THE PARABLE OF THE PRODIGAL.

CONTAINING,

The Riotous PRODIGAL, or the Sinners Aversion from God. Returning PRODIGAL, or
the Penitents Conversion to God. PRODIGALS Acceptance, or Favorable
Entertainment with God.

Delivered in diverse Sermons on LUKE 15. from Verse. 11. to Verse. 24.

By that Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ OBADIAH SEDGWICK, B. D.

Perfected by himself, and Perused by those whom He entrusted with the
publishing of his Works.

London, Printed by D. Maxwel, for SA. GELLIBRAND, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

CHRISTIAN READER,
GOds good Providence does hand unto thee in this ensuing Treatise, The whole
Parable of the Prodigal Son, both interpreted and improved, Doctrinally and
Practically, for the Spiritual Advantage, from the Pen of a Workman, who needed
not to be ashamed. Herein, the Sinners Aversion from God, Conversion to God,
and his Acceptance with God, are profitably unfolded and applied. Helps in
these several Subjects, are well worth every Christians welcome; and time
seriously spent in perusing such Discourses, will not be labor in vain. Adam,
by forsaking God, lost his primitive Glory, which cannot possibly be repaired
in his Posterity, but by returning to his Majesty-Man comes into the World
with his Back toward Heaven, and with strong Antipathies against God; yea, his
constant course of life is a departing from the Lord, till his Highness by
Omnipotent Grace does change both his Heart and Way. And when the secure Sinner
is well awakened to consider his woeful Apostasy, attended with the sad
Consequents thereof, together with the impossibility of all Creature soccours
to relieve him, then, and not till then, does he seriously think of facing
about toward God, whom he has deserted with inexcusable neglect and dishonor.

Now the self condemning Convict, in this doleful condition, upon frequent
selfreflexions, and aggravating his woeful Apostasy, does find it very difficult
to hold up hope of gaining readmission into the favor of slighted and forsaken
Deity. This poor Spira did experience, as his tears, his torments, together
with his desponding, despairing language does demonstrate. But in this pitiful
plight, the sinking soul may receive strong supports, by considering, with
application, what loving Entertainment the guilty, worthless Prodigal received
from his offended, forsaken Father. These particulars, which we do only hint at
are here largely handled for thy profit; the effecting whereof, is desired and
prayed for, by

Thy loving Friends, and faithful Servants in Christ. HUMPH. CHAMBERS. EDM.
CALAMY. SIM. ASH. ADONIRAM BYFIELD.

November. 8. 1659.
A Table of the Contents.
THe Scope of the Parable, page 2. The Parts of the Parable, p. 4. Sin is a
departing from God, p. 8. A Sinner does voluntarily, of his own accord, depart
from God, p. 9. The pleasures of sinning will quickly end, and the end of them
is extreme misery, p. 9. The pleasures of sin are but short, proved p. 10. Sin
will end in many miseries, p. 12. Though sin brings men into straits, yet
straits do not always bring men from sin, p. 22. An afflicted condition no
infallible testimony of a safe condition, p. 24. The further men go on in sin,
the worse work they shall find it to prove, p. 31. And the Reasons thereof, p.
34. And why we do not always see it so, p. 37. A sinner will try all ways,
and go through the utmost extremities, ere he will return from his sins, p. 45.
How it may appear to be true, p. 49. Why it should be thus, p. 51. Take head of
shuffling with God, p. 55. Means to prevent ^his shuffling, p. 59. Nothing
shall avail this shuffling sinner till he return, but God will disappoint all
his projects, p. 61. made to appear to be a Truth, p. 63. Why nothing shall
avail the shuffling sinner till he repent, p. 64. A serious consideration, and
right comparison of the miserable estate of a sinful condition, and happly
estate of a converted converted condition, are steps to true and speedy
repentance, p. 69. How these two are prime steps to repentance, p. 71.
Objections, That we are ignorant, not at leisure, it will make us despair,
answered, p. 77. How I may know whether my consideration be right, p. 78.
Whether consideration of sin may be right, when there are some sins that a man
thinks not of, p. 83. Whether a single consideration of sin be sufficient to
repentance, p. 84. Rules for right consideration, p. 86. Rules for comparison,
p. 87. Sound Resolution is required to sound Reformation, p. 89. The properties
of this Resolution, p. 90. Why it is requisite, p. 92. The benefits and
comforts of a firm Resolution, p. 95. The Means to raise it, p. 97. and
maintain it, p. 101. True Repentance for sin will bring forth true Confession
of sin, p. 106. The Reasons of it, p. 111. Penitent persons are humble and
lowly persons, p. 118. Humbleness described, p. 120. Why true Penitents are
humble persons, p. 124. The means to become humble, p. 128. Personal
Unworthiness is not prejudicial to spiritual Supplication, p. 129. Reasons for
it, p. 131. How we may know that we are truly sensible of our Unworthiness, p.
136. Penitent intentions and resolutions should be accompanied with present
executions and performances, p. 140. Reasons for it, p. 142. The Motives and
Means for a present execution, p. 148. and The Helps, p. 154. The very initials
of true Repentance are seen by God, p. 157. proved, p. 159. Evidences of true
Repentance though initial, p. 163. God is very ready to show all kinds of mercy
to the truly Penitent, p. 165. Reasons of it, p. 169. By no means despair of
mercy, p. 174. Objections answered, p. 175. Reasons why God makes not known his
mercy presently, p. 179. How one shall be supported in the interim, p. 183. God
is pleased not only to be reconciled, but manifests himself so to be unto the
penitent, p. 184. Reasons of it, p. 186. Motive to seek after the seals and
tokens of Gods favor, p. 188. Means to attain them, p. 191. The kindest
expressions of mercy do not hinder an humble confession of sin, p. 195. Reasons
of it, p. 196. Motives to it, p. 198. God takes no notice of our sins upon our
true Repentance, but expresses himself wholly love and kindness, p. 199.
Reasons of it, p. 202. What is meant by the Robe, and the best Robe, p. 206.
How we may know whether we have put it on, p. 211. God gives to the penitent
person a precious Faith, by which he is espoused or married to Christ, p. 213.
What it is to be married unto Christ, p. 213. How Faith marries us unto Christ,
p. 216. Whether we have this Faith, p. 219. What is meant by Shoes on his Feet,
p. 222. God does enable the penitent person with Grace and strength for a
better and singular course of life and obedience, p. 223. Reasons of it, p.
227. Every sinful unconverted man is a lost man, p. 234. How a man may know
that he is lost, p. 237. A lost sinner may be found, p. 238. How God finds a
lost sinner, p. 238. Why God does thus find a lost sinner, p. 241. Motives to a
serious Trial, whether our lost souls be found, p. 242. An impenitent
unconverted man is a dead man, p. 254. Reasons of it, p. 256. Trial, whether we
be spiritually dead, p. 261. Every converted man is a living man, p. 265. How
this may be evidenced, p. 268. Trial of our selves about our spiritual life, p.
269. Objections answered, p. 276. A very great and notorious sinner may be
converted, p. 279. Who may be called so, p. 280. How it may appear great
sinners may be converted, p. 281. Directions to such converted sinners, p. 288.
Great afflictions are sometimes an occasion of great sinners conversion, p.
289. How it may appear, p. 290. There is an Almighty Ppower required to convert
a sinner, p. 294. proved, 295. True Conversion is avery great, inward and
universal change, p. 303. and demonstrated, to p. 312. How may a man know that
God has indeed changed his heart, p. 316. Comfort to those who are changed, p.
323. How may we know, this change is from converting Grace, and not from the
power of a troubling Conscinece, p. 329. Conversion brings the soul into a very
joyful condition, demonstrated p. 333. What kind of joy Conversion brings, p.
336. Why Conversion makes the souls condition so joyful, p. 339. How can this
condition be so joyful, that is so exposed to afflictions, p. 344. and denies
and abridges many delights, p. 347. Trial whether converted or no, p. 359. How
converted persons should do, to walk joyfully, p. 363.

The Parable of the PRODIGAL.
LUKE 15. 11, etc. 11. A certain man had two Sons.

12. And the younger of them said to his Father, Father, give me the portion of
goods that falls to me. And he divided unto them his Living.

13. And not many days after, the younger Son gathered all together, and took
his journey into a far Country, and there wasted his substance with riotous
living.

14. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that Land, and
he began to be in want.

15. And he went and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine, etc.


THis Chapter consists of three Parables, all of them tending to one scope and
issue, though distinct in their special matter and object. The first Parable is
of a Sheep, from verse. 4. to verse. 8. The second of a piece of Silver, from
verse. 8. to verse. 11. The third of a Child, from verse. 11. to the end.

All of these agree in two conditions; One, of Loss, the Sheep was lost, the
Groat was lost, and the Child was lost: Secondly of Recovery; the Sheep that
wandered, is brought home; the Groat which was lost, is found out; and the Son
who departed, is returned and accepted. There be who undertake the Cyril
Reasons of these Parables or dark similitudes, under which Christ does couch
some special Lesson; as, why man is compared to a Sheep, viz. because of our
Creation, wherein God made us, and not we our selves; we are the sheep of his
pasture. Psalm. 100. And why man is then compared to a Groat; because of that
singular image of God which was stamped in man at his creation; as the royal
image of a King is stamped upon such a piece of Coin. And then, why man is
compared to a Son; because of that near relation which he had to God, being
once able to call him Father. And then, why in every one of these, to a lost
Sheep, a lost Groat, a lost Son, because of his revolt and departure from God
by sin: Nay, and if it were lawful to put and use free conceits on Parables,
(as I am sure some of the Ancients do, as St. Austin, Gregory, etc.) what if in
this threefold Parable, you might epsy a threefold cause of man's fall. "In the
sheep wandering, Satan's suggestion; "In the Groat lost by the woman, the woman's
yielding; "In the Sons departing, Adams voluntary revolting, and spending of
his happy estate and condition. But these and such like observations, though to
some they seem more acute and pleasant, yet to me they are frothy and
unprofitable.

Touching the Parable therefore, concerning which I am to The Scope of the
Parable, with a division of the chief Heads thereof. Who are meant by the two
Sons.
treat, there are several conjectures about the sense and intention of it.
Concerning the Father of the two Sons, they all agree; but about the two Sons,
they differ. Some by the two Sons understand Angels and Men: The Angels, they
were the elder Son; Man the younger, being created after them. The Angels abode
at home with their Father, Man had the stock put into his own hands, and in a
quick time lost himself and it. This opinion you see has some kind of Vicinity
or correspondency; sensus pius (as Aquinas speaks of it) but not proprius. And
there is one pregnant Reason against it in the Text; for that the elder Son in
this place, is described to be grieved and sad at the acclamations and welcome
testimonies of the younger Brothers return; but the Angels rejoice and are glad
at the conversion or return of a sinner.

2. Others by the two Sons understand the Jews and the Gentiles; the Jews were
the elder, the Gentiles the younger; the Jews kept home, as it were; of all the
Nations of the Earth, they seemed to be the enclosure for God and his service;
and the Gentiles were as it were excluded, rejected, wandering sheep, a lost
people; yet at length God through Christ looks after these lost sheep, (the
other sheep of his fold, as Christ speaks, Joh. 19.) and returns and accepts of
the Gentiles, which did much provoke the Jew, (as the elder Son was here
provoked at the repentance and acceptance of the younger, and kept out.) they
were provoked to jealousy by those who once were not a people. This
interpretation pleases S. Austin and Cyril, and some others; and indeed it
bears a fair congruity with the Parable in most respects.

3. But the third and general opinion is, that by the elder Son is meant the
Scribes and Pharisees, (and under them any Justitiaries) persons too conceited
and confident of their own works, service, righteousness, as this elder Son who
had been (as he said) thus long in his Fathers house and never transgrassed any
of his Commandments, but served him carefully; which indeed was the opinion of
the Scribes and Pharisees, who trusted to and boasted of their own
righteousness: And that by the younger Son is meant the Publicans and Sinners,
persons more notoriously riotous and infamous in sinning, utterly forsaking of
God, as it were, and living without him. And the end of this Parable was to
convince the proud and envious Scribes and Pharisees, (who in verse. 1. and 2.
of this Chapter, murmured against Christ for receiving Publicans and Sinners:)
Now Christ tells them, that though these notorious sinners were despised by
them, yet he came to call them to repentance, and that God would be most
indalgent and gracious to them; though they had been great transgrassors, yet
now being penitent, he would receive them into singular mercy and favor, and
that with much joy; and therefore little reason had they to snarl at his
respect and desires toward Publicans and great sinners. Thus for the scope of
the Parable, which is, To declare the singular readiness of God in and through
Christ, even to receive the most notorious sinners, proving penitent.

Now the Parable consists, or rather comprehends two estates The parts of the
Parable.
of the Prodigal Son.

1. Of Sin and Luxury, where are considerable, 1. The Occasion of it, v. 12.
Father, give me the portion of goods that salleth to me. He would have the
estate in his own hands: He lost himself, by de^iring to be Lord of himself.

2. The Sin it self, called riotous living, v. 13. lightly come, and lightly
gone, which quickly wasted all the substance. Now whether this substance were
those good Qualities in Creation, or good Gifts of mind or estate afterward, it
is somewhat disputed; upon which I shall consider in its time and place.

3. The event of it: That estate being spent, he bethinks of an other course;
indeed, now he should have thought of coming back to his Father, but he did
not; nay, he tries all conclusions before he resolves on that: Therefore again
observe, upon the Loss and consumption of his Estate,

First, his earthly policy, He joins himself with a Citizen of that Country,
v. 15. By whom some understand the Devil; so S. Ambrose, Civis iste est istius
mundi Princeps. Others, some kind of earthly or worldly employment: But being
joined with him, his service is sordid, for he is sent into the fields (no
house shall hold him who forsakes Gods house) to feed the swine; he is made a
servant of the nastiest beast, who would not continue the servant of the best
Father and God. Secondly, his extreme misery; this shift did no way help him:
Nothing supplies, when God forsakes; and no way is comfortable, when we prove
sinful. He would fain have filled his belly with the husks which the swine did
eat, and no man gave him to eat. v. 15. Ah, what a change does sin make! Here
is one, whiles he continued with his Father, enjoyed excellent society, tender
love, complete plenty; but now forsaking his Father, he keeps company with the
swine, is extremely pinched with hunger, glad would he have been served after
the very hogs, and no man regarded him in this misery and want; so that now
there is a loss of all his happiness, and a certainty of famishing and
perishing, if he returns not, and hereupon comes forth.

The second estate of him, which was of his Conversion and Penitency: Where you
have three things observable.

1. His Consultation, set forth by a double act of reflection. 1. Positively.
First, f himself, ver 17. He came to himself Secondly of others, his fathers
servants, and their condition. 2. Comparatively, wherein he compares his
present condition with theirs, in the utility or convenience of it; They have
bread, but I have none: Quantity of it, They have bread enough, but I hunger.
Reedundancy of it, They have enough, and to spare, but I perish with hunger:
yea the meanest in my fathers house, the servants, the hired servants, yea all
in my fathers house, though many, they have bread enough; what, and shall I a
son famish and perish? Surely if my father has bread enough for servants, he
will have some for a child; and if he has to spare for hired servants, he will
have some to spare for a famishing child.

2. His Resolution; and indeed upon the sense of his own famishing misery, and
his fathers bounty and clemency, he is resolved now what course to take. And me
thinks he turns off an objection which might spring in his mind; yea my father
has plenty at home, and for hired servants, but then they are obedient and
careful, but I have been a wastful prodigal, a riotous spender, a departing and
unkind child: To which he gives ansiver; It Is true, yet for all that I am
resolved to change this course, and I will home to my father. Nothing, no not
the greatest sinnings must hinder our penitentil turning to God our Father.

Now in this Resolution of his, there are four things which he did firmly
purpose and intend:

1. Aversion, to relinquish and quit that base and miserable life and course,
[ver. 18. I will arise] q. d. I will rest here, dwell here no longer; live
thus, no, not a day more.

2. Conversion, to return to his father [and go to my father].

3. Confession, to acknowledge 1 His sin. 2. His unworthiness. If my father,
thinks he, tell me that I have gone away from him; and have offended him, why
and I will prevent him, I will confess as much; I will not defend, nor excuse,
nor mitigate, nor mince the matter; I will say, Father, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, ver. 18. And if my father tell me, I deserve never to
be looked on, and there is no reason on my part why he should look on me as a
son, or speak to me as a son; why, and I will confess that too, that my courses
have been so sinful and vile, that I am not worthy to be called his son; not
only to be a son, but to be called a son.

4. Supplication; to entreat his Father, that yet he would look upon him, and
own him, and accept of him.

Make me as one of thy hired servants. q. d. If I cannot obtain a sons place,
yet I will beg hard of a servants place; and if I cannot get a choicer servants
place, yet I will put in for an hired servants place; and if I cannot get any
servants place, yet I will get to be as one of the servants, as one of the
hired servants; which showed the humility of his heart, and also the vehemence.
When the heart is truly broken and humbled, any near relation to God, any
owning from God will be acceptable to the soul; if God will look on the
lowliness, on the unworthiness of the sinner, how pleasing is it to him

3. Thirdly follows the life of all, namely the practical execution of all
this. This counsel enlarged it self to a resolution, and this resolution is
crowned with an actual performance: for verse 20. He arose, and came to his
father. Where again observe,

1. Some things or passages on his Fathers part, viz. 1. His quick observation;
his Father saw him, ver. 20. nay, he saw him when he was yet a great way off.
The very intentions and secret motions and close purposes of our Repentance are
known to God: in this sense, he sees our thoughts afar off; many times God will
not see the sinner quickly, but he will at all times quickly see the penitent.
I have seen him, and will heal him, etc.

2. His present commiseration, [His father saw him, and had compassion on him]
When Ephraim repented, and returned and lamented, why the Lord says, My bowels
are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him: So here, the father not
only sees but compassionates. q. d. Look, the poor child is at length come
back, he has smarted enough, he shall be welcome, I will forgive him all.

3. His gracious Acceptance, expressed in three particulars:

One of speedy readiness [The father ran.] Mercy must speed to embrace a
penitent: Swift are the feet of mercy to a returning sinner.

A second of wonderful tenderness [The father fell on his neck]. How open are
the arms of mercy to take a penitent sinner into the bosom. Mercy has not
only feet to meet us, but arms also to clasp and receive us, if we be penitent.

A third of strong affectionateness [His Father kissed him]. God has not only
arms, but lips; he has not naked mercies for a penitent, opening themselves in
manifold promises only; but also sugared mercies, mercy sealed with the kisses
of his lips, with a sweet testimony that he does accept of, and is reconciled
to a penitent and returning soul.

2. Some things on the Child's part, which is the real acting of his former
resolution in an actual confession, verse. 21. And here observe a strange
interruption on his fathers part:

1. He stays not to hear all the confession and petition intended, though he
have purposed to have said more [and make me as one of thy hired servants.].
Why! the father stops him, prevents him; we propose a method many times, but
God suddenly comes in with his mercies.

2. He cannot confess so much, but the father, though not in words, yet really
does much more; Fetch forth, says he, 1. The best ro^e. 2. The precious ring,
and 3. The comely shoo's. We can bring nothing to God, but yet he can find
enough for the whole soul: And 4. The fatted Calf. Ah! how infinitely different
is the penitent condition from the impenitent: Now the child has garments,
has ornaments, has necessaries, has comfortables; when we once truly turn to
God, we shall find no lack; there is a complete happiness now come to this
returning son, who adventured on the gracious disposition of his father: and
there is a great gladness now in the father, for the penitential returning of
his son. Our condition is best, and God is most pleased, when we turn
penitents, verse. 21, 22. Let us eat and be merry; for this my son was dead, and
is alive again; he was lost, and is found.

Thus briefly have you the sense of the Parable, with a division of the chief
heads thereof: I will nov proceed to pick out the moral observations which are
couched in it, they may be reduced to three general head.

1. A Sinners digression, or aversion from God. 2. A Penitents regression, or
conversion unto God. 3. A Penitents acceptance and favorable entertainment
with God.
In the first, you see the sinners going from God to misery; In the second, you
see him returning unto himself by true penitency; In the third, you see God
returning to him in mercy: In the first you see him losing himself, in the
second you see him finding himself, in the third you see God finding of him.
Sin loses us, repentance finds us, and then God owns us.

I begin with the Sinners d^gression or aversion from God, which is set forth
unto us in v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. under the similitude of a young man, who
would have all in his own hands, and so he left his Father, took his pleasure
in Travels, soon consumed all, and shortly brought himself to extreme necessity
and misery. This is the literal part of the Parable: But the Moral part
comprehends (if I mistake not) these Propositions.

That Sin is a departing from God.

The young Prodigal, he must leave his Father, he must be D. 1. Sin is a
departing from God
gone, what does it imply, but the sinner is a departer? Sinning is a
departing; we leave God when we betake our selves to a course of sinning. Thus
is it styled in Scripture, Esai. 1. 4. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters; they have
forsaken the Lord, they have gone away backward. Here sin is called a forsaking
the Lord, and a going away, and a revolting, ye will revolt more and more:
which is a falling off untrustily from God. Jer. 2. 14. They have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters. Heb. 3. 12. An evil he art of unbelief, in
departing from the living God.

There is a twofold Departing; One is real, when he turns away from the place
or presence of another, as Jonathan arose A twofold departing. Real.
and departed from his father Saul. Thus no man can depart from God; for he
being omnipresent, is with us in every place: Another is moral, which is, when
the heart or soul departs; and thus the sinner departs from God, when his soul
and affections leave him, Moral.
and cleave to sin. And it cannot be but that sinning should be such a
departing, for as much as God and sin are most contrary, so that the soul
cannot enjoy them both; if you will love and follow your sins, you must leave
God; and if you will love and follow the Lord, you must leave your sins; for
what communion can there be betwixt light and darkness, God and sin.

The Use of this may inform us of the madness and folly of a sinner, He will
live in such or such a sin, and with greediness he Use. See the folly of the
sinner,
follows the inticements thereof: Well! thou enjoyest thy sin, but consider
that thou losest thy God; and what do thou get in all thy delights, which
are but lying vanities, whilst thou forsakest the God of thy mercies? Thy
exchange is miserable, to leave a God, and embrace a sin; to depart from the
chiefest good and happiness, and to make choice of the basest objects of sin,
which is worse then hell it self.

A second moral observation is this, that A sinner does voluntarily, of his own
accord, depart from God. Here the Prodigal D. 2. A sinner does voluntarily
depart from God.
makes choice of his own way and course, and desires to be left to himself, and
to take his own course. God compels no man to a sinful course, nor is he the
cause thereof, nor can Satan compel the heart. A man in this regard is said to
tempt and entice himself, and with Ahab to sell himself to work wickedness.

And therefore, The sinner is utterly inexcusable before God, Use. Therefore
the sinner is inexcusable.
his mouth is for ever stopped, his sin and perdition is of himself. God is
cleared in Judgment, who punishes the wicked who is the actor, contriver, and
sole cause of his own sinnings. Take any sinner who delights himself in a way
of wickedness, why! he is voluntary in it: It Is true, in dispute he pretends an
insufficiency or inability, but the real cause of his sinning is his own will,
for he loves Darkness rather then Light, and had rather serve his Lusts then
God; he makes choice of them before God, as the multitude did of Barrabas
before Christ; and when Life and Death, God and Sin are propounded, yea, and
that with the true rewards from the one, and severe wrath from the other, yet
he like Issachar bows down under the burden, and loves rest; he had rather go
on in his sins, and will not leave them: And therefore we alone are guilty of
our own blood, God is innocent as well as just, our condemnation is but a due
guerdon or payment for our own voluntary departings from God.

A third moral Observation is this, that The pleasures of sinning will quickly
end, and the end of them is extreme misery. The Prodigal Doct. 3. The pleasures
of sin will quickly end in misery.
here will be gone, he must have pleasure, his Fathers house was too strict;
well, he begins his ^iotous living, but then you read that he quickly consumed
and wasted all his substance, and brought himself into such extreme
necessities, that he became a servant to the swine, and fain would have fed his
belly with the husks which they left, but none gave unto him. This point I
intend more fully to press, which contains in it two branches: 1. That the
pleasures of sinning are but short. 2. That though delights and pleasures begin
a sinful course, yet extreme necessity and misery or streights do end it.

1. The pleasures and delights of sinning are but short: The riotous life of
the Prodigal was a present consumption of his estate. The pleasures of sin are
but short.
The pleasure of sin is like a Candle, which in the very burning and lighting
burns and consumes away. It is in Scripture compared to the crackling of
thorns, which is but a speedy blaze; and to the Lightning, which is but a
glance and a flash and away; and to a season, the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 11. which is a very inch of time, a (...), a little article of
time; for though time be long, yet a season is but a short space. In Job the
pleasure of sin is compared to a sweet morsel; a morsel is no great quantity,
and though it be sweet, yet it slips quickly away from the tongue and palate.
And the Apostle compares it to a bait wherewith a fish is taken; the fish looks
on, and nibbles a little, and takes it down, and then away goes the bait. Cain
pleased himself a while, but not long; for the sin of murder presently pursued
and cried against him: And Adam before him, had but one taste of the forbidden
tree, it quickly set his teeth on edge: Gehazi's gold and garments, and Achan's
wedge, as they were stolen waters, and though sweet, yet short. So was it with
Ahab, he got Naboths vineyard sinfully, but he scarce ever enjoyed it; he met
with a mighty curse from God presently upon him.

But here observe, that the pleasures of sin may be said to be In respect of
estimation.
short, 1. In respect of estimation: when the hearts of men judge of them as
false, unlawful, and short. Thus Moses esteemed of them, and therefore refused
the pleasures of sin, which were but for a season. 2. In respect of duration:
For if Life itself be not long, In respect of duration.
the pleasures of sin must needs be short. It is true, that as long as the
impenitent soul has a being, the guilt of his sin shall have a being and
consistence in the soul, but at the utmost sinful pleasures extend not beyond
our life, their date then of necessity must be expired, though usually they are
extinguished or interrupted before, and life is a very short tale, hour,
moment. 3. In comparison In comparison with eternity.
with eternity; though a man should live in the pleasures of sin 20, 40, 60
years, yet what is that space of time to an eternity of sorrows and bitterness.
Compare the longest time with eternity, it is scarce a considerable moment. But
you may demand, Why should the pleasures of sin be so short? Sol. Nay Reasons
of it.
you might rather demand, Why they should be at all? for indeed real pleasure
cannot arise out of sinful acts, yet a carnal and sensual pleasure there is,
which is nevertheless short: Because

1. Sin is never so pleasant, but it breeds that which is Sin is never so
pleasant but it breeds that which is unpleasant.
unpleasant; nay the more pleasure we find in it, the more displeasure it
works; like a draught of beer, which the more fully and pleasantly drops down,
the more danger is added to the patient: So is it with sin, it seems a
delightful thing to you to follow your lusts, your evil ways; but the more you
sin, the more you increase your guilt; and guilt is but a sword to cut the
throat of your sinful pleasures; It is like sweet poison, which goes down
easily and delightfully, but it will suddenly disturb and crack the body.

2. God has cursed the ways of sin; and therefore though they God has cursed
the ways of sin.
seem pleasant for a while, yet that shall not be long, he has hedged it with
thorns, threatened all evil, miserable and judicial evil against it. And look as
when a good man earnestly presses God upon his promises, his sorrows shall not
stay long, but sighs and tears shall fly away: So when a wicked man provokes
God by his sinnings, his pleasures shall be short, for the Lord will perform
his threatenings against him.

3. The pleasures of sin must necessarily be short, because conscience
Conscience cannot be long quiet.
cannot be long quiet: If you should wound and wound a man, he will begin to
feel, and to complain; even your pleasant sinnings are the most grievous
woundings of conscience, and conscience will not bear, it will awake with blood
trickling, and will be revenged of you with most bitter expostulations, severe
accusations, unsufferable gnawings, and then where are the pleasures of your
sins? Who can stand before envy? said Solomon; so against conscience, the
wounds thereof, yea and her woundings by it, who can bear? thy delights will
sink and fly off, yea thy heart will fail thee utterly, when conscience
arises to accuse and condemn thy sinful pleasures.

4. They raise up manifold afflictions and calamities which shorten our
pleasures and delights. They raise up manifold afflictions.


But I proceed to the opening of the second branch, viz. the endings of sin.
That though a sinful course may begin in many Sin will end in many miseries.
pleasures, yet it shall end in many miseries, extremities, and straits. There
are diverse sorts of ending of things: some end by way of annihilation, as the
souls of the beasts, they shall cease to be, they are resolved into nothing;
some end by way of perfection, as the souls and ways of holy men, Glory and
Salvation is their end; some end by way of corruption, as when the beauty of a
thing is marred, or a goodly body is turned; and ends in a loathsome carcass,
or sweet Wine turns to sharp Vinegar. After this manner does sin end, or a
sinful course end: as it was with the day in which Sodom was destroyed, it
began with the pleasant light of the Sun, but it ended in fire and brimstone:
Thus was it with those sinners, their delightful flames of lust ended in horrid
flames of Vengeance. There are two sorts of sorrow and trouble: one
Penitential, and the other Judicial; one of these sin must end in. Achans wedge
pleased his eye, but it lost his life. Ahabs desire was satisfied to get
Naboths Vineyard, but his blood paid for it in the portion of Jezreel. Gehazi
obtained the garments and talents, and at the end a Leprosy to his dying day.
Judas gets favor with the chief Priests, and money to betray his Master, but
he got horror of conscience, final despair and damnation for his treachery.
The young man in the Proverbs is enticed with the filthy flattery of the Prove.
7. 17.
Whore, her bed was perfumed with Myrrh, but her house is the way to hell,
going down to the chambers of death; those chambers 17.
of delight prove chambers of death.

But to open this in some particulars:

Quest. 1. To what extreme miseries and streits may sin bring the sinner? Sol.
1. To those of Body; sin may be rottenness of his bones, and may infect him
with the most nasty, irking, painful diseases, Miseries of body.
that he shall have no rest in his flesh: it may so poison his marrow, inflame
his spirits, corrupt his humors, that many times the body, which was the
instrument of sin, proves to be the great torment of the sinner. 2. To those of
Estate; sinning may eat out a goodly estate, as the worm which is gnawing at
the root of O^ estate.
a tree, disrobes it, disflourishes it, pines and shrivels it: though a man
has quick parts, ample dealings, yet if he has secret ways of sinning, his
sins will blast him, they will be as the Moth which eats out the garment, or as
the canker to the brass or iron. How many by such and such sinnings are quickly
stripped, laid low, brought to a morsel of bread, and are clothed in rags, as
the Prodigal here in the tex wasted himself out of all. 3. To those of Name, Of
name.
which is one of the three precious and tender things; viz. a man's Eye, a man's
Conscience, and a man's Name. This is a precious Fama, Fides. Oculus.
ointment, a man's life is as his name is, yet sinning casts a fly into that
ointment, a blur upon that copy, it procures reproach and shame, an hissing, a
Proverb, a byword, an odious name, a name that shall perish. 4. To those of
Conscience, which are Of conscience.
streits indeed, so that a man is almost distracted, knows not which way to
turn himself either to God or man, day nor night, is weary of life, and yet
afraid to die; he fears God, he fears man, he fears himself, he fears the
shadows of things. 5. To those of the imagining and thinking part of man; a
man's heart shall do nothing Of the imagi^ing and thinking part of man.
but meditate terror, apprehend guilt; see the form^ of bitter sinnings, and
the Idea's of infinite wrath kindling from God against him, so that he shall be
still amazed at the representation of his former sinnings, or at the
expectation of future judgments. 6. To those of the affecting part: all his
a^fections shall rise up as a tumult Of the affecting part.
within him; burdens of cruel fear, tremblings of a fainting grief, and thick
throws of hopeless despair.

Quest. 2. But why is it that sins, or sinful courses, end in such extreme
miseries and streits? Sol. Reasons thereof are many: Reasons of it.
1. Because though the beginning of sin be from a deceived heart, yet The
ending of sin is from a just God.
the ending of sin is from a just God. The corrupt heart begins sin, deluded
thereto by sinful pleasure, but God puts a period to the sin in just judgment,
in wrath and tribulation upon every soul that does evil. What we conceive about
sin is one thing, and what God will do to the sinner is another thing; we make
it sweet, but God will make it bitter at the latter end; The intentional way of
theft is with delight, but the judicial end of theft is death; so Finis. 1.
^peris, 2. operantis.
is it in all sinnings, the intention of the sinner is to please his own
corrupt heart, but the judicial end of it (which belongs to God, he being the
righteous Judge offended) is misery. 2. The true effects of sin must be made
manifest. Men would not The ^rue (...) of sin must be made manif^st.
only question the Righteousness of God, but the unlawfulness of sin, if
sinning should end peaceably. Well might they say with him, I have cleansed my
heart in vain, if sin should end in peace and blessing; but God by this
doleful Catastrophe of sin does convince man, that sin deceives them while it
pretends so much pleasure, delight, contentment, and at length repays them with
shame, loss, horror and despair. 3. Hereby men should learn To put a
difference betwixt them that fear God and that fear him not.
that there is a difference twixt them who fear God, and such as fear him not.
For indeed, in this, among many other things, do godly ways and the ungodly
differ: The Godly begin often times in sorrow, in trouble, but the end of them is
peace at the last; we see and meet with the worst of our journey at the first,
as the Israelites did with the Wilderness and Sea, but they came to Canaan at
length; but the Ungodly ways yield their best at first, their vanity, delights,
like painted colors, fall off, and their worst is hidden, and appears at last:
Alas, thou do not imagine that hell which thy sinnings are kindlings, or
that sword which it is unsheathing, or that death which it is breeding, or that
horror which it is maing within thee against thee; these are now hid from thy
eyes, but yet they are the end of thy sinnings.

I now come to the application of this point. Is the entrance of sin pleasant,
and is that pleasure but short, and ends that pleasure Use.
in miserable extremity, then 1. for

1. Information; We may hence be informed, That all things are not right and
safe, which yet are pleasant. The ways of a man Information. All things are not
safe which yet are pleasant.
seem right in his own eyes, said Solomon, and the motives of sin seem pleasant
to our corrupt hearts; yet sinful ways are false, and sinful pleasures are
naught and short. The first demand of any in point of opinion should be, how
true, not how plausible; and of affection or action, should be, How good, and
the next, how pleasant; not first how delightful, but first how lawful. We
may not do about our moral acts, as we do in our civil, ask what fine Stuffs,
but first, what good. The Apple, the forbidden Apple, which if tasted had death
in it, was yet goodly to Genesis 3. 6.
to look on, it was pleasant to the eyes. And the Wine of which Solomon speaks,
though it bit like a Serpent, and stung like an Adder, Pro. 23. 31, 32
yet it looked red, and gave its color in the cup. As all sins have after
their commission something to back them, so they have before their commission
something to enter them: After our sinning, there are corrupt defenses and
reasonings; and before our sinnings, there are corrupt pleasures and delights:
As in the sewing of a Garment, there is a Needle to make way, and then a Thread
to keep fast; so it is in the constitution of a sinful course, there is
pleasure to make way for the sin, and then there is love and defense which
keeps fast the sin. Therefore we must in this be informed, not to entertain any
thing because it does please and delight us, for usually that is sinful which
at first is delightful; it is not how it pleases me, but how it pleases God:
The soul of man naturally is very corrupt, and as it is with some stomachs
which are foul, the worst diet is most delightful, so it is with our souls
being evil, therefore that which is evil suits bests with them and pleases
them most. Pleasures of any thing must be judged by 1. A Word of truth; for if
they be not good, as well as pleasant, they are sins factors; and 2. by the
respondency they have to a nature, not as corrupt, but as renewed.

2. That sin is not only bad, but politic; not only unlawful, but
deceitful. As it is with some faces which have natural wrinkles, Sin is not
only unlawful, but deceitful.
these are dawbed over with painted glosses; or with some bodies which are
crooked, these are bolstred out with secret stiffnings; or as with rotten
wares, these are glazed over with gaudy dyings: So is it with sin, in it self a
foul thing, a loathsome and odious thing (therefore in Scripture called an
abomination, a filthiness, a vile thing, a disease, a rottenness, a sore,
putrefying sore, etc.) yet it draws on the sinner by pleasure and delight. Sin
does not move us nakedly as sinful, but cunningly as delightful; it does not
tempt the young man to uncleanness, and tell him, that whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge; but come, let us take our fill of love, I have
perfumed my bed, etc. as the strumpet in the Proverbs: It does not tempt the
person to drunkenness, and tell him that no drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom
of God, and that there is a woe belonging unto him; but it shows him the
redness and color of the Wine, and suggests the sweetness thereof unto him. So
in sins of murder, it does not show that revenge which God threatens, but that
acceptable revenge and way of ease which the sinner delightfully thinks on. As
Balak sent to Balaam the rewards of Divination, and then desired him to curse
Israel: And that Apocalyptical whore had in her hand a golden cup, and within
that the wine of fornication: So deals our sin with us when it tempts us, it
does hide the hook, and shows the bait; it conceals the obliquity, and
represents the beauty; it covers the misery, and shows only the pleasure, to
draw and ensnare our souls.

3. That all sinners are extremely mocked and deluded. They may more safely say
of their sins what ^sau spoke of Jacob; Thy All sinners are extremely deluded.
name is rightly called Jacob, for these two times thou have deceived or
supplamed me. So may sinful men say of their sins, Not twice or thrice, but
always ye still mock and deceive me. I remember, that when Joseph's brethren had
cast him into the pit, Reuben anon returns thither, but finds him not; he was
newly there, but he was quickly taken thence, and he said, The child is not,
Genesis 37. 29.
and I, whither shall I go? So may a man say of the pleasure of his sin, Even
now they were, but now they are not: And instead of that pleasure, he may now
be wringing of his hands, and cry out; The pleasure is gone and is not, the sin
remains and here sticks; the draught is gone, but the poison is not gone; the
delight is gone, but the guilt is present; the delight is fallen off, but the
grief is present: And I, now I, whether shall I go? Conscience galls me, fears
crush me, God abhors me, the world does not help, friends cannot ease me; what
I feel is bitter, and what I fear is worse: Ah my sins, you said I should have
pleasures still, you said that I should not see misery, you said that God would
be easily merciful, you said these were nothing, you said that to morrow
should be as to day, and much more abundantly: Ah that ever I trusted you,
believed you, yielded unto you; you have deceived me; by a little pleasure I am
now brought into, and left in the midst of all misery: Ah, you sins which were
once so pleasant, can you not deliver me? can you not comfort me? do ye forsake
me? is this your kindness? is this your delightfulness? where is it? I am
bereaved of your pleasures, and by you, you alone, am I now sunk into the most
soul-cutting and anguishing distresses.

4. That though sins be temporally pleasant, yet they are certainly dangerous:
They end miserably, though they begin sweetly; Sins, though temporally
pleasant, yet are certainly dangerous.
like a River which begins in a quiet Spring, but ends in a tumultuous Sea.
There are these dangers in the pleasures of Sin; 1. They are apt to draw and
entice us, 2. to bewitch and entangle us. 3. to enlarge the spirit of
transgression within. 4, to hinder all true pleasures, 5. to sear up the (...)
conscience against all holy counsel and remedy.

But I pass to a second Use, which shall be of Caution, to take Use 2. Caution.
Take heed of being deluded with the pleasures of sin. Job 15. 31. Prove. 20. 1.
Eccl. 7. 26.
heed of being deluded any longer with the pleasures of sin: me thinks Eliphaz
spoke punctually, and to the purpose; Let not him that is deceived trust (any
more) in vanity, for vanity shall be his recompense. Though sin be a while
pleasant, yet hearken not unto it, suffer not thy self to be deceived by it:
Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby
is not wise. The like he speaks of the unclean woman, whose heart is snares and
nets, (still dressing them to catch the bird) and her hands are bands. The same
may be said of any sins whatsoever. But now to move and quicken your hearts to
take heed of sinning, though mixed with pleasures and delights; Consider these
motives. Motives.


1. What thing that is wherein thou do take pleasure? Why! What is that
wherein tho^ do take pleasure.
what is it, O man, that has enticed thee? and what is it, O man, which in
thee is so enticed? It is sin that has enticed thee, and it is thy soul which
is thus enticed by sin. Sin enticeth thee, then which no evil is worse; thy
soul is enticed, then which no part in thee is so precious. And will thou
adventure that precious soul, that immortal soul, which must live for ever,
will thou adventure it for a sin, for one draught of sinful pleasure? Would
thou adventure all thy earthly estate for one draught of Beer, (as Esau did his
for one mess of pottage?) Thou would not: Yet will thou adventure the
eternal being of thy soul for one minutes pleasure of sin. Though thy sins be
pleasant in thine eyes, yet they are odious in Gods sight, though thy sins do
delight thee, yet they do grieve him, they do incense and provoke him: Have
thou nothing to take pleasure in, but that which provokes thy God, and will
damn thy so^l!

2. Thou may enjoy thy pleasures without sin. Have thou not Thou may
enjoy thy pleasures without sin
a Wife to delight thee, an Husband, Children, many outward comforts, not a
God, not a Promise, not a Christ, that thou longest only for forbidden fruit?

3. Is sin a thing to take pleasure in? did it not shed the blood of Is sin a
thing to take pleasure in?
Christ? does it not break a righteous Law? transgress an holy Will? grieve the
Spirit of God? cast the clouds of threatenings over our heads? bring down all
our Judgments on body? kindle our terrors in Conscience? heap up all our
wrath against the day of wrath? is this the thing of thy pleasure? call you
this a delight! If one should say unto thee, Be drunk, commit filthiness, and
within an hour after, thy whole body shall be roasted in a fire, or thy skin
shall be flead off thee, or every bone in thy body should be distinctly broken
in pieces, would thou now sin? And what are these punishments to sins
themselves? and what are these punishments to those of Conscience, or to that
of Hell?

4. God can easily shorten thy pleasures of sin, and he has many God can
easily shorten thy pleasures of si^.
ways to do it. First, Is not his Word of mighty power? is it not a discerner
of the thoughts and intentions of the heart? can it not divide twixt the marrow
and the joint? Is it not a light, and a fire? Is it not the sword of God, a
two-edged sword, able to pierce, and that with quickness, and that with
sharpness? Or, Secondly, if yet thou be able to maintein thy sins, and by the
strength of sensual pleasures to beat off the purest convictions, and
revelations, and pursuits of the Word, cannot the Spirit of God drive home the
sharp displeasure of God? cannot he break through the midst of all thy
resolutions and delights, and so enter into thy conscience? can he not in a
moment awaken that drouzie conscience? can he not inliven that seared
conscience? can he not injoin it to stand up and act its accusing power, when
he has irresistably enlightened it, and set the great sins of thy delight
before thee? and when conscience is deeply wounded, where then are all thy
pleasures? O, it will be as bitter then unto thee as hell: the wrath of God
felt, and the guilt of sin felt, and the terrors of Conscience felt, O how will
they drown thy pleasures, sink thy spirits, and (if God be not the more
merciful) confound thy soul! Yet this God can do, and he can easily do it; if
he says but the word, My wrath be upon him, Con^cie^ce arise and accuse him,
it is done, and then where are thy d^lights? Those sins of thine, unto which
thou have been en^iced by a little false pleasures, even they alone shall rise
up, and be the sufficient punishment for all their pleasures. Or, Thirdly, He
can shorten thy pleasures by many Judgments; he can lay such a disease upon
thy body, or such a loss on thy estate, or such a rottenness on thy name, or
such a vexation upon thy spirit, or such a madness in thy mind, or such a cross
in thy delight, that thou shall find no more pleasure in any thing. Or,
Fourthly, Can he not send forth the King of Fears, that which thou least
think of, and which will make thy joints to tremble, Death it self upon
thee? Has not He the Keys of Life and Death; and when life is gone, where then
are the pleasures of thy sin? Sin makes way for death, and death to a wicked
man, though it makes not an end of his sinning, yet it makes a full end of the
pleasures of sinning; thou shall never rejoice in the way of thy wickedness
more, thou shall never taste delight more, neither lawful delight, nor
unlawful delight. And cannot God do this suddenly? and art thou able to
withstand him? art thou greater then he?

5. Thy pleasures of sin will end in bitterness. Read the Scripture, Thy
pleasures of sin will end in bitterness.
see whether it be not so, and I beseech thee tell me, have thou not found it
so already? can thou not say, That thy sin has been an evil thing, and
bitter? Can thou not say, What fruit have I in those things whereof I am now
ashamed? Two things remember, There is a certainty of bitterness for former
sinnings, Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment. 2. Thou know not the manner of that bitterness.
The sinning, that is thy work; but the punishing of thy sins, that is Gods
work: thou have taken the pleasures which sin delivered unto thee, and thou
must now take the bitterness which God will inflict on thee. And can thou
tell. 1. When the Lord will begin to account with How sudden.
thee, either to night, or to morrow? thou art not secure a moment. Secondly,
How the Lord will begin with thee, whether How great.
in thy body, or in thy soul, or in both, in conscience, or estate? Thirdly,
How far the Lord will extend the cup unto thee; perhaps How endless.
it shall be in thy hand a cup of fury, and trembling, and amazing horror, and
whether he will have thee to drink to the lowest dregs of his wrath, how
know thou? This bitterness after thy pleasures may be purely judicial, which
shall not be tempered with any comfort, nor yet at all with the hope of any
mercy, it may be an endless displeasure from God.

Object. Yea, but we mean to repent hereafter, and so we will prevent all that
bitterness.

Sol. 1. You cannot repent at pleasure, though you sin at pleasure; nay, the
more pleasant thy sins are, the more they do disable thee to repent; for they
by thy delights do hold thy affections more firm, and increase ^hy sinful acts
more often; and both of these do cross repentance.

2. But suppose thou should repent, yet must thy sins be bitter unto thee;
though thou may believe with joy, yet thou must repent with sorrow:
Repentance is a mourning weed, a sad lamentation, a reformation with tears.

3. And believe me, thy penitential work will be the more sour, by how much the
more sweet thy sinnings have been. In Physic (if I mistake not) they hold,
that Dulcia cito vertuntur in bilem, the sweet meats are most easily turned
into bitter choler; so shall thou find experimentally, thy sweetest sins to
prove (even if thou do repent) thy sharpest burdens and griefs. David's
adultery cost him more tears, then any sin of his that we read of.

A third Use shall be of Direction: If any man of us has been enticed, that we
have taken the sweet bait, that sin has ensnared Use 3. Direction.
us by its pleasures, my advice is, Let him vomit up the morsels again, and no
more to embrace the sin for the pleasure, but to abhor the pleasure for the
sins sake. The rules which I would prescribe, are these,

1. Presently to imbitter those sinful pleasures: Do you your Presently
imbitter those sinful pleasures.
self begin the work, defer it not to God; if you begin it in a penitential
way, God will spare you in a judicial way. Judge yourselves, and ye shall not
be judged of the Lord. See and consider what thou have done; True, I have had
the pleasure, but by sinning God has had the dishonor, much dishonor, great
dishonor, frequent dishonor. Oh grieve for this, that thou should ever
delight in that which grieves thy God; that sin should be pleasant to thee,
which is so dishonorable unto him; Afflict thy soul, and do this presently,
take down thy sins the second time with bitter herbs, which at the first thou
swallowedst down with sweet delights; or rather cast them out with hearty
sorrow, which thou did hastily take in with vain pleasure.

2. For time to come, let two thoughts lodge between thine eyes; viz. 1. Former
sins have been bitter though pleasant; 2 Future Think of the bitterness of
former sins, and that future sins will be more bitter.
sins, be they never so pleasant, will prove more bitter. O let these be
engraven in thy soul, never believe thy thoughts, thy hopes, thy confidences,
nor Satan any more, nor thy own false heart; sin was pleasant heretofore, but
it ended bitterly; if thou any more hearken unto it, it will be less pleasant,
and much more terribly bitter; the second surfeits of sin do either breed more
stupefaction, or more confusion in the conscience.

3. Study to find and taste that pleasure which arises from an entire
communion with God, and a conversation which is upright. Study to find and
taste pleasure in communion with God.
Talk what thou will, the soul will have some pleasure or other; if it pitcheth
not on God, for it, it will stray aside to sin for it. Now then strive to take
pleasure in the Lord, and in his work, and in his way, and in his Graces, and
in his Christ: This shall thou find of spiritual pleasure. Spiritual pleasures
are


1. It is more sweet a thousand times then that of sin: One glass of
Spring Water is more sweet then a Caldron of Seawater; More sweet.
though the Sea be larger, it is fouler and mixed. 2. It is more lasting and
durable: Ah, thou need not to repent of it; it is More lasting.
a Spring, and not a Puddle, and its foundation is constant; never forsake thy
mercies, for lying vanities. 3. It is More affecting.
more affecting then the other: That of sin goes not beyond the sense and
affections, but this of God enters into the conscience, which is the seat of
truest comfort or saddest misery. 4. It Will drown our sinful pleasures.
will drown your sinful pleasures: Oh, thou shall find such a real value, such
a surpassing excellency, such a full contentment in the all-sufficient God,
that thou may well say as Ephraim, What have I to do any more with Idols! So
thou with the vain, piercing, false, short, pleasures of sin. Therefore set thy
heart not on sin, but holiness; though it may fall out, that at the beginning
the ways of God and holiness may seem bitter unto thee, yet know, 1. This
bitterness either is by reason of thy former pleasant sins, or thy present
sinful nature: 2. That assuredly thy delights in holiness will bring thee at
last to that right hand where there are pleasures for evermore; for as sin,
though pleasant in entrance, is bitter in conclusion, so holiness, though it
sets forth with a storm, shall land safely in a calm.

And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that Luke 15. 14.
Land, and he began to be in want.

And he went and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him
into his fields to feeds swine. 15.


The Prodigal has done with his Estate, and all the pleasures of it; now we
are to consider him both in his streights, and in the immediate use which he
made of them. Touching the former, I shall say little; only you may observe,
1. The occasion of it, a great famine: 2. His sense of it, he began to be in
^ant. Touching the latter, you may observe two things, 1. His practice under
his streights, And he went and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country: 2.
His success or reward, And he sent him into the field to feed swine. By the
Citizen generally is expounded, the Devil; by the Country, the World; by
Swine, wicked Men. There are two Propositions which I would hence observe, viz.

1. That though sin brings men into straits, yet straits do not always bring
men from sin. 2. That the further men go on in sin, the worse work they shall
find it to prove.
That though sin brings men into straits, yet straits do not always 1. Doct.
Though sin brings men into straits, yet straits do not always bring men from
sin. Distinguish betwixt Possibility and Infallibility. Representation of sin,
and Reformation of sin.
bring men from sin. You see here the prodigal is pincht with famine, and yet
he comes not home to his Father, but goes on further in his own ways. For the
opening of this Assertion a little, you must distinguish betwixt,

1. Possibility, ut medium, and Infallibility, ut remedium.

2. Betwixt Representation of sin, and Reformation of sin. Straits and miseries
are ordinarily the Looking-Glasses, wherein we may see the face of our
sinnings, but they are not always the Physick-Glasses, wherein we find the cure
of our sins; they are more often an eye salve, than an heart-salve; they may be
a qualm to bring sin to sense, when yet they are not a potion to bring off the
sinner from wandering.

3. Again, twixt impediment to sin, and twixt amendment of sin. Impediment to
sin, and amendment of sin.
Miseries and straits may be a Dam to stop the Current, when yet they are not
like the Prophets salt, effectual to heal the waters. A Lock may stop a Thief,
but not alter him. When the the Prophet Eliah met Ahab with a sharp message
about Naboth's blo^d and Vineyard, it made him go softly, it cooled his spirit,
but did not change it. Miseries more ordinarily (for the present) make men less
forward and bold in sin (as Jupiter's Log did quash the noise of the Frogs)
when yet they make them not so good as to turn them from sin: They do (like a
shower of rain and hail) make the Traveller to stand a while under the Tree,
who yet intends to hold on his journey again.

4. Again, twixt Declamation and Declination. A sinner under misery may play
the Orator, and yet never prove the Penitentiary; Declamation' and Declination.
he may both indite and accuse the sin, which yet by no means he intends to
condemn and execute. It is one thing to confess, that my sins do now hold me in
bonds of affliction, and thereupon to profess a discharge of such inmates; and
it is another thing, really to repent and to forsake those sins, yea, the very
those which a man more then suspects as patrons of his misery. So that straits
may bring sin to sight, and the sinner to a stand, and to a confession, yet not
always to repentance and to conversion; which is true, This is true,


1. Of inward straits; those manacling and severe fetters of conscience, to
which no distresses are comparable. The boylings of Of Inward straits.
conscience may be but like the boylings of the Sea: a person may have many
guilts fretting there like a Leprosy, and gnawing there like death, and
flaming there like hell it self, and yet not be brought off from sin. As Judas,
who betrayed his Master (O think of that sin!) and fell into quick horrors of
conscience, and these cured him not, but he proceeded to despair, and then to
selfmurther

2. Of outward straits; which do never come without cause, but many times go
off without remedy; they may in all the sorts of Of Outward^ straits.
them say often times, as they did of Babylon, We would have healed Babylon, and
she would not be healed. They find us evil, and they leave us worse, as we do
our friends upon their dying-beds; Ye revolt more and more, why should ye be
smitten any more? Isa. 1. 5. This is evident in Pharaoh, whose hardnings
increased (like the iron) with the strokes. Or like the Snake which, Salvian
spoke, did multiply by occision. It was no better with Saul and Ahab, nor with
that King Ahaz, who is blackt and fingred out amongst all the Kings of Judah,
because he sought not to the Lord in his distress, but trespassed yet more
against the Lord; This is that King Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. Thus it was with the
Israelites many a time, who felt the scourage, but mended not their work, but
with bleeding shoulders often times went away to sin; and no sooner were the
Assizes past, but they adventured the way to the prison again.

If you now demand the Reasons why straits or miseries do not Reasons of it.
always bring men off from sins? I answer,

1. Because, that only true Grace is it which brings men off from sins.
Afflictions may be considered two ways, either immediately Only true grace
brings men off from sin.
and solitarily, so they are not forcible to bring any man o^f from his sinful
course; no punishment whatsoever is an immediate Agent, and sufficient to turn
a sinner. Mediately and concomitantly as they are sanctified, (i.) either as
they light upon an heart sanctified, or as sanctifying Grace, with them, or by
them is wrought in the soul, and so they may bring off the heart from sin; not
the naked afflictions, but grace in the heart afflicted, turns the heart; for
nothing turns the heart from sin, bu^ that which is contrary unto sin: now
though miseries are contrary to the sinner, yet not to the sin; they are
contrary to the sinners ease and way, but not to the affection and delight of
sin, which may, and often times does live and remain even under extreme miseries.
Now then, many men are in miseries by reason of sin, yet they turn not from
sin, because they want true grace, by the strength of which alone men come off
from sin, for that it is which changes the sinful heart. You know that
Physic ordinarily works as the body is, into which it is received; there must
be some strength of nature to help it, else it will not work; the Philosophers
rule being true, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. The heat
which melts the wax, hardens the clay; and the juice which goes into the Rose
makes it sweet, but that which goes into the Nettle makes it stink; so it is
with miseries, they work as he is on whom they fall; if true grace be not in
the heart, what good use can an evil heart make of them?

2. Secondly, Because straits and miseries are sometimes merely judicial, only
the strokes of revenging Justice. You know, that Straits are sometimes merely
judicial.
there is a great deal of difference 'twixt a whip which causes smart, and a
plaster which causes healing: All miseries which befall us are not healing
plasters, sometimes they are judicial lashes, they are not the wounds of a
friend, but of an enemy. God is said in Job, to distribute sorrows in wrath,
and then they are not remedial effects, but exitial; they come not then with
their teaching and recovering assistance, but are the beginnings of a greater
judgment yet to come. You know that God plagued Pharaoh in a judicial way, the
miseries which befell him were as sharp, and great, and many, and came as thick
as most that ever befell any man of whom we ever read; nevertheless they were so
far from reclaiming of him from his sins, that still he hardened his heart, and
exalted himself; If you should demand why it should be thus with him, that no,
not quick, nor great, nor many plagues did him any good? I answer, One cause,
amongst many, is this, Because they came only in a judicial way; they did not
come out of the hand of a merciful Father, but of a provoked and revenging
Judge: If there be not grace in the heart to join with, and to improve the
affliction, and if there be not mercy to send out and bless the affliction, it
will then never do us good, it will not turn us from our Sins.

3. Thirdly, The Heart of a Sinner may be above his miseries: There is not such
a power in miseries alone, as to overruled the The heart of a sinner may be
above his miseries.
heart, or to mend it. As it was with Gallio, when the Jews did beat Softhenes,
and kept a stir, the Text says, He cared not for any of those things: (i.)
they made no prevailing impression on him, so as to divert his purpose: In like
manner may it be with the miseries which personally befall a man, his heart
(notwithstanding) may not regard them, neither may he lay things to heart, they
may be thrown off, in respect of any beneficial impression, as water from a
rock; as is evident in Pharaoh, and in the Jews, see Isa. 42. 25. He has
powered upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, and it has
set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid
it not to heart. Here was anger, and fury of anger, and poured out, and so as
to set him on fire, and to burn him, yet he laid it not to heart. If you should
take dross and corrupt stuff, and put it into the fire, you shall never refine
it, it is to no purpose, the founder in such a case would melt but in vain,
Jer. 6. 29. so in this case: For the proper operation of all miseries is only
moral, and rather re^resentative then effective (i.) they can of themselves do
nothing; perhaps they may point a man to his sins, but his heart may
effectually resist that evidence of sin by the rod of God, as well as by the
word of God. Look as it is with the Light of the Sun, though great and gentle,
yet it never opened a blind man's eyes; nor yet the Lightning, which runs
swiftly in the time of Thunder: For that natural privation exceeds the strength
of such Agents. So it is with a sinner, his heart may so cleave to sin, that
neither the Light of the Sun, I mean the blessed Word of God, nor yet the
Lightnings and Thunders of afflictions may divorce him; so great may the power
of sinful love be, that not the kindest mercies, nor the sharpest miseries
(alone) shall ever be able to melt him, or turn him. The love of sin may
increase even an incorrigible and desperate perverseness in the Will; such
perverseness, that the afflicted sin^er (possibly) may be so far from leaving
his sins, that therefore he will cleave to his sins the more, and in a proud
despite will forsake God; as that profane person, This evil is of the Lord,
why should he wait for him any longer? 2 Kin. 6. 33.

4. Lastly, Miseries do not always bring men off from their sins, M^n hate
holiness more then miseries.
because Men hate holiness and a godly life, more then miseries: (i.) There is
a greater contrariety twixt their sinful natures and holiness, then twixt them
and miseries; it is confessed, that misery, in some respect, is contrary to
nature, at least to the peace and ease of nature; yet misery is not so
distastfully contrary to a wicked nature, as holiness and godliness. Sin can
live and rule whiles the sinner is under misery, but it never can do so when he
is under grace. You know that a man never can turn from sin, but when he loves
holiness; now holiness is that which many a sinful heart, like Paul before his
conversion, persecutes to the death. Why! if some sinful hearts will venure
the loss of heaven, rather then they will be holy, will they not rather then
endure the loss of friends and estate? etc. and if they will adventure the
pains of hell rather then they will come off unto an holy life, will they not
rather endure some temporal distresses? etc. and does not this show, that some
had rather be passive in misery, then active in holiness?

Now I proceed to the useful Applications of all this to our selves: Where 1.
for Information. Do not straits and miseries always Use 1. Information.
bring men off from their sins? then

1. An afflicted condition is no infallible testimony of a safe condition. Some
people are of an opinion, that if God does punish An affl^cted condition no
infallible testimony of a safe condition.
them in this life, in crosses, losses, sicknesses, penuries, etc. they have
all their portion of misery already, and undoubtedly shall besaved. To which I
reply, 1. Though as the Israelites came at length to Canaan through the Red
Sea, and through the wilderness; so a person may after many afflictions and
miseries come to heaven: Heaven can admit of a poor Lazarus, and of a
distressed Job, and of a pursued David. 2. Yet it is not always so: A person
may be under many miseries, and notwithstanding them, he may never be happy:
the mere presence of miseries is of common providence, and not a distinguishing
privilege; by what is before us, whether outward good, or outward evil, we can
know neither love nor hatred; but as it is with the Ships at sea, whether of
the Kings Loyal subjects, or of hostile pirates, either of them are exposed to
winds and storms, to leaks and rocks, and sands; so is it with good men and bad
men, each of them are exposed to outward calamities, as each of them are
capable of outward mercies; there may be a change in their outward condition,
when yet there is no change in their inward dispositions. Job may hold fast his
uprightness under all his miseries, and Pharaoh may retain his hardness under
all his Judgments. And where the sinful affection and practice is still
retained, he shall not be free, because of his present miseries, but for ever
rejected, because of his continued iniquity.

2. That the Conjunction twixt Sin and the sinful soul is very The Conjunction
betwixt sin and the soul is very strong.
strong: For as much as very great straits and miseries effect nothing many
times. You see here, that though the Prodigal had spent all, and a famine, yea,
a great famine arose over the Land in which he was, yet he is so far from
returning and giving over his sinful course, that he does not so much as think
of it or mind it: assuredly, the Covenant of affection is very firm, which
cannot be untied with the fairest promises, nor with the severest indurances.
When the Lord shall come to a sinner, meet him in his course and way, and
because of his contempts and rebellions, distrein his estate and goods, and
then lay an Attachment of sickness on his body, and more then this, indite him
for his life by the summons of death; And yet neither the loss of all the
Mercies which once he had, nor the presence of all the Evils which now he
feels; neither the poverty of his Table, nor the rags on his Back, nor
shivering in his Bones, nor anguish in his Conscience, no, nor appearance of
Death, nor yet the ro^r^sentations of Hell, do turn him from his sinful
affections and courses; judge, whether the tree be not tough, which no Wedge
can cleave; and the disease be not deep, which no Potion can remove; and sin
does not sit close and strong to the heart, which no not extreme miseries can
occasionally and effectually discharge and quit. There are no penalties so
grievously and unspeakably afflicting and miserable as those in Hell, which
cause weeping and gnashing of teeth; and yet these, though highest for
intention, and endless for duration, never are able to turn the sinning soul:
so madly and excessively is the person enthralled, that the greatest Calamities
effectually avail not to bring him off from the least course of Iniquities.

3. Not to wonder if some men make ordinary Revolts after ordinary miseries:
Some persons may (like some stones which Wonder not if ^ome men Revolt after
miseries.
yield a sweat in change of weather) somewhat reflect on themselves, and
relent, and confess, and profess what they will be and do if God will take off
his heavy hand. And may I not appeal to many of you this day, whose hearts have
been visited with the plague, that thus then it was with you, etc. Yet when the
plague is off, and the smart and fear gone, the bitterness of death is past,
that health succeeds the sickness, and plenty succeeds the want, and strength
succeeds the weakness, good Lord! what are they? how live they? what do they?
what mind they? what affect they? what work they? Do they leave their sins? ah,
as the Pharisees made their proselites twice as much more the children of the
Devil then before, so these men become more vile, more profane, more careless,
more rebellious against the truth of God, more earthly, sensual then ever.
Brethren, if as Solomon spoke in another case, When thou see a violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: So
Eccl. 5. 8.
if thou see a man to pervert the judgments of the Lord, to pervert his
afflicting hand, to go on in his sins after he is punished for his sins; I say,
in this case do not much marvel at the matter, for miseries alone cannot make
any saving impression, or sanctified alterations. If men may hold fast their
sins even under their miseries (as a Thief may steal under the Gallows) what
marvel then if they go on in their sins after their miseries? And what cause
have we to think, that any pious semblances and pretenses should hold long,
which did owe themselves to such temporary causes, as were never able to alter
the sinners heart, though they were in some degree able to stop the sinning
person?

But I proceed to a second Use, which shall be a little to reflect on our own
hearts and ways, and to enquire how it is with us, Use 2. Reflect upon our own
hearts.
notwithstanding the miseries and straits that are upon us, as Solomon spoke
concerning sin, Who can say, My heart is clean? that I may speak this day
concerning punishment of sin, Who can say, I have been free? As it was in
Egypt, upon the departure of the Israelites, so it has been of late with most
of us, there is scarce an house of us where at least one has not been dead. I
may confidently affirm, That either death in opposition to Life, or death in
opposition to Livelihood, to some one kind or degree of outward comfort, has
within this year befallen most of us that are now here this day. Nevertheless,
I pray you tell me, Can you show your repentance yet, as you can relate your
straits and miseries still? Have not we, the Ministers of God, faithfully and
plainly told you of your sins? have not your miseries and straits been clear
Glasses to represent your sins? have not your Consciences delivered up your
sins, and said as Jonah, I know that for my sake (so they for our sake) this
great Tempest is upon you, Jon. 1. 12. Were you not in great fears, in great
griefs and troubles of mind? need I say, in great Protestations and Purposes?
But now I demand of you, Have your great straits brought you off from your
great sins? did they not find thee in a sinful way, and do they not now leave
thee walking in that path? Ah! and must the Lord say of you, They refuse to
receive instruction? they turn not to him that smites, yet have they not
returned to me; they will know no shame; they are reprobate silver; they are
not refined nor purged; their scum is not departed; If we continue in sin after
miseries,
wherefore should they be smitten any more? they revolt more and more. Well, if
it be thus with thee, yet remember, 1. That this continuance in sin
(notwithstanding our miseries) may give us just suspicion to sear that our
Corrections come not We may suspect our corrections com^ not from mercy.
from mercy, because they go off with impenitency. You need not ascend into
heaven, to pry whether your chastisements come out of the land of Indulgence or
of Vengeance: when they come from a merciful hand, they are assisted ^^th some
recovering and curing blessing. The Prophet says, That the Lord did not smite
his people as he smote others: and in two respects he Isa. 27. 7.
manifests the difference; one of Proportion, He did debate with them in
measure, ver. 8. Another of Operation, v. 9. By this shall the iniquities of
Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take awy his sins. God never
strikes in mercy, but he in some measure betters the sinner. Look as every
outward good, if it comes in mercy, it proves a step unto more holiness; so
every outward misery, if it come in mercy, it proves a stop, nay an abatement
of more sinfulness. 2. We may justly fear that our hearts are hardened; for the
soft We may fear our hearts are hardened.
heart will tremble with Josiah, at a correction in a threatening, and much more
will it melt and amend when it is in execution, as he in Job 34. 31. I have
born chastisement, I will not offend any more. But when the heart can feel
wrath, as well as hear of it; and receive the strokes with stoutness, and
strike God by sinning, when God strikes it by punishing; is it not hardened,
unsensible, I had almost said, desperace? And is an hardened condition, a good
or safe condition? 3. Do we not treble our accounts unto God by not We treble
our accounts to God.
coming off from sins which have brought on our miseries? Now we must answer 1.
For the sins which brought down our corrections: 2. For the continuing in those
sins still. 3. For doing this, being corrected thus for our sins; not only thy
sins, but Gods punishments (being thus abused) come into the account, the
Vineyard was reckoned with for the pruning, as well as the withering. 4. And
lastly, What can we look for from God, when former miseries bring us not off
from former sins? Christ said, Sin no What can we look for from God, when
miseries do not bring us off from our sins?
more, least a worse thing befall thee; and will not a worse judgment then
attend us for worse sinnings? It is with divine punishments, as with the
messengers of a displeased King, who in his name summons us to yield and become
loial; and if you despise a few messengers, they indeed may return, but then
more and greater are sent, perhaps not to parley, but to destroy: If one
punishment brings not off from sin, it does only go back to fetch a greater;
and thou can not tell but that the next messenger may be death itself, and
then something worse then dearh.

The last use which I will observe from this point, is, since miseries do not
always bring men off from sins, therefore to apply Use 3. Apply our selves to
such ways under our miseries, as may bring us off from our sins. In general. A
sanctified heart. A sanctified use In particular (...) Repentance.
our selves to such ways, and to get those things under our miseries, which
may bring us off from our sins. In the general, two things are available
hereto: 1. A sanctified heart; until the heart be sanctified, can it possibly
break off from sin? 2. A sanctified use; you must not be senseless, nor yet
impatient, but under every hand of God seek for direction and blessing from
God: Secondly, in particular, I conjecture these things mainly conduce: 1.
Repentance, which you know takes into it these branches: 1. Serious
consideration of the present condition, and of the end of present afflictions.
2. Solid humiliation. 3. Earnest prayer. 4. Effectual reformation 2. Love of
God, and more entire communion and delight in him, and with him. Afflictions
will drive you off from Love of God.
God, unless you love him. Even a small stroke is enough to mend and bring in a
loving child. 3. Faith to believe our pardon and acceptance. Nothing more
avails with the soul to leave the course Faith.
of sin, then when it can be assured if it comes back to God it shall receive
the pardon of sin. Therefore God generally propounds to his afflicted people,
an hope of mercy, as the great motive to bring them home from sin to himself by
true repentance, Joel, 2, etc. All which are wrought by the Spirit of God in
the use of the Word, and shall be given unto us, if under our miseries and
straits we do earnestly cry and pray unto the Lord.

And he sent him into his fields to feed Swine] You have heard of the Prodigals
design under his misery to relieve himself; he did not return to his father,
but joined himself to a citizen of a far country. Now ye are to hear of the
success of this design, how much it mended his poor and famished condition,
viz. nothing at all; and that will appear in two particulars: One in the
basestness of his service. That citizen sent him into his fields to feed swine.
Of all creatures the most nasty and filthy, these must he serve, and none but
these: his whole service was to be base, and therefore he is sent into the
fields to perform it; any houshold-service and homeservice (though mean) had
been tolerable. Another, in the nothingness of his reward or wages; he did the
basest service, and without the least husk of payment: for it follows in verse.
16. That he fain would have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did
eat, and no man gave unto him. If he had had any thing afforded, either to have
nourished, or to have procured nourishment, though it had been but mean, nay
the meanest; but to have nothing at all, for the fordidest service of all; yet
this was the fruit of his sinful design, that he was set upon a most base work,
and without any profit or relief at all; whence I conjecture we may ohserve
this Doct. 2. The further men go on in sin, the wor^e work it will prove. Here
is premised.
second conclusion, That the further men go on in sin, the worse work they
shall find it to prove. You see it a manifest truth here in the Prodigal, his
sin drew down his penury; notwithstanding this, he proceeds to his sins, and
now he is sent to the Swine, etc. For the better opening of this Assertion,
premise with me some few particulars.

1. A supposition, viz. That wicked men do use to go on in sin. They are said
in Scripture to proceed from evil to worse, and to A Supposition. Wicked men
use to go on in sin.
add drunkenness to thirst, and to fill up the measure of iniquity, and to know
no shame, and to revolt more and more, and to grow Worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.
13. therefore is sin in them compared to a Canker, which frets from place to
place, or eats up from part to part; and to a fretting Leprosy, which
diffuseth it self 1 Timothy 2. 17. Levit. 13. 8. 1 Kin. 8. 38. 1 Cor. 5. 6.
from a lesser to a larger compass; and to a Plague, which by degrees seizes
on all the spirits; and to Leaven, which spreads over all the lump. And this is
verified of them every way, whether they live in ease, or live in misery;
prosperity and ease do but flesh them the more, adversi^y and punishments do
not turn them at all; smiles or frowns, word or rod, mercy or misery, neither
of them do alter, but after both they yet put forth, they will lanch further:
As he in the Proverbs concerning his Wine, When I shall awake, I will seek it
yet again, that may be said of evil men; though they have felt many a smart
blow from God for Prove. 23. 35.
the^r sinnings already, yet they will look back to this trade again, they will
still deal unjustly: What David spoke in another case, they will fully act in
this of Sin, I will be yet more vile.

2. A Posi^ion, which is this, Though after punishment they will be progressive
in sin, yet they shall never be successful in sin: A Position. T^ough after
pu^ishment men be progressive in sin, yet they shall never be successful.
They may renew their work, but they shall never amend their wages; they may
set up again, but they shall break again; if they, after so great a shaking,
will build upon the same foundation, they shall find their future labors to
end in the same ruin: Nay, that is not all; but as Joshuah's curse upon the man
who should again build the City Jericho, was, that He should lay the foundation
thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son he set up the gates of it,
Jos. 6. 26. So will it prove to the person whose sins God did strive to
demolish, and overthrow by former punishments, if he again will presume to set
up the gates of them, recover them to their strength by future love, and
further progress; he shall be so far from being hereby more successful, that
his condition does become more fearful; he does lay his foundation again in
the ruin of his soul, and shall build up the gates with a greater curse from
God. Therefore you read of such who are entangled again, That their latter end
is worse then their beginning. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Men are entangled again, when
(either by the vigor of conscience, or sharpness of affliction, etc.) they
have made a pause or stop; but, like the restrained River, which climbs over
the Dam, so they get over these, unto their course of sinning again: Now says
the Apostle, these men shall never better their estates, nay, they make them
the worse; the latter end of them, or with them, is worse then the beginning.

Thirdly, know, That by progress in sin, after punishment, Progress in sin
makes the esta^e worse. Formally.
the estate is worse, Formally, Judicially, Eventually. 1. Formally worse: For,
if sin be it which makes the estate bad, then more sinning must needs be that
which makes the estate worse; as on the contrary, the additionals and
incrementals of Grace, (i.) when a man does add one degree of grace to another,
and rises in a better, and a stronger, and fuller acting of grace, hereby the
moral perfection of his soul is much more bettered and perfected; so when the
habits of sin admit of more love of sin, more exercise of sin, that a man does
go on from one sin to another, by way of addition, or in the frequent practice
of the same sins, by way of iteration, he cannot but make his sinful nature
much more sinful, more filthy, and more vile; as, when a man does twine one
thread upon another, or one cord upon another, he adds a greater strength unto
it; so, when a man shall roll and file one sin upon another, etc. by further
progress in sin, the very pollutions are more spread, and more established, and
more enlarged, by it a man is always more under the pollution of sin, and more
under the dominion of sin, as the Proselytes were made ten times more the
children of the Devil.

2. Judicially worse; which appears in two particulars, viz. Judicially. In a
Dereliction on Gods part.
1. In a Dereliction on Gods part; he does more sadly leave such a soul, give
it up to its own lusts, and its own vile affections, and unto Satan, to rule
mightily and efficaciously in such a child of disobedience, who loves to
adventure in a known way of curse and misery, so that the Lord may withdraw
himself, and desert that progressively sinning soul, and not aid and assist it
in case of most horrible lusts, or of most hideous temptations. 2. In
Condemnation In Condemnation on Consciences part.
on Consciences part: For the progress in sinnings, as at any time, so after
the time of punishment for sin, will make and raise a louder cry, and a fiercer
sentence from the conscience. A man who will not repent for the lashes on his
back, shall by his continuance in sin, quickly feel the lashes of Scorpions in
his soul; as more guilt does arise from sinful practices, so more horror does
ensue upon more guilt; more guilt is but like a great storm at Sea, or like a
great raging of a disease.

3. Eventually worse: My meaning is, that by his continued sinnings, he shall
not only continue, but much more enlarge his Eventually.
outward miseries, and straits, and punishments. I will punish you yet seven
times more. Levit. 26. Pharaoh still hardened his heart, but God still followed
him with sorer Judgments, destruction of Verba. Verber^. Vulner^.
his fields, and then of his cattle, and then of his children, and at length of
his own life. As it is with a Bird in a Net, the more she flutters and stirs,
the more is she hampered and involved; so it is with the sinner, the more he
stirs on in a sinful way, the more does he enwrap, and entrap too, himself
with greater mischief. The Israelites did begin to murmur against God, and God
then as it were did privately correct and chastize them; afterward they did
revolt from God, and then he did let loose some of the Canaanites and
Midianites upon them, who did greatly distress them; at length they grew common
in Idolatry, and very audacious in their Rebellions against God, and then they
were carried away captive by the Babylonian Armies: So that if you read the
History of them, you shall evidently discern, that every further sinning of
theirs, was nothing else but a further engaging of themselves unto greater
calamities, and as it were an adding to more cords wherewith they were more
held and beaten.

If you now demand the Reasons, or causes, why that the further men go on in
their sinning after punishment, the worse work Reasons.
they shall find it to prove: I answer, the Reasons thereof may be these. 1.
Sin is a most barren and unprosperous thing. Who has Sin is a barren and
unprosperous thing.
hardened himself against God, and prospered? said Job 9. 4. his meaning is
this, that sinning is no prosperous and thriving way. It cannot be, that a man
should go on in sin, and yet meet with prosperity and good success; and
therefore Solomon says expressly, He that hardneth his heart, shall fall into
mischief. Pro. 28. 14. So that sinning is not only not prosperous, but it is
also mischievous; it will do a man a mischief sometime or other. Can a man
gather grapes of thistles? said our Savior: It cannot be; for thistles produce
blossoms according to their kind, of a filthy and sharp quality: But as for
Grapes, which are of a sweet and refreshing and delighting nature and virtue,
they come not from such a root as a Thistle. Comfort, and blessing, and peace,
and prosperity, and good success, these cannot grow from a sinful course; the
land of sin is always a land of famine and barrenness, and watered only with
clouds of wrath, and set with thorns of vengeance, a land wherein a person must
not look to see good. So that what the Lord said of Coniah, Write that man
childless, the same may be affirmed of every sinful way; It is a barren, an
accursed, an unprofitable, an unsuccessfull way: No way to better, but the
only way to increase wrath and punishment to the sinner.

2. Nay, sin is not only a barren thing, unable to produce Sin is a very
provoking thing.
any good or blessing, but sin is also a very wicked thing, and provoking. The
sinnings of men, are the provocations of God to wrath and punishment, and the
more sinnings, are still the greater provocations. How long (says God to Moses
of the Israelites) Will they provoke me? Look as the froward and perverse
walking of a child provokes the parent (i.) stirs up his displeasure and anger:
So the sinnings of men, they do provoke the Lord by them unto jealousy and
wrath, and stir up his displeasure against them; therefore it cannot be, but
that if men go on further in sinning, they should find a worse thing of it; for
every sinning is but as it were a further kindling of the fire, and a new
incensing and provoking of the Lord; and the more that the Lord is provoked
against a sinner, the more misery and punishment is the sinner like to feel
from God.

3. No punishment which any sinner has already felt, is a discharge,
Punishments already felt is no discharge from greater to be inflicted.
but only a part of greater punishment yet due unto him. As the first fruits
were a pledge of the crop. We may not think, that because God does for
precedent sinnings afflict and judge the sinner in some particular kind,
therefore he is now secured and discharged for the time to come, as if God did
not intend to reckon wi^h him for after sinnings: But this we must know, viz.
1. That infinite and full wrath is the due debt of the transgressing soul; not
one or two punishments, but all the testimonies and degrees of wrath. 2. That
particular demonstrations of Gods wrath, are no acquittances, but rather
certificates of a fuller wrath yet behind. If ye yet shall walk contrary unto
me (says God to the Israelites, Lev. 26. 21.) I will punish you seven times
more for your sins. q. d. If ye will go on in sinning, I will surely rise
higher in punishing, I have greater punishments yet behind; so that if you
consider that debt unto sin, which is the full latitude of punishment, it must
be, that if the sinner goes on in sin, he shall not thrive, but still become
more miserable.

4. Nay, do but consider the Nature of divine Justice, and this will clear it
to be so. Divine Justice appears in two things, one in The Nature of Divine
Justice.
an Homogeneous Retribution, if I may so phrase it, according to the quality of
actions and persons. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou
do ill, sin lies at the door, said God to Cain; there is an acceptance upon
well doing, and vengeance for evil doing. The just God will recompense every
man according to the quality of his work; so that in this regard the sinning
person, who does not change his sinful work, must look for no other pay from
God at any time, but the wages for sinful work, which the Apostle assures us in
Romans 2. is tribulation and anguish. Another is, A proportionable Retribution
according to the extension of actions or works; and therefore you read of more
stripes according to the greatness of the fault in the knowingly disobdient
servant. Now, as it were against the natural retribution of Justice, to give
unto the wicked as unto the righteous; so it were against the proportionable
retribution of Justice, to repay either no punishment to a greater sinner, or
less punishment for greater sinnings; That when he continues worse in sinning,
he should either prosper at all, or that the punishment should be more
mittigated, when the offense is more raised and aggravated.

5. Lastly, God would hereby teach all men, that no time, whatsoever, is safe
to sin: Before punishment come, it is not safe to sin; To ^each that no time is
safe to sin.
for we see that sinners do pluck down punishments, and as it is with the
winds, which bring the clouds, and fly away; yet the clouds pour themselves
down on the earth; so the sins which bring out the threatenings of God, though
in respect of particular facts, they are gone, yet the threatenings pour down
many a curse and misery upon sinners: and when punishments are off, it is not a
safe time to sin, forasmuch as God is still as ready to punish, as men are
forward to sin; as we may see in the Israelites, whose pride and murmuring
caused the earth to open her mouth, and to swallow up Corah, Dathan, etc. And
the next day when they murmured again, God presently sent the Plague amongst
them, which swept away many thousands of them; for as time is not allowed to
sin, so no time can at all secure the sinner from punishment.

Object. But now against all this truth it may be objected, That we do not
always see it so: that men after punishment, making We do not always see it
so.
progress in sin, find it to prove a worse work, in respect of greater miseries
and straits. Nay, Secondly, We see oftentimes the contrary.

Sol. I answer to the first part of the Objection, That you Distinguish Betwixt
Immediate, and Certain punishment.
must distinguish,

1. 'Twixt immediate punishment, and twixt certain punishment: It cannot be
denied, but granted, that a worse punishment comes not always immediately
unto the adventurous sinner: Indeed sometimes God does shoot an other arrow of
punishment, as soon as the sinner shoots up a second arrow of rebellion; as you
read in the Israelites case of murmuring; I say, sometimes God does thus, but
always he does not so. Sometimes he does so, that sinners might know his
Justice can be quickly even, and meet with a daring sinner; but always he does
not so, because that even great sinners might confess somewhat of his great
patience. Nevertheless, there is a certainty of a worse misery unto the
progressive sinner; for as when God defers a Mercy, it usually comes down in a
cluster; so when God defers a Judgment, it ordinarily falls down in a thunder:
he is therefore in the Psalms said to whet his sword. The whetting of the sword
is but a time of preparation, and a putting on a sharper edge to give the
deeper wound; so, etc. and he is said to be righteous in recompensing
vengeance, therefore there is a certainty of a worse punishment.

2. Twixt Visible punishment, and Real punishment: though to the eye of others,
a man may seem either not to be punished Betwixt Visible and Real punishment.
at all, or less now in his continued sinnlngs then before: yet the person may
be more really punished then before; the misery upon him may be a greater
misery, not for the quantity of the thing, but for the quality of his affection
to the thing; for that evil is always most grievously miserable unto us, which
meets us in our highest way of Love, or closest suspicion of fear. And again,
the greatness of the punishment is as God mingles more wrath in the conscience
at the time. Even a little outward misery, if it be joined with a greatly
accusing and condemning conscience, is a misery, more then all other miseries
besides.

Object. Yea, but we do see, that wicked men, who do continue their sinnings
more after their punishment, that their conditions Obj. But we see the contrary.
are so far from being worse, that they are most merry and prosper? Sol. 1.
This is not always true, but only in some, and but for some Sol. This is not
always true. This argues the sorer wrath. First or last they shall find it true.
time. 2. These very things prove to them very sore judgments; for by the abuse
of them (like an ill stomach, which gathers a surfeit upon good meats) they do
more increase their sinnings, and the wrath of God. 3. First or last they shall
know that it shall not be well with the wicked, and that between a former
punishment and a greater there may step in many mercies, as twixt the fits of a
Fever, some real slumbers and pauses.

Now I proceed to the Application of this Point, which shall be for Conviction.
1. Of the vanity and deluding presumption Use. Conviction of The vanity and
deluding presumption of the sinner.
in the heart of sinners, who imagine, that worse they cannot be, and as much
misery is befallen them as can be, and therefore they will on to their sins
again. Let us not deceive our selves; that God with whom we are to deal, is of
infinite power and wrath, and the conscience of a guilty sinner is capable of
infinitely many miserable impressions. The Be may leave her sting in the
flesh, and so be disabled, etc. Therefore let no man say as Agag, Surely the
bitterness of death is past; you know Samuel presently hewed him in pieces
before the Lord in Gi^gal. Alas! thou know not the wrath which is yet
behind. God does never fully manifest his wrath upon any sinner in this life;
nor does he punish him so in any kind, but that a greater judgment, a worse
thing, as Christ spoke to him in the Gospel, may yet befall him. Consider, that
as greater judgments are yet behind all the punishments which we have felt; so
it is Gods method to begin low, but to end his work of Judgment heavily: he
does by some lighter afflictions skirmish with a person, or a Nation, and if
they yield not, then he will bring the great Army of his Plagues and
Judgments. And again, know, that multiplication of sins is a just cause for
the addition of Judgments. Renewed sinnings are always the more heinous, and
strong in deserts; but renewed sinnings after punishment for sin, are yet of a
deeper dye, because They relish much of Presumption; though God has already
testified his displeasure, yet the sinner will adventure on his wrath, and
provoke him again. They receive universal condemnation, the sinner now sins
against all the ways of recovery; the Word of God which called upon him to be
wise, and to receive instruction, and to return unto him that smote; The
punishment or rod, which did tender him the sins which brought this upon his
back; The mercy of God which drew off the wrath, and though it might have been
a destroying sword at once, that destruction should not have risen up the
second time, yet it so wrought with the master, that he would try the sinner
yet a little longer, thou might have been among the dead, yea among the
damned for thy former sinnings, yet mercy has so tempered justice, that time
is left thee to repent, and this space thou abusest to sin again; yea, though
justice met with thee for them already, yea though mercy released thee yet a
little longer, yea though thou did confess these sins, yea though thou were
greatly troubled for these sins, yea though thou did resolve against these
sins; and if thou thus sinnest more, will not thy punishment be greater? Does
not God hate sins now as well as then? Or if thou be greater in transgressions,
will he be less in justice? Can thou expect mercy should come more easily,
when sin is raised more deeply. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck
(says Solomon, Prove. 29. 1.) shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy: The same may be affirmed of being punished; usually perseverance in sin
after punishment, brings a sudden and a sore destruction. God has many arrows
which fly over the heads, and after that he has arrows to wound the hearts
of his enemies. You know that there be not only warning-pieces, but
murdering-pieces in the roial artillery. The punishment which a man has
already felt for his sins, are but so many warning-pieces to repent, to return
from sin; but if men will harden their hearts, there are murdering-pieces; God
can so deeply strike, that destruction shall not rise up the second time.

2. The second conviction shall be of Duty: If the further Conviction of duty.
men go on in sin, the worse rhey shall speed; then let us learn a double duty;
1. To avoid such things as will occasion a further progress in sin after
punishment. 2. To apply our selves to such Avoid,
ways as may take us off from sinning being punished. 1. Vitanda, The things
which we must avoid as occasioning a further progress in sin are these 1.
Ignorant Misconstruction; as if Gods Ignorant misconstruction.
arrows did fly out as his, who shot at an adventure, and lighted on Ahab, so
that our punishments are but mere casual things; naked acts, but no lessons.
Nay brethren, if we had but an ear to hear, every affliction and punishment
has a voice to speak; this may be said of every punishment, what Ehud said to
^glon; I have a message unto thee from God. 2. Atheistical pride; as Pharaoh,
who is the Lord, that I should let Israel go? When a Atheistical pride.
person will exalt himself in the times of wrath, and will not tremble nor fear
before the Lord, but slights the operation of his hands, and for all this will
not lay to heart the hand of God, alas, this makes way for sinning.

3. Froward Impatience: when persons are sensible of punishment, but vex
against God, who strikes so close, yea and like that Froward impatience.
King in the strait, This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord
any longer? When men will forsake God because he does punish them, this is a
further sin, and makes way for more sinning. The soul, which is most apt
through a murmuring impatience to question God, will be apt through a
presumptuous confidence to sin against God; in the dead sea there is least
sailing, and in the raging sea, there is most ship-wracking.

4. Empty confessions, when persons satisfy themselves with words, and a mere
form of Repentance, putting on for the time a grave Empty confessions.
countenance, and fetching a sigh, and dropping a tear, and acknowledging that
all is not well; but all this while they search not to the root, they do not
strive to examine their hearts, to humble them, to cleanse and reform them; and
what then can be expected, but upon some convenient occasion the old heart
should return to its old ways and courses? Pharaoh confessed that he and his
people had sinned, but still he hardened his heart, and would not let Israel go:
Hypocritical humiliation or repentance, because rising from mutable causes,
lasts not long, nor changes the disposition of the soul. The sore which is but
covered and not cured, will break out again.

5. Negligent remissions: An heart which likes not to change its course, may ye
for the obtaining some special good, give out Negligent remissions.
unto the doing of much good, and for the removal of some evil, make a stop of
much sin. You may observe, that sometimes in the heat of a punishment, how our
hearts (perhaps) fall down before the Lord, and we are very urgent on him, and
very diligent; spend much time in his service, and a kind of watchful
tenderness is come upon us against sin, but then we let fall our hands, and our
candle quickly burns more dimly, our task abates, our affections grow slack,
our purposes, our services wear away, and we begin to grow as forward to our
sins as before: the liking of God, and of his ways and services cool, and
sinful occasions grow as pleasing and acceptable. Remember it, that man will be
quickly bad, who grows negligently good, and the soul which is weary of Gods
service, is ready for sins work.

6. Partial reservations; when men in or after punishment will Partial
Reservations.
profess against the great bulks of sin; and as Pharaoh (at length) was willing
to let the people go, but to stay the little children, so we will bid defiance,
and seem to take resolution against our former great iniquities, in the
greatness of them, but yet we will keep back and not part with such and such
things, which perhaps formally are not sinful, but occasionally they may (to
our corrupt affections) prove so. Why! how can it be but such a soul should
make yet a progress in sin, who reservs still an incendiary motive, a quick and
captivating incentive unto sin? The river will quickly overspread and fill the
channel if you give it way: spare but your self in occasions, and they will
bring on first the lesser trials of sin, and the lesser trials will quickly
engage you to greater adventurings, and some adventurings will easily bring you
to your old courses.

In the second place let us apply our selves to such ways as may Directions.
take us off from sinning, yet more after punishment, which you have heard does
make the condition yet worse. The directions which I would commend unto you,
are these:

1. In all punishment for sinning follow the writ, open it, and see In all
punishment for sin, search out the Cause.
whose name is in it; my meaning is, enquire into thy self, search diligently
for whose sake this evil befalls thee; as the Mariners in Jonah concerning the
tempest, they did cast lots, that they might know for whose cause that evil was
upon them; so should we in the presence of our punishment, when Gods hand is in
any kind upon us, search and lift up our hands unto God, to show us the special
reasons of his wrath and indignation; for though earthly parents do many times
inconsiderately in passion chastize their children after their own pleasure,
yet God does it wisely and never without cause; we may say of all our
punishment what the Prophet says to the Israelites, Jer. 4. 18. Thy way and
thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy wickedness, etc.
Punishments never prove reformations, until first they be informations; they
never cure the heart, unless first they clear the eye: We must first spell the
Lesson, before we can take it forth; therefore this do, if thou can not find
the specialty of thy provocations, 1. Look thy afflictions and punishments well
in the face; perhaps thou may in them see the very feature of thy sin which
has caused God to punish thee; very usually, that punishment which is a Rod,
is also a Glass, it shows us the fault for which we are lashed. 2. Observe thy
self in the estate when thy punishment does come; do but recall thy bent of
heart, course, ways, imagination, devices; sometimes a man is taken by the
punishment, when he is dealing in a way which does more especially provoke God.
3. Peruse the Word, and well consider what sins have brought down such kind of
punishment. Pares culpae. Pares poenae.
God does many times keep his course of the same punishments with the same
sins; else the Apostles dehortation of the Corinthians from Idolatry and
Uncleanness, which was the Israelites sins, for fear of the like punishments,
were somewhat vain. 4. Lastly, Regard the first and more frequent verdicts of
thy own conscience. There are two times when Conscience deals more home and
faithfully with us: One is, when we are to die; Another is, when we are to
suffer; in a time of judgment and affliction, we find, as Joseph's brethren did,
the remembrance of former evils, Surely this is befallen us because of our
brother, etc. said they: So our hearts tell us, Well, assuredly this comes upon
me for my Swearing, for my Drunkenness, for my Uncleanness, for my
Covetousness, etc.

2. When your sins are brought to light, that you can say, Here is my
punishment, and there are my sins; then go to God When the sin is discovered,
go to God in an humb^e confession of i^.
with them, to him that smote thee, By most humble and broken Confession, that
thou have done wickedly, but the Lord has dealt most righteously; acquit him,
but condemn thy self: Accuse and indite thy sinning soul; O Lord, thus and thus
have I sinned and provoked thee, etc. Deal ingenuously with the Lord, and
freely confess unto him, and never leave, until thy soul be afflicted for
sinning, as well as thy body; until thou can grieve a thousand times more for
thy sins, than for thy punishment; for the dishonor which God has felt by thy
sinnings, than for the smart which thou feel under thy punishments. By most
vehement and constant Petition; and that for two things especially, Go to God
by earnest petition for
viz.

1. Reconciliation with that God whom thou have so much provoked by thy
sinnings: As Moses said to Aaron, Take a Censer, Reconciliation. Numb. 16. 46.
and put fire therein from off the Altar, and go quickly to the Congregation,
and make an atonement: So let us speedily strive to reconcile our selves unto
the Lord, beseeching him to love us freely, to receive us graciously, to pardon
us for his own sake, to remember our sins no more, not to contend with us for
ever, but to cast our sins into the depths of the Sea, and mercifully to be our
God. And in this business of reconciling our selves with God, take notice, 1.
Of the meritorious cause of it, which is the blood of Christ, called therefore
our atonement, Romans 5. and our Propitiation, 1 John 2. 1. Now beseech the Lord
to look on thee in Christ, and to remember the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, which was shed for the remission of sins, and to make peace: Beseech
him to be reconciled unto thee in and through Christ, and do thou steadfastly
trust unto him by faith for it. 2. Of the means of it. To the Word, to Prayer:
O be earnest for such dispositions upon which the Lord will ^eal mercy and
forgiveness. He will be gracious to the cry of the mournful soul, Isa. 30. 19.
and to the penitent, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

2. Sanctification: Alas, if the Lord should lay upon thee Sanctification.
as many and as great plagues as he did on Pharaoh, and should they come as
thick on thee as on him, or any that ever thou did read of; yet if the Lord
did not give thee a sanctified heart, or if the Lord did not cooperate with
the afflictions in a sanctifying way, thou will be so far from desisting, that
thy heart after a while will grow as wicked as before. It is not absolutely the
punished soul, nor is it absolutely the troubled conscience, nor is it
absolutely all that we can see or say which will divert our future course of
sinning; but it is the sanctified heart, the new heart, which will make us to
leave old sins, and live new lives: Therefore to the Lord must we go under our
afflictions, and beseech him to open our ear to discipline, and to purge away
our iniquities, and to make us partakers of his holiness, and so to cause us to
bring forth the more peaceable fruits of righteousness: and note this, That all
this must be done not in a fit, for a little time, but habitually; we must not
cease confessing, until we can heartil^ mourn; we must not cease confessing,
mourning, praying, until we find the Lord reconciled unto us, and our hearts
changed and renewed. Now those sanctified Qualities, which more specially a
punished sinner should beg, to divert him from progress in sin, and to turn him
Sanctified Qualities to be begged. Hearty Contrition for sins past.
off from sin, I conjecture are these; 1. Hearty contrition for sins past: He
who is a merry Penitent, proves an easy Delinquent; if former sinnings be no
Grief, future sinnings will be no Fear; he will never with stedfastness learn a
good Course, who can without mournfulness come off from a bad Way. Beg of God
for ever to make thee sensible and mournful. 2. Real Conversion: That the very
frame of the Mind, Will and Affections be Real Conversion.
changed; the Frame more then the Form: that thou become a new Creature, get a
new heart and Spirit. 3. A sincere love of A sincere Love to God.
God: If thy heart knows not yet how to love God, it never forgot how to go on
in Sin; there is nothing which heals the Soul of Sin, so as the Love of God:
this sets the heart on him and makes it to cleave unto him, and tender to
please him. 4. Solid fear of God: A reverent awe, both of his goodness Solid
Fear of God.
and of his greatness; this will strike off security, and hardness, and
presumption, and set us in Gods presence, and keep the conscience tender, and
increase humbleness, etc. 5. Watchfulness over our special corruptions; which,
if any, will make us to Watchfulness over our special Corruptions.
halt soonest. Do not forget how much they did provoke God already, and how
assuredly bitter they will prove, if thou do resume them.

And he fain would have filled his belly with the busks that the Swine did eat,
and no man gave unto him. Verse. 16.

These words comprehend in them two things,

First, The utmost design of the sinful Prodigal, He would fain have filled his
belly with the husks that the Swine did eat.

Secondly, The utmost disappointment, of that utmost design, And no man gave
unto him. According to either of these, there are two Propositions observable
by us; viz. That a sinner will go through, and try the utmost extremities and
ways ere he will return from his sins. 2. That nothing shall avail the
shuffling and trying sinner, until he does return from his sins. When the Lord
forsakes a man, nothing avails to help a man.

That a sinner will try all ways, and go through the utmost extremities, ere
he will return from his sins. The Prodigal here Doct. 1. A sinner will try all
way^s, to the utm^st extremities ere he will return from his sins.
spends all, yet he returns not; he is pinched with famine, yet he returns not;
he joins himself with a Citizen, and he sends him to feed Swine, yet does he
not return: if he could have got but the husks which the Swine did eat; husks
are but poor, empty, light things, miserable nourishment; but if he could have
made any shift, any way to have supported himself, he would not have returned
unto his Father. Thus you read of Pharaoh, that though there were a Climax of
plagues upon him, and wonders of ruin upon his Land, and Cattle, and Servants,
rising like a Tide and Flood, yet till it came to his firstborn, and the next
stroke was to reach his own life, he would not obey the Voice of the Lord in
letting of Israel go; like obstinate defendants in a City, which will lose one
Outwork after another, and suffer the Undermining of their Walls, ere they will
come to terms of Capitulation. So we read of the Israelites before the
Captivity, how extremely they did endure a very succession of Judgments, and
variety of strange punishments before they would return? Amos 4. 6. Cleanness
of teeth, and want of bread; yet have they not returned to me, says the Lord.
Ver. 7. Rain was withheld, and great scarcity was there of water; yet, Ver. 8.
Have ye not returned to me. Ver. 9. Smiting, with blasting, and mildew, and the
Palmer worm, yet, etc. Ver. 10. Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, and the
Sword; yet have ye not returned. Ver. 11. Overthrowing some of them as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha, and pulling some of them as a firebrand out of
the burning; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. And thus was it
with them after the Captivity, all the famine and miseries, which they suffered
in the Siege, where the mothers were forced to eat their children of a span
long, Lam. 2. And all the merciless devourings of the sword, and all the kinds
of destroying sicknesses, did not turn them to the Lord against whom they had
sinned; but after all, they spend the utmost of their policies for safety,
running into Egypt, flying unto Ashur; they tried all sorts of fruitless
confidences, before they would return unto the Lord, therefore does the Lord
threaten to hedge their ways with thorns, and to make a wall that they shall
not find their paths. Hos. 2. 6. (i.) he would cast them upon such a condition
that they should not go any further, or if they did, they should have little
ease, they should walk as upon thorns, upon continual prickings and woundings;
and all this must be done before they will return to their first husband, verse.
7. Now for the clearer opening of this Assertion, consider of these particulars:

1. That it is to be understood of the natural temper of the sinner. The sinner
may be considered two ways under extremities: As This is to be understood of
the natural temper of the sinner.
effectually assisted by the preventing grace of God, which is of surpassing
virtue to renew the soul, and to conquer its stubbornness and aversness, and
effectually to persuade and draw in the heart to yield unto God, and to give up
its weapons of lusts. The which grace (if God infuseth) at any time whether
before, or under, or after afflictions, then the sinner does not wander in the
paths of perverseness, nor does he hold out so long, but in stead of trying all
ways to continue in his sins, he will speedily assay all the ways to be freed
from them. As left unto his own corrupt spirit, and the projects, contrivances
and ways thereof. And thus it is with him, like a besieged enemy, which will
retreat from hold to hold, and dispute every inch of ground, before he will
give up the City: So is it with the sinner, his heart will devise one defense
after another, and he has yet another shift, though he be many times hardly
beset in his name, or in his estate, or in his body, yea, or in his conscience.
And God does narrowly watch over him, and does spoil him of his many false
confidences, and deals more smartingly with him to yield and return; yet he
has not only much subtilty of spirit behind to delude all, but also he has
exceeding stubbornness of spirit to oppose all the means which are used for his
conversion.

2. We must distinguish of the ways whereby God does deal with a sinner; which
are of two sorts: Some are Victorious ways, Distinguish of the ways whereby
God does deal with a sinner.
wherein the Lord undertakes the conquest of the heart himself by the immediate
power of his own grace, to pluck down strong holds, and to cast down high
imaginations; upon which, as the conversion of a sinner does infallibly ensue,
so likewise presently and speedily; for this way exceeds the strength of
rebellion in sin, and in despite of it overcomes the heart. It is the stronger
man dispossessing, and the stronger hand pulling us out of the powers of
darkness. Others are Moral ways, which consist only in external means; not in
the infusing of grace, but rather in the proposal of it, and invitations
thereto by counsel, reproof, threats, rewards, and seconding this proposal with
some or many miseries: the Proposition, That a sinner will use all the ways
and methods ere he will return from his sins, is to be understood only, when
God deals with him in a moral way, by the presence of means only, (not
otherwise) for which his corrupt heart may be too strong.

3. We must distinguish of turning from sin: It is twofold, either Distinguish
of turning from sin.
Hypocritical, and feigned; and thus many times at the first, upon the very
denunciation of a Judgment, as Ahab; or upon the perception of it, as
Jeroboam, when his hand was struck; evil men may seem to confess, and to
grieve, and to forsake sin, and to seek unto the Lord, and pretend to serve
him. Real, and solid; when the heart is truly affected with a sound detestation
of sin, and the occasions thereof; and with a sincere affection of love to God,
and endeavor of new obedience. Though the former may be acted by the sinner
without the applying of himself to the utmost extremities, yet the latter is
not.

4. There are two sorts of sins in a person: Some which are more useless,
either for the profit, or for the pleasure of the sinner; There are two sorts
of sins in a person.
they are not the favorites: Others are more special, which are wrought into
singular affection; the custom of practice, and the much experience of their
damnable delights and revenues have exceedingly indeared the soul unto them.
Though a sinner might more easily be upon parting terms with an unprofitable
servant, an unserviceable sin; yet when the divorce is to be made twixt him and
his special lust, the sin of his love and affection, the sin which lies in his
bosom, this he will not easily part with. A man will endure much pain ere he
will part with his right hand, or suffer his right eye to be plucked out; he
will stir much, and rage much, and project much, and adventure much, ere he
will be persuaded to let this Benjamin go from him.

5. There are two kinds of subsistence: One is comfortable, wherein There are
two kinds of subsistence.
a person has many supports, even of a cheerful and a plentiful living, his
cup runs over, and his head is anointed with oil. Another is ubsolute, when
there is no more then to keep soul and body together: The proposition is true,
even in this latter sense, That a sinner, though God does shave off and suspend
all the comforts of his life, and does reduce him so short, that there remains
no more then upon what he can live, if there remains but any one sprig on which
he can take hold, if he can devise any one method of safety, so that he may
imagine I shall yet live and be safe, though I go on in sin, he will not turn in
unto God now, and leave his sins, but will live the basest of lives, rather
then he will relinquish the worst of lives (a sinful life) he will walk in
rags, and beg his bread, and leave all his friends, and become an outcast, and
a comparison of the most ignoble and infamous wretches, rather then, etc.

6. This proposition holds true of all sorts of extremities: Inward, This true
of all sorts of Extremities.
in those of conscience; a sinner oft-times will rather endure the sharp edge
of the Word, which speaks nothing but wrath and bitterness, yea he will live
under the galling Items, severe frowns, bitter accusations, intolerable
scourgings, and terrors and condemnations of his conscience, though his
conscience many times upbraids him in society, amazeth him asleep, terrifies
him in the dark, condemns him for a wretch, and claps on him the apprehensions
of Hell, which makes the foundation of his soul to quake, yet it falls out
frequently that he will not turn from his sinful course. Outward in all the
kinds of misery. A man's sinful ways may be like the putrifyings of the hody
which beget the worms, that eat it out, and consume it: so the sinnings of a
person many times do rot and consume his name, yea, all his estate; yea, all
his amity; yea, all his strength, and yet through the affectionate combination
of his heart with sin, he may rather endure infamy, scorns, poverty, desertion
of friends, famine and nakedness, any thing rather then he will leave his sin;
the wicked know no shame. Pharaoh did not set his heart for all this, etc.

7. Lastly, This is true not only in a transcient and passionate This true not
only in a transient and passionate sense, But in a more permanent and
deliberate sens.
sense, when through the rage of some present distemper and fury, a person will
hear no counsel (this is true of Nations as well as Persons) nor regard any
dealing, but is violently on a sudden carried away with the strong tide, or
storm rather, of his foolish mind and passions: But it holds true likewise in a
more permanent and deliberate sense: When a sinner is exempted from the times
of rashness, and is able to see and judge of his ways and courses to be
sinful. Yet is it possible, that he may suffer not a little, but much evil; not
in one kind, but in manifold kinds; not for a short time, but for some long
duration; many weeks, yea, perha^s many years, ere his heart does yield to
return from his sinful ways to God. Thus briefly have you the Explication of
the Assertion. Now I will touch two things more, and so proceed to the
Application. One, how this may be manifested to be true: Another, why it is, or
should be thus with a sinful heart.

Quest. 1. How it may appear, that a sinful person will try all, etc. ere he
will return? How this may appear to be true.


Sol. It may manifestly appear, if you consider these particulars.

1. The patient continuation of spiritual means, without any By the continuance
of Spiritual means without any fruit of Conversion.
fruit of Conversion: God has used incessant means, and followed and pressed
upon sinners by his Servants, the Messengers of his Word many times, and for a
long time, yet they repented not, nor turned from their sins. 2 Chr. 36. 15.
The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes
and sending: he did send, and send again. Ver. 16. But they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until
there was no remedy. So Matthew. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often
would I have gathered thy children together, even as an Hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Romans 10. 21. And to Israel he
says, All the day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and
gainsaying people.

2. The large expectations of God, for the returning of sinners, By the large
expectations of God for the return of sinners without success.
without any success: Luke 13. 7. Behold, these three years I come seeking
fruit on this figtree, and find none. Number. 14. 11. The Lord said unto Moses,
How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe
me, for all the signs which I have showed among them? Ver. 27. How long shall
I bear with this evil Congregation which murmur against me? Jer. 4. 14. O
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee. Hos. 8. 5. How long will it be
ere they attain to innocence? Jer. 13. 27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be?

3. The long and exceeding complaints of God concerning sinners: By the long
and exceeding complaints of God concerning sinners.
That he is forced still to bear with them; insomuch that their continual
sinnings have grown (as it were exceeding of Gods patience) too much for God to
bear any longer; Amos 2. 13. I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that
is full of Sheaves. Jer. 15. 6. Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord; thou art
gone backward, therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee; I am weary of
repenting. Isa. 43. 24. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins; thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities.

4. The Non-plusses (if I may so phrase it) that wicked and obstinate persons,
by continuing in their sins, have put God unto: By the nonplusses that
obstinate sinners have put God unto.
Hos. 6. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes
away. This is an Antropopathy, a speech after the manner of men. Not that God
does not know what to do; but he expresses himself after the manner of a
person who has used all the ways and means to reclaim another, and yet the
other, though sometimes cunningly he pretends a reformation, falls away again.
Now, says a father, such and such ways have I used, and such ways, and
nothing does avail; my son still is wicked, he runs on from evil to worse; I
know not what to do with him, I can think of no course, etc. So, Isa. 5. 4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked for grapes, brought it forth wild grapes.

5. Nay, the kinds of Despair (as it were) which God has conceived after many
dealings, to do any good, or to reclaim them By the Despair which God has
conceived, after many dealings to do any good.
from sinful ways: Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my place. Isa. 1. 5.
Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more? Jer. 23. 29.
I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you; reprobate silver shall men
call them.

6. Yea, those dying knells and farewell wishes and resolutions By those farewell
wishes and resolutions of God because of their Impenitency.
of God, because of the impenitency of persons, demonstrates this ttuth.
Expostulations upon utmost terms, Why will ye dye? And, You shall dye in your
sins; and I will forsake you; and I will utterly destroy you. Luke 19. 41. He
beheld the City, and wept over it; Ver. 42. O that thou had known, even thou,
at the least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace: but now
they are hid from thine eyes. Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive
with him.

7. Lastly, It may appear that sinners will try all ways ere they turn, and
endure much, By the multiplication of many By the multiplication of many
Judgments.
Judgments, and repetition of manifold calamities. The many wedges which are
knocked in one after another, show that the wood is tough and unyielding: this
giving pill after pill, shows that the corrupt humor is strongly rooted, Mic.
6. 13. I will make thee sick in smiting thee, because of thy sins. So that when
all is done and suffered, God must say and do what he promises in Isa. 57. 17.
I was wroth with him, and smote him, I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on
frowardly in the way of his heart. Ver. 18. I have seen his ways and will heal
him. When all is done, one thing more God must do, he must come into the heart,
and overruled, and heal, and turn it, and then it shall be turned.

Qu. 2. Now for the second Question, Why it should be thus, that sinners should
try all the ways, and endure to the utmost rather Why it is thus.
then to turn from their sinful courses?

I answer, It is not either, 1. Because sin is such an Excellent It is not,
Because sin is really beneficial to the soul.
thing, or really beneficial to the soul; by reason of which excellency and
use, a man might be moved to endure much in his body, for the preservation and
defense of it: for sin is an evil thing, and therefore worthless. Or, 2.
Because any sin is less evil then misery; and therefore this shall be endured
rather No^ because any sin is less evil then misery. But because, The sinner
does exceedingly love his sin.
then that shall be forsaken. But, 1. The sinner does exceedingly love his sin:
The heart of a sinner is set on his sin; he has made a Covenant with death,
and an agreement with hell. He loves darkness, and is held fast with the bonds
and cords of his sinful affections. A person does many times suffer pains
sharper then death, because he does exceedingly love life: Why? a sinner loves
his sin as he loves his life; nay, more then his life, the which he does often
hazard for ever to preserve his sin. 2. The sinner is a Fool: Put a fool never
so often in the Stocks, it does The sinner is a Fool.
him no good; he understands not the cause nor end of it. Evil men are
chastized and punished by God, but they know not nor understand; they know not
that their sins are the cause thereof, and that Conversion from sin is the end
thereof. 3. There is a mavelous stout Spirit of pride in the sinner; who is
therefore said to There is a stout spirit of pride in a sinner.
fight against God, and to resist him; and though he be smitten, yet to refuse
to return, and wilfully to transgress, and that they will not hearken.
Stifnecked are they called; and foreheads have they which cannot be ashamed,
and faces that cannot blush. 4. A vain presumption, From a vain presumption.
that yet their sinful ways shall be well at last. From the Contrariety betwixt
the ways of God and the Sinners heart.
that yet their sinful ways shall be well at last: It is but bearing a while,
and at length their calamities will off. He who goes on in a sinful way, is
never without some sinful project and chimeraes; silly fancies of some good,
and some support and wearing out of his troubles, etc. 5. There is a bitter
contrariety twixt the ways of God and the sinners heart. Light and darkness
are not more opposite; hence is it that in Job they say unto God, Depart from
us, we desire not the knowledge of the Almighty. And in Psalm. 2. They break the
cords in sunder. And Heb. 10. They are said to offer despite unto the Spirit
of Grace. Holiness and holy walking, ah! it is that which their hearts hate
more then hell; they will adventure their damnation, before they will affect
and practice holiness; no greater burden and torment to them then it. 6. And
sometimes Unbelief may be a special cause, why a sinner does thus shift and
From unbelief.
try. The guilt of his sins under his afflictions may lie heavy upon his
conscience, and he may be so wholly taken up with the apprehension of wrath and
judgment and an implacability in God toward him, that God will never show him
mercy, who has been so much and so long provoked, that it is in vain to
return, now there is no hope. 7. The Vanity of a corrupt Judgment, which
deludes From the Vanity of a Corrupt Judgment.
the sinner, as if he could be sinful and safe; or that he could subsist well
enough without returning to God.

Now I proceed to the Application of this point; the Uses are many, 1. For
Conviction of Error in Judgment. Use 1. Conviction. It is no easy work to
Repent.


1. That it is an easy work to Repent, and to leave sin. When I am sick, or
come to die, then I will think of that work. No, brethren, if the heart of man
be of so subtle a temper, and so perverse a frame, can afflictions do it of
themselves? if the love of sin be so strongly in grain, that many waters of
afflictions cannot wash it out, nor many beams of mercy melt and turn it; you
must then imagine it not to be an easy work to turn the heart from sin, if it
will adventure the loss of heaven, and the endurance of hell, and the actual
presence of many sore calamities; confess then, That the descents into sin are
easy, but the returns from it are not ordinary or facile. Faciles aditus
Dificiles oxitus, says St. Austin. More is required to Convert, then External
and Congruous Grace.
Where all the means, tending to the Conversion of a sinner, are opposed, and,
as it were, wholly defeated and frustrated, there the heart is not so easily
wrought upon to ret^rn. 2. That no more is required to Convert a sinner, but
External and Congruous Grace; as if the heart were like a Fish upon the hook,
which might be drawn at pleasure to the shore; or, like Wax prepared, and it
were no more but to put on the Seal: or, as if to Convert a sin, were no more
then to report a History, or to offer a man a Purchase. Nay, but there must be
likewise Impressions as well as Invitations; not only Means, but Grace it self;
not only the Rod and Word, but likewise the Spirit of God, and his mighty
Operation; not only a Voice saying, This is the way, but also the Spirit of God
which must cause us to walk in that way: there must be healing Medicines put
within the Soul by the hand of God himself, or else all the means in the world,
the Word, the Sacraments, the afflictions, and miseries, and examples may say
and complain with the Prophet, Isa. 49. 4. I have labored in vain: I have
spent my strength for naught.

2. For Information. 1. Of that excessive stubbornness and madness in the
hearts of us sinners. Good Lord! what an hand has sin Information, Of the
excessive stubbornness of the hearts of sinners.
over us. That terrors should arise like an horrible tempest within the
conscience for sinning, and drive a man to his feet; yea, to the dust, yea,
almost as low as hell. That his sinning should pull down one calamity after
another; take away the days of peace, of plenty, of safety, of health, and
darken them with war, and tumults; with scarcity, and indigence; with danger,
and trouble; with losses, and diseases; cloth a man's body with rags, fill a
man's body with rottenness, obscure a man's name with infamy, and yet, yet after
all, and under all that a person should hold fast his wickedness, which is the
cause of all and will not let it go, he will not be weaned from it, nor
charmed. No Mercy, nor Justice, nothing can dissolve the Covenant twixt his
heart and sin; but llke that Athenian Commander (if I forget not the story) who
when he was threatened to let go the Ship, held it; when one hand was cut off,
he held it with the other; when both were cut off, he held it with his teeth.
The Lord be merciful to us, thus is it with us, though God threatens, yet we
sin; though he strikes us in one ki^d, yet we sin; though in many kinds, yet we
sin; though losses though crosses, though death be in our doors, though it
rises on our bodies, though we lose earth, life, heaven, all, yet we still
sin, and return not, but stand it out, 2. Of the admirable patience and
goodness of God. Not without reason is he styled a God Of the admirable
patience and goodness of God.
of long-suffering, and to endure with much long-suffering the vessels of
wrath: and his Goodness, the riches of Goodness. Romans 9. 22. Romans 2. 4. That he
should look after a sinner, nay, speak, nay, strike, nay, wound, nay, almost
take away his life to save his life; that he should run after a proud and
resisting sinner, though a sinner does contrive the ways of opposing, and
cunningly strives against all the methods of mercy; yet that God should not
desert him, and give him over, but try again and again, and be actively ready
to give grace to an unwilling, to a resisting, to an obstinate, foolish sinner!
who but a vile sinner would obstinately abuse such great mercy? who but a God
would endure the same with so much patience? It is not that the Lord sees not
the ways of a sinner (for he is Omniscient;) It is not that he approves or
likes the ways of a sinner, (for he is most Holy;) It is not that he will not
recompense the ways of a sinner, (for he is most Just;) It is not that he wants
power to execute his wrath Habet in potestate vindictam, mavult tamen diu
to^ere patientiam, etc. Cyprian.
and displeasure, (for he is Almighty:) No, no, that he all this while spares
and holds up, arises only from his nature, which is delighted rather to show
mercy, and which is slow to wrath, and of much long-suffering. 3. Of the
freeness of Gods grace. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. Alas! what is Of the freeness of
Gods grace.
it that the Pelagians scribled of Merits, and Papists of Deserts and
Congruities? Lo here! naturally we run from God, and naturally we are fighters
against God, we resist the motions of his Spirit, the counsels of his Word, the
lessons of many Afflictions; and could we any how subsist, we would never lay
down our weapons. Did not the Lord show more compassion to us, then we do unto
our selves; did he not enquire after us, and follow us, and as it were beset us
on every side, and in a sort surprise us by the goodness and strength of his
own Grace, we should perish in our blood, die in our folly, and be lost for
ever; but this commends the exceeding graciousness of his Grace toward us,
that though we be not only enemies by nature, but rebellious also by practice,
yet the Lord shows pity to our wandering souls, will forgive our proud
rebellions, and will heal our foolish and gainsaying hearts. It is great mercy
for him to spare us, who might for our manifold sinnings so often have
cond^mned us; and it is the greatest mercy, that he does not only not leave
and damn us, but pities, converts, and saves us.

3. For Caution: And this is the main Use which I desire to For Caution. Take
heed of shuffl^ng with God.
insist on, To take heed of shuffling with God, and digging after pits, which
will hold no water, when God calls upon us by his Word, or by his Corrections,
to return from our sins unto him, and not to hold them fast, or to withstand
the Lord, and hold him off. Here I shall propound two things: 1. Some Motives,
or Arguments to hearken unto this; 2. Some Rules and Directions to guide us.
The Motives may respect us either, Motives.
1. in the evil of thus shuffling with, and delaying of God, 2. in the good on
the contrary. I will mingle them together. Consider therefore,

1. It is a most precious thing which the Lord offers unto us, It is a most
precious thing the Lord offers to us, when at first he calls upon us to return.
when at first he calls upon us to leave our sins, and to return unto him. A
thing may be reputed precious, partly, in respect of the necessity of it, when
it does so nearly concern us, that we are undone without it. Now what shall
become of us, unless we come off from our sins? What is it that we so shuffle
for, and will not let it go? What! is it a good in it self, or a cause of good
to us? and what is it that we so hold off from? is it not Grace and Salvation?
I shall perish with hunger, says the Prodigal. So may thou truly say,
Unless I do accept of this offer of Grace, if I do thus hold on in my sinful
ways, if I shuffle never so long, yet if I continue thus, I shall at length
perish for ever, Exodus 10. 7. Know thou not that Egypt is destroyed? so,
etc. to go on thus is the way of death, to return and submit is the only way
of life: I cannot be saved unless I repent: It is not a vain thing for which
the Lord strives with me, it is to give grace and life to my poor soul. In
respect of the excellency of it: Excellent things are truly precious. Now every
grace is excellent, it has a native beauty in it, and makes us a choice and
estimable people. Do thoroughly weigh a penitent and converted condition, how in
it we are partakers of the Divine nature; what a communion we have thereby with
God; what a fellowship with Jesus Christ; how we pass from death to life, are
made the sons of God, and become the heirs of glory, and will we then thus
devise and fly from our best good; Why! when the Lord offers grace to a
sinner, what does he therein but offer himself to be his God, offer Christ to
be his Savior, offer the pardon of all his sins, offer all the comforts of his
Spirit, the blessings of his promises, and the hopes of eternal life; and if
this be not an excellent thing, what is? can a better or greater matter be
tendered to you.

2. The Lord will not always be calling upon us, nor tendering repentance unto
life, and which brings forth salvation, as the Apostle The Lord will not
always be calling upon us.
speaks; My Spirit shall not always strive, says God, Genesis 6. God strives,
when he comes close in any means. 2. When he continues and multiplieth means.
And to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation, Heb. 3. God did deal often with the Israelites by wonders, by
words, by corrections; but you know that though he bore long with them, yet he
did not bear for ever; at length he consumed and made an end of them, he would
not continue to seek after them for ever. I will ease me of mine adversaries;
Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground. If we will not become obedient, he can
quickly destroy us for our disobedience. There is a day wherein God offers
himself to be ours in grace and peace, how long or how short that day is, I
cannot justly determine; only of this we may be sure, that God may in justice
refuse us for ever, if we refuse him once. Note these Scriptures, and they may
perhaps awaken and recall us, Ezekiel. 24. 12. She has wearied her self with
lies, and her great s^um went not forth out of her, her scum shall be in the
fire. v. 13. In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee (by
afflictions,) and thou wast not purged (by repentance,) thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee Ver. 14. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do
it, I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent: aocording
to thy ways, and according to thy doings shall they judge thee, says the Lord
God, Luke 19. ver. 42. Oh! if thou had known, even thou at the least in this
thy day the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine
eyes. Hebr. 3. ver. 10. I was grieved with that generation, and said, they do
always err in their hears, and they have not known my ways. Verse. 11. So I
swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest. Psalm. 81. ver. 11. But my
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. v. 12. So I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels.
These four places do afford us four sad things, which may befall persons
refusing to return from their sins, and deluding that work. 1. That the Lord
will not still be usi^g of means. 2. That he will draw off the means. 3. He
will leave such sinners, and give them up to themselves. 4. They shall never
enter into his rest; and this the Lord binds with an Oath. Every one of these
is a Judgment sufficiently fearful; for, what shall become of the sinner, when
the Lord shall (judicially) draw off the means of his Conversion? or if the
means be continued in common to others, yet he will not work any more upon that
person through them; but he shall despise the counsels of the Word, and slight
the message of all Afflictions; and that a person should run so far and so high
in a way of wickedness, that the Lord gives him over as a desperate, hopeless,
and forlorn wretch, to walk in his own counsels, and after the lusts of his own
heart; and when the Lord seals him up by his Oath, that this is a person who
shall never see my face; though many a sinner shall be pardoned and saved, yet
this sinful Transgressor shall never enter into my rest: Now what does the
sinner know, who seeks new ways to secure his sinning, and opposes thereby all
the ways which God uses for his converting, I say, how does he know, but that
the Lord will deal thus with him. God has dealt so with some, for dealing thus
with him; he closed up the day upon Jerusalem, and left the Israelites to their
own hearts lusts, and never answered Saul any more, neither by Prophets, nor by
Dreams, and threatens to remove the Candlestick, Revel. 2.

3. Consider, That if the Lord should show almost the Miracle of his Goodness
toward such a shuffling sinner, his Conversion The conversion of such a one
will be.
will be 1. the Harder, 2. the more Bitter. It will be the Harder, for as much
as all further degrees and steps The Harder.
in sinning, do engage the heart more to the love of sin, and naturally infers
more hardness of heart, and resistance against the motions of Grace. When a
Skaine of Thread is more and more clotted and entangled, it will be the harder
to clear it; and a Cord may be so knotted, that you cannot undo it, but by
cutting it asunder: Though the work of Conversion be not difficult to God, yet
the far running sinner shall find it, for his part, a more intricate and
hitching thing, to wind his heart from those acts and paths of iniquity, into
which it has been so long accustomed. However, it will be the Harsher; the
child which sticks so often in the birth, causes the birth to be Or the
harsher.
more sharp and dolorous. Usually, the more sinful a man has been, and the
longer he has held off God, his soul is more cut; partly with Fears, for now
he has many doors to unlock ere he can fasten on grounds of comfort; not only
that he has held on a course of sin so long, but also that he has so subtly
and frequently withstood the tenders of grace, and Gods manifold dealings with
him already. Though the person may have grace truly wrought in him, to make him
see all this vileness, yet it may be long ere his faith shall be able
comfortably to apprehend Gods mercy to forgive it. He may have doubts, not
only of mercy, but of the truth of his conversion, as if it seemed rather to
be compulsive; God may long withhold from him the testimony of his love, who
has a long time perversely withheld the consent of his heart from returning
unto him. Partly with Shame: It will be an exceeding reproach and confusion of
face unto this person, when ever the Lord converts him, that he should deal
with the Lord thus, resist his Spirit so much, and withstand that great
kindness of God intended to him by the many means which he has used. Surely,
after that I was turned, I repented, says Ephraim, and after that I was
instructed I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because
I did bear the reproach of my youth, Jer. 31. 19. Then shall ye remember your
own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves
in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Ezekiel. 36.
31. Ah! how it will rent and press the soul! Such a fool, such a beast was I,
to pursue my own ruin, to reject my own mercies, to slight so great salvation,
to vex so good a God, and to be so infinitely, unthankfully base, that if I
could have found any means of support, I would never have submitted unto him,
and left my sinful course: Ah! how does the Lord take this at my hands? how
unacceptable may my returning now be, which may seem rather to be forced
through extremity, than to spring out of any ingenuity. So that you see, by our
sinful shiftings, either God may deny us converting grace, or else we shall
make our Conversion much less easy and comfortable.

Object. But some may say, What can we help it? can we turn our own hearts? it
must be the Lord who must do that; and he We cannot convert our selves.
might do it at the first as well at at the last, if he would.

Sol. And is this excuse to pass for current? has not God dealt Answered.
with thee often? did not thou more often harden thine own heart, willingly
withdraw thy self, and all out of a love to sin? 2. Though thou could not
convert thine own heart yet this thou might have done in the times of
afflictions, etc. considered, what might move the Lord thus to deal with thee;
all, or some of the causes which thy own conscience did freely suggest, and the
ends which God pointed thee to, to reform them; And then to have gone to him by
vehement prayer, to convert thy heart from thy sins, to teach it righteousness,
to submit to his instructions: Thou might thus have gone to him who can
convert, and have waited on him in the means of conversion; but thou did nor
desire after him, nor delightedst to seek him, etc.

2. But What may we do to prevent this shuffling, and assaying of means to
support us in sinning, when the Lord deals with us, and Means to prevent this
shuffling.
calls upon us for the leaving of sin?

Sol. I would commend these five Directions. 1. Strive to be convinced of this,
That as long as the Course is a sinful Course, it Be convinced of this, That a
sinful course cannot be a (...) safe course.
can never be a safe Course. We may weary our selves in the multitude of our
imaginations and ways, but run what course you please, and pursue your own
devices, yet this ye shall reap of the Lord, you shall lie down in your shame
and sorrow; you may run to new experiments, but misery will follow your sins
the next time as well as this, and in every way as well as one way: Your sins
will find you out; and as long as you carry your sins with you, you cannot keep
off calamities from you.

2. Of necessity you must return or perish: Your sinful course is You must
return or perish.
a by-path, and leads to death. It is sinful, and you know it; and being
sinful, it must be miserable. To what end does the Patient excuse the taking
of the Receipt, the wholesome Balm? he must die if he does not receive it: So
consider, To what end do I thus vary my paths, and shuffle and seek supports?
there is nothing strong enough to secure a sinner; and let me sadly consider,
that I must one time or other leave these sinnings, or else farewell my Soul and
Salvation.

3. It cannot but be best, the sooner it is: I must return, or perish; too soon
I cannot return, and the sooner the better. A Our Return is best, the sooner it
is. Best For Safety.
Soldier of a middle age, a Counselor of a grave age, and a Penitent of a
young age, are still the best. The work which must be done, is best done when
soonest: Best, for Safety; for, thy life is very uncertain; and if thou do
not leave thy sins to day, thou may be in Hell (for ought thou know) for
thy sins to morrow: For Acceptance; the Lord likes it best, when For Acceptance.
one word of Mercy can cause us to trust, and one shaking of the Rod can cause
us to tremble, and when one command suffices to turn us; when upon the first
Arrest, we give up our Weapons, it pleases Sovereignty best: For Quietness;
for we do hereby deliver not only our Souls, but Bodies also, from many
troubles, For Quietness.
the sooner we do repent, and plainly yield; why! Conscience speaks peace the
sooner, and God commands mercies the faster; strong Sins, breed long
afflictions; but give up the Sins, and God gives up the Quarrel; throw over
Bichri's head to Joab, and he will presently remove the siege. If a man had
health, he might take sleep the better; but as long as the body is diseased, it
is unquiet.

4. Strive against those diverting Principles, which do draw thee from the
right and only way, and put thee on by-thoughts and Strive against diverting
Principles, as Presumption of Mercy, Or of thy own Power.
bypath, and a vain assayment of means to support us: As 1. Presumption,
either of Mercy, though thou do add drunkenness to thirst, and still find
out thine own inventions; or thine own Power: Thou may be hindered of the
time which thou do project, and may want strength to execute thy
purposes: For sinful practices do altogether weaken our power, whilst they
delude us with a conceit of strength hereafter. 2. Stoutness and pride of
spirit: Do not, in a bravery of villainy, dispute with the Almighty Stoutness
and pride of spirir.
God; it may prove a sad Victory to thee that thou art able to reject good
counsel, and to quench all good motions. 3. Delight Delight in sin.
in sin, which drowns the errand of all afflictions, etc.

5. Beseech the Lord, at the very first, to circumcise the stubbornness Beseech
the Lord to c^rcumcise the stubbornness of your hearts.
of your hearts, and to give you the understanding ear, and the obedient
spirit; that when in the Word he calls upon you to turn from your sins, your
hearts may fall down, and cry out, O Lord, turn me; and when by afflictions he
calls upon you to turn, you may presently humble your hearts, and cry out, O
Lord, pardon me; O Lord, heal me; O Lord, turn and save me: Let us all think of
this; You know that the Lord is displeased with us, and we have hitherto
hardened our hearts against the Lord; God has dealt with us once, twice,
often, in public, in private ways, and still we seek our own ways, delude the
work of Repentance, set nothing to heart, nor repent of our evil doings.

I I. Now I proceed to the Second thing, which is, The final The final
disappointment of all the Prodigals designs. Doct. 2. Nothing shall avail the
shuffling sinner, till he return, but God will disappoint all his p^ojects.
Some things premised. This is meant^ of a sinner whom God intends to convert.
disappointment of the Prodigals assays and designs, in these words, [And no
man gave unto him.] Whence I observe,

That nothing shall avail the shuffling sinner, until he does turn from his
sins; but God will disappoint all his projects, batter down all his
confidences, frustrate all his expectations, drive him out of all his harbors,
and overthrow all the means and ways which he flies unto. Before I confirm this
Assertion, let me premise a few particulars, that so you may rightly conceive
the scope of it. Thus then.

1. I intend the Assertion, of a sinner whom God does intend to convert; others
he may leave to prosper in their imaginations: For you see it raised from the
disappointment of a Prodigal, one whose conversion at length attended his
manifold afflictions, and as manifold contrivances to keep up his sinful
conversation: though such a person knows not it, nor thinks on it, yet God is
secretly against him, and thrusts him off from all the Cities of Refuge, unto
which he flies; which way soever he turns, and what course soever he applies
himself unto, whatsoever vessel he puts himself into, it shall be like Jonah's
ship, which will not be quiet until he be cast out, until he does come to
consider of his doings, and return.

2. I intend the Assertion, of an eventual, not of an instantaneous It is
intended of an even^ual, and not of an* instantaneous, dissppointment.
disappointment: (i.) Though for the present, and some short space, the cunning
sinner may quietly possess the fruits of his projects, and solace himself in
some carnal securities; yet at length, sooner or later, God will again besiege
him, and take him off. As it was with Adonijahs guests, though for some minutes
they did feast and rejoice, yet on a sudden they were all amazed, fled and
dispersed; or as it is with the Fowls which are pursued, though they light, as
they think, upon a prey, yet the Piece is discharged, and they are all driven
away: So is it with the sinner (whom God intends to convert) though he may
contrive a way (as he thinks) and quietly and safely go on in his sinful
course, and begin to sit down, yet thither also will the Hue and Cry come, and
he shall be forced away; all that also shall be dashed in pieces; there will
come down a Writ of Ejection, and cast him out of the house, as it did Ahab out
of the Vineyard which he had unjustly possessed; so that he shall not settle
long upon any way or course, without some special and effectual disturbance
from God.

3. The shuffling projects of a sinner may be reputed invalid, either, The
shuffling projects of a sinner shall be invalid several ways.
when that every thing or way which he contrives is rased and slighted: As a
Ca^^le, unto which the Soldiers fly, is demolished; so when the Lord takes off
that Friend, or utterly blasts that course of Living, that way of Trade and
Employment wherein a sinner trusted all his hopes with: Or, When that which the
sinner contrived as his help and strength, shall shut the gate against him, not
admit him into harbor: Or, when that which he has with much art and pains
contrived, is so far from proving an help, that it augments his grief and
trouble: There is, as it were, an evil spirit, put in twixt the plotting heart,
and the obtained help, so that it proves a bitter enemy instead of a friend,
and a further misery instead of a comfort. One of these ways does God make the
shuffling projects of a sinner unavailable; either by blasting that vain Gourd
which delightfully shadowed him; or by turning off the sinner from the Horns of
those Altars, unto which he flies in times of misery; or else by making the
land of Egypt, into which he flies for Bread and Corn, to become an House of
cruel Bondage; I mean, by turning his desires into, if not Curses, yet
intolerable Crosses.

4. Whether the cause why the sinner does shuffle, be inward, or The shuffling
sinner shall neither keep down strokes of conscience, nor keep off afflictions.
whether it be outward; whether it be the strokes of Conscience, or whether it
be the stripes of Affliction; he shall neither keep down the one, nor keep off
the other, but the inward wounds shall ever and anon be renewed. As all the
endeavors of the Mariners could not calm the Sea, until Jonah was cast out of
the ship; so until the sinner forsakes his evil ways, there is no escaping the
one or the other.

The Proposition being thus explicated, I shall briefly confirm it, by
resolving two things; 1. How it may appear to be true? 2. Why it is so?

Quest. 1. How it may appear to be a truth, that nothing shall How this may
appear to be (...)
avail the shuffling sinner, until he returns from his sins?

Sol. Thus: 1. The Lord does many times make all the helps and means which the
sinner uses, to be vain, and unable, and insufficient. God many times makes
all their helps and means insufficient.
This is imported in that phrase, Jer. 3. 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped
for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains. The Israelites were
distressed by reason of their sins, they were besieged and surprised by the
Babylonians; their proper work now had been to have returned unto the Lord: But
they still go on, and think to salve and secure themselves by the help of
Syria; but all in vain, they could not preserve them, they were not able. So
the Prophet, Hos. 5 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound,
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jarib, yet could he not
heal you, nor cure you of your wound. He alludes to a sick patient, and an
impotent Physician, who cannot possibly heal. See, all the strength unto which
they repaired, could not deliver or secure them; though they did undertake the
cure, the safety, yet they could not perform it. 2. That shame which has
covered the faces of Shame has covered the faces of sinners after all their
cunning experiments.
sinners after all their cunning experiments, confirms this truth also, That
nothing avails, etc. The Israelites tried the help of Assyria, but that was too
weak a Bow; then they have another project, they will make use of Egypt; nor
should this prosper, when they had tried it, they were ashamed of it; they had
propounded great matters, and boasted much, how able they should now be, and
how safe; but when all came to all, nothing at all came of it. J^r. 2. 36, Why
gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shall be ashamed of
Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. v. 37. Yea, thou shall go forth from
him, and thine hands upon thy head; for the Lord has rejected thy confidences,
and thou shall not prosper in them. 3. The Lord has The Lord has pull^d
sinners out of the sanctuaries to which they have fled. He has dashed in
pi^ces the refuges on which they trusted.
pulled the sinners out of their sanctuaries and helps unto which they have
fled; yea, has pulled them out like sheep, Jer. 12. 3. and taken them away as
with fish-hooks, Amos 4. 2. 4. He has dashed in pieces the refuges on which
they trusted; blown down the house which they took up to lodge in; as is
evident in the cracking of the King of Egypt, unto whom the Israelites in their
captivities fled; but the Lord brought on him the Army of the Chaldeans, which
utterly overthrew him. As it was with Jonah, who fled from the Lord, and got
into a ship for ^arshish; the Lord sent a wind and storm, which did never leave
working, till it purged Jonah out of the ship. So that strength, and secure
defense, unto which the sinner betakes himself, God does as it were besiege him
therein, and never leaves, until he has demolished it, and brought him to
terms of capitulation afresh. 5. By making his sinful contrivances to prove
his stronger and harder fetters; that He makes his sinful contrivances to be
his stronger fetters.
that way, and that comfort which the sinner took up as a shadow from the storm
and heat, has (like some hired Soldiers in the day of battle) wheeled about,
and become the strongest snare, and bitterest burden. As David complained of
some of his friends, that they did prove his most enraged and cutting enemies;
Or as the Prophet speaks, The men of thy Confederacy have brought thee even to
the border; the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee; they that
did eat thy bread, have laid a wound under thee. Obad. 7. So the Lord has so
overruled it, that he has driven the sinner to a miserable stand, even when
he has pursued the wyaes (as he thought) of his own contentment; in the
pursuing whereof, he has only followed a smiling River, into a most unquiet
and troublesome Sea. 6. By a most perfect beleagring (as it were) of a By the
beleagring of a projecting sinner.
projecting sinner: hedging up all his ways with thorns, or immuring of him as
in a Castle, Hos. 2. and shutting of him up, that there shall be no going out
or coming in.

Now for the second Question, Why nothing shall avail the shuffling sinner,
until he repents? Quest. 2. Reasons of it.


I conjecture these Reasons may be rendered. 1. That unhappy quality of sin
which makes every way unsuccessfull. It is like some Sol. The unhappy quality
of sin.
weeds which mar every dish they come into; or like some servants, under whose
hand nothing prospers: So is it with sin; it is an unprosperous thing, and mars
all; the worm in our gourd, arms every creature against us, it alone were
enough to batter down the strongest Castle, and to blast our sweetest comforts;
it thrusts in a secret curse upon all our undertakings. 2. Whiles the Lord is
against a man, nothing can be sufficient to help him. What can prove a friend,
Whilst the Lord is against a man, nothing is sufficient to help him.
while the Lord is an enemy? all things come on, or fall off, as God draws
near, or stands off from us; we can never establish our selves by our own hand,
nor against Gods. You may read in Hos. 5. 13. that Ephraim and Judah in their
distress betook them to the Assyrians, b^^ they could do them no good. V. 14.
For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of
Judah; I, even I, will tear, and go away; I will take away, and none shall
rescue him. But now whiles a man goes on, shuffling, in a sinful way, the Lord
is against him. 3. The sinner would never turn to God, if any of his own ways
could avail. If The sinner would never turn to God, if any of his own ways
could avail him.
the ship could any way hold out, the men would not come to shore; but when it
is all split, and they must perish if they swim not, now they make to the
shore: So is it here; the Lord must wholly unbottom the sinner, he must strip
him of all hopes and confidences, yea he must hold him as it were over the
flames of hell, before he will turn unto him; Oh! the heart of a sinner has
made a covenant with sin, which will not easily be disannul^ed; ordinarily,
till the very life comes to it, that a man sees he must presently be damned, if
he does not repent, he will stand it out against God.

Now to proceed to the Application of this: Shall nothing help the shuffling
sinner till he repents? then certainly the Lord shows Use. Then the Lord shows
great mercy to such a sinner.
great mercy unto him; it is one of the greatest judgments, when the Lord lets
the sinner alone, to go on and prosper; a miserable thing it is, when the
patient is given over, and no Physician will meddle with him; so on the
contrary, It is a great mercy, when the Lord does not give over the sinner, but
still follows him, and still disappoints his counsels, and undermines as it
were his projects, and is too hard for him in all his ways. Thou do often
times take it heavily, that the Lord should stand against thee thus, and pull
away this comfort, and stop up that way, and disappoint and defeat one
enterprise after another: Why! now consider, were it kindness to let thee make
up thy works to hold out against God? Were it a mercy to thee, to let thee grow
strong in a way of damnation? The Lord is still against me, say thou, I can
set on no way, but I find him my adversary; I cannot settle on any thing, but
he plucks it off: I answer, The Lord is not so much against thee, as thou art
against thy self; it is true, the Lord has not yet done with thee; Why!
because thou have not yet done with sin? and his hand is still stretched out
against thee, Why? because thy hand is still stretched out against him; he does
by variety of afflictions and crosses still pursue thee; but let me tell thee
one thing, It is better he should pursue thy sins, then thy soul; let the
afflictions be what they will, they are better then damnation; all that God
intends unto thee is only this, he will never leave thee, until he has
overcome thee; as they in the war take one out-work after another, until the
besieged do yield up: So is it with the Lord, he will drive thee out of all thy
holds, as he did Nebuchadnezzar out of his Kingdom, until he has brought thee
to humble thy self for thy sins, and repent. And what is all this, but a most
tender mercy which does thus pursue thee, only that it may save thee.

2. Then it is in vain to strive against God, to hold out, for nothing shall
avail: Are we stronger then he, said the Apostle? Can It is in vain to strive
against God.
our counsels lie hid from his wisdom? or can we set upon the ways where his
eye cannot find us? Can we grasp the comfort at all, which his hand cannot
instantly pull from us? Can we command ourown safeties, whilst he is displeased
with us? or prosper at all while he says, Cursed is every fruit of thy labor?
Can any way of thine enable thee against him who can crack a whole world at
once? thou can repose thy self on none but creatures, and had thou them
all, what were they, could they secure thee against their Lord? Is there any
creature a Castle strong enough to retein a sinful traitor against God.

3. Lastly, then let us speedily return, and at once take forth the lesson of
all Gods dealing with us; that which he aims at is our Let us speedily return.
repentance; Let former times and denials and subtilties suffice us; does God
strike off all thy friends, and lay them aside? does he pull thee out of every
harbor? do all the means on which thou trustedst forsake and fail thee? O then
return unto the Lord; all this befalls thee, purposely to bring thee home to
thy father; It is because the Lord would have thy heart, thy love, thy joy, thy
fear, thy hope, thy confidence, thy obedience, etc.

Luke 15. 17. And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of
my father have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? ver. 18. I
will arise and go to my father, etc. These words contain in them the happy
fruits of sharp afflictions, the dawning of the day after a stormy night, the
quicknings of a dead man, the penitential recovery of a sinful Prodigal. We
must not despair of men, though they be great sinners; a prodigal, riotous,
luxurious person begins here to return; nor must we be quick and peremptory in
our final censures of them, though (like a ship in many storms) they hold on
their sinful courses after many dealings, for the power which converts is
mighty, and the season to convert is different; God does as it were nurse up
some from their youth in grace, others he leaves to conquer in battle; when
their deseases are grown to age and strength, yet he can over-master and heal
them, as here the Prodigal. Concerning whose penitent estate (which was the
second General) you may he pleased to consider a double 11. The division of the
Text.
act: 1. One of his Judgment, described in this verse. 17. 2. Another of his
Will, described in verse. 18. the former is an act of inspection, in the viewing
of his bad life; the other is an act of resolution, to change and leave it;
that is, (if I may so call it) the fundamental work of Repentance, and this is
the formal work of it; the one is the framing, the other is the launching of
the ship.

I must treat next on the first work, which is the judgment of the The judgment
of the Prodigal expressed in
Prodigal. Some call it an act of Consideration, which is such an effect of
right reason, whereby we rightly understand and judge of things; Others
conjecture it an act of Consultation, wherein he did deliberate and debate his
way and condition thoroughly in his mind, in comparing it with another opposite
condition; so then in this judicious working of his you have:

First, A serious consideration [he came to himself] (i.) now he began to
bethink where he was, and what he had done; like a A serious consideration.
mad man before he still raged, and ran on, never minded any thing but his
sins, but now his reason comes into joint again, he soberly and in good
earnest considers of his course and estate.

Secondly, A wise consultation: Ah! thinks he, I have brought my self into a
miserable condition, I am even ready to perish A wise consultation.
with hunger; I have gone on so far in sin, that if I return not, I am lost for
ever; I have tried all the ways that I can imagine, but they prosper not; die
and perish I would not, is life to be had no where? Where might such a poor
famisht creature find a bit of bread to save his life; Now I think on it, I
have a father living, and he has bread enough, even his meanest servants have
enough, and to spare; he has bread for servants, will he have none for a
child? they have enough, I have none at all; they have to spare, and I hunger,
I perish with hunger, my condition is most miserable, their condition is most
plentiful; Well! thus I will not rest, I will arise and go to him, etc. Before
I handle that Assertion which the text will immediately afford, there may be
many not unuseful observations, which occasionally and collaterally fall in: I
will but mention them unto you, and then sit down upon the principal intention
of the Verse.

1. That great afflictions may end in a sweet conversion; or, the sharpest
miseries, may prove a means to bring us to the sweetest Great Afflictions may
end in a sweet Conversion.
mercies: Storms, though they be to some shipwracks, yet they landsome; the
prodigal met with famine, and that brought him back to his fathers house for
bread. I had perished, said one, unless I had perished; so may many a man say,
Had I not been afflicted, I had been damned; my great losses have proved my
greatest gain; I never fell into the love of God, until I came under the
scourge of God.

2. That even a great sinner is not incapable of mercy or grace; a luxurious
prodigal, who spent all among Harlots, is A Great Sinner is not incapable of
mercy.
now returning home to his father, a penitent and grieved child: and the reason
is this; Though the sins of a man be great, yet the mercies of a God be free,
and mercy advances its own glory, when it shines on the greatest sinners. Sin
is great, but grace is stronger, it can quicken dead men. As the knottiest
wood, when it is squared, proves of strongest service; so the vilest sinner,
once converted, proves the faithfullest and activest instrument of glory to
God; and lastly, God does extend grace to great sinners, that no sinners might
despair.

3. That God does many times permit the sinner to try to the utmost, and then
converts him. A long season ere some return: God sometimes permits the Sinner
to try the utmost, and then converts him.
as Paul to breath out persecutions, and to get authority to bind all, etc. and
then he is struck down; hereby he magnifies his patience, and more demonstrates
his mercies and goodness, that after all, he will yet accept of such a sinner,
and pardon him.

4. That an Unconverted man is a mad man, he is besides himself. Sin bereavs
the sinner of the right use of reason, and he An Unconverted man, is a madman.
never comes to be sober, to be himself, until he does repent; whatsoever fury
of spirit, wildness of fancies, rendings of clothes, tearings of bonds,
untameableness, ragings, inconsiderations, are extant in madness, the same are
to be found in a mere sinful heart and life: all these propositions are
observable and useful, but that which I intend to insist on, is this:

That a serious Consideration, and the right Comparison of the miserable Doct.
A serious Consideration, and right Comparison of the miserable state of a
sinful Condition, and happy state of a Converted Condition, are steps to true
and speedy Repentance. What this Serious Consideration is.
estate of a sinful Condition, with the happy estate of a Converted condition,
are the prime steps and occasions of a true and speedy Repentance. For the
Explication of this point, I must open some particulars; 1. Concerning a
Serious Consideration of a Sinful Condition: It is an Intentive work of the
Judgment, wherein it does narrowly and diligently meditate on the whole estate
of sin. It is called in Scripture, a remembering of our ways; and sometimes a
bethinking of our selves, and a seeing what we have done, a pondring of our
paths. It is opposed not only to Ignorance and Nescience, but also to
Negligence; yea, to rashness and suddenness; and indeed it is a very deep
searching, and minding, and weighing of matters: When a man sits down and
museth, so that his mind and thoughts are thoroughly employed, he makes it a
special business, he bends all his strength rightly to inform himself, to bring
himself to a right understanding of his estate; this is a proper consideration.
There be two kinds of thoughts and mindings: some are only Intuitive; they are
but the cast of the eye, a glancing, lightning motion. Others are Discursive,
fully searching; the mind in them does thoroughly insist on the Natures, Kinds,
Circumstances, Occurrences and Issues of things, it is taken up with it as a
business. The serious consideration of a man's sinfulness, falls into this
latter; it is not a confused work, or a light overly sight of sin, it is a
settled and deep pondering of the estate in the Qualities, Acts and Fruits of
it; Nature, Number, Circumstances, Danger: v. g. When I seriously consider of
my sinful estate, I reflect on my self, what kind of life I lead, what are
those qualities, what those ways which I find and walk in: my Thoughts, my
Affections, my Speeches have been thus; and thus my actions, and thus my course
of Life. I have many bonds upon me to serve the Lord, and not to sin against
him; but, Wretch that I am, I see all my ways (which I took for pleasures and
profits) have been sinful and vile. By them all I have violated a righteous
Will, dishonored and provoked a great God (whose wrath is a consuming fire) I
have (to satisfy them) lost all my comforts, caused many evils to others,
brought many miseries on my self, put Christ to death, and, if God be not
merciful, lost my miserable soul for ever. These ways (will I not believe mine
own eyes?) are extremely sinful, and therefore (should I not believe the
Scriptures) are damnable: many a year have I run this course, and often times
under checks of Conscience; very much evil has already been upon me, and all
for sin; some troubles of Conscience: And that wrath which God threatens and is
behind, is terrible. If I go on thus, I perish for ever; for whilst I keep my
sins, the least sin of them, I must necessarily part with God, and lose my
soul. Tell me, O my vainly deluded soul, can that be good which God hates, or
safe, which God does curse? Would thou dye thus? O then thou dyest for ever;
and why then will thou live thus any longer? O thou have presumed too far
already; perhaps Patience will bear no longer, and Mercy being often abused,
may be for ever recalled; and then, thou, O my Soul, then whither will thou go?
No, no, we must no more of these forbidden fruits, and no longer must we trade
in the paths of death; there is a God who has looked on thee all this while,
and hates thy ways, and has sealed his implacable wrath with an Oath if thou
return not: Come, my soul, think aright of God, of thy past acts, of thy
present estate, of thy future condition; believe me, thy Guilts are many, thy
Accounts will be bitter; God has been still dishonored, he will not be
mocked; let us return, for we are out of the way of Heaven, and are even upon
the brink of Hell.

2. Concerning the right Comparison of the miserableness of a What this right
Comparison is Opposita juxta se posita, etc.
sinful, with the happiness of a penitent Condition, I need say but little: It
is nothing else, but after a distinct view of either, to set the one against
the other in the Nature, Kinds, Qualities, Concomitants, Ends and Issues, v. g.
Thus base and foul is an In penitent estate; thus excellent and glorions is a
Converted estate; That how opposite to God, This how suitable; That how odious
to God, This how acceptable; That how covered with threats* This how enriched
with promises; That is a cloud of thunder, This a river of delight; That is a
path of misery, This a way of mercy: in that God Abhors me, in this God loves
me; in that I feel his Frowns and strokes, in this I feel his Smiles and
comforts; that brings down all Curses on me, this all Blessings on me; In that
I show my self a Rebel, and do nothing but dishonor God, in this a Servant,
and in some measure bring him Glory; if I continue in that, farewell all Mercy
and happiness, I perish with hunger, I am lost for ever; if I attain to this,
God is mine, Christ is mine, Mercy, Pardon, Favor, Comfort, Grace, Heaven,
Happiness, I shall be saved for ever. Now, O my Soul, thou see both Estates
in their Nature, in their Fruits, in their Ends; yea, thou have felt the
bitterness of the one, say, Is not Mercy better then Misery? is not God better
then Sin? is not Heaven better then Hell? is not Plenty better then Famine?
Life, then Death? O then, arise, up, be gone, relinquish thy course of Sin, of
Misery, of Death, of Hell, and arise and go by true Repentance unto God, unto
Christ, unto Grace, unto new Obedience, unto Mercy, unto Joy, unto Blessing,
unto Life, unto Eternal Life, and that most happy, etc.

3. The third thing is to clear it, How these two are prime steps How these are
prime steps to Repentance.
to Repentance; viz. A Consideration that a sinful course is most miserable,
and a penitent is most happy and comfortable; are steps, etc. Only premise a
difference twixt a Cause, and twixt an Occasion of Repentance. The Spirit of
God is the Cause, these considerations are Occasions, and work by way of
argument or means. They work by way of Argument or Means proved, By Scripture.


1. That they do so, appears by Scripture, 1 King. 8. 47. If they shall bethink
themselves in the Land whither they were carried Captive, and repent. Ezekiel. 18.
28. Because he considers and turns away from all his Transgressions, etc.
Nay, if inconsideration be given as a proper reason, why some repented not (no
man repented, saying, What have I done?) then e contra, Consideration of our
sins must be a right step unto Repentance: Here you see clearly, that solid
consideration is, as it were, the Foundation of true Conversion; there it
begins and takes rise: there is a Bethinking of sin, before a Repenting from
sin.

2. Nay, and it is evident in Example too: I thought on my ways (said David,
Psalm. 119. 59.) and turned my feet unto thy By Example.
Testimonies: Like a Traveller, who in a Journey stands still and considers
with himself, surely this way is wrong, I am out of my way, and then he turns
about and gets him into the right way again. So in this case, the like may be
said for comparison of an Unconverted course, with the happiness of a Converted
and penitent condition, Hos. 2. 7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to
my first husband, for then was it better with me then now. The condition in
which the Church then was, was a condition of much misery and affliction; her
way of sin was hedged up with thorns, verse. 6. and the way of obedience she
considered of to be a path of mercy, and much prosperity; and comparing the one
condition with the other, hereupon resolves, to return to her first husband
(i.) to turn unto God by true Repentance.

3. It may be cleared by Argument and Reason, that these two, viz. Solid
Consideration, and Right Comparison, are steps unto By Argument.
Repentance.

1. For Solid Consideration, thus: If inconsideration be the cause of
impenitency (or of going on in a sinful course) then Consideration For solid
Consideration.
is a proper means and way for Repentance; for as much as these two are
contraries, and contrary causes produce contrary effects; but inconsideration
is a cause of impenitency, so the Prophet, If inconsideration be the cause of
impenitency, then consideration is a proper means for Repentance.
Jer. 8. 6. No man repented him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done?
every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. They
minded not what they did, whether lawful, or unlawful, or what would be the
issue of these things; but like the horse, which without fear or wit rusheth
into the battle among swords and pikes.

2. Consideration of sin, removes many qualities which keep the Consideration
of sin removes many qualities of sin, which keep the heart ^n impenitency. as,
heart in impenitency; therefore it is a good step and way unto Repentance.
There are three qualities which hold fast the soul from returning:

1. Ignorance; therefore darkened understandings, and hearts alienated from the
life of God, are conjoined, Ephesians. 4. 18. a blind mind, and a wicked life, are
inseparable; yea, greediness to sin, and ignorance, are there also coupled,
verse. 18, 19. no man so forward Ignorance.
to sin, as he who knows it not. Now solid Consideration removes ignorance, it
opens the eyes of our understanding, and makes us to see and behold that evil
in sin which we never saw before; in a right consideration there is 1. Lumen
scientiae. 2. Conscientiae. 3. Experientiae.

2. Security; for presumptuous men will never leave sin, if they may be safe.
He who fears not miserable evil, will not be Security.
persuaded to forsake his sinful evil: He who thinks that he may be wicked and
safe, will be wicked still; nay, he adds drunkenness to thirst who presumes of
peace. No evil shall befall us, said they who despised all warnings to
Repentance; but solid consideration removes this security and presumption; it
makes the soul to see, that as sin is an evil thing, so it will prove a bitter
thing; and that the way which is sinful (of all ways) is the most fearful: it
makes the sinner to behold the Angel with the sword drawn in the way of sin; my
meaning is, to behold God exceedingly displeased, the Wrath of God revealed
against all Unrighteousness, severely threatening, and one who will assuredly
execute his wrath to the utmost, if sinners will not hearken and return; by no
means acquit^ing the guilty: Except ye repent ye shall perish. 3. Hardness of
heart: That brawny Rockiness which is ever accompanied with Hardness of Heart.
an impudent resolution, casting off, and slighting all means, and which is
gainsaying, or frustrating all the Lessons of Mercies, Afflictions, Ordinances,
etc. they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the
Law, etc. Zach. 7. 12. But solid consideration helps much against this
unsensible temper; it is of great force toward the melting of the heart,
working strongly upon the affections, as Peter thought thereon and wept
bitterly. Then shall ye remember your ways, and shall loath your selves: For
now a man sees indeed that he is in a very evil condition, and lost for ever,
if the Lord be not the more merciful to him; and this will startle him
somewhat, pierce him, make him, with them in Acts 2. cry out, Men and brethren,
what shall I do?

3. Solid Consideration of sin, makes sin appear to the soul in Solid
Consideration makes Sin appear in in its own proper Nature.
its own proper nature, colors and effects: As we are drawn to ^ommit sin, so
likewise to continue in it: through falsehood and error, we are deceived and err
in our hearts, and therefore we continue in sinful ways; but as Truth does
rise in the mind, so Reformation will appear in our hearts and ways; know
therefore that sin appears unto us two ways; either Erroneously, as invested
and clothed with pleasures, profits, much serviceableness to our ends, and as
satisfactions of our desires; as Judas looked on his sin in the money, and went
on; and thus they tend to impenitency, they keep us fast in an evil way,
because of sensible sweetness. Or, Properly, and nakedly as sin; as the
Violation of a most holy Will, dishonor of a great God, and separation from a
good God, and as exposing us to the wrath of God, curse of the Law, and pains
of Hell and all outward Calamities. And thus apprehended, new Arguments and
Reasons of hatred and Detestation arise within the Soul: Should I love that, or
live in that, which is Gods dishonor, and will prove mine own damnation? My
troubles, losses, fears come all from my sins; these are my sins and my doings,
they are the cause of all this trouble, inward and outward: But solid
consideration makes sin to appear as sin in its own nature and true effects;
therefore it occasioneth hatred of sin, and consequently Repentance.

2. For Comparison of the misery of a sinful, with the happiness Comparison of
the misery of a sinful, with the happiness of a penitent condition, a step to
Repentance. For, This breeds sound Judgment of things that differ.
of a penitent and converted condition; that this likewise is a stepped and way
to Repentance, may be thus proved:

1. This Comparison breeds sound Judgment in us of things that differ: All
corrupt works are rooted in a corrupted mind; like ill rhumes in the Head,
which come from ill qualities in the Stomach; or rather like some ill diseases
and irregularities in the Lambs, Arms and Feet, which come from unsound humors
in the Brain. So it is in this case, men go on confidently in sin, and are
taken excessively with those poor baits of sensual pleasure and profit, as if
there were no other pleasure, delight, gain, acquirable, or to be found, but in
the ways and service of sin; as they in hell, think there is no other heaven:
Or as foolish children, who conceive no other sport or delight like a rattle or
dirting their hands, etc. But now, when by a comparison and true survey of
either estate, it shall appear unto the soul that all these sinful pleasures
and profits are but stolen waters, and at the best but for a season, they will
end bitterly; and on the contrary, That Repentance from sin makes way for the
most precious fountains of the most living comforts; that it enables a man for
a nearer conjunction with the truest happiness, and fullness of most infinite
goodness, and lets in to such pleasures and joys which pass all understanding,
etc. Now the soul is reduced to a right judgment, and begins to contemn those
false, vain, deluding temptations by sin, and is carried off to another course
or way which will afford the real, solid, superlative advantages in happiness
and comfort, etc.

2. This Comparison will win our love and affection to a Converted and penitent
condition: It is true, that as long as the heart loves This wins our love to a
converted condition.
sin, it will never leave it; for love is an iron clasp, a strengthening
quality, a strong and tenacious quality; but if a man's love be changed, then
his sinful ways will quickly be changed; for that way does the heart and life
go, that love does go; they are not out who say that Amor is Radix actionum, as
well as Passionum. Now by a right comparison of estates, there will appear in a
converted and penitent condition the sole and sufficient causes of Love; viz.
Good, and the best good, and only good, and most proper and suitable good; all
which is apt to draw love, and consequently Repentance, for as much as
Conversion from sin, begins in love to God.

3. This comparing of estates, in the wofulness of the one, and This
occasionally stirs up the beat to fly to God by Prayer, and in the use of
means.
in the happiness of the other; that the one is death, and the other is life
(as Moses propounds it to the Israelites) occasionally stirs up the heart to
fly unto God by prayer, and in the use of other means, for grace and ability to
leave the paths of death, and to walk in the ways of life; for naturally men
do affect life and happiness, and are afraid of death and misery.

The first Use which I would make of this shall be for Information. Use For
information. Of the cause why many are yet in their sins.
You here see the Cause why many are yet in their sins; that they repent not,
though we preach, though God punishes, though man counsels. Surely they never
yet did search their hearts and ways, they never did consider of what they
have done; they are like the Laodiceans, who thought themselves to be rich and
increased, and to stand in need of nothing; but they never yet saw their
blindness, nakedness, and extreme poverty and misery. There are many duties
unto which men will be persuaded, as to hear the Word, receive the Sacrament,
give some Alms, say some Prayers, and now and then to confer of some good; but
of all the duties which do so nearly concern them, they are hardly persuaded to
this, viz. to consider of their sins: it is true, they will confess, That all
men are sinners, and themselves too, but as some do with their debts, they care
not to see and view them; so many with their spiritual estates, they have no
mind to search into them, to look them over, to meditate of the Vileness of
them.

Consider these things, 1. That this inconsideration leaves many a sin already
committed upon a sad account. God does consider Considerations to such as do
not Consider their ways.
them, though we will not; they are in his book and before his eye, though we
will not think and look on them. 2. That it ripens sin exceedingly: The heart
which will not consider of past, will break out into sin future; it will be
high in sinning, if negligent in considering; he will venture deeply, who knows
not the nature nor the merit of sinning. 3. All the work of Repentance will lie
flat and dead: Why? where can be that brokenness of heart? that filial
lamentation for sinning? that remorse of spirit? that indignation, that
detestation of it? that resolution against it? that watchfulness and fear?
until by a sound consideration we come to see the vileness and miserableness of
sinning, etc. He who thinks his way right, will not turn aside; and that man
who knows no better, will never leave, or change, a bad course. 4. You
advantage Temptations exceedingly: You are under the edge and power of them
all, for you see nothing to hinder you; the motions to sin will pass without
any contradiction, for you know not the evil nor misery of being impenitent.
Great sins will seem but little, little will seem none; how easy is he to sin,
who considers not the great evil in sin? 5. All the edge of the Ordinances is
blunted and dulled by inconsideration; they are but water on the Tiles, which
pass away: For what are Threatenings against sin? what operation have they on
us to make us tremble and humble our hearts, whiles we hear them as Pieces
discharged at others, not at our selves? And so, what force have the Precepts
for new Obedience, or the Promises for much mercy to the Penitent, until we see
that we are the men (as Nathan said to David) whom all this concerns. 6. You
will never prize Christ aright, nor the love of God in giving of Christ, nor
will you ever seek him to purpose (with hungrings and thirstings) until you do
seriously consider of your sinful estates: A man, if whole, will not seek to
the Physician, and if he has but a scratch, will not send to the Chyrurgion:
No, sense, or slight sense of sin, has no influence on ou^ affections; but let
a man sadly view and find out that he is bad indeed, out with God, ready for
Hell, must perish for sin, this man will cry out, Is there no Balm in Gilead?
is there no hope for us sinners? He will enquire for a Savior, and when he
knows him, he will with tears beseech him (O the hope of Israel and the Savior
thereof in the time of Trouble!) Master, have mercy on me or else I perish: if
thou can do any thing, save me. 7. You will never come to any true
setledness, nor grounded assurance of peace with God, nor in your own
Consciences, until you do thoroughly consider of your sinful conditions and
estates: For how know you whether you be good or bad? in Covenant, or out of
Covenant with God? that he will save you or condemn you? what shall become of
you when you die? Until you by solid Consideration find out the vileness and
miserableness of your sinful condition, out of which you must indeed be
translated, if ever you would be saved, or know assuredly that you shall be
saved. 8. You will not know how to make special requests unto God: For you know
not the nature nor danger of that pride, of that hypocrisy, of that
uncleanness, of that envy and malice, etc. which are in you: When we do not
know what our selves are, what our estates are, we can never make special
requests for the supply of special wants; either we make no prayers at all, or
only general, and faint, and flat Petitions. 9. Lastly, If you will not think
on your ways with a Penitential Consideration, you must one day think on them
with a Judicial Consideration: It Is better to consider of them now and Repent,
then to feel them and find them in Hell and be Damned.

Object. But you will say, We are Ignorant, and it belongs to This belongs to such
as have learning.
such as have Learning to consider thoroughly of their sinful estates.

Sol. 1. It does indeed belong to the Learned, but not only to them: A learned
conscience is necessary for every sinner, though not a Answered.
learned head: the Subject who should consider, is not the learned man, but the
lamed sinner; art not thou one? 2. God has given thee a Reflexive Faculty, a
conscience, a memory inabling thee to review what has been done; thou have
these still in thee, and thou can make use of them for other businesses; why
not in this? 3. But then, study the Word more, that thou may thence be
enlightened to conceive of sin aright, etc. get knowledge, get understanding, etc.

Obj. But we are not at Leisure, we have so much business to do, etc. We are
not at leisure.


Sol. 1. This is a most necessary work, it deserves thy pains and time: What,
not at leisure to save thy soul? at leisure Answered.
to eat, to drink, to play, to be idle, to sin, and not at leisure to consider
of sin? to repent of sin? to save thy self from sin? Have you leisure to go to
Hell, and none to go to Heaven? 2. It is a most Beneficial work: it will
deliver thee from Hell, and make way for Heaven. 3. It is the m^st excellent
work that thou can spend time upon, the change of thee from Sin, to Grace;
from a sinful, to an holy condition; it is a glorious change, even into the
Image of God in Christ.

Object. But it will make me nothing but mourn, and sigh, and Object. It will
make me morn, despair, and fear. Answered.
despair, and fear.

Sol. 1. So Satan tells thee; so does not God nor his Word tell thee. 2. If
consideration of Sin, breeds godly sorrow for Sin; and Godly sorrow, Repentance
unto Salvation, thou have little cause to grieve to be thus grieved. 3. Nay,
the neglect of timely consideration, that is the cause indeed of such fear and
despair. O, say men! had we thought of this course, known this heretofore, we
had never run on so, we had never come into this extremity of horror, etc. It
is with sin as it is with diseases, if taken or not taken in time.

Another Use which I would make of this Point, shall be of Use 2. To Settle and
Relieve Troubled Souls.
Satisfaction to settle and relieve troubled Souls, who fear much whether they
have ever thoroughly and rightly considered thus of sin or no; and consequently,
fear the truth of their Repentance. For the fuller satisfying of them I will
propound some Cases, the Resolution of which may afford more clear Some Cases
Resolved for Satisfaction. Case 1. How a man may know his Consideration is
Right. If it work in him a Condemnation of Sin.
light:

1. How a Christian may know that his consideration of sin is right and
penitential? I conjecture thus,

1. If it work in him a Condemnation of sin: Before a man consider aright of
sin, he is ready to call the proud happy; he knows how to commit sin, and to
approve it, and defend it, and plead for it. Sin seems his daintiest bit, and
choicest bait; as if nothing else bore delight and contentment but sin: but
when the heart is brought rightly to ponder and to consider of sin, he is
enabled not only to condemn sin in the general, (thus, sin is an evil thing;)
but also in particular (these my sins are vile and evil things; I have done
exceeding foolishly, said David;) O that I should ever open my mouth for them,
that ever I should love them, follow them as I have done; I now behold them as
the only dishonor of God, grief of his Spirit, Violations of his
Righteousness, Injuries of his patience, abuses of his goodness and mercies;
the spears in the heart of Christ, the spots in my soul, the wounds in my
conscience, etc. It is one thing to look upon sin as a mere Object, and it is
another thing to look upon sin as a vile Object: to look on sin as a mere
Object, this is but the natural act of the understanding, which, like the eye,
is ready to see all colors; but to look on sin as a vile Object, this is the
work of a penitential understanding, wherein a person sees so much intolerable
and excessive foulness in his sinful ways, that he now condemns and judges
those wickednesses and abominations; and himself too for highest folly and
madness for love, service and obedience to them.

2. If it work in him humiliation for sin; we read of Peter If it work in him
Humiliation for sin.
that he considered, or thought on the words of Jesus (and through them, of his
great sin in the denial of master) but how did he consider of them? What, only
by his simple reflection, that Christ had forewarned him, and that he had done
evil in denying him? Surely thus he thought, but the matter went further then
his thoughts; he considered it in an affecting, or rather, in an afflicting
way; for the Text says, That when he had thought thereon, he went out and wept
bitterly. There is a fourfold consideration of sin: One is only a consideration
of sin; when a man thinks of sin as he hears a Sermon, hear it only: so, think
of it only, and that is all; this is an empty consideration. Another is, a
sinful consideration only; when a man considers of sin in a sinful way, either
to boast of it, or to excite his heart to more delight and propension to sin;
this is a guilty consideration. A third is a Judicial consideration, which
arises from the promptings and suggestions of a conscience awakened, now
accusing, and condemning, and pursuing the sinner, both with the remembrance of
former sins, and with the evidence of Gods present and future indignation. A
fourth is, a Penitential consideration; wherein, upon the evidence of sinning,
the soul is sensible, not to despair, which breeds hopeless terror, yet to
repentance, wherein it is exceedingly grieved, and troubled, and displeased for
the sins committed. If the consideration of sin be a dry act, such an act as
sets where it rises (only in the mind) and has no influence upon the
affections; if it be not a sympathizing act (.i.) such an act as works grief in
the soul, as well as discovery of evil in the mind, it is but a vain thing and
never conduces to repentance; for as it is with mercies received, unless the
apprehension of their kindness and goodness descends to the affections, they
never stir up thankfulness; and as it is with the promises, unless their
excellency and sutableness come down from the mind to the will, they never
excite faith: so is it with sin; unless, besides the consideration of it, there
be not an operation and influence upon the heart to grieve and mourn, it will
never prove right and penitential.

Thou say, thou know thy sins as well as any man can tell thee: Be it so,
but if thy heart remain hard, not humbled, abased, broken, grieved for these
sins, alas! as their unworking faith, Jam. 2. so thy unaffected speculation of
sin, is vain: but find thou this, that upon the serious consideration of thy
sins, thy heart is humbled and abased in thee? that thou art cast down in the
sense of thy exceeding vileness? O wretched man that I am! O Lord to me belongs
nothing but shame and confusion! and that thy heart is grieved within thee and
afflicted? that bitter mournings arise because of bitter sinnings? my soul has
them in remembrance and is humbled within me; Lam. 3. Thy heart melts before
the Lord; I assure thee, this is a right and blessed consideration of sin.

3. If it work in him Detestation of sin. Grief seems to be more If it work
Detestation of sin
passionate, but hatred is a more fixed quality, as I may so phrase it, Ezekiel.
36. 31. Ye shall remember your own evil ways and your doings that were not
good (here is the consideration we speak of) and ye shall loath your selves in
your own sight for your Iniquities and your abominations (here is detestation,
the proper effect of true consideration;) for in a right consideration, the
singular causes or reasons of hatred do arise: v. g. Excess of evil, absolute
repugnancy to our best good, effectual prejudice, and greatest injury.
Repugnans and Offendens, the Schoolmen make the two chief grounds of hatred.
Vide Summistas in 1. 2dae. q. 29. But I will not prosecute that. Now then
peruse thy self, Have thou considered of thy sins aright? if thou do not
hate them, thou have not; See thou sin, and art thou brought to hate it?
Let me but propound a few things unto thee, that thou may see whether thou
loathest and hate sin, or no. "Is it peace, or is it war? If sin lies quietly
in the soul, it is peace, it is not hatred; hatred breeds variance, enmity,
opposition, conflict. Paul hated sin, Romans 7. 15. and wars with it, v. 23. "Is
it a deadly war? is it for life? will this suffice thee, that sin does not
terrify thy conscience; or will thou not be satisfied, till sin be mortified
and crucified in the lusts and affections thereof? "Is it like David's war,
wherein he left not one Amalekite to escape and carry tidings; and not like
Saul's, to kill some, and spare the rest? Can thou say, Lord, I hate the thing
that is evil? Psalm. 97. 10. and I hate every false way? Oh, if there be raised
in thee, upon the consideration of sin, a deadly enmity and defiance with it,
an implacable, general dislike, abomination, resistance, and desire to root it
out; happy art thou; thy consideration of sin is rightly and effectually
penitential.

4. If it work in him, Reformation of sin: Do you not read in If it work in
thee, Reformation.
Psalm. 119. 59. that David considered and thought on his ways? I thought on my
ways, says David, (so do many, many indeed do so, but not as David did; for
after he had said, I thought on my ways, he adds,) and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies. He so thought of his ill ways, that he left them, and betook
himself unto good ways. If thinking on sin does not produce leaving of sin, it
is nothing; if thinking of sin does not breed leaving of sin, then going on in
sin will make you leave thinking of sin: And though we think of an ill way, yet
if we do not enter into, and walk in a good way, it is nothing. There is a
twofold leaving of sin, one which is proper to the condition of Glory; another
which is proper to the condition of Grace. I speak not of the former, which is
the absolute dissolution of sin; but of the latter, which is an imperfect
(though true) separation from sin; consisting, in Affection, wherein the Will
is alienated from sin; the evil which I would not do, says the Apostle: In
Mourning; O wretched man! who shall deliver me from this body of death? In
Endeavor; willing, or endeavoring to live honestly, Heb. 13. 18. There is a
purpose to walk in new obedience, and an hearty desire so to do, and not to
serve sin any longer; and also an active endeavor to put off the former
conversation, and to crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof.
To consider of sin, and yet still to love it, and still to live in it, to study
to fulfill the lusts of it, to give up our selves to the service of it, to walk
in darkness, to be the same in our affections to it, and in our obedience unto
it, this is not only a vain, but a fearful consideration: But if, when we
have thoroughly considered of sin in the vileness of it, we are effectually
wrought upon to arise from our sinful course; O Lord! I have sinned
exceedingly, and done very foolishly; I am resolved to leave this sinful way;
Lord! help thou me, give me thy grace; turn thou me, and I shall be turned;
turn away my heart and eyes, cause me to put off my old conversation; enable me
to walk and live in newness of life. This is an happy Fruit, especially if it
has two other Effects accompanying it, viz.

1. Fervent Supplication; if it carries the soul to God in Christ for mercy,
for grace, for strength. The resolution to reform, if it goes no further than
the strength of the soul, it will easily cool, and quickly fail us; if ever it
prove right, it must carry us to Christ, for as much as it is by his strength,
and by his grace, that we get our hearts turned from sin, or that we are able
to forsake our sins. Have thou considered of thy sins? why and do thou not
discern such infinite guilt in them, as makes thee for ever accursed, if thou
have not mercy in Christ? and do thou hereupon apply thy self, in all
humbleness of heart, to the Throne of mercy? O Lord be merciful to me a
sinner; according the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions: Behold me through the blood of Christ, yea, O Lord! heal my
sinful soul; O Lord! change my heart; O Lord! dissolve the powers of sin in
me, by thy mighty power subdue my iniquities; turn me from all sin, make me a
servant of righteousness.

2. Diligent application of our selves to the Means, private and public,
ordinary and extraordinary; through the right use of which, we may expect
sufficient grace from God to work Repentance never to be repented of. Have thou
rightly considered of sin, why! what art thou now doing? where may thou now
be found? what course do thou take to leave sin? what helps do thou apply
thy self unto? what occasions of sin do thou decline? what furtherances of a
new life do thou regard and use? If there be no watchfulness over thy spirit,
no restraint to thy flesh, no stoutness of resolution, no separation from the
occasions of sin, no humble study and respect to the Word, no fruitful
converse with holy society, how is it that thou say thou have considered thy
sins?

Whether the consideration of sin may be right, and available to Repentance,
when yet there are some sins which a man thinks not II. Case. Whether
Consideration of sin may be right, when there are some sins that a man thinks
not of? Particular inconsideration, if it be voluntary, does prejudice
Repentance.
on? To this, I conjecture it may be thus answered. 1. That actual or
particular inconsideration, if it be voluntary and affected, does prejudice
Repentance: For it is to be supposed, that he who will not take the pains to
think of his sins, has (...) yet found an heart or a will to leave his sins.
Therefore consider, that actual inconsideration may arise, either, From want of
light or evidence; the eyes of the mind are not yet so fully opened, they are
not so perfectly acquainted with the Law, which discovers sin; much sin they
see, but not all; not that they would not, but because they cannot; so a weak
eye has not such clear and full sight: Or, From hypocrisy of will; when means
of evidence are present, and commands of consideration are urged; but either
from a secret love of sin, or from a laziness of spirit, the person will not
take pains to consider thoroughly of his manifold sins, this kind of
inconsideration being wilful and affected will be interpreted for Impenitency,
because the person will not endeavor faithfully the ways of Repentance. 2.
That the latitude of the Object considered, does not so immediately discover
and decide, as the efficacy and influence flowing from consideration it self.
Though I am not able to find out every particular wherein I do offend; yet if
by the consideration of those sins, which I do consider of, my heart does melt
and mourn, and strives to loath and forsake them, because they are sinful: If
these drive me out of my self unto Christ; if these occasion me earnestly to
acquaint my self with God, to beg for Reconciliation, for Grace, for Mercy, for
Strength, etc. though there be many sins which I have not actually thought on,
yet this may be a right and penitential consideration. III. Case. Whether a
single Consideration of sin be sufficient to repentance?


Another Case may be this; Whether the Consideration of sin, tending to
Repentance, must be frequent? or, Whether a single Consideration may be
sufficient? For the resolution of this Case, thus. 1. Divines distinguish of
Repentance, that Distinctions premised. Repentance is either Initial, or
Gradual.
it is either Initial, or Gradual: The Initial Repentance is, the first turning
from sin, nay, the very first will and desire so to do, with a purpose and
endeavor to effect it: The Gradual Repentance is, the ripening and perfecting
of Repentance in the degrees of all the parts of it. 2. Again, There is a
twofold consideration of sin: One is solemn, wherein the There is a twofold
consideration of sin. Solemn.
soul sequesters it self, earnestly searches into the Law of God, and into its
own spirit, and into the ways of Life; perusing and reviewing the sinful
condition all over, in the parts and kinds, in the heinous circumstances and
agravations; and hereupon solemnly indites it self before the Lord, by
confessing, judging, etc. Another is ordinary; which is a daily looking
Ordinary.
over the Book, and perusing of the sinful Accounts from time to time. 3. You
must distinguish twixt the Distinguish twixt the Grace of Repentance, and the
Act of it.
Grace or quality of Repentance, and twixt the Act or exercise of Repentance;
the Grace is wrought only by Gods Spirit; the Exercise or operation is
wrought* and occasioned by consideration. These things being premised, I
conjecture thus much.

1. That solemn Consideration is necessary to initial Repentance. Solemn
consideration necessary to Initial Repentance.
The Heart is not effectually excited to the actual leaving of sin, until it
does first seriously examine and try it self, find out and ponder the vileness
of its sinning and transgression; slight thoughts work no more then slight
confessions, That we are all sinners, and there is an end; but the heart must
look on sin in the kinds, circumstances, hellish vileness of its thoughts, if
ever it will repent indeed. 2. That ordinary consideration is necessary to
gradual Repentance. If ever you would perfect your Ordinary consideration
necessary to Gradual Repentance.
Repentance, you must ever think of your sins, those that are past, those that
are present. By ordinary consideration, I do not mean, a slight and perfunctory
view of them; but a daily view, though not in length of time, yet having the
same disposition of heart to condemn and abhor them, and quickening us more
fervently to seek God for strength, and to decline the occasions of sin, and to
grow more watchful and tender, etc. If you do not ordinarily consider of the
vileness of sin, you will be ordinarily ensnared by the deceitfulness of sin;
if you would enjoy constant victory and deliverance, you must admit of frequent
consideration. As for the solemn Consideration, that I conjecture is not
necessary at all times, but upon special occasions: Either 1. Before we Solemn
consideration not necessary at all times. The times when it is necessary.
enter into some weighty business: 2. When we lie under some weighty
afflictions: 3. When we are to die, and make straight our weighty accounts: 4.
When we are more solemnly to meet the Lord and renew our Covenan^s with him; as
in the day of Humiliation, or when we are to come unto the Sacrament. Now are
we more solemnly and seriously to consider of our sins, partly, 1. Because now
the Lord Reasons of it.
considers them who come into his special presence, how you come. 2. Because
you are seriously to renew your Repentance, which you cannot seriously do,
without serious consideration. 3. Because you are to renew your Covenants with
God, to keep a more serious watch, etc. Therefore now let us search our hearts,
try, and consider of our ways, renew our Repentance, turn with all our strength
unto the Lord, put away iniquity far from us, humble our selves low before the
Lord, confess our sins, judge our selves; thus if we do, we shall find more
strength in our Repentance, more peace in our Consciences, more sweetness in
the Sacrament, more confidence toward Christ, and may comfortably expect the
pardon of our sins, and salvation by his blood.

The third and last Use shall be for Exhortation, to set upon Use 3.
Exhortation to consideration and comparison. What is required to enable us
thereto. Knowledge.
these two works of Consideration and Comparison. Here let me propound two
things unto you, respecting the practical exercise of them. Qu. 1. What is
required to enable a person rightly to consider, and to compare? etc. I
conceive thus. 1. There must be knowledge: Right Consideration and Comparison,
are works of an illightened mind; to understand the proper nature and
distinction of things, necessarily requires knwoledge: For Ignorance can
neither consider nor distinguish; therefore study the Word, and other Books, to
understand what objects are, of which you are to consider. 2. There must be
some Wisdom: For every Understanding cannot find out things, Wisdom.
nor is able to make their differences of vileness or excellency; as David said
of the Works of God, that a brutish man understands them not, etc. Psalm. 92. 5,
6. that we say of persons only enlightened, That if they have not spiritual
Wisdom, to compare things, or to consider of them, they will never, by the
evidence of the vileness of Sin, or excellency of Grace, be drawn to
Repentance. 3. There must be Retiredness, or Sequestration: You must separate
your selves, as Solomon Retiredness.
speaks. Tumults of business. or violence of noise, distract the thoughts, and
alienate them, utterly disabling to consider. 4. You must gather your selves
together: You must strive against division in mind; be careful to unite and to
center your thoughts, Gathering our thoughts together.
not suffering your selves to be scattered, or blown away from your self. 5.
You must pray unto God to open your eyes Prayer.
to see, and to give a judgment to discern, and to unite your hearts, and
enable them to go through the work; for verily you shall find much reluctance
and opposition of spirit, to such a work.

Quest. 2. In what manner we are to consider, and to compare, etc. I Answer, 1.
The Rules for a right consideration, so In what manner we must consider and
compare. The Rules for right consideration. Do it in a free time. Do it with a
full time.
as to occasion Repentance, are these. 1. Do it in a free time; there are
times, wherein a man is most unapt for such a work as this, as when very sick
in body, or under some passion of grief, or fear, or loss: Now the soul is in a
Tumult, it cannot see things aright, nor judge aright. Take a calm time for all
works of moment, either to know, or to judge thy Estate. 2. Do it with a full
time: The matter is weighty, not the work of a day, as they spoke concerning
the separation in Ezra, it was not a work to be done in one day. Nor is this of
sound Consideration, a business which can be hastily done, and well done; you
must do it deliberately and seriously; for there are many sins, and many
circumstances to be considered of, and to be weighed and judged, etc. 3. Do it
thoroughly: Do not begin a little, and then give over; leave not till you come
to the bottom; see the worst Do it thoroughly.
of it, and the utmost of it, if ever you will see the good of it: You are
never a jot the worse, by seeing how bad you are; but you may be the better all
the days of your life for it. You must be faithful to your own soul, not to
pass over any sin that you can well conceive your self guilty of. 4. You must
do it orderly: Consider not of all sins in a Lump, but break your Do it orderly.
thoughts: And as they in Judgment consider of one Cause, and then of another;
so do you of your sins; what are your chief sins, in affection, or practice, or
inclination, and so go to other, etc. in their order, time, place, etc. 5. You
must do it so long, Do it till your heart begin to Relent.
until your heart begin to relent, and grows tender and soft: Ah! how vile, and
abominable, and wretched, etc. and then strike in with God by Prayer and
Confession, etc. And this is a way to bring you to Repentance.

Secondly, the Rules for Comparison. If you would so compare Rules for
comparison of the sinful and converted state. Compare them in their proper
nature and effects.
the miserableness of the sinful, with the happiness of a converted condition,
so as to be brought to Repentance, then 1. You must compare them in their
proper natures and effects; not by that which is accidental, but by that which
is natural; there may be some trouble to a converted estate, and some delight
upon an unconverted estate; these then are preternatural, they arise not from
the things themselves, but are contingent accidents: But compare the real
natures and fruits of the one with the other, and then you shall see reason to
leave the one, and to choose the other. 2. You must compare them by a proper
Compare them by a proper Rule.
Rule: not standing, in point of definitive sentence, what your own heart, or
what the World approves; but only what God in his Word does sentence to be
most vile and miserable, and what he pronounces to be most good and
comfortable. The Rule of Comparison must ever be pure, impartial and perfect.
3. You must have so much faith also, as to believe what God says Believe what
God says of either state.
of either estate: For though you should refer the decision unto him, yet if
upon his resolving, you are resolved to quarrel against it, and dispute the
truth and validity, and say yet, It is otherwise, we will not believe that our
sinful course is so bad and so dangerous; alas! you will never repent while
you live: But you must resolve of this, that the Word shall captivate your
thoughts, and shall discover, and set the differences of estates; and so you
may be occasioned to repent. 4. You must take an humble and firm resolution to
take and follow that way which God discovers Resolve to follow that way G^d
discovers to be best,
unto you for the best; and to decline that way which God discovers to be bad
and damnable: (i.) You will betake your selves industriously and steadfastly
unto all the ways and means by which you may be strengthened to leave your
sins, and to walk with God in newness of obedience.

LUKE 15. 18. I will arise, and go to my Father.
These words contain in them, the other fundamental part of Repentance
appearing in the Prodigal, viz. The Resolution of his Will. To apprehend evil,
is something; but to leave it, is the The Resolution of the Prodigal,
safest thing; to see a better condition, shows that the eye is opened, but to
go to our Father, this shows that the heart is changed. This Resolution of the
Prodigal, is set forth, partly by the 1. Matter of it, which is very complete;
it contains as much as Repentance Set forth by The Matter of it.
requires, (Surgam and ibo,) I will arise, I will go. St. Austin is something
facetious upon the words; Surgam, I will arise, quia jacebat, for the Prodigal
was down before: Sin is a fall, and Repentance is a rising: and ibo, I will go
to my Father, quia long aberat, for the Prodigal was far from home: Sin is a
long travel, a wandering rather; and Repentance is a sweet returning: We go
abroad when we sin, we come home when we repent. And Chrysostom upon Ibo ad
patrem, I will go home to my Father, wittily compares the motions of Repentance
to those of a journey. That though which I do most conjecture at in the words,
is, The Prodigals complete Resolution for the matter of Repentance. Repentance
is a motion twixt two terms, and is made of Aversio and Conversio; Aversion
from a sinful course, and that is in Surgam, I will arise; Conversion to God,
and this is in Ibo ad patrem, I will go to my Father. 2. The Manner or Form of
it: It is not votum, a wish, nor yet velleitas, a woulding, The Manner of it.
nor yet volitia de futuro, I will hereafter: But his Resolution to arise and
to go home, is as complete as the Matter on which he does resolve; I will
arise, I will go: It was a strong and peremptory and present Resolution. 3. The
Motive or Inducement to it, and that is in the word [my Father.] The
apprehensions of a Father, The Motive to it.
work most to the return of a sinner. That I shall find a Father of God,
prevails much to make a penitent Child of men. There are many excellent
Propositions observable out of the words; some I will only point at, the rest
I will insist upon. Thus then. General Propositions.


1. That Repentance is a Gradual thing in working. Though the habitual
implantation of it be instantaneous, (for it is a Grace Repentance is a Gradual
thing in working.
infused, and therefore admits not of space and leisure,) yet the actual
operation of it is successive, and by degrees; as here in the Prodigal, 1. He
came to himself. 2. He considers of his perishing condition. 3. Then compares
it with the happy condition of those in his fathers house. And then 4. Resolves
to leave his sins, and go home to his fathers house.

2. That Repentance is an Active thing; it will make a sinner to leave his
place and to find his feet: rising and going are Repentance is an active thing
active motions. He who repents indeed, is doing indeed; it is not an an
indifferent, cold, grave, dull nothing, but the Soul stirs indeed against sin,
and strives indeed to enjoy and please God. Ephraim defiles his graven Images,
and will no more have to do with them; and readily come unto the Lord, Behold
we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. And therefore S. John says,
Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Repentance is a working Grace, it sets
the judgment, the will, the affections, the whole man on work.

3. That sound resolution is requisite to sound Reformation. Sound Resolution
is requisite to sound Reformation.
The Prodigal here is peremptory, I will arise, I will go to my Father: This is
a point of great consequence, and very proper to the Text, and therefore I will
insist upon it, by inquiring, 1. What this sound resolution is? 2. Why it is
requisite to a sound Reformation? 3. Then what useful Application of this to
our selves?

Quest. 1. What solid Resolution is? What Solid Resolution is.


Sol. It is a well grounded, strong, constant and active purpose of the Will of
a penitent sinner, wherein he is peremptorily bent to forsake a sinful course,
and to lead a holy and a better life.

1. It is a purpose or bent of the Will: So it is called, Act. 11. 23. It is a
purpose or bent of the will.
A purpose of heart: when matters of faith or fact are only discovered unto us,
the work of the mind about them is called Apprehension; when they are debated
and disputed there, this is called Deliberation: and when the will is fully
inclined and wrought upon, that it is with it as with the body carried to the
Center, the natural Inclinations poyse and bend it thither; So the very
Spirits, as it were, of the will, the Pondus of it, is carried about the work,
it is set upon it; this is called Resolution.

2. To forsake a sinful course: You must distinguish twixt Intermissions, To
forsake a sinful course.
and Excisions; twixt pausing and forsaking. In solid resolution the will is
purposed not to make only a stop, or to admit of some interruption, but also to
make a divorce, an utter separation: What have I to do with idols any more?
said Ephraim; and this separation is not only in respect of a particular or
personal act; as thus, I will do this evil this time, or for so long a time;
but also in respect of course, I am purposed to relinquish it, both in part,
and in whole, both now and for ever: there is difference betwixt 1. Absteining.
2. Forsaking. 3. Stopping. Non propono peccare, sed propono non peccare. Isai.
30. 22. Thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and say, get thee
hen^e. In the extent and latitude, though they have been Mulu utilia, jucunda
and chara.

3. And to lead a Holy or Godly Life: And in this respect, this resolution is
called sometimes, a choosing of the way of God, To lead a Godly life.
sometimes a cleaving to the Lord, sometimes a serving of the Lord, sometimes a
Covenant to serve the Lord, and to walk with him, and sometimes a readiness to
hear what the Lord will speak; I and my house will serve the Lord. Psalm. 119.
106. I have sworn and will, etc. The sum of all is this, Then is it a
resolution of the will, when a person attains thus far; This is an evil way, I
am heartily purposed never to walk in it more; this is an holy and good way, I
am heartily purposed to walk therein for ever; these sins I will follow and
serve no longer; but this God shall be my God, his Laws shall be my rule, and
guide, and his ways shall be my ways in the which I will walk.

4. In the description consider the properties of this Resolution, which The
properties of this Resolution. A well grounded purpose.
are four. 1. It is a well grounded purpose of the will; it is not a house
without a foundation, nor a ship without a bottom, nor yet with a weak bottom;
It is not raised, I know not how, or on a sudden, in an irrational and humorous
way, or in all have: Ordinarily, he who will leave an ill course in have, comes
off from it (indeed) with too much leisure; but it is such a purpose, as is
thoroughly bottomed upon such grounds as can give life, and maintain the bent
and inclination of the will. It does arise from, and depend upon mature
consideration, and upon deep conviction: The sinner does first look into, and
seriously peruse and weigh an impenitent and sinful course, and sees the
strongest, and forciblest, and justest causes to renounce it for ever; and also
upon due trial, and searching, and weighing in the balance of the Sanctuary,
he does find the ways of new obedience to be the (...) and only ways of life,
to which if he does not turn, he cannot please God, nor be saved; and unto
which if he does turn, then he is under the best God, and in the most excellent
and saving condition: and hereupon begs of God for grace and strength; and so
resolves, etc. In a Word, the Resolution is well grounded; when it follows
serious deliberation, and is raised upon divine assistance, and entered into
with earnest supplication; for our strength cannot bring forth, nor maintain so
great a work as reformation.

2. It is a strong purpose of the will: The operations of the will are reputed
strong, when either they are not divided, A strong purpose of the will.
but united; or when they are rooted in an habit or principle, and not only in
an occasion and accident; or when they are absolute, and not conditional: If
the operations be divided, they are weak as Rivers, etc. so when a man partly
wills this, and partly that; he is inclined somewhat to leave his sin, and yet
he is inclined to keep it; this division hinders right resolution, which is not
so indifferent, so indeterminate, so divided, but centers the inclination of
the will, only one way, viz. to a peremptory rejection of evil, and a
peremptory election of good; the soul goes down, and it is not a grain which
will turn it: Again, if the operations of the will arise only from occasions
which is busied in alterable circumstances, they can never be strong; as the
color in the face, which arises from violent exercise only, goes off
presently; so that resolution (if it may be so called) which arises from
changeable impressions, is always weak and fading; a deceitful bow,
unstedfast. In their afflictions they will seek me early, but, etc. Hos. 6. 4.
But to the production of a penitential resolution (which makes a strong purpose
in the will) there must be an habit which will set the heart, and incline it
so, that it will not be taken off; as in Ruth to Naomi, Entreat me not, etc.
there was a strong principle of love, which made up this strong purpose to
cleave unto her. Again, if the operations of the will be conditional, they can
never be so strong, as when they are absolute; for a supposition and case,
where the will may put off and dispense with it self, cannot make the act of
the will so firm as where the case is absolute (for now the whole bent of the
will is carried without any check or diminution.) If a man says, I will leave
such a sinful course, in case I may have the countenance of such friends, or
the benefit of such an estate; and I will lead a godly life, in case I may hold
correspondence and esteem in the world, etc. purposes upon variable conditions
are variable. These conditions do diminish the strength of Resolution; but when
a person is carried in an absolute way, come what will come, friendship or
enmity, greatness or poverty, life or death, I will change my course; this is a
strong purpose of will, and a right Resolution.

3. It is a constant purpose, or continued: The ^hylosophers do It is a
constant purpose.
well distinguish twixt Passions, which are but the soul in a mood, and a fit,
and twixt Qualities, which are settled tempers and Constitutions, as it were.
Resolution is not a transient passion, but it is a fixed quality. Not that it
is not interrupted, but that it is not renounced and given over, but is still
maintained. Nor that it is not assaulted, but that it is not changed. A twisted
Cord, Propositi tenax, that is a resolute man, and sibi constans, but a double
minded man, an unstable spirit, a will, though strong as Passion, yet if
unstable as water (hot in the first assault, as if we would be stronger then
Men, and flat in the succeeding assaults, as if we were weaker then Women)
these humors are rather some complements, which still shrink at the acting,
then resolutions for change of Life: Passions are violent, but not constant, as
the Galathians to Paul.

4. Lastly, It is an active purpose: for as it is a vain thing to It is an
active Purpose.
deliberate much, and to resolve on little at length, so it is a vain
Resolution which purposes great things, but does nothing. If I resolve to take
Physic for my health, and never take any, what avails that Resolution? Like
Antigones, I will give, but never gave. So, if a man resolve to leave his sins,
but the day is still to morrow; he sets not upon it indeed, but yet a little
slumber, yet a little sleep, as S. Austin spoke of himself, cras, cras, this is
vain. But true resolution is stirring and striving; it puts a man upon the
work, as the Prodigal, I will arise and go to my Father, who indeed did
thereupon arise and go. I am resolved to confess my sins, to judge my self, to
seek unto God by prayer; and I do indeed do so, I do confess, judge, pray, use
the means, etc.

Quest. 2. Why this Resolution is requisite to a sound Reformation? Why
Resolution is Requisite.


1. Because Reformation of our ways cannot be performed without much
Opposition: As when Nehemiah began to repair the walls, There can be no
Reformation without much opposi^ion.
was wi^h much opposition. If you will not serve sin as a Lord, you must expect
to hear of sin as an Enemy; if you will not serve its Lusts, you shall be
hindered and molested with its Lusts. Stronger rowing is requisite against a
strong Tide: So for Satan, he will not easily be dispossessed; if you will not
follow his Counsels, you shall feel his Dar^s; and the world will wonder at
you, and reproach you, and vilify you; temptations on the right hand, and on
the left. Now, all these shocks and brunts, will not be sustained without a
firm Resolution. It must be an house strongly built, upon an unmovable Rock,
which will stand against all winds and waves.

2. Because sin has been very dear unto us, and is beyond measure Sin is very
subtle to Entice us.
subtle to persuade and entice us. It is not an easy thing (though death
otherwise be threatened) to make a man willing to have his Arm or Leg cut off.
Sin is as our members ot us, it is called our self, born and bred with us. The
separation is not easy where the Conjunction is Natural, and has been more
familiar: It will not be done by reasoning or entreaty, but Resolution is
necessary. Again, Sin is most subtle to alure us, to entice us, to put out our
thoughts of Reformation. How often does it untwist the Cord and propound
delights and pleasures (some sweet baits or other) which take us quite away
from our private intentions? How extremely does it fill the heart with
Unbelief, that the Reformation of such a sin can never be? and if we set upon
it, how strangely does it amaze us, that there is no hope of mercy, and
therefore we were better enjoy some pleasure a while, then bitterness and
anguish for ever.

3. The heart is naturally deceitful, and apt to turn or be turned: The heart
is naturally D^cei^ful.
A small thing will make the eye to shut, and the very imagination of danger is
enough to discourage many a man, and to make him to recoyl: A cunning man must
be tied in firm bonds. We think that we will do much, and suffer any thing; but
this we find, that if the way be good, we do not easily like it; if it be long,
we are quickly weary of it; if it be harsh, we are ready to forsake it. Now
occurrents and accidents do ordinarily put on us new Intentions and Byasses.

4. If you consider the frame and disposition of that new course of The frame
of the new course of Godly walking.
Godly walking, you will confess that a resolution is necessary; for, 1. It is
spiritual, and wholly heavenly. 2. It is strict, and must It is spiritual.
Strict.
be ordered by rule: no room for any one sinful lust or way, strait is the
gate. 3. It is opposite and contrary to that nature and will which is corrupt
in us, it is supra and contra. 4. It is difficult Opposite to corrupt nature.
Difficult.
and very high; grace and supernatural works are hard, to deny our selves, our
own righteousness, etc. 5. It is capable of such dangers, which will not easily
be digested, even loss of life it Capable of great dangers. Very laborious.
self. 6. It is very laborious, it must cost a man much study and search, much
care and watchfulness, much prayers, and many tears, much self-denial, and
mortification; much going out of himself, and adventuring upon pure promises.
7. Of necessity, the soul must undergo much, if it will lead a godly life;
many The Soul must undergo much for i^.
violent temptations from Satan, inward conflicts with the love of sin, outward
persecutions from the world, They that will live godly must suffer persecution.
Now tell me whether a firm resolution be not necessary, when a man changes to
a course which is very spiritual and holy, whereas before he lived in a course
that was sensual and impure; again, into a course very strict and contrary to
him in great part, and very difficult, and very dangerous, and wherein he must
be very industrious, and go through many a sharp trial and brunt.

All the use which I shall make of this assertion shall be reduced Use
unto two heads. 1. Of Exhortation. 2. Direction.

1. The Ex^ortation is, that as we do desire a real reformation of our sinful
ways, so we strive to bring our hearts to a solid resolution Exhortation to
bring our hearts to this Solid Resolutition. Motives. Six dangers of
Irresolution. You will not be free from strong temptation.
against them. Two things I will propound as motives to edge this exhortation.
1. The folly and inconvenience of an irresolute and tottering and hovering
spirit viz. 1. Till you attain to a firm resolution, you will never be free
from strong temptations: Faint denials are interpretative Encouragements; as it
is with the ill humors of the body, they flock and resort to a crazy part; So
it is with Satan's temptations, they will ever be frequent where the heart is
ready to embrace, or not resolved to resist: why should thou expect that
Satan should fall off, when thou art yet irresolved to resist him? that he
should not be backward to tempt, when thou art not resolved not to yield? 2.
Till you attain to a firm resolution, you will never come to a firm peace;
Conscience cannot be clear in its testimony, when we are indifferent in our You
will never come to a firm ^eace.
purpose against sin. Paul could say, the evil that I would not do; thou can
not say so: The decision of that estate will be under a cloud, and you will be
struck with more suspicions of hypocrisy and wrath, while you come to be
plain-hearted and resolute, I will serve no sin any longer. 3. Till you attain
to a firm resolution, you will be subject to the frequent intanglings of sin;
weak You will be subject to the en^anglings of Sin.
resolutions are like a weak child, or a feather, or like weak walls, through
which any bullet will fly: Thou have no armor on, till thou be resolved; any
sinful occasion or opportunity is too hard for him, whose heart is not clad
with a peremptory denial: How can he be steadfast, who is not ^ound? a ^ame Leg
is apt to ^^ll; or what shock can a weak body sustein? it cannot be, but thou
should be under the guilt of much corruption, who art not determinately
fixed in thy resolves against all sinful suggestions: Thou wondredst at it,
that perhaps after many Prayers, and much hearing, yet some sin or other still
prevails: but can it well be expected, that Sin should not be thy Conqueror,
when as yet, thou art not resolved to be its enemy? 4. Till you attain to a
firm resolution you will but shuffle in a good course, off and on, sometimes
You will but shuffle in a Good Course.
much, sometimes little, sometimes nothing: A doubleminded man is unstable in
all his ways, says St. James 1. 8. every business will withdraw you, and any
occasion will excuse you from Gods service, while you are indifferent unto it;
every wind drives through thy Boat, and every frost will nip thy Bud. 5. Nay,
Irresolution will prove a bitter root of apostasy: if dangers surprise thee on
the left hand, or temptations on the right It will prove a bitter Root of
Apostasy.
hand; it is a thousand to one, but thou will deny the faith, and make
Shipwreck of conscience. There lies much of our hopeful constancy in Religion
as we set forth; if we begin with faint and irresolved hearts, we shall fall
back with wounded and broken Souls; he cannot be long good, who is not
resolvedly good. 6. Flat and poor communion with God: You will make no prayer,
or but cold indifferent Prayer: Austin was afraid that God There will be flat
and poor Communion with God. The Benefits of a full Resolution. It will be a
testimony, our hearts are upright.
would hear him.

2. The benefits and comforts o^ a firm Resolution, which are many. 1. It will
be a great Testimony unto you, that your hearts are upright. He who will not
resolve against a sinful course, either his heart has a flaw of hypocrisy, or
a sink of impiety; he loves sin, or would not yet le^ve it: the greatest part
of our integ^ity lies in the hearts frame and purpose: that man who is resoled
to part with all sin, has an heart who loves all good; it is only sound grace
which breeds sound resolution. 2. It will be a It will be an Apology in case of
falling.
great apology, in case of falling, that yet it is not presumptuous, but of
In^irmity. (The evil that I would not do, that do I, etc. Romans 7.) and rather
an affect of a strong temptation, then of any secret affection of the heart to
sin; for where the purpose and resolution of the heart is set against a sin,
and makes its resistance; though the sinning may be great, yet it is not
presumptuous. Four effects this firm Resolution works about sin; either it
does, 1. Cease the motions of it; or 2. Abates and lessens them; or 3.
Disappoints and frustrates them; as Joseph about his mistress: or else, 4. It
mitigates and corrects them in the degree of guilt; either it keeps me sound,
or else causes that the wound is less. 3. Such a man may confidently go to God
for help and Such a one may confidently go to God for help.
assistance. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer
(said David) but verily, God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my
Prayer, Psalm. 69. 18, 19. Thou shall not struggle with sin in vain, nor cry
unto God in vain; if once thou could be firmly resolved against sin, thou
should more confidently repair to Christ, and should assuredly find more
Victory over it, as Paul, Romans 7. 24, 25. What have I to do any more with
idols? I have heard him, and observed him; I am like a green Fir Tree, from me
is thy fruit found. Hos. 14. 8. 4. And more confidently, expect the remission
of sins past; with what face can a m^n embolden himself before the And
Confidently expect Remission of sins past.
Lord? O Lord I beseech thee to pardon such or such a sin, and I trust thou will do it, but I am not yet resolved to leave it. And when a person can come
before the Lord, and say, Search and tell me, O Lord, if there be any way of
wickedness, which I know and allow against, which I am not resolved and strive.
Now O Lord, thou art a gracious God, I beseech thee for thy mercies sake,
forgive my sins, blot them out, I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, do thou
for thine own sake pardon and subdue them. 5. You shall much free your selves
from the ancient suggestions of Satan, about particular Sins: It will free us
from the Suggestions of Satan about particular sins.
Resist the Devil and he will flee from you, Jam. 4. 7. Where there is no hope
of Victory, there will be little encouragement to fight; firm resolutions are
like rocks, against which the waves may beat and strike, but cannot move nor
alter; Satan may indeed somewhat molest, but the heart is in a sort
impregnable, which is steadfastly resolved. Christiana sum, said she, I am a
Christian, who was much assaulted to deny the Faith; and Luther in Genesis
so silenced all threats and allurements for the abnegation of Christ. When
they saw Paul's resolution fixed for Jerusalem, they gave off their
importunity: so Temptations will slack when our Resolutions are settled. It is
in vain, I will not hearken; thou may molest me, Satan, but I will never
yield unto thee.

6. You will be less interrupted in your holy services. Whilst the heart is
any thing indifferent and flexible, sinful motions, We shall be less
interrupted in our holy services.
like the Birds, will return and flock about the Corn, if the Watchman be now
there, and anon removed. When the Minister is speaking to your ear, Sin will be
speaking to your heart; and when your tongues are speaking to God, your
thoughts will be busied in giving Sin an answer, or the World: But if the heart
were more resolved against sin, it would be more united in duty; the thoughts,
and mind, and affections would be more collected and centered upon the (...),
the work in hand; it would not scatter so much, it would not follow that which
it cares not for, but peremptorily abhors.

The next Use shall be for Direction, and that in two particulars: Use 2.
Direction.
1. How to raise a solid Resolution: 2. How to keep and maintain it.

First, The Means to raise it. There are some things of How to raise a solid
Resolution.
which you must take heed and strive against, as being vigorous impediments to
the rearing of this frame, and twisting of this firm cord. Take heed of


1. A secret favoring of sin. As long as your hearts cunningly connive at, and
harbor your lusts (those evil Inmates) A secret fa^ouring of sin.
you will never thoroughly come to a Resolution to cast them off. For love will
untwist many arguments, and prevail against strong Motives; it will let down
your mind, as fast as reasons do raise it up. It is the best Friend, and
strongest Advocate that sin has. You see a Parent (perhaps David against
Absalom) resolved to exile his Child from his presence; but natural affection
turned him, and wrought so, after a while, that David longs for Absalom again.
As a Spring will work out that which is cast in; so will a secret affection to
sin, work off the impression of all Arguments, and any such preposterous
Resolves against sin.

2. A tenderness or delicacy of spirit: I mean, an inordinate Delicacy of
spirit.
self-love: Love of sin, and so also the love of our selves, both of them are
adversaries to a penitential Resolution: If a man will go to Heaven asleep,
have his ease, and his friends, and his liberty, and his safeties, and his
quiet, and his pleasures, and great matters, he will never come to a through
Resolution. God likes no such bargain, no condition; as, I am willing to serve
thee, but I am resolved never to suffer for thee; I will be good, if I may be
safe; I will go to sea, but on condition I shall meet with no storms; I will
enter into the war, but on condition that I will have no blows. We must be at a
point for all things except what is good, if we be resolved to be good indeed;
no, not Life it self must be dearer to us, than that which is far better than
Life.

3. A perverseness of spirit, on self-wilfulness; if you do resolve A
perverseness of spirit.
to be your own Master, you can never resolve to be Gods Servant; if your
hearts be not disposable to his will, they will never be flexible and fixed on
his work. You must in many things be contented to deny your own thoughts, and
to captivate your own judgments and reasonings, and to submit both your
judgment and will to a Divine Rule, and there take forth directions for your
lives, how contrary soever to your own conceits and delights.

4. A faintness of spirit. If you make the work absolutely impossible, A
faintness of spirit.
you do but cool and quash resolutions. There is a need of bellows, not waters,
for tender sparks; for no man will attempt a hopeless work, or that which he
knows will certainly prove fruitless. Do not side with such thoughts as these;
I shall never be able to get victory over such strong sins, and long
corruptions: Or, I shall never be able to do what the Lord requires, so much,
and with such affections; nor shall I ever bear such reproaches, losses,
disgraces, indignities. Never consult with flesh and blood in a case of holy
Resolution, nor credit Satan about the leaving of sin: but if thou will consult
with what may fear and dishearten thee, consult also with what may encourage
and quicken thee. Though thy sins be strong, yet they are conquerable, (only
true Grace is invincible.) It is possible for a sinful nature to be altered
and renewed, and therefore it is not impossible for any sin to be subdued:
Though thy own strength be insufficient, yet Christ's is not; He who has
commanded thee to combat with Sin, has likewise promised to conquer sin; if
thy duty be active, he is able to work in thee both to will and to do; if thy
duty be passive, he can give thee not only to do, but to suffer for his sake;
if thou must not be less then a Sufferer, he can make thee more than a
Conqueror: Thy helps are far greater than thy discouragements, there are more
with thee than against thee: Therefore fear not to resolve; it is a vanity to
talk of another, or fitter season; you will be more unwilling to leave sin, the
more time you take to commit sin.

II. There are some things which you must, in some measure Labor for
possess, if ever you would be brought to a penitential Resolution.

1. Get as distinct a knowledge of sin, as clear conviction as Clear Conviction.
you can. It is our blindness which keeps us in service; and the Will is
usually perverse, because the Judgment is greatly dark: Did we know sin aright,
(truly, fully, experimentally,) you have attained to Reasons enough, why you
should resolve against it. Sin carries its own condemnation with it: Sometimes
the particular effects of sin do half persuade us to be Christians, to leave
the service of sin; a stroke or two upon the Conscience, do thus far prevail,
as to pause and stop; If then we knew sin in the latitude of its bitter
effects, and in the intensiveness of them (beyond all thoughts) for bitterness
and perpetuity, as also that extreme vileness in the formal nature of it, which
is the vast womb and Ocean, out of which these bitter waters do flow; if we did
know sin as the darkest blot, and loathsome blur, opposite to the truest Glory
of purest Holiness; and as the most deformed and highest Rebellion to the most
equal Laws and Rules of Divine Sovereignty; and as the very Eclipse, and utter
Inconsistence with all real Happiness; and as the infallible and unavoidable
Precipice of our intolerable and eternal Damnation: At least, this would be an
occasional excitation, if not a strong foundation, upon which to raise a
Resolution to quit and forsake it. Sure I am, the defect of this, that men know
not sin, makes them bold and venturous, obstinate, and tenacious; they will not
desist from the practice of sin, because they know not the evil of sin.

2. You must get an hatred of sin, else you will never truly and Cordial
detestation.
effectually resolve against it: All the actions of our lives are fed by the
affections of the will; these are (in morals) principia immediate and
vincentia; and of all the affections (as the Anatomists observe in the body,
two master-Veins, Vena cava, and vena aorta;) so in the soul, there are two
which are Sovereign, and bear sway; one is Love, and the other is Hatred; that
bears sway in matters elegible and practicable, this in matters sinful and
declinable. Resolutions against sin, not rooted in hatred, will slack like a
deceitful Bow; and Resolutions to a better course, not raised from love, will
be but as the morning dew: It is hatred which makes us bent and peremptory
againct evil, and it is love which mak^s us resolute and steadfast for good.
Hatred has three properties in it against an evil Object, Enmity, Flight, and
Irreconcileableness: And Love has two properties in it, Union, and Adhaesion;
Ruth clave in love to Naomi, and was se^ed in it, never to leave her: And
Ephraim was strong in detestation, and therefore peremptorily in resolution,
What have I to do any more with Idols?

3. There must be Faith, and then there will be Resolution. Faith.
Faith, 1. To believe the Word of God, discovering and threatening an evil
condition and course; 2. To believe the excellency of a good Condition, and
Life, and Rewards. If thou did indeed believe that sin would damn thee,
would not thou resolve against it? if thou did indeed believe that the holy
life were the happy life, could thou by Faith see him that is invisible, and
the beauties of holiness, which are hid from the World, and those great
consolations and rewards reserved for a pious heart and conversation, thou
would quickly turn the Scale, m^ke the cho^ce, and resolve, It Is true, I must
leave my sins, but I shall gain my God; their pleasures, but I shall gain his
delights; I may forfeit the love of Friends, but I shall find kindness of God;
I quit Earth, but I shall get Heaven; I leave but filthiness, but guilt, but
misery, but Hell; I shall get holiness, and peace, and Christ, and Comfort, and
Heaven; I am insufficient, but God is sufficient.

4. Vehement Prayer, that the Lord would give a heart willing Vehement prayer.
to forsake sin, and willing to choose him and his ways: For the purposes of
our hearts are from him. Resolution should be a Pos^e of Prayers, steept in
prayer, blown up by the breath of Heaven; Psalm. 119. 5. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes. v. 8. I will keep thy statutes; O forsake me not
utterly: What you undertake without prayer, you will forsake without c^mfort:
All resolutions are best made, which are made upon the knee of prayer.

Secondly, The means to maintain and keep up this Resolution. The means to
maintain this resolution. Let it not be presump^uous, but humble.
If you would attain to a solid and permanent Resolution, then,

1. Let your Resolution not be presumptuous, but humble: If you raise your
Resolutions upon your own strength, you will shortly quit them by your own
weakness. No spiritual frame or work is safe or strong, which is reared upon it
self alone; it must not be less than a rock higher than our selves, upon which
we must build. The wings bear the body of the flying Fowl, but this they cannot
do without air to spread and bear up those wings. I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me. Philip. 4. There must be some strength in us to
advance a Resolution, but then there must be another Strength, upon which both
that Resolution and that Strength must depend: And therefore as a Warrant is of
no force, if it goes not out in the Kings name; so a Resolution is too
recoiling, which begins not in Christ's power: As David encountered Goliath, not
with his own Sword, but in Gods Name; so we must resolve against our sins, with
Gods strength assisting of us; otherwise, our sins may rerly to us, as the
Devils to the sons of Sceva, jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? A
ship, though well built, must have wind to drive it, and set it forward; and a
Christian needs more strength than his own, to forsake a bad, or to follow a
good course. It is a wise course, in lendi^g of Money, to join another party in
the Bond, who is more able and sure than the borrower: Do thou resolve
against such a sinful way, or for a holy life? t^ke not single Bond; (thy own
heart, though to thy thinking well furnished and stock^ with resolution, is yet
but a creature, and may deceive thee, and m^ke thee to break:) but take double
Bond, beseech the Lord to be bound for thee, to give thee his strength, which
is indeed sufficient to preserve, and to perpetuate thy resolutions.

2. You must be sure that you get a mournful heart for what Get a mournful
heart for what is past.
is past, or else you will never get a resolute heart for the future: if the
heart be not broken for sin, sin will quickly break the resolution of the
heart; He who will without any more ado be joyously good, I fear, least after
a while, you see him earnestly bad. We seldom observe, that an unbroken heart
is steadfast; that his foot stands sure, whose eyes remains dry, (i.) who can
leap into a good way, yet never was truly grieved for a bad. Peter's Resolution
to confess his Master, held out better after his tears, than after his
confidence: The mournful remembrance of a bad life, wherein God has been so
much dishonored, and his spirit so often grieved, it excites and quickens, and
doubles our hatred, and fears, and cares, and resolves, Should I any longer
continue thus? should I thus offend again? Paul does frequently remember his
sinful persecutions of Christ, and then is inflamed, with a more zealous
resolution and industry, to preach and advance him: Nothing daunts him, in the
righting of that good Lord and Christ, whom before he had so much wronged.

3. Be active against sin, and that is the way to keep up your Be active
against sin.
Resolutions against it: My meaning is this, you must endeavor to mortify an
evil heart, if you would hold up your resolutions against an evil course: The
heart is all in all for Life or Death, for a good, or for a bad way; kill the
root, and the branches will soon wither; diminish the Spring, and the Streams
will fail; weaken the Spirits, and the Limbs will be useless. It is a foolish
thing to say, I will not have the fit of the Ague again, unless you receive
something to alter the evil humor which causes it: I will never sin thus
again! thus how often do we resolve, and yet break out again! why? because we
would restrain effects, without surprising their causes. Be more earnest with
God, for a sober heart, and for a chaste heart, and for an humble heart, and a
heavenly heart, and a meek and quiet heart: Thou should not only resolve,
but prevail against evil acts, if thou did vehemently strive with God, to
season the Springs, to alter the nature, to better and strengthen the heart,
that fountain whence these arise and flow; for all things are strongest in
their causes, and the strength of the cause is the strength of the effect. An
occasion may be vigorous to produce a resolve, but alteration is required to
make it firm and effectual; it is health which breeds strength.

4. Let it be watchful, and not careless: They are not the many Soldiers
which keep the City, but the watchful Soldiers; Be watchful, and not
careless.
the City which is got by strength, may be lost by carelessness. To be active
and inquisitive how to make resolutions against sin, and af^erwards to be
negligent of our hearts, this is to make a strong door, but not to mind whether
it be locked or no. Our hearts (take them at the best) are very untrusty and
deceitful (at least in part) and are quickly weary of spiritual bonds; and as
an untoward Servant, after all warnings and threatenings, is hankering to whisk
out after his old companions; so our hearts, after all resolutions, are yet
inclining to evil. Therefore let us not only enjoin our spirit to take heed of
sinful courses, but guard them, set a guard upon them, as David, Psalm. 39. 1.
A man may quickly stumble, who has an able foot, if yet he has a careless
eye; the eye and the foot must go together to keep us upright.

5. If you would still keep up your Resolutions, then often review and renew
them. Our resolutions come to be strengthened Often review and renew
resolutions.
by frequent enquiry, how they are performed. Daily accountings with the
servant, may be the means to keep him faithful. If we did daily sequester our
selves, and commune with our spirits, and take an account of them; O my soul,
thou have seen the vileness of such sinful courses, and have felt the
bitterness of them, and have solemnly protested against them before the Lord,
and resolved to prosecute them no more; thou have given thy Word and Bond for
this unto the great God: Well! how have thou performed this purpose? art thou
still willing? have thou been faithful to thy self, and to thy God? wast thou
no way surprised this day? though thou did not break, yet did not thou bow
to day? though thou did not fall, did not thou trip? did nothing come from
thee to undo, or else to weaken thy resolution? Such evil motions sprang from
thy heart to sin again, did thou abhor them, and cry unto God against them?
such temptations presented themselves unto thee, did thou reject and stoutly
resist them? or have thou not found an heart somewhat harkening, somewhat
yielding, somewhat venturing? If so, then humble thy self, and as David to
Joab, 2 Samuel 11. 25. Make thy battle more strong against the City; so do thou,
bewail thy failings, and renew thy resolution again more strongly and carefully.

6. If your Resolutions be any thing impaired, let them be presently repaired.
It is possible, notwithstanding our Resolutions When resolutions are impaired,
let them be presently repaired.
against evil courses, to be surprised with evil acts, and now we are apt to
give up the Resolutions themselves; but do not so: Though the winds drive back
the Mariner, yet he holds fast his resolution still for such a Cape; and if a
man falls in his journey, yet he will rise and be going again: So let us do; if
we have not answered our Resolutions, let us not end them, but mend them: Above
all, search the causes of impairing thy Resolutions, and then thou may see
thy reparations. Say seriously, 1. Did not thou rely too much upon thy
Resolution, as if therefore thou were safe, because resolved? 2. Did not thou
grow weaker in Prayer, when thou grewest strong in Resolution? or, 3. Have thou
not been more venturous upon occasions? have thou not been tampering with
sinful occasions, such acts, ways, objects, as thou know have powder to
irritate and inflame Lust? Consider seriously how thou came to violate thy
purpose and intention, and penitently confess it before the Lord, and take up
thy Resolution again upon right grounds.

7. Let your Resolutions be accompanied with the use of all holy means which
will strengthen and perfect them. Does not the Let resolutions be accompanied
with the use of holy means.
strong man grow weak by fasting, as well as by sickness? How is it possible
but that thy Bow should slack, (i.) thy Resolution, should start aside, when
thou art a negligent Hearer, and an inconstant Petitioner? why! where lies thy
strength to perform? why do thou put off thy helps? what! art thou alone? He
who has not strength to fight, how shall he have power to conquer? would
thou stand? would thou resolve? would thou resolve so as to reform? Be much
in Prayer; Keep thy servant, O Lord, uphold me by thy Word, preserve me by thy
Spirit; work in me the will and the deed, work thine own works in me, finish
what thou have wrought; show thy power in my weakness, let thy Grace be
sufficient for me; leave me not, nor forsake me; incline my heart to thy
testimonies, turn away mine eyes from vanity. And so for the Ordinances, attend
them; they are the Strength of God for thee; they work holy qualities, holy
motions, holy convictions, holy excitations, holy affections, desires, a fear
lest we depart, and fall from our stedfastness; and they kindle more and more
our purposes to walk with God, and to shun iniquity. Oh, how admirably the
heart under them is caused to burn with ardent love of God! with desires and
resolutions to keep closer to him, how is it stirred up with more detestation
of sin? how often do they melt the heart? recover the heart, restore the heart,
and send it away with this resolution, Well! by the grace of God I will never
go on in such a sinful course, etc.

The last Use shall be for Exhortation unto us, though we have taken ill
courses formerly, yet now to resolve against them, to 3. Use. For Ex^ortation,
to resolve against sin.
arise and go home to our Father; What shall I say to move and persuade us here
to consider. 1. Either you must resolve to leave your sins, or be damned for
them, why will thou lose thy precious soul for ever. 2. Whether is better to
come back and find God a Motives.
Father, or to depart still from him, and feel him a Judge. If mercy be better
then wrath, if heaven be better then hell, resolve to arise and leave thy
sinful ways, and return unto a God and Father. 3. Have thou not found thy
sinful courses to be evil and bitter unto thee already: why will thou serve an
evil master for evil wages, the which also will still be more fearful and
heavy, by how much the longer thou continues sinful and wicked; thy terrors
will not shorten, while thou do lengthen thy sins, nor may thou expect
that thy latter days will be peace, when all thy days have been wickedness;
if thou live in sin, thou must lie down in sorrow. 4. Sin is an hateful
object, and a conquerable enemy, therefore resolve against it. It only has
the most absolute reasons of the strongest hatred, as being completely evil and
vile; it is the basest of all objects, and is thine highest enemy, there is
nothing which can undo thee but sin; and yet i is a conquerable enemy, it is
very possible that a sinner may be changed. 5. If thou once could but get an
heart to resolve against sin, thou should find the work more easy. Saint
Austin professes, that though the thoughts of leaving his sins were once a
great burden to him, yet at length being peremptorily resolved he found it a
most easy and delightful thing to live without them. 6. A new course of
obedience; O this is lise indeed. Now ar^ thou alive from the dead, if thy
heart be truly resolved, I may say (...) as Christ to Zacheus, This day is
salvation come to thine house; (...) holy life and course is the most
excellent, is the most easy, is the most peaceable, is the most gainful, it is
the best, it is the sweetest, it is the happiest life; it begins in Grace, it
will end in Glory.

LUKE 15. v. 18, 19. And will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; make me as
one of thy hired servants.
You have heard of the Prodigals penitential consideration of his sinful
estate, and of his penitential resolution, to forsake that condition and
course, I will arise and go to my father: now you are to hear his penitential
confession, And will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, etc.
In which words you have considerable. 1. Who does confess; I. 2. What he does
confess, I have sinned. 3. To whom he does confess, Father, I have sinned, 4.
How he does confess, Against Heaven and before thee; In to and coramte: There
is no difficulty in the word; and therefore I will proceed to the intent of it,
which is this: That true Repentance for sin against God, will bring forth true
Confession of Sin unto God. This is evident almost in all persons, whether
single True Repentance for sin, will bring forth true confession of sin to God.
or conjoined, who are set out for penitents in Scripture. David, his heart
bleeds, and his tongue acknowledges, I have sinned, 2 Samuel 12. upon Nathans
conviction. The Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner; he stood afar off,
smiting his breast, and inditing himself for his sins: A whole Church in Ezra,
in Nehemiah, in Daniel, all at once confessing, We have sinned, we have done
wickedly, our sins are gone over our heads. For the better explication of the
assertion; know,

That there is a threefold confession of sin;

1. Auricular, or Sacramental, which the Church of Rome A threefold confession
of sin. Auricular.
does enjoin, but not the Scripture. Confiteri^ora and singula peccata
mortalia, to confess all, and every mortal Sin, quorum memoria cum debita and
diligenti premeditatione habeatur; which a diligent, and industrious memory can
recall etiam occulta, even your secret sins, and que sunt contra duo ultima
decalogi praecepta; Nay, those which are committed against the two last
commandments, and circumstancias, yea, and all the circumstances of your sins;
this is the confession which the Church of Rome in the Trent Council does
injoin upon pain of Anathema to be made unto the Priest. Sess. 14. Can. 7. but
without any warrant from the Scripture, or averment from true Antiquity; for
Scripture assures us, that confession of sin made to God alone, obtained
remission of sins and favor, Psalm. 32. 5. I said, I will confess my sins unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Lo! here confession to God
alone, not to a Priest, and upon it remission of sins by God himself; dares any
Popish Priest reverse this absolution or confession, because not made to man,
which yet is accepted with God. Saint Chrysostom speaks strange words; Let
Tom. 5. Hom. de paenit. and confess. Lat. ^d. Bas. an. 1 558.
God only see thee confessing. And again upon Hob. 12. Hom. 31. (...), Reveal
thy way unto the Lord, (...), Confess them before God: and again, (...),
Confess thy sins before thy Judge; and Saint Austins tongue needs to be
clipped; Quid mihi cum hominibus, ut audiant confessiones nostras Conf. lib 10.
cap. 13.
quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meas? What have I to do with men,
that they should hear my confessions, as though they could heal all my
diseases? Saint Basil says, that the groans of his In Psalm. 37.
heart did suffice for a Confession. Surely here was no absolute necessity to
confess all to the Priest: but yet again observe, there is a use of Confession
in case of 1. Injury. 2. Anxiety. 3. Scandal to the Church, as in the next
particular.

2. Christian and prudential Confession; and this is the acknowledging
Christian and prudential.
of sins to men, either in case of notorious scandal, which the primitive
Churches much urged and used; or else in case of trouble; and thus we deny not
but any person may lawfully, and warrantably go unto a faithful, godly,
skilful, compassionate Minister, and confess his sins, either to obtain counsel
out of the Word of God for the remedy of sins, to recover or prevent them; or
to be imformed aright concerning his present estate, or to have his conscience
quieted and settled.

3. Penitential, which is made only to God: this the Scripture Penitential to
God.
does command, and this we hold as absolutely necessary; when we do repent,
then to make confession of our sins to God. Penitential confession considered,
In respect of the material part only, or.


Secondly, This penitential confession may be considered, either in respect of
the material part only, and so it consists of words whereby we acknowledge
wherein we have transgressed, Hos. 4. ver. 1, 2. Or of the formal part also,
and thus it conteins these Of the formal also:
ingredients which specify and dist^nguish it from all superstitious, or
hypocritical, or false confessions.

1. It is an hearty acknowledgment, no^ nuda confessio; feigned And so it is
or merely verbal confession: It is affectionate, the lips do u^ter An hearty
acknowledgment:
the mind of the heart in it, cum sensu peccati and miseriae, as a sick man
opens his disease, here I feel it, etc. The publican smote upon his breast, and
confessed. True confession is the language of the very soul, being very
sensible of sin. 2. It is voluntary, not coacta confessio; the Thief may
confess upon the rack: though And voluntary,
there were no wrath in God, no rack in conscience, no flames in hell, yet the
true penitent will confess: When there is no other cause of confession of sin
but that which is penal, it is not then truly penitential. Pharaoh confessed
under the plagues, and Judas under the stings of conscience, it was an extorted
confession, but penitential confession is voluntary, it is an act that arises
from an inward displicence with, and detestation of sin, though there be no
apprehension of hell, no sense of wrath, yet the penitent confesses even to a
Father, I have sinned. Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, and when
they were put to death I gave my voice against them. I punished them often in
every Synagogue, Acts 26. 10, 11. 3. It is distinct, and not confused: the
penitent has special bills of indictment: he knows his sins, and And distinct,
wherein he has exceeded and failed: such sins as he has most delighted in,
such as he has most walked in, such as he has most dishonored God by, such
as cleave most unto his nature, such as conscience may be most clogged with,
these he does more especially confess unto God, and indite and condemn himself
for small sins as well as great; Saul's lap, as well as Vriahs murder, ancient
sins as well as present, secret sins as well as open. But must our confession
of sins be particular? Sol. Either explicitly so, or virtually so; the heart
has a particular intention or affection; the more particular, the better, to
humble our hearts, to obtein mercies, to make us fervent. As David, though he
did give a touch at all his sins in the beginning of the 51 Psalm, yet at
length brancheth his confession into particulars, into that of Adultery, and
the other of Blood. So does Paul often uncover his special sins of Persecuting
the Church, and Blaspheming, and of Injuriousness: Judas cried out of Blood,
but not of Covetous^ess and Hypocrisy. 4. It is Humble, and not And Humble.
proud (as Benhadads servants, with ropes, etc.) done with Contrition of Heart,
not with Ostentation of Spirit. Like a flash of Lightning, breaks out of a
cloud rented; and Joseph's garment was showed to his father rent and dipped in
blood. Anciently, when they did confess their sins to God, they did it with
Sack^loth and Ashes; and the opening of their sins is termed, The pouring out
of water before the Lord (I am vile, Job 40. 4. Not worthy, etc. Luke 15.)
because when they p^ured out their sins in confession of Tongue, they likewise
poured out contrition of Heart; their tears of Grief, spoke as much as the
words of their Lips: I will declare mine Iniquities, and be sorry for my sin,
Psalm. 38. The Papists indeed have as course a Garment, and as severe a Garb in
penitential confession as any, but underneath they have dainty Linen; there
lies great pride under all this pretended Humiliation, as if all this did merit
at the hands of God; the Voice is humble Jacob's, but the pride upon the act is
proud Esau's. If they saw the wrong which they did by sinning, how could they
so proudly challenge God upon their confessing (what does the murderer deserve
because he confesses?) But truly Penitential Confession is accompanied with
grief in the heart, and with shame in the face, and with acknowledgment, That
by reason of our sins there belongs nothing to us but ^hame and confusion,
Daniel 9. 5. It is mixed with some Faith, not overcome with Despair: If the And
mixed with some Faith.
confession of sin be not mixed with some hope of pardon, it is not penitential
but desperate: Cain, in some measure confessed, but fled into the Land of Nod,
and reputes his offense Unpardonable, beyond the power or intention of Mercy to
pardon him. Judas likewise utters his sin in particular, I have sinned in
betraying innocent. Blood; But then he goos out and hangs himself: But if the
confession be truly penitential, it acknowledges sin fully, yet believingly;
not to a mere Judge, who out of the mouth of the Confessor condemns, but to a
father (Father, I have sinned, says our Prodigal) who knows how to absolve and
forgive him, that knows how to accuse and condemn himself. As you must in
Confessions acknowledge, O Lord my sins are very great; so likewise must you
relieve your selves, O Lord, thy mercies are exceeding many; thus have I
sinned, but thou can pardon; I deserve wrath, but thou can freely show me
mercy; I am a sinner, yet, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. 6. It is Sincere
and not fraudulent: then is the Confession sincere, not And Sincere.
only when the heart acts in it, but when also it acts plainly and plenarily in
it. We are but Flesh and Blood, it is my nature, I cannot help it; I am not the
first that did so; it was company that drew me. I did eat, said Adam, but the
woman gave it me to eat. I did eat, said the woman, but the Devil tempted me. I
did offer Sacrifice, said Saul, but I was afraid of the Philistims. These are
fraudulent Confessions, when either a part is knowingly and willingly kept
back; or if all comes forth, it is extenuated as much as may be. Not that any
person is to accuse himself of more then he is guilty, but that he is not to
extenuate and mince any thing wherein he is faulty, but therein to set out
himself to the full; Of whom, I am chief, said Paul: And the Prodigal here, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee. 7. It must be joined with desire
and endeavor of Reformation: Therefore forsaking of sin (at least in Voto and
conatu) And joined with desire and endeavor of Reformation.
is annexed to confession, Prove. 28. 13. Saul confessed his sinful injuries to
David his Son in Law, 2 Samuel 24. 16. Chapter 26. 2. and wept, but then he pursued
him again: So did Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27, 34. but then he hardened his heart, and
sinned yet more. They loved ease, but not cure; but David desires medicine as
much as quiet; Grace to heal, as well as Mercy to quiet: he did not open his
wounds, and then make more, but desires those which are made, that they might
be bound up and healed. So did Shecaniah, not only confess their trespass, in
taking of strange wives, Ezra 10. 2, 3. but intends reformation: Now therefore
let us make a Covenant with God to put them all away.

These ingredients I do conjecture that they make up the very form and vitals
of a penitential Confession. But why should true penitents make confession of
their sins to God? Reasons of it. There is a necessity so to do. Ex patre Dei.


1. There is a necessity so to do: Necessitas ex part Dei, and ex part rei.
1. Ex part Dei, God requires you so to do: Acknowledge thine Iniquity, that
thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have scattered thy ways
to the Strangers under every green tree, Jer. 3. 13. So Hos. 14. 1. Return to
the Lord thy God. Ver. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and say
unto him, Take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. 2. Ex part Rei:
When the heart is penitentially Ex part Rei^
changed, it cannot but confess sin will lie so heavy; as when health comes in,
pain is felt: There is such an abundant sense of sin, that the heart cannot
contain it self. If the affection be full, it must vent it self, Joseph could
not refrain: So is the heart of a penitent overcharged with the iniquities of
his Life, and Indignity by him cast on God, a gracious God.

2. There is Vtility in so doing: Though true confession of sin does not at all
merit, yet it is a way or means to obtain three There is a Utility in so doing.
It is a means to obtain, Remission of sin.
singular things; viz. 1. Remission of Sins: This is a most sweet and
surpassing mercy; David accounts him Blessed whose iniquities are covered: but
Confession is the means for Remission, which may evidently appear, 1. By Gods
direction of his people to take this course, that so they might be pardoned,
Jer. 3. 12, 13. 2. By his special Promise, upon their true confession, for to
pardon them their sins, Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses and forsakes his
sins, shall find mercy. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, God is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins. 3. By frequent experience: David said, I will
confess my Transgressions, and thou for gave the Iniquity of my sin, Psalm.
32. 5. The Publican penitentially confessed, and went home Justified, Luke 18.
13, 14. 2. Power against sins: By hearty confession to uncover Power against
sin.
sins, is a way not only to get God to cover them by Justification, but also to
cure them by Sanctification. You must take off Vulnerati tegumentum, if you
will obtain Medici Emplastrum, Austin.
as S. Austin alludes upon the Psa. 32. When you open the wound, then you make
way for the healing Plaster; and therefore S. John does not only say, If we
confess our sins God is faithful to forgive us our sins; but also adds, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 3. Peace of Conscience: You may Peace
of Conscience.
see this manifestly in David, who being distressed in spirit for sin, is much
disquieted, and roars, and his moisture is turned into the drought in Summer,
Psalm. 32. 3, 4. His silence raised his Impatience and Trouble, but as soon as
he confessed his sins, he recovered his peace, ver. 5. I acknowledge my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions
unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. So Job 33. 27.
If any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it profited
me not; Ver. 28. His life shall see the light: It is one of the Windows to let
in the beams of heavenly comfort.

3. Lastly, God is much Glorified when the penitent does humbly and truly
confess his sins: David acknowledges his sins, God is much Glorified by it.
That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge, so Psalm. 51. 4. q. d. Lord, thus have I sinned; and whatsoever
punishment thou have inflicted, or may inflict, I must quit thy Justice in
all thy proceedings; thou can not but be Righteous, for I confess my self to
be sinful: Nay, his Justice only is not glorified, but his Wisdom, that he
knows all our sins and ways; and his Power, that he is able to Judge and
condemn us; yea, and his Mercy too, that we hope yet he will pardon and forgive
the sins which we confess unto him.

If true Repentance brings forth true Confession, then by this it will appear,
That there are very few true penitents, because Use 1. Then there are very few
true Penitents.
very few who do truly and aright confess their sins.

1. Some may say of sin, what Pilate did of truth, What Is Truth? So they,
What Is Sin? They are so ignorant, that they know not what is evil, or when they
do evil. Now, how can any confess or acknowledge that sin to God, which is not
known at all to himself.

2. Others are so far from confessing themselves to be sinful, that they (like
the proud Pharisee) justify themselves to be righteous; talk of their good
meanings, purposes, ^ust dealings, etc. Sana membra ostendebat (says S. Austin
of that Pharisee) vulnera tegebat; I am no Extortioner, no Adulterer, etc. Ask
some persons, Do you acknowledge One only God, who is most Merciful, Just, Holy,
Omnipotent, Faithful, Long-suffering, (...) of Goodness and Truth, etc. Yes,
that do they, God forbid else, etc. Ask them again, Are you Idolaters? make you
no Idols? or did you ever worship them? Who they! nay, they defy them, and all
such trumpery. But do you not use to swear, and take the Name of God in vain?
Nay, for swearing, of all sins they cannot away with that; a man gets no good
by swearing. But do you remember to keep holy the Sabbath? Yea, all their
neighbors can bear witness, that they keep to the Church constantly. Ask them
again, Did you never injure your Parents? O, they were always dutiful
Children. But did you never play the whore, or the adulterer, or the thief?
Nay, now they will talk no longer with you, if you be so uncharitable as to
imagine such guilt. Why, O thou ignorant sinner! why do thou deceive thy
soul? if thou art thus righteous, thou need not to repent; and if thou art
free from all sin, how can thou confess thy sins (as a true penitent ought to
do) to God?

3. But some others there are, who do both know and acknowledge their sin; but
how? only in a formal, cold, indifferent manner. True, we are all sinners, God
help us, and there is no man but he sins, yea, the best of them all; Never
considering, That great Justice of God which is provoked by their sins; nor
that vile and abominable nature in their sins; nor that infinite wrath unto
which their guilt does oblige them; nor the excellency and necessity of
pardoning mercy, which we should earnestly sue out when we confess our sins.

4. There is another sort, who do more distinctly, and perhaps somewhat
feelingly and freely, confess their sins; but then they keep Benjamin back: And
as Rachel hid the images under her, so they reserve some one special lust; they
do not bring all the Prisoners forth unto the Bar: There is a sin which they
hide close because it is sweet, as Zophar speaks, Job 20. 12. Now this argues,
1. Hypocrisy and guile of heart, a secret love to sin; it is made, in Job 20.
12. the guise of an Hypocrite, to hide his sin. 2. Extreme folly and vanity of
spirit; for, can thou conceal any sin from that God, who is acquainted with
all thy paths, and knows thy thoughts afar off, and to whose eyes all things
are naked? will not the Lord discover the sin (which thou do cover) before
Men and Angels, to thy eternal infamy and condemnation? assuredly, though thou will not set thy sins in order before him, yet he will set thy sins in order
before thee, and will reprove thee for them, Psalm. 50. (i.) he will publish
them, and he will everlastingly punish thee for them.

5. Others do confess all their sins, but this only in times of wrath, and
judgment, and death; not like Penitents, but as Malefactors, (as men make their
Wills upon a deathbed;) not out of an hatred of sin, but out of mere sense or
fear of punishment; it is not filial, ingenuous, free, but only extorted,
involuntary, and servile, and therefore not truly penitential: They do not go
and confess their sins, as they to John the Baptist, but cry out and confess
their sins; it is that, not which they would do, but which they cannot avoid:
Conscience, like an overcharged stomach, does so over-press and pain them,
that they cannot hold, but out it comes, what oppression, injustice, usurious,
injurious, beastly, filthy, swinish sins they have lived in.

6. Others seem to be more ingenuous and voluntary, or ready to confess their
sins; but then this is with such pretenses, colors, shiftings, shuffling, as
if they were, like Lawyers, to mitigate and color a bad cause. S. Austin
complains of some, who would impute their sins to Fate, to Fortune, to the
Devil, nay, to God himself: The complaint may well suit with us; generally, we
have some device or other, either to deny, or to extenuate our sinful facts;
rather to plead for our selves, than to plead against our iniquities. It was
company, and we are but flesh and blood, and it is not usual, or (which is
contrary) it is my nature, and the Devil was strong with me, others do worse,
etc.

7. But of all men, they are most contrary to penitential Confession, who ^all
evil good, and darkness light, and that make a a mock, and a sport of sin;
whereas they should, with grief of heart, and shame of face, mournfully,
penitently, humble themselves before the Lord, and acknowledge their
iniquities, instead thereof. They boast themselves of their iniquites, and make
but a jest of that which cost the blood of Christ; It is but a trick of Youth,
and good Fellowship, and Handsomness, and Complement, and discreet Thrift; thus
do they phrase their Uncleanness, their Drunkenness, their Pride, their Lying,
their Covetousness.

8. Lastly, to mention no more, They are defective too about the true
penitential confession, who are assiduous to confess, but desiduous to forsake;
frequent to acknowledge and declare their sins, but negligent in forsaking and
leaving of them: Discovery suffices, but Recovery they mind not. This is most
ordinary with us, that we make our confession of sins to God, rather an act of
our Memory, than a work of our Conscience: it suffices us to deliver in the
tale, to number our transgressions; but then we wrestle not with the Lord in
prayer, for his Spirit of Grace to heal our hearts, and to turn us from the
sinful ways unto which we find our hearts so apt and forward. But I will no
longer insist upon the Convicting part, I proceed to another Use.

Which shall be, Not to hide our sins, but to declare and acknowledge them in a
right penitential manner before the Lord, that Use 2. Exhortation, To confess
our sins in a penttential manner. Not to cover our sins.
so we may declare our selves true Penitents. This exhortation you see consists
of two parts; Not to Cover, To Discover.

I. Not to hide and cover our sins. There is a twofold Covering of our sin;
One is natural, which is that Vail of Ignorance and blindness drawn over the
soul by Original sin, keeping the mind in spiritual darkness, not able to see
it self, nor acts, nor ways aright: This is such a Cover, wherein we our
selves are hid from our selves. There is another Covering, which is voluntary
and artificial; wherein we dig deep to hide our counsels, intentions, delights,
actions from the Lord, cunningly contriving and feigning a secrecy, as if we
could put a curtain or a cloud twixt Gods eyes, and our actions; doing evil,
and saying, None shall see it: And when it is done, never bringing that forth
by a penitential confession, which we did bring out by a sinful commission. Oh
take heed of this, though we be forward to sin, beware lest we be artificial to
conceal it. If we cannot have eyes to foresee, and strength to prevent evil;
yet let us have hearts to bewail, and tongues to confess it. Consider seriously

1. This hiding quality is a very ill quality; it is an emblem This is a very
ill quality.
of an heart, that will not yet be rid of sin: As Beggars, that will not be
cured of their sores; for if thou would be cleansed, why concealest thou thy
disease?

2. It adds much to your sin: To commit a sin may be an act of It adds much to
your sin.
infirmity, but to hide and conceal it argues either strong Atheism, that the
sinner thinks God regards it not though it be vile; or else perverse
wilfulness, he will not humble, he will not turn unto the Lord.

3. It adds nothing to our safety: Adam hid himself in the thicket, what got he
by it? what if you keep the fire close in the thatch? It adds nothing to our
safety.
You may put gold in a secret place, and perhaps it may be under a safer
custody; but he who will hide his sin, does but put a fair cloth upon a
dangerous wound, which now rankles, gangrenes, kills. Of all sins, those do
most endanger the soul, for which we are not truly humbled, or do not seriously
confess them unto God. Why should God show thee mercy, who wilt not acknowledge
thy self guilty? and how can sin but be fiercely reigning, where it is most
willingly harbored and concealed?

4. Nor does it add to our secrecy: For all things are naked and Nor does it
add to our secrecy.
bare before God, etc. God can easily discover thy sin. 1. He sees it, he has
an all-seeing eye. 2. He can make thy conscience the rack of torment at
confession. 3. And will at the last day; Nothing is hid that shall not be made
manifest. In two things does the inconfitent sinner much prejudice himself by
hiding of his sins: One, that he contrives himself for a sore punishment;
another, that he reprieves himself for an open shame. It is Gods disposition,
this, that when we discover our sin, and condemn our selves, then will he cover
those sins, and not judge our persons. 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged. But when we with wile and guile contrive to
keep them close, God then will publish and manifest them; for there is nothing
(in this kind) secret, which shall not be made manifest: Nay, simply,
manifestation is not all; judiciary is it; he will so discover them, as to
question, as to arraign, as to convict, as to sentence, as to condemn your sins.

Object. But sinners are ready to object; Who is able to confess his sins? Does
not David say, Who knows how often he offends? Psalm. 19.

Sol. It is true, every particular, numerical thought and act of sin, is not
possible to be cited and confessed; but who urges that? This belongs to thee;
1. To study thy heart and life; 2. To observe what the Lord forbids and
commands; 3. To hear what thy Conscience will speak for kinds and acts; 4. To
give diligence to find out as many of thy sins as thou can, and by no means
to omit thy special sins; and so to spread all of them, with humble, hearty,
and mournful acknowledgment before the Lord.

Object. This is the way to breed despair, to see an Army of sins on a sudden
raised up in the soul.

Sol. 1. See them you must, first, or last; either now to your humiliation, or
hereafter to your confusion; better see them now, when you have time to get God
to pardon them, then after life, when it is Gods time only to condemn you for
them. And 2. He who bids thee to see thy sins, bids thee to confess them; and
he who bids thee to confess them, has promised also to pardon them.

Object. But I shall be ashamed to confess them, so many, so foul
transgressions.

Sol. 1. If it were to Man, then thou might blush and fear; he might wonder
at thee, and perhaps incompassionately censure and blab. 2. But it is to a God
only; One who is very merciful and will keep counsel, he is very ready to
pity and to spare thee. 3. The commission of sin should be a shame, but the
confession of it is an honor; it is an honorable thing that a sinner will
glorify God, and confess and forsake his sins. Let the disease be what it
will, thou will discover it to the Physician; why then this sinful modesty to
reveal thy sins to God? And 4. especially, if thou considerest thus much, that
thy confession is not to give him knowledge of any fact with which he is not
acquainted, but to yield a testimony of thy obedience, and repentance, and
grief, and to get thy acquittance and discharge.

II. But discover and confess them: and to move you to this, consider 1. Though
it be a shame to commit sin, yet it is an honor But discover and confess them.
Motives.
to confess it. My son, give glory to the God of Israel, and confess unto him,
said Joshua, cap. 7. 19. to Achan.

2. Though the commission of sin brings heavy guilt, yet the confession of it
brings peace and ease: It is the letting out of corrupt and ulcerous matter,
which rages, and swells, and boils in the conscience.

3. Is it so great a matter, being greatly guilty, freely and humbly to
confess? If the Prophet had bid thee to have done some Is it so great a matter
for the guilty person freely to confess.
great thing, etc. so if the Lord had required of thee some great matter,
proper and high satisfaction for the wrongs thou have done unto him, thousands
of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil, etc. But when he says, Be grieved for
what thou have done, do so no more, only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou
have transgressed against the Lord thy God, Jer. 3. 13.

4. It shall surely find mercy. O pardoning mercy! how necessary, how sweet for
a sinner! But who shall have it? He that It shall surely find mercy.
confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. I said, I will
confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin,
Selah, Psalm. 32. 5. Nondum pronuntiat, sed promittit se pronuntiaturum, and
ille dimittit, says Saint Austin, ibid. And again; Vox nondum in ore erat, sed
auris Dei in cord erat: So was it with the Prodigal; he purposes to confess,
and his Father sees him a far off.

LUKE 15. 19. And am no more worthy to be called thy Son; make me as one of thy
hired Servants.
These words contain in them, a continuation of the Prodigals humble
Confession; he had in the former Verse acknowledged his sinfulness, and in this
he confesses his unworthiness, [And am He confesses his unworthiness.
no more worthy to be called thy Son.] 2. A modest supplication, [Make me as
one of thy hired Servants.] There are three Propositions which these two parts
do afford us, viz. 1. That penitent persons are humble and lowly persons. [I am
no more worthy.] 2. That unworthiness is no just prejudice to supplication. [I
am not worthy, yet make me, etc.] 3. That penitent persons earnestly desire
some relation to God. [Make me as one of thy hired Servants.]

That penitent persons are humble and lowly persons. [I am no Doct. 1. Penitent
persons are humble persons.
more worthy.] Look on every word almost in the Text, and you shall see in it
the blush of humility; I am not worthy.] The language of Pride is, I am not as
other men; the voice of Humility is, I am not worthy; what I have is of mere
mercy, what I crave is not of my merit; God may give what he pleases, and I
may receive what he gives, but I am unworthy of both; I dare not expostulate
nor challenge, I have sinned, and what mercy can I then deserve. No more
worthy.] Was he ever worthy? No. Why then no more worthy? q. d. O Lord, I
deserve nothing, no, nothing at all; so vile a wretch have I been, that it is
singular mercy if thou look at all upon me. To be thy Son.] A Son, thy Son, O
it is a high Relation, an high Digni^y! for a Vassal of Wrath to be made a
Vessel of Glory! for a Slave to Sin, to be translated to a Son of God! Who am
I? it is that which I want, it is that though which is too great for me to ask;
I am not worthy to be thy Son, nay, not worthy to be called thy son,] the very
title and name is too good for me: that so debauched and luxurious a sinner as
I, should have that honor from thee, to be mentioned or spoken of, to be in
any sort reputed among those of so singular Relation unto thee; I who have
sinned so much against thee, that I should in any kind be owned as a Son by
thee, this is an eminency; I am not worthy to be called thy Son. Thus you see
his humbleness in confession; Not worthy, utterly unworthy to be a Son, nay, to
be called thy Son: See some steps of it in his Petition; Make me as one of thy
hired servants.] A low request, but it is the modest breath of a lowly spirit.
If I may be thy servant, I shall be glad of that; not thy only servant, but
one of thy servants; not the chiefest of thy servants, but any one of thy
servants, thy hired servant: And perhaps even that is too good for me, to be a
servant, to be an hired servant, to be one of them; I shall count my self
happy, if I may be as one of the meanest servants, if I may be but a servant to
the meanest of thy servants that serve thee. And Father, I beg for this too,
make me as one of thy hired servants; I am not worthy of the least place, nor
of the meanest Relation; I challenge it not, only be thou pleased to bestow it
upon me. He is not worthy to desire the greatest, and he does modestly entreat
for the lowest Relation; both which show the humbleness of his penitential
spirit. Thus was it with Paul after his conversion; how he sinks his thoughts
and estimation Paul.
of himself! When he is to speak of his sins, 1 Timothy 1. 15. then Primus
peccatorum, I am the chief of sinners; Nemo prior, none exceeded me, nemo
pejor, I was worse then any: And when he spoke of Gods mercy to him, then,
minimus Apostolorum, I am the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 8. and
indignissimus, not worthy to be called an Apostle. Nay, he falls lower than
this, Ephesians. 3. 8. Minimus sanctorum minor minimo, less than the least of all
Saints, is this grace given, etc, Do you not see this also in the penitential
Publican? He stood afar off, and would not so much as lift up his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his Publican.
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. He judges those feet unworthy
to carry him unto God, which so often carried him from God; and those eyes
unworthy to look on his holiness, which had been so frequently cast upon
sinfulness; and whereas the Pharisee spreads his hands abroad, he turns them
upon his breast, his contrite breast, and does not boast of his righteousness,
but cries out of his sins; and justifies not himself, but humbly begs, Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner. Thus was it with Mary Magdalene upon her repentance,
Luc. 7. 38. She stood at the feet of Jesus, behind him, weeping, and began to
wash his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed
his feet, and anointed them with ointment. Mark it; all her service is lowly;
she stood, she did not sit; sitting was a posture of familarity, standing of
humility: and she stood behind; to look after Christ was enough, to look upon
him she was unworthy: And then she stood at his feet, the humblest posture, and
there all her work is acted: Stood at his feet, wept at his feet, washed his
feet, wiped his feet, kissed his feet, anointed his feet.

But now for the opening of this Proposition, I will briefly discuss, 1. What
this lowly humbleness is, which accompanies true Repentance? 2. The Causes why
true Penitents are so humbly lowly? 3. Some useful Application of this.

Quest. 1. What that humble lowliness is, which is to be found in the true
penitnnt? What this lowly humbleness is.


Sol. It is not a promiscuous familiarity with every body; such an humbleness
becomes Solomon's fool; nor is it an affected garb of complemental
dissimulation, that was Absalom's treacherous stirrup to mount up himself into
the Throne; nor is it a slavingly abasing of a man's self to acts incongruous
with the dignity of his place and calling; this were to be the Tom of a Parish;
nor is it a denial of those gifs and graces that God has bestowed upon us,
this is a modest lie, it is not lowliness; nor is it passive humiliation,
wherein the spirit may be cracked as low as Hell, and yet be still as proud as
Hell; nor is it a rejecting of Gods promises, because we can bring no worth
unto them: But Humbleness which accompanies Repentance, It is a Grace of Gods
Spirit, whereby the penitential person, from right knowledge, becomes low in
his own eyes, Humbleness described.
and judges himself most unworthy in his addresses unto God.

1. It is a Grace of Gods Spirit.] It is one of the Pearls in the It is a Grace
of Gods Spirit.
Chain which the Apostle would have us to put on, Col. 3. 12. an humble spirit
is a spiritual ornament. Some Graces are more visible and stirring, as Faith
and Charity; others are more reserved and hidden (like Soul among the stuff) as
Patience and Humility. But a Grace it is, being a supernatural Quality, not
born with us, but added unto us. In our first Birth, we come out with very high
and stout Spirits; in our second Births, with very lowly and humble Spirits; in
our low Birth, with high Spirits; in our high and excellent Birth, with lowly
Spirits.

2. Making us low in our own eyes:] Behold, says Job, 40. 4. Making us low in
our own eyes.
I am vile, (.i.) nothing worth, base, What shall I answer thee? I am as a
weaned child, said David, Psa. 131. 2. I have not the Understanding of a man,
said Agur, Pro. 30. 2. Not as if I had yet attained, says the Apostle, Phil.
3. Hence is it that in Scripture humble persons are called Little, (one of
these little ones, says Christ) little, not only in the proud contempt of the
World, but little in their own humble estimation of themselves. As David is
said to be little in his own eyes; one who set a very low rate and value on
himself. And they are said to be poor, poor in spirit; they have indeed very
rich Graces, but very poor opinions and conceits of themselves; I, who am but
dust and ashes, says Abraham: a worm and no man, said David. Excellencies they
have, but they are not puffed up by them. God does raise them, but they raise
not themselves; they are precous and honorable in his sight, but vile and
nothing in their own; they have an high Calling, and high Graces, and high
Privileges, but still low hearts: when they look on their Natural frame,
that is as low as Earth; when they look on their sinful frame, that is as low as
Hell; when they look on their Spiritual frame, then how little; it is but some
says, Oh, that God would help my Unbelief! that sorrow is but a drop, that
love but a spark, that knowledge but a dawning light, their strength but
weakness; others have more, they have but little; still they complain of
defects, infirmities, failings; what they have is nothing to the much they
want: No Vines so unfruitful, no servants so unprofitable as they.

Judging themselves unworthy in their addresses to God:] Thy Saints, said
Moses, humble themselves at thy feet; unworthy to Judging themselves unworthy
in their addresses to God.
come before God, unworthy to obtain any thing from God: the Publican dares not
lift up his eyes to heaven; Ezra is ashamed and confounded to look up: the very
Majesty and Purity of God do dazzle, and sometimes silence their thoughts; and
when they do worship toward his holy place, then mark how their Petitions run,
Not for my sake, O Lord, not in my own name, not for my righteousness, shame
and confusion belong to me; but do it for thine Own sake, for thy Mercies sake,
for thy Truths sake, for thy Christ's sake, O Lord: If thou show me no Mercy,
I deserve none; if thou give me any Mercy, it is only of thy abundant Mercy.

Arising from a right knowledge:] As Pride is rooted in Ignorance Arising from a
Right knowledge,
and Error (it is but the corrupting of our Text, a foolish blast and mistake)
so Humbleness is grounded in right Knowledge and true Judgment.

1. Of God: Humble persons do more exactly apprehend Of God.
him (what He is, what his Will is) in his perfections of Holiness, and Mercy,
and Justice, and thereupon are abased in their own sense. To compare our selves
with our selves may be dangerous, and to compare our selves with others
inferior to us in gifts, and graces, and services, it may be a speedy way to
puff us up. But a comparison of our selves with God, O how short are we? how
nothing are we in comparison of that infinite fullness of excellency in him? The
Stars make a twinkling in the night, but when the Sun appears they hide their
faces and Veil themselves. Our Graces may seem to cast their Rays, their
Beams, and to have some Luster in our eyes, whilst we compare them with others,
or our selves in darkness; but when we look on God, that Sun, that fullness of
all Holiness, then we are ashamed, may hang down our heads, and, with the
Angels, cover our Faces: Our Features are but as Deformities, and our Fullness
but Poverty, in comparison of him: And therefore when Job had a while conferred
with God, he then confesses his folly and ignorance, and abhors himself, and
will speak no more.

2. Of our selves, both in Evil and in Good. For Evil: It is discerned in the
proper nature, forms, colors, deserts of it. Oh, Of our Selves.
how much has God already been dishonored by me? How For Evil.
often? how highly? Any one Transgression, rightly apprehended, may serve to
abase us all our days. But then I still feel a corrupt nature, apt to rebel,
to step aside, to break out. Oh, how wonderfully do unbelief, hardness,
security, dullness, distraction, hypocrisy, vainglory, unthankfulness, folly,
indispositions, evil thoughts, corrupt affections cleave unto me, though under
many mercies, opportunities, helps, assistances; what am I worthy of? It is
pure mercy that I am not almost every hour thrown into Hell, by reason of
continual sinnings? For Good; look on it in all respects, and know it aright:
you may see cause of humbleness: 1. Look on it in the Qualities or Habits: at
the best very weak, things rather of desire, then of possession; we know but in
part, believe with fear, trust with doubtings, see but as in a glass; we rather
imitate then apprehend. As Prosper spoke of the joys of Grace, Ipsa and
virtutum gaudia vulnus habent, that is true of the very Graces, even our wine
is mixed with water; and like Jacobs speckled Sheep, so is it with our souls,
some of all graces, yet but alittle, and accompanied with the relics of all,
and too much sinfulness. 2. Look on it in the Acts and Fruits: We cannot go
without a Staff, and, too like Jacob, halting to our dying day; either we want
minds to good, or wills or power, not able of our selves to ha^ch one good
thought, and when the will is present, yet we find not power to perform; and
though sometimes we do good, yet evil is present with us: like Beer which runs
low with the liquor, there runs out much muddy grounds; or like Abraham's
Sacrifice, many Birds lighting on it; or like Solomon's Ointment, in which is
some dead Fly; or like a Candle, which burns with a Snuff; or like the fire,
which ascends with much smoke. Our actions are like the Arrows which are shot,
one is too far, another is too short, another is too wide, not one of an
hundred that hits the mark; so is it with us, many Duties and Services are
performed by us, but which amongst them all is performed with that reverence of
Spirit, faith on Christ, integrity of Affection, unitedness of Soul, and sole
fidelity of intention to Divine Glory. Our excellencies are weak, and the Lord
be merciful unto us, how often do we weaken them? our work is but little that
we do, very little; take aside the aversness, the indispositions, the
formalities, the coldness, the distractions, the unbelief, the weariness, the
inconstancy, the infinite infirmities which accompany them, what poor things
will they then appear? may we not fall down and say, having done our best, We
are but unprofitable servants. Nay, and that which being known may likewise
abase us, is this, we may justly say of all our poor excellencies, as the Widow
of her Vessels, They are but borrowed ware; What have we which we have not
received? Every Gift and Grace which we have, is but a Beam born of the Sun, a
drop coming from another Fountain then our Natures: all our good is but free
Gift; take the borrowed feathers from the Crow, it is then a most black
creature alone. So that consider our good aright, either in the initial cause
of it, viz. Divine and free Grace; or in the upholding cause of it, Divine
assistance; or in the qualities of it, how weak and imperfect; or in the acts
of it, how rare and uneven; all these are the springs as it were, which feed
humbleness of heart in the true Penitent.

Quest. 2. Now I proceed to the next inquiry, Why true Penitents Why true
penitents are humble persons.
are such humble and lowly persons? I am not worthy to be called thy Son.

Sol. The reasons are most of them insinuated already; I will either express
them again, or add more to them: thus then. 1. Conversion necessarily infers an
alteration in the whole man: Though it does not destroy Substances, yet it
changes Qualities; of unholy, Conversion infers an Alteration in the whole man.
it makes us holy; of ignorant, knowing; of filthy, clean; of obstinate,
flexible; of unquiet, meek; of proud and lofty, humble and lowly; therefore
penitent persons, who are converted persons, must needs be lowly, ex natura
rei; this is forcible. 2. They never did experimentally know themselves till
they began to repent: Sin was but a delight, or a mock, or a mere discourse
They now experimentally know themselves.
unto them before; the vileness of it, the contagious pollution of it, the
stinging guilt of it, the terrible effects of it, both in respect of God and
themselves, they never savv it till now; they see that of sin which they savv
not before, both for the filth and the guilt of it; and they see it with other
eyes then they savv it before; no marvel then that they become low in their own
eyes. Should they not be very vile in their own eyes, who perceive themselves
guilty of that which is most and only vile in Gods? I have sinned what shall I
say unto thee, O thou preserver of men? 3. They never saw till now how short
they came in that good of duty Job 7. 20.
which they owe to God, and how unanswerable they are to the many bonds of
obedience: I have done nothing for They now see how short they come in duty.
God all my days, nor to him in any Service and Honor. They never knew till
now how injurious they have been unto God, to the kindness of his Love, to the
counsel of his Spirit, And how injurious they have been to God.
to the righteousness of his Will; how unworthily and stubbornly they have
resisted, despised him, abused all his mercies: Thus for the Explication of the
point. Now for the Application of it to our selves; Does true Repentance
produce humble lowliness of Spirit, then let us reflect on our own hearts, and
judge what solidity Use. Let us judge of our Repentance by our lowliness.
of Repentance is wrought in us by that lowliness and sense of unworthiness
which is to be found in true penitents. Consider Pride, and loftiness, and
self-worthiness are very natural to us: though we be born wholly naked, not any
external ornament is upon us, no inward excellency, yet our natures are puffed
with Pride and selfworthiness are very natural to us.
wind and a haughtiness; and could we be rifled and stripped of every sin, we
should find this of pride (so opposite to lowliness) most intimately cleaving
to us: Paradise was not free of it: What do I speak of it? nay, Heaven it self
was troubled with it; the Devils, who are cast into the lowest darkness, fell
thither by reason of their proud loftines^. Look over all sorts of persons,
it is a wonder almost to find one truly humble-hearted sinner. If a man has
parts, the Apostle tells us that knowledge puffs up; the the wind gets into
the bladder: as it was with Diotrephes, etc. Who is the Lord, said Pharaoh? if
a man have dignities, how rare is it to see greatness stooping, and lowliness
of heart with highness of honor. If a man have riches, he needs an Apostles
charge, Not to be high-minded. If a man be poor, he is like Diogenes, trampling
upon the Philosophers chair with greater pride. Generally the scum is most
light, and vu^gar spirits most censorious and insolent. If a man be ignorant,
yet Laodicea thinks her self rich, and increased, and to have need of nothing;
though indeed she be poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked.

2. If habitually and predominantly proud, thou art as yet impenitent; it is
true that Conversion does not give an absolute cessation If Habitually Proud,
thou art impenitent.
to sin, yet it does take off dominion, and causes diminution. It cannot be,
that a man should have an heart rightly sensible of sin, and set against it,
and yet be high in the opinion of his own excellencies and worth. The mountains
are cast down into a valley, and the high imaginations brought into captivity;
the swellings of our corrupt spirits are in great measure abated and let out,
when once Grace enters our hearts, and Repentance has opened our eyes. Though
you may be free from many other actual and gross exorbitancies, if yet the
spirit of pride (be it in Spirituals, or Naturals, or Civils, or Morals) dwell
within you, and rule over you, it may be said of you what the Prophet spoke of
the stout-hearted, They were far from righteousness.

3. Few men use the means to make them humble, they seldom are at home, they
are so studious of other men's sins, that they Few men use the means to make
them humble.
neglect their own. This is a most ordinary truth, that they who are so prying
after the faults of others, seldom search themselves, and hereby only enable
their own pride, but disable themselves for humbleness. It is not foreign, but
experimental knowledge which makes us lowly. But you may reply, How may it be
known that our hearts are not lofty, but lowly, that so we may How it may be
known that our hearts are not lofty, but lowly.
judge our repentance not to be be formal, but sound. Sol. Premise a word or
two and then I have done, that I speak only of Lowliness, as it is to be found
in Christians in this life, which is not a state of perfection, but
imperfection. Secondly, as it in conflict and combat, not as absolute and
free. Now then 1. If you be truly lowly, then you live altogether upon free and
mere mercy. You then live upon mere mercy.
Every mercy is an alms unto you, and is sued out not upon desert, but upon
promise: you can find no money to buy corn, but all must be free gift: you will
be content to buy without money, and to receive without price. 2. You will then
be more patient under delays: it is but a proud beggar who will be served at
first knock, or else will be gone. It is a very ill sign when we are so You
will be patient under delays.
quick with God, that he shall lose our service if he does not presently send
out his answers. Were we indeed sensible of our own unworthiness, we would hold
it no disparagement to wait at heaven gates; he will patiently wait for some
mercy, who humbly knows that he deserves none. Even an humble heart may urge God
to make haste, but it is our proud heart which accuses and quarrels with him
for delay. 3. You will be silent in denials and withdrawments. Does not God
answer me? Why! I deserv no look nor answer. Does he You will be silent in
denials.
not give what I ask, but take away what he has given? Why it is the Lord, let
him do with his own what he pleases. It is mercy that I have yet any mercy: I
am unworthy to enjoy any good, who am most worthy to enjoy all evil. When we
are our selves, this will be our temper, if we be humble, God shall use his own
authority and pleasure to dispose of the mercies which we crave, and of the
mercies also which we have; we will be more patient in denials, and silent in
losses; What can we say who are unworthy of all? 4. You will be very thankful
for any answer, or the least mercy. If nothing will content us but great
mercies, assuredly we are not You will be very thankful for the least mercy.
humble, but have too great spirits. He who indeed judges himself not worthy
of the least of all the mercies and truth which God shows unto him, will take
up a great misery with quietness, and a little mercy with thankfulness. The
body of man if it be sound, can stoop for a pin, as well as for a piece; and
the heart, if it be humble, can bless for little mercies, as well as for great.
The touch of the little finger, as well as of the great, will make a well-tuned
stringed instrument speak, and even the whisperings of the voice are ecchoed
back in an exact concave. The least drops of mercy affect the lowly heart,
which can awake upon the least noise. The proud heart like the mountain yields
a poor crop after a shower of mercies, but the humble heart, like the Gardens,
yields plenty of sweet smelling sacrifices, after the least dews or drops of
merciful blessings and answers from God. Now say, How do you plead with God
when you approach unto him? what can you show for the mercies that you ask?
only his own mercy, no worth in you to move him: And how are you when God
delays, or denies, or removes his mercies? can you then be in dust and ashes,
and not in fire and flames? can you yet quietly serve him, wait on him, depend
on him, submit to him upon this ground? Ah! I am a sinner; I have wronged the
Father of mercies; abused all his mercies; am not worthy of the least of
mercies: It is mercy that ever I had mercy, that now I have any, that which is
lost and denied, I am not worthy of them; that which I have, I am not worthy
of. And when God answers you either in spirituals, to your souls; or in
temporals, to your outward man, How do you look upon his answers? Do you look a
squint on them as he upon Solomon's Cities? Are you able to abuse great mercies,
and slight the least? 5. If you be The more me^cies from God, will make you
more humble.
truly humble, then the more mercies and answers from God, will still add and
make you more humble and lowly. Not only the sense of your iniquities, but the
experience of Gods mercies will make you low in your eyes. Mercies have two
effects upon humble hearts, they make them more humble, and more fruitful.
David in 2 Samuel 7. when God gave him the advouzon, and, as it were, confirmed
and added to his former Charter, an intention of greater mercy to his
posterity, Why! this casts David down, ver. 18. Then went King David in, and
sa^e before the Lord, and he said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house,
that thou have brought me hitherto. The more corn is in the ear, the more it
hangs down the head; and the tree bends most, when laden with fruit. But if
mercies make us forget God, as afflictions make us forget our selves; if it be
with us as with the Arrow, which when the Bow is most bent and drawn, it flies
farthest from us; Or as with the Dial which casts the shortest shadow, when the
Sun is highest; or as with some grounds, which yields the rankest corn after
the fullest tillage: we grow careless of God, of his Ordinances in public, of
his worship in private, scornful of heavenly reproof, admonition, obedience;
alas! this shows we are not humble.

If upon due search we find our hearts lifted up with an opinion 2. Use. We
should be humbled for the want of this humbleness.
of our own worth and excellencies, and far from penitential humblings, We
should be humbled for want of this humbleness: as Hezekiah, though his heart
was lifted up, yet the text says, He humbled himself for the pride of his
heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 26, 27. And use the means by which we may become humbly
sensible of our own great unworthiness. v. g. 1. Study our selves more. And use
the means to become humble. Study our selves more.
Alas! what are we? but dust and ashes; nay, but sin and corruption: We cannot
say of our sins, as the Prophet spoke of the fore-running calamities, Gray
hairs are here and there upon him. No, no, but as David, Who can tell how often
he offends? if we knew our selves, we would abhor our selves. 2. Study the Law
more, the perfection and excellency of it, and bring thy many blots to that
purity, thy many crookednesses to that plainness. Study the Law more.
Paul was alive before the Law came, but when the Commandment came, sin
revived, and he died. 3. Study your own performances better. It Is true,
something is done, but there is more undone, Study your own performances better.
then done: thy best services have more in them to humble, then to puff thee;
thou can not do at all, unless God aids thee (but art like a Mill without
water, or a Dial without the Sun) and when thou do go, it is like
Mephibosheth, lame on both feet. When thou have made the best prayer, thou
may well bow the knee, and pray again, that God would forgive thee the much
dullness, the many distractions, the infinire unbelief in thy prayer. 4. Study
the creatures better, which are the bellows to blow up your self-conceits and
high thoughts. What is thy beauty but a Study the creatures better.
fading dye, a changeable tincture, which one blow or one disease may dash! if
it escape both, yet time will unvarnish the house newly painted? What are
riches but a labor, an heap of vanity, and a vexation of spirit; they are a
Tree long in growing, and quick in fading: Solomon compares them to a Bird
ready to fly; Paul reputes them uncertain, and David wonders who shall enjoy
them. What are clothes but a few Garments of Trees, of Beasts, somewhat
trimmed up? And our Honors, bu^ the breath of the People, a vain air and wind
at the best, quickly stirred, easily turned about and allayed? And our bodies,
but a piece of clay, a wall of earth? Our heads are but earthly Globes, and our
eyes but wasting Candles, and our feet but decaying Pillars, etc. 5. Study God
more, in his excellencies of holiness, Study God more.
of justice, of mercy, and then you will abhor your selves in dust and ashes.

Now I proceed to the second Proposition, viz.

That personal unworthiness is not prejudicial to spiritual supplication; Doct.
2. Personal unworthiness is not prejudicial to spiritual supplication.
[I am not worthy, yet make me as.] Of this Proposition, I will give you 1. The
sense. 2. Arguments to confirm it. 3. Some useful Applications.

Touching the sense or Explication of it, premise these particulars. 1. There
is a twofold unworthiness; Privative; when there is no quality or act which the
person can show to God, as a There is a twofold unworthiness.
meritorious cause, why he should accept of him or his services. Negative; when
there is no meetness or fitness of capacity in the subject, enabling of him to
receive any thing from God: for as there is a double dignity or worthiness; One
of Causality to deserve good, another of Receptivity to obtain good; so
answerably there is a double unworthiness, one which consists in the defect of
merit, another which consists in the defect of meetness: I speak only of the
former, not of the latter, for a person may not be unworthy, (.i.) unfit or
incapable to receive good, who yet is unworthy, (.i.) unable to deserve and
merit it.

2. There is an absolute and plenary unworthiness, wherein as there is no cause
of good, so there is effectual cause to hinder Th^re is an abso^ute and plenary
u^worthiness.
it; this may be called a moral unworthiness; And this a natural, a restrictive
and partial unworthiness, when there are qualities in, or actions by a person,
against which strict justice might make exceptions, yet through a gracious
indulgence they avail not to the pre^udice of the person. David says in Psalm.
66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me; and the
blind man cured, said well, Joh. 9. 31. We know that God hears not sinners.
When people have not only sin living in them, but themselves living in sin;
when they know and affect their sins, have means to leave them, but will not
have hearts to forsake them; this now imprints an absolute unworthiness, (i)
such an unworthiness, as does effectually prejudice their access and confidence
to God in prayer. Nevertheless there may be the presence of many corruptions
for quality and fact (which the sinner knows, and bewails, and judges) and
though in strict justice they are a sufficient prejudice; yet through a divine
graciousness, they prove not effectual hindrances to the presenting (...)
accepting of Prayer.

3. The privative and natural or restrictive unworthiness may be The privative
unworthiness may be considered two ways. In respect of the matter of it. Or of
the sense of it.
considered again two ways: Either in respect of the matter of it, which is
some kind or kinds of sinfulness, either in nature, (...) fact: for nothing
makes us unworthy but sin, this abaseth us, and keeps us at a distance: Or, of
the sense and apprehension of it; when the sinfulness which does make us so
unworthy, is discerned by us; and so discerned, that by reason thereof we do
judge out selves not worthy of the least of mercies. In neither respect is it
prejudicial to spiritual supplication, (i) though there be sinfulness in us,
and upon us, and we know it, and that by reason of it we are neither worthy to
speak with God, nor to prevail with God, yet we may present our supplications
unto him.

4 Prayer may be considered in a threefold respect; Either, As a Prayer may be
considered in a threefold respect.
Duty to be acted; As a Duty acting; As a Duty acted. The sense of our
unworthiness should not be any prejudice to prayer in any of those respects. 1.
Not to take us off from performing the duty of prayer: We may offer up our
sacrifice, though we cannot offer Unworthiness should not take us ^ff from
Prayer.
up our worthiness; we may bring our gift, though we cannot bring our merit;
though we cannot buy heaven, yet we may beg it. Poverty does not hinder, but
a man may be a fit beggar; and sin does not hinder, but a person may be a fit
petitioner to God. David was sensible of his sins, Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable
evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that
I am not able to look up; they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my
heart saileth me: Yet he makes his Supplication presently in the next verse, v.
13. Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me; O Lord make haste to help me. So did
Ezra, c. 9. 6. and Daniel, c. 9. 2. Nor take off Considence in the time of
Performance: An Unworthy person may lawfully be an earnest Suitor. He Nor take
off Confidence in the time of Performant^.
may put up requests, and also believe that God will grant them: See it in the
Church; Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
as filthy rags, etc. Ver. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father. Ver. 9. Be
not wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold, see,
we beseech thee, we are all thy people. So Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Names sake, O
Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. He was sensible of the greatness
of his sin, yet puts up a believing Petition for pardon. 3. Nor yet take off
our expectation of the success Nor take off our expectation of the Success.
and fruit of Prayer: Though a man has sown his seed with an hand perhaps foul
or lame, yet he expects an Harvest. We may expect a most gracious, and proper,
and seasonable answer to our ptayers, though we be most unworthy of the mercy
or blessing which we do desire. Though we know nothing in our selves to commend
us to God, yea, though we know enough in our selves to condemn us before God,
to nonsuit all our prayers, if the answers were to be given according to our
deserts, yet we may not only request the Lord, but should by Faith rely on God;
yea, and expect an answer what the Lord will answer us, and when he will
perform his promise to us.

2. But you may demand, Why should not the sense of our unworthiness prejudice
our prayings?

Sol. I will give you diverse Reasons for it: Arguments to confirm it. Though we
cannot Sue in our own name, yet we may in the Name of Christ.


1. Because though we cannot Sue in our own name, yet we may Sue in the Name of
Christ: There may be a worthiness For us though not In us. In the Old Law it
was a dangerous presumption for any man to offer a Sacrifice without a Priest,
Lev. 17. 3, 4, 5. such a person was to be cut off: in like manner it is most
dangerous for any man to offer up his prayers to God without Christ: to come in
his own name, it is the way to cut off our prayers. God will not take any
petition from us, unless it come out of the hands of our Master of requests
(.i.) Christ Jesus. And again, in the Old Law, if the Priest did offer up the
Sacrifice, though it were not a rich sacrifice of a Bullock or a Sheep, if it
were but a pair of Turtle Doves; nay, if it were but the tenth part of an Ephah
of fine flour, it was available for the person, it was accepted, Levit. 5.
intim^ting unto us, That it is not our own names, not any excellencies in us,
which make way for the acceptance or the answer of our prayers, they are
accepted for his sake in whom our persons are accepted; and therefore you read
in Rev. 8. 3. of the Angel that stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, who
had much incense, which he offered with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden Altar which was before the Throne. The golden Altar, and the golden
Censer, and much Incense make all accepted; and ver. 4. The smoke of the
incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out
of the Angels hand. It was the Angels Incense which made even the prayers of
the Saints to ascend (.i.) the meritorious intercession of Christ, which gives
acceptance and audience to our Petitions; as he is a sufficient Redeemer, so is
he a sufficient Intercessour, and therefore our own Unworthiness must not
prejudice or discourage us, for as much as the name of Jesus Christ is enough
to implead God withal.

2. Secondly, When we come to God in Prayer, we come to one who is of a most
liberal and gracious Nature, therefore our God is of a most liberal and
G^acious nature.
unworthiness should not discourage our petitions. That God is of a liberal
Nature, is unquestionable, he is abundant in goodness and truth, so Moses. He
will give grace and glory, so David. He gives to all men liberally and
upbraideth not, so Jam. 1. 5. Water comes not from the clouds as from a Pump; a
bountiful and noble Nature stands not on desert, it finds principles enough
within it self to show kindness. But which is yet more, the Lord has not only
a nature full of goodness, and most propense to give, but also he has a
gracious Nature which dispenses all good upon free terms, not for our sake who
receive, but for his own sake only who gives. As Gods liberality appears in
giving many times before we ask, and sometimes in giving more then we ask, and
sometimes in giving a better thing then we ask; so his graciousness appears in
not considering how worthy we are, what Causes and Arguments we can bring, but
in a a free dispensation of his mercies to us, without all desert or causality
on our parts: The whole cause of the mercy, is only in mercy, as in Deuteronomy. 9. 6.
The Lord thy God does not give thee this good land to possess it, for thy
righteousness, for thou art a stiffnecked people: The gift then was gracious,
no desert of it; nay, a desert of the contrary. Come, says the Prophet, ye
that have no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without
money and without price, Isay 55. 1. If God does not sell any of his mercies, if
he will take none of our coin; if he does not stand upon a price, but only upon
the asking and on the acceptance of his gifts, then our Unworthines does not
prejudice our prayers.

3. We do not only advance the name of Christ, and the name of divine Coming
with the sense of unworthiness advances the name of Christ, and is a necessary
concomit^ an ^ccept^ Prayer.
Grace by coming with a sense of our Unworthiness, but it is the necessary
concomitant of acceptable prayer. There are two singular Graces which must
exercise themselves in prayer; one is Faith, by which we go in the name of
another; another is Humility by which we go out of our selves. When Abraham
prays, his form was humble, I who am but dust and ashes. When Jacob prays his
form was humble, I who am not worthy of all the goodness and truth, etc. He
hears the desire of the humble; This poor man cried unto the Lord and he heard
him. When we pray to God, we are said to fall down at his footstool; not only
our bodies but our souls also must fall down at his footstool: And when do our
souls fall down? Then when they are fully affected with the sense of their own
unworthiness. If we would pray acceptably, we must pray humbly. If we would
pray humbly, we must be sensible of our own Unworthiness.

4. God has rejected the Prayer of such who have rested upon God has rejected
the Prayers of such who have r^sted on ^h^ir own wo^thiness.
their own worthiness: The Pharisee was rejected upon this account. Jam. 4. 6.
God resists the proud (.i.) he regards them not, he rewards them not; the
humble he does, but the proud he does not: He has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away, so Mary, Luke 1. 53. A confidence
of our Worthiness makes us incapable, therefore a sense of our Unworthiness
makes us not incapable. An empty Stomach will receive, but a full Vessel will
admit of nothing; you shall never find a rich God, if you come to him with rich
Spirits: The Pharisee he goes up to pray; and what does he discover in his
prayers? I am not as other men; I am no Extortioner, I am no Adulterer, I fast
twice in the week. He conceales his sins, and displayes his perfections; he
stands upon his worthiness, but he loses his acceptance; he justified himself,
but God did not justify him, accept him, acquit him.

5. None ever found more mercy then such who have come None have found more
mercy, then they who have been m^st sensible of unworthiness.
unto God in the sense of their own Unworthiness; I will give you some
instances for this out of Scripture. Matthew. 8. The Centurion was so sensible of
his unworthiness, that he durst not himself presume to invite Christ to the
help of his servant; and when he had entreated him, he did not think his house
worthy of Christ's presence, I am not worthy that thou should come under the
roof of mine house, ver. 8. yet he prays, Speak the word only, and my servunt
shall be healed, and he speeds; his Faith is applauded, and his prayer fully
granted; ver. 13. His servant was healed the same hour. Mar. 5. 25. The poor
woman, who was so sensible of her unworthiness, ver. 33. she came fearing, and
trembling, and fell down; she durst not either immediately or mediately speak
to Christ, only her Faith spoke at her fingers ends; for she said, If I may but
touch his clothes, I shall be whole, ver. 28. How does this speed? ver. 29.
Straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up. What should I speak of the
woman of Canaan, who confessing her self to be as a Dog, and thereupon craving
for crumbs, was presently fed and answered with a great mercy? Or, what should
I speak of the Publican, a penitent all in sighs, all in tears, altogether
unworthy, and he knew it, and therefore Stands afar off, dares not lift up his
eyes to heaven, sm^tes on his breast, and cries out, Lord, be merciful to me a
sinner? Here was a deep sense of Unworthiness; here was nevertheless a fervent
prayer, and upon it a most gracious answer, He went home justified.

6. Lastly, Sense of our unworthiness, it is a strong principle Sense of
unworthiness is a strong principle and furtherance of prayer
and furtherance of prayer: We are most barren and idle in prayer, when we are
least sensible of our sins; and we are more diligent to prayer, more spurred
on, and are more zealously fervent and importunate when we are most sensible of
our own vileness and unworthiness. For indeed the true sense of our
unworthiness, is a special part of our spiritual poverty, and poverty of spirit
breeds the strongest desires, even hungring and thirsting after righteousness,
and both of them have promises of a most full and exceeding great reward, as
you may see in Mat. 5. 3, 6. And thus briefly for the Explication and
Comfirmation of the Doctrine. Now I proceed to the useful Application of it:

The Uses which I will make of this point shall be. 1. To try our selves
whether we be sensible of our unworthiness in our Use 1.
Addresses unto God. 2. Then to encourage our hearts, notwithstanding our
unworthiness to draw near to the Throne of Grace. 1. For Examination. Are we
sensible of our unworthiness in our approaches unto God? that we deserve
nothing at For Examination.
all? that we come not to buy, but to beg? not to deserve, but to receive?
There be many reasons why I put you upon this Reasons of our Trial.
search.

1. Because many pervert this Doctrine of personal unworthiness: they utterly
mistake it; they do profess that nothing Many pervert the Doctrine of personal
unworthiness.
that is in them can deserve any thing with God, and therefore trample upon all
holiness of heart, and godliness of life, as if there were no use of Grace but
to merit; or Gold were of no use but in a Crown. But these are a loathsome
people, who would link great mercies and a wicked life together: To be sensible
of our unworthiness is not to rest in an evil condition, nor is it to run on in
an evil conversation, nor is it to slight holy duties for thy performances, nor
is it to disregard habitual or actual Grace: this argues an unsensible and
seared conscience: But this it is, to strive against sin, to strive after all
holiness, to be careful and watchful to pious performances, yet with all, and
after all, to cast those Crowns to the ground, not in their names, but in the
name of Christ, and free mercy to expect answer and help. Though imperfect
holiness in the habits or acts cannot justify men, yet they may glorify God;
and though they put not dignity into the hand, yet they put a capacity into the
hand; a fitness to receive, though not a worthiness to claim.

2. Because many tender Christians are not yet rightly sensible of their
unworthiness; they are very apt to insist and adhear unto Many ^ender
Christians are not yet rightly sensible of their unworthiness.
themselves. Two things do evidently show, that, like Jacob's Sons, who went
down with money in their Sacks, and would not go without Benjamin; so these
Christians would bring something to buy out their requests with God; One is
this, that all the promises of free Grace and mercy do not satisfy them,
though God has said he will love freely, and pardon sin for his own sake, yet
they are not contented to accept, to receive; they are most hardly persuaded
that the Sun will shine so freely, that God will accept such a vile sinner upon
such easy terms, and without any more ado pass by all transgressions.

Another is, that they are frequent in digging after reasons and causes of good
in themselves; If they could bring Hearts more broken, Graces more strong,
Affections more melting, Conversations less tainted; then they could be
persuaded that God would hear and grant them the mercy or good which they do
desire: I confess that we must strive after perfection in all Grace; enlarged
desires, an humble complaint, a fervent endeavor in the use of all sacred
means; all of these are commendable practices, yet herein we fail, and
exceedingly to, if we pluck back the hand from receiving, because we are not
full; that we will not suck the breasts, because we are empty; that we would
find any causes of good in our selves, who at our best are unprofitable and
unworthy.

3. Because it is a very dangerous thing to stand upon our personal It is very
dangerous to stand upon personal worthiness.
worthiness, when we approach unto the Lord; For, Now we come without Christ,
we do sacrifice alone, we take the Office of our high Priest out of his hands;
Nay, we frustrate the worthiness of Christ, for we cannot join our worthiness
and his together; if we plead in our own names, we make void his: As it is in
the point of Justification, if we stand to our own righteousness, we make void
the righteousness of Christ: So is it in the matter of supplication, if we
stand to our own worthiness, and will be heard for our own sake, we exclude the
merit of Christ's intercession; we may as well be our own redeemers, as our own
intercessours: We meet with pure justice; for if we stand upon personal
dignity, then our qualities and actions must necessarily have equality to
justice; God must dispense to us according to our own deserts; when we stand
upon our own worthiness, then God deals with us in justice; if we renounce it,
then room is made for the mercy-seat.

Quest. But then you will demand, how may we know, that How we may know that we
are truly sensible of our unworthiness.
we are rightly sensible of our unworthiness, in our approaches unto God?

Sol. I conjecture thus:

1. If you are sensible of your own Unworthiness, when you pray unto the Lord,
Then Jesus Christ will be your greatest plea; If Jesus Christ be our greatest
Plea.
you will begin to move in his Name, and you will urge and prosecute it in his
Name, and you will shut it up with an expectation in his Name: Thou will not
say, I am now in an excellent soft temper, and for its sake shall I prevail;
and I have carried the day through now with more affections, and less
distractions, therefore for this shall I prevail; As Leah said, I have born my
husband this son, therefore my husband will love me. But in all thy sacrifices
and services, thou will fly unto a Mediator, and still plead his Title, his
Worth, his Merit; Lord, help me to pray for Christ's sake; Lord, give me mercy
and grace for Christ's sake; Lord, hear, accept, answer, do me good, for thy
Christ's sake.

2. Then the Covenant of Grace will put heart into you, and draw If the
Covenant of Grace put heart into you.
you on alone to your performances; as the wind alone will stir the Mill, or
the tide alone will drive the Boat: I assure you, that if you be rightly
sensible of your Unworthiness, you will look after a Mercy-Seat, and after a
Throne of Grace; you will be inquisitive, upon what terms Grants of Mercy and
of Grace are issued out of the Court of Heaven. Nor will it seem a small thing
in thine eyes, that the Lord will do good to an unworthy sinner for his own
sake, yea, that he has affirmed as much, and obliged himself thereto in a firm
Covenant. This will breed in thee, Thankfulness; it will be, not only a
support to thy soul, but a joy to thy heart, thy case is yet hopeful; for,
though thou be not worthy, yet God will do thee good readily and freely: And
Usefulness; thou will be readily content to accept of mercy upon the terms of
mercy: A beggar ready to starve, will be glad to take an Alms, he will put out
his hand to receive it, and thank you too. As the Servants of Benhadad caught
the word, Thy servant, etc. so will you the word of promise; Respect, Lord, for
thy Covenant sake. At this door of free Grace, there you shall have the sinner
sensible of his unworthiness, standing night and day expecting when the Scepter
shall be held out: Gods own arguments and motives of doing good (which are to
be found only in the Covenant of Grace) they are such as you will accept of
with all your hearts, to plead with God.

The second Use is for Encouragement: That though we be sensible of our
Unworthiness, either to approach unto God, or to Use 2. Encouragement to draw
near to the Throne of Grace.
speak unto God, and much more to deserve any thing from God; yet not to be
discouraged, but humbly and confidently to draw near to the Throne of Grace,
expecting grace and mercy to help in time of need: And to excite you thereto,
consider.

1. It is not our merit, but our duty that we must look unto: It Is not
thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil; it is not It is not our
merit, but our duty we must look unto.
the Pearls of the Sea, or the Treasures of the Earth, or the Excellencies of
Angels; alas, God puts us not to that to deserve his mercies, to deserve his
graces; if so, what one sinner should ever receive mercy or grace? no flesh
righteous can be justified in his sight; and if he should mark what is amiss,
who should stand before him. But the Lord puts us upon our duty, Ask, and you
shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come, drink of the water of life freely.

2. It is not our worthiness that we must plead, but Gods promise, It is not
our worthiness that we must plead, but Gods promise.
when we pray unto him. Remember the word upon which thou have caused thy
servant to hope, said David, Psalm. 119. Remember thy Covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, said Moses, Exodus 32. Thou said that thou would do me
good, said Jacob, Genesis 32. Mercies come to thee, not for thy worthiness sake,
but for his promise sake; not ex dignitate petentis, but ex dignatione donantis.

3. You can never be so worthy, but that Justice may take exceptions You can
never be so worthy, but Justice may take exceptions.
against you; nor yet so unworthy, but mercy may fill your mouth with
arguments. Though I were righteous, yet would I not answer thee, but I would
make supplication to my Judge, says Job, chap. 9. 15. And, Though I am poor
and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me, said David, Psalm. 40. 17. The proudest
Pharisee may find enough to stop his mouth, and the humblest Publican may find
enough to open it. No, not the most righteous can stand at the Bar of Justice,
and yet the most dejected sinner may humbly plead at the Throne of Mercy; there
are Arguments enough in mercy, for any sinner to plead mercy.

4. You are not to pray in pride, but in faith; And then what is We are not to
pray in pride, but in faith.
thy condition, that Faith cannot deliver up to God through Christ? Thou
know that it is the office of Faith, not to present thy worthiness, but thy
wants: It looks on arguments for thee; not how good thou art, but how much good
thou need; not what thou can deserve, but it looks on what God will
bestow. Is it the many sins thou have committed, which present an utter
unworthiness to thy conscience? why Faith will teach thee to confess the debt,
and yet to crave for pardon. Is it the hardness or vileness of thy heart which
makes thee afraid? Oh! the Lord is of purer eyes than to look on such a dead
dog, so vile a wretch as I: Why! Faith will teach thee, that though the Lord be
lofty, and high are his habitations; yet of all people he looks after the
humble and contrite, and has respect unto them, and looks on such through the
blood of the Covenant; and that he will give Grace as readily as he will give
Mercy; and as freely bestow on thee a new heart, as a gracious pardon.

5. God only must have the glory to be the Giver of Good: and God only must
have the glory to be the giver of good.
therefore be not thou discouraged, if thou be admitted only to be the
receiver of good. To be King, no way befits the Subject; the King honors the
Subject highly, if he make him the Kings Receiver. O Christian, let it suffice
thee, let God alone find gifts to bestow, do thou study more for hands to
receive them: if ever thou would have mercy, get such an humble and believing
heart, as to be willing to receive any mercy, upon any of Gods terms.

LUKE 15. 20. And he arose and came to his Father: But when he was yet a great
way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck,
and kissed him.
These words contain in them two parts.

1. The very Life of true Repentance: Which consists not in a bare Resolution,
but in an active and real Execution: I will arise, said the Prodigal, and here
he did arise; I will go to my Father, and here did come unto his Father; [He
arose and came unto his Father.]

2. The gracious Acceptance of a real Penitent. The Graciousness of it appears,
1. In the present observation of him; (when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him:) the very intentions, much more the present actings of
repentance, are quickly eyed and observed by a merciful God. 2. In a present
affection to him; (and had compassion:) the bowels of mercy will stir, when the
heart of a sinner is penitentially touched. 3. In a present Application: His
Father saw him, and his Father pitied him; but this is not all, [His Father
also ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.] Mercy runs, and Mercy
embraces, and Mercy cheareth the penitent sinner. The first part affords us
this Proposition, viz.

That penitent intentions and resolutions should be accompanied with present
executions and performances. The Text properly Doct. 5. Penitent Resolutions
should be accompanied with present Executions.
yields this; for the words of it are but the lively and written copy of the
Prodigals private and conceived purpose, to leave his sinful courses, and to
come back to the obedience and service of his Father. It is observed of
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. 3. That he opened the doors of the house of the Lord in
the first year, and in the first month of his reign, and repaired them. The
public Reformation was the principal work, and it was the prime work too. So
must it be with a true Penitent; as soon as God sets up a Throne of Grace in
him, presently to act that Grace, in purging out of sin, and walking in the
paths of righteousness. We read this in Josiah, as soon as ever he heard the
threatenings of God out of the Law, his heart melted, and humbled it self, 2 Chronicles. 34. 19, 27. and instantly he gathered all the Elders of Judah and
Jerusalem, v. 29. and made a Covenant, v. 31. and they took away all the
abominations out of all the Countries, and turned back to serve the Lord their
God, v. 33. This you see in Practice; you may see the same likewise in Precept,
Joel 2. 12. Therefore, now turn unto me with all your heart, and with fasting,
and with weeping, and with mourning. The Duty is charged upon them for fu^ness
in all the parts of Repentance; and for quickness, Now, turn, etc. For the
better opening of this Assertion, premise with me a few particulars.

1. That the execution of a penitential resolution, is nothing This is meant of
the very practice of Repentance.
else but an acting course, or the very practice of Repentance. When not only
the Judgment approves of the parts and rules of Repentance, and the Will
embraces them with consent and desire, but the Endeavor also does, as it
were, copy them forth in the Conversation. I exercise my self to have a good
conscience, said the Apostle: So when the sinner does exercise Repentance, when
he does hate sin indeed, and flies from it, and forsakes it indeed; and when he
does indeed walk in the ways of new obedience, becomes a very servant of
righteousness, and works the work of God, this is the execution, or the
performance of a penitential purpose and resolution. As walking is to a
journey, or as writing is to a copy, or as fighting is to a war, that is
penitential execution to penitential resolution. It is but the Theory (as it
were) drawn down and put forth; It is as the tree shooting out into blossoms
and fruits: It is repentance in life, which is the life of repentance.

2. That presentness of Execution is an undelayed acting. Our actions fall
within three spaces of time; either of the which is And of an undelayed
acting.
past (as what we have done;) or of that which is future (as that which
shall be done;) or of that which is present (as that which is doing.) Look as
true Marriage, it is not a future, but a present acceptance: So true
Repentance is not a delayed, but a present reformation. Or as in Writing, the
motion of the Pen and the forming of the Letter are simultaneous: Or as in a
Clock, the wheel does move and the finger does move: So in the business of
Repentance; the purpose of amendment, should at the same time drop out into the
change of heart and vvays. To have repentance only in our purposes, is only
to have water in a cloud, or physic in a glass, it is not yet to do it.
Resolutions may be for the future, but Executions are for the present act; an
hearing while it is to day, and not hardening of the heart. As St. Paul, being
called, went immediately up to Jerusalem; so present execution of repentance
is, when we do not defer the penitential work; a not allowing of our selves in
giving way to our sins, no, not an hour, as the Apostle spoke in another case.

3. That there is a twofold present execution of penitential purposes: One is
immediate; or when the purpose and the acting And of a present execution,
either for immediateness, or seasonableness.
(without distance of time) succeed one the other, there being no predominant
impediment to the instantaneous execution of that penitential purpose. Another
is seasonable; where, though twixt the purpose and the acting there may be
some distance of time, yet the apprehension of the next occasion may truly make
the execution or practice to be present. As in the case of penitential
restitution, it may so fall out, either through the inability of the estate, or
the subjection of the person, that he cannot immediately restore; yet because
the penitent person in such a case lays hold on the next opportunity and
occasion, his resolution may be said to be acted presently, (i.) upon the next
present time when God enables him to act his purpose of restoring: So that
penitential Resolution produces present Execution; either for immediateness,
as in most cases; or for seasonableness, as in some cases.

4. That there is again a double penitential Execution of penitential And in
execution; in endeavor, or in victory.
Resolution: One consists in endeavor and application; when the person,
without delays, addresseth or applies himself to the ways by which sins may be
subdued and forsaken: Another consists in victory and assecution, wherein the
Penitent does in some more eminent degree lead captivity captive. That
penitential Execution whereof I speak, properly and naturally consists in the
former. though it must aim and strive after the latter also; (i.) when a person
does indeed resolve to leave his sins, and to serve the Lord in newness of
life; this Resolution does actively excite him to be much in Prayer unto the
Lord, and diligently to hearken to, and observe his Word, and to decline the
occasions which may give strength to his corruptions: It causes him to resist
evil motions, and to bewail them; it sets him upon all sorts of Duties and
Ordinances, so that the person is now really working against sin, and thoroughly
working for God; he is in the ways of God, and according to the measure of
grace received, working the works of God.

But why should penitential Intentions be accompanied with present Executions
or performances?

Sol. Reasons for it are many. 1. That God who commands Reasons for (...) God
commands us to repent presently.
us to repent, commands us presently to repent. The Time is under Precept, as
well as the Work. Some Precepts bind us semper, but not ad semper; other
Precepts bind us semper and ad semper too: When the Lord commands any man to
repent, this is a Duty which concerns the whole course of his life; it takes
hold of him as soon as ever he lives, and is become a sinner; and concerns him,
not only in his latter days, but all his days.

2. It is very dangerous to defer our penitential Executions or actings:
Whether we consider, 1. The Resolutions themselves; It is dangerous to delay.
they are but accidental, and not natural things; not such qualities (or rather
motions) which arise from an inbred principle, but are forensical to our
natures, and being not presently cherished by acting, like little sparks of
fire, may easily vanish, languish, and extinguish. We read of the Israelites,
that they were an unstedfast people in Covenant, and like a deceitful Bow.
Naked Resolutions will never ripen and abide; if you will not go beyond your
Resolutions, you will quickly fall from your Resolutions. 2. Our own hearts,
ah! how deceitful are they! how full of rebellion! how averse to all good!
Like the cold hearth to a little fire; how cunning to keep up Sin in the
Throne! how willing to break asunder all the bands of Obedience! with much ado
resolving, with little ado dissolving those resolves again. Volebam (says St.
Austin) and nolebam; I would, and yet I would not; one while I would, and by
and by I wouldnot. It is the Genius of cur sinful hearts, to apprehend the
present time for sin, and to crave the future time for repentance: Our worst
work we would do instantly, our best work we would do negligently: Good motions
are like a Bird falling into our hands, which if we presently catch not, she
instantly flees away. Gracious purposes in our hearts, are like warmth in the
water; the impression requires some degrees, and some blowing; but the
recession is easy; the natural coldness in the water will instantly rise up
and expel that heat: if you be not watchful, etc. 3. Extinguishing occasions.
Repentance, in all the parts of it, has many enemies and hindrances, some
within us, some without us: the Resolutions are weak, but the Occasions are
strong. Let the ship alone, and if the Pilot has only a resolution to sail
with, the next tide, or the next wind may carry the ship away. How ordinary is
the experience, That the strength of occasions have beaten back, and put to
flight many and many a resolution? like a cross wind, which has carried back
the ship unto the very harbor whence it came forth. Mere resolutions are but
unarmed Soldiers, or as unwalled Cities. You shall find much of this truth,
That meet resolutions are too weak for proper and sudden occasions. 4. Or the
assistance of Grace To resolve, and not to act, is one way whereby we quench
the Spirit. The Spirit, you know, may be quenched many ways: Positively, as
when we will walk in paths expressly contrary to his motions; this is to throw
water upon the fire: Negatively, when we do not follow nor cherish his motions;
as you quench the fire, if you do not stir it, or blow it, or add more unto it.
So when the Spirit of God shall deal thus far with us, as to convince us that
our course is evil, and yet further, to excite a purpose in our hearts to
desist; but then we let the work lie still, we do not st against that evil way,
this may cause the Spirit of God to withdraw, to desert the sinner who does
desert his counsel; who will be a Counsel our to him, who will walk in no
counsel but his own.

3. Penitential Executions, if present, will be more easy, and Present
execution will be More easy.
more comfortable. 1. They will be more easy. St. Austin had almost wasted his
spirits with resolutions and conflicts; Quamdiu, cras, cras, etc. and he
thought it many times impossible for him ever to be rid of such an inmate as
sin: But when his resolution brake out into practice, then Facile and suave,
the work grew easy and sweet. When we come to the acting part, then the Lord
will exert and put forth his power in our weakness: the acting and doing
Christian partakes of most assistance. Do we not find it thus in Prayer, and in
many other Duties, which perhaps we look upon with much fear and suspicion? But
when we are acting of them, how singularly does the Lord enlarge our thoughts
and affections? Why! this holds in the very Duty of Repentance; seta against
thy sins in good earnest, set upon a holy course in good earnest, thou shall
expermentally find, that it was thy own deceitful heart which represented the
work with more difficulty; but now having taken upon thee the yoke of Christ,
thou shall find it easy, and that God can as well work in thee to do, as to
will. 2. They More Comfortable.
will be more comfortable. Mere purposes cannot spring up such comforts as
actings; nay, even weak actings yield a thousand times more comfort than strong
resolutions: All the sap in the root does not make the flower to smell sweet,
unless that sap comes to a blossom. We cannot say our resolutions are solid,
if unactive. If they do not alter the course, for ought as we know yet, they
may be but false flashes, occasional impressions, not springing from renewing
Grace, (which will break out into practice,) but from servile causes, which may
be sufficient to stop a sinner, and with Saul, to profess he will persecute
David no more: But when Execution attends Resolution, now the heart may be
confident, that there is a renewing Principle implanted, which carries the soul
from one degree to another; from convictions to resolutions, from resolutions
to actions, from actions to courses with stedfastness and fruitfulness.

4. The Soul gets no ground by mere Resolutions: It does neither The soul gets
no ground by mere resolutitions.
alter the inward frame, nor mend the outward life; that which is of no
influence, is of no furtherance: if the resolution be on^y a resolution, it is
but a dead thing.

Now I come to the Application of all this to our selves: You have seen that
penitent resolutions should fall into present executions; Use
good purposes should be turned into quick practices The great enquiry will
hence be, What do we? it is observed of some ^^quire whether it be so with us.
Nations, that they are too soon in the Field, and of others, too long on the
bench; too quick in action, and too long in consultation. I confess, that
Repentance should begin ^n deliberation, and it should descend to resolution;
but there is more required to building then a preparation of wood and stone.
Thou have resolved to leave such and such a sin (Oh! in thy last sickness, in
thy last cross, in thy last distress of conscience; at the last Sermon, did
thou not resolve upon it, I will never serve such a lust more, I will walk more
conscienciously before the Lord?) But what is done? show me thy Repentance in
the acting part, as well as in the contriving part; thou art still held fast
with the Cords of the same lusts, and art wallowing still in the same mire, and
art lingering yet, and hastes not to come out of thy sinful ways. Zacheus made
haste, and came down at once; do we do so? David thought on his ways, and
turned his feet unto Gods Luke. 19. 5. Psalm. 119. 59.
Testimonies; he made haste and delayed not to keep his Commandments; But may
not the Lord say of us, as he did of the Israelites, How long will it be ere
they believe me? so, how long will it be ere we turn indeed from our sins to
God? It Is true, some resolutions there are working in us, oftentimes, but like
the goodness of Ephraim and Judah: Oh, Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? Oh,
Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a Morning Hos. 6. 4.
Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes away: So is it with many of us, we
purpose and profess, but we fall back to our sins still; what we were, that we
are; The time is not yet come (said they) to build the house of God, Hag. 1.
Our purposes are past, but our executions are still, still to come: Consider of
a few things. 1. Why do you resolve at all, when yet you execute and act
nothing at all. Resolutio est opus Why do you resolve at all without execution.
imperfectum and Ordinabile; does not resolution tend to action? will God be
mocked with mere purposes? or think you to charm and satisfy your consciences
always upon frequent sinnings, to multiply resolutions only? Alas* if
Repentance be not now done, it is not yet begun; so much as thou do, thou
repent'st; if sin be yet to be left, as yet it is not left; and then where art
thou as yet, but in an impetitent condition? 2. Is not Repentance a great work?
Why, then is it not thy present work? Thy Soul is embarked It not Repentance a
great work, why not then thy present work?
in that Vessel; eternity depends upon a moment: That which must be done, why
is it not quickly done? and if it be not presently done, we may be eternally
undone; why do we defer the doing of that? the best work should have the best
time and place. 3. Is not thy life a shortest breath? a thinnest vapor? a
flying Post? a gleaning shadow? every moment we Thy life is very short.
are dying; eat and dye, sleep and dye: Should not our last work be our present
work, when our last work may be our next work? 4. It cannot be less then
presumption, to put off the practical It is presumption to put off the
practical part of Rep^ntance.
part of Repentance: Either you must presume upon future life (which yet is a
Cord that thou can not lengthen;) or you must presume on future strength
(which is a marrow still wasted by a lingering disease;) or you must presume on
Divine Grace, which may be an hand justly withdrawn, because it was a mercy
unjustly referred and delayed. 5. You will but harden your hearts the more, and
skill the way of hypocrisy the more; for De^ay hardens the heart the more.
thus to untwist your Cords, wherewith you have so often bound your selves,
makes you to venture, and venture yet a little further; yet once more, till a
little and a little inflames your Souls to much evil, and the custom of
sinning wears out both the sense of sin, and resolutions against it. 6. Lastly,
You do but aggravate your sins the more, by naked and empty resolutions against
And aggravates our sins by empty resolutions against them.
them; you do not hinder the course of it, and you do intensively raise the
gult of it; for sinning against resolution in a sinning against express light,
and against a condemning light: A person who has resolved to leave such a
course, it is supposed that he not only knows it to be evil, but likewise
condemns it as evil: Now it is a great aggravation of sin to continue in it,
with light revealing, and accusing, and cutting.

Obj. But some may say, We hope, that though our Executions are not so full,
yet they are real; the quality is there, though^ the equality be not; something
we do, though not so much. Sol. To this I answer. 1. That it is most evident,
that many persons do not by practice and execution answer their resolutions at
all; their resolution arise from such grounds as will not hold out to an
execution and practice: If one should demand, what are become of the many
sickbed resolutions? of those that you made, when the hand of God was upon
you? you vowed much unto God (as he did in a storm, etc.) but as the King said
of Mordecai, What has been done to Mordecai for this? so what have you done to
make good your resolutions? I believe your hearts are speechless, your
consciences do condemn you, that health has been the time of more sinning,
though sickness was the time of more resolving. The same may be said for
others, whose consciences have been more actively and fiercely stirring; Oh! if
the Lord would abate that wrath, and cool that inflamed spirit, etc. yet what
are the fruits of many such resolutions. As the Devil said of Job, But now
stretch forth thy hand, and he will curse thee of thy face; so here on the
contrary, as soon as the Lord takes off his hand, these are as ready to
continue and proceed on in their sins, as the Israelites were, when they were
delivered out of the Land of Egypt, from the fiery furnace: Yea, and of others;
is it not manifest that they are fare enough from present executions, when they
voluntarily defer the acting part of Repentance to old age? Hereafter is time
enough, etc.

2. Others perhaps do act and execute presently, yet they are exceedingly out:
For 1. Though it be presently, yet it is partially; they act resolutions, as
Saul did his Sword, upon the meanest and poorest, not upon the greatest; they
do not answer their resolutions to the full. Deal kindly with the young man for
my sake (said David) So when many persons come to execute their Resolutions
against sin, they fail, they falter, they do not execute Agag; some pleasant
corruption (which will mar all) finds favor. 2. Though it be presently, yet it
is but presently; the present execution of the purpose is but a present, a
transient execution, an hanging down the head for a day or for a week; a busy
and earnest reformation for a while, but this Assize (like ours here) is but
for a few days, it breathes away; the heart turns again to sin, and the next
convenient occasion is too prevalent, it carries away the Soul.

2. But to draw nearer to our selves; however we have been defective Use 2. Let
us set upon a present execution.
to answer our manifold resolutions by present executions and practices; yet
now let us for the time to come, as he said of words, so I of purposes, vertere
proposita in Opera; Not be like Clouds, seeming to be full of Water, but to
pour down: Let us act the parts of Penitents, as the Prophet said to the
hovering Israelites, if God be God, serve him; so here, if Repentance be a
necessary duty to be performed, let us then act it, act it presently. For this,
I will only propound two things. 1. The Motives. 2. The Means for a present
Execution. 1. The Motives.

1. A present Execution is the truest part of Repentance: At the Motives. A
present execution is the truest part of Repentance.
best, you are but in a preparation, in a mere disposition toward Repentance,
until you act it; it is not so much what you would be, as what you are; what
you intend, as what you practice, that will give the most real testimony of
your Repentance. 2. A present execution, it is the safest part of repentance:
Of the two, he is in the more sure condition, who resolves to leave a wicked
And the safest part of Repentance.
life, and does indeed forsake it; and resolves to lead a holy life, and does
indeed enterprise it; than he who resolves on both, but practices neither. The
doer of good is a thousand times more sure then the resolver: something in some
cases may be said to stay a person from his resolutions; yet if nothing comes
of the resolutions, I assure you the scales will hang trembling: but action
does more fully determine the estate, and the Scripture is more clear for the
spiritual estate, as it lies in practice, then as it lies in purpose. 3. A
present execution, it is the comfortablest part; While repentance lies only in
resolution, it is but as a Tree in And the comfortablest part of Repentance.
the Winter, perhaps well rooted, but it lives dry; but when repentance breaks
out into action, it is as a Tree in the Spring, well rooted, well flowered, and
well smelling too. There is more comfort to do, then to intend to do; indeed to
cease a sinful course, and indeed to walk an holy life, this opens all the
comforts of of the promises, draws down the favor of God, assures us more of
interest in Christ, excuses more in the conscience, reviveth more in all
occurrences. 4. A present execution, it is the wisest part; we cannot say what
we shall do to morrow, when we cannot assure And the wisest part.
our selves, what, and where we shall be to morrow: He is wisest for Divine
Glory, and for his own happiness, who acts an immediate duty of salvation, upon
present terms. There are four things which declare wisdom; One to sow in
season; Another, to sail in season; A third, to accept and receive the Word of
Grace in season; A fourth to act repentance in season, even now while it is
called to day.

2. The means: If we would execute our pen^tential resolutions, then we must 1.
Take heed of the impediments of this Means.
present Execution. 2. Make use of the helps and furtherances of it.

1. The impediments of a present execution are many. Take heed of the
Impediments. Imb^cillity of Resolution.


1. Imbecility of resolution: Debile fundamentum fallit opus; if the foundation
be weak, how can the building be strong? the house which was built on a Rock,
did stand; but that which was erected on the Sands, fell down: Where
resolutions are either weakly raised on strong grounds, or suddenly raised on
weak and mutable occasions, there is either no execution, or uncertain; for no
effect does exceed the virtue of his cause: Thou have almost persuaded me to be
a Christian; this left King Agrippa still in Heathenisme. You will never go
through with the work, if you attain not to a through resolution; when you have
an heart that goes and comes, you will have only fits of repentance, which will
come and go: Of two things be sure, if ever you would penitentially act to
purpose; One that you see strong and prevalent reasons to change your course of
life, such as may not be over topped by any arguments that sin may suggest
hereafter; they are the spirits in the brain, which confer to motion in the
Hands and Legs: Another, that you resolve not on deceitful and fallible
grounds. If your resolutions be upon Motives, either mutable, or conditional;
you may be troubled with much temptation, but you will never advance in much
penitential actions.

2. Servile fear: When we so exalt the opinions of men, and their Tongues, and
their Power; what will they think of me? Servile fear.
how will they nickname, and disgrace me? what may befall me? who can tell
what mischief they may do unto me? These are the Frosts which nip the buds, and
the Winds which bind the Ship, and the Remora's which hold the Children still
in the birth. We love the opinions of men, to be well thought on; and the
Tongues of men to be well spoken of; and the respects of men to be
countenanced, and encouraged: A cross way makes us start; Zedekiah would not
obey the Lord, least the Princes should laugh at him; and many of the Jews
durst not confess Christ, for fear of the Scribes and Pha^isees. For a man who
enjoyes friends, and ease, and estate, and abundance in all sorts, to thrust
out into a Sea, to enter into a holy and strict course of Life, wherein he
shall be sure to be scorned as the offscouring of the world, be trampled upon
as the more in the streets, be torn in his name by the teeth of wild beasts,
suffer shipwreck in his liberty, in his plenty, in his body; Why? these
apprehensions are e^ough to quell and to keep in all forwardness, all action;
as Spira confesses, That they wrought on him when he denied the profession of
the Truth of Christ. Therefore if you would descend into the present execution
of penitential purposes, you must not be slavishly affected unto man; you must
not fear the power of man, nor be a^hamed of the Cross of Christ; you must put
your shoulder under the Cross, and the contempts of men under your feet: I am
ready (says Paul, Acts 21. 13) not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you,
says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 14. I will not fear what man can do unto me, said
David. Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and
of the son of man who shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker, and have feared continually because of the fury of the oppressor, as if
he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor? Isa. 51. 12,
13.

3. Despair of performance: Why, say we, as good never a Despair of performance.
whit as never the better. It is not possible that ever we should get hands to
conquer all these sins, or feet to walk in all these ways which are so holy,
so many, so strict, so difficult. We cannot find words to pray, nay, God knows,
sometimes not hearts; the motions of sin are thick and strong, and ableevery
moment to lead us captive; we have made some assay, but alas, the work proves
so harsh, so uncomfortable, so unprosperous; we are without all strength, we
shall never break all these bonds of sin, nor tread through all these paths of
holy duties. Thus as death closes up our eyes, so does despair shut up all our
actions; where there is no hope to finish, there will be no heart to begin: But
let us reject such despairing delusions; what has been done may be done; what
God commands to do, he can enable to do; and what he promises that we shall
do, that he will make and cause us do: But God has commanded us to leave all
our sinful courses, and to lead a life of holiness; God has promised grace
sufficient to forsake an evil way and to walk in a good way, I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. If God gives strength to work, why should
we withold hearts to work? Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis, said S.
Austin: Lord, give what thou command, and then command what thou will.
Seriously consider any one penitential work, for which God has not promised
grace and strength to perform. Many have traveled in this penitential Work,
and have found it very feisable and passable: How many are this day in heaven?
and how many are walking toward heaven? all of them prove, that it is not
impossible to execute penitential resolutions.

4. Hypocrisy and guile of heart: Where the heart is false, Hypocrisy.
there the performance is faint; if the work be not done in the heart, it will
never be done in the life; the work is best done in the life, which is first
done in the heart. They in Jeremiah had rotten hearts, they did not cordially
intend to leave their own ways, and therefore when they were put to it indeed,
they would not yield to walk in the ways which God prescribed. Where an holy
way is not thoroughly approved, and where an evil way is not thoroughly hated,
there may be many flashes, but there will never be solid performances or
courses: Yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little folding of the
hands, said the Sluggard, who loved sleep and idleness, Prove. 6. 10. So where
our affections are hank^ing about a sin, there is ever, at the least, a
slowness to leave that sin: Modo, modo, said S. Austin, when motions came into
him to forsake his ^nclean Lusts, they answered, Shortly, shortly; Hereafter,
hereafter; and this modo, modo, was sine modo; this putting off from day to
day, would have continued so all the days of his life. Therefore if you would
execute your penitential resolutions, take heed of corrupt affections; if they
again prevail upon you, they will assuredly entangle and hinder you, they mar
the judgment, and close with temptations, and hinder actions. Oh how suddenly
will they quench your spirits, alter your judgments, put aside your duties,
extenuate your purposes, bring you into further bondage, confirm your
unwillingness, excite your fears, raise up discouragements, and all to
frustrate the present executions of your former resolutions. Corrupt affections
are the very gates of sin, the Bane of holiness, the Quenchers of resolutions,
and the Impediments of all good performances.

5. Worldly cares: Our Saviout says, That the seed which fell among thorns
was chaoked, Luke 8. 7. And what was it which Worldly cares.
did choa^ it? see verse. 14. The cares, and riches, and pleasures of this Life,
There are two things which worldly cares do choke viz. Heavenly directions of
the word, and Heavenly resolutions of the heart; so that neither the one nor
the other do come unto perfection, Holy performance or action, it is the end or
perfection of all knowledge and resolution, and worldly cares stifle both. You
have many a man who comes to the word, and hears the terrors of God and his
wrath revealed against his unrighteounsness, insomuch that his soul (with
Felix) trembles under the strokes of divine justice; Or he hears how happy and
blessed the condition and life of holiness is; what heavens of mercies, what
rivers of comforts, what excusations and peace of Conscience, what blessings in
life, what supports in death, what rewards after death it shall procure to
persons; upon the one and the other he is stirred up to the sense of his sins,
to the admiration of Holiness; to a condemnation of his evil course, to a
resolution for a better. But then it is with him as with some ship, sometimes
as soon as it is putting out of the Harbor, it strikes upon a rock, or falls
into the sands, and loses all the precious lading: Or as with Corn sown and
let fall in an open and solid place, where the Birds come down and instantly
pick it up; so is it here with this man, the world meets him again at the
Church door, or at his own door, and all these impressions and resolutions are
spilt and gone; Worldly engagements take present possession of his thoughts,
and all the service of his affections, so that he has no time to consider what
God did speak or work in him; no time secretly to beg of God to write those
truths in his heart, to keep all this in the purpose of his heart, to give him
the Spirit of Grace and strength to walk in the ways of God revealed now unto
him. When you turn the course of the water another way, the Mill cannot stir;
so when men turn the course of their thoughts and affections to secular and
vain employments, all resolutions stand still, they have nothing now to elicit
or draw them on and out into any holy or careful diligence of obedience and
performance: The Oxen and the Farm, etc. took them quite off, and they made
excuses (.i.) for the present they had other engagements: therefore take heed
of worldly cares. It is impossible that you should be much in the actings of
any Grace, if you be very much in the service of worldly cares.

6. Lastly, Presumptuous Confidence is also an Impediment to the Presumptuous
confidence.
present executions of good resolutions; whether it be of future time,
hereafter shall serve the turn; it is not wisdom to be so forward; soft and
fair will go far; we have day enough yet before us; a year, two or ten hence;
after such a business is effected, or (which is worse) after the pleasures of
such a sin is a little more tasted. Or of Future ability: This is a work which
we will do at pleasure and at leisure: when we see the scouts, the forerunners
of the army, then we will buckle on our armor: when we espy the harbingers of
death approaching, old age, sickness, weakness, diseases, then we will think of
heaven, and forsake hell: what need we be troubling our selves to be doing of
that a long time, which we can dispatch at any time? if we have but time to
say, Lord have mercy upon me, what would ye more? Or of Future Mercy: Wherefore
has God Mercy but for sinners? and he has said, That if at any time a sinner
convert he will have mercy: We have found him kind unto us all our days, and
doubt not of his fatherly compassion at the last. Thus do men post of all
penitential executions, and for ever endanger their souls. Alas! for future
time, whose is it? Seneca the Heathen could see more truth then this: Solum
tempus presens nostrum: No time is ours but the present. Thou carriest thy life
in thy hands, thy breath in thy nostrils, and see more Graves made for the
young then for the aged. And as for thy future ability, why do thou so grossly
befool thy self? know thou not that present Neglects cause stronger
Indispositions? Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit, the Schoolboy will
teach thee. Every man by more sinning grows more sinful, and therefore most
unapt and averse to good. And then Future Mercy, it is of all things the most
uncertain to pardon sin, where present mercy leaves us not to repentance from
sin: it is all one as if thou should thus argue, God will hereafter pardon
me, and therefore for the present I will sin against him, disobey, dishonor,
vex, and grieve, and abuse him. These are the principal impediments to a
present expectation of penitential resolutions, and are to be declined by us. I
now proceed to the helps and furtherances to a present Helps.
execution of penitential^ resolutions, which are these, amongst many.

1. Solid Conviction of a sinful estate: This will put us upon a present
Execution. When the Soul is brought to an experimental Solid conviction of a
sinful state.
sense of the vileness and bitterness of sin, it will not then lie hovering;
Were I best to give up this course, or shall I go on in it still? No, but when
the Soul is indeed wounded, the ways shall without delay be reformed; take a
person in some judicial, and close conviction of sin, upon a sick and dying
bed, how forward is a person then to change and better his courses; much more
do solid and evangelical convictions sweetly dispose, and incline the heart to
the forsaking of an evil, and walking in a good way. They in Acts 2. 37. were
pricked in their hearts, and what did this work in them? they cry out
presently, Men and brethren what shall we do? So Saul was struck to the ground,
and was astonished, and trembled, and then presently cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 4, 6. Outward afflictions you see many times do put
on men to alter and reform their ways; of much greater force are inward
afflictions of spirit. Go on yet in sin! God forbid! shall I continue in sin
any longer, who, if I make not haste, may lose all mercy, and drop into Hell it
self? what I feel is much, what I deserve, I cannot bear.

2. Holy Wisdom: To know times and seasons, is an high Holy wisdom.
part of Wisdom; Walk not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, (says
the Apostle) Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. There are four things which solid Wisdom teaches
a man; One is, to look to the best part; Another, to make choice of the best
good; A third, to walk in the best ways; A fourth is to do all this in the
first place, and surest time: Have I any thing more near to me, then my soul?
more concerning my soul then God? more concerning God, then walking before him?
Where am I, if I lose my Soul? what am I, if I enjoy not God? whether run I, if
I continue in sin? if my soul be nearest, and God choicest, and his ways
safest, why do I demur? what, should I take time, or put off the doing of that
which is ever best done, when it is done? If I will live yet in sin, for ought
I know, I may then dye in sin; and if I dye in sin, I must for ever perish for
sin; Why should I not? Do I not admit the present loss of that, which else may
be the eternal loss of my Soul? But if I set into an holy life, this is the
very path of God, the image of Glory, the Ark of safety, and the pledge of an
happy eternity. Why should I be so safety, and the pledge of an happy eternity.
Why should I be so foolish, to be miserably bad, who in a moment may be
assuredly blessed? any wisdom will teach me to leave a wicked life, for an
holy and good; which has made me to know, that mercy is beter then misery; and
that Heaven is better then Hell.

3. Christian Courage: If we will not act the ways of Heaven, till we see all
difficulties removed, and all dangers Christian courage.
secured, we shall never enter into those ways: but when the love of Christ
has inflamed our hearts with a right zeal of his Glory, assuredly, we will be
ding: Modo magnificetur Christus, I must bring some Glory to my God, etc.
Luther feared not to go to the Diet at Worms, had there been as many devils, as
tiles on the houses: What do you tell S. Paul of bonds, or speak to the
courageous Christian of discouragements; I have sworn, and will perform it
(says David) that I will keep thy righteous statutes. S. Jerome would not only
renounce, but throw off, and trample upon father and mother for Christ: What do
you speak of poverty, of disgraces, of losses, of want, of selfdenials in ease,
in pleasures? etc. He who will be good, can lose nothing but that which will
lose him; and get that which he should never have gotten, had he not been good
indeed.

4. A precious estimation and affection after Gods honor: Ah! A precious
estimation of Gods honor.
did we in any holy measure comprehend the height, and breadth, and depth of his
favor in Christ; would we not strive to enter in at the strait Gate? should
not the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence? What to sand upon a sinful
pleasure, or profit, or way, and to lose a good, gracious, bountiful God: What
sinful lust, pleasure, way would we stand upon? What holy course or way would
we set upon? would we be slow to see the face of God, and live? would we not
speedily set our selves in the ways of his countenance? Zacheus being desirous
to see Christ, upon his call, made haste and came down. Luke 19. 6.

5. A tender fear of God: This also causes a present execution of our
purposes. You read what it wrought in Josiah, in Noah, in others. When the
heart apprehends its way to be evil, and the displeasure of God to hang over
it, and his threatenings all in armor, etc. Oh, I dare not go on to offend any
longer!

6. A right belief in God: Whether you take it in the threats, as they of
Niniveh believed the preaching of Jonah, and A tender fear of God.
presently humbled and reformed themselves and ways, chap. 3. 5. Promises of
sweetest mercy made unto real penitents, that full, free, soon mercy shall be
had: Why? if those be believed, they will draw off the soul from a sinful
course A right Belief in God.
unto a good course. The Apostle therefore beseeches the Romans, by the
mercies of God to be transformed, Romans 12. 1. O this, that God offers and
assures me of mercy, and now I may have it if I will now reform, a puts the
soul to the present work; To day I will hear his voice, for to day is the day
of mercy, this is an acceptable season, now I may be made happy for ever.

LUKE 15. 20 And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck,
and kissed him.
These words contein in them two parts,

1. The real practice of Repentance; which consists not in a bare Resolution,
but in a sincere Execution (I will arise, said the Prodigal) this was Motus
volentis; (and he did arise,) this was opus penitentis. I will go to my father;
and here [He arose and came to his father.]

2. The comfortable issue of real Repentance [But when he was yet a great way
off, etc.] Wherein you have considerable, 1. The quick observation of this
penitents Father, [His father saw him, yea, when he was yet a great way off:]
Even in this sense God sees our thoughts afar off; God many times is unwilling
to see the sinner, but he is at all times very willing to espy the penitent. 2.
His present commiseration, [His father saw him, and had compassion on him]
Wicked men look on a penitent with derision; penitent persons look on
themselves with abomination, but God looks on them with compassion: he looks on
the penitent sinner with a pitiful affection: When Ephraim repented, and
turned, My Bowels (says God) are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on
him: As soon as ever the Prodigal looks back, mercy looks out. q. d. Ah! is he
returned indeed? I pity him, I will receive him, I will forgive him. 3. His
gracious acceptance expressed in three particulars;

1. One of speedy readiness: [The Father ran] The Son does go, the Father ran.
Mercy has not only a quick eye, but foot also; it posts, it speeds, it runs to
embrace a penitent: God is very slow to punish a sinner, but he is very ready
to relieve and accept of a returning sinner.

2. A second, Of wonderful tenderness: [The Father fell on his neck] To have
looked on him, was it not enough? to have given order for his usage, had it not
been well? to have taken him by the hand, had it not been too much? but the
Father did more then all this [He fell on his neck.] Divine mercy will not only
meet a penitent, but embrace him. That sinner whom the hands of justice would
have everlastingly confounded, if he be penitent, the arms of mercy will
lovingly clasp, etc.

A third, Of strong affectionateness: [And kissed him] Here are eyes to behold
the returning Son, and an heart to pity him, and feet to meet him, and arms to
embrace him, and lips also to kiss him: Naked mercies are not enough (in Gods
account) for a true penitent, he must have sealed mercies too. God does not
think it enough that he is reconciled unto hm, unless also he does testify and
make it known that he is so.

There are many excellent Propositions observable out of these words. v. g.

That the very Initials of true Repentance are seen by God: Doct. 1. The very
Initials of true Repentance are seen by God.
The penitent Prodigal was in the way, but yet it was a great way off; and his
Father saw him, and had compassion, I said, I will confess my trangressions
unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32. 5. Vox
n^ndum in ora erat and Auris Dei in corda erat, So. S. Austin in Locum. Isai.
66. 2. To this man will I look even to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word. Repentance may be considered in three degrees,
1. In the Impression of it: ANd this is when so much grace is implanted, as to
turn the heart. 2. In the expression of it: and this is, when so much Grace
appears, as to enter into a new path, and do new works. 3. In the progression
of it: And this is, when a greater Victory is obtained over our sins, and
appears in our course of new obedience. Now the Initials of true Repentance, I
conjecture, to consists partly in the Conversion of the heart; when the mind,
and will, and affections are healed, and turned: and partly, in the reformation
of the life; when the person out of an hatred of sin, and love of God, sets
upon another course of obedience, and service. It is just like a Ship, that is
going out, or like a Shop that is newly set up; things are very raw, there is
much dross with the little Silver; a little health, and much lameness; a great
journey, and but a few steps; the work is rather in desire, and much in
complaints; and though perhaps little be done, yet all is heartily endeavored
to be done; this I call the Initials of Repentance.

There are six things show that Repentance is begun in truth. Six things show
Repentance is begun in truth. Condemnation.
1. One is Condemnation: When the judgment looks upon all sin after another
manner then formerly, sentencing it as the most vile, and accursed of all
evils, and no sin (knowingly) finds favor. 2. Another is Aversation: When the
will flies, Aversation.
and shuns it, as that, which is most contrary to all goodness, and happiness.
3. A third is Weariness: When the Soul is as Weariness.
weary of Sin, as any Porter can be of his Burden, or as a sick-man is of his
Bed. Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God, are a broken spirit; a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. 4. A fourth is Lamentation: That
the Soul cannot yet be rid of Lamentation.
the unruly motions, and insolences of sin; It is grieved, that Life and
Death, Hell and Heaven, Grace and Sin should thus be together. 5. A fifth is
Resistance, or conflict: The Soul does Resistance.
use the best means it can, to separate more from sin, and all sinful ways,
and to walk only in all holy paths, in the paths of righteousness. And the
sixth is an active Inctination, to obey God in all things; a thirsting and
striving, an aiming, a writing after the Copy. An active Inclination.


And there are four things, which do show that Repentance is Four things show
that Repentance is but begun. Impotency.
but begun, it is only initial. 1. One is Impotency, or weakness of operation:
When the penitential parts do move and stir, yet like a child, who begins to go
very feebly. There is as much appears in the course, as declares another spring
or principle, and rule, by which the Soul strives to walk, but the performance
is very tender and feeble; like a young Tree that has but tender branches, and
small fruit: The person does mourn, and confess, and pray, and live, and obey,
but with weakness. 2. A second is efficacy of Temptation: When Temptations do
easily Efficacy of Temptation.
beset and discourage the Soul; as when the Tree is but a young plant, the
Winds to toss it, and make it reel; so when Temptations do, as it were, drive
the Soul, and are apt to raise quick fears, and discouragements: Oh! I shall be
overcome again, I shall hardly hold on, I cannot well see how I shall be able
to perform, and preserve in these ways which I have chosen. A third is the
Validity of present Corruption; which though it be truly hated, and bewailed,
yet it is very apt upon occasions to assault and Validity of present Corruption.
prevail; when every little stone is apt to make one stumble, it argues that
the strength is weak. 4. Necessary presence of many helps: When a Man cannot
go, but with two Crutches; and a Child must lean upon many props, and a
penitent upon many sensible encouragements.

Now that these Initials of Repentance are graciously accepted The Doctrine
proved. God respects the truth as well as the degrees of Grace.
of God, may be thus manifested. 1. The Lord does respect the truth of Grace,
as well as the degrees of it, every quality as well as the quantity. Are not
thine eyes upon the truth? The Goldsmith has his eye on the very thin rays of
Godl, as well as on the great knobs and pieces; Grace is excellent and amiable
at the lowest, though then admirable when at highest. 2. The main thing that
God looks upon, is to the heart; (My Son, give me thy God looks most at the
Heart.
heart:) All that is done, if the heart be not in it, it is of little or no
estimation with God; but if the heart be right, this the Lord prizeth
exceedingly, and so much, that for its sake, he passes by many infirmities.
The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart. etc. 2 Chro. 30. 19.
Now in the Initials of Repentance, the heart is set right; it is set on God,
and toward God in truth. 3. Even the Initials of Repentance are his own Gifts
(special gifts of his blessed Spirit) it is he that works The Initials of
Repentance are his Cist.
in us to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. The spiritual will, and the spiritual
deed (though both be imperfect) yet are they the genuine effect of Gods own
spirit; sparks out of his fire, works of his own hands: Now as in the Creation,
God looked upon all that he made, and saw that it was good, he liked it well.
So is it in our Renovation; all that good which God works in us, he does accept
and approve, he does not despise his own image, which though it shine more
fairly in progressive Repentance, yet is it truly stamped in our initial
Conversion. 4. That which comes This Springs ^^om faith.
not only from a person, having faith, but from faith it self, that the Lord
will graciously accept. For as our actions do not please him without faith (it
is impossible without faith to please God:) So on the contrary, when the
actions do come from faith, they do please the Lord. Abels Sacrifice presented
in Faith, did please him, when Cains presented without faith, was not regarded;
faith puts a value and acceptance on our actions. But even initial Repentance
comes from faith; the person is by faith united to Jesus Christ, from whom he
has received strength and grace to forsake his sins, and to become a servant
of righteousness. 5. The Lord has said, that he will not despise the day of
small things; nor quench the smoking flax, nor break the God will not de^p^se
^he Day (...) ^mall things
bruised reed: What Husbandman does despise the little plant which he has set?
Or what father does despise the little child he has begoten? Why! that God who
has appointed all the means and ordinances, to cherish, and prop, and
comfort, and nourish, and perfect the initials of Repentance; does not he
graciously accept of it? have we not reason to believe that he does countenance
these beginnings, who presently makes all provision for the nursing and
supplies of it?

To make some Application of this. 1. It convinces the common obloquies and
aspersions cast upon religion and religious courses to Use 1. Conviction of
that aspersion, that if we begin to be penitent farewell all Comfort.
be mere injuries and falsities. viz. that if once you begin to be religions
and penitential, then farwell all comfort; as if the grave of sin were the
Resurrection of Grief; or of necessity, men must be everlastingly pensive, if
once truly, and seriously penitential: But this is false, no course so good, so
comfortable, as the penitential; mercy to invite you, mercy to receive you,
mercy to pardon you, and mercy to save you. As soon as ever we begin to be
good, and to be penitent, and are entered into the way of new obedience,
presently the merciful eye and favor of God is upon us; mercy looks after us;
and though we have been foul Transgressors, and have now but the very seeds
and implantations of repentance (mixed with exceeding imperfections) yet the
Lord will benignly and graciously accept of us, and love us.

And as it does convince that error, of the sadness of entering Use 2. And o^
that error of the austerity of God toward Penitents.
into a good course; so also another error, of the austerity and harshness of
God toward poor Penitents, as if nothing would please the Lord but quantity,
and great measures of Grace. Oh, if I had so much sorrow for sin! if I had so
much hatred! if I had so much power over my corruptions! Why! it were well if
thou had, and thou do not well, if thou strivest not beyond all the
measure of grace which thou do attain: But then to think, that only great
grace is in grace with God, and not little grace; Repentance grown, and not
Repentance begun; that God will not look on drops, but rivers; not on weakness,
but strength only; that a poor, contrite, broken, troubled soul, which prizeth
grace above heaven, and hates sin above hell, but yet is troubled with the
presence of much corruption, and is apprehensive of manifold wants in all kinds
of grace, that the Lord will never look upon such a thin, new, weak Christian,
unless with austerity and distance: Why do we thus belie the Lord? and falsify
the graciousness of the Almighty? who does so love holiness, and delight in the
conversion of a sinner, that as soon as ever the sinner begins truly to repent,
the Lord has thoughts of mercy and peace for him, he is observed and accepted,
(Ananias is presently sent to Paul,) messengers of peace are presently
dispatched, Patents of mercy are sealed for him.

And thirdly, It does justly abase that unworthy, proud, and censorious
harshness and strangeness, which many (who would take Use 3. It discovers the
proud harshness of men toward such as come short of themselves or others.
it ill, if they be not in your opinion set up in the highest form of Piety,)
do sinfully or foolishly express, either in condemning, or in contemning such
as fall very short (in the penitential work) of others, or of themselves; yea,
and will shun tender society with them, till they see some further perfections
and ripenesses. Alas, what do we! by what rule do we walk? whose example do we
look upon? We must be wise, it is true; and what wisdom is it to leave tender
buds to the frost, which we might have covered and enlarged with heat and
warmth? I beseech you, let us pause a while: 1. Are all in our Family Men? Are
there not some Children, perhaps newborn Babes? Are all in the Flock strong
Sheep? are there not some Lambs (perhaps) newly yeaned? Are all the Stars in
the Heaven of the same magnitude? some are greater, others are less, yet all in
the Heavens. Do you despise Children? reject the Lambs? or slight the Moon,
because of her spots, and lesser light than that of the Sun? Why! we read of
the like disparity in the heavenly course: St. John tells us of Fathers, and of
Young Men, and of Chidren too, yea, and of Babes; and Christ advised Peter's
respects, as well unto the Lambs, as unto the Sheep. 2. Were not we Beginners
once our selves? Was our Sun at the top? our Gold so exquisitely pure? did not
we then need compassions and helps in times of infancy, weakness, conflicts,
temptations? What is our present strength, but some help to former weakness?
Time was, we could hardly go or stand, although now we can walk and run: What a
childishness is it, for the Artist in Grammar to slight the Youth who is now
spelling his Letters, when this was the first Line of his own Learning, the
first step whereby he went to his height? 3. And did God despise us in our
beginnings? Did not he gently lead those that were with young, and carried the
Lambs in his arms? as the Prophet speaks. How often has he laid our fainting
and weak souls to the breasts of consolation? comforted us in our fears?
strengthened our feeble hands? answered our doubts? 4. Nor does he now slight
them, whom he tenderly owns upon the very entrances into a new and holy course,
sees them afar off, and has compassion: Why then do we so slight and neglect
them, and put them from us, who have as good a God as our selves, (and if we be
good,) the same, the same Christ, and also the same truth and reality of
Repentance? And is not Minimum Christi amabile? But they are indiscreet?
Surely, they are no true penitents that are very fools: No man so wise as he
who is wise for his soul. But they have many failings? And not one of them
approved, all bewailed. But they come short in Duties, alas they are very
short? In expressions, which the vilest hypocrite may excel in; not in
affections, which the true penitent only abounds in. Therefore repent of your
pride and state: See thou a penitent higher than thy self, honor him, and
imitate; see thou a penitent lower than thy self, honor and cherish him: God
will meet him with much mercy, do thou meet him with much love and pity. Ten
Evidences of True Repentance, though Initial.
And take these Ten Evidences, that a man's Repentance is true, though weak; and
real, though but initial. 1. He is much Much in Grief, though little in
Strength. He hates sin, though he cannot be rid of it. Conflicts with sin,
though he cannot conquer it. He will not be its servant, though its Captive. He
cries for help though not delivered He must have God reconciled, though he
questions it. He would obey, in all things though he falls short He prizeth
more grace, though he enjoy little. He holds up his purposes. He mourns for
what he wants. Use 4. For Comfort to such as have the Initials of Repentance.
in Grief, though little in Strength: He will grieve for sinning, though he
should never be damned for sin; and sin is his daily grief, as it is his daily
temptation. 2. He hates sin, though he cannot be rid of it: His soul loathes not
only the actions, but nature also of sin. 3. He conflicts with sin, though he
cannot conquer it; is an Enemy to it, though not a Conqueror over it, though
much assaulted by it; fears Sin more than Hell. 4. He will not be a Servant,
though sometimes he is forced to be a Captive: His Will and Love are
unconquerable. 5. He cries out for help, though he be not yet delivered; O
Lord, help: Laments his condition, because so pestered with sinful motions. 6.
He must have God reconciled, though he much questions it: He must have Christ,
and Mercy, etc. 7. He would obey God in all things, though he falls very short
of it. 8. He prizes more Grace, and strives after it, though he enjoyes very
little of it. 9. He holds up his purpose to walk with God, though he be not
able, in every thing, and at all times, to make it good. 10. What he wants in
the heights of Repentance, is made up in the depths of Humbleness and
Mournfulness.

A fourth Use of this Point shall be for Comfort and Support, to such as have
though but the initials of Repentance in them: The fountain of Godly sorrow
drops, though but a little, and the journey of an holy life is but begun; they
have newly (within these few days) set the first foot in the paths of God.
What shall I say to such persons? Surely,

1. Let them not be discouraged at all: Though it be but a little A little
Grace, if true,
grace, Repentance newly planted and begun; yet if it be true Grace, 1. It is
worth a who^e world: One man's Soul is worth Is worth a whole world.
the World, much more is Grace; Grace (even in the least degree of it) is of an
invaluable allay: The Lord has shown thee mercy indeed, if he has bestowed any
grace on thee; it is more worth than if he had given thee all the Kingdoms of
the World; more, in respect of Excellency, and in respect of Consequence. 2. As
little as it is, it is as much as ever any Penitent It is as much as any
Penitent had at first.
had at the first. It Is true, our improvements of Grace are very different in
the course of our lives, but the habitual implantations of grace are alike and
equal: Thou have as much now as ever any had at first, who are now gone to
heaven. 3. As little as it is, it shall pull down, and work out the strongest
sin that ever did cleave unto thee; though not at once, yet by degrees; a This
little will be victorious.
beam of Light which appears in the morning seems no great matter to deal with
all the darkness in the air, yet depending upon such a strong principle and
fountain as the Sun, it does by degrees chase away, etc. 4. As little and as
weak as it is, it It shall not cease till it bring thee to heaven.
shall never cease, till it has brought thee to heaven: The Ark and many
tossings, and thy weak Grace shall have many assaults; but thy weak Grace is in
the sure hands of a strong God, who by it will make thee more than Conqueror,
through him that loved thee. 5. As weak as it is now, it shall be stronger and
It shall grow stronger and stronger.
stronger: God has but begun his work in thee, the which he will finish; the
Foundation is laid, but the Covering is to come: The seed is but sown, which
will arise and spread; the fire kindled, which will be blown and flaming: God
does not leave any gracious work, until he has made it glorious; and having
given truth, will also enlarge it to a just measure, sufficient for thy soul,
and place, and salvation.

2. Nay, let them be encouraged and rejoice: Even a little They have matter of
rejoicing.
Grace may be just cause of great joy. The Mother rejoices much if the Child
be born: Though your Repentance wants much, in respect of gradual perfection;
yet being real and true, 1. All the sins that you have committed, are pardoned:
The promise of pardon or remission of sins, presently and assuredly opens Their
sins are pardoned.
to every true Penitent; as soon as the wicked forsakes his ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and turns to the Lord, he will have mercy, and
abundantly pardon. He who does more perfect and polish his repentance, it is
confessed, that he has the more assurance and comfort of his pardon; but the
right unto, and grant of pardon, immediately appertains to a person upon the
very entrance of his repentance. Now pardon of sins is a testimony of Gods
highest Love, and therefore a cause of most exceeding joy. 2. If you should now
die, you should If he should now die, he should be saved.
be saved. The first fruits you know were a pledge of the full harvest; though
you have but as it were the first fruits of Repentance, yet these are sure
pawns of fullest glory. Godly sorrow works repentance of salvation. Christ
says, Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 5. 3. Though you have but some lower, weaker stock of Graces, so that
you are in your own opinion poor, scarce worth any thing, or enjoying of any
thing, yet the weakest Christian shall have an Heavenly Kingdom. 3. Your
persons are dear unto God. Jer. 31. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself; Is Their persons are dear to God.
Ephraim my dear son? is he my pleasant child? etc. So Isa. 66. To this man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit. 4. Your weak
services are accepted: God hears your Their weak services are accepted. God
will pass by many infirmities.
groans, considers your sighs, puts your tears into his bottel. 5. By reason of
that reality in your repentance, the Lord will pass by many infirmities and
imperfections: Infirmities shall not hinder, where a reality of Grace and
Repentance is begun. They in the time of Hezekiah did truly repent and prepare
before the Passover; and though they were very defective, yet the defects did
not prevail to hinder the effects and acceptance of their service. I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. How indulgent
is the tender father to the obedient child, though he can do but very little,
and very weakly? Where the Lord sees that the heart is rightly set; O Lord, I
would not offend thee; O Lord, I would obey thee; then he is very merciful to
pass by our failings, and to accept of our weak beginnings, and very weak
endeavors.

Now I come to a second Proposition, which is, That God is Doct. 5. God is very
ready to show all kinds of mercy to the truly penitent.
very ready and quick to show all kinds of mercy to the true Penitent. I said I
will confess, and thou forgavest me.

You see here in the Text, what tender, what affectionate, what speedy, what
free mercy is showed to the returning Prodigal (His Father saw him afar off,
and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.) What could
he do more? There is a great difference twixt Gods coming to punish a sinner,
and his coming to show mercy to a Penitent: (Tardus ad vindictam,) when he is
to inflict punishment, then he walks and deliberates, as it were, there is a
kind of strife within him; How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I
deliver thee up, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee
as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together,
Hos. 11. 8. He is slow to wrath, Nah. 1. 3. but then he is velox ad
misericordiam, swift, quick and ready to show mercy. He runs here in the Text
to accept of the penitent Prodigal. As soon as ever Ephraim said, I repented,
Jer. 31. 19. instantly it follows, I will surely have mercy upon him says the
Lord, v. 20. I have sinned, says David; Nathan has it in Commission
presently, 2 Samuel 12 13. The Lord has done away thy sin. The Prophet Esaias, c.
30. 18. has a singular phrase; The Lord will wait that he may be gracious unto
you. He does even watch, and listen, and hearken for the first hint and
occasion to show mercy; I hearkened and heard, Jer. 8. Why will ye die, O house
of Israel! Ezekiel. 18. 31. What an expression is that? q. d. Lo here is mercy for
you, if you will but leave your sins: I pray you draw not confusion on your
selves; mercy is better than wrath, turn you and live; do not refuse mercy: I
stand not upon what is past, so that you will repent, I had rather show you
mercy.

For the opening of this excellent Assertion, premise these particulars. 1.
What it is to show mercy. 2. What it is to be ready and quick, etc.

1. To show mercy to a Penitent, imports many things, v. g. What it is to show
mercy.
Pitiful Compassion, Acceptance into Grace and Favor, abundant Pardon,
withdrawment of Wrath and Evil, collation of any Good; all this is showing of
mercy; when God does pity a man, bring him into favor, remit offenses, take
off judgments, pour down blessings; thus is the Lord ready to do to the true
Penitent, if a man repents (indeed) of his sins. The Lord, 1. Will pity him:
God will pity him.
He will have compassion on us, says the Church, Mic. 7. 19. and will pity him
as a Father does the Child, Psalm. 103. 13. 2. Will accept him into favor: (i.)
He will be Accept him into favor.
reconciled unto him, and will be highly well pleased with him; He shall pray
unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with
joy; said Elihu, Job 33. 26. When they in Isa. 1. did cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, Come now, says the Lord, and let us reason together: q. d.
We are now very good friends, all is well, I love you, I am pacified toward
you. 3. Will pardon him: (i.) Pardon him.
discharge him of all the guilt, that it shall not be redundant; he will blot
out his iniquities, and remember them no more; and though they be sought for,
yet they shall not be found, Jer. 50. 20. If the Jer. 31. 34.
wicked forsake his ways, and his thoughts, God will abundantly pardon him,
Isa. 55. 7. 4. Will withdraw his wrath: And Withdraw his wrath.
therefore it is said, that he reserves not wrath for ever, and it is but for a
moment: He breaks off the shackles and bolts, Mic. 7. 18. Mine anger is turned
away from him, says God of penitent Israel, Hos. 14. 4. Lastly, Will bestow
any Covenant blessings upon him: If you consent and obey, you shall eat the
good Bestow blessings upon him.
of the Land, Esa. 1. 19. And Hos. 2. 21. The Lord will hear the heavens, and
the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn and the
wine, and all these shall hear Jezreel.

2. To be ready to show mercy, is opposite to dullness and slowness, and imports
a speedy aptness, and quickness, and cheerfulness. There is a fourfold
readiness in this kind. 1. One is of apprehension, which consists in a quick
observation of the A fourfold readiness to show mercy. In Apprehension.
misery and need that a sinner lies under: Such a readiness to mercy there is
in God to a penitent sinner. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.
18. Ephraim did grieve for sin, was much troubled, and ashamed, and confounded,
(Alas, I have sinned, I have offended the Lord:) Well, says God, I have heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself; q. d. I take special notice of him. Or as he
expresses it in Hos. 14. 8. I have heard him, and observed him. 2. Another is
of Commiseration, (that is) In Commiseration.
God takes the condition of the Penitent to heart. He does look on him with
tender affections, (my bowels are troubled for him, Jer. 31. 20.) As when a
Parent beholds a Child falling down and begging for acceptance with floods of
tears, this goes to the very heart of him, it stirs his affections, etc. 3. A
third is In Resolution.
of Resolution: I will surely have mercy upon him. The nature of God does
presently incline him to pass by offenses, and to accept of the Penitent, to
think thoughts of peace and mercy toward him. 4. A fourth is, of Expression:
(i.) the Lord is very ready, not only to intend mercy, but to manifest it unto
Of Expression.
the penitent person; and therefore as soon as ever any soul does repent, God
does send unto him by the Ministry of the Gospel, and assures him by all his
loving promises, that there is mercy for him. Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye my people.
Act. 2. 39. The promise is to you, and to your children. It Is thus spoken
presently upon their Repentance. The Promises of Pardon are Letters Patents of
Graciousness, and are sealed by the very Truth of God, and left open for any
penitent person to behold Gods abundant mercy to forgive him, and to accept of
him.

3. God is not only ready to show mercy to the Penitent, but all God is ready
to show all kinds of mercy.
kinds of mercy. You may read in Scripture of several qualifications (as it
were) of mercy; 1. There is Free mercy; which is an acceptance of, and a
remission or discharge, without any Free mercy.
desert in the party receiving; though he has nothing to deserve mercy, nay,
though he has enough to deserve wrath, yet the Lord will freely forgive him;
such a kind of mercy has God for the Penitent; and therefore he says of such,
I will love them freely, Hos. 14. 4. and that he forgives them for his own
sake, Esa. 43. 2. There is Abundant mercy: God is Abundant mercy.
said to be rich in mercy, to be plentiful in compassion, to have manifold
mercies, even multitudes of mercy, and to pardon abundantly. Though the
penitent has many sins to be pardoned, and many necessities to be supplied,
yet the Lord is very ready to multiply pardons unto him; not to forgive some
sins only, but all the sins committed: It is not the quantity of sins for
number, nor the quality of sins for kind, nor the aggravations of sins by
circumstances, which hinders mercy, if a a man be penitent; but though the sins
were as red as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; and though they have
been like Crimson, they shall be as Wool, Esa. 1. 18. 3. There is Tender Tender
mercy.
mercy: Tenderness consists in an easiness of Compassion, and forward
willingness to help. The tender Mother easily draws out the breasts. Such a
tenderness of mercy is there in God to the Penitent; he is most willing to
forgive, he rejoices to show mercy, and does it with his whole heart. Nor does
he upbraid and grieve the sinner when he shows mercy; but in the showing of
mercy, only shows mercy; he will forgive sins, and never mention them any more
to the forgiven Penitent. 4. There is Sure mercy: A penitent person may be Sure
mercy.
unsure of many things of his earthly comforts, of his worldly friends, of his
own life; but of two things he may be sure, of Heaven hereafter, and of Mercy
presently; as soon as ever his heart is taken off from sin, his faith may look
on mercy: Though he has reason to be grieved for sins, yet he has no reason
to doubt the pardon of his sins; for that God who has promised to pardon
abundantly, has also said, I will surely have mercy on him, Jer. 31. 20. 5.
There is Loving and Reviving mercy.
reviving mercy, such as takes off the turbulency of the Conscience, settles,
and composeth, and speaks peace unto it, and admirably refreshes it by the
impression of Divine consolations. even such mercy is God ready also to give to
the penitent, even to bind up their bruised spirits, and to give them beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness. Isa. 61. 1, 2. He will create lips of peace, and words of
comfort, Speak comfortable to Jerusalem, say unto her, that her sins are
pardoned. Isa. 40. (...).

But why is God so ready to show mercy to the penitent person? Sol. There are
reasons, partly respecting God, and the penitent. Reasons of it.
1. In respect of God. 1. It is his nature to be the Lord, the Lord God,
gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, In
respect of God. It is his nature.
transgression, and sin; therefore called a Father, and the Father of mercies,
a Husband, Friend, Physician: Every nature is apt to produce, or send out such
acts as lie within it, and are suitable unto it, The Fire is apt to heat, and
the Sun to shine, and the Water to moisten: The liberal man, it is his nature
to be apt to give, and the courteous man to speak kindly; the nature of the
Lord is merciful, and therefore no wonder, that he is ready to show mercy. 2.
It It is his Promise.
is his promise to show mercy to the penitent; his nature is ready to pity any
man in misery, and to offer him mercy and help; but besides this, he is ready
to make good his promises, he has passed his holy word of truth, that he will
have mercy on the penitent; the promises are so many that I cannot mention
them, See Isai. 55. Ezekiel. 18. etc. 3. It is his delight to show them It is his
Delight.
mercy; he delights in mercy. Mic. 7. 18. What any delights in, that he is
ready to do; there is nothing more facile to action, or more abundant in
action, or more unweariable in action, then delight; delight is no burden: when
God shows mercy, he is doing that, wherein he delights. Two things God delights
in, One is, a penitent soul (there is joy in heaven for his conversion,) and
another is, to show mercy to that Soul. Jer. 33. 8. I will pardon all their
iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me. v. 9. And it shall be to me a
name of joy. 4. It is his glory: is it the glory It is his glory.
of a man to pass by an offense, and is it not the glory of a God mercifully to
pass over transgressions? you get by it, and God gets by it. Isai. 30. 18.
Therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; there be many
things which do exalt God, (set his glory on high;) our humility does it, our
faith does it, and his own mercies do it. Jer. 33. 9. This shall be to me a
name of joy and praise, and an honor before all the nations of the earth; who
shall hear all the good that I do unto you. When he pardons a sinner and shows
him mercy, why now he gets him a Name; Who is a God like unto thee, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin? God gets him a name three ways; sometimes by
Omnipotent acts, as when he works wonders: never was the like seen in Israel.
Sometimes by Vindictive acts, as when he over rules and confounds the great
enemies of his people; so he got him a name upon Pharaoh. Sometimes by his
Gracious acts, as when he pardons a sinner. Paul sets it down for all posterity
to look on that mercy which was showed unto him. The Lord gives the Penitent
mercy, and hereby he gets unto himself much Glory. 5. His love is great to
Penitents, and therefore his mercy is ready His love is great to Penitents.
for penitents: his general Love, his Philanthropie inclines him thus far as to
reveal mercy, and to offer mercy, and to beseech by mercy, even the unkindest
Impenitents, Why will ye die? turn and live: When shall it once be? O then what
must his special love produce? if he be ready to show mercy to enemies, is he
not ready to show it to sons? If to Rebels, surely then to friends? if to them
that disobey him, how much to them who do humble themselves at his footstool?
who repent, for whose souls he gave the blood of his Son?

Secondly in respect of the penitent themselves, God is very ready In respect
of the Penitent.
to show them mercy. 1. There is nothing in the World that they need like
mercy: It is the only Plaster for their wound, and They need nothing like
mercy.
Anchor for their Ship; if they have not mercy, they are undone. Usually there
is in every condition some one thing, which the heart of man does most need; if
he be sick, then health; if poor, then sufficiency; if dejected, then comfort;
Christ tells Martha of one thing that was necessary: and David he has one
thing to desire of the Lord; and the penitent person he has one needful
request too, O that God would be merciful to me a sinner, so the Publicane. 2.
If God were not ready to show mercy Else he might be swallowed up with Despair.
to the penitent, he might be swallowed up with despair. Isa. 57. 16. I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, lest the spirit should
fail before me: Do your know what belongs to a wounded Conscience, to the sense
of sin and the wrath of God? how great, how sharp, how bitter? Is it a small
thing, think you, to dwell with everlasting burnings? to see nothing but sin,
and Hell? No, No, the Lord knows what the severity of his wrath is, and he
knows what the Impotency of the soul is, and he knows what the terror of a
troubled conscience is, how it sinks, and cracks if no hope of mercy appears;
and therefore he is very ready to show mercy to the penitent, lest despair
should overwhelm them: despair is ready to rise in two cases; One is when there
is exceeding tenderness and sensibleness of sin; Another is, when there is a
long absence and improbability of mercy; for what has the soul now to rest on,
and to support it? Now off all persons living there are none so sensible of
sin, as true penitents; (we may say of other people, as the Apostle did, the
rest are hardened) and of all penitent people, they are most tender in
conscience, and apprehensive of sin, and fearful about mercy, who are newly
converted from a sinful way: O how hard is it to keep them above water, to
persuade them that any mercy belongs to them? and therefore the Lord is ready
to show them mercy, that their spirits might not fail before him, nor be
overwhelmed with despair.

Is the Lord so ready to show all kind of mercy to the penitent? Use 1.
Instruction.
Thence may we be instructed unto two things. 1. To the approbation. 2. To the
application of our selves to a penitential Course.

1. To the Approbation of a penitential Course: Why are ye so To approve of a
penitential course.
averse, and accuse, and condemn it? They have a saying, that Finis dat
amabilitatem Mediis: the end does make the means lovely, it does give spirit
and encouragement to the use of means. Repentance is in it self a most
excellent and peculiar grace, a singular gift of God, and therefore desirable;
But besides that (Behold thy son lives, etc.) it brings the soul to partake of
mercy (of the choicest mercy in God) pardoning mercy, which is of most
immediate concernment and influence to the everlasting salvation of man: nay,
it brings mercy and salvation presently, This day is salvation come unto thy
house: It Is granted, many persons do accuse a penitential course of much
vexation, and sadness, and grief, as if it were the grave of all delight
(whereas indeed it is only the sepulcher of our Lusts, and of lustful
pleasures.) And others cry out upon the difficulty of it, as if it were an
heavy yoke, and an intolerable burden. But judge not of duties by the opinion
of ignorant and graceless men; nor by the folly and error of your own sinful
and inexperienced hearts. No, but judge of them by what the Word pronounces of
them, in themselves, and by their ends. Is Salvation a desirable thing? is
mercy an excellent thing? Why, then Repentance must be an excellent thing,
which brings us unto mercy, and unto Salvation.

Object. But there must be brokenness of heart for sin, and there must be a
diligent endeavor to leave all sin, and there must be strict care to walk with
God.

Sol. And what of all this, It is as if thou should say, O but I must not be
wicked, I must become a new man, I must leave that which will damn me, I must
hink well of such a course as will bring me to find saving mercy with God;
there cannot be a worse estate and more fearful end then Impenitency, and there
cannot be a better and more soul-saving estate then Repentance.

2. To the quick application of our selves to a Penitential course: Apply your
selves to a nitential course.
I beseech you at length, if there be any understanding in you, any sense in
you, any credence of a hell and heaven, any belief of a God or happiness,
seriously consider with me that, 1. You must perish for ever, if you have not
mercy: If Mercy does not save you, Justice must damn thee; what shall become of
thy soul, if thy sins be not pardoned? they cannot but be condemnation unto
thee, without gracious and merciful Remission. Therefore new, says the Lord,
turn unto me, etc. Joel. 3. 12. and Heb. 3. 15. Whiles it is said to day,
harden not your hearts. Repentance is a present duty, Now God commands every
one to repent, Act. 17. 30. 2. Are you sinners, or are you not? if you be not
sinners, then I confess you need no pardoning mercy; but if you be sinners,
then mercy must be your plea and anchor: Save me for thy mercies sake, and blot
out my transgressions, according to the multitude of thy mercies, says, David,
Psalm. 6. 51. Ah wretches that we are! we are sinners by Nature, and sinners by
Life; who can say, My heart is c^e^n? We lie down in our sins every moment; so
that we need mercy, much mercy, all mercy. 3. Unless you do practically repent,
(.i.) indeed for sake your sinful ways, and walk in newness of obedience, you
shall never have mercy; Except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish, said
Jesus Christ. It is the unchangeable Decree of God, and the revealed pleasure
of God, that no man shall have his mercy but the Penitent: It were an
unreasonable thing, that he should have mercy to pardon sin, who will not have
an heart to leave sin. I know very well, that the Lord is very rich in measure,
and delights in mercy, and is ready to show mercy, and is able to pardon
abundantly; God forbid that any should straighten the Mercy Seat at all. But O
thou vainly presumptious soul, look over all the Bible, read it often, and tell
me, where do thou find, that God will be thus merciful to any one sinner,
but him who is truly penitent? It is not to him who is civil, but penitent; it
is not to him that says he is a sinner, but who does forsake his sins; this is
he that shall find mercy. 4. Yea, and consider one thing more; how utterly
inexcusable you Thou art Inexcusable if thou do not Repent.
and before God and men, if you do not repent: ah! what a sad and shameful
appearance will thou make before the Lord, when he shall at the last day judge
thee for all thy sinfulness? when thou shall be set in the presence of Christ,
and Angels, and men, and devils; And the Lord shall say, This is the person to
whom I have offered the saving blood of my son, and all my pardoning mercies,
if that he would but have left his sinful ways. Thy own conscience will
condemn thee for ever, that ever thou should exalt the lust of thy sin before
the mercy of God; yea, the very Devils will cry shame of thee; they may say, If
we had had such mercy offered, we could not have been worse then have refused
it; thou had mercy offered to pardon thee, and yet thou would go on in thy
sins. Know, O man, thouart inexcusable before God, thou can make no apology
at all. Two things let them be for every engraven in your breasts; One is, that
if mercy will not bring in your souls to repentance, nothing will do it; I
affirm it, that if you were in hell it self, the to^ments of it wo^ld not
incline you to repent, if the mercies of God now upon earth will not prevail
with you: Another, if mercy do not lead you to repentance, there remains
nothing but a fearful expectation of the fiery indignation of God; thou art as
sure to be dam^ed as thou now live, if thou do not repent thee of thy sins.

A second Use shall be of Caution: Since the Lord is so ready to Use 2 Cau^^^,
K^^p not (...) from Repentance by despairing o^ Mercy.
show all mercy to the penitent, therefore take heed that you keep not off from
repentance by despairing of mercy. There are three sorts of sinners: Some whose
hearts are hard^ed as the Adamant, through an habitual itera ion by sin, and
(...) infl^med affection unto sin; who like that unjust Judge fearing neither
God nor man, so they are sens^ble neither of the vileness of sion, nor of the
goodness of mercy; Some whose hearts are mollifyed, graciously altered, have
seen the evil of their ways, and forsaken them, and are turned unto the Lord,
seeking him with mourning, and with supplication, to whom the Scepter of Mercy
has been graciously stretched forth, and they have effectually touched that
Scepter with believing hearts, and are returned with much peace and joy
unspeakable: Others there are twixt both these; they are not so low as the
first, for their consciences are awaked and troubled; nor yet so high as the
last, for they cannot believe any mercy will reach unto them; their souls
cannot discern any intention of mercy toward them, and all the promises of
mercy seem to them as restrictive, nay, as exclusive proclamations, denying
unto them (though grantting unto others) the privilege of their Books, and the
P^alm of mercy, and so are apt to despair; mercy seems to them a far off, and
slow, and long a coming. Therefore now, to such persons who are awakned in
their consciences, to see the vileness of their sinful ways, and their lost
condition; my advice is, by no means to despair of mercy. Reasons against
despair. Despair is a very heinous Sin.


Reasons why I thus advise are these. 1. Despair is a very heinous sin; It is
one of the highest impeachments of Gods greatest glory and delight: there is
nothing wherein God does more magnify himself in the eyes of the world, or
more glory in, then to sit upon his mercy-seat: Now despair is not every
diminution, and eclipse of mercy, but it is (in its kind) a very extinction of
all the love, and kindness, and mercifulness in God; it gives, 1. The lie to
the promises. 2. Reproach to Gods nature; and particularly to the attribute of
mercy, that it is not, 1. Kind enough. 2. Willing enough. 3. Full enough. 4.
Free enough. 2. It is a sore enemy to Repentance; of no hope of mercy, then no
care to repent, I can but be damned. 2. And The most uncomfortable sin.
then it is the most uncomfortable sin: Other sins afford some (though
ungrounded and poor) contentment either in profit or pleasure: But despair
being the grave of mercy, it is also the very night, and funeral of all
comfort; and, as S. Austin spoke of an evil conscience, that is true of
despair, It is its own torment; for taking the soul off from all remedy, it
must necessarily afflict it with the most exquisite sense of fear and horror.
3. Satan is very apt to fall in with an awakened conscience, and there to
aggravate Satan is very apt to draw us to despair.
sin above all measure, thereby to incline it to despair of mercy; if he cannot
make us dye in a senseless Ca^m, his next aim is to make us perish in an
unquiet and despairing storm; either to undervalue our sins, and so to slay us
with security; or else to undervalue mercy, and so sink us with distrust. 4.
Yea, and no A newly awakned conscience is apt to it.
conscience is more propense to suspect divine ^avour, and to credit false
suggestions, then a newly awakened conscience: Indeed while our hearts are
totally seared, and past feeling (much sin being not at all felt) here is an
easy ground to delude our selves, that mercy will quickly bend unto us, who do
take our selves to be good enough, and not much to need it; but when many sins
shall be laid to our charge, and great ones too, with that wrath which a just
and holy God has threatened, and we feel the burnings of the wrath begun with
us; I assure you, it will be most difficult to withhold that Soul from
despairing of mercy, which at once sees much guilt, and feels much wrath. 5.
There is infinite There is infinite mercy in God.
mercy is God: It is his nature, and he can forgive iniquity, transgression,
and sin; Est in misericordia divina, divina Omnipotentia; Therefore this I say
unto you, any of you, whose consciences God has awakned to the sight and sense
of your sins (whether by the Ministry of his Word, or of his rod) as you desire
not utterly to cast dishonor, extreemest dishonor to God, and to draw the
saddest, and yet most fruitless anguish, on your own spirits; and yet again, as
you tender the welfare of your Souls, your everlasting safety, by repentance
and faith; do not despair of finding mercy with God, but come in unto him by
solid repentance, and you shall find him, even unto you a God ready to forgive
iniquity, transgression, and sin.

Ob. Yea, but though the Lord be merciful, yet is he just, he I, but God will
not clear the guilty.
will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. I have refused mercy; I cannot
pray; I cannot be heard or answered! How then can I? I, who have sinned so
much, now expect any mercy! Sol. To this I answer briefly: There are two kinds
of sinners, whom God will not clear. One is, Who do not see their sins, yet
love them. Another, Who do not see their sins, and yet go on in them. Answered
Psalm. 11. 5. The wicked, and him that loves violence, his soul does hate. And
Psalm. 68. 21. He will wound the head of such as still go on in their
wickedness. If you be such sinners, who do see your sins, and will love them,
and not forsake them, be confident, that remaining thus, there remains nothing
for you, but an expectation of wrath and just judgment from the righteous God:
But if you see your sins, and desire to repent, to bewail them, to forsake them
with all your heart, to turn from your evil ways; why! the Lord has mercy for
you, he is very ready to pardon and accept of you: If we confess our sins, 1 John 1. 9. he is faithful to forgive us our sins.

Obj. But do ye not read the threatenings of God? as Jonah 1. 3. Yet forty
days, and Ninive shall be destroyed. Sol. Remember one thing as a
Preservative, that all Gods threatenings against our sins, are to be understood
in sensu composito, as the schools speak, viz. thus, if we continue im^enitent,
and not otherwise; not in sensu diviso, if we return from them: like a Kings
proclamation of death, if the Traitors do not lay down their Weapons, but if
they do, he offers and assures them of his pardon.

Obj. I, this is it! I had mercy offered in the Kings Proclamation, I did not
yield when mercy was tendered.
if I would lay down my Weapons; but I did not yield when mercy was tendered:
If I had repented, when God formerly offered me mercy, there had been hope; but
I continued in sin, where grace abounded, and since mercy was offered;
therefore now too late, in vain. Sol. To this also, let me give answer. 1.
Indeed it Answered.
was thy duty to have repented, upon the very first proposal of grace and
mercy; and it was thy sin (at all) to stand out, yea, and thy sinnings contract
a deep guilt by commission after the tender of divine mercy, (sin is more
sinful, where the offer of mercy is more plentiful.) But secondly, Though the
precedent refusals of mercy make the course of sin more guilty, yet they do not
make the condition of the sinner to be hopeless, and utterly incapable of
mercy: For 1. Mercy is able to pardon, even sins against mercy; as it is the
antidote for sins against the Law, so likewise the salve for sins against the
Gospel: There is so much mercy in God, as can rejoice against judgment, yea,
and that can rejoice over sins against mercy too; my meaning is, that Gods
goodness is so natural to him, and great, that it can pass by the evils,
against his goodness, and kindness. 2. And that, God is willing and ready so to
do, it may appear by this, that he continues his invitations, and offers of
mercy, though formerly neglected; How often would I have gathered thee? says
Christ of Jerusalem: and let it yet alone one year, of the Tree. And then know
that this is certain; as long as God continues a suit of mercy unto thee,
neither is the date of thy mercy expired, nor does thy former refusal justly
prejudice thy present right to or acceptance of mercy. If the King renews his
Proclama ion of favor to those who have formerly despised it, it is now
lawful and safe for them to come in and accept of it: But since thy former
refusal, God has, as it were, renewed the Embassage; He has sent other
servants unto thee, to proclaim unto thee Mercy, if thou will return; yea, and
has assured thee, that he will pardon all former rebellions in all kinds; if
now thou will hear his voice, thou shall live, and not die: Therefore now turn
unto the Lord; this day does Mercy beseech thee to leave thy sins, and says,
If thou will forsake them, I am thine.

Object. But surely the Lord hates me, and has no delight toward God hates
me, and will destroy me. Answered.
I have been a vassal of sin, and now must be a vessel of destruction. Sol. Ah
foolish and senseless sinner, who please thy self with the arguings of an
unbelieving spirit; Does God hate thee! or does he delight in thy destruction!
Had this been so, what wants there that hou had not been irrecoverably sent
to the place of the damned long ere this? How easily could he, (if he had
delighted in thy confusion and destruction) struck thee at once? Do thou not
see, that when thou wast mad in renewing thy sins, then did his repentings
kindle within him? When he had just, and many, and strong occasions and
provocations, yet he has spared thee to this day; would he have done so, had
he desired to have destroyed thee? 2. And what is the end of all this patience
and forbearance? Do thou so ill interpret it an intention of revenge, which
is altogether a fruit of his great mercy? No, no, it is not thy destruction,
but thy repentance and conversion which he delights in: See Ezekiel. 33. 11. Not
the ruin of thy person, but corruptions: He delight not in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live.

Object. But I cannot repent, and I cannot turn mine own I cannot repent.
Answered. I cannot pray Answered.
heart. Sol. Pray unto him, Turn me, and I shall be turned. Object. But I
cannot pray. Sol. Sigh then, and grieve; pray that you may pray, and mourn
because you cannot mourn. And therefore leave these false surmizes of God, and
sinful, foolish, unworthy reasonings; set upon the work of repentance indeed,
and thou shall quickly find, that God is so far from hating thee, that he will
meet thee with loving kindness, and great mercies.

Object. O no, never such a sinner as I have been a sinner above measure
sinful, so wholly sinful, so only sinful, so continually Never such a
sinner as I have been.
sinful. To this also a word. 1. Greatness of sinning it not an absolute
impediment to Gods readiness in pardoning; for as much as great sinners are
called upon to repent, as well as lesser Answered.
sinners; and if the duty of Repentance concerns them, then there is a capacity
of mercy for them. 2. God does upon repentance promise to pardon great sinners.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1. 16. Come now, and let us reason
together, says the Lord. V. 18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
Istiduo colores sunt valde tenaces and mansivi quibus intelligitur peccata
quantumque sint gravia ex genere and habituata ex consuetudine, divina gratia
purgabuntur, says Lyra well upon that place: Yea, though they have been
peccata sanguinea, so S. Jerome upon the same place. 3. Great sinnings, upon
repentance, have found greater mercies: Adam's sin, very great, (whether you
consider it formally or causally,) yet upon repentance, mercy pardoned it,
David's sin of murder, (it was a crying sin,) and of adultery, (it was a
wounding sin;) yet, upon his repentance, both pardoned by mercy. What should I
speak of Manasses in the Old Testament, or of Paul in the New? 4. The greater
sinnings should ever prove the quicker reasons of repentance, and not be made
the causes of despair, or more sinning: If thy sinnings had not been so high,
it had been better; but being so, thy remedy is not an addition of a worse sin,
or a continuance in the same sins, but to pray unto the Lord to turn thee, and
to forgive thee.

Object. Why, I have prayed, and yet I can get no mercy, not I have prayed, and
yet can get no mercy.
see any hopes or appearance of mercy; therefore, surely God will not be so
ready to show me mercy. Sol. This is a sore Objection, and usually troubled
Consciences are enthralled with it, Answered.
and many times receive great discouragement because of the silence of mercy to
their tears and prayers: But let us see how we may instruct and support persons
in this case. 1. God is ready God is ready to hear prayer.
to hear prayer. Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear prayer. Before they call, I
will answer; and while they are speaking, I will hear, Isa. 65. 2. Of all men's
prayers, he is most ready to hear the prayer of afflicted Most ready to hear
the prayer of the affl^cted.
persons. Psalm. 18. 27. Thou will save the afflicted. Psalm. 22. 24. He has not
despised nor abhorred the afflictions of the afflicted, neither has he hid his
face from them; but when he cried unto him, he heard him: Of all the Prayers
which he is ready to hear, there are none which he does more feelingly and
compassionately tender, than the Prayers of afflicted people, especially such
as are inwardly afflicted in their souls and consciences for their sins. No
people are more apt to fear that the Lord does not hear their Prayers, and yet
no Prayers does God sooner hear than theirs; for as much as the Lord does
exceedingly delight in the sacrifices of a broken spirit, and he is full of
pitifulness and bowels toward them; I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, Jer. 31. 18. When Ephraim smote upon the thigh, and was confounded and
ashamed, why! you know the Lord could not contain his affections; Is Ephraim my
dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord. David, you find him much afflicted and
distressed in his soul, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. he did no sooner acknowledge his sin,
but God did express his mercy, v. 5. The like you may see of him, in Psalm. 6.
1, 2. compared with v. 8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, the
Lord has heard my suplication, the Lord has received my Prayer. So true is
that of the Prophet, Isa. 30. 19. He will be very gra^ious unto thee at the
voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. But then know we,
that there may be sometimes God does not presently make known his Mercy.
Reasons of it on our parts.
some special Reasons, why the Lord does not presently make known his mercy to
the troubled and seeking soul. The Reasons may be either on their part, or on
Gods part.

1. Quick mercy must first see quickened fervency: Though God be ready to hear
their Prayers, yet there may be some reasons, Quickened fervency may be wanting.
why he does not presently give them sensible tokens that they are heard. If
you pray for pardoning mercy, as Austin did for repentance; if you pray with a
careless, dull, flat, formal, neglecting sprit, not esteeming of Gods mercy and
favor as your lives, nay, above your lives; if you seek not the Lord in this
with all your hearts. Pardoning mercy is the greatest mercy for the soul, and
must be desired with the greatest affections of the soul, with cries, with
importunities: If you do not mightily wrestle with him, as David in Psalm. 6.
and as Daniel in c. 9. No marvel that cold Suits have slow Answers; though you
be afflicted in your consciences, yet if those inward afflictions cannot raise
the price of mercy, and set a stronger edge upon your affections, if the
burnings of your consciences do not kindle flames of affections for mercy, you
may wait for your answer.

2. As it must be a quickened affection which must find quick mercy, so it must
be a pure affection. I will that men pray every Or a pure affecction.
where, lifting up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Art thou sure that no iniquity
cleaves unto thee, and is an impedit to thy suit for mercy? Thou art troubled
with the grossness of some one of thy sins, but do not thou connive at the
shreds of the same sin? the limbs of it afflict thee, but do not the leaves and
the twigs hang on still? If we do not purely and entirely put off our sins, why
should we complain, that God does not let down his mercy? If I regard iniquity
in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66. 18. If you favor your known
sin, in any part, or the least degree of it, where now has God promised to
show thee favor or mercy? Or suppose thou shakest off one crying sin, and yet
retain some other sin; put off one servant, and take another; be troubled for
one transgression, and yet live in another; is this repentance? Thou do not
change thy course, but thy sin, and how then can thou expect mercy? But if
thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward God, and ^utst
iniquity far from thee, then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, said
Zophar, Job 11. 13, 14. If thou thus return to the Almighty, and putst away
iniquity, Job 22. 23. thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear
thee, v. 27. As your prayers must be servent, so they must be the fervent
prayers of a righteous man, which do prevail much: Not that he who prays must
have no sin, but that he must love and connive at none.

3. Thy heart is troubled with the guilt of sin, but does it morn Do thou
mourn for the vileness and fithiness of thy sin.
for the viteness and filth of thy sin? Thou seek for a Cordial, but do
thou pray for Salve too? Vehement thou art for Mercy, but what for Grace? Where
guilt only troubles, it may make me earnest for mercy to ease me, that is
involuntary; would not be troubled but is troubled because he is troubled: But
where the filthiness of sin troubles me, now I do not only importune in
prayer, but mourn also, and amas desirous of healing as I am of pardoning, this
is voluntary; he would mourn, and mourns because he can mourn no more: If thou
seek the Lord with a mourning heart, as well as with a troubled heart, the
fountain is set upon for transgressions and sins, Zach. 13. 1. and if the
fountain be opened for thee, it cannot be long ere mercies will swim unto thee.

4. And with what faith have thou prayed? Thy troubled Conscience With what
faith have thou prayed?
would trouble thee if thou did not pray, and therefore have thou prayed to
give it a little quiet, as we do a crying child the breast to still it: What
things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that you receive them, and ye
shall have them: Have thou, and do thou consider and ponder the promises of
Gods mercy made over the penitent persons? Have thou considered of his
merciful nature, tender love in and through Christ? of his commands to broken
and afflicted souls to come unto him for Balm and Oil? Have thou found how
proper his merciful promises are to thy condition? (every way good and
convenient;) and do confess this word of promise a gracious and a good word?
and judge him to be faithful who has promised, and thy self unworthy of
mercy? and thereupon, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, have bended thy heart and
knees to the God of mercy, trusting through him to find grace and mercy to help
in time of need, and those his promises to be Yea and Amen to thy soul through
Christ? Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that will Ido. According to
your faith (said Christ to the blind men, Matt. 9. 29.) so be it unto you.
Alas! thy prayers have not found the way to Gods Mercy-seat all this while,
because they have not had faith for their Guide; if our Messenger lose their
way, no marvel if we stay long for an answer.

Lastly; Why have thou called home the Ambassadors, those prayers Have thou not
called home thy prayers.
of thine which were Leigers at Heaven? In a fit of proud impatience, and
fruitless vexation, and bold presumption, thou have limited the holy One of
Israel to a day: And if at such another prayer God did not sensibly answer
thee, thou would and have restrained seeking of him. What do thou mean to
beg, and yet to prescribe? Alas! that there should be so much pride yet in an
heart, which we would think humbled as low as Hell! That it should profess it
self to deserve a thousand damnations, and yet quarrel with God, for not being
quick in a present expedition of mercy! Thou art too quick with God. Judge how
these answer one the other: O Lord, I do not deserve the least mercy, I deserve
never to find mercy; and yet if the Lord does not presently show me mercy, I
will not seek unto him any more. As you must get humbled hearts, so you must
get humble hearts; He hears the desires of the humble. Your Prayers must be
patient, as well as ^ervent: Mercy, pardoning mercy, is worth the waiting for:
It is the most excellent of mercies, and most sure to the patient Petitioner;
Psalm. 40. 1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry. Blessed are all that wait for it, Isa. 30. 18.

Or there may be Reasons on Gods part, why he does a while Reasons on Gods
part. God suspends mercy. To give us some taste what it is to provoke him.
suspend or hold up the demonstration of his mercy to a troubled soul and
seeking. 1. To give us some taste, what it is to provoke him, and sin against
him. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings
shall reprove thee: know therefore, and see, that it is an evil and a bitter
thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. As we have had years to bath
our selves in the delights of sin, so we must have some minutes to taste the
proper fruits, the bitterness of sin: Thou would not believe the Gall and the
Wormwood, etc. Lam. 3. 2. To alienate or work off our affections wholly from
sin; which now is so To alienate our affections from sin.
deadly a sting, so smart a wound, so noisome a prison, which fills us with
such horrible terrors, and costs us almost our lives to obtain pardon and
mercy: Thou would not easily part with sin. Who would love sin any more,
which 1. raises so great terrors, 2. utterly depriveth of mercy, 3. or
hinders it, and makes it slow to answer. 3. To abase us more in our own eyes,
To abase us the more in our own eyes, that we may exalt his mercy.
that so his mercy may exalt us, and we may exalt his mercy; to value the
excellency of mercy, to confess our unworthiness of mercy, to enlarge our
desires of mercy. 4. Nay, not only to exalt his mercy, but retain his mercy;
not easily forfeit the excellency and sweetness of mercy, by any future
sinning. The That we may retain his mercy.
Church which had much ado to find Christ, she then caught him, and would not
let him go. The pardoning mercies of God ordinarily yield us most sweetness,
and abide in their strength To make us an Instance of mercy, and Instrument of
comfort.
with us, after deepest humiliations, and difficultest fruitions of them. 5.
Perhaps the Lord will make thee a great Instance of mercy, and a great
Instrument to comfort others; and therefore suffers thee to lie a long time
in darkness and silence, and at length will relieve thee.

Object. Yea, but how shall a troubled soul be supported in the How shall not
be supported in the interim?
the interims, until mercy, pardoning mercy does come, and prayers therein be
answered fully. Sol. I answer to this also; 1. If thou can not have comfort
to feed on, yet thou have duty to work on: If thou have not comfort, look to
duty.
Every Christian may either find it an Autumn to gather fruit, or else a Spring
to set it. It is a great mercy that thou art at the gates of Mercy; it is a
great mercy, 1. to enjoy, 2. to beg, 3. to wait for mercy; a comfort, to have
such an heart to come so near to mercy; thou have a time to search thy heart
more, and to review thy estate, and to peruse thy prayers, to mend and continue
all. All which are but thy improvements in grace, and will eventually prove the
enlargements of thy mercy and peace. No man can make a better progress in his
repentance, but he does thereby prepare for the greater, for the sweeter, for
the longer mercies. 2. Though you have not experience to support you, yet you
have faith. Though thou have not experience, yet thou have faith.
It is written, and sealed, though not delivered as yet, Whosoever does truly
repent, (mourn for sin, forsake it, endeavor to walk with God, etc.) though he
have not the joy of his pardon in his conscience, yet he has the assurance of
his pardon in the promise. Now Gods Word should support us as much as Gods
Testimony; his Word should be as good to our faith, as his Testimony is sweet
to our sense and feeling. 3. The dawnings of pardoning mercy The dawnings of
pardoning mercy may support.
(which are rising upon you) may also support you: Though you cannot read your
Pardon under the Broad Seal, yet you may find it passing the Privy Seal. For 1.
Upon your humble praying for pardoning mercy, you do feel your consciences more
quieted and settled and revived with better confidence and expectation of mercy.
2. You find your hearts more enflamingly resolved, that you will never give
over; you will now follow on to know the Lord and his mercies. It was a sign
(anciently) that God regarded prayers, when ^ire came down upon the sacrifice,
as 1 Kin. 18. 24. 2 Chro. 7. 1. so is it a singular argument that God accepts
of your prayers for mercy or grace, when upon your prayers he does enlarge and
enliven you more earnestly to seek him in those kinds. If God does himself hold
up thy suit, he will not long hold off his answer; when we will have no Nay,
then, Be it unto thee as thou will. If he prepare thine heart, he will at
length incline his ^ar.

And fell on his neck and kissed him.] You have seen already, the Eyes of Mercy
to epsy a returning Penitent, and the Feet of Mercy, its speedy pace to meet a
returning Penitent, the Father ran; and of the Bowels of Mercy, He had
compassion on him. In all which, we have discovered that singular readiness
which is in God to show mercy to a true Penitent. Now there yet remain, 1. The
Arms of Mercy, Amplexus misericordiarum, [And he fell on his neck.] 2. The
Sealings of all this mercy, though not verbally, yet most significantly
expressed toward the returning Prodigal, [and kissed him.] What they say of
Scire, that though we do know, yet this satisfies us not, unless another does
know Nisi t^ scire ho^ sciat alter.
that we do know; the same is true of Love and Mercy; though we have loving
affections and merciful intentions toward any, yet this is not enough to the
party, unless he be made to know the same. Therefore here are singular
expressions, as well as admirable intentions; the Box of Ointment is opened;
Joseph cannot contain himself, but cries out, I am Joseph: The Father of the
Prodigal does forgive and accept of him, and testifies all this, by falling on
his neck and kissing of him. There be diverse Kisses: Not to speak of the Kiss
of Subjection and Reverence, which David calls for, Psalm. 2. 12. Nor of the
Kiss of Incivility and Filthiness, the whorish kiss, of which Solomon speaks,
Prove. 17. 13. Nor of the Kiss of Falsehood and Treachery, Judas-kiss, Matthew. 26.
49. Nor of the Kiss of Courtesy, common to all friends, the Heathens used it,
as Xenophon and Herodotus relate: Nor of the Kiss of Charity, used among the
primitive Christians, especially before the Lords Supper. The Kiss in the Text
is a Kiss of Merciful Affection; and it is given unto the Prodigal by his
Father, in signum Reconciliationis, that He and his Father were now friends,
and in a state of love and kindne^s: In signum Pacis, to take off all fears and
doubts, all was exceeding well; and in signum Laetitiae, to intimate unto him,
what a welcome child he now was. His Father was not more grieved at his sinful
departure, but he is now much more gladded at his penitential return. Doct. God
is not only reconciled, but manifests himself so to be unto the P^nitent.


The proper Observation from this I conjecture is, That God is pleased, not
only to be reconciled, but also to manifest and declare himself as one
reconciled to penitent people. Joh. 14. 21. I will love him, and manifest my
self unto him. Rev. 3. 20. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Rev. 2. 17. To him that
overcomes will I give to ^at of the hidden Manna: and I will give him a white
Stone, and in the Stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving he
that receives it. Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost which is given unto us. This is a Proposition of deep
consequence, and also of some difficulty, and therefore must be the more warily
opened and attended. Some things premised. Gods R^c^nciled favor is
demonstrable to a ^itted soul.
For the sense and meaning of it premise these particulars:

1. That Gods reconciled favor is a thing demonsirable to a fitted soul; (.i.)
it is not besides the nature of Divine favor, to open it self so that it may
be apprehended, no more then it is against the nature of Light, to reveal it
self. Nor is it beyond the capacity and proportion of a penitential soul tobe
cognoscitive, (i.) to be able to look on, and know Divine favor. In
Universali, the Papists and others do grant, as, That God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself: but more then this, I affirm in particulars,
There is not only a Notional knowledge in the general, but there may be an
Experimental knowledge in particular of Divine favor. By this, says David, I
know thou favourest me. And S. Paul of Christ, Who loved me. God has actually
manifested his love and favor to his people of old; Son, be of good comfort,
thy sins are for given thee, Mat. 9. And Romans 8. Paul had it, and all the
Saints had it: And he does manifest it, and will manifest it to all true
penitents. But then,

2. There is a double manifestation of his favor; One is Natural, A double
Manifestation of his favor. Natural.
and this is when God does imprint such qualities on the soul, which are the
sole fruits of a reconciled Love, as when he bestows on it the sanctifying
graces of his Spirit; Another is Formal, wherein he does evidently make over
the goodness of Formal.
his Love, (i.) make us directly to know that he does love us, and is
reconciled unto us: which is done two ways, either, 1. By the Testimony of the
Word apprehended by faith; 2. By the Testimony of his Spirit, causing in us an
express evidence and sense of Gods love, as a witness, and as a seal. Now one
of these ways God is pleased to manifest his reconciled favor, or to evidence
it unto the penitential soul, and sometimes both.

3. The time which God takes to declare or make known (in a The time of this
manifestation is a^b^trary.
more formal way of evidence) his reconciled love unto the penitential soul, is
not necessary and determinate, but arbitrary and free. It is not restrained to
the very birth or hour of our Conversion, nor limited to any one part of time
after it more then an other. But God is pleased differently to make himself
known, and his loving favor known. Lydia partaked of Joy as soon s the
partaked of Grace; but with other Christians it may be, perhaps, as with
Simeon, that their eyes do not see their Salvation till near their death in the
latter end.

4. The measure of Gods dispensation in this particular, is also The measure of
Gods Dispensation of it is very different.
very different and various: ^very Penitent has not one and the same degree
that another has; and he who has most of it in evidence, has it but mixed and
imperfect. A Declaration there is to every penitent soul that God loves it, but
not equal, nor absolute.

5. This Declaration of Divine Love, though it be very comfortable, This
Declaration is separable at least in the sense of it.
yet it is very separable, especially in the sense and feeling of it: For it is
(for the duration of it) an effect of mere favor, which is let out ad Been
placitum only, and it is not an essential to the Christian condition, therefore
it may go off. So that this is the sum of the Proposition, That Gods reconciled
favor is a thing which may be known, and God is pleased to make it known to
all penitents either Naturally or Formally, at some time or other, in some
measure or other, so long as he himself shall judge best.

The Reasons where of are these: 1. His promise is not only to Reasons of it.
Gods Promise is to make known his love to them.
love his people, but likewise to make known his love to them; not only the
affection, but the declaration of it is in promise, Ezekiel. 34. 30. They shall
know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the house of
Israel, are my people, says the Lord God. 2. It is the thing which the
penitential people of It is the thing which Gods people desire.
God do exceedingly crave and desire. Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift up the light of thy
Countenance upon me. Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift up the light of thy Countenance upon
me. Psalm. 17. 7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness. Psalm. 106. 4. Remember
me, O Lord, with the favor thou bear unto thy people, O visit me with thy
salvation. Psalm. 119. 132. Look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest
to do unto those that love thy Name. Cant. 1. 2. Let him kise me with the
kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then Wine. Now I pray consider two
things, that, 1. The prayers which God commands his people to make. 2. The
things which God promises to grant: where promises are made, and commands are
made, there if prayers be made, God will fulfill them. The manifestation of Gods
favor is that which the people of God are commanded to seek; (Seek ye my ^ace,
Psalm. 27. 8.) and God has promised to declare his loving favor to them, and
therefore if they seek it, he will. 3. It is the thing which they do
exceedingly need: Though not sim-ply It is the thing which they Need.
to their esse, yet respectively to their Been esse. The loving kindness of God
it is their life, and it is the Joy of their salvation, and it is their
reviving, it is the binding up of their wounds, the settling of their fears, the
strength of their soul, the peace of their conscience, the anchor of their
ship, the Ark of rest* 4. The Lord will grant unto his people, even in this
life, the God will give his people here the first fruits of a Glorious life.
first fruits of their glorious life: though hereafter they shall see him face
to face, yet here they shall know him as through a Glass; here they shall taste
how good he is, that they may more earnestly look after a full and Beatifical
fruition of him. 5. And likewise to let them know the difference twixt a
sinful, To let them know the difference twix^ a sinful and penitential course
To distinguish twixt the pleasures of sin and the joy of the Holy Ghost.
and penitent course; in the one they shall know how just he is in wrath, to
hate, and punish sin; in the other how gracious, and merciful he is, to
comfort, and revive a penitent. 6. Yea, yet more, he does declare his
reconciled favor to them that they likewise may distinguish twixt these poor,
false, miserable, jollities, and pleasures, which they had by sin; and twixt
those soul reviving transcendently affecting comforts, unspeakeable joies,
unconceivable peace which arise to them, upon the knowledge of God reconciled to
them in and through Christ: That there is not that juice, that support, that
delight, that singularity of contentment in any way, as in a good way; nor the
like life and spirit to be drawn from any sinful or earthly springs, as from
the goodness and kindness of his loving favor: that a God reconciled is the
only happiness of the soul.

Does the Lord manifest unto penitential persons his reconciled Use Satisfy not
your selves without the seals of Gods favor.
favor? Then you who take your selves to be converts and penitents, satisfy
not your selves, be not contented until you find the SEals and tokens of Gods
favor. You have (I know) his Word and Bond for your reconciliation, and your
condition really is the state of reconciliation; you do love the Lord, and the
Lord does love you: But yet advance somewhat farther, strive to find the kisses,
the gracious expressions and evidences from God, that he is reconciled unto you.

The Motives to excite you hereto, are many and forcible. Motives. The
differences twixt God and you have been very great.
1. The differences twixt God and you have been very great and high, such as
have much provoked the Lord; and they have been of long continuance, such as
have deserved ten thousand Hells: No^ why will you not strive to make it out of
doubt that God has pardoned you, and is in Christ graciously reconciled unto
you? If there have been differences betwixt us and a man of place, we will use
all the means to take up the controversy, and get a release of all things; how
much more having to do with God?

2. This Reconciled Love is worth the suing out: No love like Reconciled love
is worth the suing out.
it; partly, because it does so immediately concern the soul of a Christian. It
is a love which accepts of a sinner, and makes the sinner accepted; it is more
to him then the Princes pardon to a Traitor: Indeed, it is his passing from
death to eternal Life. What should become of a sinner; if the Lord were not
reconciled to him? If the Lord be his enemy and holds distance, the soul can
never stand before him in Judgment: Farewell Peace, farewell Heaven without it.
Partly, because it is the choicest and chiefest Love that God does bestow:
There is no one whom he does embrace with the love of friendship and
reconciliation, but Elect persons, and such as he intends for Glory. Therefore
this Love is called, the ancient Love, great Love, Ephesians. 2. and the free Love,
and the Love of his chosen, and a Love which is sure, and a Love which neither
Powers, nor principalities, nor world, nor life, nor death, nor things present,
nor things to come, can extirpate or abolish. You may partake of his common
Love, and the common effects of that Love, yet you may be his very enemies, and
vessels of wrath. Partly, because it frees you from the sorest fears, and
sharpest torments. You know that there are no troubles like those in
Conscience, nor fears like those concerning our eternal Conditions. What^ if I
be one whom the Lord hates? what if I should dye, and then be damned? what if I
be not in favor with the Lord? what if such or such a sin be not yet pardoned?
Now the evidence that God is reconciled to you, does silence these fears, and
eases the conscience of these tormenting suspicions: The Lord is my light (said
David, Psalm. 27. 1.) whom shall I fear? And, I will lay me down in peace, Psa.
4. 8.

3. It is one of the most admirable comforters of the soul in any condition. It
comforts the soul in any condition.
If your condition be prosperous, why, the assurance that God is reconciled
unto you, makes all your outward comforts the more comfortable unto you: It is
like health to a good complexion, which sprinkles it over, and inamels the face
with a fair beauty; or like the light to color, which unveils and discloseth
all their art; or like the dew to the herbs, which makes them the more
fragrant; when a man can say, I have all things, and God is reconciled to me
too; I have such a Lordship, and the King is my friend too; such honors,
friends, estate, and the Lord has accepted of me too, and I know that all is
pardoned; is not this a comfort, when all is pleasant on earth, and all is
right in heaven: whereas, if the Lord be not reconciled to a man, what avails
all the world? If your conditions be calamitous, yet the assurance that God is
reconci^ed to you, is an admirable cordial. You read in Mat. 9. 2. Of a man
sick with a dead Palsy, (a disease which exceedingly dejects the spirits;)
Christ comes unto him, and gives him a Cordial; what was it, think you? why
this, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. You will think this
an improper comfort to a man in such a disease, but it was not; the assurance
that our sins are pardoned, and that God is reconciled, revives, and cheers up
the heart, nothing more. So S. Paul speaks of Tribulation, Di^ress,
Persecution, Famine, Nakedness, Peril, Sword, Yea, of Death it self, Romans 8.
35, 36. and adds. v. 37. In all these things we are more then conquerours: he
made light of them all, they were as nothing. How so? whence came this? why!
from assurance of Gods love; for (says he, v. 38, 39.) I am persuaded, that
neither death nor life, nor any Creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lard. If your condition be pious,
this evidence is the main thing which makes it most comfortable; all the habits
of graces are no actual comforts, unless they become evident; and so far do
they comfort you, as they are true and real evidences of Gods reconciled love
and favor unto you.

4. It will be an unspeakable stay unto you in death; you know It will be a
stay in Death.
the day of death will shortly overtake every one of us: Here is no abiding
City; and what temptations may befall us then, we cannot assure our selves; we
know not what Satan or conscience may raise up against us: When our souls are
ready to depart, then either to be determinate; God is not yet reconciled to
me, (that just God, before whom I must immediately appear to answer, and make
accounts;) or to be indeterminate; It may be, I am reconciled, it may be I am
not, I never had any solid evidence of it; how distracting a thing is this,
that the soul, one minute hopes the best, and presently, it doubts the worst?
Now I think I shall go to Heaven; and by and by, I fear lest I shall be cast
into Hell: But if you had obtained to an evidence of Gods reconciled favor
unto you, that the Lord had pardoned all the sins of your life, and had
graciously accepted of you in Christ, though death it self appears, you would
not much be moved. I know that my redeemer lives, said Job c. 19. And we know,
that if our earthly house be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
eternal in the heavens, (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 5. 1.

5. It is of all the most quickening and forwarding thing to the It is the most
Quickening in duty.
heart, for the performance of all sorts of holy duties: We oftentimes
complain, what dull and slow hearts we have to Prayer; were we more assured
that God is reconciled to us, we should quickly find hearts more affected, and
more enlarged for Prayer; though we be afraid, and fly from an angry and just
God, yet we would ^hye in, and speed unto a reconciled, and gracious God. Psalm.
63. 1. Thou art my God; (here he discerns that whereof we speak. sc. God
reconciled;) and then it follows, early will I seek unto thee. Again, we
wonder at our listnesses of our spirits to the word, that we do not mind it,
long after it, affect it more; were you more assured of Gods love, being more
affected with him, we should certainly grow more affected with his word. They,
in 1 Pet. 2. 2. must desire the sincere Milk of the Word, as new born Babes
(.i.) with much eagerness, and delightfulness; but how might this apprehension
be wrought in them. Why! v. 3. If so be, that you have tasted, that the Lord is
gracious, q. d. a taste (an experience, an assurance) that God is your gracious
God, that is it which will whet an edge and appetite after the word; I say no
more but this, you will serve the Lord with more willing hearts, and cheerful,
then ever you did in all your lives, if so be you could get assurance that God
is reconciled.

6. It makes your hearts most confident on God in evil times; It makes us
Confident in evil times.
when afflictions are upon you, when dangers arise, when distractions are in
the world, when any near calamity breaks in; these are like Land-floods, which
carry away all, or like the deluge in Noah's time, which exceeded all the
mountains, so do these drown all the vain hopes, and confidences of evil men,
that are not reconciled to God; they know not in the world what to do, they
have no heart to go in unot God, for their consciences now tell them plainly,
that they are in the estate of enmity, and wrath. But even now, though the
foundations of the earth be shaken, the assured person, who knows God is
reconciled to him, knows also that his foundation of love stands sure and firm,
and through all, does he make his address unto the God of his mercies, and
shall find acceptance with him.

7. Lastly, It is that which will wonderfully enlarge your graces; It will
wonderfully enlarge our Graces.
the Apostle delivers it in the general, that the knowledge of the love of
Christ, is a means by which we come to be filled with all the fullness of God.
Ephesians. 3. 19. See but Luke 7. 38. You shall find that much was there forgiven;
the woman, though a great sinner, was graciously reconciled; what follows on
this, she loved much, she wept much, she humbled her self much, her affections
to Christ; her tears for her sins, her humility of spirit, all of them are set
down as exemplary copies; this is it, which will make the light of our Moon, to
be as the light of the Sun; and our light of the Sun, as the light of seven
days.

You may perhaps reply unto me, this evidence that God is reconciled to us
(which is so excellent in it self, and produces such effects) were a very
heaven upon earth, if we could attain unto it. But what means should we use,
that we may at length enjoy it: Means to attain it.
I con^ecture thus, that the means of obtaining it, are twofold, Internal,
External. The Internal means are three, viz. Conscience, the Spirit of God, and
Faith; for all these have in them a reflexive, and an evidencing virtue or
power.

1. Then, you must get your consciences renewed: Conscience, Get your
Consciences renewed.
absolutely considered, has a reflexing power, it can look on our natural acts
and conditions; but it must be conscience renewed, which must testify of the
spiritual estate, and that God is reconciled to you. The testimony or evidence
of conscience renewed, is (you know) syllogistical, and nothing else but the
echo of the word, v. g. whosoever truly repents of sin, the Lord is reconciled
to him; this is the proposition of the word, as you may read in Hos. 14. 1, 2,
3. They are described, as acting the parts of true penitents; and then v. 4. I
will love them freely: So Jer. 31. 19. Ephraim is turned, and repents, and then
v. 20. Ephraim is a dear child, and a pleasant Son; he is earnestly remembered,
and sure mercy is his; (.i.) Ephraim is reconciled, and dearly loved of God.
Here renewed conscience assumes, But I do unfainedly repent, I do truly mourn,
and forsake sin; and now with assurance, it concludes by way of evidence and
testimony, Therefore the Lord is reconciled unto me, he does freely and surely
love me. Obj. But it is objected, Conscience may be deceived; it may assume
without ground, and so deludingly conclude the matter. Sol. I grant that
conscience may be erroneous in its grounds, but conscience as renewed, and
concluding as a renewed conscience, will not delude you, nor err; for
conscience renewed, concludes not upon an empty imagination, but upon a solid
examination of the heart and life. It finds that integrity in the heart, and
that uprightness in ordering the life, which does answer the word of God; And
reading that the Lord loves the upright, and that he will show his salvation to
him that orders his conversation aright: Now upon search, finding this habitual
and actual uprightness, it concludes, Surely I am the person whom the Lord
loves, and to whom he is reconciled.

2. You must get the spirit of God: The Apostle in Romans 5. 5. Get the spirit of
God.
says, that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost; so
that if ever you would know the love of God unto you, you must have the spirit
of God: the spirit of God has many operations given unto him, as that he
inlightens the mind, humbles the heart, sanctifies it, and then that he seals
and comfort it; and as these effects, so the order of them is observable; he
does not first of all seal or assure, and then inlighten, and then sanctify,
and then humble; but he first inlightens, humbles, sanctifies and converts the
soul, and then assures and comforts it: Peruse Romans 8. you shall find, that the
witness of the spirit that we are the children of God, v. 16. follows the
spirit of bondage, and of adoption, and of supplication, v. 15. and the
quickening of the spirit, v. 11. and a leading of the spirit, v. 14. So that if
ever you would be assured that the Lord is reconciled to you, you must get his
spirit convincing, humbling, renewing, and leading you; so much evidence as you
have of holiness, so much assurance you may build on of Gods reconciled favor
unto you. Obj. But here also it is objected, we may thus be cozened with
Enthusiasms, taking a fond dream and delusion, for a witnessing or testimony of
Gods spirit. Sol. I answer, this is a fond and ridiculous exception; for the
spirit of God (as S. Ambrose speaks) can neither deceive, nor be deceived. The
sealing or assuring testimony of Gods Spirit, is never Nudum nor Nudatum
testimonium; but as it is a seal to a deed drawn, (I mean an heart first
written over with renewing graces;) so in the sealing, it always produces
more tender and lively operations of holiness, in all good works.

3. Lastly, If you would get assurance of Gods love reconciled unto your souls,
you must get Faith. Faith is the eye, by which we Get Faith.
look on God, and it is that light, by which we see God looking on us: How did
Simeon see Christ to be his Savior? Or Paul know that Christ loved him, but by
Faith? There are two ways by which Faith can and will bring the soul to see or
know God reconciled unto it: One is, by and in Christ; there is no seeing of a
reconciled God, but in a Mediator, and therefore Christ is called so often our
Peace, our Atonement, our Reconciler: The other is, by and through the
Promises, which is therefore called the Covenant of Grace; q. d. sets forth,
and presents God unto us, as graciously reconciled. If you have so much faith
as will bring you to Christ, to know him, to embrace and accept of him, to rely
on him, you may with safest confidence conclude and be persuaded, that God is
your reconciled God: For God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself.

2. The external means of obtaining assurance are: 1. Conscionable External
means. Diligent Application of our selves to the Word.
and diligent application of our selves to the Word. The word of God is both
the instrument of our Regeneration, and of our Consolation; and is not only
productive of faith, as it is an adherence, but able also to produce it, as it
is an evidence: and therefore, as you read that faith in acceptance depends on
the word, Romans 10. 17. so we read that faith in assurance flows likewise from
it. 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name
of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. And as the Word
is oftentimes called a Word of Faith, so it is sometimes called a Lip of Peace.
Isa. 57. 19. q. it produces an assurance from which that peace does flow. 2.
And to the Sacrament. The Sacrament has, I confess, many To the Sacrament.
ends; and it is (as the Word of God is) an Organ or Instrument of the Divine
spirit, for much good unto believing souls. Among the rest, it has a singular
virtue to breed assurance of Gods love, and therefore it is called, a Seal in
To. 4. 11. In it Christ Jesus (in whom God is reconciled) is most distinctly
represented in his Passion, as making peace by his blood for our souls: In it
the same Christ Jesus is particularly offered and applied unto us, with all the
benefits and efficacies of his person: Take, eat, this is my body which was
given for you, 1 Cor. 11. 24. As if God should say, As surely as I give thee
this bread and wine, so I give thee my Son, and the purchase of his death, even
reconciliation, and pardon, and mercy. A believing celebration of the Sacrament
is a most admirable means to remove our doubts, and to establish our hearts
with an Fervent and patient Prayer.
assurance that God is reconciled unto us. 3. Fervent and patient Prayer;
prizing the favor of God, as David did, Psalm. 63. 3. Hungring and thirsting
after it, as he hid, Psalm. 106. 4, 5. And thus continuing to seek with
diligence, being withal tenderly careful in our hearts and ways to please the
Lord; we shall have the desires of our Souls crowned with the testimonies of
his love here, and with the full glory of his face, and favor hereafter.

Luke 15. 21, 22, 23. 21. And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.
22. But the Father said to his servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it
on him, and put a Ring on his hand, and Shoes on his feet.

23. And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat, and be
merry.

These words contain in them. 1. The real acting of a penitential intention:
The matter whereof, in his humble and sad confession, I have insisted on
already, when I touched on v. 18, 19. Now I shall observe a little more from
the circumstance and manner of it. 2. The strange alteration of his condition:
The heart of man never alters from sin to its prejudice; the best courses ever
draw after them, the best comforts. While he was a prodigal, he had neither
bread to eat, nor Rags to cloth him, nor house to lodge him, much less Jewels
to adorn him, and feasts to entertain him: But now he becomes a penitent, here
is a Father to admit him into a house, to put the best Robe on his back, and
the Ring on his finger, and Shoes on his feet, and likewise to provide meat,
even the choicest for his belly. Before I touch on these, distinctly and
particularly, there are some Propositions, which I will briefly touch on, v. g.

Doct. That, no not the kindest expressions of mercy do silence a The kindest
expressions of mercy, do not hinder an humble confession of sin.
truly penitential heart, from an humble confession of sin; Kindest mercies
draw out humblest confessions: The Father pities, meets, embraces, kisseth this
penitential Prodigal. What does he? rise up and slight all that has been evil?
Oh no! mercy melts him down, and he confesses with tears, Father I have
sinned, etc. q. d. What is this, that thou should so easily, so freely, so
m^rcifully behold so sinful, so unworthy a wretch as I have been? As David,
when God declared unto him the intentions of his further mercies, for him and
his posterity: He sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God? and
what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto? So is it with the true
penitent, upon the Declaration of pardoning and accepting mercy. Now, O Lord
God, who am I? I, who have done so wickedly, yet to be remembered so graciously?
The same you find in Paul, who, though he received a testimony of his pardon
and acceptance, by a messenger graciously dispatched from Jesus Christ himself,
Acts 9. 17. Yet he does most frequently, and humbly acknowledge and confess the
kinds and greatness of his former transgressions.

There is (for the time) a twofold Confession. 1. Antecedent, There is a
twofold Confession. Antecedent. Consequent.
which is that humbling way, which God designs for the assecution of mercy. See
Prove. 28. 13. and 1 Jo. 1. 9. To make us indite, and condemn our selves, that
he may acquit and pardon us. 2. Consequent; which is that judging, and
self-condemning way, after mercy is obtained: The sight of mercy breeds four
notable effects in a true penitent; 1. Much Admiration, (Oh, that God should
look on me!) 2. Much Detestation, (Oh, that God should ever pardon me!) 3. More
contrition, (Oh, that I should sin against such a God;) 4. More Confession, (I
have sinned, and done very foolishly to sin against a God much in mercy.)

2. This consequent confession, which follows the expressions or Consequent
confession has these qualities. It is an ac-^ knowledgment of sin, with more
compunction.
testimonies of pardoning mercy has these qualities. 1. It is an acknowledging
of sin, with more compunction of spirit: Sight of pardon does not only open our
lips, but our eyes, and fetches forth not only words but tears; the heart does
break out, when mercy breaks forth: The heart never confesses sin with more
filial grief, then when it apprehends sin, much sin discharged with a paternal
love: the wind breaks the clouds, but the Sun melts them most into showers, so
etc. 2. It is an acknowledging of sin, with more indignation: The grea^er mercy
makes a penitent With more indignation.
to be the sharper Judge; the more God is now pleased with him, the more is he
displeased with himself, for sinning against him. When God remembered his
Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 60. then did the penitential Israelites remember their
ways with shame. v. 61. And when he made it known to them, that he was
pacifyed toward them, then were they confounded, and never opened their mouths
more, v. 63. 3. It is an acknowledging of sin with more With more aggravation.
aggravation: Servile confessions are usually more deceitful and partial; as
Adam did acknowledge his sin, but puts it on Eve; no co^fessions are so free and
full, as such which arise from the apprehension of mercies. David got his
pardon for a great transgression; but then ho^ exact is he in the distinct
accusation of himself, and humble acknowledgment of his sin, in all the
articles and circumstances of it? Psalm. 51. 4. It is an acknowledgment of sin,
with more detestation. Evidence of pardon produces two With more detestation.
effects: One is, more ardent affection of love to God; Another is (which
necessarily follows) a deeper hatred of sin, which opposed so gracious a
goodness. All that good which God mentions in the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 25. to
the end of v. 30. produced a better remembrance of former evils, and also a
deeper loathing of themselves for their iniquities, v. 31. As Job upon Gods
appearing to him, and conferring with him, now abhors himself in dust and
ashes: So the penitent upon the manifestation of divine favor, does more
acknowledge his vileness, judge his follies, and abhor his iniquities; it is ever
true, that the greatest mercies set the heart at greatest distance with sin.

But now it is demanded; Why should the expressions of mercy elicite confession
of sin, if it be pardoned? why any more confession? Reasons though hereof be
many. 1. Piety in man is Reasons of it. Piety in man is not opposite, but
subordin^te to pity in God.
not opposite, but only subordinate to Pity in God. Divine love does not
destroy, but increase duty: Assurance follows the habits, and always advances
the acts of grace: As it is our duty to seek our pardon by confession, so also
to carry away the same with continued confessions; confession of sin is not a
transient, but a constant duty; As the Mathematicians speak of a Line, That it
is not punctum, but fluxus punctorum; so I say of any duty, It is not one
indivisible act only, but an act repeated: to believe is a duty, in which one
act only is not enough, for I must still keep my eye upon Christ. So to confess
sin, is a duty not done altogether, because once done; but still to be done,
because a duty to be done: though God be pleased to forget, yet it is our duty
to remember. But secondly, By confession of sin, after remission and testimony,
Mercy is now acknowledged to be mercy.
mercy is now acknowledged to be mercy: What a man may speak in straights is
one thing, what in free circumstances, when extra aleam, is another. Many a man
cries out for mercy, who perhaps scarce will give mercy all the glory
afterward. But when we are pardoned, and yet confess sin, we do really profess,
That it was not Worthiness in us, but only Goodness in God, that pardoned. No
man can more fully give the glory of his pardon to sole mercy, then he who does
confess his sins after mercy: What is this confession of sin, but as if the
person should say, O Lord, to me, indeed, nothing did belong but shame and
confusion; for I, for my part, have thus and thus sinned against thee, and
deserved thy wrath, but it was mere mercy that saved and pardoned me? 3. The
more pardoning mercy God shows, The more humility is thereby wrought in the
heart; The more pardoning mercy, the more Humility
for who can behold much pardon, but withal must know, it was much sin that
has that much pardon? He has greater cause of shame, because all this while a
God of such mercy has been offended: So that here is more cause for the heart
to abase it self and to confess its own vileness. 4. Upon New, and more grounds
of confession do arise
gracious remission, more, and new grounds of Confession do arise: Before I am
pardoned, I confess my sins, because God requires confession, and also because
he does upon a right confession promise Remission. When I am pardoned, more
reasons of Confession are upon mercy, namely, mercy granted, and mercy sealed.
O then! have I not more cause to confess my sinful vileness, having tasted of
most unspeakable goodness in the pardon of it?

Does the penitent person humbly confess his sins after the Use Upon sense of
pardon let us do so.
pardon of them? Why, let us (if any of us think that we are pardoned) do so
too: It Is a truth, that of all things we are most willing to forget our sins; we
have much ado to keep our thoughts on them in a penitential way (its death
almost to some men to think on their sins thus) and in case if by a little duty
we have got the least hope of pardon, we ordinarily put those sins off from any
future solemn Confessions. This I conceive arises from two causes; the one is
the sensible influence which sin (often to be thought on) imprints on the
conscience. After considerations of sin, we have usually most bitterness and
trouble, which we willingly would not feel. Another is an ignorance of the
power and use of pardoning mercy; which as it brings Rest, Peace, so most
hearty grief and confession: I will say to Such as fa^l in after confession. It
is suspicious whether ever they had any Pardon at all. Or whether they ever
truly repanted or no.
men presuming on pardon, and yet failing in an after confession of their sins,
1. It is suspicious whether ever they had any pardon at all, or real assurance
thereof; forasmuch as they fail in this after effect of confession, which is
always the more increased by the greater evidence of divine mercy. 2. It is
suspicious whether they ever truly repented or no; for as much as true
repentance does incline us to go over and perfect all the acts and branches of
Repentance, whereof confession, in a right manner performed, is not the least.

But for our parts, if any of us upon a penitential course have been so far
blessed as to see the face of God with peace, and have found any testimony of
his pardoning mercy, let us never cease to bless that mercy, and with mournful
and self-judging hearts to iterate and continue our confession of the sins for
which we have found mercy.

Motives hereunto are these, 1. We shall hereby the better prolong Mo^ives to
it. We shall hereby the better increase our assurance of mercy.
and increase our assurance of divine mercy: I conjecture that you shall in
your experience find this truth, viz. That assurance lives longest in a
believing Eye, an humble Spirit, and in a Soul accustomed to the strict
exercise of Repentance: the way to get assurance of pardon, is ever the best
way to preserve and enlarge Our Conscience will hereby acquit us for the
sincerity of our Confession.
it. 2. Hereby our Consciences shall most acquit us for the sincerity of our
confession: Antecedent acts do not always yield unto us that solid ground as
subsequent acts: As about our outward mercies, after prayers do more denominate
the celestial frame then former prayers, because those may be depending on
self-love and necessity, but the other springs out of spiritual love and piety,
and respects to divine glory. So is it in the business of confession of sin; to
confess under the beams of mercy is a better temper then to confess under the
strokes of Justice; it argues a more holy Ingenuity to acknowledge and bewail
our vileness, being discharged of wrath and punishment, then only to exclaim
either upon the Rack, or upon hopes to be taken off.

3. Hereby the frame of the heart is kept more tender against sin, The frame of
the heart is hereby kept more tender against sin.
as Ezra 9. 14. Should we again break thy Commandments? Continued sense of sin
produces four singular effects, and with much addition too; Most cordial
Thankfulness, Most tender Fearfulness, Most diligent Fruitfulness, Most careful
Tenderness. The daily judger of his former sins by a penitential confession, he
is the man who abounds most with the thankful Lip, the watchful Heart, the
fruitful Hand and tender Conscience. Two things make us hardened and careless;
Forgetfulness of Mercies from God, and of Sins against God. But no more of this
Assertion.

There is another implicit Observation from the carriage of the Father to this
penitential Prodigal upon his Confession. It is this, As there is nothing in
the Sons thoughts and expressions but his Sins, so there is nothing in the
Fathers Intentions and expressions but Kindness. The Son he thinks of his sins,
intends to leave his sins, and to confess them, and so he does; The Father he
thinks of mercies and compassions, intends to accept and pardon him; and when
he comes, he does not speak a word of his sins, but every expression is mercy,
and peace, and kindness; Fetch the best Robe, put on the Ring, etc. Whence I
conjecture this Proposition is observable;

That God takes no notice of our sins upon our true Repentance, Doct. 2. God
takes no notice of our sins upon Repentance, but expresses himself wholly in
love and kindness. God takes no notice of former sins. There is, Notitia
Intuitiva. Notitia Charitativa.
but wholly expresses himself in love and kindness. There are two Branches of
this Assertion; 1. One, that God takes no notice of former sins upon our true
Repentance. There is a threefold notice of sin in respect of God; 1. Notitia
Intuitiva; which is his all observing eye of Omniscience, from which nothing
can be hid; but every Creature, and operation of the Creature, whether open or
secret, is visible and manifest unto God: that distinction of known and
unknown, secret and open, has no place in God, to whose eye all things are
naked. In this respect the former sins of a penitent fall within Gods notice;
for the goodness of Divine Mercy does not blindfold the eye of Divine
Omniscience. 2. Notitia Charitativa; which is a notice of sins, as a kind
Creditor takes notice of Debts owing unto him, and set down in his book, his
eye is on them, and his Pen also to cross and dash them out. And in this
respect also God takes notice of former sins, namely, so as out of rich love,
and gracious favor to cross and forgive them: unless we will fondly imagine
that God forgives sins by hap-chance, at an adventure, never seeing and
considering what he does. 3. Notitia Vindictiva; which is a Judiciary notice,
as a Judge takes notice Notitia Vindictiva.
of the evil facts of a Malefactor to Condemn him, or to trouble and vex him.
In this respect, upon true Repentance, God takes no notice of former sins,
(.i.) either to condemn the penitent person for them, or, to upbraid him and
dishearten him by casting them into his dish, or hitting of him in the teeth,
as we speak Proverbially. Hence those phrases in the Scripture upon supposition
of Repentance, Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sin no more. Not that Repentance makes God forgetful (for he is no:
capable of such a defect as Oblivion) but that when men cease to sin, God will
cease to argue and speak with them after a Judicial manner for their sins. So
Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed;
ver. 22. All his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him; he means, in any harsh, judicial, and cutting way. More
such phrases there are, as, that he will cover our sins, cast them into the
depths of the sea, and cast them behind his back; and though they be sought
for, yet they shall not be found.

The second Branch is, that he expresses himself wholly in He expresses
himself wholly in love and kindness.
love and kindness; the which is most evident in Jer. 31. 19. when Ephraim
repented and confessed his sin, all the expressions now from God are full of
tender Love, Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? I do earnestly*
remember him still, (Ephraim thinks that I have forgotten him, that I regard
him not, but there is no such matter;) my bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy on him. Hos. 14. 2, 3. Israel is repenting, and confessing,
and praying, and how does God answer him? See v. 4. I will heal their
backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him.
Ver. 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel.

Yet here we must distinguish, 1. Twixt Gods expressions, which Distinguish
Twix^ Gods expressions. And the Penitents Apprehensions.
are always very gracious, gentle, closing up, comforting and reviving of the
penitent. And the penitents apprehensions, which by reason of several
principles in him, are sometimes misplaced and mistaken: God is just, and he is
a sinner; he is a penitent sinner, and God is merciful: Now whiles the penitent
apprehends his Sins only, and not his Repentance; or Gods Justice only, and not
his Mercy, that tender graciousness and loving kindness, is not so acquitted by
him in his apprehensions. Not that God is not really tender to him, but that
he, through mistake and error, apprehends it not so.

2. Again, you must distinguish Gods tender love and kindness as it is
considerable, in Divine promise, and in Humane sense and Distinguish of Gods
love* as it is considerable (...) Div^ne Pro^^^es and Humane sense*
feeling: You can no sooner repent, but God is wholly in terms of tender love,
if you will behold his behavior toward you in his Promises: In them indeed
you have the Idea, as it were, of his mind and affection; they are the right
glass to behold the face of his mercifulness in; through which, if you look,
you shall not find any one harsh word, or look, or intention toward a
penitent, but all his thoughts in them are thoughts of peace, and all his words
in them are lips of peace. Though the Samamaritan poured both Oil and Vinegar
into the wound, yet God, through his promises, pours out only the Oil of
gladness. But if you consult with his sense and feeling (which is out of the
road of Faith) then indeed this gracious tenderness is not so evident, but we
are apt, through incredulous hastiness, and ungrounded mis-judgings, to
exclaim with Zion, But my God has forgotten me; or with David, He hides away
his face from me: or with Job, (it was in the fits of impatience) He writes
bitter things against me.

3. Thirdly, You must distinguish of the penitent behaving himself, Distinguish
of the behavior, as a Penitent, or as a Delinquent.
either, ad modum penitentis, as a penitent, ad modum peccantis, as a
delinquent. Let him repent and keep on in the ways of repentance, he shall
meet with nothing from God but sweetness of love and mercy; every step of
righteousness is a path of peace and joy; but if he step aside, if he goes to a
by-Lane, he may quickly lose the sight of the City; if the arm or foot slip out
of joint, then indeed there is ache and pain, instead of ease and quiet; so, if
a penitent person do what is sinful, he must not think that God will appear in
that amiableness; for as God will frown on no man which is in a good way, so
will he smile Distinguish of Gods expressions of himself, and Satan's
representations of him.
on no man, if found in an evil path.

4. Lastly, You must distinguish of Gods expression of himself, and either
Satan's or our own unbelieving hearts representations of God: Before we repent
our own hearts and Satan represent God all in mercy to us, and when we do
repent, so far as our hearts are sinful, they are still guileful, and conjoyn
with Satan to represent God unto us all in Justice and terror. But a natural
and proper representation is one thing, and a preternatural and corrupt
representation is another thing. How the dispositions and actions of men may
present me in their due and real Entity to a man, is one thing; and how the
cunning lies, and artificial devices of an envious enemy may report me, this is
another thing. This then is the sense of the assertion, That when any person
does truly repent, God will not only not upbraid, and object unto him his sins,
but will graciously pass them over; and for his part, the penitent behaving
himself like a penitent, and judging of him aright, according to his nature and
promises, shall find all in love, graciousness, and kindness to him and for him.

Reasons whereof are these; 1. Upon true repentance sin is Reasons of it. Upon
true Repentance sin is pardoned.
pardoned: Repent, says S. Peter, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.
And he that forsakes his sin shall find mercy, Prove. 28. And Isa. 55. 7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and I will abundantly pardon: Whence I infer, If
sin be pardoned, then there is no voice from heaven to be heard but that of
Love and kindness. Indeed while we continue in sin, like Adam, we hear the
voice of God and are afraid; for then it is the voice of his wrath and
threatenings: but sin being pardoned, wrath is removed, God is reconciled, and
his voice now is only the sweet voice of the Gosp^l; not the thunders of Sinai,
but the glad tidings of Sion: Therefore, 2. God has said, That he will not God
will not break the bruised Reed.
break the bruised reed, and takes it ill from any to add afflictions to the
afflicted. Now there is no expression more observed by a penitent then Gods.
Gods expressions are bruising or raising; all is for comfort or discomfort, as
it comes from God; the least harshness from him would set back the penitent
into an overwhelming multitude of terrors, fears, and distractions, and
discouragements; the which the Lord likes not, having made the soul ^it for his
mercies. 3. Comfort is the proper expression for the penitent: As threatenings
are the most proper for an impenitent person, Comfort is the proper expression
for the Penitent.
so comfort for a penitent. It were a dangerous mistake to give a Vomit when a
Cordial is proper; binding up is proper for the broken in heart, and comfort
for mourners, and reviving for the contrite. Gracio^s expressions from God, are
the very thing which the penitent needs, his spirit cannot else live and uphold
it self. There are two things under which the spirit of man cannot well bear up
and sustain it self; One is, near and strong afflictions without Divine
strength; Another is, the quick sense of sin without the gracious sight of
mercies. As they are needful, so are they seasonable, for as much as 1. Satan
is most ready to fall f^ul upon the Soul, upon its Repentance, with strongest
accusations, falsest suggestions and oppressions, to overwhelm it with despair,
as on him in the Corinthians. 2. The Heart at such a time is most apt to fear
the worst, to suspect its own soundness and Gods kindness. 3. Nothing would
settle and quiet the Spirit of the penitent person more then Gods gracious
expressions: This is light in darkness, life in death, the only Restorative to
a sensible sinner, and a languishing soul. Therefore,

The first Use of this Point, shall be to imitate God in this Use Imitate God
in this kindness and goodness*
kindness of expression, and goodness of oblivion: When we see persons truly
penitential for former sins, as we must not call Evil, Good, so neither must we
call Good, Evil; if God will not mention former sins to a penitent, how dare we
to do it? It is an usual way of a sly and malicious person in his
detractations; Yea, he is so and so now indeed, but what was he heretofore? And
thus he digs up those old rotten corruptions with his malicious tongue, which
the penitent has long buried with many tears, and God has covered with much
mercy. It is an argument that thou art of a beastly nature, who art still in
the wounds and not on the sound parts. Speak against sin, and condemn it as
well in thy self as in others, with all ^it zeal, but spare at least the
converted and penitent sinner: Never open a wound which God has healed, nor
shamefully blaze the sin which God has mercifully pardoned. 2. You see the way
to have your sins covered and You see the way to have our sins covered and hid.
hid: Men upon sinful commissions devise many shifts, and colors, and arts to
keep their sins close and hid, as if the Sun could be muffled, or the Fire
sti^led, or the Wound not cured, would not break out; No, truly repent of sins,
and that is the best way for to get sins concealed as well as pardoned. Now the
Lord will not mention them; but if we continue impenitent, the Lord will set
our sins in order, they shall break out to our shame as they have broken out to
his dishonor.

But the Father said to his servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on
him, and put a Ring on his hand, and Shoes on his feet.
These words are a List of the special favors which were conferred The special
favors conferred upon the Penitential Prodigal.
upon the penitential Prodigal; where you have, 1. The Number of them, 1. The
R^be, 2. The Ring, 3. The Shoes; a suit large enough from top to toe. We need a
complete furniture, and God here bestows it. 2. The Quality of them; 1. The
Robe is the best; and 2. The Ring is precious; and 3. The Shoes are proper, and
fit, and the best. God gives unto his people what is most excellent, and what
is most useful. 3. The Order of them; first the Robe, and then the Ring;
because if the Allusion be to a Marriage, the Wedding Garment is ever put on
before the Wedding Ring. Or else because the Garment (which is the Robe) is
always more necessary then the Ornament (which is the Ring.) Or which is
choicest, because Interest in Christ, precedeth our Benefits by Christ. Again,
as the Robe before the Ring, so the Ring before the Shoes; not because the
Hands are more estimable then the Feet, but because our Feet can never tread
well with Shoes of Patience, until we first finger the Ring of Faith; we can
never go well, nor bear well, unless first we believe well.

I begin with the first of these, the prime Favor bestowed on The prime favor
bestowed upon the Prodigal. The matter of it. The Author of it.
the Prodigal; in which you have observable, 1. The matter of that favor,
called a Robe, and the Best Robe. What this Robe is, and why called the Best,
whether for Order, or for Dignity, or for Necessity, or all, we shall presently
discuss. 2. The Author of this favor The Father said* Why that phrase, the
Father? why not, God said? Surely because our mercies, choicer mercies, come
out of the hand of a reconciled God; they come from the Father of mercies, who
is also the God of all grace. And why no more then, The Father said? etc.
because saying from God is enough, it is as good as doing: his Imperative
saying, is a Causative saying; if he speaks the word, we are made whole; and
we, though naked, are clothed. The manner of conferring it.
3. The manner of conferring it, [He said to his servants, Bring it forth, and
put it (...) think the servants here are the Angels; Others (...) them to be
the Ministers of the Gospel. But why, says he, to his servants, bring it
forth, and put it on? is he not able to do it himself? True, God alone is able;
but he who for power is able alone to confer any grace, being Lord of all, in
wisdom thinks fit to confer and dispense Grace by the Ministry of servants,
that so the use of means should always accompany the dependence on his power:
But why, says he not, let the Prodigal put it on himself? I conjecture,
because, as God only has Grace, so he only can invest us with it; we can no
more dress our selves with spiritual abilities, then the child that is newly
born: God finds the Garment, and he also finds the hands to put it on; gives
Christ, and an hand of Faith to put him on; gives grace, and a will also to
receive it. If the Prodigal had been naturally able, as the Pelagians clamor
it, it had been enough that the Ga^ment had been brought forth, and showed unto
him as the best, and then he could have of himself put it on, but there is no
such matter; the Prodigal wanted not only a Robe to wear, but strength also to
put it on, and therefore the Robe is by his Fathers will, both represented to
him, and he invested with it by a Forinsecal Induition. So that you have at
this time, 1. The gift and the excellency of it. 2. The Author, or cause of it.
3. The means, or manner of Application of it. Touching the first, two questions
crave our resolution:

1. What this Robe or Garment is, which is here bestowed on What this Robe or
Garment is.
the returning Prodigal? Sol. There is, you know, a forefold Garment. 1.
Natural: Our Skin is the Garment that swathes our flesh and body. Job seems
to insinuate this, to be as a motheaten Garment, c. 13. 28. and a changeable
suit, c. 30. 18. The Text speaks not of it. 2. Civil: Such as we, wear for use
and distinction; nor of this does the Text speak. 3. Evil: The Apostle calls it
a Garment spotted with the flesh, Jude v. 23. and the Prophet styles it a
menstruous cloth, and S. Paul advises us to put it wholly off, Ephesians. 4. 4.
Spiritual: Which is of that regardand concernment The Spiritual Robe.
to the Soul, as a civil Garment is to the body; this is the garment of which
the Text does speak. This again is twofold, either 1. Imputed righteousness. 2.
Or Inherent righteousness, both of these are in Scripture expressed as
Garments, and we are often called to put them on, as Romans 13. Ephesians. 4. and (...)
in the Revelation is said to be clothed with the Sun.

The Robe, though as I conjecture in this place, is, that of imputed
righteousness, namely, the active and passive obedience of Of imputed
Righteousness. Put on by Faith. Compared to a Robe. For Necessity.
Jesus Christ, which we then put on, when by faith we receive Jesus Christ; and
it is well compared to a Robe or Garment. 1. For necessity; though all sorts of
Garments be not necessary, yet some are, partly, to cover our shame and
nakedness, and defects, that they appear not: before the fall of Adam,
nakedness was a badg of innocence, but after it, a reproach and shame; and
therefore God made our first paren^s Garments to cover their shame: In like
manner, if we would have our sinful, naked Souls, which are shameful in the
eyes of God and man, covered from the revenging eye of his justice, that our
nakedness appear not, Rev. 3. 18. Of necessity, we must be clothed with the
Robe of Christ's righteousness: Partly, To protect us from injuries of extreme
cold in the Winter, and violent heat in the Summer, etc. Of the same virtue, is
the Robe of Christ's righteousness to secure the Soul from the scorch^^g flames
of divine wrath, and the piercing terrors of a guilty and accusing conscience;
by the shadow of it, we enjoy peace unspeakable, and most delightful
tranquillity: To preserve and cherish natural heat and life; our Garments are
the warm Bed we walk in, and somewhat answerable to food for preservation: ^uch
is Jesus Christ, in respect of justifying righteousness, a very quickening
spirit, our life, and the stay thereof, and the spring of our sweetest
comforts, and refreshings in conscience; for what is justification but life
from the dead, mercy at the bar, pardon to a condemned person, God at one with
us, and we estated into his favor and happiness? 2. For For Ornament.
Ornament, Therefore you read of costly Apparel, of Purple, and soft Raiment,
of Clothing of wrought Gold, and Raiment of needle work, all which are
beautiful adornings, and set us out in a kind of Majesty and State. Does not
the righteousness of Christ do so? it is our comely and glorious Ornament,
which for the glory of it, is called the clothing of the Sun, and beautiful
Ornaments; ^uch as make us altogether comely, and lovely, without spot or
wrinkle, and very pleasant and precious: It is the choicest Jewel which the
Christian can wear. 3. For distinction: For Distinction.
Nations you know, are distinguished by their habits; and so amongst us, the
orders of Callings are, or should be differenced by variety of Garments. Thus
our profession of, and reliance only on the righteousness of Christ, does
distinguish us from all In^idels, Jews, Papists, who either deny the thing, or
else rely on something else.

2. But why is this Garment called the best Robe? Some think To the best Robe.
it is called Best, by reason of its antiquity; and therefore they expound
(...), Stotam primum, the first Robe, as if Adam had wore this Garment before
his Fall; but how he should get Christ's Garment (who in that estate neither
had, nor did need his person) I cannot yet conceive: Others interpret the
Bestness of this Robe, not so much by the antiquity, as by the excellency; For
excellency.
for it is a garment more excellent then any other in all the world: To show
its precedence, in respect of our ordinary Garments, is a mere idle and vain
labor; for indeed there is no comparison twixt them, because of different
kinds, and of vast disproportion. But frame the comparison with Garments, which
have some excellency in them, yet, as Solomon spoke of the daughter, she
surmounted them all; so here, etc.

First, Compare it with that Garment which Adam had in Inn^cency, yet this of
Christ's is better: Better if you consider the Compared wiih that of Adam in
innocence.
subjects, Christ and Adam; or the duration, for stability, or vigor, for our
benefit: The first Adam was a perfect man, but the second Adam was perfect God
as well as man; the righteousness in the one, though it was perfect pro statu,
yet it was both mutable, and incommunicable: Adam might, and did lose it, nor
did he derive it in the virtue and benefit of it to another, or in the matter
it self: But Christ's righteousness is immutable, and also communicable; it is a
Garment for the head, and for the members, and not in our keeping, but in his
own; and therefore not a changeable Suit, but a Garme^nt which shall never wax
old. Secondly, Compare it with the Garments which the high Priest did wear, it
is far more excellent then any of them. The Ephod, Compared with the Garments
of the high Priest.
which the high Priest was to wear, was made of white Linen, and it was large,
and set with many precious stones; and so also was the Breast Plate of
judgmentvery precious, and the Robe of the Ephod, which had the Pomgranats, and
the Bells of Gold; as also the Embroidered Coat which was curiously wrought of
most precious matter, and cunning workmanship. But far inferior to this
Garment of Christ's righteousness, of which all those Garments were but types
and shadows, but a Ceremonial adumbration of his substantial perfection,
suggesting that more admirable perfection, and excellency which was to be
believed, and found in Christ and his righteousness. Or thirdly, Compare it
with that holiness which we call inherent, because existing in us; Or with
inherent holiness.
though this be a rare and distinguishing, and excellent Garment; yet it is not
comparable to that of Christ's righteousness: Because 1. It wants much of
perfection: It is not the Sun, but a twinkling Star; there be many holes to be
picked in this Coat, it falls short for length and breadth; much corrup ion
clings about it; we know, and believe, and love, and obey, but in part. 2. It
wants exceedingly in respect of dignity and merit; we cannot get the blessing
for its sake; though it be via yet it is not causa. But the righteousness of
Christ, it is a most absolute and complete thing, and also eminently
meritorious; it is a full price, and deserves Heaven it self for us; we stand
perfect, recti in curia, before God in it; it covers all our defects, and
represents us altogether acceptable before the judgment seat. In a word, to sum
up all concerning this Garment: It is the best in respect, Of Divine
Designation; It is best in respect. Of Divine designation. Of Divine
acceptance. Of Comparison. Of our condition.
the wisdom of God appoints it as the choicest and chiefest: Of Divine
acceptance; He looks upon it with more favor then any other righteousness: Of
Comparison, with all others, as I have showed: And of our Condition, there is
not so proper, and so useful, and so meritorious a Garment for any Christian to
put on, as this.

Thus briefly of the excellency of the Gift. Now I proceed to the second
Branch, which contains the Author or Giver thereof, [The Father said, Bring
forth] as also the manner of Application of it. [He said to his servants, Put
on.]

1. The Author of this Righteousness (which is the best Robe) God is the Author
of it.
is God, and therefore it is frequently called the Gift of righteousness, Romans
5. 17. and the righteousness of God, Phil. 3. 9. Because it is a righteousness
of his giving. God is the cause of it, By giving of Christ to be our
righteousness, who is expressly said, of God to be made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. By giving unto us the means by which that
righteousness is communicated, viz. Word and Sacraments: By blessing these
means to work in us Faith to receive Jesus Christ, and so become partakers of
his righteousness; by imputing that righteousness of Christ unto us, upon our
believing, and so accepting of us to eternal life.

2. The manner of Application: Put it on him, says the Text. The manner of
Application.
There is a threefold Application of this Robe of righteousness unto sinners:
One, ex part donantis, which is God, the prime cause, who applies it to us by
Imputation, as you may evidently see in To. 4. R^. 5. A second, ex part
ministrantis, which are the means, through which the righteousness of God is
revealed, and likewise (by the effectual concomitancy of the Spirit) applied
unto us: The Ordinances of God are the Orb which carry the Sun of
righteousness. A third is, ex part recipientis: and the Application, or
putting on of this robe of righteousness on our part, is partly Sacramental,
when we are baptized into Christ, and profess publicly to receive him: partly
Spiritual, which belongs to that faith (which God alone implants) inabling us
to put on Christ, as the Scripture often expresses it.

I will now bring down all this to our selves, in some useful Applications: Use.
All that I will in^ist on at this time, shall be reduced unto two heads. 1.
For Examination; whether this best Robe be put upon us, yea or no. 2. For
Direction. 1. How to get it, 2. How to use For Examination.
and wear it. Examine your selves what Wardrobe you have? You have, I perceive,
many fassions, many habits; we know not how to Have you put on this Robe or no?
call them, whether civil, or uncivil, you shift so often: there is such a
vanity in man, that disposes his fancy to alterations; and besides that, there
is an extreme pride in persons, they must be in brave clothing, and mistake
their conditions, and abilities: though they lose their Reputation and their
Estate for it, They will wear after the best. Well, if you have such a mind to
rich Garments, what say you to the best Robe that ever any sinful person did
wear? what say you to the righteousness of Christ? have you put it on, yea or
no? Consider

1. It is such a Garment, that of all other thou need most: Our It is a
Garment that of all others we need most.
best Garments are many times superfluous, we need them not, we can attire our
selves, well enough without them; but this best Robe is the most needful; thou
can not live without it, nor may thou dye without it: How naked art thou
with thy filthiness, before the eyes of a pure God? And how at once may his
wrath pour out it self like fire, and consume thee, having no covering at all
to shelter thee? Friend (said he) to that intruder in the Gospel, How came
thou in here without thy Wedding Garment? When thou go to Prayer, or steps
to the Sacrament, or art giving up thy Soul into the hands of God, and have no
covering for any of thy sins; may not God in the same way of judgment say unto
thee, and bespeak thee: How do thou present thy self before me with all this
sinfulness? thou know that I am a God of purer eyes then to behold sin, and
there is no communion twixt light and darkness: I tell thee, that there is, No
acceptance of thy person without this Robe; the Lord cannot abide the sight of
thee without it, for thou can not but provoke him, as often as thou appears
before him in thy nakedness and vileness: No respect unto thy services; not
that the Lord does dislike any duty, but that the person must be first covered
with the righteousness of Christ, if he would have his offering to be accepted.
2. By nature we are born naked, utterly destitute of this By nature we are born
naked.
precious Robe. As for the nativity (said God to Jerusalem) in the day that
thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in Water to
supple thee, neither wast thou salted at all, nor swadled at all. Ezekiel. 16. 4.
Or as Christ to the Church of Laodica, Thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked: So we by nature, clothed only with rags of
corruption (with filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6.) and, as Joshua in Zach. 3. 3.
Clothed with filthy Garments, destitute of God, of Christ, of all
righteousness: as if you should see a naked child, born with Sores, and Boils,
and Plagues, and Leprosies, running and spreading from top to toe. 3. You are
of We are of no excellency without this Robe.
no excellency without this Robe: Then only we come to excellent Ornaments when
this is put on. All the Robes you get on you, are but the shrouds of dead men,
or like Velvet cast over an Hearse. As Solomon said of beauty in a foolish
woman, it is but as a Jewel in a swines snout: So we say of all other Garments,
they are Ornaments put on a base dead and loathsomesoul. 4. The Robe of There
is none like it.
Christ's righteousness, there is none like it, for thy good and benefit: For 1.
It is an Ornament as well as a Garment: All our acceptance It is an Ornament as
well as a Garment.
before God is as we are clothed with it, then are we clothed with the Sun,
now are we precious in his eyes; it makes us beautiful and lovely, and accepted
in the eyes of God. 2. It is armor as An Armor as well as an Ornament.
well as Ornament: For the preciousness of it, it is a vesture of pure Gold;
and for the strength of it, it is as a Coat of Mail: Let us put on the Armor of
Light, Romans 13. 12. We may by it, keep off the strongest accusations of Satan,
and stand even before the judgmentseat. I am black but comely, says the
Church, Cant. 1. 5. though in her self black, yet in this righteousness comely.
It can answer all our own imperfections, and all that Satan can object against
us, or the Law, or our own fearful hearts: Sins and imperfections, and defects,
cannot answer God; but a perfect righteousness can. 3. It is a Garment for
warmth as well as for sight: When we look on our selves and our own
righteousness, our spirits may dye within It is a Garment for warmth as wel^ as
for sight.
us; but peace and comfort ^low from the righteousness of Christ, it was
perfect, and meritorious, and accepted; and this will cheer the heart above
all, if we be found in Christ having his righteousness. There goes wonderful
virtue from the hem of this Garment, both to satisfy God, and to pacify the
conscience; as Jacob got the blessing with the elder Sons Garment, so do we get
all our mercies, and comforts, and blessings, by being clothed with the Robe
of Christ's righteousness.

But how may we know that we have put on this best Robe? How may we know that
we have put it on. Have we put off our own Rags.
Sol. I will instance but in three particulars to discover this. 1. If we have
put on Christ's Robe, we have put off our own Rags; (we have put them off, 1.
Affectu. 2. Conatu.) As it was with Joshua, Zach. 3. 4. His filthy Rags were
taken away, and then he was clothed with change of Raiment: So here, no man
can assure himself that he is clothed with Christ's righteousness, unless he
does dismantle himself of his own unrighteousness. Ephesians. 4. 21. If ye have been
taught as the truth is in Jesus; v. 22. Put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. v.
23. And put on that new man, etc. Romans 13. 12. Cast off the Works of Darkness,
and put on the Armor of light: For a man to imagine that he has the Robe of
Christ's righteousness, and yet to walk in the paths of unrighteousness, in
chambering and want^nness, in strife and envying, in all voluptuousness, and
beastliness, etc. No man, says Christ, sows a piece of new Cl^ath to an old
Garment, Mark 2. 21. It Is true, that none but sinners are clothed with this
Robe; but then it is as true, that no sinners are clothed with it, but strive
with all their might, to put off their sinful rags by hearty contrition, and
confession, and conversion. 2. Only ^aith puts on this Robe; Only faith, puts
on this Robe.
And therefore, as this Robe is called the righteousness of God, both for
designation, imputation, and acceptance; So it is also called the
righteousness of Faith: Not that Faith in a formal sense is our righteousness:
For Faith did not dye for us, no^ can Faith of it self merit for us; nor is
Faith of it self complete, but imperfect: but because it is the instrument
which apprehends Christ and his righteousness, and by which we put on Christ
with his righteousness. Have you Faith, or have you not? Nay, but deceive not
your selves, The Faith which puts on this righteousness, must be able, 1. To
deny our own righteousness, to take of all confidence in the flesh; Faith
cannot put on Christ's righteousness, until it has put off your own. 2. To see
a need of this righteousness; and to prize and desire to be found in it, above
and before all other; the Laodiceans must see that they are naked, and then buy
Raiment, Rev. 3. 3. To unite us to Jesus Christ: It must work in us, both
estimation (for our judgments) and acceptance (for our wills;) so that it must
make us one with Christ, and so we come to be clothed with the Garment of
Christ: But perhaps you can rest upon your own good meanings, works, innocence.
You are rich, and need not to borrow any Garment; you are united to your lusts,
and will not part with them for Christ, nor for all his Ornament. 3. This Robe
This Robe, and that of holiness are inseparable.
of righteousness, and that other of holiness are inseparable: It is granted,
that inherent holiness is not formally the same with imputed righteousness; it
is granted, that the one is in Christ, the other is in us; that the one is
perfect, the other is imperfect; that the one is meritorious, the other though
it be precious, yet it is not meritorious: Yet as the light, and heat of the
Sun, though the one be not the other, yer they go together; so the Robe of
righteousness, and the Robe of holiness go together; the new Garment is only to
be seen upon the new man. Therefore you read, that Christ is made not only
Righteousness, but also Sanctification: Righteousness, this is a grace without
us, whereby we are advanced; Sanctification, this is a grace wrought within us,
by which we advance and glorify God; that respects the State, this the nature
of the person: As Grace must reign through righteousness to eternal life, To.
5. 21. So also holiness must reign to everlasting life, To. 6. 22. The one as a
cause, the other as a means. Now then, as if thou can discern any light in
the morning, thou concludest that the Sun is risen, so if thou can discover
any true holiness in thy heart, thou may conclude that the Sun of
righteousness is risen: the appearing of holiness is a sign of the rising of
righteousness. Yea, the Prophet speaking of the Sun of Righteousness, says, He
shall arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. to intimate, That where
righteousness comes, there holiness comes. Ah! do thou find no change in thy
Nature, in thy Judgment, in thy Mind, in thy Will, in thy Affections? why (as
sure as the Lord lives) thou have not yet put on this Robe of righteousness.
Does Christ present thy person unspotted before God? and does he (think thou)
leave thy heart with all its spots and filthiness?

[And put a Ring on his Hand.]

This is the second favor conferred on the penitent Prodigal by his Father. A
Ring is such a piece of substance which is put on the finger, partly for
Ornament, and partly to testify Nuptial union and conjunction. S. Chrysostom
does conjecture, that the Ring in this place is, Nuptiarum insigne quibus
Christus Ecclesiam Sponsat, an emblem of the Espousals twixt Christ and his
Church. So that then we have this Proposition to insist on:

That God gives unto the penitent person a precious Faith, by Doct. 2. G^d
gives the penitent person Faith by which he is married to Christ.
which he is Espoused or Married unto Christ. There are three things, which
being explained, will give up unto us the full sense of this Assertion: 1. What
it is to be married unto Christ. 2. That Faith does Espouse and Marry a person
unto Christ; and what faith that is, and in what respect. 3. That the penitent
person has this faith.

Quest. 1. For the first of these; What it is to be Espoused or What it is to
^e married unto Christ.
Married unto Christ? (which is here signified by putting on the Ring.) Sol.
They who write of Marriage do conjecture that these six things concur unto it,
1. Mutuus Consensus, a mutual Consenting. 2. Mutuus Contractus, a mutual
Contracting; 3. Mutua Obligatio, a mutual Obliging; 4. Mutua Conjunctio, a
mutual Union and Conjunction; 5. Mutua Potestas, a mutual faculty or Right; 6.
Mutua Societas, a mutual use or Society. Translate this from a Civil to a
Spiritual consideration, and then to be married to Christ implies, 1. A Consent
to take or accept of Christ: Though knowledge of persons be necessary and ^it,
yet it is not sufficient to marriage It implies, A Consent.
without con^ent; for marriage ought to be a voluntary transaction of persons,
and in it we do, in a sort, give away our selves; but then this is not without
our selves; yea, and therein we do elect and make choice for our selves, and
therefore consent is a necessary concurrence to marriage. Now this consent is
nothing else but a free and plain act of the will, accepting of Jesus Christ,
before all other, to be its Head and Lord. Christ offers himself in the Gospel
unto a person, I am the only Savior of sinners, and Lord of all, designed to
be Priest, Prophet and King; art thou willing to accept of me? can thou like
of me before all others? do thou so? do thou make choice of me for thy
Savior and Lord? 2. A Contracting of the Soul with Christ: Contractus is
nothing A mutual Contract.
else but consensus explicatus, a contract is a consent expressed in words; but
then they must be words proper to make Marriage. They must not be verba dubia,
dubious words; as, I will marry none but you; but verba clara and affirmativa,
affirmative, I will marry you: for the Rule of the Casuists is good, Consensus
non datur per meram negationem. And as they must not be verba dubia, but
affirmativa, so they must not be verba futura and conditionata, hereafter, or
upon such a condition, but verba de presenti, I now accept or take, etc. Then a
man is Married unto Christ, when he does freely, and absolutely, and presently
receive the Lord Jesus. Not, I would have Christ if it did not prejudice my
worldly estate, ease, friends, etc. Or, hereafter I will accept of him, when I
come to dye, and be in distress; but now when Salvation is offered, now while
Christ tenders himself, I now yield up my heart and life unto him. 3. An
obliging of the Soul to Christ; for, ex contractu oritur vinculum; A mutual
Obligation.
some call this traditio, or, resig^atio: and therefore Marriage is a Knot or
Tie, wherein persons are mutually limited and bound each to other in a way of
Conjugal separation from all others; and this in Scripture is called a
Covenant. So when any one Marries Christ, he does therein discharge himself in
affection and subjection from all that is contrary to Christ; and solemnly
Covenants and binds himself to Christ alone: He will have no Savior and no
Lord but Christ, and to him will he cleave for ever; Simpliciter and
indissolubiliter, and persona, and statu, and tempore: It is not every
apprehension, nor every transcient approbation, but the Will must come to an
obligation, binding it self in a perpetual Covenant to Christ alone. 4. An
Union or Conjunction A Mutual Conjunction
with Christ: Before Marriage the persons were distinct, and had no other
relation but what was common to Nature; but upon Marriage two are made one
flesh, 1 Cor. 6. 16. This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, said Adam
of his Wife, Genesis 2. So when the soul is married unto Christ, not only in
respect of affection (for love unites) but likewise in respect of nature; he
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 17. That
Nature which is in Christ, it is participated of by him that is married unto
Christ; so that there does arise, upon this marriage, the nearest and dearest
relation of union that is in all the world. 5. A faculty of right or interest:
Indeed Christ's faculty over us is, facultas Dominii, and facultas Influ^ntiae;
A mutual Right.
a faculty of Dominion (he has a right to rule and guide us) and a faculty of
Influence, he has a right to teach and heal us: Such a faculty of Sovereignty
we have not over Christ; yet we have ^acultatem Juris, a faculty of Right or
Interest, which they call Jus in re, or as others, a faculty of propriety.
Though the Wife has not a power of authority over her Husband, yet she has a
power of propriety in her Husband; that as he can say, This is my Wife, so she
can say, This is my Husband. In like manner, whosoever is married unto Christ,
he has an interest in the person, in the condition of Christ; there has
passed such an entire, and proper, and peculiar, and mutual resignation, that
he may say as the Church in the Canticles, My Beloved is mine, and I am his:
The married unto Christ gives up the right of his soul and body unto Christ; O
Lord Jesus, all that I am, all that I have, all that I can do, is thine and for
thee. 6. Lastly, A mutual Society.
There is Society and ^se: As marriage infers with it Co-habitation and
Co-interest, they dwell together, and make use of either, both persons and
estates. Thus is it when any person is married unto Christ, there is a holy
society and fellowship of him with Christ; Christ dwells in him, and he dwells in
Christ; Christ delights in him, and he delights in Christ; Christ makes use of
him, and he makes use of Christ: If he wants grace, or mercy, or strength, or
peace, or comfort, why, says Christ, I am thine, I have them for thee, make
use of me: And if Christ would use him in any service, Lord, says the soul
that is married to Christ, If thou will have me to speak for thee, I will speak
for thee; If thou will have me to do for thee, I will do for thee; if thou will
have me to suffer for thee, I will suffer for thee; if thou will have me to dye
for thee; I will dye for the Name of Christ, said Paul. So that you see what
the Ring in the Text may import, namely, the marriage of the soul unto Christ,
and what that is.

Quest. 2. The next thing to be discussed is, What that is What it is which
marries us unto Christ, viz. Faith.
which marryeth us unto Christ? and that I told you was Faith: The principal
cause of this match is the Spirit of Jesus Christ, but the internally
instrumental cause is Faith. I know you know the several acceptations of the
word Faith; I take it in the Habitual sense, not in the Doctrinal, and there
too in the choice and eminent part; I mean, as restrained to Justifying and
Saving: of all other Graces in man, this is it which makes How Faith does it.
the match and draws up the marriage twixt the Soul and Christ. And the manner
how it does effect it, I conceive may be thus:

1. By discovering the preheminent excellencies of Christ: For By Discovering
the excellencies of Christ.
till the soul can discern a better excellency in Christ then in any other
thing, it will never yield to match it self unto him. Now Faith has two
Virtues; One is, to make the mind rightly to judge all sinful and worldly
things as base and vile, dr^ss and dung (Phil. 3.) in comparison of Christ.
Another is, to represent unto the soul the real and surpassing excellencies of
Christ. It is the Jacobs Staff which makes us to take the height, and depth,
and breadth of the excellency of Christ; that there is no Beloved like Christ;
he is the Choicest of ten thousand; such a one in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily; full of Grace; the holy One of God; the brightness of the Fathers
Image; the Lord of Life; the Prince of Glory; the most excellent in himself,
and most complete and absolute for the Redemption and Salvation of a sinner.

2. By subjecting the Judgment to the assent and approbation of By subjecting
the Judgment to the Approbation of his excellency.
this excellent truth, That none is like Christ for a sinner; That he is the
only Savior and Redeemer; and that such an offer of Jesus Christ unto a
sinner, is worthy of all acceptance; the sinner is made for ever if he can get
Christ, and he perishes for ever if he enjoyes him not. As a woman in a
disposition to Marriage, she considers of the person, and his qualities, and
condition, and thinks often, This man has choice parts in him, a good estate,
I cannot better my self if I refuse him, I see I may do very well if I match
unto him. Answerable effects does Faith work in the soul, it does make the
mind of a man to see the superlative excellency of Jesus Christ, and to fall
in liking of him and them. Come, I need a Savior; Christ is he, and none else;
he is the Prince of my peace, the Lord of my life; his Nature is excellent,
Redemption sufficient and proper, Laws righteous and good; it is my wisdom, it
is my safety, it is my salvation to accept of him, and to bestow my soul on him.

3. By inclining the will to consent and embrace the Lord Jesus: For true Faith
is not a mere notion, but an operating grace; it By inclining the will to
embrace him.
is as light in the mind, and as heat in the will; there it is a singular
representation, and here it is an effectual inclination. It is granted, that to
embrace, or to be willing, or to consent, are the acts of the will; but to
embrace Christ with a conjugal consent, to be willing to bestow our selves on
him, this comes from faith enabling the Will so to will. Not by way of
coaction, for the Will cannot be compelled; nor does Faith work in a violent
way, though it works in an effectual way, enabling the Will to a free election
of Christ before all others, (i.) predominant causes in Christ, to accept of
him, and to resign up to him, rather than to sin, or world, or any thing else;
and when the Will is wrought upon, so as to accept of Christ in his Person, and
Offices, and Estates, the soul is now matched or married to Christ by Faith. It
bestows it self, and gives Christ all the right, and cleaves unto him in an
indissoluble bond of affection and service.

Quest. 3. The third resolveable is, concerning the Subject of this The subject
of this faith.
faith, who has it? The Text resolves that, by telling us, that the Ring was
put on the returning Prodigals finger, so that the penitent person is he who
wears the Ring, (i.) who is an espoused The penitent person is only married
unto Christ.
or married person by Faith unto Christ: You may be married to your Lusts, and
to the World, though you be impenitent; yet none but Penitents are married unto
Christ by Faith. Not that Repentance goes before Faith in Christ, (for no Grace
habitually considered, is in time before another, though in operation it be:)
Nor that Repentance is the cause of Faith; for it is a most improper Assertion,
to make one Grace to be the cause of another Grace, when as every Grace does
come only from the Spirit of Reasons.
Christ as the cause. But because, 1. The penitent person is only the The
penitent person only has faith.
subject of Faith which does marry us to Christ; no person is a believer, who
is not a penitent person: The Prodigal, while only a Prodigal, he has neither
Garment nor Ring; but when he is a returning Prodigal, then he has both, and
not till then. 2. Only penitent persons can evidence their faith and espousal
unto Only penitent persons can evidence their faith.
Christ: Another, who is impenitent, can no more evidence his interest or title
to Christ, then an Alien that never heard of this Land, can evidence or
conclude his title and right to any Goods or Chattels of yours. The title to
Christ is proper only to the Penitent; for them he lived, and for them only
he died.

Now if any should yet further demand, Why the Lord should Why will the Lord
give this to penitent persons. To convince the world, there is no lo^s in
leaving sin. To support the soul of the heavy laden.
give unto penitent persons a precious faith to espouse them to Christ? I
conjecture, briefly, that these may be the Grounds or Reasons. 1. To convince
all the world, that there is no loss in leaving of sin. Abjice tectum and toll
coelum, said one. The repentant person forsakes his sins, but presently finds a
Savior; he is divorced from that which would damn him, and by faith is
espoused unto one that will save him. 2. To support the soul of the penitent,
which of all other is most sick and heavy laden: It is most sensible of sin,
and guilt, and Gods displeasure, on all which it cannot long look alone. If the
penitent person had not faith to see a Mediator, he would not long have an eye
to look upon his transgressions. It is a truth, that Repentance could never act
it self, unless the penitent person had faith to act it self too. The sorrow in
Repentance would infinitely sink into despair, and the forsaking of sin would
turn into a forsaking of God, if Faith saw not a Mediator for Transgressions,
and a merciful God through him. 3. Lastly; The Lord intends singular mercy to
the penitent God intends singular mercies to the Penitent.
persons; to perform many precious promises of pardon and grace and comfort
unto them, and therefore gives them Faith, unto which all the Promises are
made. The promises may be considered two ways; either in respect, 1. of
Intention, so they look unto the Penitent; of Application, so only Faith is
the Hand in the Penitent which actively applies the Promises. Again, you know
that the Promises of God are Yea, and Amen in Christ, (i.) they are all sealed
by him, and made good unto us by him; so that first we must have Christ, before
the Promises made good unto us by Christ: And therefore God gives unto the
penitent person the Grace of Faith to espouse him unto Christ, that so he may
settle upon him all the Dowry (upon the Marriage) of the rich mercy and good in
his precious Promises.

The main Use which I will make of this assertion, is, To try our selves,
whether we have this precious Ring of Faith, (a Ring Use. Try our selves
whether we have this precious faith. A necessary trial, if we consider, The
paucity of true believers.
more precious than that of Gold,) put on our fingers, yea, or no. It is as
necessary a demur as ever you were put unto all your days, whether you
consider, 1. The paucity of true believers. All men have not faith, says the
Apostle: All men? nay, very few; Who has believed our report? said the
Prophet: We preach, we offer Christ unto you, we beseech you to accept of the
Lord of Life, to give up your hearts and lives unto him; but who believes our
report? We tell you that Christ is better than all the world, his blood is
better than sin, it is better to love and serve him than world or sin; but who
believes our report? Men care not to know the excellencies of Christ, they
prize him not, they care not to hear him speak in his Ordinances, they will in
no wise consent and yield to his terms and conditions. 2. The Vtility The
utility of it.
of it. To the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if we come without our
Wedding-Ring, it will be as sad a day to us, as to him who came without his
Wedding Garment. We do not only receive no good at the Sacrament; for we have
neither hand nor mouth to take and eat, if we have not Faith; not title at all
to the intrinsecal benefits by Christ, if we have not faith in him. Nay, we
occasion much evil and Judgment upon our selves, we adventure to eat and drink
our own damnation, not discerning the 1 Cor. 11.
Lords body: And righteously may the Lord judge us for coming to his Sacrament
without Faith, for as much as in so doing, we do not only presume against an
express prohibition that we should hold off, but also we do (at the least
interpretatively) assay to make God a Liar, and a favourer of all villainy, as
if he would put his Seal of Pardon and mercy, and for all the good of his
Covenant in Christ, to a wicked, impenitent, and unbelieving sinner. 3. The
Hypocrisy of our hearts, so apt to deceive themselves with shadows in stead of
substances, not The hypocrifie of our hearts.
considering, that Satan can delude a man with the show of any grace. Every
Ring is not a Ring of Gold; nor is every Faith a precious and unfeigned Faith:
There is a thing called Presumption, which is bold enough, but it is not Faith;
and there is Knowledge of Christ, as revealed in the Word, which a man may
have, and utter too, and yet not have Faith; there is Profession of Faith, for
the truth against errors, and yet the Grace of Faith is another thing. A man
may have so much faith as to believe that there is a Christ, and to confess his
excellencies, and in some sort to see his own necessities of Christ, yea, he
may begin to article and capitulate as the Young Man, and yet break off, and be
far enough from a Faith which does indeed espouse and marry his soul unto
Christ. 4. Lastly, The misery and danger: Suppose The misery and danger.
you do deceive your selves, and in the event it appears that you are not
espoused to Jesus Christ by Faith, that you never gave your hearts unto him,
that there never was any conjugal Union and Bond twixt you; if thou indeed
should live Christless, and die Christless, what helpless, hopeless,
happyless person art thou?

But you will reply, We trust that we are truly penitent persons, and that God
has given unto us such a Faith, whereby we are really married unto Christ.
Sol. Well; if that be so, you have great cause to bless the Lord: And that you
may not be deceived therein, I will deliver unto you, some proper effects which
that Faith produces in every soul that is indeed married unto Qualities
produced by an espousing faith.
Christ. There are four Qualities produced by an espousing Faith. 1.
Estimation: Let the Wife see that she reverence her Husband, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5. She must both acknowledge Estimation.
him as a Head, and honor him as a Lord, ju^^e and esteem of him (in a
relative consideration) above all other. The like effect does Faith produce, if
it espouseth us to Christ, it sets up Christ above all, accounts of him as most
excellent, judges of all other things but as dross and dung in comparison of
him, will part with all for to get Christ: The beauties of Christ are glorious
in the eyes of every believer; Christ does not seem a mean thing, an ordinary
or common thing; but he is the Pearl, the Sun of Righteousness: My Lord, and my
God, says Thomas. In a word, Faith (if right) exalts the Excellency of Christ,
and the Authority of Christ; the Excellencies of his Person, and the Authority
of his Will and Laws. 2. Election: Election.
We make choice of Christ before all other. Though sins, though the pleasures
and profits of the world, proffer themselves, yet, as the Martyr at the stake,
None but Christ: Or as Paul, I desire to know nothing but Christ crucisied: So
the true believer, Give me Christ, I have enough, I have that which is best of
all; he is the the Optimum and the Vnicum to Faith. 3. Affection: Conjugal
Affection.
Faith ever produces conjugal Love. It were a monstrous evil, for a woman to
marry a man, and no^ love him; and it were an adulterous thing, for her to love
any more then her own Husband. Marriage does, by way of Duty, infer and draw
with it two qualities of Love; one is exclusive, and it is an unity of Love;
the other is intensive, and it is a redundancy of Love: Thus is it with us; if
Faith has espoused us unto Christ, it does kindle in us a love unto Christ;
not a divided love, a love to Christ, and a love to sin; a love to Christ, and
a love to the world; but an united love; none is by us esteemed and loved as
our Lord, but Christ: Nor does it satisfy it self with a remiss and diminutive
love, which may serve any inferior object; but as Christ is in himself the
most excellent object, so Faith produces such a degree of love which bears
some proportion with that object, viz. a superlative love, a love of Christ
above all, and more then all; more set on Christ than on any other object,
which yet may lawfully be loved more than our father, or mother, or wife, or
children. Do we find this love in our hearts to Christ, against all, and above
all? Nay again, True conjugal love infers with it a Love, 1. of Complacency, to
delight in the thing loved; 2. of Society, to be with the person loved: Is it
so with us? what delght have we in Christ? in his person, in his excellencies,
in his works, in his ord^^ances? Is it our best joy to hear him, to see him, to
speak with him. 4. Subjection: I confess that marriage does not make the
Subjection.
woman a slave, yet by virtue thereof she is bound to submission or subjection;
she does in a sort give away her self unto the disposal of another in the Lord:
Thy desire, says God, Genesis 3. 16. shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee. If thou have a Faith which does espouse thee unto Christ, that Faith
brings thy heart into the obedience and subjection of Christ. It subjects thy
will to Christ's will, and thy judgment to his truths, and thy desire to his
rule, and thy works to his laws. If Christ would have thee be and do one thing,
and thou will be and do another, that thy will is still contradicting of
Christ's will, and thy way is still contrary to his way: Though a man may be
married to such a stubborn and perverse piece, yet Christ is not; for all that
are married unto him by Faith, have in some measure wrought in them, an
obediential spirit, desirous to know the mind of the Lord, and willing to live
godly in Christ Jesus. Now this subjection which is the effect of an espousing
Faith, has these properties in it, viz. 1. Universality; the wife is subject
in all things: 2. Diligence; we must take care to please him: 3.
Delightfulne^^; it must be no burden: 4. Constancy; as long as we live, we
must be subject to the will of our Lord.

The last Use shall be for Exhortatiou, That in case you find Use 2.
Exhortation.
this Ring of Faith, by which you are espoused unto Christ, given unto you,
then be very careful to wear it, and to bring it along with you to this next
Sacrament. We usually put on our Robes and our Rings, when we come to any
solemn Feasts: The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Feast of good things,
there is Christ, and mercy, and redemption, and sanctification, and what not
for the soul; but bring your Ring with you; Christ looks that you should come
with it, and you can do no good at the Sacrament, if you have not the Ring on
your hand: Though you put forth your hand, yet if the Ring be not on it, the
hand may take the bread, but the Ring is it which only can take Christ;
therefore bring Faith with you to the Sacrament. Joseph's Brethren must bring
Benjamin with them, or else they must not see his face, nor should get food.
And let your faith work upon Christ all along; on the love of Christ, on the
sufferings of Christ, of the Covenant of God with you in Christ, of the offer
of Christ unto you, (now under seal that he is yours;) seal with your Ring, put
your Seal to the Covenant and Deed of Christ and God; and feed on him, believe
on him, draw from him; This is my Lord, this is my Savior, this blood was shed
for me, my Christ will do me good, I shall be saved by his blood, reconciled by
his blood, healed and preserved by his Spirit.

And shoes on his Feet.
This is the third Favor which is bestowed upon the repenting Prodigal; his
Lips were kissed, his Back was clothed, his Hand was adorned, and now his Feet
are shod; the penitent person is only the complete person. But what these What
is meant by shoes on his feet.
Feet are, and what the Shoes which are put-on them, is a point differently
conjectured of by Interpreters. Sol. Not to waste time, both the Words are
Metaphorically to be understood for some things which do in some respects
answer to Feet, and Shoes. Feeet are taken sometimes, 1. for the springs of our
actions and courses; as for our Will and Affections, so Eccles. 5. 1. 2. For
the actions and courses themselves, which Solomon calls the path of our feet,
Prove. 4. 26. And in this sense David says, Will thou not keep my feet from
falling? Psalm. 56. 13. and God is said to guide the feet of his People, and to
preserve the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9. And Shoes on the feet, are also
diversely taken in a metaphorical sense: 1. Sometimes for a mortified
disposition to the world, as the shoes keep the feet at a distance from the
earth, and with them we trample upon the earth. 2. Sometimes for strength
against passive injuries and evils; as feet shod can pass upon sharp thorns and
stones; this is called, Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Christ,
Ephesians. 6. 3. Sometimes for a ^it ability in all walking; for the shoes do not
only adorn the feet, but strengthen them in and unto motion: From all which we
may, I think, observe this Proposition.

That God does enable a penitent person with grace and strength Doct. God does
enable a penitent person with grace and strength for a singular walking.
for a better and singular walking or course of Life and Obedience. The
Prodigal before his Conversion walked with naked feet, wildly, loosely,
disgracefully, dangerously; but upon his repentance, he has shoes put on his
feet; not only his Heart is altered, but his Life; not only his disposition,
but condition; not only his condition, but his conversation: He was another
man, and now walks as another man. The same you see in Paul, before his
Conversion, and after it: Before his Conversion, his feet were swift to shed
blood, he persecuted the Saints and Members of Christ to the death; but after
his Conversion, he exalts Jesus Christ, and is endeared in highest affection
unto him and his servants, prizeth Christ above all, loves Christ above all,
strives for the propagation and for the obedience of the Gospel above all, and
his feet carry him to most places and persons for the service of Christ: And
this alteration in the course of life, Paul expresses to be in all that are
effectually called and converted, that they do not now walk as other Gentiles,
Ephesians. 4. 17. nor as they themselves once did, in darkness and voluptuousness,
but do put off their old Conversation, Ephesians. 4. 22. and walk as children of
the light, Ephesians. 5. 8. and become servants of righteousne^^, Romans 6. 18. and
have their fruits unto ^oliness. v. 22. What this singular walking is.


But the Question may be, What that singular course of living or walking is,
unto which God does enable penitent persons? Sol. I conjecture of it thus. 1.
It is an heavenly and spiritual A heavenly and spiritual walking.
walking. In Abraham this is called, a walking before God; and in Noah, a
walking with God; in the Galatians, a walking in the Spirit; in others, a
walking in Christ; in the Phillippians, a conversation in heaven. Before our
conversion, we mind nothing, and endeavor after nothing, and employ our selves
in nothing but sinful, sensual, vain things and courses: But when the soul is
truly made penitential, now our hearts mind a God, and his Word, and his Glory;
now they meditate on his Will and Laws, now they crave after Grace and heavenly
strength, now they busy and endeavor, What shall we do to be saved? Now our
feet can bring us to the Courts of God, and now we can conscionably prize and
use communion with God; we take more delight a thousand times to read his Word,
than all Play-books, and merry Histories; to hear the voice of Christ, to be
reforming of what is evil, to be much in Prayer, and all the works of holy
Obedience, than in any wicked or vain way whatsoever.

2. It is a regular course of life: The feet, when shoes are on them, are then
restrained, as it were, and confined; they are A regular course of life.
kept to a size, and do not ^qu^nder and expatiate: So is it with the course of
a man who is made a true Penitent; it is not now loose and wild, guided by the
season of every company, nor by the examples of every man, nor by the course of
the world, nor by the lusts of his own heart; what others do, is no rule to
him; and what others applaud, is no rule to him; and what others decide, is no
rule to him; and what his own heart suggests, is no rule to him: But he has a
sure rule unto which he takes heed, and according to which he orders his
conversation, and walks. If the Word of God says, Go, he goes; if that say,
Come, he comes: If that, like the Cloud before the Israelites, moves by
Precept, he rises up, and endeavors to follow it; if that, like the same
Cloud, does rest and forbid, he sits down, and dares not do it: He does not do
what he will, but what he may; live after an Humor, but after a Law; he would
have every action, not bad, but good; and that it may be so, first consults
with the Word, Is it lawful? and then resolves to practice it, because it is
so.

3. It is an even and upright course of life; as the shoes keep An even and
upright course of life.
the feet up on either side. Such feet does God bestow upon penitent people, as
the living creatures had, their feet were straight feet, Ezekiel. 1. 7. not like
the Images feet in Daniel 2. 33. which were part of Iron, and part of Clay. A
conversation that is like the Prophets cake, which was not turned, Hos. 7. 8.
Doughbaked bread on the one side, and dough on the other; so P^ous in one part,
and Impious in another; publicly Religious, and secretly Profane; in one
society Angelical, in another Diabolical; in one place a Doctrine, and in an
other an Use of Confutation: like a Fish, to give a frisk into the Air, and
then to plunge into the Ocean of Lusts. Such a Leopard-like life, spotted
course is ignoble; when the Christian runs, like that Beast with two feet of
different length, with a general unevenness in his ways; but strait feet are
those which the Penitent walks withal: as he has not an heart and an heart, so
he has not a foot and a foot: It Is granted, he may be sometimes lam^ and trip;
frailties and infirmities befall the best, but an even, equal tenor is yet to
be found in the main bulk of his paths. He has no Artificial shoes, wider and
lesser, made on purpose, but in the bent of his heart and endeavors, desires
to have a good conscience in all things, void of offense to God and man. The
Philosopher does distinguish twixt a Complexion which arises from Passion, and
that which buds out from an Habitual temper; when a person occasionally
blusheth, though he be of a pale Complexion, yet color arises in his face;
but the Sanguine temper is still of a ruddy face: Passionate actions are rare
and unequal, but natural are frequent and even. The penitent, in the whole
course of his conversation, is homo quadratus, square, and uniform, and
beautiful, and comely in the expression of holiness.

4. It is Ingenious and single: His life moves not by several Ingenious and
single.
Rules, nor yet runs by several Principles, nor yet is carried unto opposite
Ends. The Mariner he spends his life at Sea for Profit, and the Scholar he
spends his life in Study for Knowledge, and the Ambitious man he follows the
Court for Honor, and the Hypodrite he trades in Duty for applause: but the
true Penitent, he is careful, and watchful, and diligent over all his ways,
and in all the duties of piety, for Divine glory. Gregory Nazianzen
distinguishes of three sorts of men; some are Mercenaries, who work to get a
good reward; others are Servants, who work to avoid punishment; others are
Sons, and these labor for the highest good, to enjoy God, and to set out his
Glory: Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, says the Apostle. The Christian
lives by the Lord; By the Grace of God, I am that I am, said Paul. And he lives
upon the Lord, The life that I now live, I live by the Faith of the Son of God,
says S. Paul again. And he lives unto the Lord, both to his approbation and to
his honor, So that Christ may be magnified, says Paul yet again: his
intentions are such as have the glory of God most principally in them; so that
if you could unbowel the ways of a Christian to discern their scope, you
should find in them this Inscription, To the Glory of God. And the actions
themselves (for the course of them) are such as respect the glory of God, they
are all of them Holiness to the Lord, God is magnified by them.

5. It is a profitable Walking: The impenitent man is a dead A profitable
walking.
man, and his life is a deadly life, like the Plague, which is an infecting
disease; like the Prophets girdle, rotten, and good for nothing. Either he is a
dead letter, barren to any good, or he is a killing letter, doing much evil;
either he is a rotten stick, good for nothing, or else he is a firebrand,
causing much wickedness. But^ when a person becomes penitent, now his heart is
made go^d, and his life becomes profitable. As Paul wrote of Onesimus to
Philemon, That in time past he was unprofitable to him, but now, says he,
profitable to thee and me. There is good to be got by him that is made good;
blood runs through all the veins of his Conversation; one may get heat at his
fire, and light at his candle, and refreshing at his streams, and clothing by
his fleece; one may melt by his tears, go by his light, learn to trust by his
faith, to fear by his tenderness, to live by his obedience. Oh how he strives
to convert others, with S. Austin; to give knowledge to others, with S. Paul; to
warn and beseech others, with Lot; to profit thesouls of others, and help the
bodies of others. In his general calling he is diligent, and in his particular
he is active; his counsels are savoury, and his walkings are heavenly, such as
may save himself and those about him, if they be so humble and wise as to
apprehend and learn.

6. Lastly, It is a comely walking; how beautiful are thy feet withshoes, says
Christ of the Church, Ca^t. 7. 1. (Congruous to It is a comely walking.
the condition of his place, of Grace;) the walkings of a penitent are
beautiful walkings, such as adorn his profession, such as become the Gospel of
Christ, such as set out the truth of Grace, which he has received, and the
hope of glory which he expects, like so many Stars which are the glory of
heaven: so are his particular actions inamelled with that Ornament of Me^kness,
with that Crown of Wisdom, with that Tenderness of Cireumspection, with that
Sweetness of Charity, with that Gracefulness of Piety, that no only the mouths
of some are stopped, but likewise the mouths of others are opened, by beholding
the uniform light of his new Conversation, to glori^ie our father which is in
heaven.

2. Quest. Thus you see what that better and singular course of life is, unto
which God enables penitent persons: Now let us consider the Reasons why God
does enable them thus to walk. Reasons of it.


It cannot but be thus, if you consider 1. The principle which is From the
principle which is implanted in them.
implanted in them: As things are in being, so they are in working; that nature
which is most predominant in any, has still the command of the actions in him.
Does the penitent now live an heavenly life? Why, God has given unto him a
spiritual, and heavenly nature; He is made pertaker of the Divine Nature, which
of all others is most holy, and spiritual, and heavenly. Does he order his life
by the rule of the Word? Why, the Word of God is ingraffed in him, and abides
in him in the virtues and efficacies of it, so that he was converted by it, and
will now be guided by it. Does he lead an upright life? Why, the Lord has
taken from him the spirit of guile and deceitfulness, and has given unto him
an One heart, a plain, sincere, perfect, or upright heart; a right heart which
cannot abide doubling, and dividing, and hollowness, but it is of the truth;
there is truth in the inward parts, and therefore there is truth in the outward
acts. Does he lead a single life for Divine Glory? Why, he has received real
grace from God, which will work only for God; the Waters which come from the
Sea, will run into the Sea again. Does he live a profitable life? Why, it is
the nature of true grace, and true repentance to make us as active in a good
way, as we were violent in a bad; the nature of Good is to be diffusive, as the
nature of fire is to heat, and of the Sun is to give light: The love of Christ
constrains me (says Paul.) Does he adorn his holy profession with an
answerable conversation? Why! how can it be otherwise, but that gracious
habits, should breed gracious acts; and glorious qualities, should breed
glorious effects? It is the nature of a Star to shine, as it is the nature of
dirt to defile; and it is the nature of a Diamond to sparkle, as it is of the
earth to be b^ack, etc.

2. The peculiar disposition of Repentance. Repentance in From the peculiar
disposition of Repentance.
the proper nature produces two effects. 1. One in newness of life: It is
against the truth of Repentance for a man to live the same life, to keep on the
same course, for this is impenitency; not conversion, but continuation; not a
regress, but a progress; not a change of life, but a course of the same life:
But when Repentance comes, change comes; for what is repentance but the new
purpose for a new life? A man must be what he was not, and do that which he
never did, and run an other course quite contrary to what he did; put off the
old conversation, and put on a new; Cease to do evil, and learn to do well; put
off the service of unrighteousness, and become the servant of holiness: this is
to be a penitent. 2. Another is revenge: you know the Apostle makes this one of
the fruits of godly sorrow and repentance; yea what revenge? 2. Cor. 7. Now
this revenge, as it consists in many other things, so in this especially; that
as we have employed our souls and bodies in wicked acts to serve against the
Lord to his dishonor, so now we employ and improve them in holy services to the
proper glory of God; now we busy them, to know him, to love him, to obey him,
to honor him: The penitent person is so sensible of the infinite dishonor
which God has had by his sinful life, that if he had now a thousand souls and
bodies, and ten thousand lives, all were little enough in all holiness of
Conversation to redeem those dishonours, and repair them.

3. The peculiar intentions which God has toward penitent persons. The
peculiar Intentions of God toward Penitent sinners. He intends much Glory by
them.
1 He does intend much glory to himself by them: for these are the people whom
he does form for his glory, and raise up to declare his praise, as is evident
in Paul, and all other singular penitents, they have been the great instruments
of his glory; but they cannot bring him glory unless they be enabled to live
better lives then before. If they be alienated from the life of God, they
necessarily are alienated from the glory of God. Right believing, and right
living, these are our methods to display the glory of God. 2. He does intend
much peace and joy And much pea^e and joy unto them.
unto their Consciences; a peace which passes all understanding, and a joy
which passes all expression; even that which springs from his gracious favor
and reconciliation with them in Christ, which both pacifies the conscience, and
also quickens and revives it. But this could not be, unless he enabled them to
new and better lives; the life of holiness is the only path of peace, that of
wickedness is a way which knows not peace; there is no peace unto wicked men,
nor unto wicked ways. And for Joy, that only breeds joy in conscience, which
makes the conscience not to accuse, but excuse; not to torment, but comfort;
only the new life is the properly joyful and comfortable life; there are no
spirits in the life which is not spiritual. 3. He does intend much outward
mercy to them: See how full the field of blessings is to the penitent; but it
And much outward mercy to them.
is upon this condition, If his life be obedient; as it were upon his good
behavior, If ye consent and obey ye shall eat the good of the Land. 4. He does
intend them Glory before men, and Glory And Glory before men, and with himself
in Heaven.
with himself in heaven: For the penitent he makes to be the excellent on
earth; his refined pieces of gold, a choice people whom Nations shall honor,
and the people shall call blessed. When a man leaves a sordid and ignominious
course of sinning, he then becomes honorable in the eyes of God, and reputable
in the eyes of men. Now the spots of Leprosy fall off from Naoman, and his
flesh grows clear and fair; but how should this Sun break out, if the clouds
still remain? Of necessity the life must alter, if we would have the opinions
of men to alter; yea, and to what purpose is it to imagine an eternal life
hereafter, unless we here first live an holy life, without which no man shall
see God?

Does God enable the true penitent to a new and better life or Use 1,
walking? then let us reflect on our ways and lives. How do we live? What kind
of life do^st thou live. D^ceive not thy self with the goodness of thy heart,
if thy* life be bad.
What kind of life is that which we do now live? Is it the life of a penitent
or no? Never talk that thy heart is as good to Godward as any man's though thy
life be vile; thou deludest thy self; if thy life be evil, assuredly thy heart
is not good: The Tree, says our Savior, is known by his fruits; for a person
to talk of a penitent heart, and what terror he has had for sin, and in some
particulars to mak^ a little semblance of godliness, when yet all this while he
goes on in a course of drunkenness, or of uncleanness, of riotousness, or of
lying, or of pride, or of covetousness, or of injustice, or of scoffing, etc.
What a monstrous and wilful deceit is this of a man's soul? Thou a penitent, who
art still a servant of Lust! Thou a penitent, who still walk in darkness!
Thou a penitent whose very course of life is nothing but a confutation of
repentance, a trade in sin! Know thou not, O sinner, that where the heart is
changed, the life will change? If thou have once put off thy corrupt nature,
thou will easily put off thy corrupt conversation. Who does as he did, if he be
not as he was? No, real repentance turns us, and that is, from the love of sin
in the heart, and from the course of sin in the life; as it suffers thee not to
be an hypocrite, so it abhors that thou should be profane; if thy life be
bad, question it not, thy heart is bad; that filthy speech comes from thy
filthy Nature, that haughty look from thy proud Nature, that griping hand from
thy cruel Nature, that fraudulent tongue from thy cousening Nature. 2. As much
are they deceived who go on gently and gravely in their old, Nor with a cold,
formal, negative Repentance.
formal, cold, negative way of repentance; deeming themselves no less then
Penitentiaries, who have this only to plead, They never in all their lives did
wrong or harm, etc. But remember, O self-deceiver, if ever God gives to thee
repentance indeed, thou will find other sinful courses to be left besides those
of Commission; thou will find thine Omissions to be a highly guilty course of
sin, that thou frequently omits calling upon God, hearing of his Word, reading
of his Word, examining of thy heart, humbling of thy soul, walking in an holy,
and heavenly, and exact manner, etc. Thou often criest out, What bad course am
I in? I demand of thee, what holy course art thou in? what other course of life
leadest thou then ever, etc. Well, I will say no more but this; but if other
and better lives be the arguments of true Repentance, the Lord be merciful to
us, there are then but very few penitents; the same oaths, the same cursings,
the same worldliness, the same pride, the same drunkenness, the same
uncleanness, the same neglects of God and spiritual duties; we are Use 2. Let
us show our Repentance by our Conversation.
not others then we were, we live not otherwise then we have done.

But secondly, If any of you take your selves to be penitents, I beseech you
then, let us carefully show it by our lives and conversations. Consider to this
purpose, 1. If there be truth of If there be true Repentance there will be
newness of conversation.
Repentance, there will be newness of Conversation: A monstrous taing to see a
man start up and walk with his Coffin and Gravecloaths. If it be light it will
shine, and if it be fire it will heat, and if it be salt it will season; if thy
heart be purged indeed, thy life will also be reformed indeed. If ye have been
taught as the Ephesians. 4. 21.
truth is in Jesus: put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man.
2. The Lord jesus has purchased thy Life as well as thy Soul, and redeemed thy
Conversation as well as thy Nature; Christ has purchased thy life as well as
thy soul.
He did dye not only to recover thy inward Man, but also to cure thy outward
Man; that as thy Heart should not be profane, so thy Conversation should not be
vain: Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, that we should no longer live
the rest of our time in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. Christ has dyed for thee,
that now thou should live unto him. 3. The honor of Religion lies upon thy
The honor of Religion lies upon thy life.
Life: Thy heart may be a secret, a closet of much good or evil, we leave it to
the Searcher of hearts; but thy life is a public Letter, an audible Voice, a
common Object: The profession of truth and holiness is an honorable thing in
it self, but a good and answerable Conversation adds and reflects a greater
honor to it. As the Heaven is a beautiful Creature, but it is the more
beautified by the shining of the Stars: So is it with Religion, it is an
Excellency in it self, and is made the more excellent by an excellent
Conversation. But a lewd, rude, foolish, boystrous, incongruous, fowl, uneven,
evil life, makes Religion to look like Gold in the dirt, or like a Jewel in a
Swines snout, or like Beauty in a Whore. It is the very scandal of Religion,
and as a death verse upon an holy profession: What is it, that thou now and
then fillest the eyes of men with a little gravity, and the ears of men with a
little piety, when still thou, by thy wicked life, arms the hearts of men to
scorn, and the tongues of men to blasphe^ the Name of God and Professors? The
more pretense thou have to repentance, the more odious art thou, by thy
impenitent life, to the profession thereof. The strictest eyes are upon the
strictest professors, and no miscarriages take so soon with men, or damp
Religion more* 4. The souls of men lie much upon their life: What Greg.
Nazianz. The souls of men lie much upon their life.
said of the Painter, That he teaches not by his language, but by his hand;
and Chrysostom of the Minister, That his first part is to Live well, and then
to Teach well; that is true of every penitent Christian, for his inward
affections come not so into our scales as his outword actions: We judge of him,
and imitate him not by what lies hid in his heart, but by what appears in his
life; and of all men we are most confident to imitate the actions of those who
pretend most against sin. Now then, if thou who pretendest to repent of all
sin, by thy sinful life should^t multiply sinners amongst men, or strengthen
the hearts of sinners from returning, O how bitter, O how dismal, how fearful,
how an amazing account, that thou even under a form of Repentance, should
keep men in an estate of impenitency, to damn their souls by thy continual
sinnings? Sins in conversation are always of more public danger then those of
disposition, as a Feavor or a Plague* 5. The comfort and peace of thy
Conscience lies much in it: The comfort and peace of thy Conscience lies much
in it.
A good Life is the best Commentary of an upright heart, and uprightness is a
comfort: A good Life is the best Star to clear up Gods glory; and to bring him
glory, is to bring our selves comfort. Conscience will judge thee more for evil
in life, as more perfected, more hurtful, than for that within. A good life is
the only Plaster, by which we heal others; the only Pilot by which we direct
others; the only Hand, by which we hold up others: We may think good, but this
circumscribes it self with our selves; we may desire good, but this also
con^ines it self with our selves. The good life is the life only which does
good to others; and the more good we do, the more comfort still we have* 6. The
reward will be great to the life that is good: Its true, The Reward will be
great to the good life.
that God in his future retribution has respect to the inward graces and
dispositions, but he takes public notice of the operations of them in our
lives, as for acting themselves, and therefore pronounces the reward to the
doer, and the kingdom unto him that clothes, and feeds, and visits, etc. What!
an eternal life for a good life! 7. But lastly, Look on all who are truly
penitent, or have All that are truly penitent have been very circumspect of
their lives.
been so, how tender and circumspect they have been of their lives and
walkings: How extremely circumspect was David of his tongue, Psa. 39. and as
exceedingly pensive for any unbeseeming word or fact, much more for any
scandalous evo^; such a fool, such a beast was I, Psa. 51. So the Apostles,
both in their ways and in their directions unto all the Saints, pressing
earnestly, and that by the Lord Jesus, that they live and walk as becomes
Saints, and as becomes the Gospel, and that the Name of Christ be not
blasphemed; and as as who has called them is holy, so should they be holy in
all manner of conversation.

Quest. But how should our lives be so led, that it may appear The manner ^f a
P^nitents life.
we are Penitents indeed? Sol. For the manner of life which the truly Penitent
should lead, either it respects, 1. God, in duties of Piety. And here these
adjuncts of Life are necessary: As it respects Go^ in du^ies of Pie^y.
1. Solid, and not formal performances of Religious Services; in the main
Duties; not an empty cloud, a naked vizard, a life without life. 2. Adequate,
and not partial ways of obedience, like and dislike. 3. Constant, and not light
and changeable exercises of holy acts; without wavering and unsetledness.
Secondly, Men: And here the walking or conversation must be, As it respects Men.
1. Wise, and not ridiculous; 2. Meek and gentle, and not turbulent; 3.
Pro^itable, and not vain or evil; 4. Merciful, and not cruel; 5. Humble, and
not censorious; 6. Just, and not scandalous and injurious; 7. In all things
circumspect without offense. Thirdly, Those in relation to us: And here the
life must be an Observance, without contempt and slighting of those to whom
honor is due; 2. Affection with love and pity, without scorn or rigor; 3. A
Care, with furtherance of their souls, without neglect and weariness.

For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found: And
they began to be merry,
These words seem to be an Abridgement of the whole Parable of the Prodigal
Child. And they comprehend in them, 1. His natural, sinful, or unconverted
condition; [This my son was dead, and was lost.] A natural man is a dead man,
and a lost man; either of these expresses a sad misery, but both of them
conclude him completely miserable. 2. His supernatural, changed, or converted
condition; [and is alive again, and is found.] No man lives, till he be a
converted man. Fuit (said Seneca) non vixit; and ab eo tempore censemur, ex quo
in Christo renascimur, says Hierome. 3. The joy, comfort, and delight of that
altered condition; [And they began to be merry.] Joy is a drop distilled from
Grace; the condition is then comfortable, when it is godly. I begin with the
first part, and there with the lost estate of the Prodigal; where observe,

That every sinful or unconverted man is a lost man. [This my son was lost.]
There are two sorts of sinners in Scripture, Doct. 1. Every sinful unconverted
man is a lost man.
who are styled lost. 1. Finally impenitent: These are irrecoverably lost;
lost, and never found. Thus Judas was lost; None of them is lost, but the son
of perdition, Joh. 17. 1. And of such the Apostle speaks, If our Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that are lost. 2 Cor. 4. 3. 2. Temporary wanderers; who
quantum ad statum presentem are lost, but quoad decretum de futuro shall be
found: To these that saying seems to refer, in Luke 19. 10. The Son of Man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost. Again, One may be said to be
lost, 1. who is stepped out of the way: Every sinning is a straying, and every
straying is a kind of lostness; thus even a converted man is many times lost. I
have gone astray (says David, Psalm. 119. 170.) like a lost sheep. 2. Who is
not as yet come into the way: Thus the unconverted man is lost. Psalm. 58. 3.
The wicked are estranged from the womb; they go astray as soon as they be born.
And Psalm. 14. 3. They are gone aside. And Romans 9. 12. They are all gone out of
the way.

Now an unconverted man may be called a lost man, in eight And may be so called
in eight respects. He has lost his God.
respects. Because, 1. He has lost his God: Every man (at the first) had God
to be his God; but man sinned, and by sin every man lost God: We never lose our
selves, but when we lose our God; and we never lose our God, but by sinning.
There was one once, who lost his Kingdom for a draught of Water; and
Lysimachus.
we, in Adam, lost our God for the taste of an Apple. This is a great loss, to
lose our God. A Child may lose his Father, and yet live; the Mariner may lose
his Anchor, and yet sail: But if the World does lose the Sun, it loses all;
But if Man loses his God, he loses him who is better than All. There are four
great losses in that one loss of God: There is a loss, 1. of the Image of God,
that Royal Crown is gone; 2. of the Favor of God, that friendly look is gone;
3. of the Society of God, that sweet fruition is gone; 4. of the Happiness of
God, that only life is gone: A Just God remains still, and a Mighty God
remains still; but the Gracious God is lost, but the Blessed God is lost.

2. He has lost his Paradise: Paradise was the garden of Lost his Paradise,
blessings, and of all delights; and some conjecture, that all happiness
consists in delight; but the impenitent, wandering, unconverted sinner, is ^ar
from blessing or comfort. The child of disobedience is only an heir of the
curse; Write that man childless, said God of Coniah; so may it be said of an
unconverted sinner, Write that man comfortless. Or as Jeremiah said of Pashur,
Thou shall be called Magor-missabib, terror round about; the same may be
affirmed of this sinner, He is exiled from all comfort and blessing, there is
no peace unto him, no blessing; he cannot justly expect one crop of mercy, not
one good day all his days; the womb is a prison, the world a sea, sin a grave,
life a wilderness, death an hell, to a wicked man.

3. He has lost his soul: And what is left when my soul is lost? There are
diverse kinds of losses; some Losses are Gain Lost his soul.
to us, (such was Paul's loss, Phil. 3.) Some Losses are a Pain to us, a little
diminution, an excire only of this or that comfort; some lose Sin, and get
Christ; some lose Earth, and get Heaven; but no loss like the loss of the Soul:
Now every unconverted man has lost this Jewel, this Soul of his: He has lost
his Soul, 1. To Satan, who has the dominion and use of it, he rules, and he
works mightily in it, and over it; a wicked man's soul is the Devils slave, he
takes it captive at his pleasure: 2. To a condemning and revenging God; The
soul that sins shall die; the Lease is forfeited; sin forfeits the soul into
the hands of a condemning God, and there it is stayed for ever, unless a price
be paid by the blood of Christ to ransom and recover it.

4. He has lost his Excellencies: His Glory is departed. Sinful Lost his
Excellencies.
man does not know what is become of created man; yea, he has lost these so
long, that he knows not whether ever he had any of them, or no; whether he ever
had such an eye or Lamp of exquisite knowledge, whether he ever had such a
vesture of righteousness, whether he ever had such a stock of ability and
sufficiency for Obedience. As he once could not find Rome in Rome, nor they
know Jezabel to have been Jezabel; just so is it with a poor sinner. He once
was a child of Light, a son of Obedience, he was created holy and righteous:
But what is become of all his created stock? But man dies, and man gives up
the ghost, and where is he? Job 14. 10. So here, man has sinned, and man has
lost all his excellencies, and where is he? Adam, where art thou? said God: A
sad question, Where art thou? An hour since, Adam was Adam; but upon his
sinning, Adam, where is Adam? Where is righteous Adam? Where is Adam, who had
power to believe, to love, to obey all my will? Where is he? and where is all
this? All is lost.

5. He has lost his way, his way home: Every sinful man is Lost his way.
a wandering Meteor, a very Planet on earth; he is gone from the fold, as a
silly sheep; he is gone from his Fathers house, as a silly Child; he is gone
out of the right path, like a silly Traveller in the Wilderness. Sin puts us
into a Maze, into a Labyrinth; we go from one sin to another sin, out of one
by-path into another by-path; and the further we go in sinful paths, the more
still we go out of the way: But the right path which leads back to our God, O
the sinner has not an eye to see it; and when he has light to see it, yet he
has not an heart to turn unto it, nor feet to walk in it. Romans 3. 12. They are
all gone out of the way; v. 17. The way of peace they have not known. Psalm. 95.
10. It is a people that do err in their hearts, and they have not known my
ways. The lost sinner has an erring mind, and an erring heart, and erring
affections. There is but one way to come back to God, which is by Christ, (I am
the way, etc.) but the lost sinner knows not Christ, nor the way unto Christ.

6. He has lost his Ability: He who once had power to fall, Lost his ability.
being fallen, has now no power to rise any more; a self-deliverance is as
impossible as a self-creation: It must be light which finds that which is lost,
but sinful man is darkness; it must be strength which raises up one who is
fallen, but lost man is less than weakness. He who loses himself by sin, must
come back again by grace; but the natural man has no grace, no not a desire of
it, no not a thought of it, no nothing of all of it. What Sin casts down, Faith
must set up; but the unconverted man does not, nay, cannot believe; of himself
he cannot: As all our powers were at first in Adams hands, so all our powers
now are in Christ's hands.

7. The sinner is also lost in respect of his Title and Plea, and Lost in
respect of his liberty.
in respect of his Liberty and Freedom, so that now every sinner is a very
slave and bondsman. Obj. But how comes man to be How man comes to be lost.
a lost man? I answer, Man came to be a lost sinner, First, By Temptation: The
Devil lost his own happiness, and by his cunning seducements, Man lost his
happiness too. Four things he By temptation.
used for this: 1. He raised a suspicion and jealousy in our hearts of God; 2.
Then a dislike of our present condition; 3. Then an affectation of an higher
condition; 4. A false persuasion of Gods threatening. Secondly, By his own will.
And there were (besides our original Liberty ad utrumlibet) four principal sins
which By his own will.
brought us into our Lostness: 1. Pride, 2. Unbelief, 3. Presumption, 4.
Coffeehouse.

Object. But how may a man know that he is as yet in a lost condition? How a
man may know that he is lost.
Sol. This may be resolved by these Queries: 1. Where is thy Home? 2. What is
thy way? 3. When did thou return? 1. Every lost man is a man afar off. In
longum abiit, he is gone Every lost man is afar off.
far from home, from his Father: When the Prodigal was lost, where was he then?
The Text says, That he was gone into a far Country. When the Ephesians were
lost, where were they? Afar off, Ephesians. 2. 17. When the Israelites were lost,
where were they? They are gone away far from me, Jer. 2. 5. A natural man is
far from God, (take me right,) you can never find God and a wicked man
together; his nature is far from God, and his thoughts are far from God, and
his affections are far from God: O, he cannot endure the presence of God, he
cannot endure Holiness, he cannot endure holy Ordinances, nor holy Services,
nor holy Admonitions, nor holy Reproofs, nor any holy Communion; the further he
is from these, the better does he think his condition to be. A man is never at
home till he has a God, and till he stands in Gods presence, and till he has
communion with his God: But the natural man, etc. 2. Every lost man is in a
false way, in Every lost man is in a false way.
a by-way; his ways are sinful ways: The lost man, he is out of the common and
known Road; he is in the Woods, in the Ditches, in the Deserts, in the Fields,
and he goes from one strange place to another strange place. O man! whilst
thou walk after thy sins, whilst thou runnest from sin to sin, whiles thy
way and course of Life is in the fulfilling and following of thy Lusts,
assuredly thou art a lost man. 3. Did thou ever yet return to He is lost who
does not return.
God? If not, then as yet thou art in a lost condition. O consider this,
consider it seriously, When did thou return? How did thou return? Wherein
did thou return back unto thy God? Is not he lost, who is still losing of
himself? who still goes on in his Wilderness? And this thou do; where thou
wast twenty years ago, there thou art still.

That a lost sinner may be found. [This my son was lost, and is found] In
Scripture there is a twofold finding. 1. We are Doct. 2. A lost sinner may be
found.
said to find God: Seek the Lord, while he may be found, Isa. 55. 6. I found
him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3. 4. 2. God is said to find us. Now God finds a
sinner two ways: 1. Judicially, and in wrath, ad evertendum; 2. Graciously, and
in mercy, ad convertendum. Here three Questions offer themselves to be
discussed.

Quest. 1. Who is it that finds a lost sinner? Sol. The Answer Who finds the
lost sinner? God only.
is easy; It is God only. I will seek that which was lost, Ezekiel. 34. 16. It
was he who found Abraham in Caldea amongst the Idolaters, and David among the
sheep-folds, and Manasses among the thorns and bushes, and Paul in the way to
Damascus, and Matthew at the receipt of Custom, and the Israelites in their
blood, and Mary Magdalene in her uncleanness. The sinner cannot find himself;
he can lose himself, but he cannot find himself; he can wander, but he cannot
return of himself: Avertere a De^, man can do that; but convertere ad Deum, man
cannot do this. Man loves to wander; but to come back, man has neither will
nor power. No man can ^ind a lost sinner. He may find a lost sinner, by way of
discovery, but he cannot find him by way of recovery; I may discover, but not
recover; 2. Bewail, but not prevail; 3. give Counsel, but not give Grace: I may
see one running from God, but I cannot bring him back to God; I may see him
wandering to Hell, but I cannot set his heart to turn back to Heaven; and I may
bewail a lost sinner, yet I cannot prevail upon a lost sinner; and I can give
him counsel to come home, but I cannot give him grace to come home: It is God,
God only, who can find a lost sinner. Quis ovem perdicam requirere debeat,
nonne qui perdidit, quis perdidit? nonne qui habuit? Quis habuit, nonne qui
^ecit. So Tertullian appositely, He only that made man, he only it is who can
find the sinner.

Quest. 2. How God finds a lost sinner? Sol. There are How God ^inds a lost
sinner?
seven Acts of God, which are conversant about the finding of a lost sinner. 1.
He is moved with compassion toward him; the He is moved with compassion
toward him.
Lord pities such a sinner: Alas, says God, this poor, ignorant, foolish man,
is gone from me, the fountain of his life; lo, how his lusts deceive him, how
Satan rules him, how he wanders up and down in vanity; he is quite out of the
way of his happiness; he is running toward hell, but perceives it not; he is
undoing and destroying his immortal soul, but observes it not; he knows not
whether he goes; he is undone for ever, if I stay him not, if I turn him not.
2. He intends good to this particular lost sinner. I will surely have mercy on
him. I have seen his ways, He intends good to this lost sinner.
and will heal him. I know the thoughts that I think toward him, thoughts of
good, and not of evil. I will glorify all my mercy and goodness in this very
sinner; I will not suffer him to run on thus, I will look after him, I will
bring him home to my self, and save him. 3. He sends out after him; one
servant, and another He sends out after him.
servant; one Minister, and another Minister: Go, says God, to such a Parish,
and to such a Family, and preach, and make enquiry, Is there not such a
miserable sinner here? is there not such a lost man there? one that is gone
from his Fathers house? one that has spent all in riotous living? Is there
never a man here, who has departed from God, lived without God, run all his
life in sinful, loose, base courses of disobedience, and would now be glad of
mercy? This is the general seeking of a lost sinner. 4. He makes a privy search
after him; for (perhaps) He makes a privy search after him.
the general Hue and Cry will not find the sinner, and therefore the Lord makes
a privy search: As to find out Achan, there was Tribe searched by Tribe, and
Family by Family, and Person by Person; and thus does the Lord in finding of a
lost sinner; He comes more distinctly, and his Word or Afflictions draw after
this sinner more personally; they light at his door, (upon his person) and
knock, and enquire, Art not thou the man? does not the lost sinner abide here?
Art not thou he who have lived ignorantly, or pro^anely, and gone astray from
thy God? 5. He He lights on him at length*
lights on him at length: And then the Lord lights on a lost sinner, when he
actuates and quickens Conscience in him, which now can be silent no longer, but
cries out, Lord, here he is; Here is the Swearer, Drunkard, Whoremonger,
Sabbath-breaker, etc. And now out comes the lost sinner, with a trembling
heart, and a guilt-smiting spirit, Lord, who is it that you look for? do you
look after a sinner, a lost sinner? I am the man you look for: Oh I have
sinned, I have wandered, I have been lost all my Oh I have sinned, I have
wandered, I have been lost all my days; What shall I say unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? or what shall I do? Oh! if thou take not pity on me, if
thou show not mercy unto me, I perish, I die, I am lost for ever. 6. He
deals with this sinner to return and come back unto him. Hos. 14. 1. O Israel,
return unto the Lord thy God; for thou He deals with him to return.
have fallen by thine iniquity. And there are four ways which the Lord uses to
prevail upon a lost sinner, to turn back unto him: Four ways.
1. By Expostulation: What have I been unto thee, or what have I done unto
thee, or what iniquity have thou found in me, By Expostulation.
that thou have all this while departed from me? Was not I the God that formed
thee? the Father that brought thee forth? the Master that fed thee, and took
care of thee? Was there not goodness, and kindness, and fullness enough in me?
why have thou dealt thus unkindly with me? 2. By Conviction of his By
Conviction.
wandering condition, with the baseness and miserableness thereof. These are thy
ways, and these have been thy doings, and what profit have thou by those things
whereof thou art or may be now ashamed? Why! what have thou got by all thy
sinful wanderings? See how naked thou art of all spiritual good, how shameful
thy course has been: Is the Wilderness a place for a Child? How poor and
undone thou art! Thou have spent all; and if thou continuest in thy sinful
ways, thou will certainly perish with hunger: Sin has been thy loss; and if
thou return not, it w^ll certainly be thy ruin. Return, O lost Sinner, return,
return, why will thou die and perish for ever? 3. By By Propositions of Mercy.
Propositions of Mercy: As S. John ran after that young lost man of Jerusalem,
crying unto him, Return, my son, return; Christ will yet accept of thee, Christ
will yet show thee mercy. So does the Lord God, when he would bring back a lost
sinner; Return, says he, and live, return and live. Ezekiel. 18. 32. Though thou
have forgot the Duty of a Child, yet I have not put off the Affection of a
Father: I am that Father, in whose house there is bread enough, and to spare;
Do but come back unto me, and all shall be well: Can thou live without Bread?
can thou live without my Mercy? Mercy shall be thine, if thou will return
from thy lost and sinful courses. 4. By directing him into the way of coming
back: As 1. With mournful confession of his sins. By directing him into the
way of Returning.
Hos. 14. 2. Take with you words, and return unto the Lord; say unto him, Take
away iniquity, and receive us graciously. 2. With penitential reformation. Isa.
55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. 3. With believing application: Thou must
go, says God, to my Son; for he is the way and the life, and he came to seek
and to save that which was lost. Seventhly: By laying hold upon him by his
Almighty Grace, and putting into him a returning heart.
Now, notwithstanding all this, the lost sinner is not perfectly found, and
therefore the Lord does one thing more; he does with this lost sinner, as the
shepherd did with the lost sheep, who took him on his shoulders, and brought
him home: So the Lord lays hold on this poor lost soul, by his Almighty Spirit
of Grace, and puts into him a returning heart, an other heart, and makes him
willing and glad to leave his sinful ways, and to return to himself, and to
implore his reconciled favor and acceptance in Jesus Christ: Which being done,
now is the lost sinner found indeed; for then, and then only is a lost sinner
found, when he, in truth, turns back to God, and enjoys him as his reconciled
God in Christ. Jer. 3. 22. Return, ye backsliding children: Behold, we come
unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

Quest. 3. Why does God thus look after and find a lost sinner? Why God does
thus find a lost sinner?
Sol. The Reasons may be these. 1. Although the sinner be not worth the looking
after, yet the soul of a sinner is worth the looking after. The sinner is the
Devils creature, but the soul is The soul is worth the looking after.
Gods creature, (The soul that I have made, says God, Isa. 57. 16.) The lost
sheep was worth the looking after, and so was the lost groat; surely then a
lost soul is worth the looking after, which is, at least, of as much value as a
lost Groat. Christ (says Theophylact on Matthew. 18.) was the man who left the
Ninety nine sheep, and looked after one lost sheep; he left the the society of
Angels in Heaven, to find one lost Soul on Earth. O, the Soul of Man is a
precious, a valuable Substance, made only by God, and fit only to match and
converse with God. 2. As God knows God knows the loss of a soul.
the worth of a soul, so God knows the loss of a Soul: O Sirs! we make little
account of losing souls; but verily no loss like the loss of a soul: As Christ
spoke of the fall of that house, The fall thereof was great, that is true of the
loss of a soul, the loss thereof is very great. A man, in the event, loses
nothing, though he loses all the world, if his soul be not lost: But if the
soul be lost, all is lost, all is lost to an eternity; and therefore the Lord,
out of unspeakable pity, looks after a lost sinner. Christ has said down a
price for souls.
3. Jesus Christ has laid down a price for some souls, and Jesus Christ shall
see of the travel of his soul, he shall have his purchase to the full value. 4.
God will have some to magnify the God will have some to magnify the riches of
his Grace.
riches of his glorious Grace, and Love, and Kindness, and Mercy, yea, and to
enjoy eternal Glory with himself; therefore he will find some lost sinners: For
no sinner but a found sinner, can either glorify God, or be glorified with him.

The first Use shall be for Examination of our selves, Whether Use 1.
Examination. Whether our lost souls be found?
our lost souls be found thus of God, or no? I will propound unto you, 1. Some
Arguments or Motives to put you upon this Trial. 2. Then the Trials or
Characters of a person whom God in mercy has found.

The Arguments which may move us to a serious Trial, whether Motives to a
serious Trial.
we be found persons, or no, are these: 1. Every man is lost, but every man is
not found: All are lost, but few are found; Every man is lost, but every man is
not found.
the way of sin is general, but the way of mercy is special: Mat. 7. 13. Wide
is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there
be that go in thereat. v. 14. But strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
that leads unto life, and ^ew there be that ^ind it. You read of a general
complaint, They are all gone out of the way; but you read not of a general
acclamation, They are all returned into the way. Take the way of finding a lost
sinner, and bringing him home to God, either 1. by Repentance: Why! the number
of sinners is exceeding large, but the number of repenting sinners is very
scant. As he said once of an Army, Here are many Men, but few Soldiers; so may
it be said in this case: Sinners are like the Sands in the sea, very numerous;
but Penitent Sinners are like Pear^s in thesea, very rare and precious. 2. By
Faith: All are sinners, but few, very few are ^rue believers: Historical Faith,
though it be a common faith, yet it is not very common; Who has believed our
report? They are the ^ewest part of the world, who do credere Christum, believe
that there is a Christ; but how few, even of these, do credere in Christum,
believe in Christ? And Men are never found, till Faith be found in them.

2. It is a very bad, and a very sad condition, not to be found It is a very
sad condition, not to be found.
out of, but to be found still in a lost condition: If it were no more but
this, That such a person cannot find himself under the clasp or compass of any
saving mercy, this were heavy: To be in a D^sert, and not to know that ever he
shall come alive out of it; to be in the Ocean, and not to know that ever he
shall come safe to Land; to be in a sinful condition, and not to know whether
ever Divine Mercy will pull him out of this condition: Yet this is the case of
a lost sinner; he cannot tell whether ever Divine Mercy will look after him, or
no; perhaps it will, perhaps it will not.

But besides this, let us consider what may find that lost sinner, whom Divine
Mercy has not yet effectually and graciously found. 1. All external miseries
may suddenly ^ind him. Adam All external miseries may suddenly find him.
run away from God, and what did he find? and Jonah, and what did he find? All
losses may speedily befall a lost person; Safety is at home, and Dangers abroad:
In how many dangers is the lost sheep upon the mountains? In how many perils is
the lost man in the wilderness? they may become an easy prey to all devouring
beasts, and are often times forced to eat up themselves to preserve themselves. A
lost, impenitent, unconverted sinner, is sure of no mercy; and he is naked, and
exposed to all misery. In the fullness of his sufficiency (says Zophar, Job 20.
22.) he shall be in streights, every hand of the wicked shall come upon him, v.
23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath
upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating. 2. A guilty and
amazing Conscience may quickly find him; that inward Hell, as one speaks: The A
guilty Conscience may quickly find him.
glistring Sword comes out of his Gall, terrors are upon him, Job 20. 25.
When Judas had lost himself, how quickly did he find a guilty Conscience? It is
an heavy thing, to be found out by that which, as Bernard speaks, is Bailiff,
and Jailor, and Witness, and Jury, and Sheriffs, and Judge, and Executioner
too. Every man that finds me will kill me, said Cain, Gen 4. 3. And Death may
find thee; to which thou will say, as Ahab to the Prophet, Have thou found me,
O mine enemy? And Death may find thee.
Death may return the Prophets answer unto thee, Yea, I have found thee,
because thou have sold thy se^f to work evil in the sight of the Lord, 1 Kin.
21. 20. 4. And Gods condemning Gods condemning Judgments will find thee.
Judgment will find thee. If thou, O lost sinner, be not now found to thy
conversion, God will one day find thee to thy subversion; if Mercy finds thee
not to come back to God, Justice shall find thee to cast thee quite away from
God.

3. It is an unspeakable joy, if thou can find that God has in mercy ^ound
thy l^st soul. O there are many precious mercies It is unspeakable joy, if God
have found thy lost soul. Here is, Rescuing mercy. Pardoning mercy. Reconciled
communion with God.
which a found soul does and may find. 1. Rescuing mercy: He is delivered from
Sin and Satan. Is it not a mercy to be freed of a Disease, of a Prison? O what
then to be delivered from Sin, from Satan! 2. Pardoning mercy. That of the
Prophet is certainly verified of thee, in Jer. 50. ^0. In those days, and in
that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I
will pardon them, etc. 3. Reconciled communion with thy God: Thou who wast
found in Jail before, may now be found in thy Fathers house; thou who wast a
Vagabond before, art now a Son; God has accepted of thee, thou have found
favor in his eyes, and may find free access unto his presence* Thy soul
shall be found in glory.
4. Nay, If God has found thee in mercy, it will not be long ere that soul of
thine shall be found in Glory.

4. Many men do reckon upon it, that they are found, when yet Many men think
themselves found, who yet are lost.
they remain in a lost condition. There are three things which discover the
mistake of men in this kind. 1. Though they say, that they have found out their
sinful condition, yet still they remain in their sinful condition. 2. Though
they say, that they have found out the true way of life, yet they cannot be
found walking in that way of life. 3. Though they say that God has found them,
yet you cannot find them to fear this God, nor to love this God, nor to honor
and exalt this God; all the marks of Lostness are upon them, ignorance,
blindness, superstition, profaneness, vile ways, etc.

But will some say, How may one know, that God has found (in How may one know
that God has found his lost soul.
converting mercy) his lost soul? This leads me to the second thing, which
comprehends the Trials or Characters of a lost soul truly found: And there are
Nine infallible Evidences of a lost person graciously found. Trials of it.


1. When a lost sinner is found by God, he does then ^ind himself to He finds
himself to be utterly lost.
be utterly lost. Unclean, unclean, said the Leper. Undone, undone, God be
merciful to me a sinner, said the Publican. In me there dwells no good, I am
the greatest of sinners, said Paul. God finds us by making us to find our
selves. There is a vast difference twixt 1. A vulgar confession, I am a sinner,
all men are sinners; 2. An experimental conviction, I am the lost sinner, these
sins, these my sins have undone me; I am undone and lost for such a sin, and
for such a sin; I perish, I perish, if I get not out of this condition; my God
is lost, and my soul will be lost; I am gone from God, I am out of the way of
life; if I stay here, I die: I perish for hunger, said the found Prodigal. Thou
look on thy self and state, but how? as sinful! well; but do thou look
on that thy sinful estate, as a perishing, as thy perishing condition? as a
condition, not a day, not an hour, not a moment more to be stayed in? Do
thou look on it as on the Leak in the Ship, as a sinking Leak, as a splitting
Rock, as a soul-destroying, murdering, ruining condition? The Lord never finds
any man, but he finds him and brings him back, so as he shall acknowledge who
has found him, (even a God,) and what has found him, (even his mercy;) and
this will never be acknowledged, until God makes us first to see how utterly
lost we were; that the found sinner may say, 'Twas mercy that pitied me, 'twas
mercy that looked after me, 'twas mercy that lighted on me, 'twas mercy which
dealt with me, wooed me, overcame me, brought me back, saved me; mere mercy;
for I was utterly lost, I had perished, if mercy had not recovered me, etc.

2. When God finds a lost sinner, that sinner finds himself without He finds
himself without strength to return.
all strength to come back to God. Though you find your selves to have lost
your God, yet if you can find strength of your own to bring you back unto your
God, assuredly your lost souls are not found: For (to speak punctually) no man
finds himself lost, who as yet can find any thing in himself to set up himself;
if I yet possess strength, I am not yet lost: But a truly and experimentally
lost soul, feels in it self not only a loss of God, but also of power to come
forth, to come back to God; Romans 5. Without strength. It knows not, by its own
light, one foot of the way; and when it is made known, alas, it finds no power
to stir; nay, if I might have mercy and heaven upon the freest terms, but for
coming home, I am not able to do it. O how a found lost soul complains! It
complains as much of an impotent heart, as of a wandering heart: I cannot come,
I cannot turn this wandering heart into the right way; come back to my God I
should, but come I cannot; go to Christ I should, but go I cannot; if Christ
does not come to me, I shall never be able to come to him; if he does not seek
me, I shall never seek him; i^ he finds not me with strength, I shall never
find him with comfort and safety.

3. If God has indeed found thee, Thou will, above all He will above all
things desire to be found in Christ.
things, desire to be found in Christ. The found soul presently finds a need of
Christ, Paul, as soon as mercy found him, would by no means be found in
himself, but by all means be found in Christ; That I may be found in him, says
Paul, Phil. 3. 9. There was a Nobleman (one Elyearius) who was supposed to be
lost, and his Lady sent up and down to find him; One at length meets with him,
and tells him how sollicitous his Wife was to find him out; O (answered he)
commend me to my Wife, and tell her, That if she desires to find me, she must
look for me in the heart of Jesus Christ, for there only am I to be found. And
verily, there is no poor soul, whom God is finding and bringing home to
himself, on whom he has imprinted a true sense of his lostness, but presently
the soul cries out, What shall I do? what shall I do to be saved? O that I
might have Christ! and O that I might be found in Jesus Christ! Remember two
things: 1. That the Lord will bring back to himself no soul, but by Jesus
Christ: Christ is the sinners way to the Father; he is the door by which you
are admitted: If ever the Lord casts an eye on thee, or take thee by the hand,
it is for his Christ's sake. 2. A lost soul, which is found, finds an absolute
need of Jesus Christ: Nothing out of Christ can make peace, can justify, can
reconcile, can set us straight, can make us accepted. Had I all other things,
and had not Christ, I were still a lost person: Had I the righteousness of
Angels, yet if I had not Christ, I were lost; could I mourn, could I repent,
could I pray, could I live holily, could I walk exactly, yet I am lost; I am
still lost, until I get into Christ. I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. God will look on me as my
Judge, he will look on me as his enemy, he will not own me as a Father, as a
reconciled Father, but in Christ.

4. If thy lost soul be truly found, then Jesus Christ may be Jesus Christ may
be found in that lost soul.
found in that lost soul of thine. They report of Ignatius, that the Letters of
Jesus were found written in his heart: This I dare affirm, That the Picture of
Christ, the Graces of Christ, the Life of Christ, is to be found in every found
man. Paul, Lydia, the Jailor, Christ was sought by them, and found in them. It
cannot be, that a sinner should be found, if Christ be not to be found in him.
Why! if thou be a Christless man, who doubts it, but that thou art a lost man?
Now do not deceive thy soul; thou can say, that Christ once was to be found
in the Temple, and* Christ once was to be found on the Cross, and Christ is
still to be found at the right hand of his Father; but is there not one place
more where thou can find him? have thou not a heart? Is Christ to be found
there, I say, there, in thy heart? I find him in thy Ear when thou hear, and
I find him in thy mouth when thou speak, and thou find him in thy mind
when thou think; but still I ask, Do thou find him in thy heart? which
loves, which fears, which joys, which delights, which embraces? O, is Christ
in thy heart! what? a found man, and nothing of Christ to be found in thee! I
know not, perhaps will thou reply. Why this is strange, that Christ should be
in thee, and thou never know it! Christ dwells in the broken heart, in the
believing heart; Christ lives in him, who only lives upon Christ. Christ was a
crucified Christ, does he cru^ifie thy heart? He was a holy Christ, does he
purify thy heart? He was an humble Christ, does he abase thy heart? He was a
tender Christ, does he mollify thy heart? He was a satisfying Christ, does he
pacify thy heart? He was an obedient Christ, does he command, does he lead,
does he rule thy heart? He did for thee, can thou do for him? He died for
thee, can thou suffer for him? He loved thee, can thou delight in him?

5. If the Lord has graciously found thy lost soul, and indeed Then thou will
find sufficiency in thy Fathers house.
brought it home unto himself, Then thou will ^ind sufficiency, an enough at
least, in thy Fathers house. There is enough in God, to allure and draw a
sinner home, to keep a sinner at home that he needs not wander abroad, mercy
and pleasures for evermore: This the Prodigal discovered afar off, even in the
birth of his finding; There is bread enough, and to spare. God seems a poor
thing, a mean thing, an insufficient thing to a lost man; and therefore he
wanders up and down, and serves his lusts, and begs from the Creatures to make
him out some delight, some pleasure, some profit, some subsistence, some
contentment: But God is a rich thing, a Fullness; He alone is enough; One God is
enough for my one soul, if my soul indeed be found of him: O, he has Mercy
enough for me to save me, Love enough for me to delight me, Pleasure enough for
me to comfort me, Dignity enough for me to advance me, Help enough for me to
preserve me; Happiness enough for me, to save me. If I want Grace, he is the
God of Grace; if I want Peace, he is the God of Peace; if I want Mercies, he is
the Father of Mercies; if I want for Earth, the Earth is the Lords; if I would
have Heaven, he is the God of my Salvation. Now, friend, what say you? has God
found your lost soul? and what has your soul found in your God? What can
thou say of this God, of his Mercy, Love, Entertainment, Communion? With thee
the fatherless finds mercy; Thy favor is better than life; It is good for me
to draw near unto God; can thou say thus? is there bread enough for thee in
thy Fathers house? If so, why do thou yet run away? run abroad to Sin for
delight, to the Creature for satisfaction?

6. If God has graciously found thee, and brought thee out of Thou will be
afraid to lose thy self again.
thy lost and wandering condition, Thou will be afraid to lose thy self again,
to wander again, to go astray again from thy God who has found thee. There are
six things which the found and recovered person does apprehend: 1. The great
iniquity in his formerly lost and wandering course of life. 2. His great vanity
all that while, to forsake his own mercies, to sow the wind, and reap the
whirlwind. What profit had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans
6. 3. The great kindness and love which God has manifested toward his lost
soul, in bringing him back to himself, and now to own him as a Father does a
Son* 4. The great ingratitude, to displease that mercy which was pleased to
find him. 5. The madness of folly, to return to an experimental misery, and to
forfeit sweet mercy, which he has liberally tasted since he was found. 6. The
great hazard, whether mercy will ever look after him any more, who has so
presumptuously abused mercy received. O no; the found sinner has found such
freeness, fullness, sweetness of entertainment; such rich mercy, such free love,
such wonderful kindness, that as Peter in another case, (it is good for us to
be here;) or as the returning Church, (it is best being with my first Husband;)
or as Paul about his being with Christ, so he about continuing and complying
with his God, It is best of all. And therefore he cries out against all
temptations, Shall I return to folly, when God has spoken peace? shall I sin
again, since Gad has given me such a deliverance as this? O no, O no; Canaan
is better then Egypt, Paradise is better then a wilderness, a Fathers House is
better then to serve Swine, plenty is better then famine; Now God smiles on me,
and shall I raise his frowns? Now conscience speaks peace, shall I turn this
oil into a Sword? O let me never unjoynt the Bones which mercy at length has
set; O let me never darken the Sun, which shines so comfortably; O let me never
feed on husks, who may still feed on bread; O let me never run from a Palace
to a Prison: It was Gods mercy, and my happiness to be rescued out of a lost
condition; let it never be my sin and curse, to throw my self out of Heaven, to
cast my self out of Paradise again, for a sins sake which formerly lost me, to
depart from mercy, which has graciously found me.

7. If a found person does stray, he cannot be quiet until he be If he do stray
he is not quiet till he come back again.
found, and come back again to his God. I sal. 119. 176. I have gone astray
like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: There is this difference twixt the
strayings of the Godly, and of the wicked; when a wicked man strayes he is then
at home, (sin is his home, and sinful paths are the paths in which he loves to
wander; the mire and dirt are the delightful home of the Swine) and therefore
he delights to be abroad, and cares not to come back again: But a Godly man, if
he strayes, if he sins, he is now from home, he sees some steps of lostness in
every step of sinfulness, his heart is apt presently to smite him for it; Alas!
what have I done? whether am I going? shall I go again from my Fathers House?
what ayled me thus to step aside? I cannot rest thus, I will home again what
ever comes of it. And back he comes with an ashamed heart, as Ephraim did; and
with a mourning heart, as Peter did; and with a self-judging heart, as David
did: O my God, O my Father, I, even I have sinned, sinned again; yet for
Christ's sake, accept of me again. Me thinks it is with him, just as it is with
a poor Child, whom evil company has seduced from home; his heart aches, and he
slips from them, and under a Bush he sits, and there bethinks himself, and
sighs, and weeps as if his heart would break; after which he rises, and home
he comes, and steals to the door, and listens, and knocks softly; and the
Servants comes forth, and, say they, where have you been all this while? O,
your Father wonders at you! and has been much troubled that you have dealt
thus with him: Now the child takes on, and is cut to the heart; and will not my
Father be pacifyed? I know that I have oftended him, and dealt unkindly with
him: Never had a Child so good a Father; I pray you, speak for me, and tell
him, I am without. Let him come in, says his Father: In he comes, and falls
down, and with floods of tears acknowledges his strayings, and humbly entreats
his Father to pass by this wandering, and to own him again, and to look on him
as he was wont to do: O Sir, (says he) I cannot live without your favor, nor
will I live out of your house. Even thus is it with a found Child of God, if he
happens to stray and sin, his heart smites him, and his heart aches; (O says
he) what have I done to deal thus with my good God and Father, I am ashamed and
grieved; To one Minister he goes, and perhaps to another; Do you think that the
Lord will be merciful to me again? Yea, to God he goes, and confesses all, and
beseeches him to deal with him like a Father: Lord, (says he) it has been a
woeful and bitter time to me, I cannot stand it out; I come in unto thee, sin is
my burden, and thy displeasure is my burden: I beseech thee to pardon the
trespass of thy servant, and be reconciled unto me, and own me with thy favor
and mercy once again.

8. He who is truly found by Gods Grace and Mercy, does desire He endeavors so
find others.
and endeavor to find others, or that others may also be found; J^. 1. 43, 45.
Christ finds Philip, and Philip finds Nathaniel: There is no good man who would
partake of Grace and Heaven alone; and there is no wicked man who would enjoy
sin and hell alone: Wicked men are like those that are drowning, who catch hold
on others; and every good man is like a Candle, which being lighted holds out
light to others; or like a stick of fire, which being kindled, would kindle
more sticks: Good Lord, the same Mercy, the same Grace, the same Christ, the
same reconciled God, and Father for my poor Child too, and for my poor Husband
too, and for my poor Parents too: O Lord, pity them too, they are lost, and
they know not the misery of a lost condition, nay, the happiness of a found
condition: Good Lord, open their eyes, and bring them home to thy self in
Christ. And to his friends he goes; O continue not in this condition, you are
lost, I was so; Return to God, you know not the sweetness of his mercy, of his
love. 9. If God has found thee indeed, Then thou may be found in Gods ways:
The ways or course of life which a man leads, He will be found in Gods ways.
plainly discovers whether he be found or lost; a man that is still lost, he
continues in ways which are loose and lost, which will bring him to
everlasting perdition and loss: A man that is found by Grace, is now, in such
ways as brings Glory to him which finds, and also brings him to Glory who is
found; What! talk of being found by Gods mercy, and yet wallowing in thy lusts,
still running on in thy sinful base ways! what! brought back to God, and still
running away from God! Assuredly, the found man is to be found in new ways, in
the paths of righteousness and holiness; he is a shamed of his old ways, and
forsakes them: Paul is not persecuting now, but humbling himself for it, and
praying, and preaching, and living to Christ.

The next Use shall be of Exhortation unto a twofold Duty. Use 2. Exhortation.
1. To find out your lost condition. 2. To get out of a lost condition. 1.
Labor to find out your lost condition: Be convinced, To ^ind out our lost
condition. Consider. The extreme pride and selfconceltedness of every si^ner.
We shall never se^k to God, till we find our selves lost.
that naturally you are lost men. There are two Reasons which may move you to
this. 1. The extreme pride and self-conceitedness; the self-conceit, and
self-deceit in every sinner; there is no sinner thinks himself so safe and well
as the lost sinner: I have need of nothing (said Laodicea.) I was alive once
(said Paul,) We were never in bondage (said the Jews.) 2. You will never seek
unto the Lord to bring you out of a lost condition, until you ^ind your selves
lost: Who seeks his bread but the hungry? or asks the way, who thinks himself
in the way? or comes home, who is not gone abroad?

Obj. But you will say, how may a man be convinced that his condition is lost?
Sol. I answer, there are seven special convictions of it. 1. The fall of
mankind in Adam: Our nature ^even Convictions of our lost condition.
was like a stock deposited in his hand, what he had, we had; what he kept, we
kept; when he fell, we fell; and what he lost, we also lost; his condition was
not personal, but natural; not particular, but Universal: Oh, that Ship is
split, that Tree is fallen, that Stock is spent. 2. The Observation of our
ways and paths: do but eye them, and judge of them: As when God opened the
eyes of the Syrians, they saw themselves to be in the midst of Samaria; so if
God ever open thine eyes, thou will see and confess that all thy ways are but
wanderings, and all the time of thy life has been lost in iniquity, and vanity.
3. The study of the Law: Ah! When will thou read thy self in it! thou will find
thy self many a thousand mile from home, and to have been a long, very long
wanderer, a lost and undone person. Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment came, sin
revived, and I dyed. 4. A conscience enlightened and quickened: There is no one
faculty in man, which can discover his present condition to him, so certainly
and so clearly as Conscience; Men speak, fancy speaks, corrupted judgment, and
reason speak, yea, but what does conscience speak, in private, on a sick bed,
in an imm^ent judgment? 5. The judgment of Godly and experienced Christians,
who have known experimentally a lost condition, and a found condition. 6. The
un-inclination of his spirit to all Communion with God: Nay, the very aversness
of it thereto. 7. The absolute inexperience of his soul, in the family of God,
never yet knowing what such a fathers house does me^n.

Secondly, When you have found out your lost condition, then S^^^ve to get out
of this lost Condition.
strive to get out of it: O, do not continue in it, either through presumption,
that you can quickly come home, or through despair, that God now will never
look after you, nor regard you; But pray the Lord in mercy to turn thy heart,
to give thee an heart to come back unto him. Obj. But I have wandered so long,
that I shall never be accepted, nor welcomed, although I should come back. Sol.
Say not so: But consider well of these ensuing particulars. 1. The Lord says,
That he has been found of them that sought him not; and will he not then be
found of them that return and seek him? Si peccanti, quid penitenti, si erranti
quid qu^renti? If he looks after thee then, will he not look on thee now? 2.
There was never awandering lost Soul, that ever returned back to his Fathers
House, but the door has been opened to him, and he has found mercy; the
Prodigal here, Manasses, Paul etc. 3. If thou have a heart to turn home, it is
a certain sign that God intends thee mercy; he has put returning thoughts in
thee, because he has already contrived thoughts of mercy toward thee. We love
him, because he loved us first; we turn to him, because he first turned to us.
4. The Lord God has sent Jesus Christ from Heaven, to look after, and to find,
and to save that which was lost: Now, though thou can not expect to find the
door opened for thine own sake; yet thou shall see the door open, and the Arms
of Mercy open to thee, for Christ's sake. 5. How many messengers and servants
has God, and does God still send after, which cry earnestly unto thee, Come
back, return and live? Thus the Gospel cries, thus Conscience cries, thus all
thy mercies cry, thus all thy afflictions cry: If God be yet seeking after
thee, thou may yet be found; and if thou will seek, and wait a while, thy
poor lost soul shall also be found. 6. God has chalked out the ways and steps
of returning home to him. 7. God has found men in their blood, and has said
unto them, Live. Ezekiel. 6.

For this my Son was dead, and is alive again.
These words do hold forth a pithy description of a sinners conversion; that
is, a passage from death to life; or a mutation from a dead condition, into a
living condition; the estate of sin is a dead estate, yea, a deadly estate; and
the state of Grace, is a living estate, yea, a lively estate. There any many
Doctrinal Propositions, which are couched in these words: As 1. That an
impenitent, or unconverted man, is a dead man: [This my Son was dead] 2. That
when a sinner is converted, he is then made a live: [And is alive] 3. That God
does sometimes convert a very great and notorious sinner: [This, this my Son]
4. That great afflictions are sometimes the means of a great sinners
Conversion: [This my Son was] 5. That there is an almighty power, required to
convert or change a sinner [As much as to make a dead man to live.] 6. That
true Conversion is a very great and conspicuous alteration: (No change is like
that from death to life.) 7. That true Conversion is an inward, or a
soul-alteration; not of clothes, or painting: (It is the putting of life into a
dead man.) 8. That a sinner contributes nothing at all toward his Conversion,
but Conversion of a sinner, is the sole work of a God; (for it is God only, who
can quicken the dead, no dead man can make himself alive.) 9. That the Lord
takes notice of every condition of man (of the Prodigals former condition, he
was dead, and of his present condition, but he is alive again.) 10. That the
Lord does own every converted person, as a Father owns a Son: [This my Son.]

1. That an impenitent or unconverted man is a dead man [This Doct. 1. An
unconverted man, is a dead man.
my Son was dead] The sinner is in Scripture sometimes styled, A fallen man.
Hos. 14. 1. Thou have fallen by thine iniquity: Yea, but this fall is a deadly
fall; not like Eutychu's Fall, Acts 20. 29. in whom yet there was life, verse.
10. But like Ahaziah's Fall, which was deadly to him, 2 Kings 1. 4. A diseased
man, (Isa. 1. 6. From the sole of the soot even to the head, there is no
soundness) but this disease is a deadly disease; and therefore sin is called
the Plague of the heart, 1 Kings 8. No disease is so deadly as the Plague, and
no Plague is so deadly as the Plague in the heart. A wounded man (Luke 10. 30.
A certain man fell among Thieves, who wo^nded him.) But this wound is a deadly
wound, like that which the King of Babylon gave to Pharaoh, which made him
groan with the groanings of a deadly wounded man, Ezekiel. 30. 24. An inthralled
man. 2 Pet. 2. 19. Of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in
Bondage; But this Bondage is a deadly Bondage; whether of sin unto death (says
the Apostle) of the servants of sin, Romans 6. 16. A dead man; and this is the
highest, unless you say, a damned man; frequently does the Scripture Phrase
this way. Psalm 106. 28. They did eat the sacri^ices of the dead, because
offered to dead Idols, and by dead Idolaters. Prove. 21. 16. The man that
wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of
the dead, (.i.) of the ungodly, wicked, impenitent: The Ephesians, what were
they before their conversion? See Chap. 2. 1. Dead in sins and trespasses. The
Colossians, what were they before their conversion? See Chap. 2. 13. And you
being dead in your sins, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 6. The Gospel was preached to them that
were dead, (.i.) to wicked and impenitent persons; nay, Jude, v. 12. speaks of
some that were twice dead; dead in respect of Original Sin, and dead in respect
of Actual sin; or, dead in respect of corruption, and dead in respect to their
former profession. I grant, that an unconverted sinner may be alive. 1. In
respect of his own opinion: I was once alive (said Paul Romans 7. 9.) but when
the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed. 2. In the opinion of men. Rev.
3. 1. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead; So Christ of the Church
of Sardis. 3. To sinful works; he lives in them, and lives with them, and lives
to them; but this life is death, this life is a sign that he is dead, that unto
spirituals he is dead. This is a great Point, of which I am now discoursing,
and has been the subject of much dispute, as in former Ages, so in this latter
Age. There have been some that have denied (utterly) this death of a sinner;
others have held sinful men to be wounded, and to be half dead: The Pelagians
go this way, so do all the Papists, and verily the Arminians come not much
short herein; yea, most men pre^me that though they be sinners, yet that they
are not altogether dead, but some life still remains in them, or some power.
Favor me therefore, to o^en the point with some distinctions, and then I shall
confirm the truth delivered, both with Scripture and Arguments, and wind up the
rest with some profitable Applications to our Several Distinctions.
selves.

1. For the first of these I distinguish thus; Man is considerable Man
considered under a three ^^ld St^te. Of Creation. Of Degeneration. Of
Regeneration. Man in his Degeneration Considered as to Natural actions.
Political actions. Or Theological.
under a threefold estate. 1. Of Institution, or Creation: Wherein he was
alive, and had a power to live or dye. 2. Of Destitution, or Degeneration: In
this estate every man living is dead. 3. Of Restitution, o^ Regeneration: And
here he is born again, and is made alive again. Again, man in his degenerate or
fallen estate, may be considered in relation to actions, and objects, either,
1. Natural: To these he is alive; the soul in man is no dead, but living thing,
and is able to understand, will, desire, discourse, and reason; and this man
can eat, drink, sleep, etc. 2. Political: Here also life is found in him; even
a wicked man (destitute of all Grace) is alive to trade, to bargain, to buy, to
sell, to plant, to build. 3. Theological, or Spiritual: Now here the
impe^itent, or unconverted man is plane mortuus; stark dead. An understanding
(I confess) he still has, but none that is able to know God aright, or Christ,
or any saving truth (without Divine aid or Grace.) 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, If we (Apostle
and regenerate) be not sufficient, who is! if not to think, then to what! to
think, is the lowest act of po^er, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. John 1. 5. The light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. A ^ill also I grant
unto the natural and unconverted man, for he could not be a man, if he had not
a will, but this will (without Grace) cannot do any spiritual good, nor choose
it, nor love it, nor desire it: Non potest home aliquid velle nisi adjuvetur ab
eo, qui malum non potest velle: So S. Austin against Pelagius, Tom. 3. De
spiritu and Litera cap. 3. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, Joh.
15. 5. No man comes to me, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. It is God
who works in us to will and to do (says the Apostle) Phil. 2. 13. And Works, I
grant un^o this man, but spiritual work I deny to them. Quid boni petest
perditus nisi in quantum a perditione liberatus: Austin in Enchirid. c. 30.
They that are in the flesh cannot please God, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 8. An
evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, so our Savior, Mat. 7. 18. Without
says it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11. 6.

2. But let us proceed further, and search what Reasons may be produced to
demonstrate the Assertion: That the natural, or Reasons of it.
unconverted man is spiritually dead, and as to spirituals altogether dead;
Thus then, 1. He who has no Communion at all with H^ ^ath no communion with
the principles of spiritual life.
the principles of spiritual life, is (in a spiritual sense) altogether dead;
for where there is no principle of life, there cannot be any thing but death:
Toll animam, toll vitam; but the impenitent and unconverted sinner, has no
communion with any one principle of spiritual life: Therefore, etc. There is a
twofold principle of this life. 1. A primitive conjunction with God, in the
estate of Innocence; but this is lost. 2. Arenewed Conjunction with God by
Christ; but yet this is not attained to by an unconverted sinner. It is a
confessed truth, that Jesus Christ is the Author of spiritual life to the
sinner: He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has not
life, Joh. 5. 17. And the sinner has it partly by Faith, which taking Christ,
takes life from him; by the Spirit of Regeneration, which renews, and makes him
alive; but the unconverted sinner, has neither the one, nor the other; had he
either, he were then converted.

2. Original sin (whilst reigning) is a complete cause of spiritual Original
sin, is a complete cause of spiritual death.
death: But original sin reigns in the impenitent and unconverted sinner,
therefore he is dead. The Fathers have diversely Phrased Original sin; some call
it Venenum Syerpentis, so Cprian; others Plagam serpentis, so Ireneus; others
Vitium parentum, so Pau^inius in Austin; the Apostle Paul calls it, sometimes,
the body of sin, sometimes, the body of death, sometimes, the Law of sin and
death, sometimes, the Uncircumcision of the heart. Our Divines generally
conceive two things in it, viz. In Original sin, there is 1. A total
deprivation of original righteousness: The Faculties remain, but the Rectitude
is gone. It is reported of an excellent Philosopher, that he fell into a
Disease, which dashed out all the Learning that ever he acquired, so that he
forgot even his own Name. Original sin is like the extinguishing of a Candle;
the Candle remains still, but the Light is gone: Or like the quenching of red
Iron; the Iron remains, but the fiery redness is all gone: Or like a Tree, the
Limbs remain, but the Life is gone. It is an Universal spoil; it has robbed us
of all our supernaturals; worse to us than the Devil to Job, who took away all
that he had, yet spared his Life: But Original Sin not only took away Paradise
and Righteousness, but all self-power so much as to desire to be good. 2. A
total depravation of all the man. Seges ubi Troia: The Soul of Man was once
like a Garden, fully set with the sweetest Flowers of Righteousness; but now it
is become like a Wilderness run over and filled with Briars and Thorns: Or it
is like a Face, which once was the most curious of features, (every part
expressing most amiable sweetness;) now it is like the same Face, most deformed
with the clusters of the Pox, and the very shame and reproach of it self. There
is not a Faculty in the Soul, but it is like the Bough of a fruitful Tree,
thickly laden with Iniquity: It is a Spring, bubling out nothing but
aversation, enmity, resistance to spiritual good; and readiness, inclination,
eagerness, unsatiableness to all that is evil: God saw that every imagination
of the thoughts of the heart of man was only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. The
best of men complain of blindness, of dullness, of deadness; Alas then, what, or
how is it with the worst of men? Paul could not do good, a wicked man would not
do good: Paul complains for want of power; what then may an unconverted man do!
By all this (I think) it manifectly appears, That the unconverted man is
spiritually dead, because Original Sin reigns in him; (if in any, then in him;)
and where Original Sin reigns, there is a total privation or absence of all
spiritual Life, and total corruption or presence of spiritual Death in the
Soul. The terms used in Scripture to express conversion.


3. The Terms used in Scripture to express a sinners conversion, do seem
sufficiently weighty, to prove, That before his conversion he was spiritually
dead: For it is set forth sometimes, By the Resurrection of the dead; Ephesians. 5.
14. Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the dead. By the Generation of a
person. Of his own good will begat he us with the word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. By
Creation. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Now
observe; if Conversion be a Resurrection, a spiritual Resurrection, then the
soul before Conversion was spiritually dead; if Conversion be a Regeneration,
then a new life is brought into the soul, which it totally wanted before: If
Conversion be a Creation, and the converted man qua talis be a new creature,
then he had no spiritual being before. If spiritual Life be a creature only of
Christ's making, then, etc.

4. To me, those spiritual Promises which God makes, of giving The promises of
giving a spiritual being and life.
a spiritual being and life, do abundantly clear, that man is dead: As, of
pouring forth the Spirit of Grace, giving his Spirit, taking away the heart of
Stone, and giving the heart of Flesh, of giving Knowledge, Love, Fear, etc.
Such kinds of Promises imply three things: 1. Our total want and need; 2. Gods
undertaking to bestow them; 3. A free and total donation of them to us on Gods
part.

5. S. Austin uses the Duty of Prayer, to prove this Assertion The duty of,
Prayer.
against the Pelagians; Petenda a Deo bona omnia, ergo nihil boni ex nobis
possumus. And in an Epistle to Vitalis, he says, Prorsus non oramus Deum, sed
orare nos singimus si nos ipsos non illum credimus facere quod oramus.

6. I will add but one Argument more, viz. That man is totally dead, (quantum
ad spiritualia,) who cannot so much as Man cannot prepare himself to life.
prepare himself, no not remotely, no not in any degree unto the life of Grace:
But, the Unconverted man cannot (virtute propria, and without supernatural
aid,) in the least degree prepare himself, etc. for, without that aid, he
cannot desire deliverance out of his sinful estate, nor mourn over it, nay not
feel it, nay not spiritually know it.

The Use which I desire to make of this Point, I shall reduce unto, 1.
Information, 2. Trial, 3. Instruction.

1. For Information. Is every natural and unconverted man a Information.
spiritually dead man? Hence we may be informed of several The unconverted man
is in the saddest condition.
Truths. 1. That the unconverted man is, of all men on the earth, in the
saddest, vilest, miserablest condition: Why? Because he is spiritually dead,
dead, spiritually dead. A wounded man is in a tedious condition, and a diseased
man is in a languishing condition; but what is a wound to death? what is a
disease to death? Me morienti mori; Death is the Sunset of all comfort; Death
is the drowning of a little world; Death is the very Hermitage of forgetfulness
and loathsome corruption: Death is the lowest and vilest condition; what then
is a spiritual Death? No Death like the spiritual Death. O my friends, consider
spiritual Death, either in comparison, in its proper complexion, Consider this
death.
or in the consequents of it, surely, no Death, no condition is so dismal as
it. 1. In comparison with any other In comparison with other death.
Death: This is the worst, this is the heaviest. There is the Death of our
Goods and Estate, (into which Job fell;) of our Name and Reputation, (into
which David fell;) of our Bodies and natural Life, (into which Lazarus fell;)
of the Soul, the immortal soul of man, into which every unconverted sinner is
fallen: Now what is a dead Estate to a dead Soul? Or what is a dead Name to a
dead Soul? Or what is a dead Body to a dead Soul? It is not so much as the
death of a Dog to the death of a Man. Every unconverted man has a dead soul; a
converted man may have a troubled soul, but the unconverted man has a dead
soul, sin has slain his precious soul; If the soul be dead, what is alive?
What is that man whose soul is dead? In all other deaths, something is alive;
if Goods be gone, the Name lives; if the Name be gone, the Body lives; if the
Body be gone, the Soul lives: But if the Soul also be gone, what lives? 2. In
it self: Why spiritual Death is a total privation of God, In i^ self.
of Christ, of Grace; no life of God, no life of Christ, no life of Grace is
there in any unconverted person; none at all. Ah poor wretch! what art thou,
and what is thy condition, who art thus dead? A total corruption, diffusion,
possession with sin. S. Austin affirms, That the very Virtues of the Heathens
were but splendida peccata, mere flowers on a dead man: And Solomon, The
sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. What a ghastly s^ght
would it be, to open a grave, and see the dead body run over with crawling
worms, and a general putrefaction over all the parts! And truly, so it is with
the soul of an unconverted person; it is the filthiest, nastiest, corruptedst,
may I say, C^^^on. Luther said once, So many sins, so many hells; surely, I may
then say, So many Sins, so many Deaths. The unconverted man is full of sin: his
heart is full of evil, so Soloman; He is filled with all unrighteousness, so
Paul affirms. Job was filled with botches, yea, but he was not filled with
sins; and Lazarus was filled with sores, yea, but he was not filled with sins;
and David's soul was filled with complaints, and Christ's soul was filled which
sorrow, yea, but it was not filled with sin. Every unconverted man's dead soul
is filled with living sins, as a good man's soul is filled with dying and dead
sins; and a soul full of living sins, is much like a soul filled up with
Hel-fire. There is no evil so evil as sin, and no sin so evil as living sin,
and no living sin so evil as a fullness and an onliness of living sin. 3. In the
consequents of it: I will name but three of them, In the consequents of it.
1. All the guilt of all those sins lie on him alone. 2. All the wrath of God
looks on him, the sentence of curse. 3. An eternal death may soon befall him.

2. Then no marvel, that public and private admonitions, counsels, No marvel
that admonitions, reproofs, counsels, prevail not with most men.
reproofs, prevail not with the most of men. We Ministers preach, and we think
we preach Religion, and with evidence enough of Reason, and deliver things
fairly and plainly and convincingly; and now we wonder at it, that men should
hear such clear and undeniable truths, and not be moved and persuaded! And
Parents give admirable counsels and instructions to their Children, and no good
comes of them! etc. Why Sirs, are not unconverted men dead men? And what can
all our undertakings (alone considered) do unto dead men? Assuredly, unless the
Lord of Life himself will speak these counsels and these admonitions unto
sinful men, they will never hear them so as to be stirred, so as to be moved,
so as to be converted by them; they will remain in their sinful condition and
obstinate ways to eternity.

3. Then it is of Gods mere mercy, and pity, and power, if ever It is Gods
mercy that any soul is converted.
thy poor soul be converted: Never ascribe it to thy excellency, (what
excellency is there in a dead man?) to thy power, (what power is there where
there is no life?) to thy self preparations, (what active disposing or
preparation can a dead man afford?) The dead sinner is the mere object of
purest mercy, and the dead sinner is without all strength; if ever his souls
lives, then to Christ must that life own it self, and to Divine Mercy, and
Power, etc.

The next Use shall be for Trial or Examination. Since every unconverted man is
spiritually dead; let us therefore search our Use 2. Trial, Whether we be
spiritually dead. Four Tokens of it.
hearts, in what a condition they are: Are not many of us yet dead in sins and
trespasses? spiritually dead men? There are four Tokens of a man spiritually
dead. 1. Vnsensibleness: Where there is no life, there is no sense; of all
sinners, the unsensible sinner is in the most deadly condition. Tanto pejor
quanto insensibiliter, says Austin. Do what you will to a dead man, he is
Unsensibleness.
unsensible of it; call to him, he hears not; put the sweetest perfumes to him,
he smells not; kick him, cut him, burn him, he feels not; although he be full of
loathsomness, he perceives it not. Now I beseech you mind this Trial; for
verily, if spiritual unsensibleness prevail upon you, you are spiritually dead:
If spiritual sense be the first evidence of Life, then e contra, spiritual
unsensibleness is a sure evidence of Death: And what spiritual sensation is yet
wrought in you? There are sins upon sins (mountains upon mountains) in your
hearts, the least of them has been an heavy burden to a living soul, but what
have thou ever felt of thy sinful heart and life? There is in the Ministry of
the Gospel, no less than riches of Mercy, freeness of Love, glories of Heaven
tendered to you; but what do you perceive in it? Did thou never yet feel and
cry out of a body of Death? O here, here is a dead heart, an ignorant heart, a
proud heart, an unbelieving heart, an heart in which there is no good, in which
is all evil. Ah poor man, thou art a dead man; no feeling, no complaining, no
crying out of thy heart against all those many many vile and notorious sins.

2. An universal and constant coldness. If life be gone, heat is gone; the Feet
are cold, and the Hands are cold, and the whole An universal and constant
coldness.
Body is cold, and the very Heart is cold too: A living man may have cold hands
and feet, but he never has a cold heart; for life is there, and heat is there.
Why! there is no one converted man under heaven, but he has some heat in him;
though not much in some of his actions, yet certainly some in his heart: O,
says he, I approve of what is good, and I would do good, and I delight in the
Law of God after the inward man; I believe, Lord help my unbelief. But now, an
unconverted man has, 1. A cold heart unto any spiritual good. Suppose he be at
Prayer, and at Sermon; why! but he has no heart to or in these duties, he has
no mind to these works, no delight in them, or in the Sabbath, or in a Fast;
and though his body be present, yet his heart is afar off, it goes after his
covetousness. 2. And this Coldness is universal: There is not any one spiritual
Duty, unto which his heart is not dead or cold. He will tell you when he hears
Catechizing, I should like Preaching; and so when he hears Preaching, I could
like Praying; and so when Praying comes, I could like Reading; and when Reading
comes, I could like Meditating; and when that comes, I could like Practicing;
and when Practicing comes, I could like Understanding: But he dissembles, he
loves not one Duty at all; his heart to these is like a sick stomach, that
seems to like any thing but what it has, but indeed likes no meat. 3. And it
is also constant: I confess, even a good and converted heart may find sometimes
more actual indispositions to good than at other times, and sometimes a greater
measure of dullness and deadness; but an heart constantly cold, from one end of
the year to another, all the life long, still to loath spiritual services,
never to attain unto a delightful and affectionate communion with God, This is
a Token of a dead soul.

3. Where the Word preached is but a dead Letter unto the hearer, Where the
Word preach^d is but a dead Letter.
certainly that man is in a dead condition. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost, says the Apostle: So may I say, If our Gospel be dead, it
is so only to them that are dead. The Gospel is the great Trumpet of Christ,
the Silver Trumpet by which he raises the dead; as, at the last, he shall
raise the dead by the Voice of the Trumpet; this is that by which Jesus Christ
quickens and pulls a soul out of its sinful condition. 1. It lets in light to
see that condition: 2. It affects Conscience to feel it: 3. It puts in Faith to
go to Christ to fetch life: Yet many men are not wrought on at all by the
Gospel preached: Unmoveableness is the token of a dead man.

4. A delight in dead things, and in dead works, plainly declare A delight in
dead works.
a dead condition. Paul, in Ephesians. 2. 1. tells the Ephesians, that they were
once dead; but how did that appear? See verse. 2. In time past ye walked
according to the course of this world. And verse. 3. Ye had your conversation in
the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. 1.
In dead things: Dead men are heavy, and descend to the earth; worldly things
are the Optima and the Vltima of an unconverted heart. Who will show us any
good? Psalm. 4. If that of Paul (Col. 3. 1, 2. If ye be risen with Christ, then
seek those things that are above, and set your affections on things that are
above,) be a true sign of a living raised man, then e contra, to seek, to
settle affections on things below, is a true sign of a dead man. 2. In dead
works: These opera mortua and mortifera. And truly, nothing does more discover
a spiritual death, than a delight, and a service of sin; certainly, such a man
is yet an unconverted man.

The last Use shall be for Instruction unto several Duties. I will but glance a
them. 1. Have as little society with wicked men Use 3. Instruction. Have as
little society with unconverted men as may be.
as may be; for they are dead men: Would any man living have a dead man to be
his companion? There is a twofold Society with men: 1. One is necessary, in
respect of our Relations, or of our Commerce and Trade, which cannot well be
avoided: 2. Another is arbitrary, in respect of our Election; avoid this, do
not make choice of wicked society. There are two Reasons to hearken to this
advice: One is, You shall never get any spiritual good by their society; a
wicked man is an unprofitable man; Can any one gather Figs of Thorns, or Grapes
of Thistles? Who is the better for a dead man? Another is, You shall receive
much hurt by such society: The Jews were unclean, if they did but touch a dead
body. It was the practice of a Tyrant once, to tie a dead man to a living man,
that the filthy savor of the dead man might infect and destroy the life of the
living man. O you who are to marry your children, take heed of marrying them to
the dead; and you who are Freemen, take heed of embracing society with the
dead. There are three notorious mischiefs will ensue hereupon: 1. Dead society
will, by degrees, bring you into a deadness of heart; wicked company will
certainly abate your zeal and holy affections, as waters do the flaming fire:
2. Dead society will quench your Life in spiritual Duties; they will not only
interrupt, but mitigate your sweet and wonted society with God* and good men:
3. Dead society will, in time, corrupt you to dead works: Remember Solomon.

2. Lament and bewail thy unconverted Friends and Kindred. Lament thy
unconverted friends.
You read that David wept for Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son, etc. and you
read, that Christ wept for Lazarus, being dead; and you read, of both of these
weeping also for those that were spiritually dead: David, Psalm. 119. Rivers of
tears run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy Law. Christ came near to
Jerusalem, and wept over it, saying, Oh if thou had known, even thou, at the
least in, etc. Would not thou weep to see thy Fathers, or Mothers, or
Sisters, or Brothers dead body carrying out to the grave? and say, Alas my
Father, alas my Brother, alas my Child? How then can thou refrain tears for
their dead souls? Why do not thou pity the dead and unconverted soul of thy
Father? etc. At a Funeral Feast, there is no mirth, because the Master of the
house is dead: Ah, weep over thy Father, over thy Son; the Master of the house
is dead, his precious soul is dead: Thy pity can do a dead body no good, but it
may do a dead soul some good, especially, if you take in the next Duty, which
is,

3. Pray for the dead: I mean not in the Popish sense; they, Pray for the Dead.
you know, pray for souls departed, supposing them to be in Purgatory, where
the pains, as they say, are intolerable, equal to them in Hell, and the souls
are deprived of the vision of God; and therefore their Priests and others often
pray for them; and upon the Graves they inscribe, Pray for the soul of such a
one, and on his soul Jesu have mercy: But this is a wicked superstition. We
acknowledge no Purgatory, and no need of Prayers for souls departed, yet we
hold Prayers requisite for one another, whiles we are upon the earth. And
because some are dead whiles they live, O pray to the Lord for them; Lord Jesu,
have mercy upon the soul of my Husband, Child, Wife; O convert them, quicken
them from the dead, suffer them not, their poor souls, to die for ever. When
Steven was to die, he prayed for those that were spiritually dead: When Christ
was dying, he also prayed for them: And Monica, the Mother of Austin, prayed
for him; and all of them were heard. Object. But I have prayed, but yet no good
comes of it. Sol. Pray still; as long as there is life, and as long as there is
prayer, there is hope: It will be an excellent comfort to thee, and eternal
happiness to thy friend, if thou can, at length, by thy prayers, prevail with
God to deliver that one soul from death. Use the means by which you may be
quickened.


4. If the Lord has opened any of your eyes but to see what your spiritual
condition is, that you are yet in your graves, yet dead in tre^passes and s^^s;
my advice unto you is this, Go, use the means by which your dead souls may be
quickened. Object. Why! but this is ridiculous, to bid a dead man do work, go,
stir, do any thing. Sol. I answer, 1. There is a difference twixt a man
corporally dead, and a man spiritually dead: The former can do no action
whatsoever, neither spiritual, nor civil, nor natural; the latter, though he
can do nothing in spirituals, yet for the other, he may, and can. 2. You must
distinguish twixt a spiritual action, and an action which brings to a spiritual
means: He cannot convert his own heart, yet he has power to hear the Word,
which can. It Is true, that a wicked unconverted man cannot exert any one
spiritual action; nevertheless, he has liberty and power to go to Church, and
hear a Sermon: Why! use this power, and this liberty, to come to the Pool where
the Angel stirs; to come to the Ordinances, where God is pleased to quicken and
raise the dead. 3. When thou art under a spiritual Ordinance, thou art under
the voice of Christ himself, who has said, That the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and live. And truly, let me tell thee, That the Voice of
Jesus Christ in his Word, has not only a power to find a lost man, but also to
quicken a dead man.

I have finished the first Proposition out of these words, viz. Luke 15. 24.
That the unconverted man is a dead man: I now proceed to the second, which is
this;

That every converted man is a living man. When the sinner Doct. 2. Every
converted man is a living man.
is converted, he is then made alive. Conversion is a Sinners Life. So the
Text, This my son is alive again. It is reported of Similis, Captain of the
Guard to the Emperor Adrian, that he retired from the Court into the Country
seven years before his death, and caused this to be written on his Tomb, Hi^
jacet Similis cu^us aet as multoru^ annorum ^uit, ipse septem duntaxat annos
vixit: For so many years only was he converted. We count the length of our
lives from the time of our birth, and we must count the life of our souls from
the time of our new birth, said Hierom. It is frequent in Scripture, to style
converted persons living persons, or persons made alive, Romans 6. 13. Yield your
selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead. Chap. 8. v. 10. If
Christ be in you, the spirit is life because of righteousness. Gal. 2. 20. I
live, says Paul. Col. 2. 13. You who were dead in your sins has he quickened.
For the advantageous discussion of this Point, I shall briefly open unto you,
1. What Life that is, which the converted sinner attains unto? 2. How it may
appear that he is invested with such a Life? and why? 3. Then the useful
Application of all this* unto our selves.

1. What Life that is, wherewith the converted man is invested? What is the
life of a converted sinner, A fourfold life. Natural.
Sol. I speak only of that Life incident unto man, which is fourfold. 1. Life
natural, which is a power to move and act. I count not my life dear unto me,
said Paul, Act. 20. 24. All that a man has he will give for his life, Job 1.
This is the Life of Nature, and every man, good or bad, enjoys it. 2. Life
connatural; which is a prosperous fruition of our Lives Life connatural.
with peace, contentment, and comfortable successes, in the external matters
and affairs of our life: This also is possibly incident to all sorts of men. 3.
Preternatural; which is a death, Preternatural.
rather than a life: A sinful life, a life acted under the power and motion of
sinful lusts. I was alive once, said Paul, Romans 7. In this respect, wicked and
ungodly men only are alive. 4. Supernatural; Supernatural.
a divine life, a new life, a life in Christ, and from Christ, and to Christ:
Of which there are two parts, and they are proper only to converted persons. 1.
There is the Life of Grace, which they enjoy in this world: 2. There is the
Life of Glory, which they enjoy in the world to come, called often in
Scripture, eternal life. The Text speaks of the first of these; The The life of
Grace, is The life of Justification.
converted sinner is invested with the Life of Grace: And this again is
branched into the life of, 1. Justification; for when a sinner is justified, he
is then in the condition of life: The unjustified man is a dead man, (for he
lies under the sentence of death;) and the justified man is a living man, he is
passed from death to life; the Lord takes off the sentence of eternal death
from him; He shall not die for the sins which he has committed, for I have
pardoned all his sins, and now he shall live, and not die, says the Lord. 2.
Sanctification: When a sinner is sanctified, Of Sanctification. Which may be
considered, In the cause of it.
he is then made alive. At this, I suppose, the Text does principally aim. This
Life is considerable, 1. In the Cause of it, which is no other but the Spirit
of Jesus Christ, who unites Christ and the Soul together; and upon this union,
the Soul is quickened with the life of Christ. I live by the faith of the Son of
God, Gal. 2. 20. 2. In the Nature of it; it is a novum and spirituale esse,
which does regenerate the man, and, as it were, create him In the nature of it.
again. The Scripture styles this quality, a new creature, and the new man: It
is an holy living principle. In a word, this life is nothing else but the Grace
of the Spirit, regenerating, and renewing the whole soul of a sinner. It is
saving light set up in the Mind, and saving wisdom set up in the Judgment, and
saving grace set up in the Will and Affections, which alter the old sinful
nature in man, and are a new spiritual inclination to matters that are
spiritual, yea, and a new spiritual ability or power in the whole soul of man
to work that is spiritual: Whereas the Understanding could not know the things
of God, now it is enabled to know them, and to admire them, and to study them:
whereas the Will was both unable to good, and unwilling to good, and only set
on what was evil; now, being quickened by Grace, it is drawn off from that
affectionate inclination to evil, and it is bent and inclined, and in some
measure enabled to desire Christ, to love Jesus Christ, to fear God, to obey
God, and to walk with God: And when this comes into the heart of a sinner, he
is said to be alive again.

Shall I draw out my thoughts of this Subject more clearly unto When a sinner
is made alive. Jesus Christ applies himself unto the soul, and breaths into it
the breath of life.
you? Take me then thus. When any sinner is made spiritually alive, 1. Jesus
Christ applies himself to the Soul, and he breaths into it the Spirit of Life.
He does with a poor dead soul, much like as Eliah did with the Shunamites dead
child; who lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon the child's mouth, and his
eyes upon the child's eyes, and his hands upon the child's hands; and he
stretched himself upon the child, and the flesh of the child waxed warm: So the
Lord Jesus applies himself by his Spirit to the soul of a sinner, (to all the
soul of a sinner,) and works mightily in it, producing knowledge in a blind
mind, and feeling in an hard heart, and faith in an unbelieving spirit, and all
his Graces in the whole Soul. 2. Which gracious principles He puts in living
principles.
are all of them living principles; and alter all the soul, and incline it
spiritually: So that the man who cared not for God, nor Christ, nor Grace, nor
holy Duties heretofore; now his soul bends to these, and he minds these, and he
is never better than when he is thinking of God, and mourning for his sins, and
thirsting for Christ, and praying to God, and hearing of the Word of God; this
is his desire, and this is his delight. 3. There is a power in these principles
of spiritual life. A power There is power of spiritual life in these principles.
against his sins; so that now he can hate them, and say, What have I to do any
more with Idols? Get ye hence. And a power in his affections; so that now he is
able to love God above all, and able to fear God, and not displease him
willingly. And a power in his will; so that now he is able to come to Christ,
and cleave to Christ, as his only happiness. And a power to spiritual actions;
so that he is now able to hear and understand, to pray and wrestle, to pray and
believe, to believe and repent.

Quest. 2. How it may be evidenced, that the converted man is How this may be
evidenced.
thus made spiritually alive. Sol. Thus, 1. Every converted man has a living
union with Jesus Christ; he is brought into He has a living union with Christ.
fellowship with Christ. Now Jesus Christ is a living Head, and all his members
are living Members. 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life. And Joh. 6.
51. I am the living bread, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever. (...) 2. All true grace is of a living nature: False grace is a dead
thing, it True grace is of a living nature.
has no life, and can give no life; but true grace is living. True ^aith is a
living faith, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. And true hope
is a living hope; 1 Pet. 1. 3. God has begotten us to a lively hope. 3. Every
converted man is the child of the living God; he is born of the Spirit, who is
the Spirit of life. He is a child of the living God.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; and God as a Father never
begets any dead Children: All his children are begot after his own image; they
are partakers of the Divine nature, and that is a living nature. (...) 4. The
converted man lives the rest He lives the rest of his life to God.
of his life unto God. 1. Pet. 3. 2. None of us lives to himself; for whether
we live, we live unto the Lord, Romans 14. 8. Can he possibly live unto the Lord,
until he be made alive by the Lord? What glory can God get by the life of a
dead sinner? The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day,
said Hez^kiah, Isa. 38. 19. God must have much glory from the converted man;
not only passive glory on him, (this he has on wicked men,) but active glory
from him, glory from his believing, and glory from his obedience, which cannot
be unless he be made alive, spiritually alive.

The Use of this Doctrine shall be to draw you into a searching acquaintance
with your spiritual condition. There is not Use. Trial of our selves about our
spiritual life.
a business which can possibly concern you more nearly than this, Whether you
be children of Death, or of Life? Whether yet dead in sins, or quickened by the
life of grace? Can it be said of us as here of the Prodigal, This my Son was
dead, but is alive? So we were sometimes disobedient, ignorant, proud, vile,
serving diverse lusts: but after that the grace of God has appeared, we are
alive; we have put off those lusts, and have other Principles, other Natures,
other Lives. Let me offer unto you four Motives, to try your souls about their
spiritual Motives to this Trial.
Life.

1. You have enjoyed the means of Life, The Gospel is often You have enjoied
the means of life.
called, the Word of Life, a quickening and regenerating Word; it carries Christ
in it, the Author of Life; and the Apostle calls it, the Ministration of Life:
And perhaps it has been so to some poor man and woman, and to some of thy
children. But O how long have thou heard it? how often have thou come to this
Bread of Life? to these Waters of Life? What! and yet dead in thy sins? not yet
quickened and made alive? Why! thou art a reproach to the Gospel; and thy sins
have not only given, death to thy soul, but death to the Gospel of Christ, the
Gospel is made by them a dead Letter; it is not so in it self, but thou have
made it so: And how will thou answer God, for killing thy soul, and killing his
Christ, and killing his Gospel?

2. Many have a name that they live, but (like the Angel of Many have a name to
live, and yet are dead.
the Church of Sardis) they are dead, Revel. 3. 1. Oh Sirs! Spiritual life,
(the life of grace,) is a rare thing, and a difficult thing. Every man loves
his life, but few love this life: No man hates his own life (almost,) but most
men hate this life of grace, because it is destructive to this life of sin: And
many think they have it, and others think so too, and yet they have it not. You
know, it is one thing to put Flowers upon a dead body, and another thing to put
life into a dead man: It is one thing for the Sun to convey light, another
thing for the Sun to convey life. I might show you, that m^n mistake spiritual
life exceedingly: Education in a person may lead him far, and so may an
enlightened and generous Conscience, and so may restraining Grace, and so may
Art, and so may the common gifts of the Spirit; they may enable a man to
strange conceptions, and strange affections, and strange actions, and yet the
man may be spiritually dead: Not any of these flow from a gracious principle of
spiritual life: Why! common Gifts may lead up the soul far, and Education may
lead to Duties much, and Conscience may awe sin exceedingly, and Art or
Hypocrisy may counterfeit the very life of Grace (as a Stage Player does a
King) wonderfully. O therefore, look to it, that you have more than a name of
life; that you live indeed.

3. If you should deceive your selves, and when you come to It would be very
sad to be deceived in this.
die, you find that you have been dead all your lives, and never were
spiritually made alive; Oh! in what a condition will thy poor trembling soul
be! To die, and see nothing but death! I thought there was life in my heart,
and life in my strong faith, and life in my troubles of spirit, and life in my
obedience; but alas, I never lived, I never enjoyed Christ, never enjoyed
grace, etc.

4. If the Lord has made thee alive from the dead, I do not To be alive, is
cause of great joy.
know any man living on the earth, that has such cause of joy unspeakable and
glorious. I will mention but three particulars unto thee. 1. Hereby thou may
be assured of thy interest in the richest mercy, and greatest love of God to
thy poor soul. Read but the Apostle in Ephesians. 2. 4. But God, who is rich in
mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, v. 5. even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us. 2. Thou may palpably discover the tokens and
virtues of Jesus Christ upon thy soul, the very Effigies of the saving works of
Christ; that which Paul so longed to know, even the power of the death and of
the resurrection of Christ, Philip. 3. 10. In thy death to Sin, and in thy life
of Grace, does the power of Christ's death, and of Christ's resurrection appear.
3. Thou may certainly know, that Heaven shall be the place of thy rest
hereafter. Spiritual life comes from Heaven, and bends to Heaven, and shall
bring to Heaven: It prepares for Heaven, and it is a part of Heaven, and it
shall be perfected and filled up in Heaven. O what things are these! who would
miss of these! For Christ's sake, search thoroughly whether you be made alive.

Now me thinks I hear some soul secretly longing to know how it may be cleared
un^o it, That God has quickened it from the Signs of spiritual life.
dead; That as it was once dead, yet it is now alive. Sol. There are many
things which may clearly declare it; for indeed, life is such an active thing,
(especially spiritual life,) that it may easily appear, sometimes or other, to
him who has it.

1. If sin be alive, then thou art still dead; and if sin be dead, thou art
certainly alive. I will open both these par^s. 1. If sin be alive, then the man
is dead; for it is impossible that the If sin be alive, the man is dead.
same man should be alive and dead under the same consideration. Spiritual Life
and spiritual Death are incompatible at the same time in the same subject: And
therefore, if sin be alive, questionless you are spiritually dead. Now there
are four things which manifest sin to be alive in any man's soul. 1. The flaming
bents, and in^atiable desires of the heart, after things forbidden in the Word.
Ephesians. 4. 19. we read of sin with greediness 2. The universal and easy
authority, law, or command that it has over the soul and body; that it can use
them in the service of lusts, when, and as it pleases, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 3. The
joyful contentation and satisfaction which the heart takes in evil things; as
we do in meat and drink. 4. The customary trade and course of our life in
sinful ways; a walking in them, a living in them. O, if these be yet found in
thee, sin is alive still, and thou art dead still. 2. But if sin be dead, thou
art certainly alive. If sin be dead, thou art alive.
I confess, sin may be restrained, and a man not alive; and sin may be
troublesome in some respects, and a man not yet alive: But if it be dead, the
man is spiritually alive; for sin in thee can never come to be dead, but by
spiritual life. Now sin is dead in thee, if thou can find two things. 1. If
it has lost thy affections: If love to sin be gone, and hatred of sin be come;
if delight in sin be quenched, and sorrow for sin be implanted. Oh Sirs! the
love of sin is the life of sin; and if the hatred of sin does live, then the
love of sin is dead. 2. If it has lost its Authority, its free and
uncontrolled power; although it molests still, and tempts still, yet it rules
not, thou art not a slave to it, and subject to it, thou will not serve it,
obey it any longer: If thou have Christ for thy Lord, the Law of Christ for thy
Rule, and Sin for thy Enemy, thou art alive.

2. A second sign of spiritual life is, a spiritual sense of spiritual wants.
This is an undoubted truth, That where there is A spiritual sense of spiritual
wants.
life, there is sense; and where there is sense, there is life: If the life be
a spiritual life, then the sense is a spiritual sense, a feeling of our
spiritual wants. When the Prodigal began to live, he began to feel; to feel; to
feel his nakedness, to feel his poverty, to feel his wants: And when Paul began
to live, he began to see his wants; Romans 7. 14. The law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin: I know that in me there dwells no good thing; how to
perform that which is good, I find not. O when God gives grace unto the heart,
that grace, though never so weak; affords two operations: 1. It gives you a
clearer sight of sin; 2. it gives you a fuller sight of your wants. It is
Learning which makes us to see how much Learning we want; it is Health which
makes you see how much Health you want; it is Grace which makes you see how
little Grace you have, and how much you still need: No man rightly feels the
want of more Faith, but by some Faith; the want of more Softness, but by some
Softness.

Object. But now the Question may be, How a man may How a spiritual sense may
be known.
know, that the sense of his wants be a spiritual sense of them? for many men
say that they want such and such spiritual Graces, and yet they have not a
spiritual life in them. Sol. I answer^ There are four things which declare the
sense of our spiritual wants to be a true spiritual sense: 1. Ordinarily, it
follows after a deep Conviction of sin; that man It follows after a deep
conviction of sin.
deceives himself, who talks of spiritual wants, and yet never saw his
spiritual fullness of sin. The Lords ordinary way in Conversion is, To strip us
wholly of our selves; and therefore, 1. He opens our eyes to see how rich we
have been in sin; 2. To see how poor and nothing we are in Grace. 2. If it be a
spiritual sense, it is an humbling It is an humbling sense.
sense: He who can see much sin in himself, and not be troubled, is not rightly
sensible of sin; and he who can see much want of grace in himself, and not be
humbled, is not spiritually sensible of his spiritual wants. What! and yet so
little Knowledge! yet so little Faith! and yet so little Love of Christ! yet no
more strength to pray, to deny my self, to overcome my sins! And now he mourns
and weeps. 3. If it be a living spiritual sense, it is an humb^e sense. The It
is an humble sense.
presence of Grace (though little) breeds an high conflict with all sin, and a
lowly spirit under all wants. This man admires at other Christians Graces, and
prizes them, and goes home, and confesses, Lord, I am less then the least of
all Saints. 4. If it be a spiritual sense, then it is a careful and an active
sense: It It is a careful and an active sense.
would have these wants supplied; it is full of inquiry, what shall I do? and
it is full of Prayer, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief: The sense of want
will not cease but in the sense of supply.

3. A spiritual appetite is a sign of spiritual life; You know There is a
spiritual appetite.
that life seeks its own preservation; the living man must have food, and will
have food: As soon as ever a child is born, if it be living, nature prompts it
to crave the breasts; and verily, so it is with every new born Christian; As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As soon as the
Prodigal began to be spiritually alive, he presently thought of food; O, (says
he) there is bread enough in my Fathers house, and to spare: As there is bread
for life, so there is bread of life; and as there are waters for life, so there
are waters of life; there is spiritual bread, and spiritual water: Corpus
Christi est pabulum fidei, The Lord Jesus and his Ordinances are the spiritual
food of the soul; and when a man receives a spiritual life, he cannot live
without them, but depends on them as for the nutrition and preservation of his
life.

Here again it may be demanded, How a Christian may know that his appetite is a
truly spiritual appetite, flowing from life? To which Signs of appetite flowing
from life. It is a strong appetite.
I answer thus: If it be an appetite flowing from spiritual life. 1. Then it is
a strong appetite; the Scriptures call it an hungring and thirsting, the
strongest and fiercest of all appetites: O Sirs, There is an appetite dainty,
and there is an appetite hungry; there is a difference twixt a want on empty
desire, and an hungring, or an appetite for life. Give me children, or else I
dye; the word is to such a man, more then his appointed food. 2. It is an
Universal Appetite: Some men have a stomach to the Word, but not to the
Sacrament; and some A Universal appetite.
have a stomach to the Sacrament: (O, that they must have) but not to the Word;
and some have a stomach to this part of the Word, not to that part of the Word,
and to it as thus dressed, and another way dressed; New Dishes for dainty
stomachs: But a Christian in whom the life of Grace is wrought, why! he is for
the Word, and he is for Sacrament, and he is for all Christ's Ordinances, and
all Christ's truths: Why! (says he) I have a proud heart, and such a truth will
humble it; and I have a troubled heart, and such a truth will comfort it; and I
have a doubtful heart, and such a truth will direct it; and I have a weak
heart, and such an Ordinance will strengthen it; so that he sees food in all of
them, and he has an appetite to all of them. 3. It is a constant A constant
appetite.
appetite: Give a living man food in the morning, and Life looks for some at
night; he can feed to day, and he can feed to morrow too. Thus it is with a
living man; though when a man is dying, his stomach dies in him, and leaves
him: One Sermon a month, or a year, will satisfy. A living Christian, he
takes in provision every market day (every Sabbath) for his soul, and he longs
for the market day again: O, when will the Sabbath come again! O, when shall I
appear before God again! O, when shall I sit down, and be entertained at
Christ's Table again! O, I could hear of Christ, of Faith, of Mortification, of
the Love of God, of newness of Obedience, etc. still I need more heavenly
nourishment for my Graces, etc.

4. Spiritual Growth is a sign of Spiritual Life: You know There is spiritual
growth.
that living men do grow, until they attain unto that proportion and measure,
which Nature (say the Philosophers,) God (say we) allots unto them. Therefore
living Christians are compared to a sucking and thriving child, which sucks and
grows by sucking: And to living branches that grow into more strength; and in
Scripture, True Grace (which is the same with spiritual life) it is of an
increasing and growing nature; Christ compares it to a grain of Mustard Seed,
which is little at first, but in time grows and spreads exceedingly; and
Solomon compares it to the Sun, which rises more and more to the perfect day.
Paul commends the Corinthians, that they did abound in all Grace; and prays
for the Philippians, that their love might a bound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all Judgment; And he himself forgot what was behind, and
pressed forward, and counted himself not to have apprehended. O you! who take
your selves to be alive, do you grow in grace? Many men grow worse and worse
under the means of Grace; many grow in notions, but they do not grow in Grace;
many grow into new opinions, but they do not grow in holy affections. But do
you grow in Grace? and do you grow in all Grace? and do you grow according to
the means of Growth? Alas! many men decay apace, and many men, like pictures,
retain the same dimensions; sin is no more weakened after forty years living,
then at the first; their old sins retain their old strength, and their faith
receives no augmentation; they are no more able to trust on God for their
bodies, nor to rely on Christ for their souls then heretofore. The barrenness
and unfruitfulness of Christians, is an unspeakable dishonor to the Gospel,
and an evident testimony, that they have but a form of Godliness without the
power of it; I might now have shown you, that true spiritual Growth is 1.
Especially an inward Growth. 2. And a general Growth. 3. And the Growth comes
in by the Growth of Faith. 4. And appears best in the Growth of humili^y.

5. A spiritual cry or breath, is another sign of spiritual life: There is a
spiritual breath.
If a man can but groan and breath, that man is a living man. When Paul was
converted, Ananias was sent unto him, as to a chosen Vessel, Behold (said God
unto him) he prays: in Zach. 12. 10. The Spirit of Grace, and of Supplication
are joined, for the one never goes without the other: But will some reply, This
cannot be a sure sign of spiritual life; for a wicked man may pray, and cry to
God; we read of their Prayers and cries in Scripture often. I grant it, But 1.
There is a difference twixt a spiritual cry, and a natural cry; their cries
arise from natural principles, but not from a spiritual principle. 2. It is the
cry of a distressed man, but not of a renewed man. 3. It is a cry for natural
and outward good, but not for spiritual and everlasting good. 4. And when they
cry for mercy and heaven; it is not that mercy may bring them into an holy
communion with God, but only that mercy may keep them from wrath and Hell.

6. Lastly, A spiritual manner of working is an infallible evidence There is a
spiritual manner of working.
of a spiritual quickning^ When the Lord converts a man and makes him
spiritually alive, he now works spiritual work. 1. By Spiritual Rules. 2. From
Spiritual Principles in the strength of Christ, by Faith, and from love. 3.
With Spiritual Affections, willingly, cheerfully, and delightfully. 4. For
Spiritual ends. 1. By Spiritual Rules; To as many as walk according By
spiritual rules.
to this Rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6. 16. A dead and unconverted man lives
by the Rules of his sensual Lusts, or the customs of the World, or the wisdom
of carnal policy; sin rules him, and men rule him, and his profits and
pleasures rule him: But when the man is converted, now God rules him; he stands
in awe of Gods Word* and lives, as 1 Pet. 4. 2. To the Will of God: His
actions, intentions, desires, steps are measured by the word; it is not An libet,
but An licet; The word lets him out, and brings him in: Whether the living
Creature went, thither the Wheels went, so, etc. 2. From spiritual Principles:
O Sirs, From spiritual principles.
a man may do much work (which we call spiritual) from a Carnal and low
principle; self-Love, Vainglory, Education, a quick Conscience, may set out
much: But the living Christians work arises from union with Christ; all is done
in the strength of Christ, and Faith fetches strength from Christ to pray, and
to preach, and to mourn, and to repent, etc. 3. With spiritual affections: With
spiritual affections.
There is a connaturalness twixt a spiritual heart, and a spiritual work. Thy
word was the rejoicing of my heart; I was glad (said David) when they said unto
me, let us go to the House of the Lord. I delight (says Paul) in the Law of
God after the inward man: It is good for ^e to draw near to God: There are
affections in the works of a living man; his works drop out of his heart,
another man's fall out of his parts. 4. For spiritual ends; So that Christ may
be glorified: we live For spiritual ends.
unto the Lord, unto him that dyed for us; Whatsoever ye do, do it to the Glory
of God; that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.
11.

Obj. But will some say, if these be signs of the life of Complaints of the
want of all these.
Grace; of one being made spiritually alive, then I am in a sad condition: For
1. I find much sin still living in me. 2. And I find very dull, if not dead
affections; and I find, 3. Exceeding impotency to what is good. 4. And I cannot
find that old appetite, and those old ^ervent crie^ of Prayer which here (...)
I found. 5. And as for grow hunder spiritual means, O, my heart sinks to behold
the rich seasons of Grace, and my barrenness and unfruitfulness under them.
Sol. I should Answered.
be ^^^th that any truly living Soul should go away with a sad heart; therefore
give me leave to answer thy fears, 1. Generally. 2. Then distinctly.

1. Generally thus: 1. Such complaints as these (ordinarily) Generally.
are the language not of the dead, but of the living: When shall you hear such
indit^ments from a base, lewd, sin-loving, and serving person? O no, these are
the complaints of an heart that is spiritually sensible, and spiritually
tender, and spiritually jealous, and which would not be deceived in its
spiritual condition. 2. If such complaints as these be attended with inward
humblings, and abasings of the heart, and with desires and endeavors of help,
assuredly they are the Testimonies of a living man: Who shall deliver me, O
wretched man! was the complaint of living Paul. 3. If thou can not at all
times find every one of the forenamed Symptoms of life; yet if at any time
thou can find any one of them, it is a sign that thou live; if the child
does not go, yet if it sucks, this shows life; if it does not speak, yet if it
cry, it is alive; if it does not cry, yet if it breath, it is a sign of life:
If there be groanings under the burden of sin, and ^ighings, for help, for
grace, for Christ, etc. they are a sign of life. O Christian, the spiritual
life is sometimes more open, and full, and lively, and quick in actions; and
sometimes it is reduced to desires, to a will, to a complaint, to a tear, to a
sigh, to a groan; O, that I could pray, O, that I could believe.

2. Dictinctly to the particular Cases.

Obj. 1. Thou fear that thou art not alive, because much Distinctly to the
particular cases. I am not alive, because much sin is living in me. Answered.
sin is yet living in thee: To which I answer. 1. It is with the Christian made
alive by Grace, as it was with Lazarus made alive by Christ, who had for a
while his grave clothes on him, and he was bound hand and foot, and yet he was
made alive; so there may be many sinful corruptions, yet cleaving to that soul,
which is indeed quickened with spiritual life. Nay, if thou did feel no sinful
corruptions, I should question whether yet thou were made alive, for spiritual
life or grace does give unto the soul, 1. The clearest sense of sin. 2. And the
greatest grief for sin. 3. And the strongest combat and conflict with sin. 2.
There is a difference twixt a feeling of sin still stirring in us, and of the
life of sin still ruling in us: Thou feel sin living in temptation, but do
thou feel sin living in thy affection; Thou feel sin molesting of thee as a
Tyrant, but do thou acknowledge sin ruling over thee as a King. 3. And what
do thou, when thou find sin thus working? Do thou dye daily? If thou
feel sin as if it were alive, does not this humble thee? and does not this
hasten thee by Faith unto Christ, for more crucifying virtue?

Obj. 2. Thou fear that yet thou art not alive, because thou There is much
du^ness and deadness in my affections and operations. Answe^ed.
discernest much spiritual dullness, and deadness in thy affections and
operations. Sol. I answer. 1. Even the living have so^nd too much spiritual
deadness in their hearts: David's soul was heavy, and cast down, and indisposed,
and a deadness possessed him, and he prays of en^; O Lord quicken me. 2. But
is there not a difference twixt deadness and death; death is the total
privation of life (where there is spiritual death? there is not so much as the
habit of grace) but deadness is some diminution, or some damp upon the habit of
grace, that it steps not out to its acts, with that liberty, and that alacrity
as it was wont, and such a deadness may be in a living soul. And thirdly, Thou
feel this deadness, and thou dislikest it, and thou bewailest it, and thou
prayest, how often, how earnestly: Lord quicken this dead heart of mine: Is it
thus where death prevails? do dead men do thus? 4. The actions of life are
various; Let the action for the quantity be what it will, greater or lesser,
quick or dull, free or checked, and interrupted; yet if what thou do be done
in the strength of Christ, if it be wrought with an humble and an upright
heart; assuredly, thou art not a dead sinner, but a living (though perhaps
troubled) Christian.

Obj. 3. But I have no power to do any good; I cannot believe, I cannot pray, I
cannot mourn. Sol. 1. What, no Power at all? I have no power to do any good.
Answered.
never any power, no power from thy self, nor any power from Christ; no power
perhaps to this work; but what, no power to any spiritual work? no power
(perhaps at this time) to an eminent act, but then is there not a power to pray
for power? Though power appears not in the work, does not power yet appear in
the will and desire? Romans 7. 18. I know that in me (that is in my flesh)
dwells no good thing. For to will is present with me; but to perform that
which is good I find not: I cannot do it, but I would do it. 2. If there be a
power living in the will, it is the best sign of life: A wicked man does often
the good which his will is against, and the good man often does not the good,
cannot do the good, which his will is yet for. Now God looks upon the will,
more then upon the work: If gracious acts be couchant in the will, life is in
thee. 3. However, although thou have not power (sometimes) let down for
spiritual work; yet thou have so much power still remaining, as to lif^ up weak
hands for more power: Though thou can not believe, nor repent, nor mourn as
thou think, yet there is an heart to seek unto God in Christ for this power
to believe, etc.

Obj. 4. But my old lively affections are gone, my old estimations, My old
lively ^ff^ctions are gone. Answered.
my old hungrings and thirstings, my old delightful communion with God in
prayer, and in his ordinances. Sol. To this I would only say thus much. 1.
There is a difference twixt the intensive swiftness, or flash of affections,
and the intensive strength, and weight of the affections. A young Christian is
most in the former, an old Christian (who acts more upon Judgment and Faith) is
most in the latter. 2. The case seems rather to be of a living man, like to
dye, then dead: Of a man decaying in Grace, rather then totally deprived of
grace; of a sick Christian, rather then of a dead Christian. 3. And therefore
seriously search the causes of the remission of thy first love, of thy ancient
favor in holy communion: O, look whether a dead fly be not fallen into the
ointment, whether some insnaring lust, fleshly, or worldly has not robbed thee
of thy strength. 4. If so, Be humbled greatly, and repent, and do thy first
work.

Obj. 5. But where there is life, there is growth, but I find it not. I find
no growth. Answered.
Sol. A word to this: The denial of growth may be either 1. Negative, Never any
at all; this is impossible if life be wrought. 2. Comparative; Not so much as
another, not so much as I have found under such, or such means; not so much as
I desire; and this may be where there is life.

I have finished two Proposition from this Text: One respecting the death, and
the other respecting the life of a sinner: I now proceed to a third, which is,
That a very great and notorious Doct. 3. A very great sinner may be converted.
sinner may be (at length) converted and changed. [This my Son was dead, and is
alive again:] This Son! and who was he, or what was he; in the precedent
Verses, you may see his picture, you may read the History of him; he was one,
who would be gone from his Fathers House, and into a far Country he went, and
there he did waste his substance with riotous living. He made an end of all of
it, and in the basest of ways, amongst Harlots; and then betakes himself to
^ordid shifts: He offered himself to ^eed Swine, and would have fed with the
Swine, nay, would have lived upon the Offals and Husks which the Swine left: He
stood it out to the last; if he could possibly have subsisted, if he could but
have lived, he would never have come back to his Father: Yet this Son, this Son
at length comes back, at length is converted, and is alive again. But I
obtained mercy (said Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13.) Misericordia^ donantem, mercy of
Conversion; misericordiam condonan^em, mercy of remission: I obtained mercy!
Why! what was he more then another, that he does so emphatically speak of
himself, I obtained mercy! Yea, there was reason to set it off thus with an
Emphasis; for he was a notorious sinner, I was (says he) a Blasphemer, and a
Pers^cuter and Injurious, yet I, I obtained mercy! Some of you know that it
has been an ancient question and debate about the equality or inequality of
sin; I think thus, 1. That Original sin (quantum ad se) is equally divided
amongst all men, there is aequalis carentia debiti, and aequalis inhaerentia
Indebiti (as touching the nature of Original sin) in every man; in respect of
it, one sinner is not a greater sinner then another. 2. Yet the actual exercise
of that sin, may be more in one man, then in another; and hence it is, that
some sinners we call them lesser, and others we call them greater: By a great
sinner, I mean one who exceeds another very much in sinful ways and guilt. And
one may be called a great, a very great sinner in four respects; nevertheless
they have not hindered conversion. One may be called a great sinner in four
respects.


1. One may be called a very great sinner, whose single sin is of an amazing
quality; such as not only Scripture condemns, but When a single sin is of ^n
amazing quality.
even nature shrinks at it, as Incest and Sodomy; there is a kind of
reluctance, and abhorrency in nature against those, and the very Heathens start
at them: Yet God has converted some men guilty of these sins. The incestuous
Corinthian, whom Paul would have delivered to Satan, was wrought upon, and
converted, and repented; and 1 Cor. 6. 9. Some of them who were abusers of
themselves with mankind, v. 11. Were yet washed, and sanctified and justified.
2. One may be called a very great sinner, whose kinds of sinning are very many,
and all of them exceedingly Whose kinds of sinning are very many and provoking.
provoking: When they are as a volly of poisoned arrows, all of them levelled
at, and shot into the very face of God; every one of them, like Saul, is higher
by the head then other sins, which in comparison are of a lower stature: Such a
great sinner was Manasses; he was one of the highest Idolaters that ever we
read of, and a witch, and dealt with the Devil, and offered some of his
children to the Devil, 2 Chronicles. 33. 3, 4, 6. and shed much innocent blood: Yet
this notorious sinner at length humbled himself greatly, and was converted: See
verse. 12, 13. 3. One may be called a very great sinner, Who has continued a
long time in a course of great sins.
who has continued a long time in the course and practice of great sins,
perhaps twenty, forty, fifty years: Abraham continued a long time in his
Idolatry, and at length was called and converted: The Ephesians walked
according to the course of this world, and had their conversation in times past
in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind, Chap. 2. verse. 2, 3. yet at length were quickened and converted, verse. 5.
4. One may be called a great Whose sins are ^reatly circumstanced.
sinner, whose sinnings are very greatly circumstanced: Circumstances, you
know, give a very great accent unto moral actions.

Quest. But how may it appear, that a very great sinner may Demonstrations it.
be converted? Sol. There are four Reasons of it, or Demonstrations for it. 1.
Because some great sinners belong to the Election of Gods Grace: Paul was (as
you have seen) a very Some great sinners belong to the Election of Grace.
great sinner; yet says God of him, Act. 9. 15. He is a chosen vessel unto me.
There are two things (amongst many other) which belong to the Divine Election.
1. It is a free Act, and if I may use the word without offense, an Independent
Act, raised only from the good pleasure of the Divine Will, and not from the
condition of the Object. Romans 9. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. Verse. 16. It
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. If God will choose foolish things, and base things, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 27,
28. 2. It is an infallible Decree: I mean, such a Decree which God will
certainly fulfill. In Election, God does decree or ordain a person unto
salvation; and this person God will certainly bring unto salvation, by those
means which he has appointed for that purpose: And therefore, if a great
sinner be within the compass of Gods Election, him in time will God convert;
Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.

2. Because the Conversion of a Sinner is an omnipotent work: It belongs to
God, to whom nothing is too hard; he can pardon The conversion of a sinner is
an omnipotent work.
great sins as well as little, and convert great sinners as well as ordinary
sinners. There is as much power put forth to convert a sinner, as there was to
make a world, yea, and more: For in Creation, there was nothing in the Subject
created to resist and withstand; but when a Sinner is to be converted, there is
an exceeding great resistance, such a resistance, as is able to put by all the
strength and power of a moral Agent. No created and finite power can convert a
sinner: An infinite power is required; and if that be put forth, the stoutest
and strongest sinner must and does yield. If the Sun rises, then the thickest
darkness flees away and vanishes: If Christ speaks the word, then Lazarus, who
had been dead four days, lives again. Steven preaches, and not only Paul
slights his Sermon, but consents also to his death: But when Jesus Christ spoke
only a few words unto him, Paul now quakes, and trembles, and yields, Lord,
what will thou have me to do.

3. Because the Lord God has the absolute dominion over the God has the
absolute dominion over the heart.
heart; he can dispose, fashion, alter, turn it, as he pleases, and when he
pleases: He has the command of the heart and grace. Take the heart (as
usually we do) for any or all the faculties of the soul, yea, as corrupted by
nature and custom, yet God has a dominion over it, and he can make new
impressions, and divine alterations and inclinations upon it. The Understanding
naturally is blind and dark, unable to unfold and apprehend the morality of
conditions, actions, objects; but God can turn it from darkness to light; he
can imprint on it the clearest light, whereby it shall be able to behold what
is good, and what is evil. The Judgment naturally is erroneous, it mistakes
good for evil, and evil for good; judges sinful evil as the best and sweetest
way, condemns good as most contrary to us, to our delights, courses, ends:
But God is able to imprint on man's Judgment, a discerning and righteously
sentencing ability, that a man shall not only see his sinful nature and life,
but condemn it (I was mad, says Paul; such a fool, a beast was I. They shall
remember their evil ways, and loath themselves, Hos. 2. 7.) as his greatest
evil and misery; and conclude, that a new holy penitent life is the best of all
lives, and that for himself. The Conscience is either sleepy or seared
naturally: But God can awaken it, and imprint on it a power to feel sin; to
complain, accuse, indite, wound, and slay the sinner, that he shall have no
rest as long as he lies in his sinful condition: Sin revived and I died, Romans
7. The Will is naturally averse, and perverse; it is set against all spiritual
good, and set upon evil: But cannot God alter this Will? He can easily turn it
about; let him but drop in the least degree of Grace, and the Will presently
wheels about, and is as ready, and desirous, and cleaving to good, as ever it
was to evil: Lord, what will thou have me to do? Act. 9. So for the Affections,
the Lord has the dominion over them: He can make them to love him as much and
more than ever they loved sin; and to grieve, and to hate, and to fear sin,
etc. Get thee hence; what have I any more to do with Idols?

4. The Lord does sometimes convert a great sinner to glorify his God does
this to glorify his own grace.
own Grace. 1. The power of it, that it is able to cure great and strong
diseases. If ordinary sinners only were converted, men would imagine but a
common and vulgar power lay in converting Grace; where there is a lesser
opposition, there a weaker strength may suffice to do the work: But if sin be
strong, now the power of Grace appears, in rescuing the soul even from the
Gates of Hell, and from the Powers of Darkness. 2. The riches of it: When all
the world knows, and the man himself knows, That there was nothing in him, but
a vilest heart, and lewdest course, and yet Divine Grace has converted him; O,
says he, this was rich Mercy and Grace indeed. The Apostle says, That God
quickened the dead Ephesians, that he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace, chap. 2. verse. 7. O, says the great sinner, (now converted,) never was
there such a gracious and such a merciful God, such a kind and loving God; I
was dead, and he has made me alive; I was the greatest of sinners, and I have
yet obtained the sweetest of mercies; I was the greatest Enemy, and yet God
would be my kindest Friend; overcome by Sin, and now overcome by Grace; falling
down into Hell, and now lifted up to Heaven; so bad, that Justice might have
had much Glory to damn me, yet God has been so good, that Mercy shall have the
Glory to save me. Vs^ ^o relieve the troubled Conscience.
and distressed Conscience. You shall find by experience these two Truths: 1.
That whiles men are in a dead, lost, vile, and unsensible condition, they then
imagine that their sins are little, and mercies great, and they have power to
turn to God when they please: 2. That when they come to be truly sensible of
their hearts and ways, then their sins appear exceeding great, and the mercy
and grace of God seem little; O! they have withstood the offers of grace, and
all self-power is gone, and the greatness of their sinning is an absolute bar
to their conversion.

And there are eight Reasons, why a man (made sensible of Reasons why a man
sensible of his great sin, thinks God will not convert him.
his great sinnings) inclines to think that God will never convert him. 1.
Because he has been one who has exceedingly provoked God to wrath against
him: He sees great wrath in God, and that he has, by his continual sinnings,
incensed the Lord. O, says he, it is mercy that must convert; but I have
turned a merciful God into a just God, and a kind God into an angry God; my
great sins have put me into the hands of his great wrath. 2. Because such a
person sees his condition lying under the threatenings of God, and out of the
reach of the promises of God; God threatening him, Warrants issued out to take
and arrest him, an Arrow levelled at him; God has said, That he will wound the
hairy scalp of him that goes still on in his iniquities; and that he who
hardens his heart, being often r^proved, shall be destroyed without remedy; Now
I have been that sinner. 3. Because such a person feels the impressions of Gods
displeasure on his Conscience: He is in the very hands of wrath; Conscience
tells him, Thou art the man, and these have been thy sinnings, these have been
thy ways and thy doings; and Conscience condemns him for one who has delighted
himself in evil, and secretly goes and smites him with unavoidable fears and
terrors. Now when a man feels wrath, it is an hard thing to persuade him, that
God has any thoughts and intentions of mercy and grace for him. 4. Such a
person ordinarily looks more upon the examples of destruction, than upon the
instances of conversion; rather what God has done against them, than for any
of them. O, says he, God in Scripture has often left such and such great
sinners to their As the Israelites Psalm. 81. 12. 2 These. 2. J^r. 13. 14.
own hearts lusts, and he has given them up to Satan's delusions, and to a
reprobate mind and sense, and would not have mercy on them, he would deal with
them no more. 5. The distance twixt his greatly sinning soul, and converting
grace, seems to him wondrously large: If I had been but sick and weak! but can
a dead man live? should a Rebel be embraced? can a Blackmore be made white? It
is great grace to convert a little sinner, but what grace is sufficient to
convert so great a sinner? 6. He measures the disposition of Divine Grace, by
the indisposition of his own heart. O, says he, I have been, how long, how
stubbornly unwilling to receive grace, how violent to oppose grace! If I had
neglected it only, but I have rejected it; I have been so long unwilling,
despising, will Grace be pleased and so willing to one so unwilling? Grace will
not be willing to smile on him who has frowned on it; Grace will not stoop to
him who has trampled upon Grace: Can Divine Grace and I be so easily friends!
What, forty years lying in Hell, and now to think I shall go to Heaven! all my
life to serve the Devil, and yet now to think that God will take me, or make me
his servant! 7. Such a man sees his sins in another manner than ever before:
The face of sin is unvailed, like so many spears in the heart of Christ, like
so many wounds given to sweetest Mercy, like so many cups of poison that he
has drunk, and so many cups of wrath which he has made Christ to drink, and
as so much dung cast upon the Beauties of Holiness. 8. Yea, and he feels his
sins in another manner. O, says he, I feel my proud heart still, and my
adulterous heart still, and my covetous heart still; and when any good arises,
it is surprised, it it resisted, it is quenched by a thousand evil motions: And
though I hear, and though I seek God, yet it is thus with me. O! my sins have
been so great, that God will never undertake my conversion, my change; had I
been more civil, had I been less evil, perhaps he would.

Now I would say six things to this great sinner. 1. Great Six things to this
great sinner. Great sinnings should be reasons of great humblings, but not of
un belief.
sinnings should be reasons of great humblings, but they should never be the
causes and helps of unbelief. Grandia delicta, fletus grandes. Because thou
have found an heart which could sin exceedingly, beseech God to give thee an
heart to mourn exceedingly; and think not, that God cannot do much good,
because thou have done much evil. 2. Great sinnings should work a self-despair,
but they should never work a God-despair. Great sinnings show Great sinnings
should work a self-despair, but not a God-despair.
a great fullness of sin, which cannot be overcome, but by a great God. Thou art
a great sinner, but God is a great God; there is no sinner like to thee, and
there is no God like to him: He is great in power, (if he were not able to
convert a great sinner, he were not great in power;) and he is great in mercy
and love, (he were not great in mercy to pardon, nor great in love to save, if
he did not pardon great sinners, and convert great sinners:) Therefore, as the
least sinner should despair of his own power, so no sinner, no not the
greatest, should despair of Gods power. 3. God has converted great sinners.
Usually, God has conve^ted great sinners.
the sinners whom God has converted, they have been of the greatest rank of
sinners: He has passed by many an hundred civil righteous persons, and his
converting Grace has laid hold on the notorious sinner. Thou art not the first
Idolater, the first Thief, the first Whore, the first Adulterer, the first
Drunkard, the first Swearer, the first Sodomite, the first Persecutor, the
first Unbeliever and refuser of Grace, that Divine Grace has assayed and
converted: They had no more power to contribute toward their conversion; there
was no more reason in them to move the Lord to look upon them, than there is in
thy self; yet God did convert them. 4. Though a person can say, No sinner can
say, God will never convert him.
that God has not hitherto converted him; yet no sinner (living under the
means of Grace) can safely say, that God will never convert him: For no sinner
can know his eternal Reprobation, this is a secret counsel which is reserved in
the bosom of God; can know the season, the very designed season when God will
convert him; for the Lord reserves the power of conversion, and the season of
conversion to himself; he converts some at one time, some at another: God never
revealed to any man, that at such a time, at such an hour he would convert him;
Consequenter, a man may know the hour of his conversion, but Antecedenter, he
could not know that God would then (just then) convert him. 5. There is more
probability that God will convert thee (thus sensible, There is more
probability of thy conversion, being thus sensible, than not. Reasons of it.
etc.) than that he will not. For 1. The clearing of thy great sinfulness unto
thee, and the setting of thy great sins in order before thine eyes; 2. The
quicknings of thy Conscience to feel the burden and weight of thy great
transgressions; 3. The great perplexities and fears in thy heart because of
these great sins, are no evil signs at all: Of the two, the troubled Conscience
is much more hopeful than the ^eared Conscience. Vicinior saluti est dolor
patientis quam stupor non sentientis, as Austin well. Though trouble in
Conscience be not always an infallible Argument of Life, yet it is an ordinary
Antecedent unto Spiritual Life: The still Voice came after the Whirlwind, and
Christ came after the storm, and Canaan came after the Wilderness, the Spirit
of Adoption comes after the Spirit of Bondage. 6. But what if the Lord has
already converted What if the Lord have already converted thee.
thee? What if God have done that work in thee which thou fear he will never
work further? Assuredly, if thou art greatly ashamed of thy great
trangressions; if thy soul can now loath it self for all its abominations; if
thy heart can remember them, and bitterly mourn over them; if thy cries be
great to be delivered from them; if thy fears be great to sin no more; if thy
heart will not be content without a new heart; if thou and God must be
reconciled; if thou have received an heart willing to be converted; What shall
I say? Thou art indeed converted.] Remember two supports which I leave with
thee: 1. No poor sinner can be so ready and willing to be converted by God, but
God is much more ready and willing to convert him; 2. A willingness to be
converted, is conversion begun; the first stroke of conversion lights upon the
Will of a sinner, and the greatest part of conversion appears in the change and
conversion of the Will; it is from the will of Gods grace, that thou art
willing to have grace.

A second Use shall be of Caution. Let no man presume to continue Use 2.
Caution. Let no man presume to continue in great sins.
in great sins, or to remain secure and careless, because he hears that a great
sinner may be changed and converted: For 1. Although God does convert some
great sinners, one Abraham, one Paul, one Mary Magdalene, yet there are many of
them whom he never converts. 2. Perhaps he may convert, perhaps he may not; and
what if he does not? It is but contingent to thee: Perhaps he will convert
thee, this should move thee to seek him; perhaps he will not, this may affright
thee to stand out any longer against him. Therefore, to be bold in sin, because
God can, and sometimes does convert a great sinner, may move thee rather to
conclude, he will not, he intends not to convert thee, than that he does. When
Divine Goodness is made encourageable to sin against that Goodness; when it is
not a melting Sun, but an hardening Sun; it is a presage rather of a man's
subversion, than of his conversion. 3. Though God can, and does sometimes
convert a great sinner, yet usually the greater sinner comes off with the
sharper conversion. The great Malefactor sometimes has his Book and his Life
too, but he is burned in the Hand, and in the Shoulder. Paul was a great
sinner, and was converted; but his great sins, which were a troubling to
Christ, did prove a trembling to his heart. God puts such a sinner upon the
Rack; he strikes and wounds him, that all the Country shall hear of the
troubles which his Conscience feels for his sinnings against God: God does, as
it were, singe him with the flames of Hell, before he meets him with the kisses
of Heaven. 4. Most usually, those great and notorious sinners whom God
converts, are such who have thus sinned under their ignorance. I was a
blasphemer, etc. says Paul, but I did obtain mercy, for I did it ignorantly,
and through misbelief. He did not know what he did, he thought he had been in
the right: You seldom read of one knowing Pharisee, who persecuted Christ,
that was converted; yet you read of many of the Jews, and of the Elders, that
were converted; for they did not know Jesus Christ to be the Lord of Glory. I
will not say, that no knowingly notorious sinner shall ever be converted; but
certainly, Conversion is very rare, where Knowledge holds the Candle to long
and great works of Darkness. Those sinners who go on against the workings of an
enlightening Spirit, fall very rarely within the favor of the converting
Spirit: Therefore let no man gather poison from this honey, etc.

The last Use shall be a word of Direction to any great and notorious Use 3.
Direction to such converted sinners. Take pains to be assured of pardon.
sinner, whom God has been pleased mightily and graciously to convert. I would
commend these Advisoes unto him. 1. Let him take much pains to get his
Acquittance fairly writ and sealed; I mean, to be well assured that his sins
are pardoned. Believe it, no man shall find his title so questioned, his heart
so assaulted with often doubts and fears of pardon, as one who has been a
great sinner: The Provocations have been great, and Conscience has been
boistrous, and Satan can lay in shrewd exceptions, etc. 2. Let Conscience be
exceeding tender: O awake Keep conscience ten^er.
it not, displease it not by new adventurings; all the old wounds will bleed
afresh: A little new sin committed, will raise up the old ghosts; it will
revive the sense of all the old great sins, which although they be pardoned,
yet thou will now think they are not. A person who before his Conversion lived
as if he had been in Hell, should after his Conversion live as if he were in
Heaven. (...) 3. Love much, and do much; do some great thing Love much, and do
much.
for Gods Glory.

This my Son was dead, and is alive again.
Alive again! but how came this about? what was the occasion of this Prodigals
Conversion? look back unto v. 15, 16. he was brought so low as to feed Swine,
and would have been glad of the Husks, but no man gave unto him, and he is
ready to perish with hunger; and now returning thoughts came into his mind; now
he resolves to come back again unto his Fathers house: Whence observe,

That great afflictions are sometimes an occasion of the Conversion of Doct. 4.
Great afflictions are sometimes an occasion of great sinners conversion.
a great sinner. There are two sorts of afflictions, 1. Inward, which set upon
the conscience; these are sometimes an occasion of Conversion: A troubled
conscience does many times end in a renewed conscience; troubles of heart are
oftentimes closed with change of heart. The great storms occasion the Traveller
to come in for shelter: The biting Serpents occasioned the Israelites to look
to the brazen Serpent; the avenger of blood made the guilty person to fly to
the City of refuge; and a condemning conscience oftentimes makes a poor
troubled Soul to come in unto Jesus Christ for ease and rest. 2. Outward, which
light upon the body and estate of a sinner; these also sometimes serve to fetch
in a sinner; as he once said, periissem nisi periissem, I had perished unless I
had perished. Joseph's brethren had never found Joseph, and craved food of him,
unless a famine had befallen them. If God had not deprived some men of their
wordly goods, they had never come in to seek heavenly Treasures: We may say of
them that if they had been fed, they had been famished; and if they had not
been famished, they had never been fed with the bread of life.

Again, these outward afflictions may be considered two ways, either 1.
Simply, and nakedly in themselves; so they cannot convert any sinner, no more
then the pool of Bethesda (alone) could heal a diseased Person, or Elijahs
salt could heal the Waters. 2. Concomitantly, as accompanied with, and
sanctified by Gods Spirit: It is not the hammer, but the fire which softens the
iron; It was not the Water, but the Angel that stirred the water, which made
the water medicinal: It is not the Rope, but the strength of the hand upon the
Rope, which draws in the Bo^t. Afflictions in themselves are privations of a
comfortable good; but if God sanctifies them, they may then be a means of our
everlasting good: God can use them as a bridle, not only to stop us running out
of the way, but also to turn us into the right way. Hos. 2. 14. I will allure
her, and bring her into the wilderness. By alluring, he means a gracious and
effectual persuasion, a prevailing even to Conversion; but then he will bring
her into the wilderness; God brings men into the Wilderness (into a barren,
desolate miserable condition) and then allures or converts them. Manasses was a
great sinner, and yet God humbled him greatly, and (as it is thought) converted
him; but what means did he use for this? See 2 Chro. 33. 11. The Lord brought
upon him the captains of the host of the King of Assyria, who took Manasseh
among the Thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon. v.
12. And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly. Nebuchadnezzar was a proud and lofty sinner, and therefore God
pulled him down; he did drive him from men, and he did eat Grass as Oxen, and his
body was wet with the Dew of Heaven; and having thus abased him, he wrought
upon him to acknowledge and praise the true God, Dan. 4. 33, 34.

Quest. How may it appear that, etc. Sol. There are four How this may appear.
Afflictions sanctified are the souls Looking Glasses.
things attending upon sanctified afflictions, and all of them contribute to
Conversion. 1. Afflictions (sanctified) are the souls Looking-Glass, wherein a
man may see his sins, which are the causes of afflictions; there are diverse
Glasses in which we may see the face of our sins. 1. The Glass of the Word. 2.
The Glass of Reproof. 3. The Glass of Conscience. 4. The Glass of Afflictions:
Affliction is a Glass wherein a person first sees his own sins; Ocules quam
culpa claudit pena aperit. We were verily guilty of the blood of our brother
(said Joseph's Brethren;) and as I have served others, so the Lord has served
me (said Adonibezeck,) 2. Sees them as sinners. In prosperity we see the
pleasures of sin, but in adversity the bitterness of sin; in the one we see
them as our friends, in the other as our enemies: An evil and bitter thing that
we have forsaken the Lord (so Jeremiah speaks.) 3. Sees them with a serious
look; sees them, and thinks of them; sees them, and lays them to heart: Thy
wickedness has procured these things unto thee. Now when a person is brought
to a right sight of sin, to see his own sins, and as sins, and seriously
considers of them; this is a way tending to his Conversion: I considered my
ways (said David) and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

2. Afflictions (sanctified) work much upon the Conscience; they are the rods
of God upon the Soul; they are the Waters of They work much upon the conscience.
Marah, bitter Waters, and they stir up conscience to speak bitter words unto
us: These were thy ways, and these were thy doings; thou would not be
warned, thou would not hearken, and now see whither thy sins do tend, now see
into what straits they have brought thee, now thou will believe that God is
displeased with thee: When conscience is stirred, when the burden of
afflictions turn into the burden of conscience, two things ordinarily ensue
thereupon. 1. A man's carnal security is broken: The man thought himself safe
and secure before; but now he sees his condition to be very sad, unsound,
unsafe, and miserable; not only my goods are gone, but my God also is gone. 2.
The heart comes to be humbled: O, A working conscience, a smiting conscience is
the Hammer of God, by which he breaks and bows the soul. Afflictions now stir
up the Gall and the Wormwood, and the soul is humbled by them; and when the
soul is brought to see sin, and to consider of sin, and to be humbled for sin,
it is now in a fair way of Conversion.

3. Afflictions (if sanctified) are gales to Prayer: Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee; they powered out a Prayer, when They are gales to Prayer.
thy chastening was upon them, Isai. 26. 10. In their afflictions, they will
seek me early, Hosea 5. It is almost natural for an afflicted man to pray, and
afflictions put an edge of zeal on Prayer; we are seldom more frequent and
more fervent in that duty, then in the times of our distress. But then observe,
that as afflictions are apt to quicken prayer; so if they have occasioned a
sense and trouble in the heart for sin, Then 1. Usually they stir up Prayer for
pardon of sin, and for conversion from sin. Blot out my transgressions, prays
afflicted David. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, prays distressed
Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18 These are the two great desires of a distressed soul. 2.
Usually God hears these Prayers, The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise, Ps. 51. 17. A poor
sinner cannot put up a more acceptable request unto God then this: Lord, I
beseech thee, change and turn my heart, subdue mine iniquities! let not sin
have dominion over me! I beseech thee, suffer me not to dishonor thee any
more! So that now you see that afflictions have brought the Soul and God
together; the afflicted Person sees a need of Mercy and Grace, and unto God he
applies himself who is the only Author of a sinners Conversion, the only
Physician of a sinful soul.

4. Afflictions (if* sanctified) incline us unto converting Ordinances: They
incline us to conve^ting ordinances.
You shall observe that men under their afflictions are 1. More willing to
hear. 2. More attentive in hearing. 3. More tractable and pliable, (.i.) more
easy to be wrought upon in hearing: When a man is chastned with pain, and his
flesh consumed away, and his soul draws near to the Grave; then he will make
use of a Messenger, of an Interpreter, of one among a thousand to show unto him
his uprightness, Job 33. 19. to 23. Oh, what a Divine influence and authority
has the Word over such a man? he can be content to have his sins ripped open,
and he can hear and weep, Oh, a sinner! and he longs to hear of some word of
hope, and when he hears it, Oh, how good is God! and he catches greedily at
the word of direction; and when he hears it, Oh, when shall I be this! when
shall I do this! Lord, give grace, give strength unto thy poor servant; the man
in his prosperity would not know the Lord, nor hearken to him; he was above
counsel and instruction, but now his ear is opened to discipline, and
instruction is sealed unto him, Job 33. 16. Now it is, Lord, that which I see
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more, Job* 34. 32.

The first Use shall be for Trial of our selves, what the fruit of Use. Trial,
what the fruit of our affliction is.
all our afflictions is; I think there is no man almost in all the Kingdom,
but God has of late some way or other afflicted him. Many have lost all their
estates, not an House is left to them, nor Land, nor a Rag to their backs; many
have lost their Husbands or their Children in the War; many have lost some of
their Family with the Plague lately; who has not been some way or other
afflicted? Now consider, 1. It is the saddest affliction, It is the saddest
affl^ction, not to be bittered by affliction.
to be no way bettered by afflictions; No misery like that, to love the sins,
and continue still in the sins which brought our misery: Oh, to be as far from
our friends (as before) and as far from our God as before; to be thrust out of
an earthly possession, and not yet to get an heavenly inheritance; to lose our
Lands, and not yet to get Christ; to have no home to go to here, nor any home
to go unto hereafter; to lose our estates, and keep our sins; to lose the
world, and to lose the soul too; to lose all our comforts, and yet not to lose
the cause of all our discomforts. It was a miracle that the three children were
in a fiery furnace, yet not one hair of their heads was singed; It was a
miracle that Moses bush was burning, and not consumed: Oh, it is a sad wonder
that so many afflictions are upon men, and not one sin troubled, not one sin
consumed, mortifyed! 2. Many persons, though much afflicted, and long
afflicted, yet are not converted; God complained of old, they return not to him
Many persons though much and long afflicted, are not converted. E^gh^ so ^s of
person^. Stupid sinners. D^p^rate sinners.
that smites them; and in another place, yet have ye not returned to me, says
the Lord. There are eight sorts of men, whose afflictions have not been
effectual to their Conversion. 1. Stupid Sinners, who know not from whom
afflictions are sent, nor for what end: Wherefore has all this evil befallen
us, said they. 2. Desperate Sinners, who forsake God in their afflictions: They
cry not when he binds them, Job. 30. 13. This evil is of the Lord; why should
I wait upon the Lord any longer? said he in 2 Kin. 6. 33. 3. Bold sinners, who
grow worse and worse under their affliction; as Bold sinners.
the Anvile by blows is more hardened; like Ahaz in his distresses who sinned
yet more, 2 Chr. 28. 22. 4. Proud Sinners, who repine, and murmur, and complain
against God, fretting against him, and Proud sinners.
perhaps cursing of God, as they in I^. 8. 21. 5. Careless Sinners, who
Careless sinners.
regard not the operations of Gods hands, and lay nothing to heart: The unjust
knows no shame, Zep. 3. 5. 6. Politic Sinners, who think Politic sinners.
Despairing sinners.
to make up their losses by any temporizing compliances. 7. Despairing Sinners,
who sink under the burden of worldly losses and crosses; a worldly sorrow does
seize on them, even unto death, and crush them as Rachel, etc. 8. Hypocritical
Sinners, who seem to turn unto God in Prayer and Fasting, but it is like Judah,
friendly Hypocritical sinners.
not with their whole hearts; at the best they do but stop in sinning, but
they do not forsake their sins; their righteousness is but as the morning dew,
Hos. 6. I will but say three things to all these men. 1. It is a sure sign,
that the afflictions are whips of wrath, and not rods of love, they come not
from a Father, but from a Judge. 2. It is a sure sign that greater afflictions
are to follow, I will chastise you seven times more, Lev. 26. 21. or else,
which is worse, eternal destruction. Reprobate Silver shall they be called:
Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be
purged till I cause my fury to rest upon thee. 3. It is a sign that men are
very wicked, drowned in the love of sin, or the World, or that a spirit of
Atheism prevails and reigns in them.

I now proceed to another Proposition, which is employed in these words:

That there is an Almighty Power required to convert or change a Doct. 5. There
is an almighty power required to convert a sinner.
sinner, no less then is requisite to quicken a dead man: (This my Son was
dead, and is alive again;) To awaken a man out of sleep, needs no great power;
(a word, a call, a cry, a little stiring may do it;) but to quicken a dead man,
here calls, and cries, and stirrings will not do it, all the power of Men and
Angels will not do it. In Acts 2. 41. you read of three thousand converted at
one Sermon. And in Acts 4. 4. of five thousand converted at another Sermon, so
many, so quickly converted; certainly the Power that wrought this must be
Almighty. Jesus Christ himself must come, and he must cry, and he must cry with
a loud voice; Lazarus, come forth, Joh. 11. 43. The Apostle speaks of the
exceeding greatness of Gods Power, toward them that believe, and of the
working of his mighty Power, Ephesians. 1. 19. Even such a Power as God wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, v. 20.

There is a twofold opinion about the power which is put forth The power put
forth in conversion. Not moral only.
in a sinners Conversion. 1. Some hold it to be Moral only, because this is
most congruous to the will of man, which is a moral subject. God (they imagine)
does offer and propound such Objects, with such Arguments which do woo, and
allure, and prevail with the will of a sinner. Sol. It is true that the outward
means work only after a moral way. The word (which is the ministry for
Conversion) it does offer to the sinner Arguments of life, and death; It
reveals, and commands, and promises and threatens: But a moral suasion (as
they call it) is not sufficient to convert: And there are four Reasons which to
me seem very strong and unanswerable against it, 1. The Proved.
very Phrases by which a sinners Conversion is expressed in Scripture, do
surmount a moral suasion: There is no less power to convert a sinner then there
was 1. To create man at the first. 2. There shall be to raise the dead at the
last; when a sinner is converted, he is said to be created again, to be born
again, to be regenerated; his heart is said to be opened, and circumcised; his
strong heart is taken away, an heart of flesh is given unto him; surely all
this is more then a moral power. 2. This moral suasion must necessarily
presuppose some power and abilities in him with whom it deals; as if you
counsel a man, you suppose something in him to incline him to hearken; if you
do not suppose such a power, then it must be supposed that your counsel is in
vain; as if you should counsel an Ethiopian to change his skin, or a blind man
to see; this were in vain, for there is no power in them to do these. 3. The
conversion of a sinner in respect of God should be then contingent; It might
be, and it might not be; Though God intends to convert a man, yet he may fail
and miss of the event, for as much as a moral work is resistable, and may
easily be put by. How often would I have gathered your children, and you would
not; ye always resist the Holy Ghost. 4. Yea, the Conversion of a sinner
should in the event depend more upon the will of man, then on the will of God.
The grace offered is common, and it is made peculiar, and differential by man's
will; the right use of grace is not of grace, but of free will; so that
discrimen siliorum Dei and seculi, is a natura, not ex gratia. The moral
suasion is presented unto two sinners, the suasion is alike; why does it bring
this man and not the other man to Conversion? There can be no reason given but
this, that the one would hearken to it, the other would not; so that the effect
of Conversion (by this opinion) is manifestly placed in the liberty of a
sinners will, whereas the Scripture plainly ascribes it to the will of him who
calls, not to the will of him who is called. 2. Others hold it to be much
beyond this; To be a most High Power, a I^ is a most high power, a creating
power.
Creating Power, a Divine Power, an Almighty Power, such a Power as overpowers
all the sinful power in man, bears it down, and overcomes a proud, stubborn,
resisting heart; though it does not totaliter eradicare, yet it does actualiter
predominari and vincere resistentiam voluntatis. Now that no less power is
sufficient, effectually Proved.
to convert a sinner, may be cleared by these Arguments. 1. If you consider the
nature of Conversion it self: there are two From the nature of conve^sion.
things which Conversion does denote; One is an immediate work of God, renewing
man, or giving unto him a new birth; this cannot be done without an almighty
Power. Our Divines in the Synod of Dort, call this Mirabilem operationem;
Prosper calls this Grace Bonorum in nobis creatricem: This is the creating
work, to bestow a Soul upon the Soul, a Spirit of life upon a spirit; this must
be the work of an almighty God indeed, Omnipotentissima potestas inclinandi
humanorum cordium: Austin de Cor. and Gra. c. 14. No man nor Angel can make a
creature, only a God can make creatures, and new creatures: The Ethiopian
cannot change his skin, and can any but a God, change the heart, the nature of
a sinner? Another is, A work of man by Faith, and Repentance, turning himself
unto God; some term the former conversionem primam, and the latter conversionem
secundam; these two in the order of time cannot scarce be distinguished, but in
order of causality they are, the work of God converting man is before, and it
is a cause of the action in man converting unto God: Now Conversion in this
sense depends upon an almighty Power; even the believer cannot believe without
Gods mighty Power; there is a wonderful Power required to draw out the act of
believing: Oh, how much power is necessary to make any troubled broken heart
actually to come unto Christ, actually to believe, to embrace Jesus Christ! how
many Seas must be divided first? how many Mountains levelled and removed out of
their places first? It must come from the Father, if any do come unto the Son.
See Jo. 6. 37. 45. Unto you it is given to believe. ((...)) Faith is the gift
of God, and the act of Faith is the gift of God too; a renewed will is from
God, and when it is renewed, even now to will is from God: God works in you to
will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. there must be his good will
to make us will good, and his (...) for our (...), his work to make us to work.
2. If you consider the strength of sin in man's nature: we look upon two things
in From the strength of sin in man's nature.
sin; the guilt of it; Oh, this was so great, so mighty that it could never be
expiated but by an almighty satisfaction, even the blood of the Son of God; the
filth and corruption of it, why! thus considered, it is of that strength in the
Soul, that no Power but what is Divine can overcome it, an almighty Power is
necessary to this, it must be a stronger then the strong that must dispossess
this strong man; they are no weak weapons, but mighty weapons; and mighty
through God, which must pull down these strong holds; the heart of man is full
of evil, says Solomon; it is desperately wicked, says Jeremy: I beseech you
pause a while upon two Considerations. 1. There is an exceeding strength in
Sin, even in the Regenerate, and converted Person: Paul cries out, I am sold, I
am led captive. David is weeping for no less sins then of Adultery, and Murder:
Peter weeps bitterly for no less sin then denying of Christ, then for swearing
and cursing. In the very best the flesh lusts against the Spirit; So that
they cannot do the Good they would, and cannot overcome the evil that they
hate. Now mark, if there be so much strength in sinful nature dying, how great
is the strength in sinful nature living? If there be so much power in a broken
arm, how great is the power in a perfect, strong unbroken arm? If all the
Christians Grace he has be sometimes too weak for his sinful inclination,
assuredly then all external counsels, advises, reproofs are too weak to alter
the whole sinful nature; for the quality of Grace is much more strong, then the
exhortation unto Grace.

2. That there is such a strength in sin, that all the degrees of Grace unto
which a converted person can possible attain in this life, are not able totally
to rid the soul of it. Till the mud-wall be quite pulled down, some of the Ivy
will stick unto it; Jacob went halting unto his grave. Till death makes an end
of our lives, Grace cannot make an end of our sins. Is it thus with the
converted person, that neither Counsels, nor Exhortations, nor Grace received
can utterly extirpate sin? nay is sometimes too weak for sin? verily then there
can be no conversion of a sinner without an Almighty power: the power of sin in
an unconverted man being in fullest strength, in every faculty and making
highest resistance to Grace, because naturally of deepest contrariety thereunto.

3. Nay thirdly, consider as there is a mighty strength From that strength
joined with Sin, to oppose the sinners Conversion.
in sin, so there is a mighty strength joined with sin, to oppose the sinners
Conversion; and the sinner cannot be converted until both these armies be
conquered: 1. Satan's strength is joined with the strength of sin: the sinner is
under the dominion of sin, and he is likewise under the dominion of Satan; and
as sin is a powerful Lord, so Satan is a powerful Prince; he is the God of this
world, he works mightily in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. He takes
them captive at his pleasure; and as Pharaoh raised all his host, when the
Children of Israel were to go out of Egypt; so does Satan stir up all his
policy, and put forth all his power, to withhold a person from being converted.
He arms the Judgment with reasons, exceptions, shifts, disputes; and he arms
the Will with aversness, unreasonableness, stubbornness, pride; And he arms the
Conscience, and he arms the Affections. O what corrupt reasonings? how many
proud denials? what hideous representations of the ways of Grace? what
delights, what profits we have had by sin? what impossibilities, what disputes,
what fears, what terrors, what dampings of the Word, what distractions in
Prayer, what agonies, and continual, and vehement, and violent conflicts,
doubts, scruples, etc? 2 All these must be answered, and all these must be
conquered, if the soul be converted. And can all this be done by a moral
power? O no; it must be an Almighty power, which must rescue a poor soul out of
the hands of two such mighty Lords. The people of Israel could not be delivered
from one King, and with a temporal deliverance, but by the exceeding greatness
of Gods power, and by an high and insuperable working of divine Grace. 4. There
is more then an ordinary power required for effects which fall short of
Conversion: and if From the effects which fall short of Conversion.
no less then an almighty power be required for these (which are at the best
but subordinate and preparative works to the main work of Conversion,)
questionless then, the work of Conversion depends, and must depend on an
almighty Power. Such a quantity of power cannot be denied for the greater,
which yet must be granted for the lesser works, in the same Order. There are
some good and learned Divines, who handling the preparatives Synod. D^rdr. page
160.
to Conversion, do conceive four precious acts or works, wrought before it. v.
g. 1. Notitia divinae voluntatis, a knowledge of the Divine will. 2. Sensus
peccati, a sight and feeling of our sins, and sinful condition; 3. Cogitatio de
liberatione, some thoughts and desires of deliverance; 4. Spes veniae, an hope
at last of a possibility of mercy and pardon: all which God works by the
preaching of the Word. As upon Peter's sermon, they came to a ^ense of their
sin, and fear, and trouble, and desire, and had some hope of deliverance
preached unto them, the promise being made to them and unto their Children;
upon which God converted them. Now mark me; There is a necessity of an almighty
Power to produce these antecedaneous, and inferior works. None but the God of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, can inlighten the eyes of the
Ephesians, c. 1. 17, 18. Surely then, none less then he can open the heart of
the Ephesians; for which is the greater work, to open an eye, or to open an
heart? Is it not more to give life to the dead, then to give sight to the
blind? None but God can make a sinner sensible of his sins; When the
Commandment came, sin revived, and I died, Romans 7. 9. Now which is the greater
work, to make me feel my sins, or to make me forsake my sins? to trouble my
heart, or to alter my heart? to feel my disease, or to heal me of my disease?
to show me my ^etters, or break off these ^etters?

5. It is (at least) as great a work to convert a sinner, as it is to From the
power required to preserve a sinner converted.
preserve a sinner converted; and one would think a greater work; for to the
one man is dead, to the other he is living. Is i^ not more to make the house,
then to repair the house? but to preserve or keep a converted person steadfast
to the end, there needs no less then the power of a God: (We are kept by the
power of God through faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 5.) therefore to convert a
sinner does require no less power then that of a God. Now put all these things
together; the nature of Conversion, the Power of a sinful heart, the Strength
of Satan, the Power required for lesser works then conversion, the Greatness of
making, then keeping, and then I think it will manifestly appear, That no less
then an almighty Power is necessary to a sinners Conversion.

Is there an almighty power required to convert a sinner, Use 1.
as great a power as to make a dead man alive? how To humble us from the
consideration of the D^pth of our disease.
may this humble all our thoughts, and all our hearts! you may judge of the
depth of the disease, by the breadth of the Remedy; so may we of the greatness
of our fall, by the greatness of the power which is required to raise us up. O
who can utter the sinfulness of a sinner! who of us would believe that there is
so great a strength in one of his sins! that all the powers in heaven and earth
(less then Gods) are not able, are not sufficient to turn his heart from it!
That one lust of Pride, that one lust of Uncleanness, that one lust of
Covetousness, that one lust of Vainglory, etc. is too strong for thee, and it
is too strong for all the men on earth, and it is too strong for all the Angels
in heaven. Though one pulls and the other pulls, and all of them pull together,
they cannot pull it from thy heart, nor thy heart from it: you read in 2 Kings
4. 31. that Gehazi went before Elisha and laid the staff upon the face of the
Child, but there was neither voice, nor hearing; wherefore he went again to
meet Elisha, and told him saying, The child is not awaked: Why! thus it is with
thy heart under all the means of life and Grace; they may all turn back to God
and say, This sinner is not yet awakened, he is not yet turned; The word of God
may say, I cannot with all my Instructions, with all my Reproofs, with all my
Exhortations convert him: nor can I, says Conscience; nor I, says Affliction;
nor I, says the Minister; nor I, says the Father. The proud Pelagians,
Papists, Arminians dream in this Point of a sleeper, but think not of a death;
they talk of a prison, and opening the door, but think not of the chains
wherewith the prisoner is bound and fettered: they talk of a Counselor, but
forget the Physician; they write, as if a sinner were to be converted with
Logic and R^etorick; but alas! if any word converts a sinner, it must be an
almighty word; God must quicken, as well as call; God must heal, as well as
speak; God must work as a God, or else the sinner will remain an eternal
sinner.

2. If such an almighty Power be necessary to convert a sinner, It is foolish
presumption to defer Repentance upon a pretense of turning when we list.
then what a foolish Presumption is it to defer to beg Repentance, supposing a
lurking dormant power in the heart to turn when we list? But, O vain man! why
yet a little sleep more, and yet a little slumbring more! and why to morrow, or
why hereafter? what is thy power, or what is thy strength to come off from thy
sins, or to overcome and turn thy sinful heart? Why! Go and try some lesser
thing, change the Leopards spots, turn night into day, raise thy dead child out
of the grave, stop the course of the Sea, and sweeten it: Read the word, and
make thy self to understand it; Read thy heart and make thy self to humble it;
if thou can not do the lesser, the weaker, why will thou endanger thy self
with a presuming to do the greater, the stronger? Is it credible, that a sinner
is able to do the work of a God? thou can not break the thread, and shall thou
be sufficient to break the Cable? thou can not pluck up the plant, and shall
thou be able to pull up the Oak? thou art not able to extinguish the rising of
a sinful thought, and will thou ever be able to convert a sinful nature? And
tell me seriously, does thy sinful power decrease by sinful actings! In civil
trading the stock is sometimes diminished; but in sinful tradings, sin
increases the more in strength, by how much the more is it laid out in
sinning; and the more that sinful power increases, the more need is there of a
greater power to convert the heart. If the weakest sinner does need an almighty
power to convert him, O what an almighty, almighty power does the strong
sinner, does the long sinner need for his Conversion!

3. If an almighty power be required to the Conversion of a If you would be
converted look after a^ almighty Power.
sinner; then, if ever you would be converted, look to that which is more then
a finite power. If thou would have thy self converted, or any who belong to
thee converted, do not expect it from men or means; Friends may desire
conversion, and Ministers may preach the doctrine of Conversion, but it is God
only who can effect the work of Conversion. I spoke unto thy Disciples (said
that troubled man about his possessed child) to cast him out, and they could
not, Mar. 9. 18. I confess, we must use spiritual means, we must hear, we must
pray, we must confer, but if you think that any of these (nuda virtute) by
their own natural power can convert, you are deceived. It is not the word, but
God by the word; (the power of God to salvation:) it is not prayer, but God to
whom ye pray; it is not the minister, but God who sends the minister, who is
able to enlighten thy mind, to quicken thy conscience, to convert thy heart;
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, said Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18. So say thou, O
Lord, thou art the living God, thou only art the Lord of life, I come to thee
to convert me unto thee; I hear, I read, I confer, I meditate on arguments, I
purpose, and yet I am not converted; Ministers deal with me, and Friends deal
with me, and Mercies deal with me, and Afflictions deal with me, and Ordinances
deal with me, and yet I am not converted! O Lord, I am without strength, and
they are without strength; but thou art not without strength. No power less
then thine will be sufficient for my Conversion: Now, O Lord, reveal thine arm;
stretch out thine hand; O pity, speak, quicken, turn, save one sinner more;
nothing is too hard for thee, thou did make a world by thy mouth, and thou will raise the dead, by thy word; O speak but one word, and my dead soul shall
live. 4. Does the co^ version of a sinner depend upon an almighty power? then
let us not despair, of a mighty sinner; nor yet let a mighty sinner despair
Despair not of a mighty sinner.
of a possibility of Conversion. God has an almighty Power to condemn a
sinner, therefore let him not presume; God has an almighty Power to convert a
sinner, therefore let no sinner despair.

5. Then if any of you be converted, Bless God for it: we Bless God for our
conversion.
could never do it; it is God, and God alone, who has done it: there are
reasons why God reserves the power of a sinners Conversion to himself alone; 1.
That men should seek to him alone for it; If God alone had not all the power of
giving, he should lose of all the duty in praying, and asking. 2. That he alone
may have all the glory, and praise. Comfort to us that God converts by an
almighty Power.


6. This is of exceeding Comfort to us, That it belongs to the almighty power
of God to convert a sinner: For 1. That power is power sufficient: 2. It ever
abides in God: 3. It is accompanied with an exceeding willingness; if thou
seek to him, thou shall find his will to be as great as his power; he is as
willing as he is able to convert thee; thou can not come with a more
exceptable petition.

This my son was dead, and is alive again. Luke 15. 24.

These words comprehend in them (if I mistake not) a most exact description of
a sinners conversion; both 1. In the general nature of it, that it is a
(perfective) change; [Was, and Is; was dead, and is alive:] 2. And in the
differential or proper ingredients of it, which are couched in these words [is
alive again.] In which three distinguishing ingredients of conversion are
espiable; namely, That it is a Change: 1. Very great, and notable: The
inlivening of a dead man is so. 2. Very secret and internal; the putting of life
into a dead man is so. 3. Very spreading and universal; when a dead man is made
alive, it is so. I confess that every one of these particulars does merit a
full and large discourse; but because I desire to open unto you the true nature
of conversion, at the first, in as narrow a compass as I can, I shall therefore
endeavor to draw all these goodly truths into one little Map, that so you may
be the better able to ^nderstand and remember them. With your favor, I will
grasp them into this one Proposition.

That true Conversion is a change, a very great, and inward, Doct. 6. True
conversion is a change, a great, inward, and Universal Change. It is a Change.
and universal change. You plainly see four things in this Assertion which
offer themselves to our consideration. 1. True Conversion is a change; (was
dead and is alive;) certainly here is a change. Ego sum ego, said the Harlot,
here was no Conversion. Ego non sum ego, answered the young man; here was
conversion, for here was a change; There may be a was, and an is, without a
change. Christ was God, and is God, Revel. 1. 8. And in many men the was, and
the is, are without a change; They were ignorant, and are ignorant still; they
were filthy, and are filthy still; Rev. 22. 11. But if a man be converted, the
was, and the is, are different, they are changed: I was a Persecutor, said
Paul, but being converted he is not so; such were some of you, said Paul of the
Corinthians, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. Now when I say, that
Conversion is a change, you must know that there is a twofold Change: One is,
Substantial, which alters the substance of man, as in Generation, and in
Corruption, of which the Philosophers speak: Conversion is no such change; the
soul and body of a man remains the self same substance before and after
Conversion: It was the same Paul who Was a Persecutor, and Is a Preacher of
Christ: As in the Sacrament, it is the same Bread for substance after
Consecration, which it was before Consecration; So is it the same man, for the
Philosophical substance, before and after conversion.

Another is accidental, which alters the qualities of man. Naaman was the same
man when he was a Leper, and when he was cured of his Leprosy; he was the same
for substance, (of it there was no change,) but he was not the same for the
accidental quality, (because his leprosy was changed.) Such a change is there
in conversion; the sinful Leprosy is changed, and a fair beautiful form of
holiness is put into his soul; the Glove is now perfumed, the bitter water is
now seasoned, another nature contrary to his former nature is now infused; old
things are past away, all things are become new, 2. Cor. 5. 17. Again observe,
that the accidental change, or alteration of a person, is likewise twofold; 1.
One is Corruptive, which is from good to evil; such a change was there in the
Angels that fell, (they fell from heaven to hell, from being Children of Light,
to be the Princes of darkness) and such a change was there in Adam that fell. O
what a change! what a sudden loss of great possessions, of unspeakable
perfections. O how good once he was, O what a sinner now he is! 2. Another is
perfective, which is from evil to Good: Such a change is Conversion: Why! it is
from sin to God: It is more then for Joseph to leave the prison and be made a
Prince: when a man is converted, he is now raised and enabled with the nature,
and life, and excellencies of God and Christ; true Conversion is a perfecting
change.

One distinction more I cannot omit; It is this, The perfective change is
likewise twofold 1. Relative and forinsecal, as in the Justification of a
sinner: when a sinner is Justified, the state of this sinner is changed; before
it he was in the state of death and condemnation; after it he is in the state
of life and absolution. 2. Inherent and intrinsecal; as here in the conversion
of a sinner, which is a change within a man; a change not so properly of his
condition, as of his disposition; even from one contrary to another, and that a
Genere ad Genus, from one kind of quality to another kind. A sinner has
sometimes a contrary motion of good to evil put into him, but this is not
Conversion; for it is not a mutation, but a motion: A sinners inclination is
sometimes withheld, that he does not sin; yet this is not conversion, for it is
a chaining only, not a changing of his disposition; the Lion is a Lion in
chains. A sinner goes from one sin to another; he leaves his riotousness, and
turns to coveteousness; he leaves profaneness, and turns to hypocrisy; yet
this is not Conversion, for his sinful disposition is not altered from kind to
kind: It is but a shifting from one evil to another evil; as the wind from one
point to another; it is not a change from evil to good. If a man could leave
all the sins in the world, and yet he loved and served but one, this man is not
a converted man, because conversion is a change from one kind to a contrary
kind, which the man comes short of whose heart is still set on any one sin.

2. True Conversion is a very great and notable Change; It is a very great and
not able change.
there is no change, I think, in all the world of that height and depth as the
conversion of a sinner. No not that from Grace to Glory; because it is but ab
imperfecto, and this is a contrario. The Scripture does frequently parallel it
even with those changes which are miraculous: When Christ made the blind to
see, and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the dead to live, and
dispossessed Devils; these were very great and notable changes, take them
single and they were so. Now all these miracles are wrought in any one
converted person; It Is called a Creation, a Resurrection, etc. because God puts
out as much Power in the Conversion of a sinner, as he did in creating the
World. It is the prime work of the Spirit of Christ, the top, the very highest;
when any one man is converted, the blind is made to see, and the deaf is made
to hear: (Isai. 29. 18. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the Book,
and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness,) and
the dumb is made to speak, and the lame is made to leap: Isai. 35. 5. The eyes
of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. v.
6. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing:
Yea, and the dead is made to live; [This my Son was dead, and is alive again;]
and so many sins as there are from which the heart is converted, of so many
Devils is that heart dispossessed; thy filthiness was an unclean Devil, and thy
persecution was a raging Devil; every sin that possessed thee was a strong
Devil within thee: Oh, what a great change is it to behold a stone turned into
flesh! and yet in Conversion, The heart of stone is turned into an heart of
flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26. What a change were it to see a stone changed into a Son of
Abraham! and yet in Conversion a stony hearted sinner is changed into a Son of
God; what a change were it to see darkness turned into light! yet in Conversion
it is so; Ye were once darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8.
What shall I say? in Conversion, the Bramble becomes a Fig Tree, and the Lion
becomes a Lamb, and the Wilderness is turned into a Paradise, and Hell is
turned into Heaven; the Extortioner turns liberal, so did Zacheus; the
Persecutor becomes a Martyr, so did Paul; the hideous sinner become a Saint, so
did Four things se^ out the greatness of this change. The^e is a change of
nature in nature.
the Corinthians; the blasphemer now fears an oath. There are four things which
set out the greatness of the change in a sinners Conversion. 1. There is a
change of nature in nature; there is a man, and a man, in the same man; an old
man, and a new man, in the same man; two judgments in one judgment, two wills
in one will, like two Armies in one Field, or like the Twins in Rebecca's Womb.
2. There is the strangest unlikeness to a This is in a moment.
man's self in a moment that ever was; in a moment to hate Christ exceedingly,
and the next moment to love Christ above all; to crucify Christ because he
said he was the Son of God, and presently confess that he is the Son of God; to
mock the Apostles as drunkards, and presently cry out, what shall we do? etc.
this moment to love sin, as if it were my only Heaven; and the next moment to
loath sin, as if it were my only Hell: Now to count all truth and holiness, but
as dung to the World; and presently to count all the World but as dung to Grace
and Christ. 3. There is the highest contrariety in actions and courses that
ever was; to see a man pull down what he built up, and There is the highest
contrariety of courses and actions.
to build up what he pulled down; to be mad against Christ, and then presently
even besides himself for Christ; to scourge and revile Paul and Silas, and
presently after, honor and embrace, and almost adore them: To reproach the
Saints and their ways, and suddenly to admire them, and value them and their
paths, as worthiest of our dearest love and society. 4. And a little, And a
little grace to produce all this.
very little Grace to produce all this: That one drop should sweeten the great
bitter Ocean; that one little spark should cause all this flame; A very little
Engine should move all the World, and level the Mountains; a little Grace to
enter the Throne, and to turn all the soul round about. That Moses little Rod
should divide the Sea, and melt the Rock; a little Ant tumble down a Mountain;
that the Grain of Mustard Seed, which is the least of seeds, should grow into a
Tree: That a very little Grace should transform the most rebellious heart,
humble the most proud heart, quicken the dead, purisie the most vile
affections, conquer the Gates of Hell, overthrow sin, dispossess Satan; should
beget such a River of Grief, kindle such a flame of love, such a zeal for God,
tenderness in Conscience, such a strength to do, and suffer, to believe, life
in death, joy in sorrows, hopes in despair; raise so high as to love them that
hate us, bless them that curse us, pray for them that despightfully use us, and
do good for evil. 3. True Conversion is an inward change: When It is an inward
change.
a dead man is made alive, this is done by the infusion of an inward principle
of life; the clothing of a dead man is one thing, and the quickening of a dead
man is another thing; it is one thing to plaster an old house, and it is
another thing to build a new house; Conversion may be considered two ways;
either 1. Extensively: So it is a change even of the life, and outward actions
of men; it is a cleansing of the flesh, as well as of the spirit; it is a
sanctifying of the body, as well as of the soul: It is a putting off the former
Conversation, Ephesians. 4. 22. 2. Denominatively: So it is an inward change; the
Prophet calls it a washing of the heart, Wash thine heart, O Jerusalem, Jer.
44. 4. The Apostle calls it a transformation by the renewing of the mind, Romans
2. 29. and a Circumcision of the heart, Romans 2. 29. St. John calls it, a laying
the Ax to the root of the Tree, Mat. 3. 10. Ezekiel calls it, the giving of a
new heart, and of a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Every converted man has a
changed heart; we say in nature, that Cor est primum vivens: It is true also in
Grace, the first work of quickening and converting Grace begins in the heart of
a sinner. The heart first fell from God, and it is the first that turns unto
God. The heart is the first Seat of Sin, and it is the first Throne of Grace:
Sin is the wound and disease of the heart, and Grace must bring the Plaster
thither; sin is first in the heart, and most in the heart; dominion is there,
the poison is there; bring in the heart, prevail with it, and you bring in all
the man: An outward change without an inward change, is 1. But Hypocrisy: The
Hypocritical Pharisees made clean the outside of the Cup, but not the inside; a
golden profession and a rotten heart, this is but Hypocrisy. 2. But Vanity; it
is to lap the Boughs, and leave the Roots which can send out more; it is to
empty the Cistern, and to leave the Fountain running, which fills it again. 3.
But self and souldeceit: What a foolish fancy is it to think my self a
converted man, because my Tongue is quiet, and yet my heart does curse Whether
every internalchange be an evidence of true conversion. Four internal changes
may be in man unconverted. A change from ignorance to knowledge.
God? because my body is honest, when yet my heart burns and boils with lust?
because my hands strike not, and yet my heart is full of malice, and revenge,
and murder?

Quest. But here a single scruple may be propounded, viz. Whether every
internal change be an evidence of true Conversion. To which I answer, it is
not; there are four Internal changes which may be in a man unconverted. 1. A
change from ignorance to knowledge: The man who was an ignorant sinner, may
become a knowing sinner, and yet remain still an unconverted sinner; for a man
may hate the good which he knows, and love the evil which he knows; neither of
which can consist with true Conversion. 2. A change from error to truth. Many
From error to truth.
a man forsakes the Popish Religion, and embraces the Protestant Religion; his
opinion and judgment of things may be altered, and yet his sinful heart may not
be altered; he may hold justification by faith only, and yet his heart be
utterly void of saving faith; he may deny merit unto the works of Repentance,
and yet his heart never truly repent; he may hold the true and right Government
of Christ in his Church, and yet that Government of Christ may never be set up
in his own heart. 3. A change from security to trouble and perplexity: It is
possible that a great From security to trouble.
sinner who was as senseless as the Rock, may now be as trembling as the Leaf,
and his conscience troubled as the Sea, and yet his heart not converted; Cain
was troubled, so was Pharaoh, so was Saul, so was Judas, yet none of them
converted: There is a trouble which rises from a quick conscience, and there
is a trouble which rises from quickening grace; this latter is an evidence of
true Conversion, the other is not. 4. A temporary change, or A temporary change.
rather a transient diversity in the affections. It is possible for some
scornful person to hear the Gospel preached by some John Baptist (as Herod did)
with joy, and to hear some Paul (as Felix did) with trembling, who formerly
scorned all preaching; yea, this man may be in a great changeableness, yet
never be truly changed; divine truths may fall upon him with that evidence and
efficacy, as to shake his heart, stir his affections, excite his resolutions,
and yet after a little while, as the cold does on Water that is heated, all
these workings expire into nothing, his old incorporated, familiar lusts
prevail over them, and work them wholly out; till the inward change be a change
of the heart, it is not a truly converting change.

4. Lastly, true Conversion is an universal change: When It is a universal
change.
a dead man is quickened, the soul is not only infused, but also diffused, it is
tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, the whole made alive; so is it in
true Conversion, that grace which converts a sinner, does change all the
sinner, every faculty of the soul for the quality of it, and every member of
the body, for the spiritual use of it: Therefore, converting grace is compared
to the Light which runs through all the body of the air, every part whereof is
enlightened; and it is compared to Leaven which spreads and insinuates it self
into every part of the Lump. You cannot dip into any leaf of this Book, into
any parcel of a converted man, but you shall find a divine and spiritual
change, a spirit of grace on it. He is sanctified throughout, in soul, spirit
and body: I confess, it were a work worthy of the deepest study of the exactest
Minister to find out, and deliver two things unto us: 1. One is, the Minimum
quod sic, the least breath or life of converting grace. 2. Another is, The
specifical operations of converting grace, in all the faculties of the soul, so
that one may say safely, this faculty is changed, and that faculty is changed
by grace and nothing else. This I make no question of, that converting grace
does make the whole man alive. For 1. It is a new and renewing quality. 2. It
is of a diffusive virtue, being a good in Genere optimorum. 3. It must be
Co-extensive with sin, which has perverted the whole man: But yet to set out
its changing work in every faculty of the sou^, I cannot undertake it in the
exquisiteness thereof; yet if you will favorably accept of my endeavors, I
shall attempt toward it, that so you may Concerning this universal change,
the better conceive of that universal change wrought in a sinner upon his
Conversion.

1. I premise a few Propositions which I take for granted Premise some things.
Co^verting grace is a concatination of all saving graces. All these are
Simultaneous in their Birth.
truths, (v. g.) 1. That converting Grace, (which changes the soul) is a
Concatination of all particular saving graces: It is not Faith only, ^or
Repentance only, nor Hope only, nor Love only, etc. but all of them, a Link or
Golden ^hain, as it were, of them. 2. That all these are simultaneous in their
birth; they are not implanted one before another, or one more than another,
(habitually considered) but are of a simultaneous and coexistent production,
although in the order of working and manifestation of work, there be a
precedence. 3. All these All these concur in their specifical nature, as to
this change.
graces concur in their specifical nature, and immediate operation, as to a
change of the soul. The change wrought in the mind, is of the same nature with
that which is wought in the will; and the change in the will, is of the same
nature with that in the affections; every faculty is renewed and changed with
the same kind of Grace in Conversion; for all true Graces are of the same
nature, and all of them concur to work a like saving change; though one grace
be seated in one faculty, and another grace in another faculty; all of them are
like so many streams flowing from the same Fountain, and coming into diverse
Rooms, and washing, or cleansing of them all, so that the whole house is made
clean by them.

2. These things being premised; I shall now briefly show unto you the
Univers^lity of change wrought by converting The universality of this change
showed in the particulars. In the mind.
Grace. 1. In the mind or understanding of a sinner (when he is converted)
there is implanted an heavenly or saving light or knowledge, which removes the
power and dominion of darkness or ignorance, and now inables the person to
behold the saving truths, and will, and ways of God in Christ, in a spiritual,
clear, serious, and delightful manner; all which he looks upon, not with a
naked or merely intuitive apprehension, but with admiration, but with
application, but with delight, and singular desire, and a certain kind of
transformation. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Bu^ we all with open face beholding as in a glass
the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from Glory to Glory:
When the mind is renewed, it has now a spiritual light and worth. Jesus Christ
appears as an excellent Object to Paul, Phil. 3. 8. and the Statutes of God an
excellent Object to David, Psalm. 119. 4, 5. 2. In the Judgment of a sinner
(when he is converted) there In the judgment.
is also a saving and a gracious change; for there does converting Grace cast
down the high imaginations of a sinner (as touching himself) and his carnal
reasonings, and fleshly disputes against God and Christ, and holiness, and so
captivates the judgment of a sinner, that he confesses and acknowledges, and
approves of all the methods, truths, causes, means, and ways of salvation, as
best, and best for him, and now best for him; Oh, none but Christ, none but
Christ (said the Martyr:) It it wonderful to behold how the judgment of a
converted man condemns what he formerly approved most, and how it approves what
he condemned most; the man now judges of his sin, as the only evil, and of
Christ as his only good: Oh, how foolish, how vain, how vile, that I have lived
in, and served, and followed my sinful lusts! Oh, how glorious, how happy, how
desirable is a part in Christ and Grace; yea, and the judgment now is as
fruitful and vigorous in forming Arguments to forsake sin, as it was once to
draw the heart to sin, and sees a thousand times more reason to embrace Christ,
and love holiness, then to slight and refuse them. 3. In the Will of a sinner
(when he is converted) there is also a change wrought by Grace; the resisting,
proud, unreasonable In the will.
stubbornness and enmity of it is subdued, and an holy pliableness,
yieldingness, willingness is conveyed into it. It Is rare to behold how the
Needle with one touch of the Adamant wheels about, so to behold the admirable
inclinations of the will of a sinner, upon one touch of Grace from Christ; not
long since deaf, but now hearkening; not long since resisting of Christ to the
death, and now following Christ as for life; a little while since shutting the
door, and barring it, and now unlocking the door, and opening it; ere while I
will not, and now Lord, what will thou have me to do? I should be tedious unto
you to discourse of the new inclinations and aversions, of the new elections
and rejections, of the new purposes and resolutions, of the In the affections.
new conformableness and subjections which are plainly evident upon Conversion
in the will of the sinner. 4* In all the affections of a sinner, which in
Conversion are so metamorphosed or changed, that you can hardly persuade your
self, this is the man to day, whom you knew yesterday; one affection seems to
be changed into another, love into hatred, and hatred into love; joy into
grief, boldness into fear; Lately, the desires were, who will show us any good;
now the desires are, what shall we do to be saved? Lately, the delights were i^
sin, in sensualities, in vain societies; now they are in the favor of God, in
Jesus Christ, in pardon of sin, in heavenly communion: Lately, the love was set
on that which was most unlovely, now it is set on the most lovely object
indeed, Christ is the center, etc. Lately, the grief was a turbulent Sea for
worldly losses, but now it is a running River for sinning against God: Lately,
the affections were wings for iniquity, but now they are springs for duty: I
may not enlarge; by what you have heard, it may plainly appear D^monstrations
of a notable change in Conversion. From the person converted. From the work of
Conversion.
that true Conversion works an universal change in the sinner: Demonstrations
that there is a notable change in Conversion. 1. The person converted, he is
made pertaker of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 1. 4. He is a new Creature, 2 Cor.
5. 7. He is quickened from the dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. He is born again, Jo. 3. 3. 2.
The work of Conversion: It is the effect of the great and good will of
Election; and in it, God displayes the glory of his great Love and Grace, and
Mercy; And Christ sees of the travel of his soul, some special fruit of his
wonderful sufferings and purchases; And the holy Ghost does manifest his
almighty Po^er, and the noblest act thereof; and converting grace is a new
contrary nature, a new man. 3. The end of Conversion: Conversion is the first
From the end of Conversion.
inward work for heavenly glory. It is wrought to make us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light; Naturally we are opposite to God,
and to all Communion with him; Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; no
unclean thing can enter there; sinning Angels were cast out of Heaven; God
qualifies those whom he will dignifie; he qualifyed Saul for an earthly
Kingdom, much more the sinner for an heavenly Kingdom: Heavenly glory is
absolutely inconsistent with a graceless heart; the promise of it is so, and
the nature of it is so, and the work of it is so, and the reward of it is so.
4. Converted persons are to live other lives, and to do other works; therefore,
there must be a change of their Converted persons must live other lives. Use 1.
This convince^h many to be yet unconverted. Such in whom appears no change at
all.
Forms, and Principles, and Powers.

Is true Conversion a change? a great change? an internal and cordial change?
an universal change? Why! then this one truth palpably convinces multitudes of
people, to be (as yet) not converted.

1. There are some men in whom there appears no change at all, neither inward
nor outward; the Leopards spots remain, and the Blackmores skin is unchanged;
they were ignorant, and so are still; they were drunkards, swearers, railers,
scoffers, mockers of godliness, and godly men, Sabbath Breakers, unclean,
proud, and so are still. The Prophet speaks of some, whose scum departed not
from them, Ezekiel. 24. 12. And the Apostle, of some who cannot cease to do evil,
2 Pet. 2. 14. And David, of some who hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50. 16. And
Steven, of some who always resist the holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. And Paul, of
some who wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. Although changes go over their age,
they were young, and now are old, yet no change goes over their hearts and
lives; although changes go over their bodies, (their strength is changed into
weakness, and their health is changed into sickness;) although changes go over
their estates, (their wealth is changed into poverty, and their abundance is
changed into want;) although changes go over the times, (peace is changed into
war, and safety is changed into danger:) nay although sometimes changes go
over their consciences, (Stupidity is changed into horror, and pleasure into
terror:) yet their hearts are not changed: (they approve, love and delight in
their sins as much as ever:) and their Conversations are not changed; they
drive the same trade, run on to the same excess of Riotousness, wallow in the
same mire of Ungodliness; despise converting Ordinances, converted Persons,
converting Graces. Now what shall I say to these Persons? They are unchanged
sinners, and so is God an unchangeable God; who has threatened them, and swore
his Wrath against them. Thou will not repent of thy sins, nor will God repent
of his Wrath; thou will not turn to him, and therefore will he turn away his
mercy from thee, and will overturn, overturn, overturn thee, as the Prophet
phraseth it.

2. There are some whose change is only outward, but it is Such whose Change is
only outward not inward.
not inward and cordial: they stand off from many sins, and come on to many
duties, and yet their hearts are not changed: There are six things which may
convince a man, that his heart is not changed; 1. When a man seems to be tender
least he should Six things convince a man his Heart is not changed.
commit a sin, but yet his heart was never tender and humbled for all the sins
which he has committed. Jer. 31. 19. I was ashamed, yea even confounded,
because I did bear the reproach of my youth. If Repentance begins not in tears,
it will end in tears. When I look forward and see sin with a trembling eye, (O
I dare not offend my God:) and when I look backward and see sin with a mournful
eye; (O I have sinned, I have sinned:) these indeed do show a converted and
changed heart. But I fear it is rather a policy, then a change, and a regard
more to my credit, then my conscience, when I expostulate with a sin in
Temptation, and never mourn for many sins in Commission.

2. When a man leaves many sins, but yet he does not loath any sin. Many a man
sometimes abstains from meat, yet loves it; but a good heart abstains from sin,
as from a serpent, which he hates. He turns his face from them, but he turns
not his heart from them; he does not act the sin, nor does hate the sin; he
does not let (...) out of door, nor yet crucify it within door; he seems not to
be a friend, and yet is not an enemy to sin; this man's heart is not changed. 3.
When a man acts from an awing Conscience and not from a renewing Spirit; flies
from sin, only, when conscience flies upon him for sinning, and does good only
when conscience is unquiet; when not Grace (which works uniformly,) but terour
(which works accidentally) is his Principle; though a while there be some
diversity and diversion too in this man, yet there is no change of heart in
him; even Pharaoh under a Judgment yielded, who yet upon a respite hardened his
heart again; and Iron, whiles hot, becomes malleable, nevertheless, it is not
changed in its Intrinsecal disposition. 4. When a man is Formal in duties, but
not Spiritual in duties; he holds a customary course, but not a conscientious
course; this man's heart is not changed: Judas was as busy about Christ as the
other Disciples, yet he was not changed; Some unconverted man may be as
frequent in religious duties as converted persons are, yet their hearts
unchanged. There are four things which prove a formal Christian to have an
unchanged Four things prove a formal Christian to have an unchanged Heart.
Heart; for though he does good duties, yet he does them, 1. From carnal
Principles, of Custom, Education, Example, not from Faith, Love and Spiritual
Principles. 2. For Carnal Ends, with a respect to his Estimation with men, not
with God; or he does some good, to blind and cover more evil. 3. As a Carnal or
Natural work, not as a Communion with God or Christ; if he does them it is
sufficient, but whether he meets with God in them, or God with him in them;
whether he pleases God, and God accepts of him and them, or what heavenly
revenues come into his soul upon them, he regards not. 4. Without any Delight;
A good m^n hates the sin which he does, an evil man hates the good which he
does; he delights not in the Law of God after the Inward man; he is glad when
the work is done, but not to do the work: It is his Task, it is not his
Pleasure; It is a Heaviness, but not an Heaven to him; his Spirit is weary, as
much as his Body; he cannot take hold of God, be importunate in prayer for any
Grace; he does not put out a Might, a Power, a Zeal in holy Services; but acts
them with a sleepy, faint, wearisome undelightful Spirit. 5. When a man has
been and still is a stranger to Inward Conflicts, certainly that man's heart was
never changed: there may be two conditions, wherein all may be quiet: One is in
anothere life where grace stands alone; in heaven there is no sin, but holiness
is grown unto its utmost perfection, and therefore it is above contrariety and
conflict. Another is in this life, where sin stands alone, it has the
dominion, and blinds the mind, sears the conscience, and hardens the heart;
there is neither a contrary light, nor a contrary grace, to raise any stirs and
conflicts. But then there is a third condition, which has medium
participationis in it, in which the soul is partly flesh and partly spirit, sin
is there, and grace is there; there are two contrary Natures, two contrary
Laws, two contrary Inclinations and workings; two Adamants as it were, one
drawing the soul to evil, the other drawing the soul to good, one willing, the
other unwilling, one yielding, the other resisting, one putting on to ^aith, to
love, to mourning, to praying, to repenting, the other putting off the soul
from all these; when I would do good, evil is present with me, says Paul. And
verily it is thus with every converted and changed man: The flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the flesh; and these two are
contrary one to another, so that they cannot do the good that they would, Gal.
5. 17. And if no such thing be in thee, thy heart was never changed: That man
who never finds an unbelieving nature, opposing and conflicting with a
believing nature; hardness conflicting with softness, etc. his heart was never
changed, for converting grace is in us but in part; and if but in part, then
some sinfulness still remains; and believe it, there are not two more active,
more contrary, more conflicting principles then grace and sin in the same
subject. 6. When a man is constantly formal in the same rode and posture, all
his days like a Pio^ture, never better nor worse. Such who seem to be changed
without and within, but it is not total. Two things manifest a partial change.
When they do not come up fully to the commanding Will of God.


3. There are many men who seem to be changed without and within, yet the
change is not a total or universal change; and there are two things which do
manifest a partial change only to be in many men. 1. When they do not come up
fully to God, in respect of his commanding will; they cannot come up to the
Will of God, when his Will is most spiritual, when his will is most strict as
self-denial, when his will is most difficult; Oh, to sacrifice Isa^c that
beloved Child, to part with Ben^amin, this is against them; to pluck out the
right eye, and cut off the right hand, this is an hard saying, when his will is
most suffering: For the young man to forsake all his riches, this is a
sorrowful Injuction; to renounce all our honors with Moses, and to suffer
reproaches with the people of God; to leave Friends, and Father, and Mother,
and Brethren, and Sisters, and Children, and Lands, and Life too, as the
Apostles did. When a man is converted, he is now so changed that his will and
Gods Will are not suitable, but also coextensive; It is pliable, and it is
parallel: Gods Will is my will, and what he wills I will; the Law of God is
written in his heart, every command of God is engraven upon it; there may you
read the Masters Copy, and the Scholar writing after it. This is to be done
(says God,) this I desire to do, says the Godly heart; this I would have thee
to believe, Lord I believe, help my unbelief; Thus much I would have thee to
suffer; Lord strengthen me, and give me not only to believe, but to suffer for
thy sake: But in a partial change it is otherwise. 2. When they do not fully
come up to God in respect of his forbidding Nor to the forbidding Will of God.
will; You know that God forbids all sin, he forbids spiritual sins, (pride,
ambition, etc.) as well as fleshly sins, 2 Cor. 7. 1. little sins (faith and
troth, vain thoughts) as well as great sins; secret sins (alone) as well as
open sins; heart sins (heart-adultery, revenge, malice) as well as life sins;
Gospel sins (unbelief and grieving of the Spirit of God) as well as Law sins;
sins of Omission as well as sins of Commission; breeding or original sin as
well as actual.

Quest. But some may say unto me; If the case be so, How How a man may know
that God has indeed changed his heart? Some things premised. There are many
abo^^ive changes.
may one know that God has indeed converted and changed his very heart, so
that he may confidently say, that although I was once dead, yet I am now alive?
This Question deserves a serious Resolution. For 1. There are many abortive
changes, deluding changes, rising from false and insufficient Principles, from
a terrifyed conscience, or from politic parts, or from the power of restraint,
or from denial of occasions, or from prevalent passions, or from the
contrariety of one sin to another, or from a present and sudden apprehension of
matters, or from the defect of strength, or from judicial impressions, by the
appearing of death, or from education, or from respect to our superiors and
friends, and hopes which we have from them, etc. 2. If the heart should never
graciously be changed, If the heart be never changed, the man is damned.
(as sure as God lives) the man will be damned; though the man may have parts,
abilities, honors, be civil, ingenuous, candid and punctual with men, and
in-offensive in his dealings: O friends! the Heart (or Soul) is that which God
looks on, and every man is as his heart is; as that is, so the man is; he is so
for the present, and he is so for eternity. Except a man be born again he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, said Christ to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. 3. If
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, says the Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 17. Old
things are past away, all things are become new. Christ you know is the way,
the truth, and the life: Can the Christless man ever be a heavenly man?
assuredly no Christ, no Heaven: But then if a man be in Christ he is a new
Creature (.i.) Christ does change him, and forms him a new; he strips him of
his old heart, and puts into him a new heart.

These things being premised: I now come to answer the Case The case answered.
propounded; Only I must crave favor to acquaint you with two things. One,
that I speak not of such a change as implies perfection, but only of that which
although it be true and saving, is nevertheless imperfect, for so is all the
work of grace in this life. Another is, that I intend not to give you
Characters of a progressive change, which may be found in Christians whom God
has called, and converted, and changed for many years, in whom the work of
Conversion is come to much maturity and strength; but only of an initial
change, as it stands in truth and sincerity, although newly wrought, and
perhaps it be very feeble and weak, yet it is to be found in every man whom
Divine Grace does convert. Now this Initial change may be evidenced by the
several contrary habitudes and fixed carriages in the converted The initial
change evidenced by the several contraricties.
person, as to time past, and time present, and time future; in respect of all
which you shall clearly discern a singular alteration, if the Conversion be
true.

1. The first contrariety or alteration, respects the time past: As to the time
past.
Before the sinner was converted, there were four unhappy qualities possessing
of him, as touching his sinfulness. 1. A mavelous blindness, and reflexive
unsensibleness of his sinful condition, dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.
Past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. 2. A wonderful erroneousness and false judgment of
his estate; thinking highly and proudly of himself, as once La^dicea did, and
the Jews and Pharisees did; We are Abraham's seed, and never in bondage, Joh. 8.
33. 3. A miserable security of spirit, extremely careless and negligent about
the internal and eternal concernments of his soul; alive once without the Law,
Romans 7. 9. Soul, take thine ease, etc. They say, peace and safety, 1 These. 5.
3. 4. A remorseless pursuing of his sinful lusts, without any heartsmiting
troubles for his sinning and provoking of God. No man repented, saying, What
have I done? every one turned to his course, Jer. 8. 6. 5. Alienation from the
life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. Thus it was with the man, before God converted him,
and changed him; but now behold the alteration and contrariety. 1. There is a
graciously quick and active quickening light fallen into him, which opens his
eyes, and affects his conscience to a clear and right sight of his sinful heart
and life. Romans 7. 9. But when the Commandment came, sin revived, etc. As if the
light of the Sun brake into a darkroom, and represented all the nastiness in
it. Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. His sins are set before him, and
conscience acquaints him with his forepast evils, so that he is convinced, and
can make no defense, but cries out with the Leper, I am unclean, unclean. 2.
All his erroneous and proud conceits of himself are tumbled down; the Mountains
are laid low, and the man judges of himself, as if he were the greatest and
vilest sinner that ever lived; he abhors himself, Oh, how wicked! Oh, how vain!
Oh, how vile! Oh, how mad! Oh, how foolish! Oh, how beastly! I have been a
transgressor from the womb; I have lived without God, against God; none so
ignorant, none so proud, none so filthy, none so froward and rebellious against
the Will of God, against the goodness of God as I: In me there dwells no good
thing; I am without strength: No man living has such proper thoughts, such
humble thoughts of himself as he. Oh, unfit to dye, unworthy to live, undone if
mercy be not free mercy, and abundant mercy. 3. His Castle of security is
demolished, and the secure negligent man becomes now a most anxious and
solicitous and careful man about the condition of his soul. 2 Cor. 7. 11. What
carefulness it wrought in you; this now takes him up. What shall we do? say
they to John the Baptist: And what shall we do? say they to Peter: And what
shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. 30. O my Soul (my poor lost, wandering, sinful,
undone Soul) what shall I do? what will become of me? and what will become of
thee for all these sins? And now the man inquires, and hears, and confers, and
prays, as for his life: Oh (says he) I need mercy, and mercy I must have; I
need Christ, and Christ I must have; I need grace, and grace I must have; and
as that impotent person lay at the Pool for cure, so does this converted
sinner; he lies at the pool of the word, and at the gates of heaven day and
night; and there he cries out, God be merciful to me a sinner; and there he
wrestles with God, as Jacob once; I will not let thee go unless thou bless me;
until thou be reconciled, until I have Christ, until my heart be sanctified. 4.
His hardened remorselesness is now turned into a singular brokenness and grief
of spirit; the Rock is smitten, and the waters gush out; a Fountain is opened
within him: He who made but a sport of sinning before; he who could grasp the
nettles, and tread on hell, and vex mercy, and shoot through the heart of
Christ, and not be moved or troubled at all: Oh now, how is the man altered? I
see him trembling and quaking with Paul, I see him bitterly weeping with Peter,
I see him washing his Couch, with David; I see him in heaviness and bitterness
for his sinnings, as one for his first born. One while he meditates, and then
weeps; thus, and thus, and thus have I dishonored my God. Another while he
hears, and reads, and weeps, I am that man, O Lord; I am he of whom thou
speak, I am that sinner; Iam he who has out-faced thy Law, out-stood thy
offers of grace, and resisted (Oh how often) thy good Spirit. 5. He is now for
the life of God to be wrought in him: This he now prizeth as the most excellent
life; and for this, he prays, Lord, another heart, a new spirit.

2. The second contrariety respects the time present: And As to the time
present.
there are four things for the time present, in a truly changed and converted
person which never were in him before. 1. A present hatred of sin. 2. A present
flying unto Christ. 3. A present love of God. 4. A present course of new
obedience. 1. When the Lord has converted and changed the heart of a sinner,
there is wrought in him a present hatred of sin; the man loved his sins before,
and took pleasure in unrighteousness, held it fast, and defended it; sin is now
seen as the greatest evil, and the more he sees it, the more he hates it: As
soon as ever the heart is changed, immediately it is a sin-hating heart; I do
not say there is no sin, but I say the heart hates sin: The evil that I hate,
said Paul, Romans 7. 15. and in Ezekiel. 36. where God promises to give them a new
heart, he says, Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and shall loath
your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations.

Quest. But here now is a great Scruple, how a person may know that he hates
sin? Many think they do so, and are deceived, How a man may know that he hates
sin.
it proves only a passion.

Sol. In true hatred there are six things. 1. An extreme detestation: Every
dislike is not hatred, but true hatred is an extreme loathing. Thou shall cast
them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence, Isai.
30. 22. 2. An earnest separation: He that hated his wife did sue out a Bill of
divorce from her in the Law. 3. An irreconcilable alienation: Two angry men
may be made friends; but if two men hate each other, friendship is
everlastingly broken betwixt them. 4. A constant and perpetual colluctation: If
they cannot be severed one from the other, they still oppose and conflict one
with the other. 5. A deadly intention and destruction; for nothing satisfies
hatred, but death and ruin; Saul hated David, and sought his life, Absalom
hated Amnon, and killed him. 6. An impartial aversation; hatred is of the whole
kind, I hate every false way: Will thou now know whether God has changed thy
heart, then ask thy heart; What is it that thou abhorrest as the superlative
evil? what is that which thou would have separated as far from thee, as
heaven is from hell? what is that thy heart will never renew league or
friendship with any more? what is that against which thy soul does rise, and
with which (as Israel with Amalek,) thou have war for ever? what is that which
thou will be avenged of, and daily do endeavor the mortifying and crucifying
of? what is that which thou sets thy heart against, in the comprehensive
latitude thereof, whether great, or little, open, or secret? If it be sin, if
it be thy sins, assuredly here is true hatred of sin, and assuredly here is a
most distinguishing Character of a sound Conversion and change. It was not wont
to be thus with thee, nor is this findeable in any unconverted person
whosoever. Sin was once to thee as Dalilah to Samson, and now is it to thee as
Tamar to Amnon. It was a sweet morsel once which thou heldst fast, but now it
is the menstruous cloth which thou do cast away, and say, get thee hence;
what have I to do any more with Idols? If it be thus with thee, bless thy God
who has showed grace to thy soul.

2. When the Lord has changed and converted the heart of a sinner, the sinner
presently flies unto Jesus Christ: The first stroke of Grace is on the heart,
and the first breathing of Grace is for Christ; as the new born babe flies unto
the breasts, or as any creature does to its center, and place of rest. For when
the heart is changed by converting grace, 1. It breeds the most exquisite
discovery and sense of sin, and consequently of the souls need of Christ. 2. It
is most impatient of distance or difference with God, and prizeth his
reconciled favor superlatively, cannot live without it. 3. It sees nothing
more valuable in it self, or more suitable to its condition then Christ,
Christus amor meus pondus meum. And therefore, if you take notice of it, you
may experimentally find upon the first impressions of Grace, that the soul is
mostly taken up with Christ, and with Faith: Oh, that I might be found in him!
Oh, that I could believe on him! It sees excellency in Christ, and Peace in
Christ, and Redemption in Christ, and Righteousness in Christ, and Grace in
Christ, and Kindness in Christ, and Help, and Life, and Heaven, and all in
Christ. In Conversion, Christ secretly draws the Soul to himself; and being
converted, the soul strives to draw Christ to it self; It would have Christ, it
must have Christ; it is never well, it is never satisfied until it has Christ.

3. When the Lord has converted and changed the heart of a sinner, there is
wrought in him a present love of God: It is wonderful to see how the Tide turns
upon Conversion. There was once one found weeping very bitterly; and being
demanded, why! O, said he, all other things are loved, but Amorum amatur, Love
it self is not loved. So before Conversion, a man could find love for his
Parents, and love for his Relations, and love for his Recreations, and love for
his Profits, and love for his Sins; but no love for God. But after Conversion,
the man can scarce find any love for any, unless it be for his God, and in his
God. A graciously changed Heart is enabled to see, 1. The glories in God; those
most Pure and Amiable Excellencies in God. 2. The Transcendent Love of God to
it, in the Eternity of it, in the Freeness of it, in the Sweetness and Goodness
of it. 3. The Unspeakable Communications and Bounties of God toward it in
Jesus Christ; for the present, and for the future: It is Grace which makes us
to see what a gracious God he is: It is Grace which makes us to see what a
Royal gift Jesus Christ is; It is Grace which makes us apprehensive of all the
Love in God, and from God; and therefore no marvel that the changed heart falls
presently in love with God; (O Love the Lord all ye his Saints) into a Love of
Friendship, and into a Love of Complacence, as they speak; that it admires
God, and prizeth Communion with him; and takes its full and highest delight in
him: Plusquam mea, plusquam meos, plusquam me, said Bernard.

4. When the Lord converts and changes a person, the man presently Steps into
the path of new Obedience; when Grace has changed the Heart, the Heart
instantly changes its Master and its service; O it will not live as it has
done, for a thousand Worlds; It is a servant of sin no more, but a servant of
righteousness: look on any converted man (since the Word began,) as soon as
ever Grace dropped into his Heart, a newness of Obedience dropped into his Life,
against all Ease, Pleasures, Profits, Encouragements, Discouragements, Threats,
Dangers; It was so with Abraham, with Paul, with all those thousands in the
Acts, with all those Ephesians; And indeed it cannot be otherwise, forasm^ch as
all their external course is but the pulse of the Heart. The Pondus of the will
is changed, it is at the command of the Heart; which being brought into God,
the services of the heart are also brought in with it. O, that you would peruse
your selves in this second Trial, what present contratiety you find in your
Hearts; It is a very near Trial, and a most Infallible discovery of the truth
or falsehood, or your Change.

3. The last Contrariety or Change (which I shall but touch) As to the time
future.
respects the time Future: there are five admirable Properties for the time
future, which may be found in every truly Changed and Converted person. 1. He
is very tender and fearful, least he should sin against his God: Keep thy
servant from presum ptuous sins; cleanse thou me from secret faults: Psalm. 19.
12, 13. Should we again break thy Commandments! said Ex^a, c. 9. 14. How can I
do this Great wickedness, and sin against God! said Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. There
is in a Changed and Converted man, 1. A tender Jealousy over a Deceitful heart.
2. a tender Watchfulness, against Alluring temptations. 3. a tender Conscience,
which feels the first Risings of sin. 4. a tender Dissidence of his Own
strength. 5. a tender Fear, and aweful Regard of Gods Presence and Goodness. He
is afraid to sin, although the sin be Secret; and although it be Commodious;
and although it be Pleasant. I will but name the rest. 2. He is very Zealous
and Active for God; Paul even besides himself. 3. He is very Faithful and
Constant unto God. 4. He is very Serious and Industrious, to get assurance of
Gods love, and of his inheritance in the highest heavens. Give all diligence
etc. 2 Pet. 1. 10. 5. He strives for the Conversion and change of others.

The next Use must be of Comfort and Support, to all such who find this change
wrought in their hearts by converting Grace. Use. 2.
There are four Adjuncts which make this Converting change Comfort to those who
are changed.
unspeakably Comfortable and Joyous. 1. Next to Christ it is the choicest and
chiefest gift that the heart of man is capable of in this life. The gifts of
God are of several Orders and several Next to Christ it is the choicest gift
the heart is capable of.
Natures, uses and ends; some are in order to a natural preservation, as food,
and raiment, and Health. Some are in order to an extrinsecal condition or State
of Life, as Honors and civil Authority; Some are in order to private society
and relation, as Wife, and Husband, and Children; Some are in order to secular
converse, as Father and Friends, politic wisdom, and parts, etc. These are
all of them good in their kind, but as it is said of diverse Captains
belonging to David, although they did great matters, yet they attained not to
the acts of the three first Worthies: So none of these rise or mount either to
that intrinsecal Dignity, or to that supernatural and ultimate End, which the
change by Grace does; The least drop of Grace is more then all the Ocean of the
World. The Apostle Paul says, it is a change from Glory to Glory; the work is
a work of Glory and the man becomes glorious who is a converted man. S. Peter
says, He is now made partaker of the Divine Nature: The excellencies of God
are stamped on thy soul; the Sun is now risen within thee as the Glory of God
filled the Temple: so when a man is converted, the beams of grace do fill his
soul; thou art precious, the filthy rags are taken away.

2. It is an evidence of great love and rich mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. But God who is
rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he It is an evidence of great love.
loved us when we were dead, has quickened us, etc. It is a testimony of the
greatest love, as it is of the greatest hatred in God, to be left to our sinful
lusts and ways.

3. Converting grace it is the first, visible and sure characteristical It is
the first visible distinction betwixt hell and heaven.
distinction twixt Hell and Heaven, twixt Death and Life, twixt a Goat and a
Sheep, twixt a wicked condition, and a Godly condition. There is a twofold
distinction of persons touching their everlasting estates: One is in decreto,
which lies in the breast and counsel of God; the other is in decreto, which is
to be found in the heart of man. Now quoad nos and quantum ad objectum;
Converting grace makes the difference, it shows who is loved, and who is hated;
it shows who is for Heaven, and who is for Hell. It is not honor, nor wealth,
nor strength, nor parts, nor civility, nor meanness, nor poverty, nor
education, nor knowledge, nor trouble of conscience, nor restraint, nor
profession, nor external action, which is the partition wall which divides and
decides the state for the present and future. If Ministers or Angels should
assure thee of an interest in Christ, and of remission of thy sins, and of
future happiness while yet thy heart is unconverted, they do certainly delude
and deceive thee; for if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: But if God
has converted and changed thy heart, thou art assuredly past from death to
life, thou art among the first born of God: No sorts of wicked men are in this
changed and converted condition, no profane person, no hypocritical person; as
soon as any is converted, it may be said of him, as Christ of Zacheus, This day
is salvation come to him, for as much as he also is a child of Abraham.

4. It never goes alone, it is always accompanied with justification, It never
goes alone.
pardon, interest in Christ, reconciliation with God. Jesus was sent to bless
them in turning them away from their iniquities, Acts 3. 26. Be converted that
your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3. 19. Come now, and let us reason together,
Isai. 55. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, etc. It is the most comfortable condition.


5. It is the most comfortable and joyful condition; for now there is a change
of all, without and within you. The converted souls are glad, Acts 2. 47. the
converted Jailor rejoiced, Acts 16. 34. the Eunuch rejoiced, Acts 8. 6, 8. The
first work of the Spirit is grace, the next is joy; Heaven now stands open for
you to see all, etc. Threatenings are turned into promises, curses into
blessings, enemies unto friends, aliens into sons, accusing into an excusing
conscience, voice of terror into a voice of peace, hell into heaven. It is the
only unprejudicial change on earth.


6. It is the only unprejudicial change on earth: In all other changes there is
either diminution or danger. If a rich man becomes poor, there is a diminution
of his Condition; if a poor man becomes rich, there is a danger to his spirit,
lest he becomes covetous or proud. If a man be lifted up to greatness and
authority, there is a danger, lest he forgets God, and be injurious; if an
healthy man becomes sick and weak, here is an impairing, a loss and danger of
life: Only, when a wicked man is converted, and becomes holy, there is neither
diminution nor danger; converting grace is no thief in the Candle: It is no
preternatural heat which sucks away that which is vital; thou losest nothing at
all by it, no spot to thy credit, no burden to thy conscience, no eclipse to
thy honor, no gall in thy Cup, nor wast to thy Lands: It does not darken thy
name, nor weaken thy strength, nor diminish thy coffers, nor imbitter thy
comforts: No loss but the losing of sin, which we cannot keep but to our loss;
all that it does is this, that it decreaseth and destroys thy sinful lusts;
it roots out those weeds, it pulls out hell, it heals thy wounds, and is the
deadly enemy to thy deadliest enemies.

7. The converting change is an unchangeable change: The next change is into
Heaven. A wicked man may be changed It is an unchangeable change.
into a Godly man, and a Godly man may be changed into Heaven, but the Godly
man shall never be changed again into a wicked man; the state of grace is an
unchangeable state, a better condition them Adams in Paradise; his was perfect
but mutable, this is imperfect, but not changeable: Once a Son, and ever a Son;
the Son abides in the house for ever (says Christ;) once converted, and for
ever blessed. Gods converting Grace is an abiding seed, and it is immortal
seed, and it is a gift which God never repents of, although much of the
strength of it may be abated by our falls, as fire is raked up under the ashes;
although the sense of it does sometime fail us, and the comfort, and the
liveliness of operation appears not, yet as there is life in the root, though
there be not leaves on the Tree, and as there is a soul in the man, though
sickness be in his body, so the truth and state of grace continues under all a
Christians eclipses, weaknesses, failings; for converting grace comes from an
unchangeable will in God, the will of his love, whom he loves once, he loves to
the end. 2. It depends upon an everlasting Communion with Christ, who marries
the soul to himself for ever. 3. And it is given as a pledge and pawn of eternal
glory. 4. And it is assisted with an everlasting arm, and power of God.

8. No other change shall hurt you, but further you: Afflictions, No other
change shall hurt us, but further us.
Death, it is gain unto you, it is the last style, and then you are at home for
ever.

Object. But now some distressed person may reply, These are comforts indeed,
but not to me; for I fear that my heart is not changed, nor yet truly changed;
I am not indeed altogether what once I was, but this I fear is but a stop of
conscience, or but the fruit of hypocrisy. Oh, I feel such changes on my
spirit! I fear I am not truly changed.
it is not always alike, and so much sinfulness, so much unbelief, so much
hardness, so much difficulty to good, so much weakness under temptations;
surely my change is not true, a great, an inward, a total change, and therefore
none of these comforts appertain unto me.

Sol. Shall I speak a few words to such a person, (surely some such there may
be.)

1. The change by Conversion is but imperfect in this life; it is a total
change, although it changes us not totally: A converted This change is but
imperfect in this life.
man is sanctified throughout, but not perfectly throughout; when the day
breaks, there is a change that one may truly say, the night is past, and yet
many degrees of darkness stick in the air; as soon as ever God infuseth grace
into the soul, there is immediately a change as to the denomination of the
estate, though not as to the consummation of the estate; Paul's estate was a
converted and changed estate, and yet there was a Law in his Members, as well
as a Law in his Mind, Romans 7. Conversion is a change from the dominion of what
was contrary, not from the absolute being of a contrary. Though a Tyrant dwell
and stirs in a Kingdom, yet if a lawful Monarch rules, the Kingdom is
changed: Many sins are in a converted man still; but if grace does rule the
heart now, which formerly was ruled by sin, that man is a changed man.

2. Converting grace, although it be wrought at once, yet it is Converting
grace, though wrought at once, yet is brought on by degrees.
brought on by degrees: The truth of it begins in an instant, but the strength
of it comes in time. It is a very curious question why God gives Grace by
degrees, or successively in this life, and not all at once, but still leaves
some sinful corruption behind. Divines conjecture three reasons of it? 1. Our
present incapacity of a present fullness: The Bottle cannot be filled but by
degrees, though the Ocean be full; there is as much grace given at first as to
make a new creature, but not a strong creature. 2. Our estate on earth, must be
a combating estate, to difference the estate of grace and glory; that in heaven
only is the crowning and triumphing. 3. And it is an estate of faith, which is
a continual dependence, and a continual drawing of help, and a continual
recourse to the fountain: In Creation, Perfection of being was at once, and in
Glorification at once; but not so in Sanctification, this rises like Ezekiels
Water, or like the light of the Sun. This may yet satisfy thee, though grace
be imperfect and not full at once. 1. Justification is perfect. 2. Though you
find but little, yet you cannot be fatisfyed without more. 3. You have
perfecting means of holiness, though you have not perfect holiness; a word to
build you up. 4. That God who has begun, has promised to finish, and your
little is a pledge of more. 5. Truth of grace may lie in a little compass.

3. There may be many changes upon the spirit of a man, which There may be many
changes not inconsistent with the saving change.
yet are not inconsistent with the saving change of his Spirit: Sometimes he
may be lively and quick, sometimes he may be flat and dull, sometimes he may be
confident and cheerful, and at some other times he may be afraid and mournful;
sometimes he may be full, and enlarged; and at some other time he may be
aukard, and straightened; sometimes he may have more sense of Gods Love, and
sometimes more sense of his own sins: None of these things are essential to the
converted estate; a man's heart may be truly changed by converting grace,
notwithstanding many crosses and afflictions on his outward estate, many
eclipses in his comforts, many varieties in his spiritual actings, many
contrarieties twixt his sense and his faith, many temptations upon his spirit,
to many doubts and fears in his heart.

4. Sinful corruptions never work with a more sensible strength, Sinful
corruptions work with more sensible strength when the heart is truly changed.
then when the heart is truly converted and changed: Before Conversion, our
sins do work more mightily, but we do not then perceive the workings, because
your delight was then in sinning, and nothing is burdensome to delight; and
nothing was in us contrary to our sinnings; the strong man kept all the house,
and every faculty was a friend and servant to sin; the river ran all one way:
But when the heart is converted, there is now laid into it 1. The quickest
principle of feeling. 2. The contrariest principle of resisting. 3. The
properest principle of destruction to sin; and therefore no marvel that we feel
our sinful natures more than formerly; for all qualities are most active, and
most felt in cases of resistance and destruction; nevertheless none of these
must conclude against our Conversion, but rather for it, because 1. The
greatest work of grace is inward. 2. The sense of sinful workings joined with
an hatred of them, and humbling of the heart under them, and with addresses to
God for subduing power, is certainly a sign of converting grace: Therefore
hearken unto me thou distressed soul: 1. Though the Glory of Grace consists in
Victory, yet the Truth of Grace appears in Combats; the fighting Soldier is as
right to the cause, as the conquering Soldier: there is fire in the smoking
flax, as well as in the flaming furnace. 2. That great corruptions still
remaining in temptation, are the burdens of a weak Christian, but are not the
Characters of a false Christian. 3. Jesus Christ can by a little grace weaken
strongest corruptions: The least true grace will help thy soul to Christ,
through whose strength thou who art now in conflict shall ere long be made more
than a Conqueror. 4. True grace begins in weakness, goes on with combat, but
ends in victory: There is but little light at the first, and more darkness for
quantity; but the light of the Sun is rising, and dissipating, and at length
remains alone. Conquering grace has comfort, conflicting grace has strength,
and even mourning grace has truth; Peter's tears showed truth of Grace, as
well as Paul's Triumph.

But how may I descern my change to arise from the power of converting How it
may be discerned, that this change is from converting grace, and ^ot from the
power of a troubling conscience. Answered.
grace, and not from the power only of a troubling conscience? Sol. I conceive
thus, in four particulars. 1. When the change is made only from the sting of
conscience, that change goes off, and vanishes, when the trouble of conscience
goes off, and continues only while that does continue: whiles the trouble of
conscience is on the man, the man will hear, and the man will pray, and the man
will consult, and profess, and resolve, yea, and now too, to become a new man;
yea, and he will cry out against his sins, and will not come near his sins. But
when that trouble is off, all is off again; the Water which was heated, grows
cold again; Saul is pursuing David again, and Foelix is covetous again. But if
the change be from grace, though trouble be off, yet the heart is against sin,
and is for good; for grace sets us against sin, as it makes us unholy, and
evil, and not only, or principally, as it makes us uncomfortable and miserable.
2. When the change arises only from a troubling conscience, not from a
contrariety to God, but to us: It does not arise from a hatred of sin, and a
love of good; but only from a hatred of torment, a self-love, and a love of
ease; the man loves that sin, that he dares not now commit, and hates the good
which now he does; he does the good, only as a means to take off his trouble;
he does it not as a work in which he delights, nor does he fly sin as an evil
which he hates; he flies sin as it is malum sensibile, not as it is malum
spirituale: But in a gracious change, trouble does not cause hatred, but hatred
causes trouble of sin. 3. When the change is only from a troubling conscience,
then when the trouble is gone, the man's heart is more hardened, and he grows
more wicked then ever before, and in after sinnings, less sensible, and less
troubled; as Iron grows more hardened after it has been in the fire, or water
that is stopped more violent. If they be again entangled, and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. But where the
heart is changed by grace, the more grace, still the more sense of sin, and
still the more fear to sin, and still the more love of God. 4. When the change
comes only from the trouble of conscience, the change extends no further then
to that, or those particular sins for which the conscience does trouble the
man; if the other sins trouble not, they are not left: But when the change is
wrought by grace, this change extends to all sins. I hate every evil way (says
David;) they do no iniquity, Psalm. 119. Let us ^leanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Quest. How may a man know that his change is not the fruit of Hypocrisy, but
of Converting grace? Sol. This may be discerned How it appears, this change is
not the fruit of Hypocrisy.
thus. 1 The change by Hypocrisy 1. Is not Cordial; no Hypocrites heart is
changed: In heart ye work wickedness. The Hypocrite dares to give way to heart
sins: Judah turned Answered.
not with her heart but feignedly. 2. Is not Universal: The Prophet tells the
hypocritical Israelites, that they were as a Cake half baked, and not turned;
an hypocrite, though he forsake many sins, yet he loves some sin; Jehu cannot
part with the golden Calves, though he did destroy Baal. 3. Is not lasting, but
changeable; suitable occasions are too strong for an heart felsely changed. 4.
Is not able to abide three Trials, of the Word, of Conscience, of Death.

The third Use shall be to exhort and entreat us to stir up all our hearts, to
beg of God to work in them this admirable change by Use 3. Exhortation to beg
of God to work this change.
Conversion. I read in Scripture that the blind man cried out, Jesus thou Son
of David have mercy on me; and again, Thou Son of David, etc. and all this was
for a change in his eyes; and I read that Naoman took a great journey into the
Land of Israel, and all was to be cleansed of the Leprosy of his body. And why
will we not take a little pains to have our hearts and souls changed by grace:
Consider seriously, 1. That a man is not excluded No other want excludes from
heaven. This want certainly excludes us.
from heaven, for any other want; not for want of wisdom, or parts, or riches,
or dignities. 2. Thou art certainly excluded from heaven, the door is shut up
against thee, if thou be not converted and changed; the holy God will never
look upon thee, and thou shall never look upon that holy God in his holy place.
The unclean person was shut out of the Camp, and no unclean thing shall ever
enter into heaven. 3. It is thy duty, thou art It is thy duty to be changed.
bound to be a converted and changed person; every man is bound to hate and
forsake his sins, and to come back, and love, and serve his God; did God make
thee to serve thy lusts? has he preserved thee all this while to sin against
him? Is this the fruit of thy dreadful Covenant which thou have made with him?
4. What will thou get by keeping thy sins, or any one of them? What will thou
get by keeping thy sins. Be persuaded. To beseech the Lord to change thy heart.
Be persuaded therefore at least unto two things. 1. To beseech the Lord to
change and convert thy heart, even thine also, remember well. 1. None can
change a sinner but God: The Musician must tune the Instrument. 2. It is no sin
to beg of God a Conversion from sin; No, no, thou can not put up a more
acceptable request: Lord, I am weary of my sins, I would dishonor thee no
more, I would be good, I would serve thee; thou only can change me, and
enable me; for thy Mercies sake do so, and heal, and turn me, so shall I be
healed and turned. 3. God has changed and converted great sinners; was not
Manasses so! M. Magdalen so! Paul so! the Corinthians so! Why, venture toward
his mercy seat; who can tell but he may do so to thee? 4. He has changed
sinners, who have not sought him; and will he refuse it for them, who do seek
it of him? if he many times be found of them that seek him not, will he deny to
them, who seek? 5. You have his promise to do this very converting work for
you; He will give his holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. I will
give a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Behold he calls thee, he
tells thee that he is willing to convert thee, why, then art thou not willing
to receive it, to have it done? do not say, thou art a sinner; God never did
convert any but a sinner, nor does he promise to convert any, who is not a
sinner. 6. Did ever any beg this, and failed of it? Lord (said one to Christ)
If thou will, thou can make me clean, (what, says Christ to him? does he not
answer him at all? Does he say, I cannot? Or does he say, I will not? O no, his
answer is (and it is a present answer,) I will, be thou clean. 2. To come to
the Word, and come for this end, that God may convert and change; many came
Come to the word for this end.
to the Pool of Bethesda, to look on it; and an impotent man came thither to be
cured in it, and there he was cured; many come to hear the Word, to mock at it;
and many come to get some notions from it, and many come to catch the Minister
at it, but he who comes for this very end to be converted and changed by it, I
believe he shall first or last attain his end; the word shall convert and
change him. The word is sometimes compared to a Glass, which discovers; Jam. 1.
29. and sometimes to a Laver which washes and cleanses, Psalm. 119. 9. even
the young man (who of all other is most unruly and wild) is converted by it.
The Power of God, goes with the Word of God; and the Grace of God, comes by the
Word of God; it is Vehiculum Spiritus, and canalis Gratiae; Thousands have been
converted by it, and so may thou.

Has God converted and changed thy heart? hearken then to Use 4. Counsels to
the converted.
a few counsels. 1. Take heed of sinning after Conversion; Do not sin against
grace received; if thou do, thou will weaken and lame thy strength, wilt
darken thy heaven, wilt perplex thy conscience, wilt show thy self more
ungrateful then any man; no wicked man can have such an aggravation of sin upon
him, as thou have. 2. Honor God with that Grace which thou have received:
Conversion fits and enables a man for Gods Service and Glory.

And they began to be merry. Luke 15. 24.

These words are as the Banquet after the Feast; they are the close, and the
reckoning that is brought in upon the lost Son being brought home. The case is
wonderfully altered with him, (all is altered, when the sinner is altered) when
he was wandering from his Father, he ran up and down the Country, and wasted all
his estate among Harlots; he shifted himself to his very skin, and out he is
turned amongst the Swine, and no man regarded him; the poor wretch wanted
Father, and House, and Clothes, and all Comforts, and was upon his last Legs,
at the very point of starving and famishing. But now being found and returned
home, all mercies come in unto him; there is a Father to embrace him, and an
House to entertain him, and Raiment to cloth him, and Friends to welcome him,
and a feast to rejoice him. [And they began to be merry:] As formerly you have
had the nature of Conversion, so in these, you have the fruit of Conversion.
When Jesus Christ was born, there was great joy; and when a sinner is born
again, hereupon also arises great joy. The Proposition on which I intend to
insist, is this:

That Conversion brings the Soul into a joyful, a very joyful condition; [They
began to be merry] Mirth is the accent of joy, Doct. 7. Conversion brings the
soul into a very joiful condition.
it is an emphatical joy; but when did they begin to be merry? why! as soon as
it was said, This my Son is alive, and this my Son is found; now they begin to
be merry. Conversion may be considered three ways. 1. Antecedenter: For the
precious qualities and works, which immediately go before, and ordinarily usher
in Conversion; so it is sad, and bitter, and sharp; for there the law imprints
a sense of sin, and of wrath, and a spirit of bondage to fear; the Needle
pricks, and the Sword cuts and wounds, and the Hammer bruiseth, and the Plough
rents and tears. 2. Formaliter: as it is a perfective change, and alteration,
even from hell to heaven, from basest lusts, to sweetest holiness; and thus it
is (at the least) a fundamental, radical, and virtual joy. 3. Consequenter: For
the Crop and present harvest, which results out of Conversion; thus it is the
Music after the tuning of the strings; the fruit of righteousness is peace, so
the fruit of conversion is joy and delight. There are three things unto which I
desire to speak about this point. 1. That upon Conversion, the condition
becomes very joyful and pleasant; quod sit. 2. What kind of joy and pleasure
Conversion does bring; quale sit. 3. Reasons why so; cur sit: and then the
useful Application.

Quest. 1. For the first of these; that Conversion does bring the soul into a
very joyful condition.

Sol. There are four things which demonstrate the quod sit of The quod sit
demonstrated.
this. 1. Many pregnant places of Scripture; Psalm. 52. 11. Shout for joy, all
ye that ar^ upright in heart, Psalm. 132. 9. By Scripture.
Let thy Saints shout for joy, Isai. 35. 10. The ransomed of the Lord shall
return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Isai.
65. 13. Behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. v. 14.
Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart. Isai. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be
joyful in my God. Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God consists in righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Prove. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. 2. Many pregnant testimonies and
instances: By Instances.
When Zacheus was converted, he came down joyfully, and received Christ, Luke
19. 6, 9. When the three thousand were converted, there ensued singular
gladness and joy, Acts 2. 41. When the Eunuch was converted, he went home
rejoicing, Act. 8. 39. When those in Samaria were converted, the Text says,
There was great joy in that City, Acts 8. 5, 6. When the Jailor was converted,
He rejoiced, believing in God with all his house, Acts 16. 34. When they to
whom Peter wrote were converted, they did rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. 3. The many Comparisons, by which converting grace
is expressed, By Comparisons.
does confirm it, that it makes the souls condition very joyful, and
delightful: The estate of grace is set forth by all the things which are
esteemed pleasant, and delightful, and joyful. Men take Delight, and Joy, in
Honor, Beauty, Strength, Youth, Riches, Pearls, and Jewels, in Birth, in
Wisdom, and Knowledge, in Springs, Orchards, Spices, Perfumes, Buildings,
Victories, Life, Duration, Friends. Why! when converting grace is conveyed into
the heart, the man now is honorable, and of high dignity; now the beauties of
Christ are on his soul, all his graces are more precious then Pearls, and Gold,
and Silver; he is rich in spiritual treasures, he is one born of the Spirit of
God, never truly knowing and wise, till now, etc. Nay, grace is phrased by such
things, which yield a general and universal contentment and delight to the
whole man: It is sometimes called Light, which is pleasant to the eye;
Ointment, which is pleasant to the smell; Wine, which is pleasant to the taste;
Music, or the joyful sound, which is pleasant to the ear. Nay, yet again, it
is sometimes called Truth, and that is pleasant to the understanding; Goodness,
and that is pleasant to the will; a Kingdom, and that is pleasant to desire;
an Inheritance, and that is pleasant to hope; Communion, and that is pleasant
to love; a Possession, and and that is pleasant to joy; a Victory, and that is
pleasant to hatred; a Security, and that is pleasant to fear; Heaven, the
Kingdom of Heaven, and that is pleasantness itself; and all this even under
fears and combats, when at the first, and weakest, and lowest: Nay, yet once
more, it is set out by all the occasions, and by all the times of joy, to the
birth of a man-child; for joy that a manchild is born (said Christ;) A
converted man is a newborn. To the day of Marriage, which some call the only
day of joy; a converted man is married to Christ: To a Feast, Isai. 25. 6.
Every dish is filled with mercy. To a Coronation day, which was a day of
gladness of heart to Solomon, Cant. 3. 11. There is a crown of life for every
converted soul. To the time of Harvest, when the Husbandman reaps with joy,
Isai. 9. 3. To the returns of Merchants upon the increase of Wine and Oil;
Psalm. 4. To a ransom and release from bondage and captivity; a converted man
is set at liberty, he is a freeman in Christ 4. Consider Conversion in the
Causes of it, or in the very By the Causes of it.
Nature of it, or in the Acts flowing from it; certainly by all of them you may
be induced to believe that it makes the Condition joyful and pleasant. 1. The
Causes of it, which are four, 1. The Radical cause. Why! Conversion drops out
of the Eternal Love of God to a man's soul. Behold what manner of Love, 1 Jo. 3.
1. as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts. 13. 2. The
Meritorious cause: Who loved us and gave himself for us, Gal. 2. It is one part
of Christ's purchase, he merited Grace and Glory for his. 3. The Efficient
cause; (immediately efficient) it is the first breath of Gods sanctifying
Spirit, the Spirit of true Comfort and Joy. 4. The Instrumental cause; the word
which is called sweet, and sweeter then the Honey, and the breasts of
Consolation, is the instrument of Conversion, Jam. 1. 2. Its own Nature.
Converting Grace has three things intrinsecal unto it. 1. Goodness; it is By
the Nature of it.
good, and it only makes us good: Now Goodness is the foundation of Delight;
Nothing is truly pleasant, but what is truly good. 2. Suteableness; There is
nothing so suitable either to the nature of the soul, or end of the soul, as
true Grace. 3. Perfection; it is the Glory of the Soul.

3. The acts flowing from it; If the acts flowing from Conversion be such as
God himself takes delight in, (He takes delight By the acts flow^ng from it,
in the prayer of his servants, in the broken hearts of his servants, in the
Faith, and in the Fear, and in the Hope of his servants; all their services are
a sweet savor unto him, as Noah's sacrifice was:) Surely then Conversion is
able to make the converted Soul joyful and delightful. Again, there cannot be
a greater delight and joy then when an Active and Actual intercourse is
maintained twixt an immortal Soul and perfect Blessedness; when my Soul has a
free converss with Blessedness it self, and Blessedness it self has a Gracious
converse with my soul, this is as if two deeply in Love conversed with each
other: this is as if Jonathan and David met together; this is as if Jacob and
Joseph met together, and infinitely more: But upon Conversion, the soul and God
have mutual communications. (And is not God the blessedness of man's soul, and
is not blessedness a joyful and pleasant sight) God speaks to that soul, and
that soul speaks with God; the soul opens its self to God, and God opens
himself to that soul. Ergo.

5. It were a mighty dishonor to God that his Ways, his Image, By the
dishonor that otherwise would redound to God. What kind of Joy Conversion
brings. A Lawful Joy. Quaedam. 1. Nec bona nec Jucunda. 2. Bona sed non
jucunda. 3. Jucunda sed non bon^. 4. Jucunda et Bon^. ^o Bernard.
should be barren of Joy, and yet the Devils ways and sin, pleasant. 6. A
Great motive to draw in a soul were lost. 7. Grace does spiritualize our joys,
it does not nullify true joy.

Quest. 2. What kind of Joy and Pleasure does Conversion bring unto the Soul.
Sol. There are five properties in the joy which Conversion lets into the Soul.

1. It is a lawful Joy and Pleasure. There are many things which are pleasent,
but they are not Lawful: Stolen waters are sweet, says Solomon, but God
allows them not; the Tree in the garden was Pleasant, but it was not Lawful
for Adam and Eve to taste of. Sinful ways afford some kind of joy, but that
joy is forbidden fruit; God has cursed sin and all that comes out of sin.
Agrippina poisoned her husband with the meat he most delighted in. Wicked men
delight and rejoice in sinful things, but this is only sweet Poison, God
allows it not; nor is it safe: But conversion yields a Joy, which the soul may
safely feed on; It is lawful to rejoice in the Lord, and to rejoice in Christ,
and to rejoice in the pardon of our sins, and to rejoice that our names are
written in the book of Life.

2. It is a Spiritual Joy; A Joy that reaches to the spirit of Man, and that
becomes the spirit of man, and that raises the A Spiritual joy.
spirit of man. 1. Many men have joy in their faces, and yet not joy in their
hearts; A man in a fever has a lively color, when yet he has a dying heart;
and many have joy in their tongues and mouths, and yet no joy in their
consciences. As he said to one that commended his fine shoe, But you do not
know where it pincheth me; a wicked man has an hell in his conscience, who yet
has a smile in his countenance; But a Converted man's joy, is an heart joy; My
servants shall sing for joy of heart, Isa. 65. 14. My Spirit rejoiceth in God
my Savior, said Mary, Luke 2. 2. And it is a spirit becoming joy. Laughter is
not seemly for a fool, said Solomon; There are joys which are not seemly nor
becoming an Immortal soul: Agesilaus said of some pleasures, that they were fit
for salves, not for Freemen: a wicked man takes joy either in Vile things,
which fight against the Soul; or in vain things, which are below a Soul; his
joys are fetched out of hell, or out of the Creature; either such joys as
delight the Devil, or delight the beasts, or delight the basest and vainest of
men; in Whoring, and Drinking, and Cursing, and Dicing, and Dancing, and
Gaming, and Mumming, and Masking etc. But Conversion feeds the Soul with the
joys of the Holy Ghost, with Divine joy, joy drawn out of the wells of
Salvation, Isa. 12. 2. And it is a Spirit-raising joy: when the soul is cast
down, and all the comforts on Earth cannot lift it up and cheer it, yet
Conversion can let in a fetching Cordial; It can open a window to see the light
of Gods countenance and favor, which can turn night into day, and troubles
into peace, and heaviness into an exceeding joy; even David's, Why art thou cast
down O my Soul? into Praise the Lord O my Soul 3. It is a wonderful Joy; There
are two cases wherein men do wonder, how a man can possibly be joyful. A
wonderful Joy.
1. One is, when all the comforts of the Creature fail him; not a Candle but is
without light, not a Well but is stopped; not a Spring but is dry; No friend to
look on and pity, no maintenance, no subsistence: Yet in such a case (which is
wont to be a time Sighs and Tears) can a converted man rejoice. Hab. 3. 17.
Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine,
The labor of the Olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the
^lock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stals;
Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. 2.
Another is, when all outward miseries are upon him: as when all his outward
estate is taken away, yet then converted persons have taken joyfully the
spoiling of their Goods, Heb. 10. 34. When Afflictions, Derisions, Reproaches,
Bonds, Imprisonments, Scourgings, cruel Torments, are laid on him; Yet says
Paul, We rejoice in Tribulations also, Romans 5. 3. Yet says Christ, when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake, Re^oyce and be exceeding glad, Mat. 5. 11, 12. And the
Apostles when they were imprisoned and bea^en, rejoiced that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name, Act. 5. 41. My Brethren count it all Joy,
when ye fall into diverse Temptations, Jam. 1. 2. When he is going to endure a
cruel death as burning in the Fire, devouring by wild Beasts, roasting on the
Gridiron, boiling in Oil, breaking of the Bones, tearing out the Bowels; All
these have converted persons sustained, with unspeakeable Courage, clapping of
the Hands, kissing of the Stake, and Glorious Rejoicings. Why, the truth is
that though all the Candles on Earth be put out, yet he has Light and Comfort,
still ^un sh^nes, nothing can dissolve, nor yet interrupt the souls sweet
^ommunion with God. 4. It is a Firm, and Pure, and Vnclogged Joy; an
unconverted man A firm and pure Joy.
has his joy, and his delights, and his mirth, and pleasure; but there are
three doleful burdens under which all this while he lies. 1. Notwithstanding
all his joys, he lies under the hatred of God. 2. Notwithstanding all his
joys, he lies under the dominion of his sinful Lusts. 3. Notwithstanding all
his joys, he lies under the power of a Guilty, and Accusing, and Condemning
Conscience; but now the Converted man's joy is a Perfect joy, a Wel-grounded
joy; God loves him, Christ has satisfied for him, his heart is sanctified, and
his conscience pacified. 5. It is a well ending joy; A joy which ends A well
ending Joy.
in joy: an unconverted man has his joys and pleasures, but they end in
Grief and horror. O my poor Soul, said Adrian, when he was dying, whither art
thou now going? all thy Mirth, and Joy, are at an end: nec ut soles dabis
jocos, thou art going away, and all thy joys are going away: Luke 16. 15. But
Abraham said to Dives, Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. Dives fared sumptuously every day, he had pleasure on earth, but
after them his soul went into hell torments: he never had pleasure more.
Babylon, it is said of her Rev. 18. 7. how much she has glorified her self,
and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: Job speaking of the
Wicked, chap. 21. 7. says, That they take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at
the sound of the Organ: v. 12. they spend their days in wealth, and in a
moment go down to the Grave: Solomon speaks ironically to the Voluptuous
Youths, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes; But know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into Judgment: So then the converted man's joy, is a short joy, and
a joy that ends in bitterest sorrow: But a converted man's joy, is a lasting
joy, and it ends in perfect joy; when he dies, yet his grace dies not, yet his
joy dies not: Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into thy Master's joy;
the end of life, is the beginning of all joy.

6. It is a transcendent joy; it exceeds all worldly joys. A transcendent joy.
Psalm. 4. 7. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that
their Corn and their Wine increased. Psalm. 60. 3. Thy loving kindness is better
then life.

Quest. 3. Why does Conversion make the souls condition so Reasons of it.
joyful? Sol. ^t cannot but be so, if you consider Conversion, either as to
God, or as to Christ, or as to Conscience.

1. As to God. As to God. Conversion is the certain effect of Gods election.


1. True Conversion is the certain effect of Gods gracious election; Although
Conversion be not the cause of election, yet it is the fruit of election, it is
the counterpane of election. Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordinaed to eternal
life, believed. 1. These. 1. 4. Knowing, Brethren, Beloved, the election of God.
v. 5. For our Gospel came not to you in word only, but in power also, and in
the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election
sure. When the word comes to the person, in the Letter only, this is no sign of
his election, but when it comes in power, and in the Holy Ghost it is; for to
come in power, and in the Holy Ghost, is mightily, and effectually to change
and convert a person, and this the Apostle makes an evidence of election; and
questionless, a copy of a man's election cannot but be a cause of great joy;
Rejoice (says Christ to his Disciples) that your names are written in heaven:
Oh, what a comfort is it to know that God from all eternity has written and
recorded it down, This is the man whom I will have mercy on, and will glorify
to all eternity!

2. True Conversion, It is the singular fruit of God's great It is a singular
fruit of Gods Love.
Love, and of his rich mercy to a man's soul, the sure token of great love: God
has a common love and mercy, and God has a choice love and mercy; there are
some to whom he has a great love, and unto whom he shows rich mercy: Now
Conversion is a drop out of that great Ocean; the man is greatly beloved of
God, who is converted by God. 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of Love the
Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Sons of God. Ephesians. 2.
4, 5. But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
v. 5. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us.

3. True Conversion brings a soul under all the good and kind It brings a soul
under all the smiles of God.
Language of God, under the smiles of God. All the Ordinances are as Milk, and
Honey, and Wine, and Oil to a converted man. The Word is a good Word to him,
and the Sacrament is a good Sacrament to him; Why! when an unconverted man
hearts of all the mercy, and kindness, and happiness which God portions out for
a converted sinner; I say, when he hears of all this, and gets but a lick or a
taste of it upon the top of his Tongue, it effects him, and makes him glad.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and the stony ground received the seed with
joy; and shall not the converted man, whose due portion all this is, shall not
his heart have joy and gladness? shall a stranger who peeps over into the
Garden, and is a spectator only at the Feast, shall he find a relish? and shall
not he who has the Posie at his Nose smell the sweetness? shall not he who
c^tes at the Table, be filled with the goodness, and fat, and marrow, and
rejoice, and bless God?

4. True Conversion, It is a Claspe, the Golden Claspe of It is the clasp of
the Covenant of Grace
that everlasting Covenant of Gods Grace. Note here two things. 1. All the
desirable delicacies of the soul are treasured up in the Covenant of Gods
Grace; in it are contained all the gracious attributes in God, all the gracious
affections of God, all the gracious relations of God, all the gracious promises
and engagements of God. There you find the reconciled God, the merciful God,
the pardoning God, the sin-subduing God, the strengthening and helping God, the
guiding and upholding God, the blessing and comforting God; you cannot think of
a mercy for the soul, of a mercy for the body, of a mercy for this life, of an
happiness after this life, but there it is, but there it is for you, but there
it is assuredly for you. 2. Every converted person is in this Covenant; Why!
the new heart, and the new spirit, (is not this Conversion?) are a very part of
it; Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will give them a new heart, and a new spirit: If this be
so, then certainly Conversion brings a person into a very joyful condition.
Mark a little: If the mercies which many receive only from Providence do
delight and please them, shall not the mercies which men receive from Gods
Covenant please and rejoice them? Bread is sweet to an hungry man, out of
whatsoever hand it comes; and is it not more sweet when it comes out of the
hand of love and kindness? O Sirs! even the ordinary mercies to a converted
man, have a sweet distinction in them; they are so perfumed, they are so
distilled, they are so carved, they are all of them the kisses of a father, the
gifts of a gracious God. Every bit of Bread thou eatest, and every draught of
Beer thou drinkest, and every piece of Cloth thou wearest, it is the special
provision of thy most gracious God, and thy loving Father: If some one royal
mercy in the Covenant be able sometimes to sweeten an Ocean, to turn hell into
heaven, to wipe off all tears, and put the soul almost into an ecstasy of joy;
what rivers of joy then can the whole Covenant afford? If the lifting up of the
light of Gods countenance upon the soul, (which is but one beam of the
Covenant) if his saving to a man, Soul, I am thy Salvation; if one word, Son,
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, imprints a superlative comfort, a
joy unspeakable and full of glory; if one drop be so sweet, how sweet is the
Fountain? if one Grape, what is the cluster of Grapes? Now not only this or
that mercy in the Covenant belongs to a converted man, but every mercy, the God
of all mercies, and all the mercies of God; the God of all comforts, and all
the comforts of God.

5. True Conversion, It is the infallible forerunner, the It is the infallible
forerunner of glory.
earnest, the pawn of Glory: the pledge which God leaves in hand, the first
fruits of thy eternal Glory in the highest heavens; and is not this a cause of
great joy? if I look back, and see a love from all eternity; if forward, and
see a glory to all eternity. Truly, if I should never taste Honey on earth; if
all the Wells of a present comfort were stopped up, if my Father should never
smile on me in the way, if all my Life were a sailing on brinish tears, and my
Ship were still to be tossed with troublesome waves; yet, if I were sure at
length to put in at this Port, to come safe to Heaven at length, to appear
before the God of Gods at the last, to see him in Glory, and enjoy his face,
and the pleasures at his right hand for evermore, even this confidence and
assurance were enough to make me to rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God. Oh
Christian, besides all that joy which arises from converting grace (which is
it self a sweet Rose) and besides all those Honey dewes which fall upon the
soul in the exercise of grace, in the way to Heaven, (Thou meetest him that
rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways,
Isai. 64. 5.) There is also reserved in the highest heavens, that most perfect
happiness, that most perfect tranquillity, that most perfect joy; Oh, I cannot
express it, I cannot comprehend it. 1 Pet. 1. 3. He has begotten us again unto
a lively hope. v. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in heaven for you. Ponder the words; an inheritance,
the best of possessions; incorruptible, the best of inheritances; undefiled,
the best of incorruptibles; unfading, the best of undefileds; and reserved in
heaven, the best of unfadings: Nothing is so surely kept as that which is kept
in heaven for us, and born unto all this, and a lively hope of all this: Oh,
what comfort! Oh, what joy comes out of all this! If I had all the world, and
looked up toward heaven, but my heart should tell me, that goodly Canaan will
never fall to thy portion; it would be now with me, as once with Ahab, who,
though he enjoyed a Kingdom, yet was very sad, because the heavens were as
Brass to him. But in the midst of all distresses to look up to Heaven, to think
of God, and the future Beatifical Vision, and upon infallible grounds, to say,
that God is my Father, that Heaven is my inheritance, that place of Glory is my
home, there shall I be shortly, there shall I be to eternity, I have the
earnest of it, the pawn of it in my heart, the first fruits, etc.

2. Secondly, As to Christ: The converted condition cannot As to Christ.
but be joyful, because the converted person has. 1. A near relation to
Christ; Bone of his Bone. 2. A singular propriety in Christ; my beloved is
mine, etc. 3. An admirable revenue by Christ; wonderful riches, of and by
Christ all are yours, for ye are Christ's. 4. He is bought by Christ, and
reconciled by Christ, and loved by Christ, and discharged by Christ, and owned
by Christ, and defended by Christ, and kept by Christ, and shall one day be
saved by Christ.

3. As to Conscience: As a man's conscience is, so is his comfort As to
Conscience.
or discomfort, so is his joy or sorrow: One drop of an evil conscience (says
Luther) does imbitter the whole Sea of worldly joy: an evil conscience is an
hell in the breast, and in hell (said Latimer) there is no mirth: and on the
contrary, a good conscience it is a kind of heaven; one good word from it will
sweeten all our miseries, and cause us to rejoice under all sorrows. Solomon
says it is a continual feast, it is the year of Jubilee; conscience speaks the
truest joy, and the strongest joy, and the highest joy, and no man has a good
conscience but a good man: Conscience cannot speak peace till a man be
converted; and when he is converted, conscience has then a commission and
authority to look on the man, and speak to the man as God does. When thou
hear of pardon of sins, Oh, says conscience, hearken and be of good cheer,
that's thy portion: when thou hear of Jesus Christ, and of his sufferings,
and of his satisfactions, and merits, hearken, says conscience, and take hold,
for all this also is thy portion; when thou hear the Covenant of Grace
graciously explained, and all the glories in heaven; Oh, says conscience, all
this also is thy portion: when thou art about to pray, and fears are intruding
themselves; do not fear, ^aith conscience, thou art speaking to thy Father:
when thou art about to dye, and tremblings are upon thee, do not doubt or
tremble, says conscience, thou art going to thy God: when Satan suggests thou
have nothing to do with the mercy-seat, what, such a sinner? thou have, says
conscience; when unbelief suggests, Christ will have nothing to do with thee,
he will, says conscience.

Now, against all that has been said; it is objected, That the assertion of
joy for a converted person cannot be true: Because 1. No persons are so exposed
to afflictions, and persecutions, and infamies as converted persons. They are
appointed to them, 1 These. 3. And they that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecutions; how can that condition be so very joyful, which may,
and oftentimes does deprive a man of all his comforts. 2. Conversion brings the
person into a narrow path, and under the straitest rules, even such as condemn,
and cut off a world of pleasures, and delights; can that condition be very
joyful which denies us the fruition of many joys and delights. 3. Conversion
breeds the deepest sense of sin, and the greatest mourning for sins: Nothing
makes the heart more mournful then converting grace. See Zach. 12. 10. Can that
condition be so very joyful, which makes the heart so exceeding mournful? 4. We
see no persons walk more uncomfortably then (at least) some converted persons:
Yet the estate is joyful, though the man is not always so; God is a God of
comfort, and they can pray for comfort; comfort, O Lord, thy servants soul! But
more fully.

Object. 1. No persons are so exposed to afflictions and persecutions as
converted persons, and these do deprive us of joy and How can this condition be
joyful that is so exposed to affl^ctions. Answered.
comfort.

To th^s I answer, 1. It is a truth that Conversion does expose a person to
most afflictions and persecutions; Many are the afflictions of the righteous,
says David, Psalm. 34. 19. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution, says Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Filii lucis, are Filii crucis,
and Christianus is Crucianus (said Luther.) In the World you shall have
troubles (said Christ to his Disciples) and the Disciple is not above his
Master; if the Master dyed upon the Cross, is it much that the Disciple take up
the Cross? Nevertheless in the second place, as it was emblem'd in Reverend
Hoopers Motto, There was a Lamb in a flaming Bush, with the Sun shining upon
it; or as it was with the three Children, though they were in a fiery Furnace,
yet the Son of God walked with them, and preserved them: So, though converted
persons meet with many afflictions, there is yet a spring of joy, a Sun of
comfort open unto them; therefore heed me.

1. Afflictions and persecutions do only take away the Christians outward
comforts: The Shell, not the Kernel; the Case, not the Afflictions only take
away their outward comforts.
Jewel (which neither make nor mar the joy and comfort of a converted person)
they do not take away the true principles of comfort. There are three sorts of
comforts; Sensual; which are drawn out of our sinful lusts; Conversion is an
enemy to these: Sensitive; which are drawn out of the creatures; affliction is
an enemy to these: Spiritual, which are drawn out of the favor of God, the
blood of Christ, the Testimony of a good conscience; afflictions cannot hinder
these, and only a sinful unconversion is an enemy to these: The Winter freezeth
up the Ponds, but not the Ocean; the winds blow out the Candle, but not the
Sun: An Unconverted man may have an exemption from all outward Afflictions, and
yet have no inward Joy; for although he has peace with men, yet he has no
peace with God; and although he has no trouble upon his Estate, yet he may
have terror upon his Conscience. But a Converted man, although he be compassed
with outward Sorrows, nevertheless he has inward Joy; though all the Candles
be blown out, yet I am Comforted as long as the Sun does shine. There are two
sorts of evils; there are mala tristia, and mala turpia: afflictions are only
Sorrowful evils as to ou^ sense, they are not Sinful evils as to our
conscience. Now no evil is able to take away spiritual comfort, unless it be a
sinful evil; I confess, that did a godly man look upon creature comforts as
his bonum ultimum, as that which made him happy, then afflictions would be
inconsistent with his joy, he might well cry out, as Micah once, Ye have taken
away my gods, and what have I more? But he does not so: It is not the Creature,
but the Creator, which is the foundation of his Happiness and joy. A man may be
Bad who has them, and Good who wants them: If we had hope only in this life
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.) we were of all men the most miserable. I wish
that you would or could give credit unto two things, one is, That that only
makes the estate comfortable which denominates it to be good; for nothing can
be truly delightful, but what is truly good. The other is, That there is a
greater power in the presence of the chiefest good to make the Soul joyful,
then there can be in the recess or absence of the least kind of good to make it
uncomfortable. Were Afflictions the greatest evils, and were Creatures the best
good, then joy could not consist with afflictions; but God is the chiefest
good, and the Christian enjoyes him under all afflictions as his inseparable
good; Ergo. 2. As Afflictions do not take off the Times of afflictions are his
most proper seasons for joy
Christians true joy, so the times of afflictions are often times the most proper
seasons for joy and comfort to his soul. There are three seasons of special
comforts which God is pleased to reserve for his servants, one is after great
temptations, or to prepare against them; as that Voice, This is my well beloved
Son, came to Christ immediately before his temptation. The second is, after
great Humiliations. God who comforts them that are cast down, says Paul, 2
Cor. 7. 6. The Angel comforted Christ after his Agony; the Cordial comes after
the Physic. The third is, before and under great afflictions and trials: Paul
was to appear before Nero, but first God appeared to him saying, Be of good
cheer Paul. He is come, he is come, said the Martyr when he saw the stake; and
Stephen saw heaven opened before he dyed. The comforts of heaven came into his
heart just before the stones were thrown at him to dash out his brains. 2 Cor.
1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies and God of all comforts, who comfort us in all our tribulations; for
as our sufferings abound, so our Consolation abounds through Christ. Is not
the night a season to light a Candle? and is not weakness the season to give a
Cordial? and is not the winter a season to make a Fire? When does or can the
Christian more need the comforts of God, then when all comforts on earth do
fail him? 3. As afflictions deprive not the Christian of the true principles of
Joy, so neither Afflictions cannot hinder his principles of Joy from acting in
a way of comfort.
can they hinder those principles in himself from acting in a way of comfort.
There are two principles (especially) in the Christian which enable him to joy
and comfort: One is Faith: It is still Day, and never Night with Faith; the
Star shines best in the night; (Believing ye rejoiced with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.) Now Faith can act very comfortably in
uncomfortable times; it can see the same God, with the same Love, and in the
same Covenant, and in the same Relation, in Adversity as in Prosperity: Hab. 3.
17. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, etc. yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, etc. Romans 5. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulation, etc. 1 Samuel
29. 6 the people spoke of stoning him, but David encouraged himself in the Lord
his God. Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? etc. If
even in afflictions I can go unto the same arms of Christ, and unto the same
breasts of divine Love, and into the same chamber of Presence; if I can look
upon God as my God, and see him to be my Father, that I can make known my heart
to him, and he can make known his favor to me, what should hinder me now to be
joyful, who still do enjoy him who (alone) makes all my joy? Another is, the
Testimony of Conscience: This is the Friend in adversity. This is our
rejoicing, even the testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Conscience is a
man's night or day, his Hell or Heaven, his Palace of delight or Jail of
bitterness: If Conscience be sanctified or pacified, it can speak a peace or
joy that none can crush; none can hinder, but under the greatest afflictions
and persecutions a converted man may and does enjoy the testimony of a good
Conscience: Thou art upright, says Conscience to Hezekiah on his sickbed;
Thou fear God, says Conscience to Job under the loss of all; Thou love
Christ, says Conscience to Paul, even in the Prison.

Object. 2. Now to the second Objection, That converting But conversion brings
us into a narrow path, it is an enemy to many delights.
Grace brings the person into a narrow path, and under the strictest rules,
even such as condemn a multitude of joys and delights; how can that condition
be so joyful, which denies and abridgeth, etc? Sol. To this I answer.

1. It is granted, That converting Grace brings the person into Answered. There
is a strictness required.
a very narrow path, and under very strict rules. A converted man must not walk
as other men; he must not allow himself to think, and desire, and love, and
speak, and act as formerly: He must fear to sin, he must love the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might; he must order his
steps by the Word of God; he must deny himself, and crucify his dearest lusts,
and not shun the hardest duty, nor delight in the least iniquity.

2. But then, This strictness is no adversary to his true joy. In This
strictness is no adversary to true joy.
keeping of thy commandments there is great reward, says David, Psalm. 19. 11.
Great peace have they who love thy law, Psalm. 119. 165. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy upon the Israel of God,
Gal. 6. 16. I beseech you to consider four things: 1. Let thine own Conscience
judge, whether it be not a more comfortable course to obey God, then to disobey
God? to have grace to serve God acceptably, then to have an heart still free
and ready to dishonor and provoke God? Who has most true comfort, the bones
sound and in place, or broken? to walk on the Land, or to be troubled at Sea?
the Child who runs away from his Father, or the Child who waits upon his
Father? the Child that desires to please, or the Child that continues to grieve
and vex? the wandering and famished Prodigal, or the returning and embraced Son.
Hos. 2. 7. I will return to my first Husband; for then it was better with me
then now. 2. Rightly understand what it is strictly to walk with God: It is an
endeavor in your affections and duties to draw near to God in all
well-pleasing, and to answer the will of God. The Christians course of
obedience, it is his daily communion with his God in this life: When thou
prayest, what is Praying, but a divine conference of the soul with God? and
when thou hear, what is this but a divine conference of God with the soul?
and when thou repentest, what is that but a recovery and return of the soul to
God? and when thou believe, what is that but the recumbency of the soul on
the goodness of God? and when thou receivest the Sacrament, what is it, but a
communion, a feasting with Jesus Christ? If a strict walking be nothing but a
divine and heavenly communion with God, why do thou, how dare thou to
judge of it as the only Bar to shut out all joy and comfort? Was there ever
any affectionate Wife, that thought it an injury to her Joy to speak with her
Husband, or to enjoy the society of her Husband? Was there ever any faithful
Friend, who thought it a misery, a burden to enjoy the society of his Friends,
to open his heart unto his Friend? How then can it be a prejudice to any man's
joy, to enjoy communion with his God? 3. Consult with experience, which has
traveled in the strict ways of God; either thine own experience, (if any,)
which day of thy life has been closed up with heartiest joy? whether the day
of licentiousness, or the day of strictness? That day which thou have let out
to thy lusts, has made the night a trembling to thee; that day which thou have
redeemed for walking with God, has always given unto thee the sweetest rest
and repose at night: The experience of godly people; have any of them ever
found more soul rejoicing then when they have abounded in strictest obedience?
This is thy burden, but it is their delight; the purest walking has distilled
the sweetest joy, and their looser walking has been the cause of their
greatest sorrows. It is with a strict Christian as with the Sun, which still
keeps to the Ecliptique Line, and is of all the Stars the most glorious and
comfortable when it is at the highest; and the higher Sun, the purer and warmer
light: And it is with the loose Christian as with the uneven foot, the wry
stepping is the cause of unjoynting, or pinching and paining. 4. The strict
walking, what is it but a path to everlasting life? every step of it is a step
to heaven. Strait is the gate which leads unto life, says Christ: There is an
easy way for men to walk in, but that's the way to hell, and what comfort is
it, after all to go to hell, to go to hell with ease. There is a strict way for
men to walk in, but it is the way to life, to eternal life: Now even that alone
is sufficient to create joy, that these steps after a while will bring me to
appear before the God of Gods in Sion; and truly, there is no end whatsoever,
the which if it be (in it self) amiable and comfortable, but it darts also an
amiableness and comfortableness upon all the steps and paths which tend unto it.

3. Lastly, Converting Grace does not condemn or deny any lawful Converting
grace denies not any lawful joy.
joy and comfort: It does only two things; 1. It absolutely condemns and
abridgeth the soul of man of all sinful joys, of joys and delights which arise
from his sinful lusts and ways; and is it not the great goodness of God, to
deny us leave to drink cups of poison, and glasses of hell? Or is it possible
that any Christian should to thee, that sin should be thy delight, which is a
departing of the poor soul from God, which is an incensing of the wrath of God,
which was such a dreadful burden to Jesus Christ, which puts the soul under
the wrath and curse of God; one act whereof must cost more then all the world
is worth to pardon it. 2. It does only order our outward lawful joys and
delights, for the seasons, for the measures, for other circumstances; so that
they may be our sauce, not our food; our helps to Godliness, not damps thereto:
It is but the Bridle on the Horse, the Pale for the Garden, the Finger on the
Dial. Conversion abridgeth us of no delight, but of that which to want is a
true delight; and so orders the rest, that you may not lose delight. Conversion
makes us mournful for sin, and how can it be so joyful. Answered. True grace
makes the heart more mournf^ll.


Object. 3. Conversion breeds the quickest sense of sin, and the deepest
mourning for sin, yea, a continual mourning for sin, makes the clouds to drop,
never mournful till converted; and can that condition be so joyful which
makes the heart so mournful?

To this I answer, 1. It is certain, that true grace 1. does make the clearest
discovery of sin: 2. It yields the tenderest sense of sin, (for it takes away
the heart of stone, and gives an heart of flesh,) and nothing makes the heart
more mournful, then true grace.

2. But then know, that mourning for sin and joy in the heart are no way
inconsistent. Isai 12. 3. With joy shall ye draw water But this is not
inconsistent with joy.
out of the wells of salvation. Three things I would grant, 1. That love of sin
and true joy are inconsistent; 2. Worldly sorrow and spiritual joy are
inconsistent; 3. That terror for sin and joy of heart are inconsistent; Legal
terror and Evangelical joy are so, but Evangelical sorrow and Evangelical joy
are not so; for as one grace is consistent with another grace, so one heavenly
affection is consistent with another heavenly affection. And there are three
things which (to me) fully convince, That Evangelical mourning is consistent
with Spiritual joy: One is, That such a mourning is but a drop out of the eye
of faith; They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn, Zach. 12.
10. and certainly, nothing comes from faith, but what is comfortable; all is
Gospel that Faith trades in. Another is, That the mourning heart is a renewed
heart, and verily the gracious heart is a joyous heart. The third is, That the
mourning sinner is a pardoned sinner: (Cum intueor flentem, sentis
ignoscibilem,) if the fountain of sorrow be set open in the heart, the fountain
of mercy is set open in heaven, Zach. 12. 10. compared with chap. 13. 1. Yea
let me add to this also three experiences: 1. One is this, That the Christian
is never more sad and mournful, then when he feels his heart least mournful:
He is then cast down; O (says he) into what a condition am I brought? I was
wont to find a tender, sensible mourning spirit; but me thinks now my heart is
grown hard again: O Lord, why am I now hardened from thy fear? And the man
never gives over with God and himself, until tenderness be renewed in his heart
again. 2. That the Christian is never more joyful, then when he is most
mournful: Blessed are they that sow besides all Waters, says the Prophet.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, says Christ. They
that sow in tears shall reap in joy, says David. Godly sorrow is the Water
that is turned into Wine; One drop of a guilty Conscience is able to turn all
our Joys into Bitterness, and one drop of godly sorrow is able to turn all our
bitterness into joy. I rejoice, says Paul, that I made you sorry; what cause
then had they to rejoice who were sorry? sorry after a godly sort; sorry with a
sorrow that bred repentance unto salvation, never to be repented of. 3. That
the Christian is never more mournful then when he is most joyful: The time of a
Christians highest joy, is the time of his greatest assurance: Sealing and
assuring times are the soulraising and reviving times. And the times of
greatest assurance, are the times of our greatest mournings: The more
manifestation of Gods Love, and the more assurance of Gods Mercy, do ever cause
in the heart more Humility and more sorrow; here is now the greatest joy for
mercy, and here is now the greatest mourning for sinning against mercy.

Object. 4. We see no persons to walk more sadly and more uncomfortably I, but
no persons walk more sadly then converted persons. Answered, It is a False
Charge.
then (at least) many do who are converted persons, Ergo. To this give me
favor to answer more fully: 1. This is a False Charge, and a very unjust
Cal^mny: take the divisions of the sons of men according to the diversity of
their spiritual conditions, compare men with men, according unto them, and I
dare confidently affirm, That no condition is more dreadfully sad then the
condition of men Unconverted; and no condition is more comfortably cheerful,
then the condition of men truly Converted; let us a while peruse the phrases and
instances of such. Me thinks the terrible passages in Scripture may abundantly
convince us of the dreadfulness of an Unconverted and wicked person, Isa. 57.
20. The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. ver. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Job 20.
16, 17, 23, 24, 25. there Zophar sets him out: He shall suck the gall of Asps,
and the Vipers tongue shall slay him. He shall not see the Rivers, nor the
floods and streams of Honey and Butter. When he is about to fill his belly, God
shall send upon him the fierceness of his wrath, and shall cause it to rain
upon him. The bow of Steel shall strike him through, the glistring sword comes
out of his gall, terrors are upon him. Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the
portion of their cup. Again, did you ever read of any one godly and converted
person who fell into that horrible despair as Cain or Judas did? But take the
hardest agonies incident to true converts, they are 1. rather fears then
horrors; 2. rather doubts then despairs; 3. effects of a mistaking Conscience,
then a rightly condemning Conscience; 4. They can look toward the Promises, as
Jonah did in the deeps toward God; 5. Faith does does act for relief, and will
hold some communion with God; 6. They are abated by the Ordinances; 7. They are
but for a time; 8. They end in fullest settling and glorious comforts, and
likewise with advantage to their gracious condition. And truly, it is
impossible that wicked and ungodly men should ever enjoy that serenity and
peace as the godly do, for as much as all the principles and causes of
uncomfortableness abide on the wicked. 1. Sin is in them in all its strength:
They have a thousand hells and arrows of guilt sticking in their hearts; they
have souls full of plague sores, the deadly strokes of death, the restless
motions of evil spirits. 2. They carry a roaring Lion in their breasts; I mean,
an evil, accusing, smiting, wounding, racking, condemning Conscience; which if
it once awake, it will tear the caul of their hearts, and crush them with the
flames of unavoidable, unsupportable and continual wrath. 3. They have no City
of Refuge open to their succor, no land or shore, no place to cast anchor, no
portion in Christ; and therefore the Law of God stands in full force against
their souls, and under its curse they lie, and at that Bar of Justice must they
be tried. 4. They end in an eternal and perfect Hell. 5. Take them at their
best, God is their Enemy, (they never yet made peace with him,) and all their
outward blessings are steeped in gall, and drenched in Wormwood; as their
sorrows, so their blessings are distributed in wrath.

2. Many converted persons are not really sad and uncomfortable, Many converted
persons are not really sad, they only seem so.
but only seem so to the mean and childish opinions of vain men, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. The joy of Christians is an hidden joy,
(Hidden Manna, Revel. 2. 20.) it is a spiritual joy to which thou art a
stranger, meat to eat which thou know not of. Suppose that thou rejoycest
not in a fine Baby, and a Toy, which is a Child's great delight, art thou
therefore sad? All objects yield not contentment to an high mind, nor joy to a
good man; he cannot take pleasure in an Alehouse and Tavern, in swaggering and
masking, in dicing and carding, and swearing, and whoring; but yet he can take
delight in a reconciled God, in a Christ, in the Word of God, in praying to
God, in gracious returns from God, in expectation of the Glory of God. A swine
delights in mire, but a man does not. The Moon is often times dark to the world,
when yet that part which faceth to the Sun is beautiful and lightsome: The
countenance and carriage of a Christian, as to the world, seems dull and
uncomfortable, but if you could look into the heart of him (which faceth
toward heaven) O there is Righteousness, there is Peace, there is Joy in the
Holy Ghost!

3. If any converted persons be sad, and want actual joy and comfort, If they
be sad, Conversion is not the cause of it.
yet their Conversion is not the cause thereof. Can the Sun be any cause of
darkness? But, amongst others, these are the Causes of it; Either 1. Thy
unconversion. It is the unconverted husband, child, master, which makes sadness
in the heart of the converted wife, father, etc. It is thy drunkenness, thy
cursing and swearing, thy scorning and sco^^ing, thy resisting and shifting the
offers of Grace, thy lying and slandering, thy pride and looseness which makes
the hearts of Ministers ready to break, and the hearts of thy godly friends
ready to sink in them: O they tremble at thy condition, and they grieve to see
God so extremely dishonored. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of tears run down mine
eyes, because they keep not thy Law. ver. 158. I beheld the transgressors and
was grieved, because they kept not thy Word. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. The wicked deeds
of the ungodly Sodomites vexed the soul of righteous Lot. Luke 19. 41. It was
Jerusalems proud obstinacy, that would not know in her day the things which
concerned her peace, that made Jesus Christ to weep. 2. Their Captivities to
sin. Paul's conversion did never trouble him, but this did trouble him, that he
did the evil which he would not; his Corruption, not Conversion; That the Law
of his members led him captive against the Law of his mind. It was not Peter's
Conversion, but Peter's transgression, that made him go forth and weep bitterly.
It was not David's Conversion, but David's great sinning, which made him go so
heavily, and ro^r so greatly, Psalm. 32. 3. The Fears and Suspicions that they
are not yet truly converted. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death! O they feel so many working Corruptions still, and so
little of the strength of Christ still, and so much unbelief still, and so many
indispositions still, and so many failings still, and so many doubts about
these; This ^race is not right, the saving Work is not begun; and these things
make them ^o sigh, and weep, and go heavily all the day long. 4. They are but
newly crept out of the shell: The Spirit of Bondage is yet hardly worn off,
some legal Dints stick on them: they are either still in travel, or but newly
delivered; Or if they be got out of the state of Bondage, yet they are for the
present under spiritual conflicts; and as spiritual Bondage before Conversion,
so spiritual conflicts after conversion suspends the taste of a present and
actual joy: Or if that be not the damp, then perhaps it is some ignorance or
unexperience; they are not yet come to read their Fathers Will and Christ's
Testament, what portion is left and laid out for the Children of God: Or if
that be not it, then perhaps it is a present fit of unbelief, they cannot yet
be persuaded that God means so much mercy, and so much love, and so many great
things for them.

Is it so, That ^onversion brings the person into a very joyful Use 1.
condition? Hence then 1. We may be Informed of four Information.
things,

1. That they are enemies to their joy and comfort, who are adversaries They
are enemies to their joy, who are enemies to Conversion.
to their Conversion. Prove. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and ye Scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Six
things show one to be in an unconverted condition; Unsensibleness, Love of sin,
Path of evil, hatred of Reformation, despising the Means of Conversion,
loathing of Converted-Persons. There are some persons who hate to be reformed,
who hold fast their ^^ns, and will not let them go; they are like those
stiff-necked Jews, who always resisted the Holy Ghost; a disobedient people
to the Call of God, they refuse to put their necks into the yoke of Jesus
Christ, and will not be bound with his cords; They love their sinful ways, and
will not return to the Almighty: Why! Write that man childless, said God of
Coniah; So I say of these men, Write them comfortless: Will the Lord lie for
you? Or will he misplace his hands for you? Peace is the effect of
righteousness, and Joy is the fruit of Conversion. And shall thou have
pleasure, who take pleasure in unrighteousness? Shall thou know the ways of
Peace, who wilt not know the path of Holiness? Did ever God smile on him who
hated God? Or clasp him with joy, who despised his grace with hatred? Go
enquire and search all the Springs of joy, and knock at all the Gates of
pleasure, dilig^ntly ask, What of delight they contain for thee? Knock at the
mercy-seat, which is the Gate of God, and ask; Lord, have thou not joy for one
who will go on in his sins, and will not return unto thee? No (says God) not
any; but he who ^orsakes his sins shall have mercy, and he who hardens his
heart shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28. 13, 14. Knock at the Gospel, which is
the gate of Christ, and ask; Blessed Jesu, have thou no word of comfort for him
who resists thy spirit, and will not come in unto thee? No not I (says Christ)
not any; thou despisest the goodness of God, and by thy impenitency and
hardness, treasurest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Knock at
conscience, which is the gate of thine own soul, and ask; O conscience, have thou not a word of peace to speak to one who loves his sins, and is an enemy to
God and godliness? Who, I, says conscience! not I; thou art an enemy of
righteousness, and in the gall of bitterness, and except thou repent, thou
shall certainly perish. Knock at the Scriptures, which are the Gate of truth,
and ask; May not the wicked and unconverted person suck at the breasts of your
consolation? are not th^se wells of salvation open for me to draw joy and
comfort out of? Oh no, say the promises, we are childrens bread, and legacies
for sons; if thou be a believer, we are a Fountain opened for thee; if thou be
an unbeliever, we are a Fountain sealed against thee. Knock at the Creatures,
which are the Gate of Providence, and ask; Have ye no Commission of Comfort for
one who cares not to remember his Creator? O no, say all the Creatures, Sin
long ago has cast thee out of Paradise, and turned the earth into a curse, and
thy blessings are cursed, and thy sinnings do poison all the flowers in our
Garden unto thee. Nay, Knock at thy very Sins, which are the Gate of Hell, and
ask them; Ye of all other are my dearest friends, and choicest masters, and
have ye no Joys and Comforts for me? O yes, say they, we have, but they are
forbidden fruit, but they are pleasures of sin for a season, but they will end
in everlasting torments and sorrow. Thus is every wicked and unconverted man in
Cains condition, who cried out, Behold, thou have driven me out this day from
the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth, Genesis 4. 14.

2. That they are enemies and slanderers of the goodness and They are
slanderers of the sweetness of Gods ways, who thus reproach the state of
Conversion.
sweetness of the ways of God, who load the estate of Conversion with all the
ignominious reproaches of sadness and heaviness; and mopishness, and
melancholy, and bitterness, and grave of all joy and pleasure: As the Spies of
old traduced the good and pleasant land of Ca^aan, which abounded with milk and
honey, O it was a land that did eat up the Inhabitants thereof; But as God spoke
once to Aaron and Miriam, How were ye not afraid to speak against my servant
Moses? so I to these; How are ye not afraid to reproach the ways of the living
God? Is not God the God of comfort? Is not Christ the consolation of Israel? Is
not the Holy Ghost the comforter? are not the Scriptures written for our
consolation? are not the Promises the breasts of Consolation? are not all the
paths of Wisdom paths of pleasantness? are not the Graces of God the very
beds of Spices? Is not the peace of Conscience a peace that passes all
understanding? Does David find the Word sweeter then the honey comb? Does Job
find it better then his appointed food? Does Jeremiah find it the Rejoicing of
his heart? Do thou read of so many Converted persons in Scripture full of
joy and gladness, rejoicing in Christ, rejoicing in the hope of the Glory of
God, re^oycing in Troubles, in Persecutions, yea, in Death it self; and yet
dare thou to revile and scandalize the converted man's condition as the only
sea of Bitterness, and darkest night, eclipsing all joy and comfort? I pray
thee to consider, 1. This does arise from the gall of thy wicked and imbittered
Spirit, hating and despising the goodly excellencies of holiness and holy
persons. 2. It does show a cursed heart to call good evil, as it does to call
evil good; and as he that justifies the Wicked, so he that condemns the just,
is an abomination to the Lord; How much more then, he who condemns Righteousness
it self. 3. This does show an Universal rage against Gods glory and man's
happiness; So heavily do thou load the paths of Conversion, that so much as
in thee lies, thou disswadest and discouragest all the men on earth from
leaving off their sins, so that God shall have no Glory from them; nor they any
true happiness from God. 4. And lastly: Take heed least God deal with thee, as
once he did with the lying spies; shut them out of Canaan, and destroyed them
with a remarkable Judgment.

3. That they have hitherto deluded and deceived themselves with false joy, in
stead of true joy, who as yet never saw a converted They who never were
converted, delude themselves with false joy.
condition. All thy mirth and joy has been but false fire; a madness, not a
joyfulness; sparkles of thy own kindling; thou have fed on the husks all this
while, on a fancy, on a Dream; thou have never in all thy life took in one
draught of true ^oy, nor ever shall thou, till God convert thy soul. Take heed
of settling your souls, or resting your souls on any works, or any affections
which are antecedent to conversion, even the sorrows and troubles before
conversion are no matter of joy and comfort; if any joy depends on them, it is
rather because conversion has followed them; and the joys which many men take
before their conversion, certainly they are false joys, poor joys, they are not
pleasures of Gods right hand. There are three properties of true Joy: 1. It is
not the Usher which goes before, but the Handmaid that follows after Grace. 2.
It is not a Surfeit to dead, but a Cordial to strengthen; and it is not a Feast
to satisfy, but a Sauce to quicken communion with God. 3. It is not a
temptation to sin, but upholds against the new temptations of sin. True Joy
never goes before true Grace, but follows it. Do you use to gather fruit before
you plant, or reap before ye sow.

4. Then if ever you would have joy, and live joyful If you would have joy,
get converted hearts.
lives, get converted hearts. Every man desires joy; and as the Be hunts for
honey, so do men naturally hunt for delight; (...) aut jucunde aut non omnino.
Let the thing or condition be what it will, if we take no delight in it, it is
a burden to us: Heaven would not be Heaven to him who cannot find delight in
it. Now Conversion is the true path to true joy. If God would be pleased (once)
to convert thy soul, his converting Grace would lick thy sores, and pull out
the stings in Conscience, and sweeten the bitter Springs, and clear the Heavens
to thee; it would make thy bed to be easy, and thy bread to be sweet, and thy
condition to be a Paradise; even the Wilderness should drop honey to thee, and
thy heart should sing for joy. It is a witty passage of Bernards, (de bonis
deferendis) Be willing to sacrifice thy Isaac, and thy Isaac shall live. Isaac,
you know, signifies laughter; do but sacrifice thy sinful pleasure, and then
thy true pleasure shall not die, but live. Caius gave unto Agrippa a Chain of
Gold which was as heavy as the Chain of Iron that he endured in the Prison:
Sins do ^ut upon us a Chain of Iron, which if we would forsake, Conversion
would put upon as a Chain of Gold; thou shall not lose, but better thy
pleasures, by forsaking of thy sins and the pleasures of them. O! that all the
joys which you have heard attending a converted condition, might allure all our
hearts to become converted persons. I observe five things about the converted
condition in Scripture. 1. The invitation unto it, and there joy presents it
self; Turn and live, turn and live; hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness, Isa. 55. 2. 2. The
entrance into it, and there joy embraces the person: As soon as the Prodigal
Son returned, his Father saw him a far off, (O how quick is Mercy to espy a
Convert!) and had compassion, (O how tender is Mercy to yern over a Convert!)
and ran, (O how swift is Mercy to receive a Convert!) and fell on his neck, (O
how how out-stretching is Mercy to embrace a Convert!) and kissed him, (O how
kind is Mercy to entertain a Convert!) 3. The motion or course of it, and there
joy attends the person: I have rejoiced, says David, Psalm. 119. 14. in the way
of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. When a converted man does
Mediate, his meditation is styled sweet: Hear, he hears With joy; When they
heard this they were glad: Pray, this is a sweet incense to David; And I will
make them joyful in my house of prayer, Isa. 56. 7. Believe, he does believe
and rejoice: Mourn, there is appointed the oy^ of joy for mourning, Isa. 61. 3.
Do the will of God, it is his delight to do the will of God: Suffer; Rejoice,
says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4 13. in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings. 4. The conclusion or end of it, why! there also does joy accompany
him: Psalm. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the just, for the end of that
man is peace. 5. The reward and recompense of it, and there also joy does clasp
the converted person: Enter into thy Masters joy, says Christ to the good
servant: Gaudium supra omne gaudium, At thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore, said David.

O^ that all these things might so affect our hearts this day, as to forsake
our sins, and turn back to God Pleasure is the great ^^it which is laid forth
to catch the soul of man; Satan draws us to sin by pleasure, and God draws us
to grace by pleasure; shall pleasure move thee to damn thy soul? and shall not
true pleasure move thee to save thy soul? Our Aversion from God depends much
upon pleasure, and our Conversion unto God depends much upon pleasure; me
thinks that Gods promise should be more accounted then the Devils temptation;
is it not more probable to buy a better penniworth from heaven then from hell?
and is it not more reasonable to traffic at the gates of life for joy, then to
trade at the gates of death for comfort? Return, return, O sinner! yet, yet,
come back to thy God, and do not for lying vanities any longer forsake thine
own mercies, -- But God must persuade Japhet.

Try whether you are in a converted condition or no. There Use 2. Try whether
converted or no. Nine things show a man is unconverted.
are two sorts of persons. 1. Some plainly unconverted. 2. Some deceiving
themselves about it. Nine things do show that a man is as yet absolutely in an
unconverted condition.

1. Vnsensibleness: God promises to take away the stony heart; quanto
insensibilior, tanto pe jor. This is the Stone upon the Grave.

2. Love of sin: Wicked men are described by this in Scriptu^re.

3. Walking in the path of sin: It is his work, his trade; when a man chuse^h
an evil way, and sits in the Chair, is a servant of unrighteousness, walks in
the way fo wicked men.

4. Hating to be reformed: It is an abomination to him to be good, that will
rather be damned then reformed, breaks the Cords, will not have Christ to reign.

5. Despising of the means of Conversion: The word of the Lord is a reproach to
him; his heart rages when the word finds out his sins, and would separate him
and his lusts.

6. Loathing of converted persons; cannot endure the sight of grace; his
special dislikes are of the godly, and disgraces, and discountenancings of
them; he is exceedingly displeased and grieved at the estimations of godliness,
and rejoices in the cloudings, and setting of it.

7. In communion with God: It is a note of a wicked man, that God is not in all
his thoughts, and that he call; not upon God, but is a stranger to him, the
stil-born child is a dead child.

8. Disvaluations of Jesus Christ, and of all the precious seasons of grace,
and opportunities of mercy; the Swine tramples upon the Pearl, the days of the
Son of man are of no account with him.

9. An earthly rest and satisfaction: When he is a man only for this life, and
for this present world, sets up his staff on this side Jordan; all his hopes
are in this life.

Secondly: Five things which do show that a man flatters and Five things show a
man deceived about his conversion.
deceives himself about his condition, that it is converted, when yet it falls
short thereof.

1. Mere knowledge; though a man knows never so much, yet if he be but a knowing
man, he may be a learned man, but he is not a converted man. It is one thing to
know controversies, another thing to know Conversion: If the knowledge be
without 1. Experience; know what sin is, but feel it not; know what Christ is,
but never feel the virtues and powers of his death and resurrection: 2.
Propriety; know Christ as a purchase, but not as an inheritance; what he is,
and has done, but not what he is to me, or has done for me: 3. Power; as a
candle that lightens, but not as fire to burn, as an Ornament on a Tomb, not as
a Soul to the Body; as a Star which shines in the night, not as the Sun which
makes day; new knowledge, but still an old heart: 4. Affections; know sin, but
hate it not, nor mou^n for it; know Christ, but love and desire him not: 5.
Practice, like a Scholar, who knows Countries, but never travels to them;
reads the Copy, but writes not after it, know the way to heaven, but never
walks the way to heaven.

2. Mere trouble of conscience: A troubled condition is one thing, a converted
condition is another; Cain and Judas were troubled, yet not converted; many
things may suffice to trouble us, which yet are not sufficient to convert us;
the Law, the Wrath of God, the quickness of conscience, fear of death and hell
and shame may suffice to trouble us, yet not to convert us. The Sea may be
troubled, and yet remains brinish; the Iron may be broken, and yet it is hard;
the Water boils, and yet it is Water: There is a difference twixt passive
trouble, and active trouble; twixt a trouble that I would get off, and godly
sorrow which I would get up; twixt trouble in ratione p^nae, and in ratione
gratiae; twixt being troubled for sin as it is malum sensible, and as malum
spirituale, twixt malum as causa mali, and malum as affectus mali. The
Land-flood is high, but it leaves the mud and dirt behind; the Wells water is
less, but it cleanses.

3. Limited Reformation: When only external; if internal, yet partial, will
stick with Christ for some one thing. True Conversion is an invisible work, it
is seed under ground, it is a child formed in the womb, it is the hidden man of
the heart, it is Christ formed and living in us, it is a new Creation of the
heart, the new heart, a law written there. The Phar^sees were good at Outworks,
all far to the eyes of men: Outward abstinence from sin may consist with an
inward love of it; and a man may do much good, who yet is not good:
Self-grounds, and ends, of profit, of esteem, of hopes, of compliance with
others, besides those workings of conscience, etc. may lead us out to visible
conformities, when yet, etc.

4. Accidental resolutions: When a person will on a sudden grow good
altogether, only upon mutable occasions; 1. As in an exigence of Conscience, 2.
In a fit of Sickness, 3. Some present conviction of the Word, 4. Some imminent
judgments, 5. present hopes; not upon solid Conviction, consideration, fervent
prayer to God to work the change, etc.

5. Passionate Joys: If taken by the Word upon the discoveries of Grace, and
Mercy, and Love of Christ, and of future glory; like one who is taken with the
Ware, yet will not come up to the Price: The young man would have heaven, but
will not sell all, take up the Cross and follow Christ. But when a man is truly
converted, he is like the Wise Merchant, who found the Pearl, and rejoiced, and
sold all, and bought it. He will part with all his Lusts, and Friends, and
Pleasures, and World, to enjoy Christ.

Does Conversion bring the soul into a joyful condition? Then Use. 3. Let every
converted person take his portion of joy.
let every converted person take his due portion, and live as becomes himself,
joyfully. Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous. Phil. 4.
4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice. I wish that converted
persons would consider

1. That God does not reserve all their joys unto another life: God does not
reserve all their joy to another life,
O no, spiritual joy is an allowance also for this life; a good bit and bait by
the way. Nay, it is not a mere Toleration or Permission, but it is an express
Command and Injunction; and as a man does sin who refuses Grace, so some man
may sin who refuses Joy. 2. God would have the life of Grace to God would have
the life of Grace a shadow of the life of Glory.
be a primordial shadow (at least) of the life of Glory: and indeed our estate
of Grace is an Epitome of that in Glory; only that is a fuller and larger
Volume: We have the same God, the same Christ, the same Spirit, the same
Communion in this as in that; only here it is more Mediate, there more
Immediate; here Imperfect, there Perfect; here Mixed, and there Pure. And do
thou so poorly conceive of God, that He who is able to make an heaven full of
joy to Eternity hereafter, is not able or willing to let fall a few drops of
joy upon thy soul on earth? Or that there can or should be any Communion with
such a God, which should not be joyful and delightful? The Emperor would have
none to go away sad. 3. God would God would have the Christians life to be the
credit of Grace.
have the Christians life, as to be the fruit, so to be the credit of Grace.
Grace is an ornament to the soul, and spiritual joy is an Ornament to grace: It
testifies to the world, that conversion quits all costs: What! shall madness be
found in the habitations of the wicked, and shall not joy be found in the
tabernacles of the just? Shall the worldly man rejoice in a Creature, and shall
not the godly man rejoice in his God? Shall the condemned malefactor take
delight, and shall not the acquitted person take comfort? Shall wicked men suck
pleasure out of bitter waters, and shall not good men draw joy out of the wells
of salvation? Joy is not comely for a fool, says Solomon, but it becomes the
upright to rejoice, says David. 4. As spiritual joy is an ornament, so it is
an improvement to grace. It is a certain truth, that grace Joy is an
Improvement to Grace,
is the Mother of joy, and true joy is the Nurse of grace. Spiritual comforts
are inlargements to spiritual graces; look as it is with sinful pleasures, they
do add to our sinful principles; the more delight that any man finds in sinful
ways, this adds the more love, and the more desire, and the more earnestness
for to sin; so is it in spiritual ways, the more joy and delight any man takes
in them, this adds a new quickening to his graces, a fresher edge unto them;
nothing makes either a communion, or an action more frequent, or more fervent
then delight; did thou ever find thy heart more apt to pray, or more fixed in
prayer, then when thou foundest most delight and comfort, in, or upon praying?
so for other duties. 5. Spiritual joy will exceedingly It will exceddingly
facilitate the way and work to heaven.
facilitate the way and work for heaven: It is our facundus Comes, which is pro
Vehiculo. As the fear of the Lord is our treasure, Isa. 33. 6. So the joy of
the Lord is our strength, Neh. 8. 10. An heavy, dull, sad spirit, is a burden
of^ it self, and is very apt to make every thing else a burden: Now spiritual
joy, it takes off dullness and deadness, and enables us to run the way of Gods
Commandments, and to run the race that is set before us. Amanti nihil
difficile, it makes our spiritual work to come off; the Wheels run if oyled.

Quest. This is true, will some reply; but what should converted What should
converted persons do to walk joyfully?
persons do, that they may walk joyfully? Sol. There are two sorts of converted
persons: Incipientes; who are newly called, newly wrought on, newly brought
home; and these ordinarily are full of fears, of doubts, of temptations, of
conflicts, of heaviness: Proficientes; who are long standers in the ways of
grace. Will you favor me to speak a few words to either of these.

1. To persons newly converted: I would humbly present Directions. To persons
newly converted.
these directions, as proper means or Conduits of joy and comforts to their
souls.

1. Draw up your spiritual condition to some issue: Do not live with a doubtful
suspicion; perhaps you are converted, perhaps Draw up your Spiritual condition
to some Issue.
you are not converted: As ignorance is an enemy to grace, so doubtfulness is
an enemy to comfort. That man who is still in suit, whether his Conversion be
true, will not dare to lay claim to the joys which result from Conversion: If
I fear my grace, I shall much more fear my comfort: Give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure. Therefore do this; bring thy souls estate to
the word, (that is the rule, that is the fire, that is the touchstone;) if the
Word of God will approve and decide for thee, bless God, and maintain the truth
of thy spiritual estate, against all the suggestions of Satan, and cavils of
thine own heart; when once that does say, truth of grace is in thee; conscience
will say, truth of comfort belongs unto thee.

2. Get a little more faith; one dram more would turn the the scale, and settle
thine heart. Faith trades with the Fountain, Get a little more says.
with the God of Comfort, and of Peace, and with Jesus Christ: It is Faith that
lets you into Christ, and it is Faith which lets comfort into you. The God of
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, Romans 15. 13. There are five
privileges of Faith: It has the first look of Mercy, it has the first kiss
from Christ, it has the first news of acceptance unto Life, it has the first
answer of Peace, it has the first draught of Joy: Oh, get a little more faith;
a little more faith would weaken the grounds of thy fears, quell the motions of
thy doubts, clear thy way to the fountains of comfort, imprint on thy heart a
most joyful Communion with thy God and Christ; no life of joy, but that of
faith.

3 And Learn to live by faith, and then you will have more Learn to live by
faith.
joy and comfort. Four things would make a man's life very joyful and
comfortable. 1. If he were eased of all burdens. 2. If he were secured from
all prejudices. 3. If what he had were good, and enough. 4. If he were assured,
that whatsoever good he should need, of that he should not fail, but be
supplied with it in due time. Now the life of faith, 1. Eases you of all your
burdens: There are but two burdens upon us; 1. The sinful, Faith sees this
taken off by Christ, He bare our sins: 2. The earthly, of cares; Faith sees
Gods providence taking that off, The Lord is a Sun, etc. Psalm. 84. I will never
leave thee, Heb. 13. Bread shall be given to him, his waters shall be sure,
Isa. 33. 16. Cast your care on him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. 2.
Secures you against all prejudices and hurts: Faith finds us still in Gods
hands, and in a safe custody: Though there be evils in the world, yet they
shall not come nigh you; and his work goes on, though ours do not: God is with
you, who can be against you. There Is a Deluge, but Noah's in the Ark; a storm,
but you are in an hiding place: He holds you in his hand, and covers you under
his wings; makes all things to work for good. Faith sees the Trouble and the
Sanctuary both, Occurrences and Providence both, ruling, carrying on,
observing, watching, preserving: If Earth will not keep you safe, Heaven shall. 3.
It renders the present possession as good, and enough: Your portion is so: For
what is a Christians portion? Is not God? is not his favor? And is not God
enough? is not his favor better then life? He who cannot be contented with a
God, and a Christ, and a Covenant of Grace, and Heaven, will be satisfied with
nothing. You have but little of Earth, A^ but you have God and Christ. If a man
have but a little Garden, yet if he have a large field, etc. A little of Earth,
and much of Heaven, makes a fair Estate. 4. It assures you of supplies
universal and seasonable. Universal; I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. No good
thing will he withhold, Psalm. 84. 11. No good for soul, no good for body, (you
have his Bonds for both;) and this is for life; Surely goodness and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, Psalm. 23. Nay, for everlastingness; I will
marry thee to my self for ever, Hos. 2. 19. 2. Seasonable; In an acceptable
time, etc. In the mount God will be seen.

4. Get a little more understanding and judgment about your converted Get more
understanding and judgment about your converted condition.
and gracious condition. Shall I help thee a little with a few Considerations
and Informations? Know then, 1. The great Fountain of thy Joy lies more in thy
Justification then in thy Sanctification. Thou have not so much Holiness as
another, but thou have of Christ's Righteousness; thou can not apprehend so
strongly, but thou art apprehended as strongly, Christ lays as fast hold of
thee. 2. That Grace and Weakness may dwell together. It may be very true,
though very weak, the smoking flax, and the bruised reed, and the grain of
mustard seed; A Father has one Child in the Cradle, and another in the Shop; a
Shepherd has Lambs in the flock, as well as Sheep; the Gardener has Plants,
as well as Trees; and Christ has Babes, as well as strong Men, belonging to
him. 3. That the least Grace, and the great Love of God do go together: The
little drop of Grace comes out of the Ocean of his great Love; the Penny, as
well as the Shilling, bears the Superscription. 4. That the least degree of
true Grace denominates the condition to be converted: I would believe, is
Faith; I would love thee, is Love; I desire to do thy will, is Obedience: Not
Strength, but Truth denominates. 5. True Grace and many Conflicts go together:
Let the motions of sin be never so vile, but I hate them; never so many, but I
resist them; here Grace is the Lord which rules me, though sin be the Enemy
which molests me. Why am I thus? Alas, there are contraries in thee, Light and
Darkness, Flesh and Spirit. 6. True Grace and some Failings may lodge together:
I may at the same time be a Captive to Sin, and yet a Servant to Grace; sin may
sometimes be too strong even for him who hates sin. 7. All services to God are
interpreted and accepted by God according to the will of a converted person:
Although thou can not pray so freely, so fully, so uniformly, yet if God see
a will in thee desirous so to do, it shall pass for current; groans, and sighs,
and chatterings, and desires, and tears, etc. 8. Thou never do any Duty, but
Jesus Christ gives acceptance unto it by his Intercession; his sweet Incense
takes off the ill savor: The greatest work done by thee, if it comes in thy
own name, is rejected; the weakest, if presented in his Name, a sigh or groan,
is graciously accepted; as the Sacrifices by the Priest. 9. God never expects
thou should buy out thy own pardon, or bring from thy self any satisfaction
for any of thy sins; he has designed that work only to Jesus Christ, in whom
he has accepted thee, and for whose sake alone he does and will discharge
thee: You trade in Heaven upon gracious terms; when you come for any grace and
help, thy Reasons and Motives are in God, who gives, and freely gives. 10. As
soon as ever converting Grace prevails upon thy heart, Salvation is come to thy
soul: Thou art now a Believet; and if a Believer, a Son; and if a Son, an Heir
of all the comfortable Promises now, and a Coheir with Christ hereafter. 11.
The Lord will bless thy buds, and increase thy stock of Grace: He will water,
as well as plant it. 12. That little Grace shall never fail thee, never leave
thee, till it brings thee to Heaven: The greatest Grace is imperfect, and the
least Grace is invincible; the greatest Grace is weak, and the weakest Grace is
immortal.

Now if Christians did believe all these Truths, and would consider of them,
would not their condition be more joyful? Here Is a Weakness, I but it is
Grace; that Grace is little, I but it comes from Graciousness, and makes me
gracious: O how many conflicts! I but it is 'twixt Grace and Sin; yea, and many
sinnings, I but not love of sin, no voluntary service: But how poor in Duties!
I but God regards the Will: But what will become of me for my former sins? Why!
Christ has satisfied, and God has pardoned: But if I had strength of Grace, I
might take comfort; Why! the weakest Convert is a Believer, and the weakest
Believer has Christ; Ergo.

Secondly, to Persons long since converted; What should they To persons long
since converted. Often examine and review your Speritual condition. Be upright.
do to walk with joyful hearts? I answer, 1. Often examine and review your
Spiritual condition; this will keep you and God friends: often look upon the
evidences of Gods favor to your Souls, and maintain and clear them if
blotted; Such experiences are bathes of Comfort: Remember the days of old. 2.
Be upright; maintain the Oil, and you maintain the light. The work of
Righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever: Isai. 32. 17 A stable Spirit will further a stable Joy; one
^^y step puts the bone out of joint, That man loses his Spiritual pleasure,
who steps out for sinful pleasure; remember David's swarving, and Peter's, and
Jacobs. 3. Live by faith: We never meet wi^h more troubles Live by faith.
then when we shift for our selves. That man who can trust God most, him does
God trust with most Grace and peace: see Habak. 3. 17, 18. 4. Hold up close
communion with God Hold up close communion with God.
and his people; he who rrades most at heaven, gets the greatest stock of Grace
and comfort; even the neglect of one prayer may lose a man much comfort; be
satisfied with God alone, and let not out your minds to earthly things; And
that one sermon which thou did overslip, brought in exceeding Joy to thy
fellow Christian. 5. Walk in the fear of God all the day long: Walk in the fear
of God all the day long.
Self-confidence makes the person to lie down in tears; but he who fears to
sin, fortifies his Graces and comforts; expose not your selves to Temptations.
6. Renew a solemn and speedy Peace Renew peace upon every fall.
upon every fall; Light may quickly be restored to a candle newly blown out,
and the bone displaced may presently be set again; Let not a disease settle. 7.
Engage not thy mind to vain and new Engage not to new opinions.
Opinions. Mind the maine things of Life and Salvation, and not profitable
strifes. He who has not more Grace to get, has assuredly much comfort to
lose; an Unsettled Judgment will quickly raise an uncomfortable heart. 8.
Preserve an humble and contented Spirit. Pride is the father of coffeehouse,
Preserve an humble and content^d Spirit.
and Coffeehouse is a prison to our Graces, and a Sea to our comforts. Thy
Graces will not be pleasant to thee, if thy outward condition please thee not.
9. Be active and thriving. That Be active and thriving.
man who does most for God, does also most for his own comfort; Barrenness is
no good sign of Life, and therefore no good way for comfort; the traveling Be
is laden with honey: Thriving Grace is a clear evidence of truth, and adds to
our excellency and our joy.

FINIS.

