(...). LEARNING'S NECESSITY TO AN ABLE MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL.

By JOSEPH SEDGWICK, Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's Coll: in the UNIVERSITY
of Cambridge.



LONDON: Printed by R. D. for EDWARD STORY, Bookseller in CAMBRIDGE, An. Do.
1653.

Dignissimo Do Procancellario; Collegiorum Praefectis Reverendis, Sociis
eorundem doctissimis; Iuventuti Nobili, Generosae, doctae and ingenuae:
Academiae Cantabrigiensi, Quam Ecclesia Anglicana Matrem agnoscit foecundam,
piamque Filiam, Resp. Anglicana subditam simul sentit atque etiam Rectricem,
Dum in Alumnis assidet Reip. Gubernaculo; Dudum denique Orbis Christianus
partim reveritus est Sociam, partim metuit Adversariam; Cui cum Sorore
celeberrima Veritatem Ecclesia; Consilium Politia; Lucem omnem, Celebritatem
omnem Vniversa adeo Anglia unice refert acceptam: Quam Majorum per aliquot
secula Pietas and munificentia, Alumnorum ab omni pene hominum memoria
sinceritas and Eruditio Exteris exhibuerunt plane invidendam, Reip. studiosis
in pretio summo habendam, Et (Quod seculo degeneri poscunt and contendunt
Fanatici) Avarae Ignorantiae (nisi Deus coelitus obnunciaverit) diripiendam: In
qua Quod vere culpent nil reperiunt obtrectatores, Monitricibus etiam Avaritia,
Invidia and Inscitia, Praeter hodiernam Academicorum scientiam, and eximiam
Fundatorum liberalitatem: Crimen est Academicis nil aliud, quam quod Ditescere
videantur and Sapere, supra quod par est Ministris (si Deo placet) Evangelicis:
Quam a vero crimine securam praestitit innocentia, A rapina sacrilegorum, Dei
hactenus Sospitatoris Tutela, Malevolorum vero diris and calumniis ipsa
exposuit Integritas: (Eorum, inquam, Quibus Ignorare est Sanctitatis
principium, Quaeque sequitur Conclusio, Reip. and Ecclesiae pernicies: Qui per
spississimam totius Ecclesiae caliginem tendendum clamant ad lucem Evangelicam,
Dei Regno in tenebris constituto: Nimirum,

Vt nocte illa tecti, dum coelum rapere videri cupiunt, diripiant terr^na.
Immerito Academiae vitio vertitur talium negligentia, Nam Matter Academia non
creat, non violenter ingerit, Sed volentibus excolit ingenia, Et Hos etiam,
quod inse erat, voluit illa fuisse doctos.) Eidem Matri Almae aeternitatem
apprecans, In eadem Viris pietate, gravitate, and rerum divinarum humanarumque
scientia conspicuis, Juvenibus Majorum splendore, suo candore, spe omnium
Beatissimis: (Quos calumniarum impudentissimarum in elenchum, Operi praefigit)

Se Suaque L. M. D. D. C. J. S. C. C.

To the Judicious and Ingenuous READER.
IT is a strange Subject, Reader, and in a sober World, it would be a
ridiculous commendation of all-acknowledged Worth. But that Unreasonableness
will never receive satisfaction, and Error will be always talkative, and
extraordinarily selfconceited, if it fancy it has put all men to silence;
former Discourses might have made this present altogether groundless and
unseasonable. I suppose, when Ignorance has had the impudence to outbrave a
whole University, and seemed to plead that its Ingratitude and Turbulency can
show the warrant of Divine Inspiration, I suppose (I say) now gratitude to the
place (where I have received a great part of mine education, and might have
been a Scholar able to unty as knotty objections, as the enemies of Learning
can propose) and a just discovery of counterfeit Revelation, may be sufficient
warrant for this trial of your patience. I think, printing now needs no
excusatory preface. Since I hinder no body from doing the same work more
substantially, nor desire any one to read, that has any thing else to do, or
can tell how handsomely to be idle: I shall give no other account of the
present undertaking, but that it came into my thoughts, (and yet I do not fancy
any extraordinary special motion, though it ran a pretty while in my head,) and
why may not I go along with so great a crowd for noveltie's sake? If any read
it, and dislike all or any piece of it, it is two to one but I should be of his
mind, if I were acquainted with his reasons. For when all is done, let men talk
what they will, Reason is an excellent thing if a man can hit on it. Of all
things I can least endure Enthusiasme, unless it be in brave lofty and
Romantic lines. Then methinks it sounds rarely, and turned into Latin Verse,
might be bound up with Ovid's Metamorphosis. Else I have no patience to hear
in plain English and sober sadness God made the Author of lies. These
pretenders to the Spirit should not in justice trouble the World with their
wild conceptions, till they can speak sense, and make out their Positions
rationally, or show miracles. And then I shall admire, though I be not able to
understand, what till then I must look upon, as calling in Heaven only to help
at a dead lift, and to salve over the weakness and falsehood, which they are
conscious of; unless by a strange spirit of delusion they can think God can be
the Author and discoverer of Trifles. Till then I shall be bold to esteem it
no better then nonsense. And, Reader, if you find any such here, I confess it
is humane. I guess it is not the first you ever have read. Nor is it so great
a fault, but I dare own, the effect of humane frailty. Only, I am certain, I
intended it for sense. And this is all I can commend the Anthour or the Work
for, that he is a well-meaner, and that this is the sincerely-intended and
thankful and dutiful endeavor of one, that is

An hearty honourer of Learning and true Worth, wherever he meets it. J. S.

Of the Use of LEARNING to the MINISTRY.
I Never heard of any that made it a mere If, whither the Universities might be
improved to a public Civil advantage, but some that knew little what belonged
to good breeding and ingenuous education; that scarce remembered that Man was a
creature endued with Reason, and had faculties higher then corporeal: Men that
could not so much as see that Government and civil Society require much
refinednesse of parts, and are exceedingly advanced by whatever betters and
restores the soul to any measure of its due perfection. I would none would
adventure, before they understood the terms, to pass sentence upon their
connection. Sure, Languages, Physic, and the Mathematics are more for the
vainglory and empty splendor of the Nation: and Civil law must be of use,
till commerce cease, or all other nations be modeled into the English form and
Constitution. It may be easily discerned by all judicious and ingenuous
observers, that a great part of the conveniences of this life and necessaries
to mutual converse do owe their invention and perfection to the idleness and
luxury of the lazy scholars, as some are pleased opprobriously to requite their
serviceablenesse and industry. In truth, it is a conceit befitting such
sensual heads, that there is no pains save in ploughing and threshing; and
that Learning gives no help to the Commonalty, because such men are not able to
look further then outward appearance. In the Fable the rest of the Members
quarreled at the idleness of the Belly; and now the Head it seems must be cut
off and the Eyes pulled out, as condemned for unworking contrivances and
sloathful direction. Sure, a Watch-maker would count him very ridiculous, that
should seriously rebuke him for curious vanity, and for those simple little
wheels and springs that must be hid in the Case, while the Hand or the Bell is
all that gives our senses notice of the time of the day. Fool, would he answer
to such pragmaticall and rash-judging ignorance, these are the principal cause
of that motion which directs you to the hour. And are those men not at all
employed to the public interest, who spend their time in order to the
wel-educating of our Gentry, directing them to those studies which enlarge
their parts, ennoble their minds, and thereby enable them for the more
effectual serving their Countries? True learning does abundantly approve it
self and its excellency in many of our former and late eminent Patriots; who
have been as eminent in the service of the State, as in the acquired
accomplishments of Learning. I leave it to enquiry, how few have been famous
for Political Prudence, who have not by some after industry made amends for the
defects or neglect of their education in youth. If any man have abused the
gifts conveyed to him by the Instruction here received, the Commonweal may
only say of him, as he of an able and considerable enemy, Talis cum sis noster
utinam esses. and we may heartily wish such had discovered themselves more
really for the good of their Native Soil. Do not natural parts run the same
hazard of misapplication and misemployment? yet I shall count him either an
enemy to the State, or very covetous of company, that should in earnest pray
for a continual generation of Fools in England. An eminent soldier (as I
think) detracts nothing from the commendation and desirableness of Martial,
skill, though he prove an enemy to his Country, and fight valiantly for the
disturbance of its peace. If the enlargement of the soul, if the experience of
former ages, if the service of the abilities of other men in other ages and
nations, if great patterns of eloquent and fit expressing our thoughts, if a
well-directed judgment inured to serious and exact scanning of things in
themselves and in their circumstances, if knowledge of men and manners, if a
forevers'dnesse in the consideration of many cases of great difficulty and
moment, and a readiness to draw out what is long ago prepared, if to be
furnished with examples of Divine Providence and humane prudence, if this and
far more then this (which Scholars in public employment can more sensibly
and fully explain) be inconsiderable, and have no influence upon the State, I
must grant that these places of public education are useless, and we may
without cost or pains return to an easy and cheap Barbarousnesse. Venice and
Holland have hitherto had this reckoned as no mean part of their glory, that
they have been friends to learning: and they have admitted Scholars often to
the management of public affairs, yet without any prejudice (to say no more)
to either of the Republics. Verily, Learning is disesteem'd and vilified by no
party, but that which finds it to be most of a contrary side. I observe how
even the greatest enemies of Scholarship hugg but one indifferently learned
brought over to themselves, as a main pillar and the considerablest champion of
their cause. All the country too must ring of it, if any of them get but a few
scraps of Latin and Hebrew. In Divinity they will quote as much New Testament
Greek as they can; and for Latin, you shall have it as far as Luther and
their reading will carry them. Though I am very sensible, there may be a
dissembling of Learning, to make show of a Miracle. It is interest only and
domestic want that makes men inveigh against Arts and Sciences, which else
would by the same men be extolled as absolutely requisite to a Magistrate or a
Minister. I shall add, that whatever they speak of sense against Learning is
most what borrowed from the sportfull Exercises of Learned Wits in commendation
of Ignorance, that speak Sophistry beyond these men's solution, and kick such
bladders in play at their pleasure. It comes likewise partly from the
melancholy fits of some men's devotion, that overlashingly or popularly express
absolutely what is to be understood in comparison with piety and religion, and
that begin to be truly sensible of an irreligious adoration of learning,
whereof they have formerly been guilty to the contempt and neglect of
spiritual righteousness. Something, it may be, is hinted by the discontents
and railings of a few, that imagine their deserts not sufficiently esteemed and
rewarded, and are thence put upon this new device to raise their names in the
World. For our ordinary Opponents, it would be sufficient before any rational
judge, truly to allege against their accusations, that they speak evil of
things which they know not. This might very reasonably invalidate their
testimony and probations, that they understand not enough what learning is, to
determine how great its usefullness may be. I suppose they never had any of
their own to try. Nor is the lazy unusefulnesse or the abuse of some men's
learning any stronger argument, then the hoarding up or squandring away of
money, which some men are guilty of, is against the true civil use of money.
Nay, but none make use of it but for a vain ostentation. And yet they may, and
as wise men as our adversaries, not be able to discern. I would fain convince
men, that only a learned man is sufficient fully to discover where learning is
made use of. An ingenuous Artist may make use of his Mathematical skill in
making a Perspective, yet an ignorant stander by sees nothing above what an
ordinary mechanic may do: when he sees the effect of the glass to be
extraordinary, he cannot improve it to Mathematical discoveries, nor will
easily be convinced that those mad scrawls in Geometry were the foundation of
contriving the instrument. In Division a man may multiply, as he performs the
operation, yet so indiscoverably, that one unskilled in Arithmetic sees no
such matter. In Fortification and like matters, an ignorant man may apprehend
things are made as they should be, but not know how far fetched the
principles are. A Physician may learn out of Galen and Hippocrates to speak
plainly, and appositely to prescribe to his patient, and the sick man be only
sensible that he tells him truly of his distemper, and does ease him by his
prescriptions. Tully, if we may believe himelf, used Logic, Rhetoric, and
Greek learning, and yet the greatest part of the Auditory understood no more
then that he spoke their language handsomely, and spoke very persuasively. Ask
Tully himself or any other Scholar, and they will show you where Demosthenes was
imitated; that Aristotle, the choicest Philosophers and learned Poets were
assistant to the Composition. Extemporary discourses may yet be the sudden
workings forth of long and well-digested studies. The rule may be plain, the
reasoning very clear, and the action no other then what an ordinary capacity
may discover to be very prudent and discreet. But consult Authors, and you may
be taught that the rule was grounded upon principles of Philosophy, the reason
agreeable to precepts of Art, and the action warranted by ancient examples in
History. That they speak so clearly and intelligibly is according to the rules
of learning, and a fruit of their judgments being perfected and thoroughly
informed by Art. It is in other discourses, as it is in sermons. Common people
judge of the Scholar only by high lines and abundance of something which they
understand not. To knowing men, all this, in a popular audience, is but an
argument of one that is very proud of, or afraid to forget that little reading
which he has. The learning of the speaker is more easily discovered by the
plain clearness of his expression, and the artificial dependence of his
conceptions, in a method and language proportioned to the capacity of his
hearers. Still some will urge, that others prove as beneficial to the
Commonweal that are unlearned, and yet as considerable in matters of public
concernment. Yet all have not such extraordinary abilities. He that cannot
travail so long or so fast as another, if any exspect like service from him, he
must be supplied with an horse. But this will receive farther answer, by what
fallows hereafter concerning Unlearned Preachers. For the present it suffices,
that, though there should be one or two above all possible addition from
Acquisition, yet Learning is so far useful to the Nation, as it enables those
for public service whom Nature left to be perfected by Art and Industry.

I hope by this time Mr. Dell will take it for granted that Learning is of
great concernment in Civils. 'Twere charity to think the well-meaning man
prevaricates in all his declaiming against Learning, or that it is an honest
mistake, but a simple-hearted running too far on the other hand. His sense
and chief intention is, it may be, that learning is not necessary to the
Ministry only; and he complains of the scarcity of Secular Foundations in the
University. Possibly he aims only to hint that (seeing our Colleges are most
ordered to Divinity, and they not enough for a constant supply of the
Ministry) besides farther care for the increase of divine knowledge, it would
be a business worthy the prudence of our State, and the munificence of some
noble Benefactours, more to provide for the maintenance of other Professions,
and for the encouragement of that learning which is of a Political and more
Temporal usefullness: in conformity to the suggestions of that Noble and
judicious Advancer of Learning. If he be offended with this charitable
construction, I hope he and others of his persuasion will the readilier close
with it, when we shall in this second and main part of our Discourse have
examined the Assertion they are so confident in, That, to a Gospel Minister,
Learning, Arts and Sciences are altogether unnecessary. But if we should prove
it to be helpful or convenient, the want of simple and absolute necessity
would be no very strong argument against the continuance of Colleges and our
Schools. Such men would be loath to be stinted, as they would stint the Church
and Commonweal, to the short scantling of pure necessaries. What their Opinion
is in plain English, it is hard to say; it being their custom to involve
themselves and their Auditors in dubious and deceitful expressions. I many
times question whether any of them be masters of their own notions. I have
heard Mr. Dell speak in his way of Of and on, concerning the Saints and
Christ's union with God: and can at last only say, I think he would hold forth
Familisme, i. e, as to this point an Enthusiastic and irrational kind of
Socinianisme. When he speaks against the Learned Ministry, sometimes the
epithets of carnal and fleshly must quite alter the sentence; then unusefull,
and not so necessary as to exclude in the want; expressions quite distinct are
often one and the same. In other men, their arguments give further light to the
sense of their position, and that at least in process of reading you may see
what it is they hold. But here the opinion is so groundless, and the arguments
so wild, that I must needs ask, Can the man himself tell what he would have?
Yet I think it is directly to what he hovers about to enquire, Whether the
Foundations of our Universities in the intentions of our pious and magnificent
Ancestors, settled (in the greatest part) for the supply of the Ministry, for
training up there and sending thence into the service of Christ in the Church
men furnished with acquired gifts of Learning, be Antichristian, or took its
original from the bottomless abyss of darkness, or any such infernal
principle; whether this constitution be any thing of the Mystery of Iniquity:
and not rather the result of pious Wisdom, well-guided Devotion, and Christian
Prudence of men zealous according to knowledge for the promoting of God's glory
in the edification of the Church. I mean as to the general, main and
fundamental intention, though most of our Founders might be mistaken in the
particular designment, as acting according to the light of those times, when
the opinions of the Church of Rome were mixed with the Christian and Catholic
Verity of the Western Churches. The Question then shall run thus,

Whether is it an Institution grounded upon true Christian Prudence, acceptable
to God and beneficial to the Church, to provide for the instructing in
Tongues, Arts and Sciences men naturally endowed with a capacity, and competent
parts, and this in order to the work of the Ministry? or is such an
Institution Antichristian, opposite to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, a piece
of old ignorant Superstition, and therefore unsufferable in a Christian State?

This, I think, is the Controversy between us and Mr. Dell. It is all that
need be said to prove an alienation of the University Lands prejudicial to the
Church of Christ in England, and consequently unlawful, unless absolutely
necessary for the removal of a greater inconvenience. I heard a story of a
French King, as I remember, to this effect. In want of money to maintain an
Army, the Church Revenues being proposed by some of the Council, says the
Pious King, My Kingdom is not yet wholly drained dry. A speech of a piously
and devoutly disposed Prince; and that savoured more of the Spirit of God and
true self-denial, then the spirit that call's upon others to make havoc of
and despoil whatever is devoted to the Interest of the Church. I acknowledge
mercy to be better then sacrifice, and the Being of a Nation more considerable
then the ornamentall splendor of the Church. For I apprehend not as yet any
such thing so sacred and devoted to a pious use, but that urgent and public
necessity brings in a sufficient dispensation for any thing besides the
inevitable ruin of a Church. In unavoidable necessity of State, when no way
else can hinder a total ruin, he is not a true lover of his Country, nor
has he digested the brave examples extant in history, that could not
cheerfully beg for his Countrie's good, and be ready to serve it and the Church
in outward want. This lesson possibly others have learned, that see no such
urgency of affairs to invite their own poverty. I question not but (if public
and national exigency should force our Rulers to suspend our present
encouragements to Learning and diligence in the Ministry) the Integrity of
University-men and their sincere desire to lay themselves out for the Church,
would abundantly appear in their greatest afflictions; and the more
conspicuously by the neglect of many now forward in preaching, because they are
forbidden, who would prove as remiss, when once they had according to their
wishes brought about their envious and malicious designs against Learning and
the Ministry: a great deal of their vehemence and diligence being from love of
disobedience and contradiction, or a design to overthrow the Clergy. I speak
not here of those whom a desire of enlarging the Kingdom of God, and declaring
to others what they have found in his ways, has stirred up to preach unto
others: nor do I doubt but there are many such of the Laity. But without any
spirit of prophecy, methinks I see most of our Intruders upon the Ministerial
office, soon after this sad accomplishment of their desires, pretending to be
above Ordinances, and very well content to be in the silence and ease of a more
exalted dispensation. It Is shrewdly suspicious that Mr. Dell's constancy in
preaching would not long survive Tithes and the University, or some stipend
large enough for a preacher of self-denial. All is yet but conjecture, for
(blessed be God) our prudent and worthy Governors are not yet put to so
dangerous a pitch. And notwithstanding some men's suggestions of public profit
and Necessity, our State will be always so conscienciously wise, as in the
greatest streights to consider how Learning and the Church may be nobly
provided for, and whether the pretended Necessity does really counterpoise the
public advantage of the present Institution, and make amends for the injury
that must be hereby done to a considerable part of the Nation, and the
improbability of leaving an able and well-provided Ministry to posterity. I
understand not why we should make more bold to leave God to provide by miracle
for the Church, then for the State: unless our Faith be of this nature, that
where we are really sensible of a necessity, we are resolved to see our selves
supplied, but we can trust God very willingly with what we care not much for,
and scarce believe in truth to have any reallity. But to the Question.

I heartily desire that encroaching term of Antichrist and Antichristian (so
frequent in some men's mouths, and used even in this business by Mr. Del and
others) had its unlimited bounds once somewhat fixed by assigning a Conception
that might tell us wherein the nature of Antichristianisme consists. It seems
to me one of those words that have worn out all their signification by
frequency of being used: or else only a nickname to reproach any opposer of
our private opinions or designs. While every thing is Antichristian in some or
others mouths, What should that be (think I) which fits Contradictories, both
parts (for ought I can see) as well as one? I suppose here he means what
exalts it self against the Kingdom of God. but still I am as much to seek for
Mr Del's meaning as before, of which by and by. In the meanetime I shall
forbear to urge the Engagements which all University-men have entered into for
the defending of the Rights, Privileges and Honor of our common Mother. Their
answer is ready: The Oaths were unlawful, and so better broken then kept.
Nevertheless, what hold can be taken of men that disannull solemn Oaths upon
every whimzy? At least, fear of an oath should have put them upon diligent
examination and impartial judgment ere they concluded the engagement unlawful.
And then (seriously) they have miserable Crowns, and very soft heads, if these
be (as it is probable they are) the prevalent Motives which they usually
produce. It is somewhat to the purpose to propose one Question to Mr. Dell.
With what Conscience can any Christian knowingly take the wages of Antichrist?
I do not understand much honesty in cheating the Man of Sin of his money. Is
the University stipend, as paid to a Divine, Antichristian maintenance? Then,
under what capacity do Mr. Dell and his associates enjoy their places in
Cambridge? I know no account can be given, but that they have rusht into the
Pulpit amongst a crowd of Mechanics. All (it seems) is fish that comes to
net. I must confess, the same largeness of Conscience may bear a man out in
receiving the emoluments, where the duty of the place is looked upon as
unlawful, and in exacting Tithes, which the same over and over declares
against as Judaicall and opposite to the Liberty of the Gospel. It is a strange
inconsistency of Doctrine and Practice, to extol self-denial in the Pulpit,
and yet to be content to keep the road of the Clergy, that is so Antichristian,
where it leads but to considerable profit, But let us see how the Opinion will
approve it self in so high pretenses to the motion and powerful incitations of
the Spirit, if these Propositions be any thing opposite to it.

1. A Gospel Ministry is to continue, though the extraordinary and miraculous
appearance of the Spirit be ceased. For this I believe will be denied in the
upshot, if the truth of our present Churches be not the first mistake. Of this
we shall speak but in subserviency to the present discourse. Upon another
occasion, I am ready to declare what I think may be said for a fuller
justification of the English Church's Apostolicalness.

2. Learning is no hinderance to the advancing of the power of the Gospel.

3. Gifts of Learning are necessary to an able and accomplished Minister or
dispenser of the Truth of God.

4. Then, I suppose, we may add without much more proof, that the Institutions
of Universities are not only commendable, but of extraordinary benefit and (in
some degree) necessity to the Christian Church.

In all which I shall endeavor to take little or nothing for granted, which
one in his right wits may considerately deny. I know the usual way is, Where
find you in Scripture that the Apostles studied 7 years at the University? What
Word is there for excluding from the Ministry those that understand not Greek
and Latin? If any man applaud such toies, and understands no better the
Doctrine of Scripture's perfection, I must confess I am as much out of hope of
convincing him, as free from any fear that he should multiply proselytes,
where any thing of sober-mindedness remains. I Will speak in a word my thoughts
as to the forementioned Doctrine of the fullness of Divine Writ, with submission
to the better judgments of our Reverend Doctors of the Church, and to the
candid examination of any judiciously ingenuous lover of truth. I understand
that we reject Traditions, as false, when they contradict written Revelation;
as dangerous, when the probability of abuse and ill consequence overweighs the
benefit received by retaining them; but thirdly, the rest only as uncertain,
because we want much of that evidence which we have of the Scripture's
authority. Yet these last may be retained according to their probability of
truth, and usefulness to the Congregations of Believers. I see no ground to
conclude all under falsehood and humane invention, which is not found in the
Scripture: though I may rationally question the certainty of such Traditions,
any further then I can discover their rationalness, or then the authority of
their discoverer and proposer gives them a credibility. Methinks I see these
Querers acted, I know not how, to a more dangerous consequence then they
themselves imagine. What use is there of their ridiculous Quere's unless to
weaken the truth of the Scripture's sufficiency? a sober and undoubted Truth,
if well understood, i. e. (as I conceive) as to matters of salvation and
necessary entertainment. though indeed it does contain all Truths that are
certainly of Divine original. I am afraid this will be the effect among common
people, that can seldom keep from one of the extremes, if once they be (as
they cannot but be in time) sensible of this wild way of disputing from
Scripture and by fond and frivolous interrogatories: many of which (though
applauded by men as madly conceited as the Enquirers) yet to a sober
indifferent mind evidence but the Authors follies, and unmask that spirit of
scurrility and immorality by which the Contrivers are frequently acted. To this
purpose we shall premise these Conclusions, of some moment in this and other
disputes.

1. Matters of common prudence needed not to be revealed, nor are they revealed
in Scripture; nor is therefore common humane prudence unlawfully used in things
Ecclesiastical. I suppose it will be easily conceived that God never intended
that the Church should be a collection of indiscretion and folly: and hence it
is that there are so few hints of those things, which mere Reason may instruct
us in. Even in the Jewish dispensation, where the outward form was exactly
prescribed, some things were left to common prudence and the determination of
the Consistory, as indeed it must be, when Laws are framed in the greatest
perfection imaginable. I know no other use of that which the Apostle calls
Government 1 Cor. 12. i. an extraordinary gift (as I apprehend) of prudence for
the ordering and managing the rule of the Church, and for a particular
application of that general direction given by St Paul, that all things should
be done decently and in order. 1 Cor. 14. 40. Decently, and in or according to
order must be understood, according to that becoming ordinateness and decorum
observed in the assemblies of civil and wel-bred men, without the rudeness of
immoral and tumultuary meetings. (...) some (I remember) have expounded by,
according to institution, i. e. the rule which I gave you. But I think good
method, convenient (as it were) ranking is the more usual signification, and
best stands in conjunction with (...). both order and decency being left to the
judgment of the Church or its governors, acting according to the rules of
prudence. Nor indeed could it be otherwise then left thus, if we consider the
several states of the Church as under and near to the Apostles times, and as
in succeeding ages. The condition of the Church and Christianity is extremely
varied, being then low, persecuted, discountenanced by the temporal power, and
in a state of poverty. Then on the contrary guided by Apostolical infallibility
and immediately furnished from heaven with a large effusion of the Spirit in
gifts and special endowments. Now remember that the Acts of the Apostles is an
History of the then Church, and the Instructions given in the Apostolical
Epistles refer to their then state, and are to be applied to us only with
consideration of circumstances, or in the common reason and general duty
contained in them. When I hear some men's objections, methinks it is sufficient
answer to many arguments fetched from primitive practice; That the Apostolical
Church's purse and power would not carry them out, as in building of Churches
and the like. We know they had not then the liberty of public worship. In
other things the Apostles needed not such helps: yet in times wherein they are
needful, the Apostles practice is no prejudice to their use. Where read we,
say some, of the Apostles praying with all that would come to join, as the
whole Congregation? Neither, say I, do we read of a whole Nation professing
Christianity, which being now the universal profession of many countries alters
the case of their and our times. Upon this particular it is not unseasonable to
wish that men would learn seriously to weigh the strength of their arguments
and their extent, more then in relation to their particular question and
present concernment. It would save them the trouble of being forced by others
to answer their own arguments upon another question. Which has been very usual
in this very principle, which some have formerly upon other occasions made use
of, that all is will worship which is instituted in the worship of God without
particular warrant from Scripture: and what the consequence has been, our
times sufficiently evidence.

II. For further confirmation of what has been said, I observe, that there are
many things common to a society of Christians and Civil Societies, Churches
being humane Societies as to the matter of them. i. partaking of this general
nature of being a Collection of rational Creatures: and then what ever is
applicable to humane Society in general, belongs to Churches as contained under
that larger notion; as for example, the lawful employment of honest wisdom
and discretion for its preservation. Provided only, that nothing be acted
contrary to the principles and nature of Christianity. If this caution be
observed, rational deductions from Civil Societies, keeping the analogy of
religion, are improveable to the Church. Much more what is deducible from the
notion of a Christian Assembly.

III. Where the reason of the thing is common and unappropriate to the
then-obtaining dispensation, and when there is nothing implied to the contrary
in the Gospel Doctrine or Institution; there arguments drawn from the Jewish
Church do hold good as to the Christian. It is warranted by S. Paul's discourse
about Gospel maintenance for the Ministry. For the Church then, was a Society
joining in the service of God; that and this partaking in the general notion of
a religious Assembly, their Ministry of a Ministry, and their Worship of the
Worship of God. And observing the difference of their and our dispensations, we
may very lawfully make use of their institutions to direct us to discover many
things, which belong to religious Congregations, Officers and Worship in
general. That only being abrogated of Moses, which was typical, and founded
in God's Covenant with Israelites as Israelites. i. e. as instated in the land
of Canaan, not as men, and related to God by creation and the covenant of
nature.

IV. Which follows from and may add strength to what has been already said:
Collections from Scripture, though not to every eye expressed in Scripture, and
arguments drawn according to the different circumstances of the Primitive and
Later conditions of the Church, are proofs very admittable by any sober
Christian. This is no more then what reason readily grants, as founded in the
very nature of the things. no more then what is commonly allowed as sufficient
proof in collecting from any History, ancient Custom and usage, or old Law,
which is in force with respect to the alteration of times. It is that which in
other more uncontroverted cases is used in alleging of Scripture it self.

V. Custom and practice of the Church in succeeding ages, and Ecclesiastical
History, especially near the Apostles times, universal, and in conformity to
the former presumptions, is an argument in it self as considerable, as
intolerable to Enthusiastic Spirits or men that affect novelty and their own
humors. Now to our question; The Christian Schools in former ages are
notorious, and the high price then set upon Learning is clear by their
diligence in instructing their children in Arts and Sciences, and by the sense
they had of Julian's injurious forbidding them the Heathenish Learning, and
denying them the liberty of the then Schools of literature. What joy for their
deliverance from this oppression by his death? What industry in supplying the
want of public education? It is evident Nazianzen had other thoughts of humane
Learning then those that prefer Julian for a pattern of reformation. But this
way of arguing, were I skilled in it, would be put off with the Antiquity of
the Mystery of Iniquity, which (if we believe some) had almost in every thing
overspred the Church of Christ straight after the decease of the Apostles.
Indeed it would be ineffectuall, because beyond the possibility of our
Opponents Examination, who have expressed their Christian justice in vilifying
and condemning the Ancients, whom they are not at all acquainted with. Yet it
needs no great reading to know that those which we acknowledge to be the times
of greatest Apostasy in the Church, were the freest from secular Learning, and
had as much darkness in that respect as our Adversaries can hope to bring
England to, if the Universities were utterly abolished. The Reformation of
Religion and the reviving of the (...), in plain English, the Gentile
Learning, were contemporary, and happily promoted by the same Instruments. And
it were strange if the Reformation begun in knowledge, could no otherwise be
carried on then by returning to the Ignorance of darker and more degenerate
ages, What can an adversary to the reformation in reason think else, but that
they have convinced us of the insufficiency of our Cause, and that now we are
sensible Learning was only an argument for us, when our Opponents had not
attained to enough to discover our fallacies, impostures and learned juglings?
What greater triumph can the Jesuits desire, then to see us beat out of our
confidence of Learning, and put to a poor and irrational shift of private
infallible Inspiration? One inclining to Atheism will be perfectly possessed
that the defenses of Christian Religion were only proud triumphs over the too
unexercised disputers against it in Heathenisme, or that the power of the
Christian Emperors was the strongest argument for the truth of Christianity:
Experience having (as he may justly surmise if all Christians were of these
men's minds) discovered to our selves the weakness of our Religion, unable to
withstand the clearer light of natural and refined reason.

We come now to our former Conclusions.

Conclusion I. A Ministry was not to cease with the primitive times and
Apostolical administration and gifts. Which will be proved if in particular we
evidence the truth of the Church of England and the lawfulness of its
Ministry: which may be done thus.

1. There is a visible Church of God in England, or the Church of England is a
true Church of Christ in an Apostolical sense. By a Church I mean, according to
the notion of a Church in the Apostolical writings (to which I refer any
attentive reader for proof of the notion) I mean (I say) by a Church, a
Collection or Society of men united in the Worship of God in his Son Jesus
Christ, whom they profess to believe to be sent by the Father for the
remission of sins, and according to whose precepts they engage themselves to
lead their lives in hopes of everlasting life through the same Lord Jesus.
Though as yet, they are no otherwise renewed then by this more general belief
of the Gospel and Salvation promised by Christ. i. e. but potentially and in
gradu remoto sanctified, their lives being unanswerable to their profession and
promise. And this is the case of the English communion, whose members having
been baptized in their infancy, and having at years of discretion acknowledged
their assent to the then-dedication of them to God, and acknowledging their
Baptism into repentance for remission of sins, are (...), Saints by call,
called unto holiness, and true members of the Church, till duly and justly put
out of communion. This is in Apostolical phrase a Church of God, and a
Congregation of Believers, in the Scripture expression. And that is soberer
language then carnal and worldly Church. though there is a more invisible
Church, more spiritually and intimately united to Christ, to which neither
hypocrites nor unrighteous professors do belong: the bounds of it being
narrower, and salvation attainable to none that are without it. But the Church
we speak of is such as those St Paul wrote to, visible and external, the
conditions of whose communion was in the Apostles time but a believing Christ
to be the Messiah, and submitting to Baptism to the remission of sins, and
repentance from dead works. This Church is not to be rested in; neither are the
members of it to be vilified and slighted as out of the Church, as unbelievers,
or to be debarred communion, who have the faith of Christ in them, and whose
hearts God has purified by a belief wrought in them of the truth of the
Gospel, though their faith be dead, as yet unprofitable, and that which, unless
it be brought into act and work by Love, will not save. Yet there is that faith
wrought in them by the Spirit of God in their education, which may by the
assistance and supervenient grace of the Spirit be a foundation of real
closing with Christ, and real Gospel-holiness. In the meanetime God has
purified their hearts by this Faith which is in them (though unconsidered,
unimproved, and unactive) in that sense as I think is agreeable with the
context of Acts 15. 9. (i. e.) so that though they were impure as to legal
purification, unclean and profane as to communion with the worshippers of the
true God, God has now made them clean as to Church Communion, and being
admitted into Brotherhood by the believing Jews, by bringing them to a belief
that Jesus is the Christ.

2. Further to warrant the communion of the Church of England, observe, that
those that are united in the Faith of Christ, ought to be united in
Church Communion. i. e. ought to assemble together for the public Profession
of their Faith in Christ and joint serving of God, seeking him for each other
and the cause of Christ in enlarging and protecting his Church, and for mutual
edification. It is grounded upon that promise of our Savior, He that confesses
me before men, him will I confess. It Is true, there are other ways of
confessing Christ: but the promise is to confession in the latitude, and it is
dangerous in any particular to be guilty of denying Christ. Assembling together
to the imploring of Divine grace; and a thankful remembrance of the Lord till
he come, is the duty of the members of Christian Churches: the ends still
remaining, and being as necessary as in the Apostles times, viz. to hold out
the profession and faith of Christ to the World, and to strengthen, encourage
and build up each other in our most precious faith and Christian love, which is
mightily confirmed by our union in the service of God, and which is the ground
of God's especial regard to united prayers, which argue the unanimity and
concord of his people. The arguments against our assemblies, that of
mixt-congregations being answered in the precedent assertion, are these two: I.
The perfection to which some men have attained so as to be past those beggarly
rudiments, external and fleshly worships etc. and now to live in immediate
communion and a constant Sabbath. If this glory and raisedness be real in
them, more then fancy and words. I shall only say, First, humility and
self-disesteeme is one maine piece of a Christian's perfection. Secondly,
submission to Divine institution certainly would be no derogation from
happiness; yea, that is the question. And for proof of it we appeal to
Apostolical practice, and those first times wherein this spirit was wholly
unknown. We desire not a warrant from Scripture, to bear us out in our
inconformity to this primitive practice. though we might more reasonably, then
they require of us, to show by Scripture that the effusion of the Spirit in
extraordinary gifts ceased with the first age of the Church. The matter is
quite other, in man's duty, and God's free dispensation. Especially, if we
remember that a public profession of our dependence upon God, and communion in
seeking and acknowledging of God, are the dictates of natural light, and
indispensable. Thirdly, enquiry may be made whether they are incapable of
growth and beyond all increase of grace; if not, whether the Scripture-way of
edification be not most imitable. Fourthly, such glorious Saints in reality,
might assemble to the greater benefit of inferior Christians: (and sure no
perfection privileges from serving God in building up the Church.) Fifthly, to
acknowledge God and Christ before men, to bless him for his mercies, to
glorify him in the Congregations of his Saints, nay to celebrate the memorial
of his death in the Supper of our Lord, are Duties agreeable with the most
Saintlike eminency, while conversant in the World. The most glorious Saint or
Angel, if in a body and mixed with humane society, would, I believe, thus be
employed, and count it no disparagement, no superfluous or empty service.
Methinks the souls under the Altar, and the Hallelujahs resounding from Heaven
to the Apocalyptical Divine, are good presumptions that there is some such
thing in Heaven; or that such service is not altogether indecorously attributed
to the highest manifestation of God. But I wish there be nothing of
self-conceit, impatience under God's wisely-and-justly-suspended communication
of himself, or formality converted to another extreme, at the bottom of this
high-towring confidence. I desire in my self to be shrewdly suspicious of that
Heaven, which lessens my willingness to meet God and his Angels (it is as
probable an exposition of 1 Cor. 11. as any I have heard) coassembled with
believers upon earth. An heart enlarged to communion with Saints, to
edification of our brethren, to a constant praising of God, and to an embracing
of any opportunity of acknowledging thankfully before men and Angels the love
of God in our Redemption; an heart, I say, thus raised to be Praecentor in the
Quire of the Saints blessing God the Father and our Lord Jesus, is an heaven in
almost every thing but in the spiritualness and Immortality of the Body. II.
The imperfection of our assemblies in comparison of the primitive times is to
some an argument against our Worship of God. Indeed, it is a good argument to
quicken our dullness to an imitation of their affectionate fervency. Yet I
appeal to the experience of devout souls, whether God be wholly absent from our
assemblies, and the quickening presence of the Spirit absolutely withdrawn. We
retain not empty and dead Ordinances: and to call them but dead and
ineffectuall shadows is an expression injurious to the manifestations of God
in many a faithful heart, who can sensibly and with rejoicing bear witness to
the appearance of God in our public Service. What wants of miraculous
presence, we may refer to the Divine Wisdom manifesting it self suteably to
each Age of Christianity. What wants of effectualness, let us blame our
negligence, and approach more spiritually to service. But what consequence is
it? (We are already by much short of the primitive ardour, and therefore must
still more recede from their so glorious example) While we believe the Gospel
grace worth our thanks, while we need his assistance and protection, we must
not deny God the service that is due unto him even by right of Creation; but do
it to our best ability. Expect what glorious times you see ground for in
Scripture. I shall not quarrel though the largeness of your hopes may exceed
any promise I can see in Divine Writ: yet remember to press toward it in
eminency of piety and due attendance upon the Worship of God, which I am sure
can be no greater prejudice to the drawing nigh of any glory in the Church,
then Simeon's waiting in the temple was to his seeing of Christ.

3. There must be set over the Church men that may watch to the Flock, Pastors
and Teachers, men able to instruct, direct and order the Church of Christ, and
more especially in their religious Assemblies. All were taught of God and had
the unction of the Spirit in the Apostles times, as much certainly as in ours.
yet see 1 Cor. 14. 3, 4, 22. and Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Has not the Church need
of edification now? Is exhortation, consolation, stirring up and quickening to
duty now altogether needless? If the Churches planted by the Apostles, and in
presence of whom the power of God had appeared so miraculously stood in need of
Overseers and Instructours; I leave it to any rational man to judge what is
requisite in these remoter ages. We acknowledge (will our Adversaries answer)
our wants. but we must not be guilty of will worship and our own inventions in
the worship of God. We expect, say they, this Ministry; only say we, it has
for the present ceased; and we dare not intermeddle of our selves in the things
of God. In reply to this, I must premise that I speak of the Ministry of the
English Church chiefly, let those defend themselves that have withdrawn from
its communion and erected Churches of other models. Then,

1. The Church of England has not created a new Ministry, but continued it
successively from the Apostolical Age. Only its Pastors, being for
Conscience excluded the Roman communion, have (as duty to God and their Savior
bound them) assembled together for the service of God, and instituted still
fresh Pastors in the Church.

2. The notion of Will Worship is very probably vindicated from misapprehension
by Doctor Hammond.

3. To provide by Christian prudence, in imitation of Apostolical wisdom, for
the Churches good is not Will Worship. It is a strange state for Christians
under the Gospel, and worse then under the Law, if they are placed in such a
condition, as that they must almost inevitably be guilty either of neglecting
the commands of God, or instituting something of their own heads. To me (under
pardon) this seems to be the Gospel frame, as to Church affairs, that it is
delivered from that punctual legality of the former dispensation; and proceeds
only according to the natural rules of Divine Worship and Christian prudence.
It is too, very improbable that the Providence of God has left all these Ages
of the Church, since the Apostles, without any means of a Gospel-ministery.

4. Our public Ministry can show their warrant in the hearts of many of their
hearers, from that Spirit which gives no attestation to Antichristian intruders.

5 It is my private opinion, and therefore proposed to a serious consideration:
It may be, the duty of a Minister is no other, then what may be performed
without miraculous gifts, and is indeed the duty of every Christian, if he had
proportionable abilities, and as far as may consist with order and decency in
the Church. Our Ministers pretend not infallibly to deliver the will of God,
any further then it is delivered in Scripture in undoubted plainness; much
less do they bring a new Gospel or a new Revelation into the World. There is
the difference between them and the Apostles, as the Jewish Lawgiver and the
Expounders of the Law. Moses, as the Apostles, was infallibly guided: not so
the Expounders of the Law. The office of a Minister is wisely to govern the
Church, to search into the will of God revealed already, declare, explain and
press the Truths already divulged by the Apostles. The separation of their
calling is (besides that disorder must be avoided, and it is very necessary
that the gifts of those be approved to the Church, who take upon them the
charge of instructing others) it is, I say, because all are not gifted for the
Ministry, it will (if conscienciously performed) take up the greatest part of
their time, and by the necessary means at present of enabling themselves for
this employment, they are taken off from a capacity of providing for themselves
in a secular way: being trained up quite contrary to the ways of trade and
worldly trafficking.

Conclusion II. Acquired gifts are no hinderance to the Kingdom of God. Not to
the embracing of the Gospel and apprehending the Mysteries thereof; nor to a
Gospel Minister. S. Paul was well versed in Jewish and Grecian literature, and
mixeth pieces of Poetry with his sacred conceptions. The Apostle says indeed,
Not many wise. But Knowledge puffing up with pride, and so punished with
spiritual blindness, speaks nothing to the disadvantage of Knowledge. Not
many rich and noble, is as much Scripture. I wish there be not as visible
characters of pride in the self-esteem and censoriousnesse, and the spirit of
turbulency of our Adversaries. I am confident Learning is no enemy to any
honest interest of Truth or true Christian piety. If they mean by the Kingdom
of God any thing beside what S. Paul means, or then that righteousness, peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost, which he speaks of, if they please to explain
themselves, it may be it is a commendation to Learning that it proves an enemy
to some fantastical whimzy or base design.

Conclusion III. Gifts of Learning are necessary to an accomplished dispenser
of the Word of God. Our Adversaries make much use of the Epithets Secular,
Humane and Natural. And then how popular a conviction is it to descant upon
God's not standing in need of man's help, upon the Kingdom of God its being
spiritual, divine and supernatural? Now all is done: only they might confirm
the antiquity of their Monkish spirit out of Erasmus his Antibarbarus. But are
not a good voice and good lungs natural? God stands not in need of Ministers
or their Learning, yet may be pleased to make use of both, and may require it
in his ordinary dispensation with the Church. Learning though fetched from an
Heathen may be from the author of Truth, and in a Christian subservient to the
work of the Gospel. Is only secular Learning taught in the Universities? Does
not the search into Divine Revelation take up a great part of
University-studies? To speak more clearly to this main assertion, I shall take
notice of these propositions.

1. Smattering in Learning is altogether useless, and good for nothing but to
fill up the period with a frivolous sentence in Latin, that is too simple to
be spoke in plain English. None ever said that the conning by heart a few
Logical terms and Philosophical distinctions, without any conception
correspondent in the mind, was any benefit to sacred study. And here some of
our Adversaries may see the mistake in their own experiment. Their Learning and
unconcocted Philosophic crudities stand them in no stead in expounding the
Bible and opening difficulties in Divinity. Nor can they, I suppose, defend
themselves with a sword, unless they have it fully in their hand: and yet a
sword is a very needful weapon. He must have fast hold of Learning and have it
perfectly at command, that intends to make any use of it in Divinity or
Humanity. Do these men conclude a Medicine ineffectuall, because they have
without success applied it before it was prepared? When we say a knife is
useful in cutting, 'twere madness to allege to the contrary that I have
tried an unsharpened and rude piece of steel. Yea, but we can preach as well as
the learned. It may be, to your own apprehensions, and men as little able to
discern as your selves. But let me answer in this homely but pat similitude.

1. Meat may be gnawn or pulled in pieces, but it is a very slovenly carving to
others. And I cannot see but it is Christian wisdom to avoid all just
occasion of contempt to the preaching of the Gospel.

2. It is easy to give our what another has carved to our hand. Sermon notes
and printed Sermons may carry a man very far. And I have been credibly
informed, that printed Sermons got by heart served a great while an Irish
Apostle for an appearance of mere depending upon the sudden suggestions of the
Spirit. But, Sirs, your Authors were Scholars. Now I should be very loath to
have him for my guide that wholly uses another man's eyes, and takes up all
upon trust. Methinks a double danger of fallibility is too much. The first had
his mistakes, and it is probable this second will return them with some
addition of his own, mistaking him that mistook. I like a directer that is able
to judge something of himself.

3. Many meats need not a knife. Yet there are some Truths of very considerable
import, that carry difficulty, and if explained amiss, may be of dangerous
consequence to a godly life.

II. Natural parts, use and practice may in many men make a great supply for
the want of acquired parts; and exceed an industrious incapacity or an
unexercised studiousnesse. And this is in plain English what some men call the
extraordinary assistance of the Spirit in prayer and preaching. Many of the
Laity are men of quick and ready abilities, nimble wits, ready apprehension,
and clear volubility of language in expressing their conceptions: especially
some having been constant hearers of the Ministry, and by much exercise in
preaching, praying and discoursing of matters of Divinity, have accustomed
themselves to nimblenesse of head and tongue. Now because these possibly excel
many a dull Plodder (whom necessity, unfitness for any thing else, or his
parents fond and ignorant admiration have quite against Nature's intention,
cast upon the University) or some few who have injured their natural abilities
by intangling themselves altogether in scholasticall intricacies; presently,
forsooth, Deus e machina, a Miracle, and the Spirit is come upon them from
above. But

1. Take them out of their road, from some general Doctrines of Christianity,
to a particular explication of Christian Truths and Duties.

2. What would they have proved if learned education had seconded nature, or
been laid as the foundation of their exercise? It is pity they supplied not
the places of some others in the Universities.

3. It is all equity and justice to set them in comparison with men of like
parts and equal practice: and then judge who has the advantage.

4. What gross mistakes are they guilty of often in interpretation of
Scriptures and collection thence, for want of skill in the Original, and
artificial discourse?

5. Consider, these men would have excelled others in a Trade, and I suppose
without Aholiab's inspiration. We find the same effects in many unlearned men,
who by practice and natural sagacity judge clearly, and express themselves
aptly and fluently in matters of civil discourse and intercourse.

Natural ability is the gift of the all-governing Spirit, and the ability
acquired by exercise is the blessing of God: but all this is nothing of the
gift of the Spirit in an Apostolical sense.

III. Experience and sense of the ways of God, or true real inward grace, is
a great advantage to a Minister of the Gospel: but not a necessary
indispensable requisite, not alone a sufficient qualification. Indeed
experience adds life, heat and affectionate power to the delivery of the Word.
But still the coldness and deadness of an unsanctified Preacher is oft-times
discernable only to himself. Upon equality of all other conditions an
experienced Christian is able with more vigor to declare the Truths of Christ.
So he may understand the Preacher more sensibly then he understands himself. A
dumb man and a stammerer may understand mine exact and true relation better
then my self, because concerned in the action, and present to that which I
deliver upon diligent enquiry and information received from others. Besides the
fullness of Sense oft-times confounds the Understanding and Elocution: since one
may feel so as to put expression to a loss: and then though I apprehend an
extraordinary affection in the man, I may be to seek for a true explanation of
the cause. Every one that can fight well, I think, is not fit to write or
Tacticks or the History of a War: both which have been well done by men who
never engaged in any military service. A man may feel abundance of pain, and
yet an Anatomist may be able more distinctly and rationally to mine
understanding to explain what part is affected, and how. But, you will say,
affection is more popular and likely to breed affection. Yet, there are some
whose judgments must be convinced, and that may desire a rational
explication. And sure clearness of knowledge is a very good foundation for the
permanency of affection. To clear this proposition yet more, I observe

1. That the Apostles rules require unscandalousness of life in a Minister.

2. That Christ's sending out of Judas is sufficient ground for calling to and
receiving into the Ministry men of abilities, whom we have no presumption of
in regard of real grace. See Mat. 7. 22. 1 Cor. 13. 2. The Scribes and
Pharisees teaching of truth are to be heard: and St. Paul joys in the Gospel's
being preached, though out of a principle of Contention, which is no fruit of
the Spirit dwelling in a Preacher. Grace is for the use of a man's soul, Gifts
for the use of the Church. The confusion of the Spirit as working grace, and as
pouring forth gifts is a fundamental mistake in this question. But know that a
Minister and a Christian are distinct notions. And though the ungracious
Preacher does not so much as think of a blessing upon his work: yet the Church
and a conscientious hearer may believingly expect fruit and edification from
God in and by his Ministry, whom God may sanctify as to the Church and its
benefit, though in his private respect he neglect him. So Cyrus of old was
sanctified for the use of Israel: and St. Paul supposes that he that preaches
to others may himself prove a castaway.

3. That all things delivered in the Gospel, and necessary to be explained are
not experienceable. Withal, consequent experience of joy or dutiful affection
is not sufficient ground of Truth. It is no improbable supposition that two
really godly may both rejoice in the Lord: the one for the universal
extensiveness of his Goodness; and the other for the special
distinguishingness of his Love. Yet whether's experience shall warrant the
truth to be on his side?

4. Experience being private and particular (of particular case, constitution
and arbitrary actings of the Spirit of Wisdom) is not to be extended to
general rule, without ground in Scripture or the nature of the thing. Else the
new-experienc'd-Divinity argued consequently against the benefit of Ordinances
and to other men's formality in the use of them, from some men's own experience
of their hypocrisy in duty, and their receiving no good by them through their
default and God's justice.

5. Shall I add, That Duties are to be delivered above the shortness of our
own seize? Duties as delivered in Scripture, and therefore as they are to
be pressed, exceed our experience. But, some will say, we have some degree of
experience, and from that collect what is yet above us. I answer, So one as yet
unexperienced apprehends in part: some kind of knowledge being presupposed to
experience. Then secondly, a notional knowledge is sufficient to a verbal
declaration: and may in many things be clearer and safer, while it fallows
Scripture-revelation, other men's manifold experience, though not its own.

IV. Gifts and endowments are principally requisite to a Gospel Minister, as
such. For the nature of a Minister is office and employment; and what enables
to be a Christian, enables not to the function of a Minister. 1 Cor. 12. peruse
the whole chapter. To clear up this, consider

1. The gifts of the Spirit in the Apostles times were not only for a
miraculous confirmation of the Doctrine's Divine Original, and for a testimony
of their designation to the work of planting the Gospel, but for enabling them
to their work. Tongues indeed, S. Paul tells us, were for unbelievers; but
prophesying was for believers and their edification. Indeed the miraculous way
of conveyance and the wonderworking power, was partly for attestation to the
truth of Christian revelation. But withal they were enabled for the carrying
on the work of the Gospel by gifts given from above. To be (...). 1. able as
well as willing to teach, was the condition of a Bishop in S. Paul's time. and
he exhorts to seek gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1. Then there was the Holy Unction, and
that not needless. By the way I shall propose to examination, whether S.
John's, Ye have received the anointing, may not relate to this enablement of
the primitive Pastors and Teachers: and so be far enough from concluding any
unnecessariness of a Ministry. For S. John writes against False Apostles, and
may very probably be thought to direct his Epistle to the Christian Churches,
as a collection of Pastors and people. Ye need not (says he) any new
Instructor, new Revealer, or explainer of revelation, since you have among you
in your Churches the Divine Unction, and the Spirit of God directing and
enabling your Presbytery constituted by Apostolical Ordination. You have
received, is very true, though every individual member of the Church had it
not, but by interest in the Pastors. But let the able judge.

2. Gifts and enablements are as necessary, nay more, now then then. There is
the same need of instructing, reproving and convincing of gainsayers,
demonstrating the truth of the Gospel by Scripture, and answering objections
against it. Besides that our remoteness from the Apostles (who in difficulties
might then be readily consulted) and the ambiguity essential to the plainest
writings, with the several prepossessions and conceptions of several parts of
Christians, have made the controversies in Divinity almost infinite. Due
consideration, good judgment, and all imaginable accomplishments are little
enough to direct in what is to be preached for the truth of God; and to
distinguish Scripture and Catholic Verity from private conceits and upstart
opinions. For the teachings of the Spirit, they are so diverse in several
pretenders, sometimes so unagreeable to the true meaning of the Word, that we
are very well satisfied in the necessity of S. John's advice, to try the
Spirits. Consider the Apostles speak not in our natural language, and many
passages relate to customs now obsolete and History of those times not
mentioned by any Inspired Writer. Do not some proofs from the old Testament
seem to proceed upon some then-received traditional expositions?

The gifts then necessary to the preaching and explaining of the Gospel (as so)
are still as necessary to that office, and the more for the ceasing of
miracles. Heathens now must be convinced by rational evidence of the Divinity
of our revelation. Doubtless, in this age Learning is necessary, when Atheism
begins to creep up in the Church and to our-face Christianity. And how nearely
related Atheism and Enthusiasme are, and how subservient each to other, is
well observed by that judicious and faithful servant of God and the Truth, Mr.
More, in his preface to that most effectual Antidote against Atheism.

3. Acquired gifts are many of them for substance the same with those then
conferred by the Spirit. The revelation of the matter by them then published,
we have in our sacred Records; and 'twere as ration all for these men to bid us
expect the Gospel truth too in an extraordinary way of discovery. What we read
is what the Apostles preached, and our Ministers (as the then-Teachers) preach
according to the sound or saving form of words delivered to them by the
Apostles, now in writing, as then also by word of mouth. The other enablements
given to them as preachers and publishers of this doctrine for enabling them in
their duty, were but the raising and directing their natural faculties in
order to clearing up the truth to themselves and others. And this is the
design and effect of a great part of Learning. Indeed if natural parts be
necessary to a Minister, let our Adversaries understand that Logic,
Metaphysics and Rhetoric are but rectifiers and perfecters of natural
endowments; and then tell us, why the perfecting and rectifying of natural
parts is useless and unnecessary. I am bold to repeat, that the maintainers of
this dispute against Learning, understand not what it is, but judge by their
own undigested notions and rude shadows of Learning.

4. Acquired gifts are the gifts of the Spirit, though not from its miraculous
operation. Studiousness and a blessing upon it are the gifts of Divine
Providence in the World and especially in the Church. Sure the diverse way of
conveyance, and the difference of ordinary and extraordinary vary not the
nature of the things. What was created by God, produced still after its kind,
though here was generation instead of creation. It is strange the gracious
gifts of God should loose their esteem, because they are not bestowed in a way
of miracle.

5. Miraculous gifts were given upon account of the Apostles exigency. It
pleased God in his wisdom to make use of the simplicity and unlearnedness of
the Apostles: and that to magnify his great power, in those miraculous
abilities infused into them from Heaven. So God chose David from a Shepherd to
be King, and furnished him with Kingly abilities. Yet is this a warrant to
choose Governors of the meanest condition and knowledge, because God is able to
give them the spirit of Wisdom and Government? That miraculous gifts are
ceased, for ought I can hear, is yet very palpable. Amongst us that are
Christians, two reasons may be given. First, unbelief is ceased. The Faith of
the Gospel is become a presupposition to our preaching, people being instructed
in it from their youth: and the primitive miracles are generally embraced for
true. Secondly; there is plentiful provision in the ordinary providence of
God, and then I know no ground for any faith to expect a miraculous supply.
Suppose any of our Adversaries preach to Welchmen, being themselves English. Do
not they learn the language? Yet there was the gift of Tongues. Whether this
were a permanent gift or no, I enquire not. If not, the Apostles sure used
humane industry when they preached to people of another language. Healing was a
gift; yet, I hope a Christian may study Physic. Then for Heathens, and
Miracles being requisite for a testimony to them, consider that there is
rational moral evidence, for the Gospel Truth and Christianity comes not with
that disadvantage, being a religion of a great part of the World. Miracles
beside being then necessary, the more for the inconsiderablenesse of the
Revealers in their persons, and the paucity of the Professors; a few
contemptible men in outward appearance contradicting all the rest of the World.
I shall only add, 1. That a great part of the Apostles knowledge was by
attendance upon Christ and converse with him, and from his expounding the
Scriptures after his resurrection, i. e. in a way of humane diligence and
industry. 2. Where ever God found gifts, he made use of them, as in S. Paul,
without any superfluous repeating the same by extraordinary endowments; which
further proves that the primitive gifts were many of them for a supply to the
Apostles illiterate education, who though called in Ignorance, were sent out
with the reality and eminency of Learned Accomplishments.

6. What Learning S. Paul speaks against, is condemned by Learning it self.
Philosophy, or the then-Philosophy, opposed Reason as well as the Gospel. The
place of Col. 2. answers it self. Philosophy according to the traditions of men
and the principles of the World, the Philosophy of the Sects, Philosophical
quirks and subtilties and ungrounded dreams and fancies concerning Angels and
the like, is nothing to genuine Philosophy proceeding upon true principles of
nature, i. e. God's discovery of himself to our understandings by the light of
Reason and works of Creation. The Sophistical, captious and wrangling deceit,
this that is called Philosophy but indeed was vain deceit, is as much declaimed
against by the sober Philosophers of the same Age. Nay, what better moral
provision in pursuance of the Apostles caution, not to be deceived by vain
Philosophical deceit, then for Ministers to be well able to discover to people
the cunning Sophistry and delusion of men that thus delight to lead captive the
multitude? Then for the glarous, painted and ranting Rhetoric of those times,
if used in the matters of God, it offends against the main principle of
Rhetoric to keep a decorum and speak suteably to the matter. Lofty towrings of
fancy, fawning words, and vainly-garnish'd expressions, neither fitting the
capacity of a popular audience, nor becoming the Majesty of a God and the
nobility of Divine revelation. Yet true raisedness of expression, a majesticall
state, and artificial and genuine insinuations, with most patheticall
captivatings of the mind, are obvious in Scripture: as obvious as fantastical
cloud-reachings are affectedly frequent in our new Formalists Enthusiasm, who
are truly those (...) in 2 Pet. 2. 18.

7. All Learning is advantageous, a great deal necessary to an able publisher
of the Truth and Governor of the Church. Tongues, and the gift of
Interpretation and Utterance, with skill to collect from Scripture easily speak
their necessity. Observe here, there are some things common to a Minister and
secular employments; and to this no wonder if secular and humane abilities be
necessary. Thus, to be able to speak aptly, intelligibly, consequently, and
suteably to the disposition and capacity of his hearers, is the Apostolical
way of preaching: and yet it is the method of secular Oratory. Dependence of
Truth upon Truth, Conclusions upon Principles is discoverable in Scripture
revelation, and is of the same nature that is in other Sciences, proceeding in
the way of natural light acting upon and in revealed Truth. Scripture is
writing, and Scripture-interpretation proceeds by the general rules of
interpretation of Authors, with whom it partakes likewise in Language, and
helps to understand the sense. For my part, I know no one piece of true and
real (whether solid or delightful) Learning that has not considerable
advantage in it to the rendering a Minister more able to understand, explain
and confirm the truth of Christian Religion. To be able to search into the true
and natural sense of Apostolical writings, to discern the excellency,
consonancy and true authenticknesse of Scripture, to examine and draw
consequences from it, to see the agreement of reason and revelation, to view
the appearances of God amongst the Heathen, their self-condemnednesse,
attestations to part of truth and defectivenesse, to take notice of God in the
Creation, and distinguish miracles from impostures, to observe God's Providence
in the World and Church, to see the several breakings forth of light and
overcastings of darkness in the Church, to make out the Truth by full
evidence, to explain and order the several Truths of revelation, and have a
distinct and more then popular notion of them, so as to be able to answer
Atheistical and unbelieving cavills, to converse with Christians in all Ages
and make use of their experiences and discoveries, to know God, our selves, and
men in order to a convenient application of our selves unto them for their
good: these are some of the ends of Learning, that thus and otherwise enlarges,
quickens and imbetters the natural faculties of the Soul. And if all this
contains any thing of usefulness to a Minister of the Gospel, we may safely
add that

Conclusion IV. The Universities, or places that offer opportunity, advantages
and encouragement to humane Learning, and that conjoined with and subservient
to Divinity, are so far from being Antichristian, that they are of apparent
necessity to the Church of Christ. And truly weigh but the concernment of
Christian Religion to the peace and happiness of a Nation, there can be (to
say no more) no greater prudence in a Magistrate (much more if professing
eminency in Christian Religion) then to lay it self out in all just and lawful
means for the conserving and propagating of it; encouraging and helping forward
those who devote their time and studies to be thus serviceable to their
Country.

I shall answer but two objections. 1. The Idleness and Luxury of the
University. 2. The diversity of Opinions and Errors.

To the First, It is no great wonder, if in these times of Liberty, when the
authority and discipline of the University has been weakened by some such
spirits amongst us as our Adversaries, when Learning seems to most to be in so
despairing a condition, not much wonder if there be some miscarriages in so
great confluence of Youth, which is very seldom considerate, and has hot
blood to suppress. But I call all that know Cambridge (and I question not but
others can testify as much for Oxford) all that judge by nothing of faction
and prejudice, that there is no collection of men this day in England, that can
show more eminent examples of true Worth, real, sober Piety and Religion, then
are in our University. Nor are the enormities so many or so unsuppress'd by
discipline, as discontent and malice would bear the World in belief.

To the Second, I wondered to hear such an argument; You Scholars cannot agree
in the truth: Ergo what need Universities? It is a strange accusation, that we
are a Society of Men. We confess we seek after truth, and if we err, it is
because we are fallible. Nay, that we differ, is an argument that we set our
selves to seek the truth, and not lazily conspire in that which, for ought we
can tell certainly, may be absolute falsehood: which is all, I doubt, a perfect
unity of opinion will amount to, till it be the fruit of an universal
infallibility of spirit. Rather the ingenuity of an indifferent and free
enquiry into Truth, is true Nobleness. I am sure it is the likeliest way to
discover Truth, to have contrary opinions debated here, where there are men
able to see how far each agree with other and how much they differ, and to
examine each other's grounds: Learning too having civilized their spirits to
calm and moderate debates, without any thing of that passionate heart-burning
and inveteratenesse, which accompanies dispute among common people. I am sure
the enemies of Learning are at a far greater distance, bateing their
joint-persecuting of the Ministry and Scholars. We can pity them, but not
fear them, whilst next to the Providence of God, with thankful
acknowledgement of our protection, we dare commit our selves fully to the
dispose of our wise and worthy Governors: appealing in the mean time, for the
usefulness of our Universities in the present constitution, to all whom
Avarice, Envy, or Fanatic Frenzy have not perfectly blinded.

FINIS.

