Seria Exercitus Series.

THE Army Anatomized: OR, A brief and plain Display of the humble, honest and
religious Actings of the General Sir Tho. Fairfax, and his Army of Saints,
toward the good of the King and Parliament, and the whole Kingdom, since the
famous Victory, at NASEBY, June 14. 1645.

Occasioned upon the serious Consideration of 4 SCRIPTURE PROPERTIES of every
true Saint and Christian Soldier.

1. Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you ( it is our Saviors own
Golden-Rule) even so do ye unto them. MAT. 7.12. 2. Not to do Any Evil (a
general-Rule, which admits of no exception, either in Kings, or in Commanders)
that Good may come thereof. ROMANS 3.8. 3. To abstain from every Appearance of
Evil; much more from every Apparent Evil. 2 THESE. 5.22. 4. Do Violence, or
Wrong, to no man; neither accuse Any man falsely. LUKE 3.14. Now, how Sir THO.
FAIRFAX's Army of Saints and Christian Soldiers have performed All These, or
any of These, shall be faithfully and plainly declared, in 20. following
Observations.

By a loyal Lover of Peace and Truth; But a hearty Contemner of Sedition and
Schism.

JUDE 11. Woe unto them, for, they have gone in the way of Kain; and ran
greedily after the Error of Balaam, for Reward; and perished in the Gainsaying
of Core. Printed in the Year, 1647.

THE ARMY ANATOMIZED.
AFter the most renowned fight and glorious victory, which the great Lord of
Hosts and God of Battles gave to our Army at Nafeby (wherein, although, next
under God, we must give the Noble General, Sir THO. FAIRFAX, the prime part of
the honor thereof, both for his magnanimity and prudence therein: Yet next unto
him, I dare be bold, most justly, to give as great a share of the honor of that
glorious Victory, to valiant and faithful Colonel Rossiter, a brave
Presbyterian Commander, in the Northern parts of the Kingdom, as Any Commander,
in the whole Army deserved: Who, in the very nick of a necessitous time of the
battle, fell in, with his fresh and valiant Troops of Horse, upon the Kings
forces, and by Gods great mercy, gave an admirable turn to the day, for us. And
after the happy recovery of the West into the Parliaments hands (wherein, also,
God honored another most renowned Presbyterian Commander, even noble and ever
to be honored Major General MASSEY, with as full a portion of the honor of that
Conquest, as any the loudest boasting Independent or Sectary in the whole Army
(not one excepted) could justly challenge to himself, so whom, let me here all
this one more brave badg of honor (the rather, because he now most unhappily
lies under a cloud of Englands gross ingratitude to him) which, reverend Mr
Vines, in his famous and most learned Funeral Sermon for the ever to be
renowned Lord Genesis Essex, p. 33. most deservedly engraved upon him, in these
words. That, renowned Governor of Gloucester, whom I may (borrowing Cicero's
word) most justly call, under God, Hujus Regni Stator, The Stator of the Kingdom
of England; Because he took the Enemies horse by the bridle, in his full
carreer, and bravely stopped him; and being resolved to sell that City to them by
the candle, he was (by the renowned Lord General ESSEX) rescued before the
candle dropped out, and thus preserved the said City, and the whole Kingdom
therewith. And (to proceed now) after the reducing of Exeter and Oxford to the
Parliaments power (but upon such terms and conditions, as (had not Cromwell too
boldly urged) the Parliament would never have condescended unto or owned) O,
had the Army, now, spontaneously tendered themselves in a Christian manner (as
that most excellent Author of the Religious Retreat, most worthily notes) to
lay down their Arms, and be disposed of by the Parllament, they had crowned the
Gospel and themselves with perpetual praise and honor. But, the Army (being
upon those Conquests too much idolized, almost by every body, in City and
Country) began, contrariwise (with the strong help of the Schismatics in the
Parliament, and by the crafty assistance of Mimical M. Hugh Peter's (that
blazon-sac'd and blattering Hocus Pocus, or blustering jugler of the drmy) who,
together, with his other two Brethren in iniquity, Dell and Saltmarsh (a triple
knot of Jesuitical Incendiaries and Firebrands of Sedition and Rebellion)
preaching or rather prattling to the Army, among many other their poisonous
positions, That the Earth is the Saints and the fullness thereof; and that they
are (now) Lords and Masters of all; and thus encouraging the Army to put forth
their horns of pride, oppression, hypocrisy and notorious dissimulation, for
the better acting and conniving of their great Design of Universal Toleration
of all Opinions, Parity and Community of all men's estates over the whose
Kingdom, and Liberty of Conscience in all Religions; notwithstanding that Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and the rest of the Army had oftentimes, and especially in one
of their late Declarations, promised and protested that they would not have to
do with matters of Religion, either concerning Presbytery or Independency, but
would refer themselves, therein, to the wisdom and piety of the Parliament. Yet
notwithstanding, this grand Design has been carried on with so much craft and
industry, by the Sectaries both in the Army, Parliament, City and Country, that
it was high time for the honest and plain hearted Presbyterian-Party to look
about them (and, O that they had done so, indeed, and been as zealous for their
God, their Covenant and Country, in time, as they should, and (then) might have
been) and that, especially, considering that the Army of our loyal Brethren of
Scotland was most honestly and peaceably upon their departure out of the
Kingdom, but, this our own Army remaining, still, in a strong body among us,
although no visible Enemy appeared (save only Chymards and imaginary Enemies of
our own contriving) to oppose them. The City of London, therefore (that main
eyesore to all the Designs, formerly, of Royal Malignants, and (now of late)
of Seditious Sectaries) together with many other Counties of the Kingdom,
earnestly and often petition the Parliament, that our Army might be disbanded,
that Presbyterian Church Government might be (as the Parliament had often
promised) established, and that the heavy taxations of the Kingdom (by reason,
especially of the Army, thus, still embodyed) might be eased and ended. But the
City of London, by reason of very many and very strange and unexpected (I am
sure most undeserved) delays herein; especially, if we (as justly we may) call
to mind the Parliaments former promises to live and dye with the City of
London; yet, I say the City was at length necessitated to exhibit to the
Parliament, a most famons, just, deliberate and righteous Remonstrance of
theirs and the Kingdoms many grievances and insupportable disgusts, in high
measure offered unto them by the Independent party in Parliament, and elsewhere,
and especially for the most necessary disbanding of the Army, and for the
settling of their City Militia in the hands and power of such persons as they
might safely conside in; (many Sectaries and neutrally disaffected persons
having then crept in among them, or at least, discovered themselves, then, to
be disaffected to the Covenant and Presbyterian Government) the City promising
and assuring their readiness and cheerfulness to raise moneys for the payment
of the Armies arrears, if these things might immediately be done for them and
the Kingdom. For satisfaction to all which the Cities desires (though by the
craft and power of the Independents in the Parliament, that famous
Remonstrance, and their other most excellent, necessary and honest Petitions
were most strangely discountenanced and seandalized, yea and voted to be
scandalous papers, yet) many fair promises were made unto them, but, still, from
time to time, obstructed and retarded, and nothing to any purpose done for
them, but the City, yea and the whole Kingdom was most grossly baffled and
deluded by the Sectaries and Independent party and their noutrakadherents.

Thus we see; When God intends; for Sin, a ^and to lash,
Men's sheltring Hopes and Helps turnall to trash.


But now in the first place, Army of Saints (so, most falsely, called, by proud
Sectaries themselves and their seduced Ones) And herein also not to rake in the
dunghill of its most deboyst deportment (for the generality of them) in most
places where they are quartered, continually complained of, almost, by all that
see and truly know them and have had experience of them; both for their most
beastly drunkenness, even to vomiting and death, in their drunken vomits; for
their frequent andmost fearful cursing and swearing by no less oaths than dam
me, wounds, blood and other Cavalierian oaths; their most profane sporting,
playing, and fighting deperately one with another, even on our Fast-days, yea
and Lords-days too; and for their most abusive, insolent and proud refusal of
the moderate, and wholesome diet in poor and mean men's houses, even beyond their
abilities, oftentimes. But, I say, to omit all these to a fitter opportunity,
hereafter, and to take a brief view of the seeming fairest flowers in this
Armies garden, even of their most speciously pretended honest Actings, all
along, of late; And, first, I say, notwithstanding that Cromwell (that fly
Ringleader to all the Armies disobedience and rebellion) had solemnly protested
and promised, oftentimes, even upon his life and honor, in the face of the
whole House of Commons in Parliament, that the Army should and would disband,
and lay down all their arms at the doors of the Parliament, whenever the
House pleased to command them; yet, afterward, when as, upon the many Petitions
of the Kingdom to the Parliament to have the Army disbanded, Both Houses of
Lords and Commous sent to have them disband, they utterly refused so to do,
except they might first have their Arrears paid, and all their own terms and
conditions granted unto them; and amongst them one Condition most destructive
to the Parliament, viz. an Act of Indempuity with the Royal Assent. As for that
late and too stale yea false and frivolous plea of the Armies, that they saw an
absolute necessity of their not disbanding; because they had discovered a most
desperate and dangerous Plot against their Army (as they termed it) and so
consequently against the Parliament and Kingdom; this, I say, was most false,
and frivolous, and they might as well persuade us there were strong, castles
built in the air against them, or any such strange Chymera's of non-Entities,
or things that never were in rerum natura. For, (at this time) there was not
any such thing objected to the Parliament, or then once dreamed of, to be the
cause of their not disbanding, but only their want of Arrears, and an Act of
Indemnity, as aforesaid; neither, to this day, has or can, any such Plot be
proved, or was once mentioned til they (upon this pretense) contrived to accuse
the 11. worthy Parliament Members of a plot, who have (to some of their
faithful friends) taken it on their Salvation, they never had the least thought
of any such plot, and as it may easily be asserted, had no ground or cause to
intend such a plot. And has not Cromwell (who is, I say, believed to be not
only the main Moderator, but Machinator also of this and all other the Armies
principal transactions) has he not here at the first, fairly played the Saint,
and performed his promise to the Parliament?

Secondly, notwithstanding Irelands extreme necessity, Parliaments, still,
earnest importunity and the Armies, still, pretended proclivity to disband, and
to have a part of the Army speedily sent away for poor gasping Ireland relief,
yet (as was remarkably evident in Colonel Hammonds andacious demands, and
articling with the Parliament, upon most arrogant and high terms, ere he would
stir a foot thither; Together with a most Seditious and Traiterous Petition (as
the Par liament it self voted it, which was subscribed by a considerable Party
of the Army) for a combination of not disbanding, except they might have their
own demands and conditions, first granted and confirmed unto them. Yea,
notwithstanding that the Parliament condescended herein also to them, as much
as possibly they could for the present, and had prepared money to pay them as
much of their Arrears as possibly they could, and promised the public faith of
the Kingdom for the rest, in due time. And thus again, they utterly refused to
obey the Parliament, herein also, and would neither disband, nor go to the help
and assistance of that greatly distressed and almost utterly ruinated Kingdom,
for want of our help, whatsoever fair Pretenses and Protestations they made of
Both. And was not here, think you, an humble and honest demeanor of a
Saint-like Army? And, had not these Saints strangely forgotten, here, what they
have often heard, and therefore should the better have remembered, that the
Prophet Samuel (inspired by the holy-Spirit of God) said most truly; 1 Samuel
22.23. To obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken, then the fat of
Rams. For rebellion is as the sin of Witcheraft, and stubborness is as
iniquity and idolatry. Or, can any wise or good man believe, that this was a
Right and Religious way to credit the Gospel, to Crown themselves with the
Title of Saints, or to purchase present or future praises? I surely think not.

Well said King David: Trust not Princes great,
Nor Sons of Men, prone to delude and Cheat.
Thirdly, Parliament (in deep sense of the absolute necessity of the business
of Ireland) had after that, again sent diverse Lords and Commons in person to
the Army (both for the disbanding of it, as was still promised, and mightily
now pretended, and days prefixed for the disbanding of such and such Regiments
of the Army; and for the (seeming) serious appropriating, and preparing of such
and such forces of Horse and Foot, to be speedily dispatched away for Ireland:
Yea, and money procured, (at least 200000. l. of the City of London, who still
were ready to help the Parliament and Kingdom at a dead lift) and that together
with those Lords and Commons, they had sent also Major General Skippon, and
Major General Massey, whom the Parliament had thereupon ordained Commanders in
chief of all the Forces in the Kingdom of Ireland, both Horse and Foot; and
notwithstanding, that diverse Commanders and Soldiers were willing to accept
that service, and to go under the Command of those brave Generals; yet the
prime Commanders and Officers of the Army, laid unremoveable blocks and
obstructions, again, in the way to hinder this work; and unless they might
change and choose their own Generals, Commanders and Officers, themselves, they
would not stir (by any means, or fair entreaties) nor did not go to this very
day. See here then still, the charity of the Saints to their distressed
brethren; and their humble obedience to their supreme Masters, the Parliament,
whom thus contemptuously and highly they affront, and what could they do more,
then (as that excellent Author of the Religious R^treat says) to contemn God
himself by such most palpable obstinacy and unparalleld Rebellion!

Fourthly, the Army thus now lying lazily still among us, Parliament to disband,
but thus obstinately, and disobediently refusing so to do, how could they be
otherwise looked upon, then (as the foresaid Author said) as Challengers of, or
Champions against the Kingdom: And for no little confirmation of this just
jelousy, let us take notice of that most notable and remarkable affront, yea,
Traitorous attempt of this Saint-like and Submissive Army to the Parliament,
acted at Holmby in Northampton Shier (where the King, then, lay and abode by
special order of Parliament) by one Joyce, a beggarly Botcher or Tailor by
profession, and but a Reformade Trooper in the Army, etc. who (by a Commanded
Troop of 2 or 300, Hourse, sent out by the Agitators, and (as it is believed by
Cromwels direction too, not known to the General till afterward) most
desperately and traitorously undertook to come suddenly to Holmby, and there
most audaciously, assaulted and set upon the King in his very Bedchamber,
scarcely suffering his Majesly to take his rest that night, and so besetting
the House with a strong armed guard of his own, Col. Graves, who was placed
there by authority of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, being for his own peace
and safety forced to fly away, his own Soldiers (having been before hand
debauched by the Agitators) basely deserting him) the next mourning betimes he
violently forced the King out of his bed, seized on his Royal person (and all
this without, yea, contrary to the power and authority of the Parliament) and
forcibly carried him and the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, as prisoners along
with him into the Army; where most Traitorously they carried his Majesty
Captive to and fro with them wheresoever they rambled, just almost as
Tamberlain carried Amurathes the great Turk up and down in triumph, in an
Iron-Cage.

Thus have we seen Pesants in pomp to ride,
Whiles Princes poorly lackey it by their side.
Fifthly, Armies General himself, (though when he heard of this most Traiterous
prank, thus acted by such an obscure and inferior fellow; he seemed utterly to
disclaim the knowledge of it, assent unto it, or assistance in it, yet)
although, as General, he might or should have executed Martial-Law upon that
Traitor Joyce, and some of his chief accomplices, and instantly to have hanged
them up (the best way to have cleared his integrity there in) for so Traitorous
a fact, and unsufferable an affront against the King and Parliament, and for so
audatious an attempt and motion in the Army, without his Generals order or
allowance: yet was so far from it, as that instead of being presently hanged
(as he most justly deserved) he has bin advanced (as is generally reported and
affirmed) to a Captains place at least, and is made one of the Agitators of the
Army. At this time also, Cromwell had got the Parliament (though with much a do
upon his engagement for the Armies obedience) to vote that no forces should be
raised against the Army, nor any thing done to distate them, just when the King
was (thus) ceased on, and stolen away without leave. And he and Peter's being
come to the Army, at their Randezvouze near Newmarket, told his Regiment and
others of the Army, that this was the best days work that ever England saw,
meaning thus, the Kings being thus got into their hands. And yet for all this,
the General (in a Declaration published under his own hand in print) excused
the whole Army from the knowledge of these things, although it was credibly
assured by some of his own Regiment, that the party of Horse, aforesaid, that
took the King, was of 8, out of every Troop in the Army. Only thus much, I must
ingenuously acknowledge of the Generals ingenuity, that he was willing to
dispose of the King back again, as the Parliament should order it, till Cromwell
(as it is generally reported) altered it otherwise. And were not here now to most
Sanctimonious Acts of humility and justice in this Army of Saints, so
arrogantly and audaciously in a most high measure to affront the Parliament in
thus, not only wresting the King most violently out of the Parliaments power
and custody; but so highly encouraging the fact, as to manifest to the whole
world that high treason and boldest rebellion, are no criminal offenses but
famous Virtues in this Sir Thomas his Army of Saints.

Sixthly, after all this, the noble Lord Damforlin, Scottish Commissioners,
appointed by both Parliament of England and Scotland, to be one of the
Attendants, on the King^ person, as a Commissioner, was most highly affronted,
and much abused by a party of the Saints of this Army, who now under Whalty,
boldly guarded the King, and would not suffer him to speak with his Majesty (as
was fit he should) but when they pleased, and as they pleased, and they must
hear whatsoever he had to say to the King, touching any private businesses, and
thus at last drove him away from his attendance. Yea, and the Lord Louderdail
also, coming as a special Messenger or Ambassador to the King from the
Parliament and Estates of Scotland was most insolently abused, by this guard of
the Army of Saints about the King: and even in his bedchamber, where he lay to
take his rest after his journey to the King, and neither suffered to stay
there, nor once to speak with the King to deliver his message, and despatch his
business with the King, but was forced immediately to depart away, without so
much as, once seeing the King. And was not here, then, think you still, a very
humble and honest Saint-like Army, thus to dare to affront all Civil and Moral
Constitutions of Nations and Kingdoms, for just Political purposes and causes
allowed by all Laws of Arms and Nations? and only thus boldly opposed by this
holy humble Independent Army of Saints.

Men prone to Pride, Errors and Heresy,
Reject all Justice, yea Civility.
Seventhly, Independents and Sectaries both in City and Country had, formerly
(but most falsely) vehemently taxed and reviled the Presbyterian Party, from
time to time (and that but only upon mere suppositions and ungrounded
jealousies, for too much complying with the Royalists and Malignant party, both
in subscriptions of Petitions, and other such like Combinations, as things not
to be admitted in point of Conscience, nor to be endured by them. Yet, now that
they have gotten the King into their power and possession, they themselves, not
only most notoriously complywith and give strange allowance to Royalists and
Malignants of all sorts and degrees to come to the King, and to have ordinary
and familiar recourse unto him (which, as you heard before, they utterly denied
to the whole Presbyterian State and Kingdom of Scotland, in their special
Messenger, or Ambassador) but, which is far more transcendently notorious in
this Army of precious and reforming Saints, they also permit most desperately
Malignant Prelatical Doctors of Divinity, the Kings former Chaplains to preach
before him (which they judge, they say, most just and reasonable for the Kings
outward and inward contentment, though against particular orders to the
contrary) and to wait upon him; yea, and which is yet more notorious and
remarkably audacious in them (it being most directly against the Ordinances,
power and authority of the Parliament) they a^^ow unto the King, the
Common Prayer Book, in most full and ample use of it, with all Prelatical
Coremenies in and about it, and the like also is allowed by this Army of
Saints, and Godly party, both at Oxford, and diverse other places, where the
Army quarters; Absolutely contrary, I say, to our solemn and sacred Covenant
and to the Ordinances of Parliament; and, that which, I am sure, the
Presbyterian party neither did, nor in conscience durst allow unto the King
when he was in their guard and custody. And is not this (as the excellent
Auther of the Religious Retreat truly says) to build with one hand and to
pluck down with another, to seem at lest, to set up again, what God and the
State (with much pains and many prayers) would have utterly raced and ruinated
from among us; Surely (as he goes on) when God gives the Kingdom to his Saints,
he will not suffer them to give such large tolerations to sinful humane
inventions in his pure and holy worship, nor, like dogs to return to their old
vomit. This undoubtedly must needs blast the too high esteem of your Army in
the hearts of good men, who verily believe these things cannot be of God. And
this makes all most justly to cry aloud to our honorable Parliament, in these
words, (which that reverend and religions Author gave his Reader in Latin but I
have Englished, thus) Take heed, O take heed, most noble Senators, and Fathers
of your Country, as ye tender the high honor of our eternal God, least whiles
ye seem to settle a present Peace, yea utterly lose an everlasting Peace. And
so say I; Take heed, all ye that deal with Schismatics:
Troy found, in Grecian Gifts, destructive tricks.


Eighthly, This Army of Saints, thus domineering, General, with his Council of
War, and brave (or rather beggarly) Agitators, which, now, make up a pretty
Picture and representation of the three Estates of a Martial petty Parliament
(whereby, we are now in great fear to be mainly governed, if not timely
prevented) begin to prescribe Rules (I had almost said, to make Laws) to the
Parliament, and they must, now, be presently voted and avouched to be the
Parliaments Army and it Thomas Fairfax sole Commander and Disposer of all the
Forts, Cinqueports and strong holds of the Kingdom, and a substantial course
taken to pay them their Arrears with certainty and constancy, from time to
time; But yet, this is not enough (considering all the distoyal service, thus,
already done to and for the Parliament) to make the General, as it were, the
Viceroy, or Sovereign and sole Commander of the whole Kingdom, and to make or
repute the Army, the principal Propugnators and Defenders of the whole Realms
safety and felicity; But Petitions must also be pretended and reported to be
exhibited to the General, and his humble Sainted Army, from all Counties and
Quarters (whereas, in very deed, as it is well known, it was but at most, a
Sectarian blustering plot of some few inponsiderable Anabaptists, Independents
and such like Juggling chismaticks in some few Counties the fixst of those
Petitions to the Army was set on foot at Bechyn in Essex by seditious Mr Salt
marsh) thus to make a huge noise to blind the eyes and daunt the heart, if it
might be, of too credulous people) (...) protection and preservation of their
pretended Peace and Liberties or rather most licientious Libertinism, in their
said Petitions, prossering and promising to the General All their homage and
honor, as to their sole Salvator, in way of bounden gratitude? Yea, and now the
General himself, in his own name (only with the testimony or subscription of
his principal Secretary, Worth-^-rush) sending forth his Deelartaions (alias,
Proclamations, like a King, indeed) both to the Parliament and People, to show
his powerful Demands, or rather, Commands; to all form and degrees of men,
whomsoever, as he sent a very plain and peremptory Summons to the City of
London, that they should give way to or comply with his Armies Proceedings, or
else the blood and misery, that would befall the City, must be upon their own
heads, not upon the Armies. And as they did, especially in August last, 1647,
in a most emment and transcendent manner of boldness, even to the Parliament it
Self, in a book, entitled, A Declaration from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
Proposals agreed on by the Council of the Army, to be presented to the
Parliament, as the Armies desires (or, I say; Commands) to the Parliament for
the settling of a just and lasting Peace; say they, but, so says not God, Esaias
57.21. For, among many most unsufferable and insolent Proposals of turning the
Triennial Parliament, settled by an act of Parliament, into a Biennial, and
that, with such bold and licentious limitations, as they themselves please to
prescribe; regulating our Common-Laws, and Courts of Justice; the Militia of
the whole Kingdom; and generally all matters of highest concernment both by
Land and Sea, in Church and State; yea, I say, these conquering Keisars take
upon them, as it were, to make and manage all Laws almost, and to regulate us
all, according to their humor and pleasure. But, among all the rest, I cannot
(nay, who can choose) but take special notice of their horrible and hellish
impiety against God and true Religion, Proposal 12. page 9. (And so, also, in
their last sort of Proposals, Propos. 9. page 13. against Conformity in
Rellgion) Where they most wickedly desire a repeal of all Acts of Parliament,
or Clauses of any Acts, imposing any penalties upon men or women for not coming
to Church; or for meetings, elsewhere (that is, in private Comers, Houses Shops,
Cellars or Barns) for prayer, or other religious duties, exercises, or
ordinances (that is) of any kind whatsoever; whether, Heretral, Seditious,
Idolatrosu, Plasphemous, yea or Traiterous too, if upon pretense of Religion
(for, there is no exception of any one of these, in that or any other the
Proposals) whereby, men may (thus) run head long to hell, by authority, and no
man dare to molest, or stay them. O most abominable and desperately accursed
Proposal, hateful to God and men! I have read of Alphonsus, King of Aragon, a
famous Prince, who hearing a Gentleman; in his Court, pleading against
Learning, and especially that it was unfit for Courtly Lords and Gentlemen to
be trained up in literature, or to be learned Scholars; he, in high
indignation thereat, cried out, presently, That it was the Voice of an Ox, not
of a man. And, certainly, whosoever (that has the least spark of piety or
grace, and) reads or hears of this most hellish Proposal, must needs most
pathetically cry out, in extreme abhorrency thereof; O the voice of some
accursed Turk or apostate Julian, not of a Saint or professed Christian! Yet,
thus, you see how like most insolent and arrogant Rebels to God and all
Goodness, to Religion and the whole Realm, this Army of Saints dares do or
desire any thing to be done, be it ever so destructive to Christanity or Civil
Policy, their desires they must have granted, per fas aut nofas, what care
they, being Saints and Conquerors of All. Hence, then I conceive, any man may
clearly conclude; that, If monstrous Pride and gross Impiety
Be signs of Saints, These (then) are Saints most high.


Ninthly, But, for the yet more subtle corroboration and strengthening of their
wicked design of an Universal Toleration; the General, the Council of War, and
Agitators (having, thus, as is aforesaid, felt the pulses of the people, in
many places, as they rambled up and down, to be all for Peace and Freedom from
Taxations, and that, almost, upon any conditions) they do first, most illegally
accuse 11. of the most loyal, active and faithful Presbyterian Members of the
House of Commons (and nothing will please them, but a present expulsion of them
out of the Parliament, though the Parliament Voted they could not, either in
Law or Conscience do it) as Complotters or Contrivers of a Second or New War
(the grand Anvil whereon, now, they must hammer and hatch all their subsequent
mischievous plots) thus, by the very name of a Second War (so opposite and
odious to desired peace) to render those worthy Gentlemen, and all that in this
sort, they must, now, hereafter have to do with all, the more odious and
contemptible to all people both in City and Country: Whereas, it is most
apparent to God and the rightly intelligent whole Kingdom, that the Army it
self was the only rise and original cause of all our fears and jealousies of a
Second War, by their so bold and rebellious refusal to disband, at the
Parliaments just Command thereof, as also upon their most notorious denial to
be lessened in their numbers, yea though it were for the most necessitous
helping of the poor gasping and dying Kingdom of Ireland, then, in most sad
distresses, as aforesaid.

Thus, Pride, and Malice, and Impiety,
Are never without deep strains of Policy.
Now, London, also, which had been (O impious ingratitude) even their principal
Foster-Fathers, as I may well say, both, in making them an Army, at the first,
and also in maintaining them, in no small measure, all along, ever since they
were first New medelld to this very day; And the ground of this their quarrel
must be, their secret complotting also with those 11. worthy Members of
Parliament, for the advancing and setting forward of the foresaid Second War,
and, to this end, their procuring of an unjust power (says the Army) from the
Parliament, for the alteration and managing of their own City Militia, thereby
to place and displace, to put in or put out whom they pleased; and that
thereupon they had thrust out of their Militia, diverse precious deserving men
(says the Army) men without all exception, and most worthy to be confided in
(whereas, indeed, they were known Schismatics, some of them preachers, yea
some of them countenancing Paul Bests abominable blasphemies, most of them,
desperate Enemies to our Covenant, and Reformation of Religion, as to the point
of the power of godliness, and of Presbyterian Church Government) and these men
(say they) were thus put out, the better to carry on the wicked Design, (for so
they now termed it) of a Second War, in the City against the Army, and so
consequently against the whole Kingdom, and that the City also secretly listed
Soldiers and conspired with the 11. accused Members and others, to occasion a
fresh effusion of blood in the Kingdom: And, thus, by this abominable lying
Engine, I say, of a Second War, which now they cry out of, in all their
Letters, Declarations and Remonstrances to the Parliament and people, hereby
(as I said before) to cry down all just defense against the Armies intended
All-overtopping-power, and thus to cry up more and more their own most crafty
design of over-mastering all others that durst endeavor to oppose or resist
them, with their still continued and strongly embodied Army; and yet (which, me
thinks, is a most strange madness in men to believe) in all this they must be
accounted the only men of peace in the Kingdom, and the chief protectors of a
Free Parliament, in its power and privileges, and of the peoples Hereditary
Liberties: Whereas, indeed, the clean contrary is most evidently true in them,
they themselves mainly and only intending nothing less than a Second or New
War, in case they may not have their will of the Parliament, in all their
Demands, especially in the point of a Universal Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience for all men; in all religions, they being thus (I say) in a strong
ready body of an Army; And having also (for a most strong confirmation of the
truth of all these premises) brought all their Artillery from Oxford, daily
listing Soldiers of all sorts, Cavaliers and others, possessing themselves most
strongly of all our most considerable Holds, Forts and Castles; And thus, I
say, most evidently resolving to fight with all that oppose them, and to get
into their power, by force, what they cannot by fraud and hypocrisy. And thus
the poor City of London has hatched up a bird to pick out her eyes; or like the
Countryman in the apologue, revived a Snake to infest and infect his whole
House; as afterward we shall yet more apparently perceive, and show you, in a
yet more fit place.

If (ever) Any; Schismatics (indeed)
In black Ingratitude, do All exceed.
Eleventhly, For the more exquisitely ripening of their design, London into
their clutches, which done, they (and that most wisely) made account all was
theirs. Now, this design was carried on with as much egregious craft and
Iesuitical subtilty, as possibly could be. For, first, the pretense must be,
that those 11. Members of Parliament, accused by them, must be speedily
suspended the House of Commons, and not suffered to sit there til they had
cleared themselves of the accusations, commenced against them: But, the
Parliament, voting the contrary, it presently threatened by this their obedient
Army of Saints, that if it were not done (and presently too) as they demanded,
they should be forced to exercise and make use of that power which was in their
hands, and in plain English, to compel the Parliament to it, whether they would
or not; and for that purpose, to bring their whole Army, toward the City and
Parliament; which, how boldly they brought to pass, and brought their stools
with them to make themselves unwillingly welcome to the City, you shall hear and
see anon in its due place.

Then, viz. the forementioned, quarrel begun against the City of London,
touching their Militia; This also must again be most stiffly insisted on and
revived, and those precious men (as the Army called them) so trustily to be
consided in, who had been put forth, as aforesaid, must, by all means, be again
restored to their power and places in the City-Militia; or else the Army (of
modest and patient, Saints, who loved not to meddle with other men's matters)
should be compelled by their power to force and constrain the City also
thereunto. But, withal (good Readers) this must be considered, by the way; That
all the Armies warlike preparations to come, now, to the City, their most busy
listing of Soldiers from all parts, to make their Army the more numerous and
form lable, their securing of Windsor Gastle, seizing upon and securing the
Blook houses at Gravesend, their summoning of the Trained Bands of Essen and
Hartford-shire to rise with them; their bringing on of all their Artillery, and
all other warlike provisions and preparations to besiege, assault and storm
the City (if they opposed the Army; and every preparation for self-defence,
which, God and nature afford to every creature against wrong and injury offered
or intended to them) all those preparations, I say, must be believed not to be
for any hurt to the City, or plunder, or spoil thereof. Provided, still, that
the City stirred not to make any defensive preparations against them, for that
must be clearly, judged by the Army to be the only cause of a Second War,
intended by the City, either in listing Soldiers, Horse or Foot, especially not
to meddle with or entertain into their pay or service, any Reformadoes (which
the Army it self did and daily do) whom, the Army of Saints and Sectaries in
the City had most vilely abrised, and who therefore were the more likely to do
the City the better and more faithful service against the Army; but, if the
City did any of these things, this, on the Cities part would, I say, be the
only means to make a Second War, and to occasion the inevitable essusion of
blood, which the Saint-like Army, notwithstanding their mighty preparations for
War (on the one side) most earnestly and piously, like pune Saints, indeed,
protested against.

Thus, still, these Saints by sly pretenses fair,
Both Parliament and City do ensnare.
Again, in the thirteenth place, Army of Saints may be yet more generally and
authoritatively called [over the whole Kingdom] and accounted the only
Peacemakers, and Conservators of the Parliaments riviledges, and Commons
Liberties [as was touched before in the 8. Observation] and so grisp the whole
power of the Kingdom into their fists, and that, both by Sea and by Land, if
possibly it might be; the Army, most audaciously, sends to the Parliament, and
most craftily desire [or rather command] that a Vote, and thereupon, an
Ordinance of Parl. might be past that they may be entitled, and acknowledged
the Parliaments Army, and so the Parliament to see that they may be paid, from
time to time, all their past, present, and suture Arrears, notwithstanding
their Free Quarter [which must be reckoned for in due time, even ad Graecas
Galendas] wheresoever they lay, and the body of their Army hereupon removed;
which was accordingly, and immediately voted in Parliament. And now also Sir
Thomas Fairfax was made Generalissimo of all the Forces, Forts, Castles,
Cinque Ports, and total strength of all the Kingdom, and under him, his Council
of War, and brave Statesmen of the Kingdom, the Mechanic Agitators of the
Army, are thus become Lords and Princes over all. And, hereupon, in requital of
these favors and kindnesses of the Parliament to the Army, which has made them
the Army of the Parliament, they turned it quite the clean contrary way, and
made our Parliament the Parliament of the Army; That is, in plain English, The
Master is become his Servants Servant. And thus now, that no less old than true
Adagy is here in this our precious Army of Saints most exquisitely fulfilled;
Asperins humili nihil est cum surgat in altum. Which may be thus Englisht.

If, once, you set a Beggar on horseback,
He Will ride to the Devil, or his neck shall crack.
In sum, Both Houses (in grateful requital for this the Parliaments favor to
this Army of Saints) was made upon them, by a bold Declaration sent by the Army
unto them, in these words, or to this effect: That if they might not have the
things they desired, granted unto them, by such a day, they must and would
accomplish them, by such extraordinary ways as God and present providence
should put them upon. Only here was all the difference twixt this grand force
and the other of the Apprentices, that, the armies was at a distance, by a
great Army with guns, pikes and swords, the other, by a company of young men,
at the Parliament doors, but all naked and unarmed, only crying out with their
tongues and entreaties not to be accounted traitors for defending themselves
against a threatening Army. And about this time the Army was at Watford, with
their great guns and formidable artillery, and many of them within 10. miles of
London which did not a little affright many of the Members away shortly after,
and so by these means and subtle devices, the Houses of Parliament became
their own, and they craftily handled them even as they listed, almost in every
thing they pleased. For, notwithstanding the Parliaments commands (now, their
only titular or nominal Lords and Masters) sent unto the Army of Saints (their
supposed Servants) more than once or twice, to keep off from quartering near
the City of London, by at least 30 or 40 miles distance, which, for a little
season they had done; And notwithstanding the City of Londons, now, choosing
out and sending Commissioners to treat with the Army (for, to such a height it
was now grown, as if the City and Army had been two distinct advers Parties) to
keep a supposed and pretended fair correspondency between them, for peaceable
conclusions; yet, the Army (grown, now to a high pitch of power, and now)
therefore more apt, especially by their active Agitators, to pick quarrels,
both with the Parliament, their Parents and Masters, and with the City, their
Foster-Fathers, if their licentious humors of Pride and Schism, were crossed ever
so little) holding themselves much affronted and still much discontented that
the aforesaid 11. accused Members, were not yet put out of the House of Commons
(though most unlawful to be done) that so the Schismatical Party in that House
might carry on their grand Design of an accursed Toleration, with the fuller
and freer concurrence of Votes and Suffrages, when once it was ripe enough to
be discust and s^and in the House; And because, also, the City of London would
not consent to alter the power of their Militia, nor lie altogether, idle,
secure, and supine, from making some just preparations for the defense of their
often and highly menaced and threatened City to be plundered, burned and made a
prey to this Army of Saints (which defense, God knows, at best, was very little
and inconsiderable) but especially by occasion of a Petition and Engagement,
whereinto diverse most honest and religious peaceable Citizens, Seamen and
Apprentices of London and the parts about it (only by reason of the Armies
often and insolent threats and formidable preparations for war, and frequent
encroachments and approachings near unto their City) had entered into, to stand
to their Covenant (which above all, this Army of sweet Saints could not endure)
made with God and the three Kingdoms, to endevor with their lives and fortunes,
the defense of their true Religion, City and Liberties, to preserve the Kings
person and dignity (now in great danger, in both, he being in the Armies wicked
custody) and to bring his Majesty to the City and Parliament for the perfecting
of a happy and wel-grounded Peace, and Truth together, and all these, upon such
terms and conditions as the Commissioners of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
of England and Scotland should see most fit and salubrious for the best good of
all the three Kingdoms; and this Petition and Engagement they purposed
(according to their honest and orderly custom of proceeding in these kinds) to
present to their Common Council, with their humble and peaceable desires that
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, if they liked and allowed thereof
would be pleased in all their names, and, then, jointly of the whole City to
present the same to the Par. for their ratification and establishment of their
desires therein. But, the Army, instantly, having private intelligence thereof
(by some false brethren, even whiles this business was but in the Embrio of it)
with all possible speed posts away their most imperious Demands (rather indeed,
Commands) to the Parliament, forthwith to suppress, this desperate and
dangerous, yea, this bloody and treasonable design (as thus they most craftly
and frightingly termed it) and upon this, to change the City Militia, which was
done all in one day; and to call the Contrivers and Actors therein, and main
Abettors thereof, into severe question, as traitorous fomentors of a Second or
New War (because, indeed, such a just defense as this was like to prove, and
would, as they justly feared, mightily impede, yea, utterly break the neck of
the Armies grand Design) or else they with all their Martial power, must of
necessity come up presently, and compel and enforce it. Besides, to aggravate
their accusations against the City, the Army had gotten perfect intelligence,
that (about or somewhat before this time) the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens
of London, had sent Letters and subscribed them with their names, into Kent
etc. to crave those their neighbors assistance to help to defend the City, if
force were made against it by the Army; which, it seems became a foul offense
in the City, and most worthy to be severely punished, (...) Treasonable Design
against the Army: just, as if a man, his house being in danger of fire to be
burned down, or of thieves and robbers coming to assault him in his house,
should send forth presently to his neighbors, to aid and assist him against
those dangers and just fears of his, and for this cause the thieves and robbers
should make a sore complaint of him, how they were wronged thereby, and procure
the Master of the house and his Servants (or associates) to be punished for
thus endevoring to save and preserve their house and goods from rapine and
ruin.

If ever, now, Sea Saints turned Sinons vile,
A Parliament and City to beguile.
Hereupon, Parliament (being now apparently forced by the (...) of this
overpowering Army, together with the help of the Independents and Secturies in
the House of Commons) voted all those that were Author of and Actor in the said
Petition and Engagement (though but intended) to be Traitors, and to be
proceeded against with the lost of their lives undestates; And presently
painted and published an Ordinance of Parliament to have them all (...) all
over the City, by Drum and Trumpet; At which most strange proceedings of the
Army and Parliament the City in general being mightily discontented, presently
sent the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of London, to petition the
Parliament for a present removal of diverse grievance^, and chiefly for an
instant revocation, or repealing of that (conceived, unjust) Ordinance
aforesaid. But, especially, very many Apprentices of London, and young men
(with diverse others mixed mong them) went also the same day to Westminster in a
tumult^ous manner (as the Army called it, though multitudes petitioning make
not a tumult, but have been very, much countenanced and encouraged, yea and
approved of by a Declaration of the Parliaments formerly s^t forth.) But
therein, also, the honest Citizen were most wickedly abused by many Cavaliers,
Malignants, y^^ and Sectaries too, who mixed themselves among the honestly
young men, the more to abuse them and their work, but all of them unarmed, thus
urging the Parliament for the instant nullifying of the said Ordinance, and so
much the more vehemently they urged the immediate performance hereof, because
they then (...) (nay heard for certain) a present adjournment of the Parliament
was resolved on, and therefore they pressed the more mightily upon Both Houses
of Parliament (whiles they were yet ^^ sitting) with earnest cries and
entreaties, to all that past in or out, for the nulling of that severe and (as
they humbly conceived) most unjust Ordinance of Parliament against them, only
for action (as they conceived and in their consciences were assured, according
to their Covenant; which their desires, being, at last, though indeed, with
much ado, obtained in Both Houses, and the Apprentices, thereupon, being, now,
contentedly departed all to their own homes; yet, upon this, the Parliament
being by Both Houses adjourned, the 2 Speakers of Both Houses of Parliament,
and other Members thereof, both L^^^s and ^om^ns, presently deserted the Parl,
and slew away, yet the disorder and tumult was raised (after all the Petitions
were granted) merely o^ ^ainly, I say, by Sectaries of the City and Army, and
by sundry eminent Cavaliers, as can be proved, (as in mighty pretended fear)
(...) our Army of Saint, for Safeguard and Sanctuary, But, the rest of the
Parliament at Westminster returning and sitting still, on the day de^^mined by
the whole Parliament, where finding their two Speakers to have deserted the
Parliament, they instantly chose them two other Speakers, and fearlesly (as
they might indeed) according to their duty to the Kingdom, proceeded in their
work and way. Besides all this, to make the matter yet more unhappily offensive
to them and us, and to make the City seem, at least, in pretense, more foul and
faulty; It pleased the Lord, that it so fell out, that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council of London, hearing for certain of the Armies extraordinary
hastening toward London, with all the strength they were able to make ready,
especially of their horse, their foot and artillery hastening also after with
all expedition, and raising the Countries to follow them and join with them;
and (therefore) I say, sitting in Council at their Guild Hall for preparation
of defense against the anger of the Army; in the said Guild Hall, a fudden
quarrel was raised there, by a most rude rubble of Anabaptists, and such like
seditious Sectaries and Schismatics, under a color and pretense of presenting
a Petition to the said Common Council for a colourable-peace, of their own
making; which rude multitude so unsufferably and basely abused valiant and
wel-deserving Major General Poyntz, a brave and victorious Commander of the
Parliaments in the North of England, who at that time came forth of the Militia
(then also sitting in the said Guild Hall) thinking to pass peaceably through
the Hall, but, I say, was so intolerably abused by the Sectaries, who as soon
as ever they saw him come forth, cried out, No Poyntz, no Poyntz, pulled him
violently by his scarlet Cloak, asking him, if he had paid for it, yea some of
them (as it is most credibly reported, by eyewitnesses) kicking him on his
breech, yea and smiting him on his head, in high scorn and contempt, in so much
that the heroick-spirited Gentleman, as a Soldier, also, could no longer endure
them, but that drawing his sword, other swords were also drawn, one was slain,
and diverse others wounded, and much hurt was done among them, (But, before
this, a party of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army of peaceable Saints had fain upon
certain of Sir Robert Pyes Soldiers, who were disposed of by our Parliament for
Ireland, and lay quietly quartred at Detford, and slew diverse of them, wounded
others of them, and made the rest of them to fly for their lives; and so were
the first themselves that shed blood in a hostile manner which I hope justice
will in time require an account of from some of them.) But I say all those
foresaid accidents on our side, most unhappily falling out together, as ye have
heard, made up the mouths of the Armies gaping hopes for the more full
completing of their main Design, viz. The City. For, the Army makes all this
(now) an unquestionable cause of their speedy marching up to London to still
their tumults, as they gave out; As if the City of London (famous for their
admirable and unparaleld Government over the whole world, for these many
hundred years) had not been able to pacisle any tumultuous disorders, suddenly
risen up among them and by their own power, and justice of the City to
apprehend and bring to trial the Authors of any such Commotions, either in the
City, or at the Parliament, without the injurious help of an ambitious and
aspiring Army, by whose examples (yea and provocations too) of rebellion, in a
special manner, against the Parliament, at first, these sad disasters have thus
fain out among us; As that excellent Author of the Religions Retreat, page 13.
well observes, in these his own very words: We may all well observe, That all
the late stirs, which the Army calls Mutinies and Treacheries, tending to New
Wars (whereof they so loudly cry out against us contioually) and spilling of
blood, have arose, in opposition to them; for if they would have laid down
their arms, as they ought to have done at the Parliaments several Commands, no
question, but every true subject would willingly have laid down his head upon
his pillow, and gladly have taken his rest, especially after such late
destructive bloody broyls, is he had so smarted by: But here now I will conclude
this Observation, with this distick, in taking notice of the most remarkable
bypocrisie of this our Army of Saints forsooth, who are so forward to fall upon
others as Rebels and seditious Traitors for only endevoring justly to defend
themselves from the violence of their Army, they forgetting themselves to be
the first and worst Traitors and Rebels against the Parliament, and so
consequently the whole Kingdom.

Thus, now, these Saints, like Hypocrites proceed,
Others to lash, for what Themselves should bleed.
Now in the foresaid interim, City of London seeming also to put themselves
upon a preparation (at least, I say, as it was hoped, but falsely) though not to
fight, yet to defend themselves and City from threatened plundering and invasion
of the Army, if it, should attempt the same against it; In all they now did,
they were but like Janus, with two faces under one hood, look two ways at one
time; Or like a Waterman, who at the same instant row one way, and look
another: For, they seem earnestly to procure power of the Parliament, and had
enough given them (had they acted accordingly) by an excellent Ordinance of
Parliament, to have bravely strengthened their City within, and to have curbed
and kept under any false-hearted Brethren, either of the Malignant or
Schismatical Parties, from hurting them within, or helping the Army without.
Upon which Ordinance, they chose noble and ever to be honored Major Genesis Massey
to be their General of all the City forces within, and the Parliament had
appointed and ordered, by their Committee for the safety of the Kingdom, noble
General Poyutz for his assistance to command the Horse and Reformadoes without;
thus they seemed seriously and in good earnest to list Horse and Foot in S.
Jameses and Tuttle-fields; made a huge pudder in the City by shutting up their
shops, beating their drums up and down in the streets, and making a mighty
pretense of a powerful opposition of the Army; but, all to no purpose; for, in
all this mean season, underhand Petitions for peace were framed, and followed
hard; Sectaries fled out of the City to their Army of Saints: crying out to the
General and Commanders, that all the Saints and godly party in London were now
quite undone, if the Army speeded not, with all possible have to London for
their preservation; yea, and the City it self persisted in their Treaty with
the Army by their Commissioners, among whom, were especially two long-breathed
Orators, ( voces, praeterea nihil; as the Countryman said of his Nightingals)
who as it is generally reported, like subtle Ambide xters, cast in so much
coloquintida of their frothy Oratory, as spoiled all the pottage of the Cities
solid preservation, (not, but that we bless God most heartily for Peace, 10000
times rather than War, and like well the work done, though not the manner of the
work-mens doing of it) for, they, undoubtedly applied a plaster far worse then
the difease, made a peace or pacification with the Army, upon no conditions at
all, on their own part, no, not so much as for saving the City from plundering
(save only by word of mouth from Sir Thomas his bare promise, and that in
ambiguous and Delphick expressions) yet, by Gods providence, indeed, their gold
chains and full chests were, for the present, preserved) But, upon many, yea
any, and all conditions advantageous to the Armies party; even such, as none
(sure) but mad men or fools in the Army would have refused; And, thus, most
ignommiously, leaving renowned General Massey, and noble General Poyntz, with
all their abused Reformadoes, in great straits, who were all forced to fly,
presently, for their own safety; and hereby also having brought the honest
Presbyterian Party, both in the Parliament and in the City, into great
inconveniences, and no little danger; yea, and, that which has in a most high
measure stained the reputation of the City, and (besides and above all the
rest) brought them under a most black cloud of infumy and disgrace, that they
most unworthily condescended to the Army to null, disavow, and disclaim, their
City Declaration, a rare piece, had it been religiously and courageously stood
unto, even a second Covenant; O, in this, my Soul grieves for the shame, of
this, late, so honorable a City, thus now made so dishonorable: All which, the
face of a Considerable Army or Horse and Foot (which, the City might easily
have raised, had it actedfaithfully, and in good earnest) appearing in a body,
with their brave and honest Commanders (as, such they were, indeed,
notwithstanding all the lying Sectaries slanders most injuriously cast upon
them) had most unquestionably, by the Lords mercy disappointed and avoided; yea
notwithstanding Southwarks treacherous trick, and the Tower-Hamblets base
defection and neutrality: Whereas, now, by this means, the freest and most
famous City in the world is totally (though, yet, insensibly) made a captivated
prey unto an incroaching and self-seeking Army of dissembling Saints.

Self-Do, Self-Have; our common Proverb goes:
Ah, stupid London, Cause of Thine own woes!
Thus, now, then, General and his Army of sweet Saints having (by notorious
subtilty) as it were vanquished and enslaved so rich, so rare, so populous and
famous a City, and that, without striking one stroke for it; and thereby, also,
having made it as infamous, as ever it had formerly been renowned and glorious:
He now brings back again with him, Both the Speakers of the Parliament, who
were, lately, fled from the two Houses of Parliament (as was formerly touched)
together with the rest of the Members of Both Houses, both Lords and Commons
(who had deserted the Parliament, as aforesaid, and in that absence of theirs
with the Army, had sat, like the Oxonian Junto, at Sion-House, between
Hounslow and Branford, and there entered into a solemn Engagement with the Army
against the two Houses of Parliament, sitting in their absence, which they
subscribed, and i^ now extant in the Parliament; and contrived a Declaration
against the fixed Parliament at Westminster, which sat still, there, as it was
their duty, in full peace and freedom, all the time of the others absence,
which was from about July 26. to August the ^. and went forward in their just
and legal Parliamentary proceedings) But the General, I say, and his Army of
innocent Saints (unwilling to do violence to any man, Luke 3.14.) with a
forcible and strong hand or power of Horse and Foot, brought back those other
Members who had deserted the Parliament, as forementioned, set them in their
seats and places in Parliament; who being so set, immediately protest against
the proceedings of the Members of Both Houses, that sat, in their absence, and
would have declared all that the Parliament at Westminster had done, in the
time of their absence, to be null and illegal. But (notwithstanding that, now,
the Parliament at Westminster was every day strongly surrounded by a strong
guard of the Armies Horse and Foot, as was conceived, to o^^^aw them: Yet, the
Parliament putting the Question to the Vote, it was clearly carried in the
Negative, at least four or five times, and that, sometimes, by above 40 voices,
That they ought not to be null, but were just and legal; till at last, the Army
having certain knowledge thereof, and much vexed thereat, presently some in the
House of Commons (as it is credibly reported) threatened the fixed Members, That
if their Votes could not, the long-sword should carry it for them: And,
immediately after, the Army (to second and confirm those words) set out a
Declaration, upon the Thursday, in Sir Thomas Fairfax's own name, protesting
therein, that, if those most honest Presbyterian fixed Members continued to sit
in the Parliament, and there to ^a^e to Vote, as they did, the (...) would
come, with all its power, and force them out, and dap them up in fast hold (let
all the world judge now what a free Parliament this is) as the Armies Captives,
or Prisoners of War, upon which furious threats on the very next day, being
Friday, diverse of the religious fixed Members, most unworthily (as we conceive)
for very fear left the House; yet, all things considered, it was well for them
that they went away; for, ^^ it was then credibly said and assured, on that
next Friday morning Cromwell came to the Parliament, and the Officers of the
Army into the House of Commons, to see their Declaration made good, and though
excepted against in the dispute, they would not withdraw, being backed with 1000
Horse in Hyde-Park, one Troop at the door, and Desborough who commanded the
Horse being ready at the door to receive Command to seize upon the Members, if
they were not able to carry it by Vote: But upon their absence, the
fled-Members (the greatest number whereof, it is well known were Sectaries and
such like neuters and siders with them) took advantage thereof, and that same
following Friday morning put the Question again to the Vote, and now ^^ last
carried it, this only one time, in the Affirmative; against the others four or
five times in the Negative; and this single Vote of theirs must stand and null
and illegal all that had been done in Parliament, in the time of their absence,
to the unspeakable ^e^^ment of the Parliament, City and whole Kingdom, whereon
(...) by and by; but now to look back to the Army of our humble-hearted Saints:
The Army having (as was forementioned) all rubs now, removed, and their way
fair before them to do what they pleased, and having quickly seared away the
City-guard from the Parliament, and confined them, now, within their own
City-walls, and entreated the City Trained-Bands (whether they would or not) to
give them possession of all the City For^s and Lines of Communication, whereof
now they were become Masters; Shortly after, the whole Army en^^r^ the City,
and that in a most Martial and triumphant equipage; The General himself, like a
second Casar, or some famous Roman Consul riding through the City in princely
pomp and stately triumph, amended by his whole Army, who rode all of them with
green Bays and Laurels in their hats, in token of Conquest, both before and
behind him, and immediately before him rode 8 or 10 of his brave conquering
Officers, in arms, all bare-headed, even like as to a King or Keisar, indeed;
the Lord Mayor also, Aldermen and Common Council of the City, having, before,
met his Excellency at Hyde-Park, to kiss their golden-fetters, and to tender to
his Excellency the promised gift of a golden Basin and Ewer of a 1000 l. price,
together with the invitation of him and his brave Commanders, to a sumptuous
feast within their City (yea and as it is credibly affirmed those two foresaid
Ambi-dexters would have the City to have had invited the Atators by name, unto
this feast, a most base absurdity) in requital of their kindness in thus easily
reducing their City into sordid Captivity; yea, and the Common people, through
the whole City, filling the streets, as the General and Army, thus, past along,
admiring, and applanding, with the highest punegyricks that their greedily
gazing eyes could manifest (like so many sottish and dull Issachars Asses) to
their, late, most mean Martial Servants, now become their Martial Masters.
Which, sitly brings this proper distick into my thoughts.

Stark Dolts and Fools, I do them (justly) hold,
That love their Fetters, though they be of Gold.
And, growing, if not future groaning miseries and calamities; The Parliament
having made the General (in part of present requital of his late good service
to them) High-Constable of the Tower of London; with power also to put in, as
his Substitute, whom he pleased, to be Lieutenant thereof; the General, to show
his zeal and fervor for the yet more effectual promoting of the grand Design,
fore-spoken of; going, now, to the Tower to take possession thereof, and having
been with all honor and humanity entertained, by the noble, and (both for his
Piety and Martial Prowess in the face of his Enemy) most highly deserving then
present Lieutenant of the Tower, Colonel West, at a sumptuous feast, or dinner
of purpose, there, provided for him; and after many seeming friendly
salutations, and hoped cordial regreets, mutually past between them at the
table; After dinner, this new High-Constable having the keys of the Toner
delivered to him; and notwithstanding also that the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council had highly recommended to his Excellency, the said noble
Lieutenant Col. West; yet he presently displaces this brave and every way
weldeserving Colonel, and gave the keys and Lieutenantship of the Tower to a
pretty young Pageant-stripling, viz. one M. Titchburs, a hopeful young man,
indeed; and one that (to be sure) is very likely to be herein very useful to
the Tower precinct and enclosure, viz. to save the hyre of a Preacher there, in
that himself has a dexterious faculty in preaching already. After this, also,
the General causes the City Militia to be new-moulded and modelld into a former
condition, to wit, of having the Schismatical Militiamen reinvested into the
power of the Militia, in satisfaction and pacification of the late quarrel and
complaint, herein, against the honest Presbyterian Citizens who had by a full
and a free Parliament obtained the just expulsion of all such Independents and
Schismatics from bearing any Office of power or trust in our Commonwealth, as
either refused to take the Covenant, or were Enemies to the Ends and Intentions
thereof, in point of Reformation and godly Church Government, according to an
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons formerly voted, printed and published by
authority, I say, of a full and free Parliament; but, now, thus altered and
nullified by the over-awing power of this Army of Saints upon this their
Parliament.

That Proverb's (thus) made good by th'General;
Might orecomes Right and Weaklings must to the Wall.
And, now, Parliament and City being pretty well brought under the terror and
power of the Army, the Army begins stiffly to prosecure the consummating of the
Sectaries great Design of Toleration and Liberty of Conference to All: And well
knowing they could not thoroughly effect this til the Parliament were thoroughly
purged of all the opposite and active Presbyterian Members therein, therefore
(as was briefly touched before) they vehemently still, inveigh against about, at
least 70 others of the more honest and pious party of the House of Commons, who
also sat and acted in the Parliament in the absence of the others, who, most
unworthily, deserted the Parliament and fled to the Army; which, now, like an
Army of Saints, indeed, full I believe, of Serpentine Craft, but not of
Dove-like Innocence) protested against their sitting in the House and voting,
there, as Members of the House, and most earnestly and urgently threatened again
and again (even by their beggarly Agitators also of their Army) to thrust and
force them out, as it were by head and shoulders, even by a day of their
appointment, or else they could forbear no longer, but would immediately force
them out, if they durst, still, abide and vote there: Insomuch that now, at
last, not only the first 11. accused worthy Members were forced to sly away for
fear of them, (whereof one most eminent Member, much honored Sir Philip
Stapleton, is (since) dead, beyond the Seas, by this Armies of dissembling
Saints most bold and bloody persecution of them, and whose most innocent blood,
I hope, the Lord, the most righteous Judge, will, when he makes inquisition for
blood, remember, and require at their hands; but also the most, if not all the
rest of the other 70 most worthy Members have been (thus) enforced to forsake
the House, and to desert that trust which the Kingdom and Counties for which
they were chosen, had imposed and invested on them. An affront, I believe,
unparalleled, and far transcending all presidents of all former ages and
Parliaments that ever this Kingdom saw, since it was a People and Nation; And
yet it is a high indignity offered to this Army of Saints, to say or think,
that such a chaste and modest Army as this is has forced, if not ravished the
Parliament of its Virgin Power and Privileges, or that they have any sinful
or sinister designs or evil intentions in all or any of these their most
remarkable Rebessions against the State and Church of God: and who
(notwithstanding all these their most insolent and arrogant actings, as
aforesaid) would have us to be charily tender of judging of them, and
charitably to be both persuaded, yea and assured that they intend no evil, but
all good unto us. Whereas, on the other side, the least and most lawful actings
of any of the Presbyterian Parties, either in Parliament or City, even for most
just self-defence and preservation, are cried out upon with open mouths and
reiterated invectives to be most bloody, hides us, and heinous treasons,
rebellions, and fomentings of a second, new, and most bloody War against the
Army and therefore against the whole Kingdom, which, methinks, brings, now,
here, most fitly, into mind, that most pertinently appliable Apologue, to this
our present purpose of the mutual shrifting of the Lion, Wolf, and the Ass,
which was thus. The Lion, Wolf, and the Ass, would needs go to shrifting or
confessing of their faults one to another; yea, and be Judges of one another
faults, and desert of punishments thereon. The Lion began, and acknowledged,
that indeed he had preyed upon many wild beasts in Woods and Forests, as his
natural food, and without which he could not live, but had never meddled with
any men, to devour or hurt them; So sentence was given by the other ^. Judges
herein; that surely this indeed was the Lions natural food, and being natural
unto him thus to do, it was sit it should be pardoned in him. Then the Wolf
came to shrift, before the Lion and the Ass; and he confessed indeed, that he
had oftentimes devoured both men and beasts that came in his way, and spared
none whom he could master and overcome: but yet truly, that this was his
natural food, by which he also lived, and without which he could not subsist;
whereupon, sentence must be given by the Lion and the Ass, that truly this was
a heinous evil in the Wolf; but yet in regard it was the Wolfes nature to
devour and tear in pieces, all that came within his reach, he ought therefore
to be likewise pardoned therein. Then the Ass coming to shrift himself before
the Lion and the Wolf his Judges, acknowledged and freely confessed, that he
had never hurt any, either men or beasts; only he remembered, that once his Mr.
that owned him, riding upon him on Pilgrimage, and having straw in his shoos,
and some of the ends of the straw hanging loose out of his shoos, and he being
very hungry in the way, reached his mouth to some of the straws, and eat them
as he went on: Whereupon, both this Lion and the Wolf instantly cried out,
that this was a most soul and unpardonable offense, and aggravated this fact to
be exceeding heinous thus; What? say they, Eat the straw out of your Mrs.
shoos, that should have kept his feet warm, and that whiles he was riding on
Pilgrimage to perform his holy Devotions! O this was a most intolerable fact,
and worthy of severest punishment: and therefore for it he must suffer death,
and so was devoured by them both. The Application I leave to the judicious and
religious Reader: only take this Distick, and I have done with this Observation.

Cobwebs take small, Great flies break loose, and gone,
And some may safely on steal then some look on.
And now in the twentieth and last place, Desperate Design, most Subtly and
Clandestinely carried on by this most deceitful Army of Saints, against the
most honest and innocent Presbyterian Party (which hold closs to their sacred
and solemn Covenant) and so by a most clear and undeniable Consequence, against
the work of a pure and powerful Reformation, both in Doctrine and Discipline:
Notwithstanding, all the loud and lying out-crys of the Sectaries of all kinds,
formerly against Persecution of any Saints or Christians for Conscience sake,
even in matters of fact: Yet, how has this Army of Saints themselves (now that
they have begun to get power into their hands at this time) bin and are the
primary, if not only Cause of the Persecution, (even unto death already of
diverse) not only of the XI Renowned and most Faithful Patriots of their
Country; both for Counsel and War: but also of 70. more of them at one blow:
and now more lately of diverse both Lords and Commons, impeached of high
Treason, for sitting in the Parliament, for the good of the City and Kingdom
(according to their Conscience and Covenant) whiles others fled from it:
Together with diverse other most unquestionably worthy and Eminent and
Excellent Citizens of London, old and young, who both in their persons and
purses, in Wars abroad, I say, and Counsels at home have laid out themselves in
a high measure: and yet now at this time, diverse of them are clapped up in
prison, Impeacht of high Treason, and some forsooth, of high Misdemeanors, and
thus their lives and estates brought into much danger, to the utter ruinating
(as much as in the malice of their Sectarian Adversaries lies) of themselves,
their wives, and dearest babes, and little Children, and diverse others, yet
more Eminent, Pious Presbyterian Citizens (fatter morsells for the mouths of
envy and mischief to feed on) are still threatened to be called in question for
their lives and estates: Which threatening is now also more lately put into
execution in no small measure, by the Impeachment and Imprisonment of the Lord
Major of London, Ald. Adams, Ald. Bunce, Ald. Langham, and other Eminent and
Excellent Spirited Citizens, upon pretense of high Treason (for, as for that
petty Impeachment of high Misdemeanors, there must not be so low a descention:
For that will not raise sums of money big enough to pay the Armies Arrears)
that thus those worthy Patriets of that (late) most knowned City, over the
whole world (though now under a Sable cloud of disgrace) may like so many
spunges, be squiez'd with deep and considerable sines and large sums, for
being so Loyal and Faithful, as to adventure to defend themselves and their
City (according to Conscience and Covenant) against the Martial orders, and
thundering Premonitions of an Army of Saints who must have it so, and their pact
Parliament (therefore) must act it so; and let God and the world judge, if this
be not the very quintessence of black ingratitude, and of breach of former
(seeming) serious and often promises, to live and dye with the City of London
at that time, when they had extreme need of their persons and purses, of ^oth
which, the most noble City of London was then most prodigal, even to
admiration. Yet now, see how most ingratefully (to say no worse) they are
repayd and rewarded, and all to please a Seditious and Religious Army, Yea, and
many more of our most famous and painful Presbyterian Ministers of the City of
London, are (as we hear for certain) threatened, to be called in question also,
(yea and some are already questioned, as Doctor Burgess, Mr. Sedgwick, and Mr.
Byfeild, and Mr. Ienkins Minister of Christs-Church) and to be punished in their
persons (an they are, and long have bin most vilely and abominably in their
purses and livelihood, under pretense (by our wicked Sectaries) of unlawfulness
of paying Tithes to the eternal shame, and indelible infamy of those that
should, but will not help it) and all and every of them, thus suffering, only
for acting according to their sacred and solemn Covenant, and the most exact
and upright rule of a good Conscience, backed by the authority of Parliament
also (if at least (now a days) we know what and where a Parliament is, or ought
to be) and that also justified, to be most legal and authentic by 5. several
votings of a free Parliament, against one single vote, of a most apparent
Army-forced, and overawed Parliament, which has thus made all those actings
of the Parliament and City Treasonable, by their Remonstrance upon the
Thursday, and their force of 1000. Horse at Hade-Park, on the next day being
Friday; and this also made both our Covenant and our Parliament, a mere snare
to honest-hearted and Religious people (as I think, has bin abundantly
fore-specified) by the intolerable and unexpressible Hypocrisy and
double-dealing of the Independents and Schismatics of these our days, both in
Parliament, Army, City and Country; Who (thus) think to mock God, as they hope
to gull and abuse too credulous men. If this be not persecution (and that in a
high nature) for honesty and Conscience sake, I know not what is. And if these
be principles and practices of Independents, Sectarian Saints, and of the
Anabaptistical-Godly-Party (as they like proud Pharisaical-Justiciaries call
themselves) I pray God deliver me and all my Friends from such White-Devils, in
Saints-shapes, from such bloody Wolves in sheeps-skins. To conclude al, has
not this precious Army of Saints, now of late also, most craftily and cunningly
contrived more and more to confound all, by their deep-digged, and even
palpable Jesuitical Machinations, as low as hell it self, in their last most
strangely woven design (even to the deep astonishment of the wisest of men
among us, and to the very posing of the quintessence of wit it self) in
suddenly conveighing our most unhappy Soveraing King from Hampton-Courts
endurance, to the impregnable prison of the Isle of Wight, thus hurrying this
poor Prince from post to pillar, even as the Proverb is, Out of the Drying Pan
into the fire; as we all have great cause to fear (as knowing the spirits of
the Sectaries in general, so well as we do) by thus either traitorously
enforcing, or craftily persuading his Majesty, for the avoiding of the
devouring Gulf Charibdis, to dash against the Sharp Rock, of death-threatning
Scylla, according to that old verse, and (if ever) now too truly verified Adagy.

Incidit in Scyllam, cupi^ns vitare Charibdim. Thus in English.

He Is dasht' gain Scyllas Rock and quite destroyed,
Hoping Charibdis Whierl-pool to avoid.
And certainly this is too evidently (at least in our present distracted
apprehension and just fear) poor King Charles his sad condition, tossed and
tumbled up and down, by most Traiterous and Rebellions Sectaries and
Schismatics, and now under a color of avoiding the deadly danger (which in
truth, I am apt enough to believe, was too really intended) of the Lilb^^ni^^
faction, the so most audatious Agitators (I had almost said Agitraitors) of the
Army, that rude rabble of Levellers indeed, as they are fitly termed by his
Majesty himself in his Declaration, said to be his, left on the table at
Hampton Court: Under this color and pretext, I say, to hurry his Majesty into
the grasping paws and Captivity of Cromwell and his Confederates, Hammond the
present Governor of the Isle of Wight, being his hopefully intended Son in Law,
thus to make up their own mouths, and work out their own weal [if possibly it
may be] though with the inevitable ruin and destruction of a, thus, poor,
tottering, torn, and most miserably distracted Church and State, if the Lord in
his insinite mere mercy and grace, interpose not to our miraculous
preservation: We being thus now by these woeful factions and fractions both
among our selves, and in this dissembling Saint-like Army, brought into the
same, or into a worse condition then King Iehosaphat was by another Army, and
with him enforced to cry out and say: Lord we know not what to say or do,
neither is there any strength in us, but our eyes are only up unto thee. And
thus far we all see they have most undenyably already proceeded: How much
farther, yet, they will wade into this their unfathomed Ocean of deceit,
cousnage and abuse of Gods people, the Lord only knows: To which most righteous
Judge of the world, who sits in heaven, and sees, and smiles, and laughs them to
scorn, and has them in most high derision, and who in his own due time, will
by his power, [through their own pride and Hipocrisie] break them in pieces
like Potters-vessells, with his Iron-mace, of irresistible justice, I leave
them. And since this is most certain, Pro. 21.30. That there is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor Counsel, that can prevail against the Lord; Therefore I will
say only thus much in brief, to all my dear Presbyterian Brethren, in the words
of Moses; Stand stid [with godly (...), holy Wisdom, precious Faith, and
Christian Resolutions,] and see the Salvation of our God, which he undoubtedly
will in his own due time, and by his own best way, work for thee. Amen and Amen.

A Merricall Corollarie, upon the Armies full performance of the
Scripture-Properties of true Saints and Christian Soldiers, prefixed in the
Front of this Treatise.
THus [Reader] thou have had a sight
By this most brief survay,
Of the Armies Actions just and right
The clean contrary way.
How they have done to Other Men
(as Christ to them did say)
As Other Men should do to Them
The clean contrary way.
How they have kept the Rule, most wise,
Which Paul before them lays,
To do no Ill that Good may rise,
All clean contrary ways.
And how each Small Appearing Sin
The Army does gainsay;
Abhor and Shun, just praise to win
The clean contrary way.
Yea, how intact from doing wrong
The Army is, I say,
And how exact from a Slanderous-Tongue
The clean contrary way.
Yea, here thou see what friends they are
To the Crown and Regal-Sway,
To Monarchy what love they bear
The clean contrary way.
What fervent love to Government
They piously display,
With Godly-Order, how content,
The clean contrary way.
Then to this Army of pure Saints,
Who, fast and lose thus play;
Let us give thanks, free from Complaints,
The clean contrary way.
A Scripture Cordial and Encouragement to all Constant Presbytertan
Covenanters, against all temporizing Dissemblers and Backsliders.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; Yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are
all they happy that deal very treacherously with thee and thy children? But
thou, O Lord, know all thine, thou see that and triest their hearts, how
they are toward thee: And will pull thin^ Enemies out like beasts for the
slaughter; and thou preparest them for a day of certain Destruction. Jerem.
12.1, 3. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lor my God, mine Holy-one? We shall
not die, O Lord, thou have ordained the wicked for judgment: And O mighty God,
thou have established them for correction. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold
evil, and can not look upon iniquity. Wherefore then O Lord, look thou
upon them that deal treacherously, and hold thy tongue, when the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous then he? Habakkuk 1.12, 13. Thus with
holy David (Psalm. 73.) Gods Children oftentimes become envious, when they see
the prosperity of fools and woked men, until they retire into the Sanctuary of
God and consult with his unerring Word, then they clearly see and understand
the end of these men, to wit, how God sees them in slippery places, casts them
down into sud^ain Destruction, soon cuts them down like the grass that
withers; so that in a moment, he is not, and the place where he lately
flourished, like a green Bay Tree in an instant, that cannot be found. Psalm.
37. Thus the hope of Hypocrites shall certainly perish, an^ be cut off and cast
away, as a spiders-web. Job 8. So that in due ^^me, Gods Children shall in holy
exultation, have just cause to rejoice in the justice and righteousness of our
God, and to say Psalm. 58. Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily
there is a God that uprightly judges the earth.

Magna, imo maxima est veritas (quoniam veritatis dominus
Est potentissimus et prudentissim^^) and super omma praevalebit.
FINIS.

