SEVERAL PROPOSALS FOR Peace and Freedom, BY AN AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE,
Offered unto Commissary General IRETON for the Concurrence of the Army, by the
Approbation and Consent of many worthy Persons of the Common Council And others
of the City of LONDON, on the Eleventh of this instant December, To be Agreed
unto, and Subscribed by all the Inhabitants OF England and Wales.

LONDON: Printed for J: Hanes, December. 22. 1648.

SEVERAL PROPOSALS FOR Peace and Freedom, BY AN AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE.
WHereas those His Majesty's failings published to us and the World by the
several Declarations and Remonstrances of Parliament cannot be denied, whereby,
through the violation of his Oath and Covenant made unto the People at his
Coronation, all our late and present Woe and Miseries of War both in England
and Ireland have come; as also the great Divisions amongst our most worthy and
eminent persons of the Commonwealth, with the great distempered and unconstant
actings and high failings even in the Parliament it self: And for that it is
the due Right and Privilege of the folk or People of this Nation, to make and
choose our and their Laws by an equal Representative in Parliament, as by the
aforesaid Coronation Oath and Covenant fully appears; Therefore the Right
Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the City of London, do
in the Name of the City, First, Humbly offer unto the Right Honorable, The High
Court of Parliament assembled at Westminster, this present entitled Paper,
called, A Great Agreement of all the People of England and Wales, for their
Approbation and Subscription; and that it may thence be dismissed, and forth
with sent into every part of the Land, to be Agreed on, Consented to, and
Subscribed by all the Freeborn People of the same (above the age of Sixteen)
on pain for the Refusers to be excluded and debarred the protection of the Law
of the Land; and that all the Subscriptions may be brought in to the present
particular Representatives of Parliament, to be Returned and Recorded there for
a grand law forever.

First, We Agree,
1. THat the King, by the Advice of his evil Council, through usurpring and
incroaching upon our Freedoms, and by leaving the Parliament, and leavying a
War against it, is guilty of all the Blood, vast expense of Treasure, and Ruin
that has been occasioned by these Wars within the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland,

II. That if any King of England shall hereafter challenge to himself a
Negative Voice, to the Determinations of the Representative in Parliament; and
shall not according to the Duty of his Kingly Office, Consent and Sign all such
Laws as the People by their Representative, The Commons of England, from time
to time assembling in Parliament, after Confultation had with the Lords therein
(when sitting) shall make and choose, may be deposed by the same Parliament:
And that what Subject of the Nation that shall assist, or side with him
therein, may upon good proof thereof, not only from thenceforth be deemed and
taken for Enemies to the State, and therefore not only void of the protection
of the Laws, but dealt with as in a case of high Treason. And that the
particular Representatives do from time to time wholly prosecute and pursue in
Parliament all such Instructions as the People for whom they are chosen and
serve, shall at the day of their Elections and afterward be required unto. And
that no Officer of War, or Member of the Committee of State, shall be chosen
into any first next following Parliament, after their discharge thereof.

III. That in all Laws made or to be made, every person may be bound alike; and
that no Degree of Lords, Peers of Parliament (now or hereafter assembled) or
others, No Tenure, Estate, Charter or Office soever, shall confer any exemption
from the ordinary Course of Justice, and Legal Proceedings, whereunto others
are subjected.

IV. That our meanings and intentions are, Not to leave our selves liable to
the least of mercy, touching our Freedoms, either of the most Righteous, or
evil and unrighteous Princes, (disclaiming confidence in vain man) But knowing
that Justice of punishment ought never to be inflicted, but where in Reason it
will convert into mercy; and seeing that it has pleased God, That a Covenant
is passed between this Nation and our Brethren of Scotland, whereby mercy is
claimed by that Nation on his Majesty's behalf: Therefore if the King shall
Assent unto this Agreement, that then He may be Proclaimed and Crowned King
again. And who (after the first four years in which the Kingdoms Debts may be
paid) may in a Parliamentary way have as great an Annual Revenue conferred upon
him, as (one year with another of his Reign) was yet ever brought into the
Exchequer, notwithstanding those vast illegal sums thereof, raised by the
multitude of Monopolies, and destroying usurping Projects, Except what shall be
defalked for such Charges as henceforth shall be thought fit to be defrayed by
the Parliament, which formerly was done by the King.

V. That all or any person or persons that shall approve, or any way allow of
any thing which the King, or any person by or under him have done in this late
miserable and destructive War, may be dealt with as in a case of high Treason:
And that neither any such who have assisted the King in person or otherwise,
and such as have approved of any thing done against the State in the said War,
may not sit, or have place in the next Parliament, or Voices in the Elections
thereof.

VI. That if any person or persons whatsoever, that shall any way wilfully
endeavor to disgrace (by approbrious speeches) any person or persons for
assisting the King in his War against the Parliament, may be bound to the good
Behavior, with great Surety for the same; And that no man whatsoever be
hereafter questioned for any thing done in reference to the late public
Differences since the year, 1641. further then in execution of the Judgment of
this present Parliament.

VII. That a general Revisement may be had of all the Laws and Statutes now in
force; and that those intending and relating to the maintenance of Popery,
Prelacy, Episcopacy, Superstition, and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or
Government, and whatsoever else that will not best stand with the good of the
nation according to this present age, may be Repealed: And that all those that
shall be continued unto us, may be put in execution, according to the purity
and truth thereof, that the tediousness and long delays formerly exercised
therein, as also all undue practice thereof, may be wholly taken away, so as
that intended chiefest good for the peaceable well-being of the Commonwealth,
may not henceforth be exercised to the great disquieting and wasting of the
people, as formerly (even hitherto) it has done. And that such sure provisions
be speedily made, not only for the hinderance and avoiding of all Vagabonds
and Beggars, but for a conscientious and sufficient Relief for all the poor and
indigent people, that none may perish with want; as also for the extirpating of
Drunkenness and Swearing, upon such high penalties, and ways of encouragement
for the prosecutors thereof, as, through God, may wholly take away all those
Evils.

VIII. That the Excize may continue but until the present Engagement thereupon
be discharged; And that what moneys soever the Parliament shall be necessitated
to use, may be raised by Subsidies and Taxes, and such other open and known
ways as may be most visible and apparently equal to the whole Commonwealth.

IX. That the people being at this time very unequally distributed for Electing
their Representatives, may be more indifferently proportioned; And that not
only every Freeholder, but Copyholder also, that is worth 40 s. per Annum, and
every other person that is worth 50 l. personal Estate, may have Voices in the
Election thereof.

X. That the people do of course choose themselves a Parliament once every two
years, after the most free and uncontrolable manner, upon pain of high Treason
to the Disturbers, over-bearer or over-bearers of any person or persons of the
Elections for ever, and to continue by the space of five Months, to begin to
sit upon the first Thursday in every second March; and to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April then next ensuing, after the dissolution of this; and
to continue till the last day of August then next following also, and no
longer; and that this may terminate and end before May 1649.

XI. That the Irish may not be still proceeded against, as to execute cruelty
for cruelty, but that both they and those other Offenders of our Brethren of
England that have not Compounded, may yet Compound, and have such Fines set
upon them, and so to be paid, as that with respect unto their conditions, may
not ruin and undo them and their posterities, except the Beginners and
Fomenters of the War.

XII. That out of every Parliament there may be a Committee of State appointed,
consisting of Forty of the Members thereof, six whereof to be out of the City
of London, Westminster, and the Borough of Southwark; and the next to be
equally proportioned for the several other Counties, Cities and Towns Corporate
of England and Wales, to Negotiate in the Intervals of Parliament, of all
things given them in charge by the said Parliament.

XIII. That annually there may be an equal Tax in every Parish within the
Kingdom of England and Wales, as well of Lands as Goods, proportionable to that
of the accustomed Tithes (Impropriations excepted) to be raised, leavied and
paid into the hands of one or more Treasurers in every County for that purpose,
to be paid and issued forth again to the Teachers in the Word, as cause shall
require: And that all Tithes of Impropriations may be bought in at such
conscientious Rates as the Committee of State (as hereafter follows) or
Commissioners from them appointed for that purpose shall think most reasonable
and meet.

XIV. That whereas God the Creator and Father of Spirits is Omnipotent and
unlimited by man, giving to every one a various and different Spirit, of which
no man is certainly Master, no, not for a minute, therefore ought Liberty of
Conscience to be granted to all godly Conscientious walkers (protesting against
the State-destroying Tenants, as to Peace and Freedom) not only of the Church
of Rome, but of Episcopal and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Courts and
Offices for that purpose also; yet the way of instructing the people is
referred to the Ministry.

15. That all inslaving Tenures upon Record by Oaths of Fealty, Villanage,
Homage, and Fines at will of the Lords, may all be bought in at such rates as
shall not exceed twenty years purchase to the Lord, upon a conscientious
computation of profits made according to the Reign of King James.

16. That all the Marish Lands, Fens and Common Pastures, within the Kingdom of
England and Wales, may be enclosed and divided, one fourth part to be equally
proportioned to the several Tenants of the several Parishes, where such Land
lies; and another fourth part to the Poor of the same; and the other two parts
to be divided for, and toward the payment of all the Officers and Soldiers
Arrears; To be holden and taken up by Copy of Court-Roll of the proper Lord or
Lords of the Soyls, giving and paying the sum of five shillings, per Acre,
Fine, for Admittance at every Alienation, Change, and Taking up, by death or
otherwise, if the Annual Rent of every Acre be worth so much, or else not to
exceed the value thereof; and twelve pence per Acre at the most, or the sixth
part of the yearly value for the Annual Rent of all that fourth part divided
among the Poor, and six pence per Acre at the most for the other three parts of
the yearly Revenue to be proportioned certainly for ever.

17. That his Excellency the Lord General, Lieutenant General Cromwell, the Lord
Mayor of our City, the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Gray of Grooby, the
Lord Wharton, Major General Skippon, Commissary General Ireton, Sir John Potts,
Sir William Waller, Sir William Br^^eton, Sir John Maynard, Colonel Harlo, Mr
Alderman Fouke, Mr Alderman Gibbs, Mr Fran. Allen, Major General Massey, Col.
Wilson, Col. Fleetwood, Col. Harrison, Col. Russel, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir
Gilbert Pickering, Sir Henry Vane junior, Mr Perpoint, Col. Marten, Col. Rigby,
Mr Holland, Sir John Palgrave, Major Wildeman, Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, Col.
Ludlow, may be a Committee to continue until the first day of the next
Parliament to regulate, place, displace, confirm, commissionate or
non-commission all Justices belonging to the Courts of Westminster, with the
Officers and Offices thereunto belonging, all-Sheriffs of Counties and Justices
of Peace, and all other the Officers and Offices whatsoever, formerly
occasioned to be granted by his Majesty, whether by usurpation or otherwise:
And after the expiration and end of the aforesaid Committee, to be desposed of
by succeeding Parliaments or Committees of State: And that his Majesty may
degrade all such persons, either in part or in whole, as were the Cause and
Beginners of the Wars, or the Continuance thereof; as also to confirm such
honors on such worthy Members as have most self-denyingly endeavored our
Freedoms, according to the judgment and wisdom of this most excellent and
honorable Committee, or the major part thereof. And after the expiration of
this Committee, that then all such persons as his Majesty shall for the future
dignifie with titles of Honor, as aforesaid, may first have certificate of
their Demerits for Services done unto the State, either from the Parliament, or
Committee of State, as aforesaid, to signify the same.

18. That the Earl of Pembrook, the Earl of Denby, the Earl of Kent, Mr
Sergeant St. John, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr Sergeant Wild,
Sir Thomas Wydrington, the Lord Lisle, Sir John Danvers, Sir Henry Myl^may,
together with his Excellency the Lord General, Lieutenant General Cromwell, the
Lord Mayor, with the rest of the Members of the excellent and honorable
Committee for the regulating of Offices and Officers, may be the Committee of
State for the next ensuing Intervals of Parliament.

19. That all Debts, upon the first Propositions, due upon the Public Faith,
and all other Moneys and Values, lent upon the fifth and twentieth parts, may
be satisfied and paid by the Inhabitants in every County within it self, by an
equal rate as well of Lands, as Goods, by Commissioners to be chosen within
themselves also for that purpose.

20. That henceforth no Freeborn person of this Nation be hereafter pressed to
serve in the War.

21. That a strict Account may be taken of all those persons that have been
Treasurers, Receivers, or otherwise any way entrusted with the Treasure of the
State.

22. That all the Dean and Chapters lands may be sold for payment of the
Public Debts, or for what other uses the Parliament shall think fit; and that
all the Soldiers of the new Model now in Arms may either be paid by proportions
out of the Marish Lands, Fens and Common Pastures; For every Trooper that is
behind, and in Arrear for every year (or proportionable according to that time)
the sum of four pounds per annum, during his life, without allowance for Free
Quarter, and every Footman the sum of fifty shillings per annum, with
proportion to time as aforesaid; and if it shall happen that the faid Marish
Lands, Fens, and Common Pastures will not be sufficient to perform the same,
that then it may be made up out of the aforesaid Deans and Chapters Lands:
Conditionally provided, That all such, as shall be assigned by the General
Council of the Army for the Service of Ireland, do not refuse the same; but
that all such, as shall be dismissed thither, shall have the Fee-simple of the
said proportions of Land to them and their heirs for ever: And all others, that
shall desire to leave the Wars, and shall be dismissed the Army by the Council
of War also, may forthwith be satisfied their Arrears upon his Excellency's
discharge.

23. That the great Weight and Charge of Ireland may be entrusted in a faithful
Committee, consisting of nine at the least, for ordering that high Affair,
whereof two to be Members of the City of London.

24. That for the frustrating of the several perilous designs of the many
parties, which are now so strongly working to carry on their particular
Interests for Ruin and Destruction to us; and for the settling of a firm Peace
in this distracted Nation; That after all have subscribed this present
Agreement for the maintaining of all our just Right, by the Power and Authority
of Parliament, that then all the Parliaments Forces now in the Kingdom may be
paid, or else effectually satisfied all their Arrers due unto them; be
acquitted of all or any past failings, and forthwith dismissed for Ireland,
with all convenient speed, under their present Conduct and Command, except what
Forces shall be thought meet for the Garrisons of England and Wales; as also
that the Lord General may still be continued with us in his Renowned Command
(General of England and Wales) aforesaid; and that Leiutenant General Cromwell
may be sent General into Ireland aforesaid, and have the Command of all the
Forces for the reducement thereof; and that the Scots there, being put under
the Command aforesaid, may then be there equally capable with our own in all
benefits, privileges and profits whatsoever, that our mercy and moderation may
be known unto all, and that the Lord is our Council.

FINIS.

