Several Occurrences, TOUCHING The further Proceedings of the SCOTS with their
Declared King.

Containing these ensuing particulars; viz.

I The Parliament of Scotlands new Act and Declaration to be published
throughout the Kingdom. II Their declared Kings sailing from Holland with seven
men of War, 500 Mariners, and about 140 pieces of Ordnance. III The Declaration
of Van Trump the Dutch Admiral, to the King of Scots. IV The bloody murdering
of Mr. Ascram ( the Parliament of Englands Agent) at Madrid in Spain, the
manner thereof, and the Kings Proclamation concerning the same. V The Duke of
Yorks Letter from Jersey, to his mother in France; and the L. Hoptons
resolution concerning the Scots.
LONDON, Printed for G. H. 1650.

Several Occurrences, touching the further Proceedings of the SCOTS.
Right Honorable,
THis morning we received Intelligence, that the King of Scots embarked
himself on Sunday the sixth instant, but upon his going aboard, a great storm
arose (which many conjecture to be ominous) The Convoy that is to guard him, is
said to be 7 ships of War, carrying in all about 140 Guns, and manned with about
500 men, which were designed to meet the East India fleet, that are now coming
to Holland, but the Prince of Orange prevailed with the States, for them to
transport him into Scotland, which otherwise might have been retarded; for Van
Trump (the Dutch Admiral) seemed unwilling to undertake the Voyage, having
other employments; and being solicited (by the young King) for accommodation
and assistance, he positively declared; That he was a sworn servant to the
States of Holland, and could not act or do any thing, without their permission
or grant, and therefore humbly desired to be excused, in not answering him with
a return, suitable to his desire, etc. As for the Scots proceedings, it is the
general talk, and daily discourse of most in these parts; but their results are
kept extreme secret, as in reference to the making a War with England: Some
report they will make no war for him, till they see how he proves; and whether
he be worth the engaging so deeply for or not: but it is more like, till they
see what forces he can procure, to make some diversion; by invading you by sea,
in several places at once. And though you may perhaps think it something
improbable, you should be invaded at sea, and that it will be impossible to
provide a Navy, either so secretly as you should not know it, or so great as
you shall not be able to deal with it; they are of another mind, and give out
that they have potent numbers in several parts, and are not without hope of a
port or garrison, in the West or in Kent (therefore look well to them) where a
few shall land at first, and the young titular-Kings party, will flock to them
in multitudes; and this (as they say) will draw your forces to one place, till
they shall have opportunity to land more in another; and as soon as these
distractions are among you, then the Scots (like a swarm of Locusts) to come in
upon you (as one man) to make fertile England as miserable by war, as their own
country is without it: and to the end, that they may obtain the most easy and
facile way, for the carrying on of this design, they have prevailed with
General Waldemar (the King of Denmark's brother) to assist them; also General
Carp and some other German Commanders, have agreed with the Prince, to serve
him for nothing in England, and that they will have no pay, how long soever the
war shall last, provided, that they may make booty of what ever shall come in
their way: It may very well be doubted, whether their rapinous fingers will be
able to distinguish, between Cavaliers goods, and those of Presbytery or
Sectary (especially if they should be most valuable;) and diverse of the Duke of
Lorains men have undertaken the like, who are pretty skilful in this art, only
they desire some advance money, which (we hear) the Prince of Orange will
furnish them with. This is the evil that threatens you, special care had
therefore need to be taken; it is very facile to prevent dangers fore-knowing of
them: Therefore begin to act strenuously and beware you be not deluded by a
beaten fawning Spaniel.

The Lord Digby's Secretary is lately arrived here from the Isle of Jersey, who
reports; That the Duke of York passes his time very merrily in that Island, and
in continual exercise, and desires to see the War begin this Summer, that he
might serve his brother in the head of the Scots; of which his desire, he has
written to the Queen in France, who was very well pleased with it, and
accounted it a very honorable design. But Sir George Cartwright (the
Governor) and the L. Hopton, do not like that he should hazard himself, and do
what in them lies, to alter his mind. And it is further reported by the said
Secretary, that the Lord Hopton will not engage with the Scots, who says they
are a perfidious people, whose hearts harbor nothing but deceit. Their bloody
proceedings against Montross, Spotsford, etc. has quite turned the tide here,
and those Officers designed for that service, will not engage with them.

By an Express from the City of Madrid in Spain, we are advertized of the
brutish and barbarous assassination of that honest and ingenuous Gentleman,
Master Ascram, Resident for the Common wealth of England with his Majesty of
Spain; which bloody Tragedy, was acted by some desperate persons, as follows;
viz. Upon his landing at the Port of Santa Maria, having intelligence of diverse
threats uttered against him, a Spanish Colonel with a guard of 200 Horse, was
appointed for his Convoy, by whom he was conducted to Madrid, where he arrived
the fifth of this Month, and that night lodged unfortunatly in a common Inn,
intending the next day to be better provided. The day following, Master Fisher
(his Steward) went to seek a house, and having found one very convenient,
agreed for it; In the mean time, it happened as Mr. Ascram and one Signeur Riba
(his Interpreter) sat alone at dinner, only with one servant attending them,
the murderers knocked at door, and pretending to be friends, easily got
access; there was six of them in number, three being habited like Merchants,
the other like soldiers: Upon their approach, Mr. Ascram rose from the Table
to salute them, but the foremost laid hold on his hair, and returned the
salutation of Joab, stabbing him into the head; which his Interpreter
perceiving, endeavored to escape, but was listewise stabbed in the Belly, and
they both fell immediately. The Assassinates were English, who posted for refuge
to the Venetian Ambassadors, but he abhorring the fact, denied them entrance,
so that they were constrained to take Sanctuary in the next Church; and being
closely pursued (by command and Proclamation from the King of Spain) five of
them are laid in prison to be made exemplary, and one escaped. This execrable
fact (with that of Dorislaus) renders that party odious to all Nations.

Brill, the 16. 1650.
An Abstract from Scotland.
Sir,
THe young King is expected within a day or two, (as many give out) but the
people are divided, and the meaner sort begin to see what slavery they live in
under the great Laurds, so that there is great probability they may in time
shake off those shackles. Yet notwithstanding, the Parliament of Scotland have
published an Act for the raising of every fourth man; A Copy whereof follows,
viz.

The States of Parliament now convened, taking into consideration the good and
service of the Kingdom, and Shires thereof, they Ordered the Committees of War
of every several Shire of the Kingdom, to make new rolls of all the sensible
persons, within each of their several Shires, and to cause the fourth man of
the whole number of their sensible persons, to be trained, armed, and formed in
Companies, and made ready upon all occasions for the public service, and good
of the Kingdom and Shires, according to the rules and Acts formerly set down.
And the Estates declare, that those persons who shall be enrolled, as the
fourth man in the several Shires, by virtue of this Act, to the effect
aforesaid, shall no ways be employed for recruiting of former Regiments; And
ordains the Shires to have the nomination and Election of the Officers of their
several Companies, and Regiments to be made up of the fourth man in the said
Shires.

Which nomination and Election, the Estate Ordains the Committees of War, of
the several Shires to represent to the Committee of the Estates of Parliament,
to whom the Parliament hereby gives power to allow or disallow of the same
nomination and Election, as the Committee shall think fit, and to place others
for such as they shall not allow, for the good of the public service: And the
Estates do further declare, that this present Act is always without prejudice
to any former Acts, made for the putting of the Kingdom in a posture of
defense, and ordaining all betwixt sixty and sixteen, to be trained and armed.

Subscribed, A. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

FINIS.

