A Serious Warning and Caution UNTO George Keith, And to many Others.

AS ALSO, A RELATION OF SOME EXPRESSIONS FROM George Keith, Concerning His
REASONS which He then gave, for Opposing and Exposing the QVAKEKS, When at His
Place at TVRNER's- HALL.

The Intention of the Publication of which, and more that is in this Paper
contained, is proposed for a Public and General Good of All.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1700.

A Serious Warning and Caution unto George Keith, etc.
WHEREAS on the 18th of the Month called August, 1700. was seen affixed upon
the great Pillars of the Exchange, on Cornhill-side, a Paper in Print,
entitled; A Serious Call to the Quakers, Inviting them to return to
Christianity: Containing many Quotations (so termed) out of the Books of diverse
Quakers, etc. Which Quotations are said to be attested by Eight Ministers of
the Church of England; wherein George Keith in his Goliah-like Spirit, does
offer to prove the same to the Quakers Faces, etc. to be Monstrous, Heretical,
and Antichristian. But there is a Stone which is cut and a cutting out of the
Mountain, without Hands, which is risen, and arising, in this Nation, which
will dash to pieces in the Head, the Work and Works of this Goliath, with his
Champions; for the Lord the invisible and mighty God is on his way, to sustain
and support his distressed and exercised People, let their Exercises be of what
nature or kind soever; and the Faithful amongst this People shall be preserved,
such that do not seek to be setting themselves up great in this World, that
deny themselves of Self and Self-Love, and Selfish Worldly Interest, but are
seeking after the invisible and only wise God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, for
the everlasting welfare of their never dying Souls; as also seeking, desiring,
and praying for the eternal welfare and good of their Relations, Neighbors,
and loving Countrymen, of what Judgment or Persuasion soever. And
notwithstanding all the Mists and dark Fogs that may arise out from the
Bottomless-Pit, and of fallen Angels, the Faithful, Humble, and Lowly minded
and hearted amongst this People, the Lord, the mighty God and Creator of all
things, he by his great and invisible Power, will preserve them, in despite of
whatever Satan and his fallen Angels can or may be suffered to do, or attempt.

And the Author of this Paper does something admire that those called Bishops
and Ministers of the Church of England, should suffer themselves to be so
Imposed upon, to think that this poor Apostatized Man and Creature, should be
of service unto them, to be an Instrument to help to bring the Quakers back to
the Church of England: I do affirm and assert, That you will in the Lord's time
see your selves Mistaken, although it may be some Particulars, such as George
Keith, whom it is supposed you take something the more notice of, because he may
have something of outward Learning, and therefore the fitter Tool to be made
use of on the aforesaid occasion, who like him, have forsaken their inward, and
spiritual, and first Love unto the Lord, which has provoked the Lord to
withdraw from them, and to give them up unto the guidance of their Souls Enemy,
and to follow their own darkened Understandings. And this I am made to declare
unto you that are called Bishops and Ministers, etc. that the same Arm,
Strength and Power, that did secretly and inwardly sustain this People in their
former Sufferings, Exercises, and Persecutions, I do affirm and assert, through
the unexpressible mercy, and goodness, and favor of Almighty God, is now in a
wonderful secret manner prevalent in the Assemblies of this People; but it is
much my Belief, and I fear, that the Lord will make some of them Examples unto
the World of his displeasure for their Unfaithfulness unto him, notwithstanding
they may, it may be, keep to the outward Profession amongst this People,
because of their secret withdrawing in their Hearts from the Lord, who has
been good and gracious unto them many a time, and delivered them many a time,
because of their getting again too much into the Love, and Spirit, and Things
of this World; of which I can remember a time when the Lord suffered many of
them to be stripped from almost all worldly Enjoyments, and in that Day the Lord
was with them, and sustained them in a low and exercised Estate, and was near
to them to do them good; and the Lord is the same at this Day, and will be the
same to all that shall be so happy as to have their reliance and dependence
always upon him. Now as to the Spirit and Disposition that has, and is of late
Years and Months entered into this, to be pitied and lamented, poor Apostatized
Man George Keith, I do affirm and testify, it is no other than the same that
was in the Prophet Balaam of Old; who for Balack's Rewards, notwithstanding the
Lord had forewarned him, yet would go with Balack to endeavor, (like this poor
Creature) for Enchantments against Israel; But the Lord turned his endeavors
of Cursing of Israel into Blessings; the Lord is not changed, he is now the
same at this very day. And this is the same Spirit that was in wicked Jeroboam,
who made Israel to sin, in causing them to worship his Golden Calves, to cause
them that they should not go up to Jerusalem, to worship and offer unto the
Lord, as the Lord had commanded; and is the same Spirit that made wicked Cain
kill his Brother Abel, because the Lord had accepted of Abel's Offering; and is
the same Spirit that in the Old World mocked at Righteous Noah, when he was
Building the Ark, at the Commandment of the Lord; and is the same Spirit that
was in Dathan and Abiram of old, that withstood Moses and Aaron, the Servants
of the Living God, who the Lord had commanded to lead his People Israel out of
Egypt's dark Land, Slavery and Bondage; the Lord caused the Earth to open its
Mouth and swallow them up: So at this Day, those that inwardly in their Hearts
which departs from the Lord, the Earth opens its Mouth, and they are
swallowed up in the Love of this World, and in the Love of Earthly Things and
Enjoyments: and this is the Spirit that was in the false Prophet Zedekiah, the
Son of Cheuah of of old, that smote the Prophet Micah the Lord's Prophet upon
the Cheek; who said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from we to speak
unto thee? And is the same Spirit that ruled in the unbelieving Jews of old,
who Crucified our Lord, the Lord of Life and Glory, the great Savior of the
World, and of Mankind; it is the same Spirit that was in the unbelieving Jews,
that Stoned that blessed Martyr Steven, who told them of their Rebellion and
Stubborness against the Lord, and how they Rebelled against his good Spirit; it
is no other but the same Spirit that caused Demas of old to embrace this
present Evil Word, complained of by that worthy Apostle and Servant of the
Lord, Paul, who lamented in his Day and Time to this effect, That all were
seeking after their own, and not the things of the Lord, who could not be
content with a low Estate which the Lord does bless; having Food and Raiment to
be therewith content, and to follow the low and humble Example of our only and
blessed Savior the Lord Jesus Christ; who, although, was Heir of all Things in
Heaven, and in the Earth, yet denied himself of all things taking off the
World, only a little sustenance, and a little something for outward Covering,
viz. a Garment which we read of was without Seam, without Rent; and so is his
Spiritual Garment witnessed, and known to be at this Day to a little Remnant;
he alone is worthy of the Glory, who is for ever blessed: And where the Rents
are, and where the Envy and Bitterness of Spirit is, and where the Runings out
are, from the Truth and blessed Spirit of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ;
let it be be amongst what People, Name or Denomination soever, such do not keep
under the Spiritual and Seamless Garment of our Lord Jesus Christ;
notwithstanding they may not be a wanting of high Pretenses, and making in
Words a great and specious Profession of him, much like the Jews of old, who
counted themselves the Children of God and Abraham's Seed; yet would needs have
Christ the blessed Messiah to be a Blasphemer, and what not, speaking
Despicably of him; saying, Is not this the Carpenter's Son? whose Father and
Mother we know; and are not his Brethren hear with us? Calling him a Deceiver,
and how that he did cast out Devils by Beelzebub, etc. And such as before go
into the Love of this present World, and too much effects the Enjoyments
thereof; and such go into a Spirit of Prejudice and Envy, and lets in a
persecuting Spirit against their Brethren, that cannot Worship after the same
way and manner, as they themselves are pleased to do; which is too much like
Cain's Spirit and Disposition. And this envious Spirit of prejudice, to my
former too great and woeful Loss, and hurt, to my great Unhappiness; having
entered into my poor Soul, through my too much giving way unto my Soul's Enemy,
after I had a long time made profession with the People called Quakers, to that
Degree, that I almost loathed the sight of any of the said People; but the
Merciful God, who had visited and tendered my Heart, in my early and young
Days, who had been many a time good unto me, who continued to follow me in my
Rebellious State, and State of Apostasy from him, justly brought upon me,
Outward and Worldly Disappointments, and blasted my Endeavors, as to Outward
and Worldly Affairs; yet providentially opened a way still for an outward
Subsistence.

Yet again, I forgot the Lord, who had showed so much Mercy and Goodness unto
me; and the Enemy again stole away my Heart from following him, by little and
little, so that I lived in much and great Excess, too much to mention hear; but
the Lord still continued to follow me, according to his wonted Mercy and long
forbearance, and in a remarkable way visited me with his Judgments. It being
now near Four Years since, by laying his Afflicting Hand upon my Body; by which
my Body came to be afflicted with diverse kinds of Indispositions and
Weaknesses, and that of a long continuance; and also inwardly visited my Soul
and Spirit with Judgment, wherein my former Disobedient and Rebellious State
was set before me, as in a Glass; the Lord having found me in this deplorable
State, and nothing but Eternity, in a dreadful manner, seemingly to appear in
my view; and that which greatly Exercised my distressed Mind, was the
unaccountable hardness of my Heart; when if the World had been in my Power to
have given, I could gladly have parted with it, to have had my hard Heart
broken, and tendered by the good Spirit of the Lord, and at that time to have
witnessed lasting Peace to my poor never dying Soul. So the Lord in great Mercy
unto me, having brought me every way very low in his time, which was a time of
great Love indeed, he did not forget to show his great Love and Mercy unto my
greatly distressed poor Soul, and brought my Heart and Spirit into much
brokenness and tenderness; for which I have abundant cause to be always
thankful unto the Lord for ever, to bless and praise his Honorable and Worthy
Name, so long as it may please the Lord to give me a Being in this Mortal Body.

The weighty, solid, and serious Consideration, of which great and
unaccountable Mercy, great Favor and Love of Almighty God to me, has
occasioned a concern of Mind in me toward others, that may have Apostatized
from the Lord as I have done, in slighting his tender and compassionate
Visitations; to warn others that may have declined in their Hearts from the
Lord of Life and Glory, as I to my former great Unhappiness have done: And this
former unhappy State and Condition of mine, may also serve to be a warning unto
all sorts of People, of what Persuasion or Judgment soever, that they do not
provoke a merciful God as I have done: For my belief is, that the Lord is not a
wanting, to afford in some degree and measure, a time of Visitation unto all,
so as to leave all without excuse, of what Persuasion or Judgment soever, when
he shall come to Judgment. And it is my belief, that at that Day the Question
will not be so much, what People's Judgments and Religious Persuasions may have
been; but whether in their Lives and Conversations, they have not lived in
Rebellion against the good Spirit of the Lord; so as in that Day be found
Workers of Iniquity, so as to incur that woeful Sentence of, Go you Cursed into
utter Darkness, etc.

And as before expressed, having through the great goodness of the Lord, in
some measure obtained Forgiveness, and Mercy, and Favor at his Merciful Hand,
has occasioned a concern upon my Mind, to go to visit this, to be lamented
Apostatized, poor Man, George Keith; which accordingly I did, about the Months
called February or March last, before he had given over Acting at his Stage at
Turner's- Hall, and some Months before he tooks Orders upon him in the Church
of England way; it being upon my Mind, to warn and caution him against that
Spirit of Prejudice, which I had a Sense of he was entered into: And I can
truly say, I found Love in my Heart reaching toward him; and amongst the
Expressions which he made to me, at the close of what past, I holding him by
the Hand, being earnestly dissuading of him from that undue proceedure of his.
He replied, What would thou have me to do? would thou have me to go into
the Street with my Wife and Family? And this, if need be, I can Testify to the
Face of George Keith to be ineffect, if not the very express Words, which came
then from the Mouth of George Keith, against whom I have nothing of Prejudice,
but Christian Tenderness, Love and Good Will in my Heart: And it would be well
for him, if he would whilst it is called to Day, to turn unto the Lord with a
sincere Heart in true Repentance, and to put up sincere Cries and Breathings
unto the Lord, as I through the Goodness and Mercy of the Lord have been made
to do, to Cry unto him in much tenderness and brokenness of Heart for
forgiveness, and for Mercy, and not to be ashamed to take Shame upon himself in
sincere Repentance, again to return unto the Lord.

No Worldly Intrest moved me to this Concern, neither am I, nor have I been
insighted hereunto by any Person, or Quaker living: The Lord is my Witness, I
have had a Concern to conceal my Concern of Mind from them, until it be
Published unto the World: And the Author of This, in Sincerity, has Christian
Love and Good Will, and Christian respect to all Solid and Sincere-hearted
People, of the Church of England Persuasion and Way; as also, to all others,
that do not too much affect Worldly Interest, that affects a Christ-like
Self-denying State, that desires the Welfare and Happiness of all that can
love Enemies; that like Christ our Lord, who came to do good unto all, even
unto the Rebellious; that when his Persecutors were Crucifying of him to Death,
he cried, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. He did not cry for
Fire to come down to destroy his Persecutors, but submitted his Will unto his
Father's Will, which he came into the World to do, to dye for Sinners, for the
Rebellious, that through him? and what he suffered for lost Man, lost Man might
be redeemed unto God out of the fallen State. So in the tender Love of Almighty
God, with which he is waiting to do the Sons of Men his Creation good withal; I
bid all to farewell. Seeing no necessity for me to subscribe my Name to this
Paper, I having more than once signified it unto George Keith, as likewise my
place of Abode and Calling, etc.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Friendly Reader,
AS to the giving this our Adversary, and the Adversaries of Truth what they
insist upon, relating to their Disingenious way of taking Scraps of their
Quotations, out of our Friend's Books, as best suits with his, and their
Inveterate prejudiced Minds; and that also in a bitter persecuting Spirit, and
Disposition against a peaceable People; not only out of diverse of our Friend's
Writings, that are yet living: And if they have not already, may as they find
freedom, give a more Sincere Sense than their Opposers have done, of what may
be objected, and unfairly opposed, and exposed by their unfair and partial
Adversaries, Sordid, Biassed, Disingenious Insinuations: And whether it does
not look unfair in These, our, and the Adversaries of Truth, to rake m the
Embers of the Dead, that are out of the Body, diverse of them Years since; so
not in a capacity to Vindicate what was then in their Time and Day, upon their
Hearts to Write, for, and on the behalf of that Way and Blessed Truth, they in
their Day and Time were made Professors, and Possessors of; on the account of
which, they underwent great Sufferings, and greatly Suffered; for Whom we have
good Reason to believe, are at Rest with the Lord. And whether this to be
Pitied and Apostatized Man George Keith is not partial in a high Degree, as to
these his Quotations; when as he himself in those many Years he was amongst the
said People, I have reason to believe, was not without a considerable share in
Writing for, and vindicating that Truth, which I believe he once sincerely and
firmly believed, that he has not so much as made one Quotation out of his own
Writings, when among the said People; and notwithstanding his public owning to
have been formerly with them Guilty, both in Doctrine and Practice of Error,
and what is proposed and desired by the Author of this Paper, is that the
unbiassed, and simple-hearted, and unwary may not be hurt, nor let in a Spirit
of prejudice, by any means, work or endeavor, by the endeavors of any poor
Envious, Bewildered and Darkened Apostate, or Apostates; who like Esau of old,
sells their Birth rights for a Mess of Pottage, for a little present Worldly
Enjoyments, a little Worldy Gain, etc. In which I am assured, they cannot have
true and lasting Peace, to their never-dying poor Souls; but Horror, Anguish
and Trouble of Mind, Heart and Spirit; For there is no Peace to the Wicked,
says my God: Which the Author of this Paper, to his unexpressible Sorrow,
Grief and Anxiety of Spirit, has by woeful Experience been acquainted withal.
Farewell.

Written in London, in the Seventh Month, 1700.
FINIS.

