A Serious Manifesto and Declaration OF THE ANABAPTIST, And other
Congregational CHURCHES, Touching the present Transactions of the Affairs of
this Commonwealth, both in Church and State.
WIth what unwearied vigor and zeal of Spirit we have always sought the
promotion and advancement of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Purity
of the Gospel, and Liberty of Conscience, against all that have opposed
themselves thereunto, some preceding years can bear us Testimony; which we
endeavored to do, not only by wading through streams of Blood and Danger in
the late Wars, with the extremest hazard of all that was Dear and Near unto us;
but also by a continual and fervent intercession, by tears and prayers unto
Almighty God on that behalf.

Nor need we here acquaint this present Age, with what success they were
answered from Him who is the Giver of all good: the real Testimonies whereof
are pregnant enough, from that sweet and Christian Liberty we all enjoyed, as
well in our Civil Employments, as our Religious Dispensations; and might from
thence long since have expected and looked for a sweet, lasting, and real
composure of Spirits and Interests in this Nation, Had not some (Ambitious of
single Power of Regality in themselves, abetted and assisted by others of like
base and degenerating spirits) spoiled the Fabric of our Peace and Happiness,
Levelling the Hope of our Settlement, to advance the height of his unjust and
usurped Power and Kingship.

During the Reign of which Dragon, all knowing men can witness, how much the
Churches of Christ then suffered, and all that bore Testimony to the Truth of
the Lord Jesus, both by Silencings, Sequestrings, Imprisonments and Death, nor
regarding of what Faith or Profession, or whether Friends or ^oes; but the
(once) Bosom Friend, as well as the Common Enemy, were alike liable to his
merciless Cruelty. But, his Violence was cut off with his Life, and his Progeny
(from Ruling) by both.

We shall not (therefore) need to mention those few minutes of his Sons R^ign,
which lasted not much longer, than whilft he contracted vast Debts for his
Fathers Funeral, but soon vanished, leaving the Commonwealth dearly to pay both
for the Erecting, and for the Pulling Down again of their Kingly Idol: Nor of
what was acted in each after-Interval and Change, Affairs of State being
always left and found in such counfusion and disorder, that the Churches of
Christ were still in jeopardy, and could very hardly get one look of favor or
Protection from successive Rulers: We having not (indeed) in all the
Vicissitudes these late years have afforded, beheld any visible Rulers, on whom
the Congregated Churches had more cause to fix a real hope of liberty and
freedom on (as to Spirituals) than on that part of the Officers of the Army
late residing in Wallingford-House (whom we do Resolve to adhere to, and stand
by) whose zeal to the Cause of Christ and his Churches, as well as Conscience
and Care of the Peoples Rights and Liberties, put them upon the Necessity of
that kind of Assembling and Acting: by whom, (had they not been so unworthily
deserted and betrayed by some of their own Fellows and Servants) we might have
seen ere this the greatest day of rejoicing and gladness amongst the Churches
of Christ, that all or any of the foregoing Ages have either seen or read of.

Being therefore deeply sensible of our present sufferings, (by the loss of
those our worthy Patriots, and Church-defenders) and of the real Causers
thereof: And finding at this present (to our great grief, as well as
admiration) That at this time the implacable Enemies of our Churches (the late
Secluded Members) are again admitted, and do now daily Sit and Vote in
Parliament; from whose violent tempers of Spirit (according to their former
expressed fury) we are in all likelihood to expect our common Peace to be
perturbed, our Meetings dissolved, and our Persons endangered, if some timely
and necessary provision for prevention thereof be not made and provided.

And we have yet further confidence to speak, That as we are not (if united) an
inconsiderable part of this Nation, both in respect of Power, Estates and
Strength: So we hope no sober and unbyassed persons can think it consistent
with our Reason and Interest, to suffer a trampling upon by Forms of
Banishment, Sequestrations, and unjust Proclamations for making some of us
Traitors, who long since have learnt to deny the Power of them.

And therefore we do hereby Manifest and Declare, on the behalf of our selves,
and all other Congregational Churches within this Commonwealth, holding the
Faith of the Lord Jesus in Word and Doctrine, That we shall not submit to any
Qualifications of Parliament in point of Faith and Religion, (a force, we hear,
intended to be put upon our Consciences) other than shall consist with the true
Teachings and Guidance of the holy Spirit. Nor shall we hold our selves obliged
to render obedience to this present State-conjunction, without the full and
free restitution and admission of the Lord Lambert, etc. lately Members of the
Committee of Safety. And we do further Declare, That we shall with our Lives
and Fortunes, and to our utmost Power and Abilities, Assist, Promote, Adhere
to, and stand by those true and faithful Assertors of the Cause of Christ and
his Churches: Looking upon all other Parties and Interests, but as such who
have kindled a fire, and compassed themselves about with sparks; that may walk
in the light of their fire, and in the sparks that they have kindled: But this
shall they have at the h^^d of the Lord, They shall lie down in Sorrow.

London, Printed for Henry Hardy. 1660.


