AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. Balyes Five Ways, WHEREBY He endeavors to prove the
Church of Rome to be the only Church of Christ wherein Salvation is to be had,
and the Church of England to be no True Church.

BY ROBERT SEPPENS Rector of Hingham in Norfolk.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for William Oliver, Bookseller, in the Marketplace
in Norwich. 1679.

TO THE READER.
WHen King CHARLES the First, that glorious Martyr, of ever blessed memory, was
by his inhuman and unnatural Subjects most barbarously Murdered; there were
Missionaries from Rome employed in all parts of the Kingdom to disaffect the
people to the Monarchy, and the Hierarchy, to the Religion, and the Government
of the Kingdom Established by Law. Amongst the rest, one came to a Gentlewoman
not far from me (when I lived at Bradenham) and presented her with a Book,
Styled An End to all Controversies, of which Doctor Baly was the Author. Now
Doctor Baly you must know was revolted from the Church of England, and was had
in great esteem for two famous Books formerly Published by him. One was a
Romance Dedicated to the Lady Crane of Suffolk, Entitled Herba Parietis, or
the Wall Flower; the other was A Narrative of the Conference betwixt King
Charles the First, and the Marquess of Worcester at Ragland Castle. It is not
my present business to enquire how well he discharged himself in those his
undertakings. But certainly the last Book he Published, viz. An End to all
Controversies, and that indeed which was given to the forementioned Gentlewoman
in order to some further design upon her: was palmarium opus, the most worthy
of the three. The Gentlewoman after the perusal of it brought it to me, with an
earnest desire to hear my judgment of it, to satisfy, therefore, her request,
I Read it over, and in the Reading of it, I observed it consisted of these two
parts especially, A Calumnious invective against the Church of England; then a
Polemick Discourse, wherein the Doctor by Five Arguments had there endeavored
to prove the Church of Rome to be the only true Church wherein Life and
Salvation was to be had, and the Church of England to be no true Church. The
Gentlewoman soon perceived what dangerous Consequence this Book might be of,
and so was not infected with any of those pernicious Principles contained in
it. But I fearing lest through the weakness of her Sex (though indeed she was
Prudent, Virtuous, and in matters of Religion of understanding above her Sex)
she might have been prevailed upon by those Arguments, and being very much
concerned to deliver her from the danger and poison of them, I thought my self
obliged to commend an Antidote to her to prevent infection. To effect which I
passed by the Railing invective part of his Discourse, and made it my business
to Answer the Polemick part of it; wherein though he very confidently boasts of
his Arguments as unanswerable and invincible, yet after a strict enquiry and
examination of them, I neither found Hector nor Achilles in them. This
Discourse I Penned long since, and immediately after delivered it my self to
the forementioned Person, who lived to see the happy Restoration of His
Majesty, and then dyed in the Communion of the Church of England. I long
expected some Answer to this, but hearing of none I have now ventured to make
it public, not out of any desire to appear again in public, but partly to
vindicate my self from the suspicion of Popery, which I have been traduced for,
partly by way of caution to others. Such as it is I willingly submit to the
Judgments of unprejudiced Readers; and that it may prove effectual for the
vindication of our Church from the false accusations of its adversaries is the
hearty Prayers as well as desires of

R. S.

(...)

Sacraments of the Lord. Augustine, Psalm xxxii. Epist. 48. and 164. etc. The
peevish Schismatics took advantage upon this their Concession to conclude
themselves to be the only Church, and to exclude all others. If it be so (say
they) Communio nostra est Ecclesia Christi. Our Communion is the Church of
Christ alone. Aug. de Bapt. de cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap. 10. And Petilianus
dixit, Petilian says, Come to the Church, O people, and fly from the
Traditors, if you will not perish: that you may know they are guilty they judge
rightly of our Faith, etc. Contra lit. Pelit. lib. 2. cap. 1.8. If this
reasoning of Petilianus was good, then the Roman Church it self was excluded,
if it was not, why does the Romanist use it against us? We must not do that to
others we would not have others do to us.

For that Argument the Doctor frames out of our Concessions toward the end of
that Chapter, It Is very fallacious.

The Church of God is but one.

The Church of Rome is the True Church.

The Church of England is opposite to that Church.

Therefore the Church of England is no True Church.

But not to trouble you with the vitiosity of his Logicks, I shall answer it as
it lies.

When we say the Church of God is but one, we mean the Universal Church, we
speak not Emphatically or Exclusively, as if she were the whole or the only
Church, but we mean she is a True particular Church. When we say the Church of
England is opposite to the Roman Church, we mean Secundum quid, in some things,
not simpliciter, not simply in the Essentials of a Church, but in some Doctrins
and Observations: In which respect some Church may be opposite to the Roman
Church, and yet be a True Church still as long as she retains all the
Fundamentals: As for example, one Doctor in the Roman Church may be opposite to
another in some Opinions and Observations of Discipline, and yet be a True
Catholic still, as well as the other.

A Second way whereby he pretends to end all Controversies and prove the Roman
Church to be the one Holy Catholic Church where Remission of sins is only,
etc. Is by reference to a third party as Umpire in the business, and so he
says Protestants are cast in their own Cause by the Arbitrament of St.
Augustine, who being the Monarch of the Fathers, is Appealed to by both Parties
as a competent Judge. Cap. 26.

It Is well the Doctor will acknowledge any Umpire in the cause, but the Pope or
the Roman Church. Surely this is a work of Supererogation, which he now does in
a Bravado to show what abundant ways he has of confuting the poor Church of
England, but he was not the Author of this device. Ieronymus Torrensis, a
Jesuit, many years ago abbreviated all St. Augustines Works, and Published
them in honor of his Church, by the name of Augustinina Confessio, Augustines
Confession. And Brerely a Priest contracted his Doctrine into a lesser Model
after him, and called it St. Augustines Religion. How much the Doctor is
beholden to his two forerunners for their Collections, the world must not know,
and it is no matter whether they do or no, if he can make it out by any means
that St. Augustine has prejudged us so many hundred years ago, it must needs
be a fatal blow to the Church of England, and this he endeavors to do by
giving us St. Augustines Judgment in all or most of the particulars
Controverted, but how truly you shall see in the sequel.

St. Augustine (says he) tells us plainly, that the Church was built upon
Peter, in the first of his Retract. Cap. 21. Yet in this very first place, St.
Augustine he knows retracts it, and says plainly by the Rock may be meant the
Person, whom he confessed, it was not said to him. Tues Petra, sed tues Petrus,
Petra autem erat Christus, quem confessus Simon: Thou art the Rock, but thou
art Peter, for the Rock was Christ whom Peter confessed, and though in the
following words he leaves it to the choice of the Reader, to take which
Interpretation he pleases, yet by retracting of the former it appears he
adhered to the latter. As is made more probable by another passage of the same
Father in a Sermon de verb. Dom. Sermon. 13. Non me super te, Petre, sed te super
me, I am not built upon thee Peter, but thou upon me, and therefore in this
point Pighius condemns that Father as inconstant to himself.

St. Augustine acknowledged the Popes Supremacy, but not that unlimited
Supremacy that is now challenged, consisting in a Superiority over Councils,
jurisdiction over Kings, in being Judge of all Controversies, for St. Augustine
himself denied Appeals to Rome.

St. Augustine (says he) taught the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, her
freedom from Original sin, her vowed Chastity. But in that Book de Sancta
Virginit. he refers us to, I find mention only of her vowed Chastity, which is
no matter of Controversy, but nothing of her freedom from Original sin: and
it is well known that Opinion of the Virgins freedom from Original sin is of a
later birth, it being unknown in St. Bernards time, nothing determined of it
till the Council of Basil. 1431.

St. Augustine says that the Authority of the Catholic Church is of more
efficacy than the word it self; and we are of his Judgment too if he be rightly
understood, that the Authority of the Church is of more efficacy to some, in
some respect, to move Pagans and Infidels.

St. Augustine tells us it is an Heretical thing to insist only upon Scripture,
and so say we, we know Reason must be used to convince Heathen, and Tradition
to convince Heretics.

St. Augustine says that the Church cannot Err, so say we, if we understand by
the Church, the Church Universal, with this limitation, in Fundamentals.

St. Augustine, The Church of Christ is Universal, and so say we: St. Augustine
tells us that the Church Catholic must be Visible, so say we.

St. Augustine teaches that there are Seven Sacrament, that is false, St.
Augustine no where speaks of that just number, neither was it ever determined
till the Council of Florence, nor heard of before Peter Lombard.

St. Augustine (says he) believed Transubstantiation in effect, but not in
terms: how does he know St. Augustine believed it in effect, when he does not
express so much in his terms?

St. Augustine teaches us that the Sacrament is to be adored, but in all the
places he refers us to I can find nothing to that purpose, but only upon Psalm
xcvii. where he has these words, Nemo carnem illam manducet nisi prius
adoraverit, let no man Eat that Flesh, unless he first adores, which I hope no
good Christian will refuse to do. Christ no Question ought to be adored in our
approaches to that Sacrament, and the Sacrament it self is venerable; with all
due respects to be handled and received.

Not to trouble my self nor you with examining all the Points of Divinity he
gives us St. Augustines judgment on: if St. Augustine taught the Eucharist to
be a Sacrifice: Confession of sins to a Priest: That Orders ought not to be
conferred but by a Bishop: That it is an Error to affirm a Bishop and a Priest
to be a like in Dignity. If he maintained Freewill: Justification by Works:
That men are made Righteous by Works: For that was St. Augustines Notion of
Justification. If he taught that good Works do Merit in some kind: the
difference betwixt Venial and Mortal sins: Prescribed days of Fasting. If he
commends Monastical life: The Learned of the Church of England will give their
suffrage to St. Augustine in all these particulars, and not betray their cause
neither: So you see we have received no great damage by this reference yet.

But if we turn over St. Augustine again and enquire out his judgment
concerning the Innovations and new Doctrines maintained in the Roman Church, we
shall see that these Appellants themselves are condemned by St. Augustines
Sentence.

The present Church of Rome maintains Worshipping of Images, St. Augustine
condemned it in his 119. Epist. ad Jan. saying, nulla imago ejus coli debet,
etc. no Image of God ought to be Worshipped, but that which is the same with
himself; and in his Book de moribus Ecclesiae. Cap. 34. he has these words, Do
not follow the rout of ignorant people, which in the true Religion are
Superstitious, I know many Worshippers of Sepulchers and Pictures. And upon
Psalm cxii. he has a long Discourse to show how dangerous the use of such
Images is.

The present Church of Rome maintains that the Scriptures are imperfect and
obscure in matters of Faith and good Life, St. Augustine teaches the contrary
in his Book de Doctr. Christiana, in those things which are plainly delivered
in the Scripture are found all things which concern Faith and good Life.

The present Church denies the Scripture to be Judge of any Controversy, St.
Collat. Carthag. 3. Cap. 187.
Augustine summons the Donatists to the Judgment of Scripture alone in that
Controversy, in one place he says the Divine Testimonies alone are sufficient
to demonstrate the Church: Let Divine Authority alone speak, let Scripture
alone be produced, to which both of us owe submission. And in his Book de
Unitate Ecclesiae, he says, Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis, sed audiamus,
haec dicit Dominus, etc. Let us not hear, this I say, and this thou say, but
let us hear, this the Lord says: There are the Lords Books, let us there seek
for the Church, let us there discuss our cause, let those things be laid aside
which we produce one against another not out of the Divine Canonical Books.

The present Roman Church forbids people Reading of the Scripture, St.
Augustine exhorts his Auditors all to Read the Scriptures, upon Psalm xxxiii.
Read the Scriptures (says he) therefore God would have them written that we
might be comforted.

The present Church of Rome has taken away the Cup from the people in the
Sacrament, St. Augustine says all the people must receive it, if they will
have life. Quaest. 57. in Levit.

The present Church of Rome maintains Transubstantiation, St. Augustine denies
it, in his Book against Adimantus, he has these words, The Lord doubted not to
say, this is my Body, when he gave a sign of his Body: And in a Sermon upon
Psalm xcviii. he has these words, Non hoc corpus, etc. You are not about to
Eat that Body, which you see, nor Drink that Blood which is poured out by my
Crucifiers. I have commended unto you a Sacrament, which being Spiritually
understood shall quicken you, and although it be necessary to celebrate it
visibly, yet it ought to be understood invisibly: it were an easy matter for a
man meanly versed in St. Augustine, to instance in many more particulars
wherein that Father varies from the judgment of the present Roman Church. As
concerning the number of the Sacraments, the Virgin Mary's Immaculate
Conception, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, etc.
But I am weary and troublesome, and so shall put a Period to this part, desiring
you now to judge impartially whether we be cast in our cause by St. Augustines
Sentence or no.

The third way he pretends to end all Controversies, is by the known and ever
acknowledged Tribunal, and Seat of Judgment provided in that behalf: and so
Protestants are cast in their own Cause again by Judiciary way of proceeding,
by the highest Judicature in Causes Ecclesiastical: the Church of Rome.

Arguments are not so plentiful with the Doctor as he makes show of, when he is
forced to make use of this new Topic, viz. to prove the Roman Church to be the
whole Catholic Church, by the judgment of the Roman Church. If I bear witness
of my self (says Christ) my witness is not true, John v. 31. Nemo qui de
seipso fert testimonium fide dignus est, propter suspicionem de nimio sui
ipsius amore. Euthym. No body that bears witness of himself, is worthy to be
believed, because every man is suspected to love himself too well.

And therefore whatsoever others may, this Argument is not like to sway much
with rational men, it is a poor thing of so great a Clerk, who has so good a
Cause as he conceives, and all learning of his side, to use such pitiful
begging of the Question: Whether the Church of Rome be the Judge of all
Controversies is one thing in question. And to Appeal to his Church as Judge,
before he has proved her to be so, is a piece of Sophistry. But this he makes
us believe he has done before in part, Cap. 1. and now he will do it more
fully by Scriptures, Fathers Greek and Latin, the practice of all Ages,
Nations, Tongues and People, and the confession of her very Adversaries. If he
can do as much as he promises, let him be Anathema Maranatha that shall not
conform his judgment to the Roman Church, but if these be all Ostentations,
Rhodomontadoes to amaze his Reader and charm his Proselytes into a Circle of
ignorance. Has not every wise man cause to suspect that Cause that needs such
Arts to underprop it?

Two things there are I suppose the Doctor is obliged to do to make this
undertaking good.

First, to prove that the Roman Church is provided, and ordained by God the
Judge of all Controversies, and so that she is lawfully possessed of this Office.

Secondly, That, de facto, she was ever acknowledged so to be.

For the first he seems to do it by these Scriptures. God erected a standing
Judicature for all Controversies among the Jews, Deuteronomy. xvii. 8, 9. He foretells
that at Christ's coming his House should be established on the top of the
mountains, Isay ii. 2.
and all Nations should flow unto it. Christ commands to hear the Church,
Matthew. xviii. and foretells that he will take the Kingdom of God from the Jews,
and give it to another Nation, i. e. the Romans, Matthew. xxi. 43. St. Paul tells
us he has given some Apostles, etc. Ephesians. iv. 11. But these being all
impertinent, and miserably wrested, I shall not wast time and paper in
answering them, and truly unless the Doctor had had more pertinent Texts to
have proved the Question, he should have done well to have waved this kind of
proof, especially seeing the Church of Rome has not always claimed by this
Title of Divine Right, when the contest was betwixt the Romans and Africans
about Appeals: Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus the then Popes of Rome did
not urge Divine Law for their claim of receiving Appeals out of Africa, but the
Decrees of the Nicene Council, whereby it appears, that then they thought not
that this Jurisdiction belonged to them by Divine Right.

Yet this failing, if he can prove the matter of Fact it will be something, this
is the Strength and Bulwark of the Cause, and this he seems to manage with more
dexterity: for very numerous he is in Quotation of Fathers, and very Rhetorical
in persuading, but his Authorities, if you observe them, are most of them
impertinent; he produces the testimonies of the Fathers in great numbers to
prove that the Pope of Rome was St. Peter's Successor, had magnificent Titles
given him, was called a Catholic Bishop, and Bishop of the Catholic Church.
That the Roman Church was in Ancient times very highly accounted of, that the
Roman Faith was called the Catholic Faith.

Only in the fixth Division, Page 234. He seems to come home to the Question:
for there he gives us a just Catalogue of oppressed Bishops that made
complaints to the Pope of Rome, and of some Holy Fathers that made their
addresses to him upon some other occasions, which seem to argue that he was
then acknowledged the Judge of all Controversies.

This at first makes a great noise like the rattling of Hail upon a House top,
but soon falls to the Ground.

The Pope of Rome may be considered in a threefold capacity.

First, of a Bishop over a particular Diocese, and so there belonged to him, as
to other Bishops, a Judgment of Jurisdiction over his own Clergy.

Secondly, of a Patriarch, in which respect there belonged to him Authority to
hear complaints of Bishops against their Metropolitans, and determine all
differences amongst Metropolitans under his Patriarchate.

Thirdly, of the Prime Patriarch of the Catholic Church, without whose
concurrence the meaner Patriarchs could do nothing in the weighty and important
affairs of the Church, to whom the Cognizance of some things belonged above
other Patriarchs, by the Canons of the Council of Sardis, and to whom singular
honor was done, and some extraordinary Privileges granted, as Bishop of the
Imperial City, as the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon said: in all which
respects Complaints and Appeals might be made to the Pope of Rome, and yet it
does not follow that he was ever acknowledged the Judge of all Controversies.
For it is evident notwithstanding all the Privileges of the Pope of Rome, that
yet there was reserved to every Bishop the Judgment of all differences amongst
Presbyters in his own Diocese: To Metropolitans the Judgment of differences
amongst Bishops: To Patriarchs the Judgment of Metropolitans: And to General
Councils the Judgment of Patriarchs.

And therefore for all this great flourish made by this Doctor in numbering so
many Appellants, and Complainants to the Pope, I believe I am able to
demonstrate out of the Records of Antiquity, that the Pope of Rome was not ever
acknowledged the Judge of all Controversies.

Polycarpus was a blessed Martyr, and a Disciple of St. John the Evangelist,
and he did not acknowledge the Pope, nor the Roman Church, to be the Judge of all
Controversies, for be refused to conform to the Judgment of the Roman Church in
the observation of Easter.

Polycrates assembled with the Asian Bishops in a Synod did not acknowledge the
Roman Church to be Judge of all Controversies: For they stood in defiance with
Pope Victor, and his Excommunication, about that Observation. Eusab. lib. 5.
cap. 23.24.

St. Cyprian was a Holy Martyr, and stand Canonized for a Saint in the Roman
Church, and he did not acknowledge the Roman Church to be Judge of all
Controversies: For he did abrogate Appeals to Rome in the Cause of Fortunatus
and Faelicissimus, and with a Council of Eighty Bishops concluded contrary to
the Roman Church in the business of Rebaptization, Epist. 55. Ad Cornel.
as Bellarmine himself acknowledges. lib. 4. de Romans Pont.

St. Augustine was the Monarch of the Fathers, and so illustrious for Learning
and Piety, that he is chosen by the Doctor to be Umpire in the difference: yet
he did not acknowledge the Roman Church to be Judge of all Controversies: For he
in two Councils with the African Bishops, viz. The (...) and the first Council
of Carthage denied Appeals to Rome in some cases.

It is true indeed, St. Augustine, in his 162. Epistle, does give us an account
of the Judgment given by Melchiades, Bishop of Rome, in the Controversy
betwixt Donatus and Caecilianus, and does very highly extol and magnify the
Sentence of Melchiades, as indeed it deserved to be. But withal he tells us
that Melchiades did not assume to himself alone Authority of Judging in that
Case, but had many Bishops of Italy, and France joined with him.

Insomuch when Donatus refusing to stand to the Judgment of Melchiades, and his
Colleague Bishops endeavored to asperse and defame Melchiades, St. Augustine
excuses him from all Arrogance and Usurpation three ways: First by declaring
that they made him a Judge of that Controversy, who Appealed unto him, and by
their Prayers Solicited him to give Sentence in it, Judicem illi eum fecerunt,
etc. they made him a Judge. Secondly, That the Emperor Constantine referred it
to him, who being petitioned sent other Bishops as Judges to sit with him, and
to determine what they found just in the matter. Thirdly, They knew they might
have Appealed to a General Council, where if these Judges had been convinced to
have Judged amiss, their Sentence might have been reversed, and the Judges
themselves Judged again.

This Testimony is full enough to evince, that neither St. Augustine nor the
Age wherein he lived, acknowledged the Roman Church the Judge of all
Controversies.

St. Jerome was a Mirror of Learning, and (as is pretended) a great assertor of
the Popes Supremacy: yet he did not acknowledge the Church off Rome to be Judge
of all Controversies: For in a great difference betwixt the Oriental Churches
and the Roman Church in Point Doctrinal, he cast off the Judgment of the Roman
Church, and followed the Oriental. In St. Jeroms time the Epistle of St. Paul
to the Hebrews was not received into the Canon of the Scripture by the Roman
Church, but by the Eastern Churches it was: Now if the Roman Church had been
acknowledged by him the Judge of all Controversies, he would not, he durst not
have varied from her, But he says expressly, Quod si Latina Consuetudo, etc.
Although the Latin Church does not admit of the Epistle as Canonical, we
notwithstanding (says he) do receive it. What need I add any more? If the
Fathers acknowledged the Roman Church the Judge of all Controversies, why did
they take so much pains in confuting Heresies by Scripture, by Tradition, when
they might have ended all, by Appealing all to the Judgment of the Roman Church?

In vain are so many means used for the compassing of that, which might be done
by fewer? And does not this Doctor himself tell us in Cap. 8. at the very
beginning, of many Heresies the Fathers suppressed by Tradition alone, without
the interposition of the Judgment of the Roman Church. By this (says he)
Eusebius acknowledges Tertullian to have repressed the Marcionites: Irenaeus
the Valentinians: St. Cyprian the Novatians: Epiphanius the Apostolicks: St.
Jerome the Helvidians: St. Augustine the Donatists: Athanasius the Arrians. How
then in the mean time was the Roman Church the Judge of all Controversies, and
why may not Heresies still be suppressed that way?

Now for the General Council, which this Author names too, as favorers of this
Jurisdiction in the Roman Chruch: It Is a very fond thing for any man to imagine
that they should contribute any thing to this assertion, when by so doing they
had nulled their own Authority and Power. It is well known that General
Councils were the highest Tribunals in the Church, that they gave Sentence in
the weightiest Controversies, that they suppressed Heresies, deposed Bishops,
Patriarchs, yea even Popes of Rome, and that the Popes of Rome themselves for
many years at their Inauguration swore to observe the Canons of the General
Councils. Now thus I argue, if the Judgment of many Differences and
Controversies did in a peculiar manner belong to General Councils: how is the
Roman Church Judge of all Controversies? If there did not: why were they
assembled, and by what Authority did they these things before specified?

The fourth way of ending all Controversies is by both Parties agreeing upon
the same mark, whereby the thing in Contestation may be found out. And so
(says he, Cap. 28.) the Church of Rome is proved to be a true Church by the
very same mark, which both Catholic and Protestants agree upon to be the mark
of Christ's Church.

And if this be all the Doctor would have, who denies it? But I pray if that
mark agreed upon on both sides be of force to prove the Church of Rome to be a
true Church: Is it of none to prove the Church of England to be so too, if
found there? How comes this common mark to signify so fully, when applied to
Roman Church, and to be as a Mute, and non-significant, when applied to the
Church of England.

It Is strange to see how in this Chapter he shuffles, plays fast and loose, now
gives, now takes away again. He begins with a designation of that mark of the
Church, which (he says) all agree upon. And that is Holiness, which he takes
in a new Notion for a Faithful Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the
Sacraments, wherein all Scriptures Catholics, Protestants agree; and yet in
the very next place he undertakes to prove that faithful Preaching of Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments, whereof this Holiness consists, are no marks
of the Church, and this he does by two or three Arguments, Page 256. which if
used against the fifteen marks of Bellarmines assigning, would pare them all
out of Roman Scutchions. Now fearing he had done something he could not answer,
he comes to salve all by a new distinction of Holiness.

Holiness (says he) may be taken two ways. Page 267.


First, For an Universal purity of Doctrine, and true Preaching of the Word, as
it is opposite to all errors in every Dogmatical and Essential Point.

Secondly, For a particular discerning Holiness, whereby the true Preaching of
the Word is opposite to all palpable and gross absurdities, repugnant to the
very Principles of Nature, Rules of Faith, and express Texts of Scripture.

What the meaning of this distinction is, I confess, I understand not, nor I
believe he himself; if he were enjoyed to make it intelligible, and justify it
by the Rules of Art, I believe it would cost him more pains than the writing of
his Book. After he has told us of this miraculous distinction, which no man
knows to what purpose, he advances to the great works, viz. To prove the Roman
Church to be a True Church by those marks, which are no marks.

We will consider (says he) on our side what Doctrine it is which the Roman
Catholics do Preach: and on the other side what Doctrine it is which the
Protestants maintain: and comparing both together, observe whether of the two
Preach more sincerely or faithfully.

For the Catholics (says he) they prescribe a strict way by Confessing of
sins, doing Penance, Restitution for wrong done, set-times of Fasting, etc.
But the Protestants the clean contrary.

If the Protestants taught all things, he would make the world believe, they
do, they were very monsters of men, not fit to live in the World. But we that
know what we Preach as well as he, proclaim to the world, that we Preach
Confession of sins, doing Penance, Restitution for wrong done, Mortification,
Set-times of Fasting, contempt of the World, Self-denial, Chastity Virginal,
Vidual, Marital, and all other things necessary to be believed and done for
Salvation. What if some Sectarian Zelots amongst us teach the contrary? How
does this concern the Church of England, who in Justice stands not bound to
maintain, or answer for all the wild and mad opinions of them, that separate
from her. And therefore it is not fair dealing in this Doctor, to make the world
believe we hold all things contrary to sound Doctrine, much worse to father
upon the Church of England all the loose, furious, spurious Principles of all
that stand in opposition to Rome. What have we to do with the intemperate
speeches of Luther, or the new Divinity of the Lemanical Dictator, who follow
none but Christ and the Primitive Catholic Church?

But grant that the Church of England should not Preach the Doctrine of Christ
so sincerely as the Roman Church does, how does it follow upon this, that the
Church of Rome is the only True Church, and the Church of England none? It Is a
Rule in Logic, that magis and minus non variant speciem: that more or less
Intention or Remission does not vary, or diversifie the kind. If the Church of
England do Preach Christ's Doctrine so sincerely, as to Preach it sufficiently
for man's Salvation, all things necessary for man's Salvation, though the Roman
Church Preach it more excellently. The Church of England may be a True Church
still: For there are degrees of the sincere Preaching, and profession of
Christ's Doctrine. One consisting in a freedom from all errors, and that is not
necessarily required to the being of a Church. Another consisting in a freedom
from all pertinacious error. And it is this last we make a note of the Church; a
sincerity free from all pertinacious error, and in this degree of sincerity the
Church of England does profess to Preach Christ's Doctrine, and by so doing is a
True Church.

The second Mark that Protestants make of the True Church, is the lawful
Administration of the Sacraments, whereby he undertakes in Cap. 30. to prove
the Church of England to be no True Church. At first he Scoptically mentions
it, calling it an Ear-mark, although as wise and as learned a man as himself,
Alexander Ales, made it so in good earnest. At last he himself makes use of it
to prove the Church of England to be no True Church, viz. because the Church of
England neither administers all the Sacraments, which are Seven, nor holds it
necessary all should be administered: nor acknowledges all to be Sacraments,
which is contrary to express Text of Scripture, and the Word of God.

A high degree of contumacy, and perverseness, if True, and enough to stigmatize
us to all Ages. But if the Church of England allow all to be Sacraments that
are so, and the number of Seven Sacraments in that sense, the Ancient Church
called them so, though amongst them two more chief, and generally necessary to
Salvation: What degree of Heresy is this?

For the word Sacrament we know it is an Ecclesiastical word, and in the power
of the Church to impose upon what holy Signs or Ceremonies she pleases. And if
the Ancient Church have thought it fitting to call those Holy Actions mentioned
in the the Scripture, with that name, as Confirmation, Holy Orders, Matrimony,
etc. we oppose it not, we commend the moderation of Melancthon, who thinks this
no just matter of quarrel. But it is well known that the word Sacrament was used
two ways by the Ancients.

First largely, for any Holy secret, or sign of any Holy secret. So Tertullian
calls Christianity it self a Sacrament, lib. 4. contra Marcion, and in his
Fifth Book speaking of Abraham's Sons, he calls them Sacramenta figuram, the
Sacraments of figures, and in his Book against the Jews; he calls the Hatchet
of Eliah, Sacramentum ligni, the Sacrament of the wood.

Sometimes strictly, for a Holy secret, Symbolically signifying, and Sealing
some Spiritual Grace, and Ordained by Christ for that purpose. And so they
esteemed Baptism, and the Eucharist, Sacraments in a more excellent manner.

But to go no further than the words of the Doctor, p. 287. where he defines a
Sacrament to be a visible sign of an invisible Grace Divinely Instituted for
our Sanctification. How will the Doctor by this Definition prove all the Seven
to be True Proper Sacraments, when Five of them want Divine Institution, or
matter and form Essential to Sacraments.

To instance in Confirmation, they acknowledge themselves there is no command of
Christ for it, but only the Example of the Apostles. The matter, they say, of
this Sacrament is Holy Chrism Confect, and made of Oil Olive and Balm
Consecrated by a Bishop: the Form is the words of the Bishop, I sign thee with
the sign of the Cross, now nothing of these is determined by Christ. Alexander
Ales says it was Ordained in the Council of Melden. Durandus denies Matrimony
to be a True and Proper Sacrament of the new Law, because it neither confers
Grace to him that has it not, nor augments it in him that has it.

Cajetan upon the fifth Chapter of St. James, verse 14. says that there is
nothing at all spoken there for the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. And seeing
some of these Sacraments according to their own Doctors want Divine
Institution, some Divine Efficacy to Sanctify, some matter and form Essential
to Sacraments, it is clear they are not of that excellency and perfection that
Baptism and the Eucharist are; and therefore what Heresy is it in the Church
of England to receive them as more chiefly, and generally necessary to
Salvation, so long as she acknowledges the other to be Sacraments in that
sense the Ancient Church called them so, vid. Lyran. in explic. visionis, etc.

The fifth and last way whereby he pretends to put an end to Controversies, is
by Combat, by answering the Challenge, which some of the Learned of the Church
of England have made to them of the Roman Church, to be tried by the Testimony
of the Fathers that lived within the time of the first six hundred years of
Christ. This Challenge was made (says he) by Bishop Jewel in a Sermon at Paul's
Cross, and by Dr. Whitaker in his Reasons against Campian.

Though we of the Church of England are no ways bound to defend what every
private Doctor shall Preach in a Sermon, or let fall from his Pen in heat of
Controversy, yet I believe verily, a man may become a Second to these
Champions in this Duel, and yet come off without broken Bones: though for my
part I confess my self altogether unable for such an undertaking, yet out of my
little Learning I am able to discover a great deal of foul play the Doctor
uses at the first, which makes me think that he himself is not very able to
hold up the Bucklers in this quarrel neither.

For in stating the quarrel betwixt the two Combatants, he reckons up three and
twenty points of Divinity as Controverted betwixt them, whereas eighteen of
these are not Controverted by the Church of England.

For the first, we maintain no Free Will.

2. We hold that Free Will Cooperates with Grace.

3. That Good Works do in some kind Merit.

4. We maintain the Fast of Lent to be very Ancient, Good, and requisite to be
observed.

5. Concerning Original sin we receive all that is determined by Ancient Church
against the Pelagians.

6. We teach Good Works are required to Justification.

7. That a man ought to be sure of his Predestination is no Doctrine of the
Church of England.

8. We teach that a man fall away after Baptism.

9. Concerning Christ the Mediator, we hold as the Roman Church, that he was
Mediator in both his Natures, but suffered only in his human.

10. We believe Christ descended into Hell.

11. We teach that Christ's Law and Precepts are possible to be kept.

12. Concerning Veneration of Relics, if we had any which we were sure were
genuine, we would not doubt to give some Veneration toward them.

13. We allow Prayer for the dead in respect of the Resurrection. In a word we
deny not Church Traditions, that are genuine, nor the Efficacy of the
Sacraments, nor the necessity of Baptism, nor Confession, and Absolution, nor
the Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist.

And for those other five points, wherein we profess to recede from the Roman
Church, we declare unto the World, if they were received in the Roman Church
only in that degree of credibility they were taught by the Ancients, we should
not look upon them as such Terriculaments as we do, when the Ancients taught
them only as probable Opinions, and the Roman Church has now made them
Articles of Faith: Can. 7.
we think it is time for us to remember that Canon of the great Council of
Ephesus which pronounces Anathema against all those that shall compose any
other Creed besides the Nicene. Which of the Ancients in the first six hundred
years did receive or teach Purgatory, or Invocation of Saints as Articles of
their Creed?

Another piece of foul play I observe in this Disputer, is this, that in
stating of the quarrel betwixt the Roman Church and the Church of England, he
does not only shuffle in many things which were never in question, but does
also leave out all those things which make up the Wall of Separation betwixt
us. As first the unlimited Supremacy of the Pope. 2. The Infallibility of the
Roman Church. 3. The Worship of Images. 4. The Sacrament in one kind. 5. Prayer
in an unknown Tongue, etc. These are the Gravamina we complain of, these are
the Rocks of Offense we stumble at, which unless he can prove by the Testimony
of the Ancients, as well at the other, he does but fight with his own shadow,
and as they say fingere stolidum adversarium, and then sugillare, make to
himself a foolish Adversary, and then beat him. I shall end with that Counsel
St. Augustine gives the Donatist: Auferte perditam simulationem, si de moribus
non vultis, saltem de literis vestris, take away the wicked dissimulation, if
ye will not from your manners, do it at least from your writings.

FINIS.

