CHRIST Under the Law; WITH The Times of the Gospel, AND Fullness thereof.



LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1664.

ERRATA.
Page 30. line 15. for years read months. p. 33. l. 19. 24 Aldermen, Add, In
diverse Cities, as it was long in London. p. 3. l. 12. in the 2 d Colume, and 24
Aldermen, to be left out. p. 40. l. 1. for Luminations, r. L^^ations. p. 44. l.
16. Colume 2 d, for the Red Sea, r, Reed Sea. l. 17, 18. for Mimum, r. Minium.
l. 39. for Psalms r. Palms. p. 59. l. 9. Col. 2. for 2705, r. 2805, without the
Parenthesis. p. 62. l. 7. Col. 2. Add, And their Longest Night, was above 13
Hours, As the first Night of Creation, was till the 13th Hour. p. 69. Parag. 3.
That of Cubits (in some Copies) to be left out, or amended, by the 2 d
Paragraph, of the 59th page. In the Preface, p. 6. l. 25. Col. ^. for
Tabernacles read Tabernacle.

The PREFACE and SCOPE.
THis Discourse was written more large, and it may be, less confused; but the
Authors distance from the Press, and little time to correct it, with so many
numbers, and other occasions, prevailed to contract and crowd it out as he
could; being only for private Friends, and such as can excuse both matter and
manner.

The first is to express some little part of the unexpressable Goodness of God,
and Love of Christ, which passes knowledge; and to help shed it abroad into
our hearts, that it may mould us into love, to God, and all men.

Have we not all One Father? Has not One God created us? Why do we then deal
treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the Covenant of our
Fathers?

And our Savior did not only bid them all say, Our Father, but repeated it,
and pressed it on the multitude, that they had All, One Father in Heaven, and
One Master, or Teacher, even Christ which is twice repeated, in Mat. 23.

And as Love was his last and great Command, on Earth; so his first Complaint
out of Heaven, was of some that had lost their first Love. And may he not
complain that we have lost All Love? which is not only waxen cold, but even
Dead, and quite put out, by Lust, or Love of the World, and Cares thereof,
which himself said, would Choke the good Seed.

And what Hope is left, or means to recover us, but in himself, Made under the
Law of Love, to God, and Man also? So that it is written in his heart, to Love
his God, and his Neighbor As himself: To propagate the Name, and Love of God,
with All his Might: and to bring his Children, Servants, and the Strangers in
his Gate, to Rest the Rest of God: as is required in the fourth Command.

And seeing he bid it be written, as a True Saying of God, that He would make
All Things New; the Author does believe it, though he does not yet see it. And
he thought it worth enquiring, When, That great Change is to come, into the
minds of Men: to mould them into Love, of God, and One another.

And finding the Psalm for the Afflicted, to tell us, that God will appear in
his Glory, when he builds up Zion: and when the Peoples are Gathered, and the
Kingdoms to serve the Lord: he searched, what the Law, or the Prophets say of
such a Gathering.

And he found that Moses Dying Charge, on Joshuah, with succeeded Kings of
Israel (which he hopes may come to Christ at length) was to gather All Israel
and their Strangers also; and to Read the Law to them All; that they may Hear
and Learn, and fear the Lord (and his Goodness in the Latter Days) At the end
of Seven years; in the Solemnity of the year of Release; in the Feast of
Tabernacles: which they call the Feast of In Gathering.

And although this was acted every 7th year in some measure; yet seeing God
himself does sometimes use a Day for a Year (or a year for as many years as it
has Days) he began to consider, whether it might not be So in This also: that
the Sabbatical years of Release, might intimate their Release from all their
Scatterings, and Bondage, at the Close of seven Prophetic years; or in 2555
years, which are seven times 365.

And first he found, that so many years, After the Fall, did bring Israel to
rest, in Canaan: and so many more, did bring the Christians to reign in
Jerusalem: and that from their First Scatterings, out of Canaan, in Jorams time
(when they were first led Captive) so many years came out, about 1666, now
coming: and from following scatterings after Joram, so many years are out about
1690: and that Daniels greatest number of 2300 days, or years, is then also
finished, from the time of his Captivity.

And for beginning those Prophetic years, about the time of Joram, there are
many reasons, besides their first scattering out of Canaan, Then. For it was a
very Great Change of the World; or, as the Jews express it, a New World; which
they believed to be seven or eight times renewed: As the old Tuscans also (in
Plutarchs Sylla) and that every such New World, was foreshewn, by Great
Prodigies, in Heaven and Earth: yea and Diverse times by signal Tides, or
Turnings, and Partings, of Waters; as the great Clepsydra.

So, at the first Creation: and again, at the Flood: and again, at passing the
Red Sea; and at entering Canaan: When Jordan was divided: As again, by Elijahs
Mantle, At His Ascension (a little before Joram) which was followed by their
first Captivity: As their Last, followed our Saviors Ascension; shadowed by
Elijahs.

The Assyrian Empire was Then shaken and broken, as Israel by Syria, and Judah
by the Philistines, Arabians and Edom, which Then first revolted, and broke
Jacobs Yoke (as was foretold by Isaac) and rested not, till it forced Ahaz, to
hire Assyria, which destroyed Israel about the time of Romulus (who might be
shadowed by Rummili, or Remaliah) that in the mask or vizor of Religion,
Ravished 683 Virgins; or 783; as it was 683 years, before the Romans first
Ravished the Virgin of Zion; and 783 before they crucified Christ.

From that time, the Prophets began to threaten Edom; by which the Jews say,
they meant Rome: as in that Map of Hell, in Isa. 34. directed against Edom, and
the Raemim, or Romim, v. 7.

And as Judahs breach, and cutting off, might be Typed, by Athaliahs cutting
off the Royal Seed (as Joram had cut off his brethren) so might those seven
Great years of Scattering, and Return, be Typed in the seven years of Famine,
and Wandering of the Widow, (who then Returned, and found the K. talking with
Gehazi: freed, it seems from his Leprosy:) And by the seven years of Joash
Hiding, and then coming up and repairing the Temple: and by many other seven
years, which are here touched.

In this search of Times, it is found that 1260, or 1290, and 1335 (which are
the Great Numbers in Dan. and the Revel.) may be Years, and Days, and Hours,
of Jewish years.

As from the Day of Trying the Paschal Lambs, or Preparation of the Passover,
To the Pentecost: Or from the day of Aarons Death, and of burning the City, and
Temple, To the Day of Creation, or Dedication of the second Temple, and of
Jerusalem, in Nehemiahs Time; and to the Feast of Trumpets, in the seventh
Month (which was for Release and Tabernacles) were 1260, 1290, or 1335 Hours.

And from the City Taken, on the 9th of the 4th Month, to the Feast of
Tabernacles, were 2300 Hours (as between the Suns Apogeum, and the Equinox: And
their great Release was, in 2300 Days.

As their Release of Hirelings, or their three years Tithes and Offerings, with
the Solemn Confessions of Deuteronomy. 26. came out in 1260, or 1335 Days.

So David's New Jerusalem was gotten from the Jebusites, who Trod it down (as
their name in Heb:) And the Ark was fixed in Zion, and the Temple built, in
1260, 1290, or at most, in 1335 years, from the first Desolation of the Flood.

And Nehemiahs New Jerusalem was finished, and dedicated, at 1260 hours, (that
is the morning of the 53 d day) from its beginning: but 1335 hours, from his
coming thither (as Nehem. 2. 11. and 6. 15.) and in so many years from Jacobs
service in Syria (Typing Israel in Assyria) or from Joseph's Bonds in Egypt; or
Isreal's coming and Dying there.

And the great Dedication, and Restitution, after Antiochus and Nicanor, was so
many Days (as in Daniel) After the City Profaned; and so many years After
Egypt, and the Golden Calf: which was 1335 years before the Maccabees, which
were 1290 years, After the Ark at Shiloh: or 1260 years After their first
Bondage to the K. of Mesopotamia (as a Type of Babylon) and 1260 years, Before
the Christians got Jerusalem, and Reigned in it, about 1100 of Christ.

All which were but Types and Shadows of the New Jerusalem, to come in those
degrees, of 1260, 1290, or 1335 years, After the Abominable Desolation, made by
Antichrist, who was Typed out by Antiochus.

Which was to come upon the Christian Church (as the Assyrian was to fill the
breadth of the Land of Emanuel) When the Romans had finished their war against
Jerusalem, in Titus, Adrian and Julian: After the ten first Christian
Persecutions. Which lasted as many years, as there were Hours in ten Days (As
the Revelation says, they should have Tribulation for Ten Days) which have
Hours 240. and there were so many Years, from the first Persecution (which
began with the Jewish War in 65 or 66 of Christ) Till Constantine.

And the Times of Julian, were as slaying of the Paschal Lambs, which were Tied
up on the tenth day (ending at Hour 240) and slain on the fourteenth, at Hour
333: As Julian was 333 years After Christ, and Romes deadly Wound was, After
Jerusalem sacked, 333 years: As Hamans Lots, or Purim, from the Preparation of
the Passover, 333 days.

333 was a signal Number to the Jews (both for Hours, to the Passover, and
Days, to Purim; and Cubits, in the Holy Courts) and to Others also. As
Plutarch observes in Fabius; finding Secrets in the Sybils, not to be uttered,
and vowing 333 Sesterces, and 333 Denaries.

Deucalions Flood, Phaetons Flames, and the first Judgment in Areopagu, much
about 333 years, before the Sack of Troy; about 333 before Lycurgus end; who
renewed the Olympic Games, 333 years after Hercules. That we speak not of
Messenia desolate, about 333 years in Aelian.

333 is half 666; and 333 Days, are 12 Times 666 Hours; which are the Monthly
Change of the Sun, and Moon; and thence, the Great Number of Change, to the
World, and in Years also: As it was to Carthage, in Paterculus; and Rome, with
Jerusalem, and other places, here discussed.

And to clear this way of reckoning Years, by Hours of the Jewish Year, the
Author shows, the Rise, and Use of Hours; with diverse Nations (long before
they be specifyed in Polibius or Plutarch; who yet can tell us the first Hour
of Romulus) and the Great account of Hours among the Jews, whose Year is a
Model of time in All Ages. So that the old Patriarchs, and all the great things
of Scripture, were in Harmony to the Days and Hours, of the Jewish Year; and
to the Site and Motions of the Heavenly Bodies.

As Hours are made by the Moon moving 24 of her Diameters, in 24 Hours; and the
Earths Diameter, 24 times in the Suns; which may be distant from the Earth,
twice 666 Radij; As the Moon 66; and Canaans Longitude is 65 or 66, in Ptolomy.

And as the first Heavenly body, is above the Earth, 65 of its Radij, and the
first Fruits of Earth, were at 65 Hours of Creation, in the 3 d Day (which was
the first of Herbs and Animals) so the Feast of the First fruits, was the 65th
Day of the Year; and in the 3 d Month, As the Tabernacles twice 65, or 130
Days, After Pentecost.

Adam was about 130 Hours of Creation, and Seth at 130 years (as many reckon
Abraham was After Terah, 130 years) in which time the Equinox Changes a whole
Day, as 12 Hours in 65 Years.

Enos was born at 235 Years of the World: and the Paschal Lambs were Tied up
and Tried at 235 Hours of the Jewish year: and the Great Cycle of the Moon,
called the Golden Number, is of 235 Months. For which, Here is an easier way to
reckon the Moons Motions, and the Suns Cycle, with the Days of the Week, in
any year of Christ, or of the Julian Period.

Kainan was born at 325 years of the World: and 325 Hours of their year, came
to the Morning Sacrifice of the Passover, slain at Hour 333; just half 666: and
Kainans Birth was 666 Years before Enochs Translation; or twice 666 before the
Flood.

Mahalael, as many years, After Kainan, as there were Hours, to the Evening
Sacrifice of the third Day: As the First Fruit Omer, heaved up, on the 3 d Day
After the Passover.

He was born 1260 (as Kainan 1332) before the Flood, and dyed in the year of
the World, 1290.

Jared, the 6 from Adam, was born 135, and lived 187 years After Kainan: and
the Morning Sacrifice of the 6th Day of the World, and of the Month and Year
(and so of the First fruit Omer, from the Tying of the Paschal Lambs) was at
Hour 135: and the Evening Sacrifice of the 8th Day (for Circumcision and the
Christian Sabbath) was at hour 187.

As from Pentecost, to the Great Hosanna, there were Days 135: and to the
Great Atonement, Days 187: As between the Vernal and Autumnal Equinox, 187:
and in the Pentateuch 187 Chapters. As the Cubits of the Inward Court of Israel
were 187, and the Outer 135; which being added to 130, makes 365, As Days in a
year; or Veins in our Body, or Negative Precepts in the Law.

And Kainan was twice 365 before Noah, 365 before Jareds End: As Mahalaels was
before the Flood; and the Flood before Abraham's Call (if born at his Fathers
70) As Hours of the Jewish year, to the First fruit Omer: Reaped After 360
Hours, and before 366; the midnight of their 16th day: when it was to be Heaved
up, After 365 Hours: As Enoch was, After he had lived 365 years (as days of a
year) and begat his Son at 65, as days to Pentecost: and the next came at 187,
as days of their year To Atonement, and between the Equinoctials as before.

And from Enochs Translation, the following things (...) the Bible, may be
found in Cons^^ to the days and hours of the Jewish year, and Sections of the
Pentateuch; which are 669, as the years between Enoch and the Flood, were 669.

The Ark was begun at Noah's 480, (as the Temple at 480 from Egypt: and the
Great Day of Unleavened Bread began at Hour 480) but of the World, 1536; and
Hour 1536, began the Pentecost, which they say continued through the 70th day.

Which began at Hour 1656, as the Flood in the year 1656: And its first 40
days Rain, may be Types of the first 40 years of the second Ark, in the
Wilderness, before it came to rest at Shiloh; in as many years after the first
Ark began, as there are Hours in 40 Days, which are 960.

And the first Pentecost in Canaan, was as many years after Enoch, as there
were Hours in the Jewish year to Pentecost, or its Preparation.

And from the first Pentecost in Canaan, To the Times of Jeroboam, and the
Caldean Sack, or Desolation by Antiochus, or by the Romans (and diverse others)
were as many Years, as Hours, between the Pentecost and Days, on which those
Desolations happened.

And if we may not guess at things to come, by what is past (in all the World
and Works of God in all ages) yet we may say, that 1666 After Christ, is as
many years, After their first Pentecost in Canaan (or first coming to it) as
there were Hours from Pentecost to the feast of Tabernacles, that is 3120: for
they entered Canaan 1455 years before Christ, and 1665 more, do make 3120: as
Hours in 130 days, from Pentecost to the feast of Tabernacles.

Or if any please to reckon from some latter Pentecost: As That in Acts 2. we
may find it As many years from Egypt, (and their coming thence) as there were
Hours in the Jewish year, to Pentecost, or its Preparation.

And 1666 will be as many years After that Pentecost in Acts 2. as there were
Hours from Pentecost, to their Great Dooms day, against their Entering into
Rest, and of Burning both Temples: on the 9th or 10th of the 5th Mon.

But the Author rather thinks that already past, and fulfilled in the Roman
Sack of Jerusalem, and Burning the last Temple; which was as many years After
their first Pentecost in Canaan, as That Day is Hours from the first Hour of
Pentecost; and as many years before these times of Christ, as there are Hours
from their Dooms day, To the Feast of Tabernacles: which can be, but 1600,
After 69 of Christ.

And the Revelations show, the Feast of Tabernacles (or Gods Tabernacle with
men) After the great Harvest, and Vintage also: which ran out from the City
(Sacked, or Trodden in That Vintage) 1600 Furlongs: as Apoc. 14.

And although Furlongs may seem to represent Months, or other times, as well as
Years (as there are much about 1600 Months in the Jewish Wars, till Adrian
raced the City) yet they are most proper for years; of which there are many
instances.

As Cubits are most proper for Days (of 24 Hours, as They had 24 Digits) So
the Cubits of the Ark do make the very years of the Ark Driven by the Flood,
out of the Dragons mouth: from 1250 to 1335.

As the years between the first and the second Ark at Zion, and David's New
Jerusalem, with the first Temple. Or from Jacobs Service, Joseph's Bonds, or
Isreal's Bondage* unto Nehemiahs New Jerusalem.

Or from Egypt and the Golden Calf, and Tabernacle To the Great Dedication in
the Maccabees. Or from That Desolation by Antiochus, To the Christians Reigning
in Jerusalem. Or from Julian in Jerusalem; and from Romes Deadly Wound, or
Sack, till about 1666 now coming.

Yet as Prophetic days may be years, so may Cubits also, in lesser bodies; as
the Tabernacle. Where the open Court was a hundred Cubits, and the Tabernacle
closed 3000, which are but 20 less then the Hours between Pentecost and the
Feast of Tabernacles. As if the very Cubits of the Tabernacle, might denote the
years from It, Flitting in the Wilderness, to the Feast of Tabernacles coming.

And as the Arks Cubits might note the Churches years driven by the Flood and
filled with Beasts (rather than men) and Trodden by them, so the very Cubits of
the Beasts skins about the Tabernacles, might denote how long those Beasts
should press the Church, or hold it in; Or how long it should be under Veils
and Coverings.

Seeing God himself did after use the Ram and Goat (whose Skins and Hair did
cover the Tabernacle) for Emblems of some of those Monarchies, which were all
showed to Abraham, and even named in the four Kings he conquered (before he met
Melchizedeck, a Type of Christ at his second coming:) and in his great Vision:
when he saw the Time of their coming out of Egypt, and those four Monarchies,
with all the kinds of Birds, and Beasts, appointed for sacrifice.

And the Cubits in the Temple, and its Courts, may represent the years to
Christ, and other great Periods of Time in the Bible; As is here at large
discussed.

And for fixing Times. Abraham's birth (which has so divided all Cronologers
between his Fathers 70 years and 130) is by these accounts, fixed 2000 years
before Ch^^^^

As 2000 Cubits in the Tabernacle before the most holy Place: and 2000 Cubits
between the Camp and the Ark: and 2000 Cubits in their Sabbath days Journey;
and 2000 Cubits in the Suburbs of their holy Cities.

And Those 2000 years are parted by 75 (before his Call or coming into Canaan)
as 75 Sons and Nephews of Noah; 75 Souls of Jacobs going into Egypt: 75
Ancestors of Christ in Luke; 75 Days from the City Sacked to the Day of
Dedication of the second Temple, and of Nehemiahs Jerusalem; and from the Day
of Atonement, To the Dedication by the Maccabees; and from the Fast for the
first Captivity (in the 9th Month) to the Feast of Purim: and 75 Cubits from
the Outer Gate, to the holy Courts about the Temple. And 75 is the Difference
between 1260, and 1335, in Daniel and the Revelation.

And 430 years from Abraham's Entering into Canaan, and their Going out of Egypt;
and receiving the Law.

Which was 1495 years before our Savior; As the very Number of the Hebrew
Alphabet (by which God wrote the Law) is just 1495; and so parted, as the years
from Egypt.

By 9 Unites, making 45, As years to the Ark at Shiloh: and 9 Decimals, making
450, As years to the Ark at Zion: 45 years before the Temple finished: which
was 1000 years before our Savior (As their Centenaries, K, R, S, T, or Christ,
do make 1000) or at most 1005. As Solomon's Songs were 1005, and his Parables
3000, as many make the years of the World, to his Temple finished.

And many that differ in That, agree in This, that they came out of Egypt 1495
full years before Christ born: So that his first year was as many years from
Egypt, as there came men from Babylon, To Jerusalem with Ezra; just 1496, as
they are numbered in Ezra 8.

Or in a round number, 1500: As the Spices in the Holy Oil (a Mighty Type of
Christ) were just 1500 Shekels. And Shekles also may shadow Years, in diverse
Scriptures here cited.

And by these accounts, Nimrods Babel may be 666 years before the Golden Calf,
or Image of the Beast (as in the Psalm) at coming out of Egypt; which was 666
years before Jerusalem was sacked by Joash; and twice 666, before the
Desolation, by Antiochus; and so 1335 years (as in Daniel) before the Temple
cleansed by the Maccabees; which was 1260 years before the Christians reigned
in Jerusalem, about 1100 of Christ, which was 2555 (or 7 Prophetic years) from
the Jews entering Canaan: which was 1455 before our Savior, and by Codoman
(with those that follow him) 2555 years After the Fall; which others make 2555
before Canaans Partition.

Which they entered, on the 10th of the 1st Month (for the Paschal Lambs) whose
noon was Hour 234; as it was 234 years, after Jacobs Death in Egypt: and the
number of Jericho (to which they passed) is 234: As Ramases is just 430: As
they came thence at 430 years from the Promise: and Succoth (that is
Tabernacles) just 480; As the Tabernacle was 480 years before the Temple: and
their third station, Etham, may be the number of years from the Temple finished
to Christ; which were very few more then 1000. And Etham in Hebrew Letters,
makes but 1001. And from Etham (where they saw the Glory* of God, in the Cloud
and Pillar, an emblem of Christ) they turned back into Egypt, and were carried
through the Red Sea, and the Wilderness: as Types of all the Sufferings of
Christ and his Members.

And many other instances of Time couched in Hebrew Leters; may persuade us,
that it was more than chance, that made so many Harmonies: and wrote the Law
with an Alphabet, that makes as many Unites (which both Jews and Christians all
agree) as there were years from the Law (so written) to Christ. With such
consort of the Days and Hours of their year.

As Genesis has 12 Sections (as their year had 12 Months) and 50 Chapters as
12 Moons have 50 Weeks; and their 50 days, between the Passover and Pentecost;
and 1534 Verses, as Hours of their year To the Evening Sacrifice, before the
Pentecost; or years of the World before Noah's Ark; which is measured Here by
its Cubits: As also the Tabernacle, and the first and second Temple.

And so may Ezekiels also, in consort to the Jewish year, and Times of the
Bible to be measured by it.

And as the Holy Garments, Veils and Curtains, were woven with six Threads of
Silk, or Linen, called Shesh (which is 6) with a Thread of Gold, as the Sun,
with the other six Metals, or the Sunday, with other six days of* the week; so
was all Ezekiels measured by a Reed of six Cubits, and a Palm (at least) which
may lead us to the Morning of the Sabbath, or 7th day of the Week, if we reckon
Days by Cubits.

And the Outer Court had seven steps, as the Week had seven Days: but the
Inward Court had 8 steps; and the Christian Sabbath was their 8th day.

The Gates, or Doors, were 10 Cubits broad, and 13 Cubits high. Their shortest
Days and Nights were 10 Hours long, their longer 13 or 14: and there were 13
days of their year, before the Passover; but the Paschal Lambs were separated
on the 10th day. And at the 10th year their Children came under the Law for
some things, and others at 13: which is signal among the Eastern Nations, for
Ishmaels Circumcision at that age.

The Gate-houses 25 Cubits broad, and 50 long. The Levites entered at 25, and
served till 50 years old: Being for the Firstborn: As the first fruits had 50
Days, between the Passover and the Pentecost: and so, the breadth of the Ark,
was 50 Cubits: As the Suburbs of the Sanctuary; and diverse other things in
Ezekiel.

The Porch and holy Places, as in Solomon's Temple; All the House with its
Walls, 100 Cubits; As each of the Courts: And so was the Court of the
Tabernacle. But in Ezekiel, three times repeated: as the Length of Noah's Ark
was 300 Cubits; and its Height was 30 Cubits, as the Length of the Tabernacle,
and the Height of the Temple: As their Months had 30 days.

And if Ezekiels Reed do represent a Week, 25000 (in the length of its holy
Portion) make about 480 years; As between the Tabernacle Raised, and the
Temple: or at most 490; As in Daniels Weeks: Of which more in another place.
With Paralels between the Kings of the North and South; till Rome devoured all;
and so became the King that should exalt and magnify himself above every god;
as Dan. 11. 36. But toward the end, the King of the South, or Saracen, shall
push at him, and the King of the North, or Turk, shall come against him as a
Whirwind, and shall overflow, and shall enter the glorious Land (of Israel) and
shall conquer many Countries in Asia and Africa; but shall not prevail against
the Children of Lot, or of Edom: where the Turk is glad to Guard his Caravans,
and pay some kind of Homage or Tribute, to those Little Great Arabians.

But the East or Persia, with the North, or Tartary, with the Muscovites, or
other Northern Princes, shall Trouble him sore: and though he shall come out
with a great Army, and with greater Fury, then before, yet he shall come to his
end, and none shall help him.

And his Palace is placed between the Seas; rightly called The Port: and
between the Holy Mountains, which all Ages placed in Thrace, or some Northern
parts of Macedonia: But the Bible, in the Holy Land.

Which was to be conquered by Saracens and Turks; or Ishmael: as the Jews still
call them. And we do not only read of Ishmael mocking Isaac (till he was driven
out to Those Arabian Deserts, where the Saracens arose) but the Prophet Jeremy
shows us a Map of this; in Ishmaels cutting off the Remnant of Israel in the
7th Month: and in that very season, when those Ishmaelites did take Jerusalem;
upon the 2 d or 3 d day of the 7th Month: on which the Jews still fast, for
Ishmaels slaying Gedaliah, etc. as Jerem 41.

But Ishmael also was chased away (as before) by Johanan, the Grace of God:
which at length shall be the Great Conqueror. As it is written, In thy Maesty
Ride on Prosperously, because of Truth and Meekness of Righteousness. For,
Mercy and Truth preserve the King: and his Throne is, especially, Kept up, by
Mercy, Psalm. 45. 5. Prove. 20. 28.

THat God Loved Adam so, that he could not leave him for Ever, I believe: in
part:

From that he says: of the Ostrich, and her cruel folly to her Eggs: and of
the Bears, Dragons, Ouls, and worst of Creatures, to their young Ones: and of a
Woman, to the Son of her womb. And yet, she may forget; but I cannot: For, I
have Graven thee, on the Palms of my hands. And was not Adam, Graven on his
heart? Or Rooted in it?

But yet more, from That he Is. For, God is Love: and Unchangeable Love. And
having Loved himself, and his own Image; he Loved it to the End: and for Ever.
And if That Love, could not hold him to Adam, in Innocence; It may be hard to
know, or believe, his Word can bind him so, to any Creature; but he may desert
it, in the best estate, attainable. Seeing it is very hard, to Understand his
Word, or any Verbal Promise: or to plead it so, with him, as to oblige him by
it: If his own heart, do not more, hold him to Good, and Goodness, Then All
Outward Words, and Promises: Or at least, then Any Creature, can do by Them.

And although Eternal Love, might be Eternal Hatred, unto Sin [which, in the
mother Language, speaks Hating: As their Hate, is also Sin:] Yet, That also,
might be, a Better argument, why God should Keep him From Sin; then why, he
should Leave him In it. For, by this, it seems, God is Love: and no Hatred:
only that he Hates Hating, and Putting away.

Love Thinks no Evil: is not Easily Provoked: Suffers Long: Endures All,
Believes All, or Hops All: Bears All: and does not only, Cover a Multitude
of Sins, but as Solomon says, It shall, or will, Cover All Transgressions.
For, it is the Glory of Man to Pass by Transgressions: And the Glory of God, to
Cover a Matter. And most of all, That which his pure, and Holy Eyes cannot
endure to see.

And if nothing could preserve him, From Sin, Or excuse him In it: Yet there
might be somewhat found, to Intercede, for the Sinner: or to distinguish,
between his Sin, and his Person. Who at best, was but, As a Little, Very Little
Infant, Unto God. And when a Sinner, yet His Offspring: and His Image still:
and so remained, As a man. And So Owned by God, to Noah. Yea, and our Savior
bids them All say, Our Father. For, we Are, His Offspring, still: and he is
the Father of our Spirits. Yea, and Man, that before the Fall, was but the
Image of God; is now [called] The Image and Glory of God.

I must not dispute, or enquire, How Man came to Fall: or God, to Change his
State, or Place, before the Fall. Or to abridge him, of somewhat, he seemed, to
Grant before: When he gave him, All Trees, for, his food: But then came, and
forbad the Tree of Knowledge. Which yet, happily, may be meant, of some other
kind of Knowledge; then is commonly taken.

Nor can I determine, What God meant by That, In Dying thou shall Dye. Seeing,
even Since the Fall also, Job describes Death, as That, which might be Loved,
More then Life. And the Wisest man asserts, the Day of Death, is Better, then
of Birth: and God might set the Cherubins in Love to keep us from That Tree,
which would have made us Live for Ever: notwithstanding All, the Threatening of
Death. Which it seems, was not so certain, but that a Taste of the Tree of
Life, might have Turned it, into Life Eternal. But Eternity it self, may be a
Burden, to One, that is Unhappy, In his Life, and Being. So, that it might be,
an Happiness, to Dye.

And the words, Threatening Death to Adam, are no worse, then God used to David,
of his Little Child: or Other Children of God: which sure, was not Eternal
Death. And to Good Hezekiah; It was added also, Thou shall Dye, and shall not
Live: and yet he did not Dye, but Live.

And to Ezekiel, God has said, When I say, or shall say, to a Wicked Man, In
Dying thou shall Dye (the very words Threatened to Adam:) yet, if he Turn, and
Repent: he shall surely Live: he shall not Dye.

And sure, we may hope, God meant no worse, to Good and Holy Adam, in
Innocence, then he Professes that he means, To a Wicked Man, in Wickedness.
To whom yet, the Threatening is but on Condition; and he adds an Oath, That he
takes no Pleasure in the Death, of a Wicked Man: and less, in the Death of a
Righteous man: As Adam was, in Innocence.

And yet, he let him Fall. To draw out Attributes, which could not well appear,
on Holy, Happy Objects. Or, in a word, to Love him More. Or draw, delight, and
self complacence (which may seem a kind of selfish Love) to Better, Higher:
that is Lower; yet more Noble, Love; of Pity; and such Tender bowels of
compassion, as could not be showed, But to Miserable Objects. Shut up under
Guilt, through Unbelief: that so he might have Mercy on them: which can appear,
Only in Misery.

By which, Eternal Wisdom, did Contrive, at once to Propagate it self; and
Magnify its Love. So that it now can Truly Love a Loveless Object, with the
same, or a Better Love then he Loved Adam, in Innocence: That I say not, Jesus
Christ himself: Who says, a Little Love can love a Friend or One alike; and it
may be Less to Love One Lovely, Fair and Kind. For, Sinners can do This: and
Hypocrites.

Nor did he, Only defer his Anger, For his own Names Sake: But that, Himself
might be, the Great Example, and Pattern, of All Long-suffering and Goodness,
(which he knew, Great enough, to Conquer All Evil:) He would not Let the Sun go
down upon his Wrath. But on the very same Day, in which Adam Fell, Under the
Law: God brought out, the Gospel: and the First Gospel Promise. whence some
think, the Same Day, of the Jewish year, was both, the Great Fast, for the
Fall; and the Feast of Atonement, or Expiation.

For (as the Wise woman of Tekoah, summed up the Gospel) God is no Accepter of
Persons: But he Still Devises Means, or Devices, that his Banished (or those,
that might be so) do not Perish From him; who still Hates Putting away.

And he Then, Devised, such a Way, as Far surpasses all our thoughts: and Then
our Words, are like to Darken Counsel, without Knowledge. Yet, there is a
Spirit, that can make us know, the things, which are Freely Given us of God.

The Poets have a Tradition, that when the Giants Rose, and Fought, against
Heaven; They could not be Conquered, but by the help, of some Mortal Man: and
so, the Gods, asked avd of Hercules. Who slew one of the Greatest Giants; but
he soon revived again; and waxed Stronger then before: Till Minerva Caught him,
and threw him out of the Moon; and so he dyed.

This (and that they have, of Hydra; and of Python; and the Serpent, slain by
Cadmus, or others) may be grounded on the First Gospel Promise, Upon the fall.
The Seed of the Woman shall Break the Serpents Head. And yet, not by its own
Strength, or Wisdom; but assisted by the Spirit of God: and in Union, with
Divine Nature.

And yet still, it is, The Seed of the Woman. God having chosen, the Weakest
Sex, to overcome his Strongest Enemies: and the most Foolish, to destroy the
Wisdom of the Wise, and Subtili Serpent. Who did First, assail the Woman (as
the Weaker Vessel:) and is Vanquished, by the Woman's Seed.

And though, in All this work, we owe, very much, to the Love of the Son of God
(who Loved Our Nature, and built us a Synagogue: and was the Blessed Seed of
the Woman.) Yet, the Root of the Matter, is the Love of the Father. And of His
Person, it is said in special, God is Love. Even God the Father: and has
showed That Love, in sending his Son: and the Sons Great Work, is still to
express the Love of the Father, who sent him. And God so Loved the World, that
He Gave His Only Son: and none can come To the Son, but whom the Father Draws.

And although, All the Saints, in All the Bible, use to address themselves,
very much, to the Son, in their Usual Convers and Prayers (As the 45th. and 102
d. Psalm. is Cited in Heb. 1. and so the Canticles, and Spouse in the
Revelation: and All the Vials of Odors, or Prayers of Saints, were To the
Lamb:) yet in This, the Apostle does especially, bow To the Father; that He
would Vouchsafe, to show them the Love of his Son: Passing Knowledge: That they
might be filled, with All the Fullness of God.

And although, it be a Great Work of the Gospel, to persuade us that Christ was
the Son of God: (and a Great Man Thought All our Shakings came, From not being
Rooted in This) yet, there is also a very Great stress in This, That he is, The
Son of Man: and The Promised Seed of the Woman.

And the same Ap. that of All things, bids his Son, Remember This, that Christ
of the Seed of David, was raised up, according to his Gospel: In another place,
has summed up All, in This.

When the fullness, of the Time, was come, God sent Forth His Son, made of a
Woman, made Under the Law: that We might receive the Adoption of Sons. And so
the Son of God is sent, To make the Sons of Men become the Sons of God. But for
this also, it Became him, and was requisite and Necessary, that he should be
also the Son of Man: and Seed of the Woman. Made of a Woman.

Which was the Best, and only Way, To Bring in, Everlasting Righteousness: To
Satisfy God; and to Sanctify Man.

For, by This Union, of Natures (and All things consequent) He comes, to be
Charged, with Our Sins: and we, with His Righteousness: being made, Partakers
of His Divine Nature: as He, of Our Humane. And Then, As Our Acts, are Imputed
unto Him: So are His, to Us: having the same Spirit, by which, He did them.
Else, they be not Ours.

For, if God had come, and Acted in us, as an Angel, or a Dove: Those Acts, In
us, had not been Ours: Except, their Principle, were made One, with Us; and We,
One with Him.

For which, God has so United himself unto Christ; that He is become the Head
of the Body. And His Union, to our Natures, is the Root of Ours, unto His
Spirit. And Till This, be wrought In us; we do not Act, but are Acted; by Some
Other: Not, by an Inward Principle, of Life and Motion.

This being the Great thing, Our Savior Prayed For (in All, that should
believe on him) that they All, might come to be One in Him; and Perfect in One.
And Not only, they In Him, but He In them: and abide in Them (as another Chap.)
And so, he concludes, his Solemn Prayer, With Repeating That particular (so
much insisted on before:) And I In them.

By which, we are, not only, His Brethren and Sisters; But (as Himself said)
His Mother also. When, He is Made Known, and Formed In us. Christ In you the
Hope of Glory. But I must only Glance at This, which is so Fully treated,
elsewhere.

And as God, has pleased to Manifest himself, In Our Nature, so he has also
Filled it, with That, which is Infinite; so, that it cannot hold it in: but is
even Forced to Vent it: and Longs, to be Drawn, and Sucked, more then ever
Anv, Woman's Breast.

As Elihu said, I am full of the Spirit of God, and I must utter it. And our
Savior says, O How am Istraitned, Till it be accomplished! As a sweet
Perfume, or Ointment, in ones hand; the more, it be Pressed, the more it
Flows out. And when the Breast is Full, the Mother calls for Any Child: the
Son of a Stranger: If her Own, be not Ready to Suck.

And This Great Advantage, we have Gotten, by Gods putting His* Own, Infinite
Nature, into Our Finite: That it must flow Out, to Ease its self (as we may
speak.) Being so Vastly Great, beyond the Humane Nature, that it cannot be
contained in it: but As the Great Ocean, in a Little Shell. Still Flowing Up,
and Flowing Out. Whereas, If he had sent the Son, only as God: or the Holy
Ghost: They might have so Contained, or Detained, the Godhead: that we might,
have seen it, no more, then in the very Father. But now, God is Manifest in
Flesh; which can not hold, What it has, Too Great, for the narrow cover.

We may add also, that our Savior himself said, It is a more Blessed thing to
Give, then to Receive. So that Himself, was not So Blessed, by Receiving, All
the fullness of the Godhead: As he was, and still is, by Giving it Out. And If
we knew the Gift of God; and Happiness to Give: And Who it was, that said it To
us: We would ask, and He would Give us, a Fountain of Living Water; flowing
out to God and Men about us. For In our Fathers House is Bread Enough, and to
Spare: and in our Brothers Heart, enough to spare: of Water, Wine, and Milk:
still Running out; and crying, Come, Every One, that thirsts: Come: yea Come
and Drink: and Drink Abundatly, My Friends.

This is the Good will of Him that dwelt in the Bush: That ever Flamed, but was
not Consumed. For, by this Union, in our Savior; the Divine Fire, is cooled
so, in Humane Water (the Pillar in the Cloud:) that it is both Safe, and
Suitable; and Pleasing to us. Whereas else, it had devoured us. For, Our God, is
a Consuming Fire.

And when All the People saw it, They ran away and cried, O Let not God speak
thus any more; but let Him speak by Thee; and We will hear. And then he
answered, They have Rightly Spoken. This was my Intent, in All my Thundering;
but to make them see their Need; of such a Mediator. And now Therefore, I will
Raise up a Prophet, From among their Brothren: Like unto Thee. And this, is 4
times repeated in Deuteronomy. with the 3. and 7. of the Acts. And in every place, it
is still observed, that the Prophet, must be a Brother. From among thy Brethren.

And the Scripture puts a Mighty stress on This, that in All his Offices, our
Savior is, and so was made, Our Brether. And the Author to the Heb. is bold to
say, that In All things; even All things. It behoved Him (for Our and His
advantage also) to be made like His Brethren. And although it was so in All
things: yet in special, that, He might be a Merciful and Faithful, High Priest.
For, Every High Priest is Ordained For Men, and Taken From among Them. For
them: Not Against them.

Wherefore Holy Brethren, partakers of that Heavenly Calling of a Brother: Look
upon, and much Consider, the Apostle (prophet) and High Priest; we so Profess,
or Own, and Claim to be our Brother.

And again, Let us hold fast this Profession, or this Claim of Christ, in such
Relation. For, we have not an High Priest, that cannot be touched with our
Infirmities: or Feeling of them: but was in All Points, Tempted as We are. Even
in All points! (both of Substance, and Circumstance also.) To Presume, and to
Despair: yea, and to destroy Himself: and other horrid Temptations.

Let us Therefore (even Therefore) Come with Boldness; to the Throne of Grace:
that so, we may obtain mercy; and find Grace, to Help in a time of Need. For
Solomon says, A Brother was born for a Time of Need: or For a Day of Adversity.

And the very sigh, by which we express sorrow (in all Languages) Ah, Ah; is
also, Brother, Brother, in the Mother Language. As if God would teach us, still
in sorrow, both to think of a Brother; and Call for his Help. To which, himself
may allude, in that of Jeremy: They shall not Lament, saying, Ah Brother, or Ah
Sister. And we never cry Ah; Ah; but our Savior hears, and knows, we need Him:
crying: Brother, Brother.

And he knows also, and has told us, There is No Temptation on us, but was
common to our Nature: and to Him, as made in it. And He is Faithful, and will
not suffer us to be Tempted, Above our Strength; or His, in us: As Paul writes
to Every one that Calls on the Name of Christ, Their Lord and Ours: and yet,
our Brother also.

This was it, the Spouse longed for, O that thou were my Brother; that sucked
the breasts of my Mother! when I found Thee, I would Kiss Thee; and I should not
be despised. I would lead thee to my Mothers House (as Isaac led Rebecca, into
Sarahs Tent:) and I would give Thee Spiced Wine, and Pomgranates (as of mixed
Nature:) And his left hand should be under my head; and his Right hand should
embrace me. Not afraid of either Hand: it seems.

And He is now, so made Our Brother; As she longed. And we may press it on him.
If He be Indeed, That Prophet, promised to Moses: Then he is, our Brother. Else
we may not Take him, for our Prophet, or our King. For God expressly tells his
people, If at any time, they Choose a King, They may not Take a Stranger: But a
Brother. One amongst thy Brethren. and repeats it, yet again, and adds. Thou
may not set a Stranger over thee; Who is not thy Brother. And again, When he
is set Over thee, he shall take heed, he do not exalt himself above his
Brethren: but must still own himself to be Their Brother: that he may prolong
his Reign Over them.

And the Kings of Israel, were to read that Scripture in a Solemn Manner, at
Releases. And when King Agrippa came to Read it so: He wept, Until they cried,
that he was their Brother: and the Law did own him so.

And so is Christ. That we may go to our Savior, As They came to Joseph: And
as the words are, They gave him a Charge (in the Name of their Father) saying,
Our Father, bid us say, Forgive, I pray thee now, the Trestass of thy Brethren:
and when Joseph heard them speak, He wept: and so, he did, when first he made
them know, he was their Brother.

And Thus, Ruth, was sent, by Naomy, to Boaz (one of Might: a Type of Christ:
the next a kin to Ebimeleck; My God the King:) and bid to lie down at his feet;
and said, Spread thy skirt over thine Handmaid: For, thou art a near Kinsman.

And the Law, has put a special blot on him; that will not Own his Kindred: or
do the Office of a Brother; when he is Required: For the Woman was to pull off
his Shoe, and spit in his face: and thus it shall be done. And may we not come
and tell our Savior, that his Brother Adam, Dyed without Issue to God: and
that He only, can Raise it up In Us: who are now Widows?

And That it is, not only, permitted, but Commanded, and our Duty, Thus to
plead with Christ; in our addresses to him; may be Farther Cleared from
Solomon. Not only, Bidding us, Say to Wisdom, Thou art my Sister, and to
Understanding, Thou art my near Kinswoman: But also, to keep This Law, as the
choysest of All Laws: and As the Apple of our Eye: the tenderest part of all
the body. And he plainly shows us, This is the way, to be kept, from the Spirit
of Error, and Delusion, (His Deceitful Woman:) Thus, to come to Christ, and
plead our Kindred, and Relation to him. For it is He only, that is True Wisdom.
In whom are hid All Treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge. The Power and Wisdom of
God: and so described, by Solomon also in diverse places. As, in his 8. Chap.
Where Wisdom shows its pedigree; and Coming forth from Eternity.

And yet, There also, This Wisdom, professes, that although He were With God;
and brought up with him; and Daily His Delight; Rejoicing always before him;
Yet I rejoiced in the Habitable parts of his Earth; and my Delight was with the
Sons of Men. And not only with Adam in Innocence: but even After the Fall:
Till which, we find no Sons of Men. But my Delight was with the Sons of Men.
Now Therefore, Hearken to me O ye Children.

Where he makes His Delight in the Sons of Men, the Ground of his Call: and we
still run away, From all his Calls, till we believe, They Spring, from His
Delight In us: or at least, some Love To Us.

As we may see in the Very Prologue of the Law. Which is All founded on This, I
am the Lord Thy God, and Thy Redeemer. Therefore, Thou shall have No Other
Gods: or Ways of Worship: but shall Love my Name, and keep my Sabbaths.
Because I am Thy God, and have Loved thee. which we may find the first and last
of All, or most Commands in all the Laws of Moses.

For God saw it strange, or vain, to ask Our Hearts: or such Respect, and
Reverence, as became a God: Before he gave us His Heart: and Owned himself to
be Our God: and to Love us Heartily. For Who has first Given? or has Lent to
him? that it might be paid, or recompensed.

I dispute not here, To Whom, the Law was Given: (though we may believe him,
that tells us, it was Given, to the Worst of Sinners. And how Else, are They
Guilty, of Breaking it? If it were not, Given to them?) But for the present,
Let it be granted only, that it was Given unto Christ; as a Man; and the Seed
of Abraham also: (that was put Under the Law, more, it may be, then Adam was:)
and Circumcised also, for a Debtor to the Whole Law: and To Fulfill All
Righteousness.

And he was not only, Put, under the Law (as other men were) but Made Under it;
For his very Being, was, made up, of the Holy, Righteous Image of God: which
was, but shadewed, in the Law. Which was so written, in his Heart, also, that
he could, as soon, Unmake himself, and let out All his Being; as ever break,
one Tittle, of the Law. Which was, his Pleasure also; and his choice delight:
and not a Burden, As to Us. Nor can we conceive him, an Holy, Good Man: In
Perfect Wisdom, and Integrity; But, he must be Made Of, With, and Under the
Moral Law of God: as Near, and Dear, to him, as his own Life and Being.

So, that He, cannot plead, his own Death, to Free him From it: As we may, to
Free our selves, from the Law; which has Power over us, But While we Live.
For, He that is Dead, is Freed from Sin, (a Blessed Word:) and From the Law
also. But He was, so Made Under it; that he chose, to Live again, to Keep it
more; as his own Choicest delight and Happiness.

And Himself, has summed up, All the Law, into Love. And of his Love to God,
his Father, we nothing doubt: but of his Love to Man, is All the Question. Yet
we read, It is Vain, for a Man, to speak of Loving God: If he do not also Love
his Neighbor. which himself made, As Great a Law, as That of Loving God; and
Like, or Equal unto, That, he made, the First, and Great Command.

Nay, he may seem, to make it More: (or of More Worth, and acceptance, which
God) to Love Ones Neighbor, then, any otherwise, to Love God himself. For,
That of Loving on's Neighbor, and Doing to All, As one would wish to himself;
he says Is The Law, and the Prophets also: Which is more, then we read, of All
Other Love to God. And the Law and the Prophets also do More forbid, Evil
Thoughts and Words, against, a Brother or Neighbor, then against, God himself,
As Deuteronomy. 15. 9. and Psalm. 50. 20. Esa. 58. Zechar. 7. 10. 8. 17.

And Man, has nothing else, or very little, to Express, his love to God, (whom
he cannot see, or reach, by All his Righteousness and Love:) but by Loving his
Neighbor: That is Every Man. For, he that Loved Another, has Fulfilled the
Whole Law. And All else is but a Tinckling Cymbal.

For, even That, which bids me Love God, and his Name, with All my Soul, and
Might; requires me both, to propagate his Name, and Nature, or Image: and to
Preserve it, and Restore it, All I may. And is not This, to Love my Neighbor,
As my self, or More?

For, Is there a Man, in the World, in whom, I may not see the Name, and Image,
and Glory, of God; as much, or more, then yet it is, in me? Or soon, it may be
so: and that it may; I must, and cannot but endeavor, All I can; If I Love
God, with All my Soul and Might.

And thus I see, the Saints of God, still Measure All their Love to God, by
Declaring his Name to Men; and Making known, his Loveliness. As the Spouse did,
Till even They that sinote her, and took away her Veyle, (or at least, knew him
not, whom her Soul loved) Came, and sought him, with her.

And another Cried, Let him not spare; For, I have not hidden his Holy Word:
But I have, and will Declare it, to my Brethren: Yea, to the Great
Congregation. Lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know. I have
not hid thy Righteousness, within my Heart. I have declared Thy faithfulness,
and Thy Salvation, I have not Concealed thy Loving kidness, and thy Truth: from
the Great Congregation. And I will Declare, Thy Name, to All Congregations; and
to All Generations: and I will Declare for Ever.

Thus it was, with Job, and David, and Christ himself; for, it was He, that
Spoke, and Acted In Those Holy Men: and most of All, in those peculiar Psalms
of Christ, upon the Cross. And his dying Prayer, says, I have Glorified Thy
Name: I have finished My Work: For, I have Declared Thy Name: and have made it
Manifest. And yet again, I have done it, and I will do it. For, it is so sweet,
that I cannot forbear: and the more I spread it, the more I see its beauty, and
its sweetness: and the more I Rub, This Precious Ointment, It Perfumeth more.
Thy Name, is an Ointment Poured forth; and Therefore the Virgins love Thee.

And if We look, on All, the Laws of God, through All the Bible, we shall find
Them More, For Man, and His Good; then For God, and His Gain, or Glory; but in
Man's Happiness. And All, Established, In, and Through the Mediator, Jesus
Christ. The Great Law Maker, as God: and the Great Law Keeper, as Man: both to
God, and Men also.

The Jews tell us, that before the World was made, God bowed down, and put his
hand, under his Robe of Glory; and brought out the Spirit of the Messiah (which
they say, First Moved on the Waters:) and looking on it, said, Will thou Redeem
Israel? and when, he answered, Yea: He said, But Do thou well to consider,
All the Toil, of That Great Work? Art thou indeed content, to lay aside thy
Robes, and Kiss their Rags? To Suck their Wounds, and Wash their Sores, and
wipe away their Putrid flesh? To be among the Chains, and Tombs; and roll
away their Clots, and Worms? To Love their Dust! and raise them from the Grave
of Death, and Rottenness? and when, upon some pause, he Said, he would: and was
content, and Glad, to do it All: The Father Kissed him; and made, an Everlasting
Covenant, with him: or to That Effect.

Which is but some, of This, before us, Made of a Woman: and made Under the
Law. Even, All the Law of Love, To Man, as Well as to God: and to Redeem Them,
that were Under the Law; that so we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

And there is Somewhat, in All the Laws, and Promises, that does especially,
relate to Christ: and is laid, upon Him, by God; and expected from him.

As the First, and Fundamental Promise (that the Woman's Seed shall Break the
Serpents head:) Is Promised, to Man; but Required of Christ. For, it is not
said, It May, but it Must: and Shall, Break the Serpent. Or, as the 72 Psalm
expresses it, He shall break in pieces the Oppressor: and as other Scriptures
have it, He shall Loose his knots (as proper to the Curling; Crossing Serpent,
in Isaia 27.) he shall dissolve All the Works of the Devil. Yea, and by Death,
destroy him, that has the Power of Death, which is the Devil; and shall Root
up Every Plant, the Heavenly Father has not Planted.

And if Sin, come Under, These Plants; or Those Promises: may we not hope, it
shall be Rooted out, and quite destroyed? As the Church is bid to Cry, Take
away All Iniquity (Not only Ours, but All.) and Let the Iniquity of the Wicked
come to an end. As it is Prayed; and Therefore Promised; in the Psalms: and we
are bid to cry for All; Forgive Us our Sins. Yea, and Christ, Prays This, In
us and with us. Therefore it shall be Granted: for He says, Lord Forgive: As
I, and These, and All my Children Do forgive.

And we do not read, God Cursed Adam, or Eve; but the Serpent; Though he laid
Pain and Travel on Eve; with Labor, Toil, and Sweat, on Adam. But of Noah it
was said, This Man shall give us Rest, or Comfort, in our work and Toil;
because of the Earth, which the Lord has Cursed.

And when Noah, built an Altar, After the flood; God smelt a savor of Rest (as
alluding to the Name of Noah, Rest) and said in his Heart, (his very Heart) I
will not again Curse the Ground, Any more, for Man's sake. Which may speak it
Cursed before, for Man's sake; or else, For Man's sake I will bless it Now: and
Curse it no more. And God Blessed Noah, and his Sons: (which is not read of
Adams Sons:) and did not only, give him Leave, to Rule the Creatures, as before
to Adam; but a Larger Commission; in the Beasts of the field (which were not so
put Under Adam: and the Serpent was more subtle, then All other Beasts:) and
other Particulars: which are now, All put, under Noah: and delivered up, into
his Hands; with a Promise also, that his Dread, should be upon them. And That
Promise is made Good, in Christ. In whom, he makes a Covenant for us, with the
Beasts of the field: when He has Married Us, and saved us, by the Lord
Jehovah: as the Prophet Hoze. And Then, the Earth also, shall yield her
increase; and God, even our God, shall bless us: and his saving light, shall
be, Upon All Nations. As the Psalms, in diverse Places.

And our Savior may allude, to Those Promises to Noah (and His name of Rest,
and Giving Rest, from Labor:) when he calls, All That Labor, and are heavy
Laden: Adding, I will Give you Rest. And again, You shall find Rest to your
Souls: however it be to your Bodies. That of the Rainbow, we find, in other
Scriptures: describing the Throne of God, (As by an Eye, with its Rainbow) and
the Revelation Cloatheth Christ, with the Rainbow (As a Circle, which himself
can never break:) Which is also, Round about the Throne: that it may be, Ever
seen, and Never out of Sight, or Mind. To witness the Everlasting Covenant with
Noah, and Mankind: As afterward, with Israel, in the Prophets Esaias, and Jeremy.
And we All, are In That Covenant, made with Noah: and it is, no small Matter,
to be, in Any, One Covenant, with God.

That, of Slaying the Manslayer, may seem, to put, Every Man Under Coertion:
That cannot, be dispensed with. For, if it be laid, on All Mankind, to slay the
Blood shedder: who can Exempt himself or others?

And is God indeed, so careful for our Blood? and is he not more for our Souls?
Is He so strict, which Beasts, and Men, and every Man's Brother? and is he not,
As strict, with Satan, or Any that devour our Souls? And is not Christ, in This
also? Seeing himself branded Cain, for Hating his Brother: or saying, Am I my
Brothers Keeper?

But God has made, Every Man, his Brothers Keeper: and our Savior, more then
All. As Psalm. 72. He shall save the Soul of the Needy: and Precious shall their
Blood, be in his sight. He shall Redeem their Souls from Deceit and Violence.
Men shall be Blessed in Him: All Nations shall Call him Blessed.

The Blessed Seed (for he speaks not of Seeds, as of Many, but of One, which
is Christ) to Bless All Nations, and All Families: or Every Family of the
Earth: As it is repeated, both to Abraham, and Jacob, and the Psalmist says,
God has set him for Everlasting Blessings, or Blessings for ever. and to the
Great Multitude, in the Temple Courts: The Apostle said, God has sent him to
Bless you, by Turning Every one of you, From your Iniquities. God has sent
him on This Errand; and has put him Under this Law: which is much to be
pleaded with him.

And the 4th Command, requires him, to Keep the Rest of God: not only himself,
and his Sons and Daughters but his Menservants and Maidservants; and Cattle,
and Stranger also, in his Gate: They must All be brought to Rest the Rest of
God. That thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, may Rest, as well as Thou.
That thine Ox, and thine Ass, may be refreshed. And the Psalmist may allude to
This; as often, as he Calls himself, A Stranger with God or the Son of His
Handmaid.

And This 4th. Command, may be found, the Sum, of All the 2 d. Table. Which
requires, Every Man, and Christ also, as a Man, to Love his Neighbor as
himself: and to endeavor that Servants, and Strangers also, may be brought, To
the Rest of God: and be Refreshed As well as We. And molded, into the Image of
God. For, they All Groan, for the Glorious Rest, and Freedom, of the Sons of
God.

And the Beauty, of That Image To be Formed in them, will so recompense, All
the Labor of Christ; that He will Never, Repent it. And He is so much in Love,
with That Image to be Formed in Us; that his Many years, of Suffering, and
Service, are but As a Few Days, in his Eyes: For the Rachel, of his Love. For,
he shall see the Travel of his Soul, and shall be Fully Satisfied, and be at
Rest.

And the Sabbatical year of Rest, was For the Earth also; the Earth which the
Lord Cursed. Nor might they reap, What grew of its Self. For, it is a year of
Rest, unto the Land: and the Sabbath of the Land, shall be meat, for Thee, and
thy Maid, and Hired Servant; and for the Stranger that Sojourneth with thee:
and the Gleaning, of every Harvest, must be left for the Poor and Stranger. As
the 19th. of Levit. Where we have also the Sum of All the Royal Law of Love: As
it lies on Every Man, as Man: and so, on Christ Also.

Thou shall not Hate thy Brother in thy Heart. Thou shall, in any wise, rebuke
thy Neighbor: and not suffer Sin upon him. A blessed Law! to be pressed, much
on Christ. And the Sum of our Coven ant is, To submit to his Teachings, and
Rebukes, or Chastenings; which are called, the Rods of the Covenant. Very
precious things!

And Thus, he promised, the Holy Spirit, to Reprove the World. And we should
beg it much. As David Cries, O Search and Try me, If any Evil way be in Me: and
Lead me in the Way Everlasting. All other ways, will quickly end: As Thorns in
a fire.

Thoushalt not Avenge; or Bear any grudge, against the Children of thy People:
But thoushalt Love thy Neighbor, As thy Self. I am the Lord.

Does it not lie, on our Savior, also? Not to Avenge, or bear any grudge,
against his People? or the Children of his People? May not This Include, the
Children of his Servant Noah? the Thousand Generations of Him, that Loved God,
and Served him, with an Upright heart: which God himself owned for a Perfect
heart: To Noah, David, Job, and Abimelech also; As the Words in Hebrew. Genesis
20. 5, 6. And it is not only said, that God did Covenant, with a Thousand
Generations; But also, Commanded it for a Thousand Generations: As Ps. 105. 8.

And the Law is plain: Thou may not bear a Grudge, against the Children of
thy People. Thou shall not Retain. For, So is the Word, and often used, against
Retaining Anger.

So directly Opposite, to Gods Retaining mercy. Which he makes so Great a
part, of his Name, to Moses: and with such an Emphasis; that Moses left it,
Noted, with a very Great Letter, in the word of Keeping Mercy: As the Jews yet
observe it, in Exodus 34. and again, in Numb. 14. They have another Great
Letter, in That, Let the Power of My Lord be Great, as thou have spoken. And
Gods Keeping Mercy, is the Tenor of the Song, in all the Scripture. And by
David's Last Words, Some were set, to sing it still; and keep it up, in the
Peoples hearts. And when they did agree, in This, the Glory of God appeared;
and some strange Return of Prayer. 1 Chronicles. 16. 41. and 23, 24. with 2 Chronicles.
5. 13. and 20, 21, 22. And there is, scarce Any thing, more Clear, in all the
Bible, then that, he will not, Retain his Anger: and much less For Ever. Seeing
he bids us, not Let, the Sun go down upon our Wrath. And himself gave us, an
example of it, at the Fall: and Afterward, the Cursed person, must not Hang
beyond Sunset. As in Moses and Joshuah. The Case of Saules Nephews Hanged up,
before the Lord; was Extraordinary: and seems branded with Rispaes Goodness,
in Watching them, which occasioned David, to bury them; with the bones of Saul,
and his Sons, Hanged also. And It is Giveing place to Satan, or Closing with
the Devil; To Reserve Anger, but for One Evening, As Ephesians. 4. and Wrath does
Rest, (or Lodge, for a Night) in the Bosom of Fools. And Wrath, is an Hebrew
word, implying somewhat to pass away, or passing. As Come my People, Hide thee
a little moment; Till my Wrath be Past.

And the Great Cause, of Gods taking up, such a Lasting War with Esau (and
Amalech, a Branch, of E^au) was, for that, he Forgot the Brotherly Covenant: or
Kindness to his Brother Jacob: and Let his Anger Tear perpetually: and cast off
pity: and Kept his Wrath for Ever. As in Amos, and Ezekiel. 35.

Yet, Edoms Widows, and Fatherless Children, are called in, to God, in Jer. 49.
And so the Law of War, requires, in Deuteronomy. 20. Which is much, to be pressed on
Christ. If thou Go to war, thou shall first offer Peace: and if Peace be
Rejected, yet thou must Preserve the Women, and Children. So that, In Judgment,
thou must still, remember Mercy.

And will thou not yet say, My Father? the guide of my Youth! Will be reserve
his Anger for Ever? will he keep it to the End? as Jer. 3. And again, Return O
Backsliding Israel, says the Lord. I will not cause my Anger, to fall upon
you: For I am Merciful, says the Lord: And I will not Keep Anger, for Ever.
And in Lam. It is good for a man, to wait and hope, for the Salvation of God.
For He will not cast off for ever; but though he cause grief, yet he will have
compassion, according to the Multitude of his Mercies: For he does not afflict,
from his Heart, or Grieve, the Children of Men.

And in the Psalms, The Lord is Merciful and Gracious, slow to Anger, and
plenteous in Mercy: he will not always Chide; Nor will he keep his Anger for
Ever. And the 30th Psalm. Give thanks at the Remembrance of his Holiness;
Because, or For, his Wrath Endures but a Moment. As if During, Lasting wrath,
could not consist with Holiness: and least of All, in God: whose ^ure and Holy
eyes, Turn away, from All, that causes Wrath; or may prolong it: and
Therefore, he blotteth out Iniquity, For his Own Names sake. Because he cannot
endure to see it. And he bids us, Put him in mind, of This Word; and Plead it
with him, that we may be Justified, Esaias. 43.

And This Holiness of God, is, Diverse times, made the Great Object of our
Praise: Or Reason Why we should Praise the Lord. Who might be Feared, for his
Power, or Wisdom; but Praised, Only, for his Holiness: which is Godness in
diverse places, Psalm. 22. 30. 97. 99, 100. 136. with the former places in the
Cronicles.

And Micah says, He will not Retain his Anger for Ever: because he Delights
in Mercy. And in Esaias: I will not contend for Ever; neither will I be Always
Wrath: For, the Spirit should fail before me: and the Souls which I have made.

A Great Argument for Mercy. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: Forsake
not the Work of thy Own Hands. And, Have Thou not poured me out as Milk? And
Curdled me as Cheese? and Thou will have desire, to the works of thy own hands.
And in our Greatest Sufferings, we are bid, to commit, the Keeping of our Souls
(our Souls) to God, in Well doing; As to a Faithful Creator: and a Faithful
preserver also.

O Thou Preserver of Men! What shall I do to thee? I have Sinned; but why Will thou not Pardon my Transgressions; and Take away mine Iniquities? Will thou not
seek me in the morning?

And all these may comment, on That Law of Love, in Leviticus. Thou shall not
avenge, or Retain, against the Children of thy People. But Thou shall Love thy
Neighbor as thy self. As plainly showing that Any Retaining Anger, is not
consistent, with the Good Law of God, or Love of our Neighbor.

And lest we should mistake, the Phrase of Neighbor, and Brother, used here;
the very same Chapter, requires to love a Stranger, As ones self. the 19. of
Levit. 34. and the 25. does also make a stranger as a Brother. Saving If Thy
Brother wax poor, thou shall relieve him: though a Stranger or a Sojourner. And
to other Arguments, for Strangers: (as that, They were Strangers, in Egypt; and
must know the Heart of a Stranger:) It is added also, that God Loves
Strangers. And the Hebrews are bidden, not to Forget to entertain Strangers;
because some have so, Entertained Angels unawares.

And yet, One of the hardest words of our Savior is, I know you not; or, you
are Strangers. Though himself observes the Law of strangers, saying, I was a
stranger, and you took Me not in (as Job says, the Stranger did not Lodge
without his Doors:) And in the Good Samaritan, the phrase of Neighbor, or
Brother, is plainly made, to reach a Stranger, and an Enemy.

And so, in the Law also. For What, in one place, is a Brothers Ox or Ass, In
another, is an Enemies, and His that Hates us: and yet, His Laden, straying
Ass, must be Pitied, and Helped. Will thou Cease to Help him? Or to leave thy
Business for him? (as the Margent of our Bible:) Thou shall surely Leave it, to
join with him, and help him, Exodus 23. 15.

And although our Souls, be as the Wild Asses Colts; yet we may plead This Law
also, with our Savior. Though they be the Asses, of his Enemies, and them that
Hate him; Yet in straying, or being Laden; He will keep This Law: and surely
Join to Help them.

And to This, he might allude, when he sent his Disciples, to loose the Ass
(Tied in the Broad way, where 2 ways met) and then came, Meek and Lowly; As
the King of Zion, upon an Ass, the Foal of an Ass.

And the parallel place in Deuteronomy. speaking, of a Brothers, or a Strangers, Ox or
Ass, by That Occasion, gives a General Rule, of All things that are Lost. In
like manner shall thou do, with his Ass, and so shall thou do with his
Raiment; and with All Lost things. Thou may not Hide thy self. A very sweet
Law, and much to be pressed on our Savior, when we fear our Souls Most Lost:
As, they may be most, in them that are Least sensible.

Does he not say, he came to seek and Sa^e, That which is Lost? And so, he
clearly expresses it, diverse times. In the Last Sheep, and Lost Groat: and
the Great Joy in Heaven, at Finding Any lost Sinner. And This is written, in
his Heart also; both, to the Lost Image of his Father; and our Lost Souls: and
the Law says, Thou May not (plainly, May not) Hide thyself: from That
which is L^st.

And How does God complain, against the Evil Shephards, that did not
strengthen the Weak, or heal the Sick, o^ bind up the Broken, or bring home
that which was Driven away; or seck out That which was Lost? But I will search
and seek them out: and I will bind up, that which is Broken: and I will
strengthen, that which is sick: and I will bring home That which was Driven
away: and I will seek out that which is lost: and I will set One Shepard, over
them: which our Savior also, Took upon him, for His Duty.

And Other sheep I have; and them also, I must bring in. And whoever, These
were (How many so ever, or How few) yet He plainly owneth, Men as Sheep, before
Conversion: In their Natural State of Wrath, as well as others.

And so Peter also, speaks of some before Conversion; that they were, As
sheep going astray, but Then, returning to the Great Shepard of the Flock. And
Esaias says, We Al^ strayed, As Lost sheep; and the Lord made our Inicuities to
meet upon Him. And in diverse Psalms, Al Nations and People of the Earth, are
Called in, because they are His People, and the sheep of his Flock: and the
sheep of His H^nds. And As a Sinner (in a state of Sin) may be a sheep; so a
wicked man is a Brother: and Owned so in the Law; that says, The Judge shall
beat the Wicked Man, deserving stripes; and yet but 40: Least, Thy Brother
(Though a Wicked man) be Vile in Thine Eyes. And Christ himself, may allude to
This, when he speaks of Many stripes, to him, that knew his Masters Will: and
yet but 40. For, he is a Brother. And the Great Law of Redemption, Is but a
Branch, of Loving God, and our Neighbor: and of Seeking, All that is Lost, or
ready to be Lost; from God, and His Under Tenants.

For you are Mine, says the Lord, and Your Land is Mine. You shall not sell,
or pawn, or Alienate, your selves, or your land, from me, for Ever. But There
shall be a Redemption. Either the Person himself: or his next Kinsman that can,
shall Redeem him, and his land. Is there Any Kinsman Nearer then Christ! that
Can Redeem us? Does not This Law, lie upon him also? Dotb God indeed take care
of Oxen, Asses, Bodies, Lands, and Houses of Clay? And did he not take care of
our Souls? the Souls which He has made (as himself speaks) more Precious
then the World beside?

And This Redemption of Persons, and Lands; is but a shadow, of Redeeming
Souls: and a ^ledge, or Earnest, hereof. As we may see plainly: by comparing,
Lev. 25, and 26. As the sum of the Law, and Gospel also. Which After Dreadful
Threatenings, Concludes sweetly, in the 44. verse. Yet, nevertheless, For All
This, or That, I will not cast them away: neither will I abhor them, to destroy
them Utterly, or Break my Covenant with them. Which is often pressed on God, in
the Psalms and Prophets. Forsake me not Utterly. And Have thou Utterly rejected
Zion?

And be not our Souls, as Little our own? and as Much the Lords? as the Jews
Bodies? Lands? and Houses were? Yet These, might not be Sold, or Alicnate for
Ever: But There must be a Redemption: Because they are the Lords: and He will
not part with His Right: and cares he not, that we sell our Selves to Sin, or
Satan for Ever? and has he not provided a Redemption in This Case also? and
shall not the Lawful, even the Lawful Captive be delivered? Even when a Man
has Sold himself for naught? as God expresses. And If none, Either would, or
Could Redeem them. Yet, were All, to go out, at the Jubilee. Which was also, but
a Type of Christ, our Great Redeemer and our Jubilee. Yea, and in the mean time,
They must not be Ruled with Rigor, which is often forbidden; and complained
of; in the Pastors, and Rulers, in Ezekiel: that They Ruled with Force and
Rigor. Which was, so contrary, to the Rule of God, and Christ. Who was told,
his People should be Free, in the Day of his Power: By the Beauties of
Holiness. And he told his Disciples, he had All Power, in Heaven, and Earth;
and Therefore, They should Teach: But not Compel, or Command, with Rigor. Not
as Lords, over Gods Inheritance, but Ensamples to the Flock.

And so, our Ancestors, told Austine, in This Island, That Religion Ought to be
Free: and not Compelled, or Forced: and the Apostles left it so: and the Laws
also: To That Time: As we read in Bid. And Alfreds Will, declares, his
subjects Free; as his own Thoughts: and following Kings were sworn, to the
Saxon Laws and Customs of our Ancestors. And how much God was against Ruling
with Rigor; we may see by his forbidding, to deliver up, Any Slave, that had
run away, from his Master; which may be a great encouragement, to run to
Christ: for, the Law forbids him, to deliver us back to Sin, or Satan, or any
hard Master.

And when God threatened, Hard Masters, unto Egypt (as they had been to Israel)
yet in That oppression, he declares, they should Cry, and be would hear, (for
he is Gracious:) and would send a Savior, and a Great One; and He shall
Deliver Them: and They shall Come, to be a third, with Israel, and Assyria:
Even a Blessing, in the midst of the Land. Whom the Lord shall Bless, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my People. Which was gotten by some Cruel Lord, Oppressing
them. For, the Lord shall smite, and he will Heal. As Esaias 19. And though
Christ, be also a King, yet even so, also, He was Under the Law: and Made Under
it. For the great Law of the King, was This, that even, when he sat upon the
Throne of his Kingdom, he should write out the Law; and read it, All his days:
that so he might be sure to keep it: and not exalt himself above his Brethren:
but Prolong his Kingom in the Midst, or heart of his Subjects. And it is, a
Great Character, of Antichrist, to think himself Above the Law: or to attempt
to Change the Times and Laws: As in Dan. 7. 25. and if God, have put, All men,
below Coertion of the Law, Then who can Exempt them? or set them Above it? And
perhaps, there is nothing more Dangerous, to Any Man, then to presume, or to
pretend himself, to be Above the Law: which God has set a bound to Kings (it
may be) Rather then to Private Men; whom others still will bound enough, as
Deuteronomy. 17. And the Great Law of a King, is Mercy Rather then Any thing else. For
so, Solomon says, Mercy, and Truth preserve a King; but his Throne is
Established by Mercy. By Mercy, rather, then Any thing else: or before All
other things: As the words plainly imply. And shall a Man Dye This Day? Am I
not King of Israel?

And we may press it much, on Christ as the Great Law, of a wise King; to
Preserve his Throne by Mercy: that it do not Totter. For, of Him, and His
Throne, it is especially said, In Mercy shall the Throne be Established: As
Esaias 16. In allusion to That of Solomon, The Throne is Established by Mercy.
And the Psalms say, His Throne is Everlasting, because Mercy and Truth are Ever
before it, and above it: and he fings of Mercy, with his Greatest Judgments:
and Happy are They, that Hear, and Understand, That Joyful Sound. For, In Thy
Righteousness (Thy very Righteousness) they shall be exalted, All the day long,
or, (as another Psalm) They shall rejoice in All thy Righteous Judgments.

For, If his tender Mercy, be above All his Works, Then sure, Above his
Judgments also: which he calls his Strange Acts. But Mercy, is his own Child.
For, he is the Father of Mercies: which are therefore One with Christ his Only
Son. and yet, a little while, and Mercy shall Triumph against, or Over,
Judgment: as we read in James.

And Christ also, bids them, Go, and learn That; I will have Mercy, rather then
Any Sacrifice. And to him, it was spoken, Ride on Prosperously, because of
Truth and Meekness of Righteousness. And He has showed thee O man! what is
Good, and what the Lord Delights in: To do Justice; but in that Also, To Love
Mercy. Or as Jeremy expresses it, To Exercise Loving Kindness and Judgment:
For, in These I delight. And in the next Chapter, the Prophet prays For Gods
Correction (O the blessed Rods of the Covenant!) and with Judgment also; but
with such Judgment, as the Chapter before: still tempered with Mercy. And
Solomon's Son lost the Kingdom of the 10 Tribes, by not observeing his Fathers
Good Rule, of Establishing his Throne, by Mercy; neglecting the Wise Council,
of the Old Men, that told him his Way, to get, and keep, the hearts of his
Subjects, was to be more Merciful, then his Father. Which we may Press on
Christ; as the wisest Council; that he get, and keep his Subjects Hearts, by
being More Merciful, then his Father yet has showed himself. And yet our
Savior gives it, As a sufficient Reason, why the Father also should grant All
that is asked of him: because he is a Great and Glorious King. And so he
concludes All his Prayer, with no other, For but This: For, thine is the
Kingdom, Power and Glory. As if This alone, were Cause enough, why he should
do, All that is Asked. And when Solomon's Mother describes, the Law of
Kindness, in the Good Woman's Tongue; She gives her Son, This Law of Kindness,
for his Heart. Open thy mouth for the Dumb, in the Case of All appointed to
Destruction. And again, Open Thy Mouth: Judge Righteously: and Plead the Cause
of the Poor and Needy. So that while the King, sits upon the Throne, As Judge:
His own Heart, and Bowels, must be Advocates to Plead, for All the Prisoners,
at the bar. Yea, for All that be Appointed for Death: Even for the worst
offenders: who may not have Council, in some Cases and Places: because indeed
the Judges are to be their Counsel, in All they can* and that was Lemuels
Council to her Son; and the Prophecy, she taught him, as for a Great King to
come* in the Last of Proverbs.

And Solomon gives it, to his Son also; If thou forbear, to deliver them that
are Drawn unto Death; and Those that are ready to be Slain: If thou say,
behold we know it not: Does not He, that p^nders the Heart, consider it? and He
that keeps Thy Soul? even Thy Soul; that has so often deserved Death: and
Liveeth still, but on the Free Grace of God!

And the 102 Psalm. (that is made For One Afflicted) tells us, that God looked
down, from the Height of his Sanctuary, to Hear the Groaning of the Prisoners;
and to Loose Them, that are Appointed unto Death. And Were we not All Appointed
to it? And may we not Press it on Christ? to open his mouth, and Plead for All
Appointed unto Death? And will not This, show his Intercession, Larger then we
do believe? not only a King, as Solomon was; but a Priest also: and so the
Great Intercessor. For, the ^riests that were Men only, were the Great
Mediators: and They had the Work of Expiation; with a Woe; if they did it not.
Yea and that, with Tender Pity, and Compassion, to the Souls of Men. And Every
High ^riest Taken from among men, is ordained For men, in things partaining to
God; that he may offer Gifts, and Sacrifices For sins: Who can have Compassion,
on the Ignorant; and on them that are out of the Way. For that, he Himself, is
Compassed with Infirmity: and by reason hereof, He ought, He ought to offer for
sin. As we read in the Hebr. and the Law also. Which did not leave it to Aarons
Choice, and Pleasure; to do it, If he would, and when he would: but laid it on
him, and his Sons; As their Great Duty, to make Expiation for Sin; and to Bear
the Iniquity, of All the Congregation, and of All their Holy Things. And to
Heal the Lepers: Or pronounce them Clean; when Ever they Could. And Woe unto
them, If they did it not.

And how Zealous was Moses himself, the King of Jessuron! in Interceding? when
he saw the Marks of Gods displeasure? How did he fall, on his Face? and Bow his
Heart; by Fasting 40 da^es together? how quickly, did he bow for them? and to
Aaron, cries Take Incence; Put it on the Censor; Go q^i^kly! Make Atonement:
For, there is Wrath Gone out; the Plague is begun.

And this, was but a Little T^pe of Christ; Under the Great Law, of
Satisfaction, and Intercession.

For, every High Priest, is Ordained, to offer Gifts and Sacrifices: wherefore
it is of Necessity, that This man, have somewhat to offer also. It is of
Necessity! and He must, offer for Sin.

And the 45 of Ezech; gives the Law of Priest, and Prince together. It shall be
the Princes Part (or Duty) to provide, and Give, Burnt-Offerings, and
Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, in the Feasts and Sabbath, and in All
Solomnities, of the house of Israel: and again, He shall prepare the
Sin Offerings; to make Reconciliation, for the House of Israel.

So that When, we want an Offering; or know not How, to offer it; we Ought, to
go to Christ; and tell him, It is Now His Part, to Give the Sacrifice, and to
Prepare it; that it May be Rightly offered. As God has now laid it on Him: As
the Prince, and King, of His People: There Described, and Promised. For, All
That Prophecy, is a Clear Promise, of some Gospel time or other. And lest the
Phrase, of Israel, might seem to limit it so, as to exclude the Gentiles, or
Others; In the very next verses, God goes on, and commands the Prophet, that
Upon the Very first day of the first Month, he should take a young Bullock: and
the Priest should put the blood, upon the Posts of the House; and upon the 4
Corners of the Altars settle; and upon the Posts of the Gate of the Court (For
every one that Enters, or comes near It; yea and for them Afar off, also; For,
the words follow,) and so, thou shall de, on the 7th day of the Month: For
Every one that Erreth, and for Him, that is simple. Which the Hebrews Turns,
To have compassion, on the Ignorant, and him that is out of the Way. And the
next verses command the Passover, on the 14th day: and Then, the Priest must
prepare a Sin-Offering; For All the People of the Land; or of the Earth: it is
the same word.

And the Hebrews, may allude to This also; when it says, of Christ, It
behooves him, to be made like his Brethren in All things; that he Might be a
Merciful and Faithful High Priest; To make Reconciliation for the Sins of the
People (as in Ezech. So ye shall Reconcile the House:) and in the same Chapter:
That by the Grace of God he might Taste Death for Every Man. Or, as the Angel,
Unto Daniel. To finish Transgression, and make an end of sin: to make
Reconciliation for Iniquity: and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness. Those
commands, are also, given, to Ezekiel: The Son of Man, whom God made a Watchman
Over Israel. A Mighty Type of Christ: in Bearing the Sins of the People: as God
speaks to him, in his 40 and 390 Days.

And as That he speaks, of a Watcher or Bishop (as the Phrase, in all Greek
Authors is,) may teach us, To allow Humane Orders, to be Divine Ordinances, in
such Cases: as the Apostles also speak: So it may also show us the Duty of a
Watcher; and his Danger, if he neglect his Duty, Toward Any Man. And who is
sufficient for it? But only Jesus Christ? Thus Typed, in Ezekiel: both a
Priest, and Prophet, or Seer, and Watcher. And thus at once, we have the Law,
or Duty both of Prince and Priest, and Prophet also. For, the Greatest, must be
Under the Law, As well as others.

And when God Promised, to Raise up the Great Prophet; It was always added, He
should be, One of their Brethren: and like unto Moses; Who was more signally,
Under the Law, then, Any Man Living: and the Meekest Man upon the Earth: and
the only Man (as the Jews abserve) that by the Lord himself, is so often
called, My Servant; Living and Dead also. A great Type of Christ: the Servant
of the Lord: as God himself often calls him.

Behold my Servant, whom I have chosen: my Beloved, in whom my soul is well
pleased. I have put my Spirit upon him: and He shall show Judgment to the
Gentiles: and he shall not Strive or Cry. A bruised Reed, he shall not break:
nor quench the Smoking Flax: Until he bring forth Judgment unto Victory,
(Then it shall be Led in Triumph by King Mercy: King of Peace and
Righteousness) and In his Name, the Gentiles Trust. They Shall Trust. As when
the Root of Jesse, shall be seen (as formerly the Branch:) His Rest shall be
Glorious.

And his own Law, for Servants is, that they give All Diligence, and do All
Heartily. And Himself Makes it, the Great work of the Chiefest Servant, to
Give Others Food, in Due Season: and with Meekness. For, if He do but begin to
smite his Fellow Servants, (yet he is to Rule them) but if once, he do begin,
to smite:) his Lord will come and cut him asunder.

Unto which, it may be, Paul alludeth, when he says. The Servant of the Lord,
must not strike; but be Gentle, unto All. Apt to Teach: Patient: in Meekness,
instructing Those that Oppose themselves.

And Solomon says, that Wisdom does, and shall (for so the Word is) Stand and
Call, to the Simple ones: and To the Scorners also: How long will ye love
Scorning? Turn ye, at my Reproof: and I will pour out my Spirit on you. Though
you Have been Scorners. Behold; I stand at the Door and knock.

And again, To you, O men, I call: and my Voice is To the Sons of Man. O ye
Simple! Understand Wisdom! and ye Fools! Be ye of an Understanding Heart! And
again, Who so is Simple; Turn in Hither. As the 45. of Ezec also.

And it was said to Christ, both as a Teacher, and a Ruler; Ride on
Prosperously, because of Truth and Meckness.

And the next Psalms, speak his Teaching, and his Ruling Meekness. He makes
Wars to cease, to the Ends of the Earth. Be still, and know, that I am God. He
shall speak the People Under us (That is the word Used.) He shall choose our
Inheritance for us; the Excellency of Jacob, whom he loved. God is gone up,
with a shout; Sing Praises to God; Sing Praises; Sing Praises to our King; Sing
Praises. For God, is King of all the Earth: Sing Praise with Understanding.
According to thy Name, O God, so is thy Praise, Unto the End of the Earth. Let
Mount Zion rejovce, and the Daughters of Judah be glad, because of Thy
Judgments. And the reason is often added; Because he is Holy. The main, or
only, Cause, of Praising God.

And so the Prophet Esaias. For my Names sake, I will refrain mine Anger: For,
why should I give my Glory to another? As Moses, was fain to do, to Joshuah:
For One passionate Speech! and another must have my Crown, if he be Meeker then
I. For, Meekness shall prevail, with God, and Man: and shall Inherit the Earth
also. As our Savior taught, and Practiced.

In Patience Possess your Souls, which Else you lose: Or at least your Crown.
And why, will you Give, your Glory, to another? It is, the Glory of Man, to
Pass by Transgression: and the Glory of God, to Cover a Matter. To be pressed
much, on Christ; as Man, and God also.

The Apostle Paul, could not find a better Pattern, or a better Argument, then
to beseech us, by the Meekness, and Gentleness of Christ. And For This cause, I
Obtained Mercy; that in me First, Jesus Christ might show forth, All
Long-suffering; for a Pattern, to them which should hereafter believe.

And the Jews deliver it, as one of the First Traditions of Moses, to the
Elders, and so downwards; that they should make Disciples of the Law, by
Meekness: being slow to speak (as Moses was) and slower to Wrath, or Judging.
which we find also, in Ieams. Who tells us, God Vpbraideth not; but Gives
Freely; Simply. And if Any Man, want wisdom, he should ask it of God: That
Gives Simply. But let Patience, have its Perfect Work, that ye may be Entire,
Wanting Nothing. And may we not Press it on Christ also? and Plead it with him?
That His Patience also, Have its Perfect Work?

And sure If All True Wisdom, be Peaceful, Gentle, Easy to be Entreated, full
of Mercy, and Good works: It is much more So, in him: who has All Treasures of
Wisdom and Meekness also. So that All Moses Meekness, was but a Little branch,
or rivulet, of His Great Root, and Ocean; of Wisdom and Meekness.

And yet Moses could say, to Joshuah, Enviest Thou for my Sake? O that All the
Lords People were Prophets! and that God would put his Spirit on them! and to
God: forgive I pray thee: or else Blot me out of thy Book.

And was it not, the Spirit of Christ, that prayed so, in Moses? and Other
Prophets of God? so much Longing that All the Lords People were Prophets: and
that All Might Prosper and be Safe? And was he not heard, in What he prayed? Is
it not He, that spoke in Job, and David, and the Prophets, and Apostles,
sighing, O that Thou had Heard! and O that Thou would hear! and Then Thy
Righteousness should be as the Sea, and thy Peace as the Great Rivers! and my
heart is Broken with Longing, and mine eyes run down, with Rivers of Tears:
because They keep not thy Holy law. Give ye wings to Moab: that it may flee
away, and be at rest: Mine Heart Mourns for it; and shall sound as Pipes: my
Bowels yearn: and I must weep: and Water thee with Tears. And Thus, To Moab,
and Edom; the Worst of Sinners; and the most Threatened. And would to God, that
All men, were not only Almost, but Altogether Christians: and as I am, but my
bonds. And I would you knew my Earnest Longing, and Agony; which I have to you,
and to Others; even All: and as many, as have not seen my face, in the flesh!
and who is afflicted, and I burn not? And the Lord make you to increase and
abound in Love, toward one another, and to All men (to All men?) As we do
toward you. And I could wish my self Accursed for my Brethren in the flesh.

Was it Paul only, that Said these things? or Christ in Him? and does he not
Then, both Love, and Pity Men? and Long, For Their Good and Happiness? Does
he put Others only, Upon it? Will he bind Heavy Burdens, of Desires, on
Others; and not Touch them with his little finger?

Was it not His Spirit, that says, in Job, Did I not weep for Him, that was in
Trouble? and was not my Soul Grieved for the Poor? My Bowels boiled, and rested
not; I went mourning, without the Sun. If I have despised the Cause of my
Manservant, or Maidservant, when they Contended with me (the worst of All
their Doings) what shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits? what
shall I answer him? Did not One, fashion us in the Womb?

If I have eaten, my Morsel alone. If I have seen Any perish, for want of
clothing. Or Any Poor, without Covering. If his loins have not blessed me. And
he were not warmed with my fleece. If I have lift up my Hand, against the
Fatherless, when I saw my Help wanting in the Gate. Then let my arm be broken
from the bone; and fall from my shoulder. If I rejoiced at the destruction of
him that Hated me: or lift up my self, when Evil found him.

Was not All This, but a little shadow of the Better, larger Heart of Christ?
so far beyond the Heart of Job, or Moses, or David, or Paul, or Any other, in
the World.

And yet Here also, we find a Tender Heart, To All, in Want and Misery. So that
Job stayed not, for Tears, or Entreaties: but another Wants, were Prayers,
Loud enough. If I have seen Any Perish for want.

And till we come to see, This also, in the Heart of Christ: We stagger; and
are still, in fear; and doubt, of him. While we think, he measures out to us,
but, as we do, to Him; and that we must begin to him, before His Giving out to
us, or Seeking us.

And yet, we see Gods Tenderness, to Beasts, that do not Pray at all, but with
Natural Voices. Which his Pity, does Interpret, into Crying unto Him (As Paul
said, to the Athenians; Whom ye Ignorantly Worship, Him I declare:) and so God,
to Job; Who has established Food, to the Raven? When his Young Ones Cry to
God? Yea, and, when They do not Cry, but only Wander, Lacking Food?

For, he gives Food to Every Living thing: not For its Crying, but, Because
his Mercy Endures for ever. And the Sparrows, and the Swallows, come, and may
(or have, leave to come) and lay their eggs, and Young Ones, On his Altars: O
my King and my God! And Hezekiah did but Chatter, as a Crane, or as a Swallow,
and yet God heard him. And so he promises, in Exodus 22. If they do, at All,
Cry to me, I will surely Hear. And the reason is added, alittle after; I will
Hear, For I am Gracious. If they do at All Cry! How much more, when they Cry
Mightily? For He that heard Young Solomon, in his sleep; and in a Dream Only:
Will he not hear him Waking? Yet it is not said that he Asked his Dream again;
when he awaked. But the Lord Heard, and Granted, what he did, but Ask in a
Dream. How much more, in Sore Affliction? Lo he Prays! and he hears All
Afflicted: and executes Judgment for All that are Opressed, as Psalm. 103. and
He Heard Jehoahaz, when he cried; Though he were a Wicked King: and continued
so, in 2 Kings 23.

And he saw Ahaz, Going softly: though a Wicked man. And he sees Affliction:
and it Cries, Loud in his ears. And Hagar did Rightly call it, the Well of
Him that Saw her: rather then Heard her: or Any Prayers, that we read of, but
her Misery.

And so, it was, in Egypt. I have seen: I have seen, their Misery; and I have
heard their sighs: although they had, as little heart, to pray, or speak to
God; as to hear him speak by Mases: when they could not hearken, for the
Anguish of their hearts.

But I have seen; I have seen Ephraim; yea, and seen his Frowardness also! but
I will heal. And when the Poor want, and cannot Cry; For, their Tongue, Cleaves
to their Mouth; I will open a fountain, in the Wilderness. As of old, I did to
Hagar.

But we must see, This also, to be part of the Law: that so we may lay it on
Christ: and plead it with him. And God, did not only, show us This, in his own
Bowels (Promising, to Comfort All that mourn: and to Replenish Every Empty
Soul; and Every sorrowful Heart: on which the Prophets sleep was sweet to him:)
But it was so, in his Heart; that now it is, also, a part of the Law. Which is
but an Image, or shadow of the Heart of God.

Beware, there be not a Thought, in thy Wicked beart, against thy poor Brother,
Saying, so or so. But then shall sure'y Lend, and Give him enough: or
sufficient, for his want: and yet, not a word of Asking.

Make thy shadow, as the Night, in the midst of Noon: Hide the outcasts: and
bewray not him that Wandereth. Be a Covert, from the Face of the Spoyler. Let
mine Outcasts, Dwell with Thee, O Moah! As alluding to David's bringing his
Parents Unto Moah; till he knew, How God would deal with him.

And again, Is not This, the Fast, that I have Chosen? to loose the bonds of
Wickedness? and to undo the Heavy Burdens? and to let the broken go Free? and
that ye break Every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry? and that
thou bring the Poor afflicted, or cast out, into thy House? and when thou see
(only see) the Naked; that thou Cover him: and that thou hide not thy self
from thine own flesh?

If thou draw out thy soul, to the Hungry; and satisfy the afflicted soul:
Then shall thy light arise in Obscurity: and thy Darkness, as the Noon day: and
the Lord shall Guide thee continually: and satisfy thy* soul in Drought: and
thou shall be like a Watered Garden; whose waters never fail; or lie: and from
Thee, shall be They, that shall build up, the old waste places: and thou shall
be called, the Repairer of the Breach.

One of the Sweetest places, in the Bible: As lying on our Savior also; when
ever he Sees Us Want. For, there is not a word of Asking, but of Want. When
thou see the Naked, that thou Clothe him: and hide not thy self from thine
own flesh: and may we not plead it with Christ? Is not He Under This Law also?
That He Hide not himself, from his own flesh? or from That which is Lost? or,
As Holy men, cried in the Scripture: O Lord behold mine Affliction! And again,
See O Lord, and consider! for I am become Vile: I am full of Confusion: O see
my Affliction. Or as Hezekiah; O Lord, I am Pressed, Very Hard; but Undertake
for me. Or be my Surety, and Mediator: which is clearly spoken to Christ. And
so David cries out, Ini^uities Prevail, Over me: But Thou shall, Thou shall
make Atonement, or Expiation (as the word signifies) Clearly spoken Unto
Christ. And so again; Be surety for me: and strike Hands for thy Poor Servant.

And the Disciple, whom our Savior loved, tells us, that If a man see his
Brother in Wam, he must not stay for Tears, or Prayers; but if he do but see
him in Wam; and shut up his Bowels; How does the Love of God, Dwell in such a
Man?

And again, If any man see his Brother, s^n a s^n, which is not unto Death; He
shall Ask: (it is not left at pleasure; but commanded: He shall Ask:) and he
shall give him Life. A sweet Promise.

As God bid ^liphaz Go to Job: and promised that He should intercede, and my
Servant shall pray for you, and I will accept him. Which we should Press on Him
that was Typified out by Job, Telling him, that God has Promised that He shall
pray, and He will Hear him for us. And when Job prayed for Them, God turned His
Captivity, and Healed Him and Them also. And so Here: He shall Ask, and he
shall Give him Life. And though he say not He shall Ask for Him that sins
unto Death; Yet he does not forbid him: but only says, I say not, that he
should pray for such. As Christ: I say not, that I will pray for you.

And when men, do not only, Trample Precious Pearls; but Turn, and burn, and
Tear, those, that bring them: As they fall out of Others Teachings; So they may
do, Out of their Prayers also: that I say not, Out of Christ's Intercession.
Which is much, in the hearts of his People: and I wish, and beg, and Value
This, for me, and mine; Above the World. And once a Father told me, You may
Hope, or Know, that Others Pray for you; when you do Pray for them.

But we see, the Prophet Jeremy, praying, most sweetly, Then, when he was
forbidden to pray, For that People. And our Savior had a Great Portion Given
him, for pouring out his Soul for s^n, and making Intercession for
Transgressors.

And the Great Command He ever received, from his Father, was, to Ask Souls of
him. For, it was not only permitted, but Commanded: As the Great Character, by
which he should be Known, and Owned, to be the Son of God. And so it is, in us,
also. For, when ever God begers a Son, he gives him a Crying, Praying Spirit.
As if he said, Thou art My Son: This day have I begotten Thee. N^w, Ask of Me,
and I will Give thee. Even as Abraham blessed God, for Giving him one Great
Victory by saying, Lord God, what will thou Give me?

However, it is very Clear, It was so required of Christ: and expected from
him; As the S^n. So that here, we may Plead; he must, be More Faithful then
Moses; Who was Faithful indeed as a Servant; But Christ, As a S^n. And his
Great Work, As a Son, was This: Ask of me, and I will Give Thee. And it was not
only Commanded, but written in his heart; (as himself says, in the 40 Psalm)
that he should do the Will of God: and his Great Will, is, that he Ever be
Asking Souls: and what he does Once, in This, he does still, and for Ever. So
that he is Ever Asking, and Ever Receiving, from his Father: and ever Giving
Out: and This Last, he counts his Greatest Happiness. For it is a More Blessed
thing to Give, then to Receive.

And he very much disappoints, his Fathers End, and Aim, in Sending him, into
the World; or Raising him up, from the Dead: If he be not, Very much, in
Asking, of his Father. For it is the Only Command, he lays on him, when he
brought him forth, Ask of Me, and I will Give thee All Nations: and the Utmost
ends of the Earth.

And That of Solomon, Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in behalf of All Appointed
to Destruction; was but a little Branch of the Great Law of God, to Christ;
Ask of Me, and I will Give thee. Most of All, for the poor Prisoners, and
such, as are Ready to Perish.

And the Psalm, for the Afflicted, tells us, That God looked down, From
Heaven, and the hight of his Sanctuary, to hear the Groaning of the Prisoners:
and to Loose those, that are Appointed to Death. It being the Great Quarrel he
had, with the King of Babylon: That he Smote in Anger, with a Perpetual Stroke;
and made the Earth to Tremble: and did shake Kingdoms: and make the World a
Wilderness: and Then Opened not his Prison doors, to Visit his Prisoners, and
let them go home again, As in Esaias 14. and 24. Now we All, were Prisoners; and
Appointed to Dye: Till God Pleased to Raise up, the Interceding Spirit of
Christ: which is Ever Crying, (in the Language of the Psalmist) O Let the
Sighing of the Prisoner come before thee; and by the Greatness of thy Name or
Power, Preserve them that are Appointed to Dye.

For Unto Christ, it was first said, If thou shall forbear to deliver them,
that are drawn Unto Death, and those that are ready to be slain: If thou
say, Behold, we know it not, does not he, that pondereth the Heart, Consider
it? And He, that Keeps thy Soul; does he not know it, and will he not render,
unto Every Man, (the Best of Men) according to his works? which Solomon has
now laid, upon his Son; or on Every Man.

And what Christ does, For All Appointed for Destruction, is not easy to
determine. But we find him Praying for All that Crucified him. As Stephen did,
To Him; and by His Spirit; for All that stoned him. Whence Paul might learn,
the Certain Character, of a Christian, so to pray to Christ: As Act. 9. 14. 21,
and 22. 16, 17. Romans 10. 12. 1. Cor 1. 2. And Solomon says, that Wisdom does,
and shall Call, to the Scorners, also. And the Man of God, must be Gentle: Even
unto Those that oppose themselves! As Paul writes to Timothy.

And our Savior, Received, Gifts, for Rebels also; and says, it is a more
Blessed thing to Give, then to Receive; and that They, which Receive Freely,
must Give Freely.

And if God be Glorified, most in Us, when we bring forth Most Fruit (and do
All the Good, we can do:) Is it not So, in Christ also? will he not do, All the
Good, he may do? Or will he not Ask, All he may? Will he not have, as much as
he can? and the Full Price, of his Death, and bitter Passion? Dyed he, as a
Fool dies.

Were His Hands bound? or his Heart rather? and his bowels, unto Poor men? or
to his Father? or his Own Glory? that he would not Ask, for All he might?
Seeing it was, the First, and Chiefest, Only, thing, his Father laid upon him:
Ask and I will Give thee. Yea and Ask again: and yet again: that so, Thy Joy,
may be Full. And I never speak, but What, the Father spoke to Me: and As, the
Father, spoke to Me. the Great Key, to open All the Bible.

And the Prophet was displeased, that the King of Israel shot but Thrice. And
sure, we may plead it with Christ; that he bids us, Pray Continually: and be
Ever Asking, that we may receive. And it is backed, with This For: For, Every
One that Asks, shall Receive. And may we not say to him, Ask us of the
Father, and he will Give us to thee. But Ask, as thou biddest us, Fervently,
and Heartily. For thou have said to us: What ever you do, Do it Heartily, As to
the Lord.

And how he Asked; or his Father Took his Asking: We may See, by Gods Giving;
and His Receiving; What was Promised, upon his Asking. Even All Nations, for
his Inheritance; and the utmost ends of the Earth, for His Possession.

Yea, and to sustain, his Spirit, in his Dying Pangs, upon the Cross: in Psalm.
22. it is expressly promised, that All the Ends of the World shall Remember and
Turn unto the Lord: and All Kings, and Nations, shall worship before him. For
he is the Blessing to all Nations; and to Every Family.

And in the 72 Psalm, All Kings shall Fall before him, All Nations shall serve
him, For (O the Mighty Fors, of the Bible!) For, he shall deliver the Needy,
when he Cries: the Poor, and him that has no Helper (Though he cannot Cry:)
He shall Redeem their Souls from Deceit, and Violence.

And again, All Nations, shall come, and Glorify Thy Name: For, It is Holy.
And in many Places, His Holiness, is the Great Cause, and Object, of All our
Praising him: and yet, All shall Praise him, and his Holy Name. So that he, is
bold, to Swear by himself, (which he would not do, If there had been a Greater
then himself) That Every Knee should how to Him: and yet, to the Glory of the
Father. And if God be Glorified in Them: shall he not also Glorify them with
himself? Yea, he will straitway Glorify them. As himself Argues.

And This, he makes, the Great Foundation of his Calling All to him: because
the Father has loved the Son, and bath given All things, into his hands, As
Mat. 11. 27. Luke 10. 21. John 3. 35.

And again, in the 13. of John, Knowing that his Father had Given, All things,
into his hands; he rises from Supper, and Girded himself. An Emblem of Power,
and Freedom: as, when thou wast Young, Thou did Gird thy self.

And in his Great Prayer, he says, As thou have Given him Power, Over All
flesh: that he should Give Eternal Life to as many as Thou have Given him. And
All thine are mine, and I om Glorified in them. And will not he Then, Glorify
them, with himself? Or where, is the force, of that Argument?

Nor does he say, I will not Pray for the World: but, I do not; in That
instant, or present time. And so he says, I came not to Judge the World, but
to save it: and yet, he did come, to Judge it also. And so, he said, I say not,
that I will Pray for you: and yet, he did, Pray for them. And so also, I pray
not that thou take them out of the World: which yet, he would, and did desire,
in due season; but not Then: At that present. And so, he did not Then, Pray for
the World: but only for them, which God had Then, Actually Given him: and
Chosen out of the World: and for them Only, at that present: and not Them, that
should Come After.

Yet, before the End, he does also pray, for Others; whom at first, He did not
Pray for. And how many might come, into the Latter End, of That Prayer, I know
not. Or how many may come, to Believe on him; by Their Word.

But if he had, before, expressly said, I will not Pray for the World (which yet
he does not say: but only, I do not) Yet, he also said, I will no more have
Mercy on the House of Israel; and yet it was but Conditional: or for such a
Time, or Season, Only. For, in the same Chapter, it is said (Even Unto Them,
and There, Where it was said, Loam^ni, and Lorubama:) I will yet have Mercy on
you: and you shall be my People; and I will be your God. And in other places he
says, he will have Mercy, on the Whole House of Israel: Though he had said, I
will not have Mercy on them: Or I will not declare it, for a Long or Uncertain
Time. Which is often called Ever, or Never. As the servant shall serve for
Ever: yet but Till the Jubilie: and Moth shall Never Enter: which another text
limits, by 10. Generations: and Ruth was about the 10th from Lot: As Boaz from
Abraham.

Or at most, I will not have, is but, I will not show, Mercy on them. Or, I
will so Chasten, As if I meant to show No Mercy. Thus Solomon bids a Father,
Chasten his Son, and not spare, or Pardon. And Esaias says, Forgive them not:
And He will not Forgive: or not Acquit the Guilty. Which is said of Job; and of
Gods Dearest Children, several times, in Jeremy: with the very worst phrase,
ever used, in the Law: which is the Root, or measure, To the Worst, in all the
Bible.

And Christ does demean himself, To the World, As if, he did not, Pray for
them. And yet he says, God sent him not to Condemn, but to save the World; And
again, I came not to Judge the World, but to sa^e the World. And so he is
called The Savior of the World: and That Lamb of God, that bears away, the
Sins of the World. And God was in Christ, Reconciling the World to himself.
And He often speaks, of Gods Loving the World also. As Moses in his Blessing
Israel, says, God loved the Nations, or All Peoples also (as the words import,
a Carrying in his Bosom:) but he has a peculiar Chosen People, who sit at his
Feet, and receive, the Law, at his M^uth: And these, he Loves, with Delight:
and others with Pity.

And in That, very Prayer, also, Christ seems to Act, as at his Going to the
Feast of Tabernacles; ^ot Openly, but, as it were, Secretly. And so, he prays
for the World also. That they may know God has sent him: and has Loved His;
as he Loved Him. And he Plainly says, that To know God, and Christ, is Life
Eternal. Which is yet promised to All: and All shall Know my Name.

And himself remembers it, written in the Prophets, You shall All be Taught of
God. And All flesh shall see the Glory of God. As it is in Esaias, with some of
the Psalms: but in others, Thus, All flesh shall praise him: and All the Trees
of the Forest shall Clap hands and rejoice: and every Eye shall see his
salvation. As also the Gospel expresses it. For our Salvation, is the Glory of
God.

And he promised, to Convince the World of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment.
And When I am lifted up, I will Draw All men, unto me. And he is gone up, Above
all Heavens, To fill All things.

And when Paul received, his Commission, to the Gentiles; It was to make, All
men see: What is the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the
World, was hid in God: who Created All things by Jesus Christ. That the Angels
also, might know, by the Churches (and of several Forms; and Latitudes: and
yet, by All, and manifold Churches, the Angels, must Vouchsafe to Learn) the
manifold wisdom of God. According to his Eternal purpose.

Which in 2. Epistles, he declares to be: To gather together, in One; and to
Reconcile; All things to himself; by Jesus Christ.

Whom we preach, Warning Every Man, and teaching Every Man, in All Wisdom. That
we may present, Every man, Perfect, in Christ Jesus. Whereunto also, I labor,
striving, according to his working, which works in me, mightily. For, I would
you knew, what Great Agony, I have, For you, and for them of Laodicea, and for
as many, as have not seen my face in the flesh, that their Hearts, might be
comforted, being knit together in Love.

And when King Agrippa said, Thou do almost persuade me to be a Christian;
he replied, I would to God, not only Thou, but All, that hear me this day, were
both almost, and altogether such as I am: except these bonds. And I could wish
my self Accursed For my Brethren, and my Kinsmen, in the flesh.

And to the Thessalonians, he writes thus, Now the Lord make you to increase,
and abound in Love, to one another, and to All men, even as we do toward you.
That so, he may establish your hearts, Unblameable, in Holiness. As plainly
showing, Their hearts would not be established, in Holiness, Without Abundant
Love to All Men. And, To Brotherly Kindness, Add Love.

And when he requires Prayers For All Men; he plainly says; This was Good,
and Acceptable, unto God our Savior. Who would have All men, to be saved; and
come to the Knowledge of the Truth. Who gave himself, a Ransom For All; to be
Testified in Its Proper Seasons. As the Words are.

For, as Peter expresses it, He is not willing, that Any should Perish; but
that All, should come, to Repentance. And account, the Long suffering of God,
to be Salvation: As our beloved Brother Paul has written to you. As before.

Whence was All This Striving, and Longing, in Paul, or Any other, for the
Salvation of All men? but from His Spirit, who promised, to Draw All men to
him? and though we do not yet see it done: we may Remember, who also said, we
do not yet see, All things, Put under him: which yet must be.

Nor may we think, he offers, Any thing to Men, but what he Heartily
desires, they should take, and enjoy. For, he bids us, not to eat the bread,
of Him, that has an evil eye: Saying, Eat and Drink, When his Heart is not
so. And he, that hates Hypocrisy, so much in Others: Sure will hate it more,
in himself. and He that swears, he has no Pleasure, in the Death of a Wicked
man, but that he Turn, and Live: is very Active also, in the use of means, to
turn him; and Real in it. Devising means, that his Banshed also, may not
Perish, but return to him.

And as, It is Said, He does not afflict from his Heart: so, when ever he does
afflict, or punish, his Greatest Enemies, As Moab, Ammon, Edom; yet he does it
Weeping. So, his Heart does mourn for Moab: and his Bowels yearn: and are
Pained for him. And his fugitives shall flee to Zoar, As his Father Lot, from
Sodom. And the Heifer of 3 year old, may allude to the Covenant made, with Lot
and Abraham (as the Turtle and the Pigeon) in Gen 15. 9. As the Lot, or Veil,
in Esaias 25, To Genesis 13. 14. And he pitties Edoms Widows and Children; As the
Daughters of Zelophehad, Though their Father Dyed in his Sin. And so he Wept,
over Jerusalem. And in Judgment, still remembers Mercy. As his Throne is
White; and yet the World will run away. And so, we shall All: except he stay,
and Turn us.

And as the Law requires, that the King (even when he sat, upon the Throne of
his Kingdom) should Write out the Law, and read it, and keep it, All his days:
that he might not exalt himself above his Brethren; but might so, prolong his
Kingdom: So

When he was Brought, In Great Solemnity, to sit upon the White Throne of his
Kingdom, in the Revelation: He bids it be Written, As a most True, Saying of
God: Behold, I make All things New.

A very sweet, and Precious Promise: Which we ought to plead, and press; when
ever we find, our Hearts Old: or the Old man, stirring, or abiding in us.

And, it may mind us, of That strict Injunction (on their coming, to enjoy
their Promised Land) to Break down All Idols, Groves, and Temples: with High
Places, and Images: and what ever, was, or might be, any mean, or Inclination,
to Idolatry, or Superstition. So that They might follow none, of the Old
manners, of the Land before them: In Worship of Their Gods: or of the True God
in their manner.

For, the Lord, declares himself As Strict, or more, in Manner of his Worship,
then in Matter. Or as Jealous, in the Matter of the 2d Command, or more, then
in the First, Which has not, That note of Jealousy, which the 2d has.

And yet This also, springs from Love: Being as the Apostle expresses it, a
Godly Jealousy: Least having Espoused us to one husband, We should wander, to
the flocks of his Corrivals. And for This also, we are bid to call Wisdom, our
Sister; that she may preserve us, from the deceiving flattering Spirit.

And Christ, has also undertaken All This; to God and Man, also. So to
Declare, the True, and Right way, of worshipping, the Only True God; that There
shall be, No more Idol, or Superstition. As in Esaias the 2d. And the Idols he
shall Utterly Destroy. Which is also Promised, as well as commanded, in the
first, and second Commandment. For so, the Words, in Hebrew, are promissive,
in the Future: rather then Imperative. Thou shall not have; Or Worship, Any
Other God. Or me, in any other way then I prescribe. And so the Psalm repeateth
it. Open Thy Mouth wide, and I Will fill Thee. O that thou would Hearken:
And Thou shall have no strange God.

We are come to Christ's Peculiars; and his Proper Work. As Heyr of the World:
As the Seed of Ab. and the 2d Adam. As the First, was in the Image of God; and
Therefore, made to Rule. Let us make man in our Image, and after our Likeness;
and let Them have Dominion. As if This, did only follow, That.

And though the Prophets call it, the Kingdom of God; and Matthew, the Kingdom
of Heaven: Yet it is a Kingdom on Earth. And so, the Psalms, and Daniel, plain
enough. For, God does Reign in Heaven still; and so he will, upon Earth: but
In, and By, and Through a man. And therefore, he has Given Christ, All
Judgment: Because he is the Son of Man. For, God will Judge us by our Peers.
And He has Given Earth to Men.

And though the Baptist, and our Savior, and Apostles, preached, that the
Kingdom was at Hand, or Coming: Yet, it was not Come. And Christ does never
call himself a King, Till his 2d coming. Then, the Son of Man, shall send, His
Angels: (which before, he calls, his Fathers Angels: and the Holy Angels:) to
gather out of His Kingdom. And, the King shall say, Come ye Blessed: and the
King shall say, Go ye Cursed.

And, he had a Taste, of This Kingdom, at his Transfig: As he said, Some shall
not taste of Death, Till they see, the Son of man, coming, in His Kingdom.

And from That Time, Forth, he spoke, of That, Kingdom, As beginning, In them.
But when, They looked, that it should appear: he hinted first, that he must
take a Long Journey, to receive his Kingdom: and after a Long time, come again.
And at length he plainly told them, that the Kingdom was offered Them, (To
Thee, O Daughter of Zion, shall the Kingdom come: the First Dominion:) But
should Then, be Taken, From Them; and be Given, To A Nation (some peculiar
Nation; as in Moses, and the Romans:) which should bring forth, Its Fruits.
When They, should be scattered, and Trodden down by the Gentiles: and not a
Stone, left, upon a Stone; in all Their Glorious Temple.

And when, They asked, the Signs, of Those things; and of His coming: and of
the End of the World: He gave them Signs, of the 2 first: and confesses the
Last was Hidden. But adds, When you see, These Signs, of the Son of man,
coming, Lift up your Heads with Joy, O Jews; For your Redemption comes (or
Return:) and Then, the Kingdom of God is Coming; at the very door. Till then,
he bid us say: Thy Kingdom Come: and Thy Will, be done: in Earth, as it is in
Heaven.

And that it meant, a Kingdom, on Earth also: we may learn, in the Church
Chatechisms, of Edward 6th, with Notes, on the Lords Prayer, and Creed; of the
Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints.

And yet, His Kingdom is Spiritual. To command, the Spirits of men; and other
Spirits. For, If I, by the Spirit of God (which was Then, as the Little
Finger:) cast out Evil Spirits; know, that the Kingdom of God is among you.

And now, is Salvation; and the Kingdom, of our God, and of Christ, Come: For,
the Accuser, of our Brethren, is cast out.

And for a Type, of This also. Coming from Transfig. he cast out the Foul
Spirit; which his Ministers, could not. And yet, he left them Power, Over All
Unclean Spirits. But they met, with one, they could not Tame.

3 Evangelists, agree in One: but give it 3 Epithets. As if Satan, also, must
have, His Trinity. The Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet. In the World: In the
Temple: and our Heart also. The Man of Sin; The Old Adam; with the Serpent (and
Eve) or False Prophet, in Paradise.

But All must out; when he comes, to Walk, in his Garden: At the Cool, or
Evening of the World. As, he came, From the Holy Mount; as Peter calls it;
speaking of his Power, and Coming: which they join, with his Kingdom. As Paul
to Tim.

And when he came, from the Holy Mount: the People left Contest, and Run, and
Salute him. As, All Kingdoms, shall: at his Coming, From the Mount. Where he
now is, But Receiving his Kingdom.

And the Psalm For the Afflicted, tells us, When the Lord shall Build up Zion,
he shall appear in his Glory. When the Peoples are Gathered together: and the
Kingdoms, to serve the Lord.

But may we hope, to find, when this shall be? In the Great, and Good things
of the Bible? With the Meek and quiet Spirit of Christ: and Prayers of his
People? For, it searches All things: Yea, the Baths, and Hidden things of God.
And in them of Old, it searched Times, also: And so it may do now, in the
Gospel Times.

Our Savior Called all the People Only Twice (To show, what makes a Christian:
what Free:) Moses Twice, or Thrice. To hear the Law: To Consecrate the Levits
(by Their Hands in Ordinati^n) and to see the Spirit, on the 70 Elders: and the
Well of Beer. Gather the People; I will give them Water. As the Rain in
Solomon's Prayer; and That Spirit, Given, In Communion; with supply of Every
joint.

And when 2 of the People, Prophesied, in the Camp; and Josuah Cried, My Lord
forbid them; Moses said, O that All the Lords People were Prophets: and that he
would put his Spirit on them All. For you may All Prophecy: Or else you should
not All be bid to Beg it; Above All Other Gifts.

And when he came to dye, he called Iosuah (by Gods Command) to Give him a
Charge; and in sight of all the People, he said to Him: Be Strong, and of Good
Courage; for Thou must Go with this People; into the Land which the Lord has
sworn. And the Lord is He, that Goes, before thee: He will be with thee: and
He will not Fail thee; nor Forsake thee. Which is 5 times repeated: As it has
5 Negatives, in the last of Hebs.

And Moses wrote this Law; and gave it, to the Priests, and All the Elders of
Israel. (Whence, the Elders also, Taught the People. As the Princes of
Jehosaphat.) And Moses commanded them, saying,

At the end of 7 years: In the Solemnity of the year of Release: In the Feast
of Tabernacles: Thou shall read, This Law, before All Israel: in their Hear^ng.

Gather the People together: Men and Women, and Children; and thy Stranger; in
thy Gates: that they may hear, and learn; and Fear the Lord their God.

That This lay, not only upon Josuah; with Those then present; is agreed by
All: and the Talmud, makes it, the peculiar work of their King: (He might Sit,
and read (as none else:) but if he Stood; it was Better: As K. Agryppa did:
when he read, and wept, at That, of a Brother King, before.) and that it must
be Read, in their own Language. And in Nehemiahs Time, They gave the sense, and
Helped them to understand the Reading. And the Law requires All to be
Gathered; that All may Hear, and Learn, and Fear the Lord.

And that this Gathering, reached to their W^rst Captivities; appears by the
Promise, in the former Chapter; To Gather them From All their scatterings.
Which is Pressed in Psalm. 106. and Promised, to be, with a Great Trumpet, of
Release: in Esaias 27. and 43. 54. and 56. And of David's Branch, as a King, In
Jer. 23. and 31, 32, 33. Ezec. 37. Mic. 4. Zeph. 3. Zech. 10.

And that Josuah took, it for a Great Command: and did his best, to practice
it, appears in Neh. 8. 17. Relating To the Solemn Meeting, at Sechem; Famous in
Ab. and Jacob (when it was the First Fruits, of the Gentiles, Circumcised:) and
in Judges, and Josuah.

And in Zeph. God promises, to Gather All Nations, and Kingdoms: and Then, he
will Pour out his Spirit; and a Pure Language: to serve him with one Sechem. As
Alluding, To Their Vouching the Lord at Sechem. And That Verse, has All the
Hebr Letters; with other things, the Jews observe.

And here, we Fix, One Foot, of the Compass. Hoping Christ, will also, make
This Good: which Josua did, and Nehem. Gathering All the People; and Strangers
also: Reading the Law: and helping them to Understand it: and to fear the Lord.
In the close of 7 years: In the Solemnity of the year of Release: In the Feast
of Tabernacles. Or In gathering of All the Fruits of Harvest. As they had, the
First fruits of Barley, in the First-fruit Omer (on the 3 d day, After the Pass.
which is past in Christ) and of Wheat, in Pentecost: the First Fruits of the
Spirit: in Act. 2. But we now expect, the Greatest Feast, of Tabernacles, and
Release. At the close, of 7 years, or 2555 (which is 7 times 365) or 2520 which
is 7 times 360.

And As 2555 years After the Fall, did bring them out of Egypt, into Canaan:
So did 2555 more, bring the Christians to Reign at Jerusalem: in 1100 of Christ.

And From Jeroboam Scattering Israel, Till about 1600. And From Ahab, To 1650.
And from Edoms Revolt, and Isreal's First Captivity, So many years, come up to
1666.

And Elijah's Gathering Israel, and Jehosaphats Judah, may be Types of That,
which should be 7 years After: As the 7 years Famine, 7 Prophetic years,
before the Great Release. As the Widow g^ther land again (a Type of Their
Return:) And Gehazi was Freed from his Leprosy (the Type of Isreal's Plagues)
for else, he could not stand and speak with the King: As he did, for That Widow.

And as Jesabel killed Naboth, and his Sons in Jesreel; So did Athaliah, slay
the Seed Royal in Judah. But Joash (or the man that Despaired) was brought up,
and Repaired, the House of God. As a Type of the Great Restoration; at the
close of 7 years. As he came In the 7th year. By Jehoshebah, the Lords Oath:
and Jehojadah, the Lords Knowledge: and Zechariah, the Lords Remembrance. As
the Song of Zech says, The Lord Remembered his Oath (the name of Zech. and
Elizab.) As His Horn of Salvation to the House of David; and His Light; allude
to 2 Cron 21. of That first Captivity; and Elijahs Letter, To Jehoram: Reigning
8 years.

And our Savior, Ends, That Generation, At the Death of Zech. slain between
the Porch and the Altar. And the Arabians, and Philistines, carried Judah,
Captive; and Hazael Israel: As Elisha foretold, in 2 Kings 8.

And though Jehoabaz was a wicked King; yet Praying, God restored Israel, and
Raised up a Savior; and brought them back from Captivity. As a Type, of Their
Return: in the close of the 7 years. For it was, After Joash came up, in the
7th year.

And this was foretold and Typified, by Jonah (Come with me, My Jonah, my Dove:
and As a trembling Dove, or Jonah, from Assyria.) and by Moses song cited in 2
Kings 14. and Psalm. 135. As Joash came, 135 years, After David and the Temple:
where the Court, in which the K. did Read, was 135 Cubits.

And when Joash had slain Zech. the same Hazael, that oppressed Israel, Carried
Judah Captive. And in Amaziah; Jerusalem was Sacked: and its Wall broke down;
and Treasures, Carried Thence, with Hostages.

Vzziah might be a Leper, about 7 years: and that might Type the sad
confusions, which should come, by mixing, the Priests, and Royal Office, in the
Machabes, and Christian Times also.

The Macedonians, Rose, about Those times: with the Greek Olympiads: a little
before Rome; and Nabonassar, in Babylon; whom some make the same with
Salmanassar; who sacked Samaria, much about 120 years before the first
Captivity To Babylon.

We may begin, the 7 years, at Any of These (being Near together:) and they may
end, within 2555, or 2520. For, the Trumpet of Release, founded on the 10th of
the 7th Month: and the Tabernacles, at the 15th. But the year was not Out, Till
the Law began again: About the Great Hosanna, closing the Tabernacles. Which is
called the End of the year, in Exodus 23. and 34. and Deuteronomy. 31.

Sodom was brought back, by Ab. in the 14th year: or 2 d 7th. And when I bring
back Thy Captivity, then I will bring back Sodom also, thy sister: and Samaria.

As the 2 wives of David (at Ziglag) or of Jacob, who served twice 7 years: and
Then, had Joseph; who was Bound, as long: and Then, Foretold, the 7 years
Famine; After 7 of Plenty. The Ark was a Captive, To the Philistines, 7 years;
and Then was brought home at Wheat Harvest: or at the Tabs. And Ester was taken
into the Royal House, in the 10th month, of the 7th year.

And David was Persecuted 7 years; or Reigned 7 years and an half, at Hebron:
before he got Jerusalem, From the Jebusites; who Trod it down, (as their name
in Hebr,) Till He Took it. As a Type of the New Jerusalem. And then he made the
Solemn Feast, to All the People: and dismissed All, with Bread and Wine, and
flesh. Although it be not called, the Feast of Tabernacles.

As Solomon's Dedication was, In the 7th Month, and Days of Tabs. with his
Solemn Feast. After 7 years, and 6 Months of his Temple. As a Type of that to
come, in 7 Prophetic years, and 6 Months After. Which end, about the year of
Christ, 1700. But David's 7 years, and half, about 1666.

And Nehemiah kept the Feast of Tabernacles, and Release, As it had not been,
From Josuahs Time. As Neh. 8. 17.

And to Clear this by the Numbers in Daniel and the Revelation. 1260, or 1290,
and 1335, are Days, or Years: As H^urs, of signal Fasts, and Feasts in the
Jewish year. As first, They Fast, on the 10th of the 1^t, For M^riams Death;
and of the 2 d for Elies, and his Sons; with the Ark Taken: Shadowing the
Church: As the P. Lambs Tied up, and Tried on the 10th (Which we call, The Day
of Trial:) slain on the 14th: in Hour of that year, 333.

As there were 333 Days of Hamans Lots; From the 13th of the 1st. To the 13 of
the 12th which was also, the Annual Feast for Nicanor slain, as Haman, at
Purim; the 14th and 15th of the 12th: and there were, 333 Days, between the
Day of Trial, and the 13th of the 12th month, called Adar.

Pentecost, the 65 t of the year: and 65 more, To the Great Doom, of not
Entering into Rest; and Burning, Both Temples (the 9 or 10 of the 5th) we call
it Dooms Day. Which was 65, before Tabs. As the Palms, or Hozanna, was 65,
before the Feast of Dedication: on the 25 of the 9. As the Fast, on the 10 of
the 7, was 65, before the Desolation: on the 15 of the 9. As the Fast for the
Seige on the 10 of the 10, was 65 before the Last of Purim. Thus the Passover
was 52 Days Before Pentecost, the 52 d After Pass. As the Fast, for Jeroboams
Sins, was 50 Days, before Doomsday; the 52 d before the Feast of Trumpets.

And Nehems New Jerusalem was finished, in 52 Days (as weeks of a year) or
1260 Hours, which are Days. 52..

As 1290 Hours, come up to Noon, of 54 Days. Signal To the Jews, For Reading
the Law, in 54 Sections. As the City, was Burnt, 54 Days, before the Feast of
Trumpets. And their annual Fast, for Aarons Death, was 54 Days before the 24,
or 25 of the 6 month: For Creation (in the Talmud) and the 2 d Temple, in Hag:
As for Finishing the City, in N^h. 6. 15. But he was at Jerusalem 3 days,
before he began to work: and so, 54, or 55, Days: which make 1290, or 1335
Hours. As the Feast of Trumpets was so many Hours, After the Day before the
City Fired: in the last of Kings.

As Pentecost was 1335 Hours After the first of the Day of Trial: which was,
1290 Hours, before the Preparation to Pentecost: which was 1260 Hours from the
Preparation, to the Passover: which was the first of Hamans Lots, and Plots
against the Jews; As Ester 3. 12.

1260 Days, are 3 years, and 6 Months: Ending, at the 7th For Release of
Hirelings (Deuteronomy. 18. Esaias 16.) Or, beginning the year in the 7th month (As it
did, in Civils,) They come out, in the 1st month, or 1st Pass. As 1290 Days, in
the 2 d month, or 2 d Passover:

And brought up, the 3. years Tithes and Offerings: with One of the Solemn
Confessions, and Doxologies, in Deuteronomy. 26. And the other came, with the First
Born, and First Fruits of Wheat; in the 3 d. Month: about the Pentecost. Which
was 1335 Days From the said year, so beginning, in the 7th Month: As 1335
Hours From the 1st Hour of the Day of Trial: But 1260 Hours, From the
Preparation to the Passover.

And for Years. The Ark was at Zion, in 1260: and the Temple was 1290: Or 1335;
From the First Desolation of the Flood. As Nehems New Jerus; about 1260, from
Jacob; or 1290, from Joseph, in Egypt: or 1335 from Jacobs Flight To Laban.

As the Dedication, in the Macabs, was just 1335, from Egypt, or the Golden
Calf: and 1290, from Their Settling in Canaan: or 1260, From their First
Bondage, of 7 or 8 years, To Mesopotamia (Typing These 7. Prophetic years; as
70. years, in Babylon: and 70 more To Nehemiahs Times:) And just 1260 years,
before the Christians Took Jerusalem: A Type, of the New Jer. to come.

And for Days also; The City, was Profaned, by Antiocbus, but 1260 Days or 3
years, and half. The Temple was cleansed, by Judas; and Antiochus Dead, in 1290
Days. Azotus Taken, and All cleared, in 1335. As the Machabes, and Jacob: Cap.

But Eupator, got the Tower of Zion; and Nicanor Swore to Burn the Temple: So
that All, was not, Fully Cleansed, Till He, was slain: in 2300 Days; from the
First Profanation. As in Dan. 8.

2300 Days, are 6 years, and as many Days As From the 15 of the 9th Month
(when the Temple was Profaned) To the 13 of the 12th For Nicanor slain: As
Haman before. And 2300 Hours come to the Evening Sacrifice, of the 96 Day (in
which Time, the Sun comes, from the Vernal Equinex, To his Highest Apogeum:)
As, From the City Taken, by the Caldees (on the 9th of the 4th month;) To the
Great Feast of Tabernacles on the 15 of the Seventh.

And in Lunar Months: 2300 days, are 6 years, and 6 Months. Coming to the Great
Day of Creation, or Finishing the 2 d Temple: and Nehems New Jerus: the 25 of
the 6 Month. Or, To the Beginning of the 7th with its Feast of Trumpets; and
Solemn Release; and Feast of Tabernacles: kept by Nehemiah.

So that 2300 Days, are a Piece of the Law of Release: which was a part, of
the 4th Command; For the Lords Sabbath. Which may be, the Sum, of All the
Second Table: As we saw before.

And From the Blood of Righteous Abell (or First Bondage, of the Church of
God:) To the Coming out of Egypt. Or, From the Great Declension of the Church
In Jareds Time (as his Name imports) To David's Zion: Or from Enochs Birth, To
Solomon: or from Enochs Translation To Josiah: Or from the Flood, To our
Savior: there were much about 2300 years.

And from Jehojackims Captivity, Till about 1680 of Christ. As from the
Chaldean Sack, To 1691, or there about: 2300 years.

And to clear our way by Days, and Hours, of the Jewish year. Pliny says,
The First consent of Nations, was in Letters: and the 3 d in Hours. Which are
first, in Daniel, at Bab. Whence the Grecians had, the Pole, and Gnomon, with
12 parts of the Day: in Herodotus. And of Hours, the Magi speak to Seleucus,
Founding Seleucia: in Appian. And Semiramis Column, was of 24, to above 144. As
Hours of a Day, and a week. L^^edaemon had a Sun-Dyall from Thales; or one of
His Scholars; as old, as Cyrus. And Plato speaks of Daily Prayer, in a Temple,
for about the 3 d part of an Hour. And Homers Works were parted (in
Pisistratus) by 24. As Hours of the Day: and Letters of the Alphabet. Which
made the Famous Charm (in Zon^ras) that cost, so many lives: As Names had such,
or such, Letters.

Time was first parted (they say) about Phoroneus: whom they call the First
Man. Whence, the Forum, Pharos, and perhaps the name of Pharoh, came. His
Niece, or Sister, ^, was the Great Isis, or Isa: Woman, Wife, and Sara. Great,
in Egypt, much about the time of Isis, Gathering up, the 24 pieces, of Osyris.
the Sun and Moon, with 24 Hours.

From H^o^, the Light: Or, their Horus. Son to Osyris; or Mizraim (the Son of
Ham; or Hammon) and the 12th from Adam. As was Chush, in Susiana: and Javan in
Jonia. Whence, 12 Ancient Gods (as Agamemnons Sacrifice) 12 Signs, 12 months:
12 Digits of Sun and Moon; with 12 Hours of Day and Night. As Egypt, had them,
parted by the Urine of their Cynocephalus, or other Living Hourglass: So the
Jews; Chaldeans; Grecians; Romans: All Nations.

Julians Hymns speak, As if Plato, learned Numbers, From Heaven. Which a Great
Man, expounds, by the Moons moving 12 Degrees a Day. But if, her Hourly Motion,
be Equal, to her Diameter: (or Seldom less, then 47, to 48 As Albategnus:)
Then, As Day and Night, by the Sun, Moving 2 Diameters; So Hours are made, by
the Moon; moving 24 of Hers, To 2 of the Suns. And This became the Common
Proportion, to the Sun and Moon, of Metalls: Gold and Silver.

And if Ptolomies, and Lansbergius, Observations, be True; the Suns Diameter,
is 24 times Bigger then the Earths: Or else the Square of This, is, 24 times in
the Great Circles Area. So that Hours, may come, From Those Proportions, of the
Sun: or Earth, About the Sun. As Job says, God Sealed up the Sun; that it
cannot Rise: and Turns the Earth about. And yet, the Sun may have especial
Times, of Standing still, or Solstice, As in Josuah: Or of Turning, at the
Tropic, in Hezekiah.

So the Tropicks, are about 24 Degrees from the Equator: As the Polar Circles,
From the Pole. And the Winds, in Vitruvius, 24. As in M^nilius 12. And
Aristotle names Eleven. But in Charlemagn, They were almost Thrice as many.

The Ancients Molded All, by 12, or 24. The Great Amphiction Counsel, of 12
Counties: with double Votes; or 24 As Aeschines. The Eleutherolacones, 24
Towns. As the Jonians: 12 in Greece, and 12 in Asia. So, the Achaeans; 12
Cities: and 24 persons, in their Council, at Highest. When Dieus pressed, 24
might be delivered up; They quitted place, and fled to the Romans.

Who had 12, and 24: in Vulturs, Augurs, Fasces, Flamens, Tables of their Laws;
and other things: from the 12 Tribes, of the Old Tuscans; or Grecians akin to
the Jews, in Machabes:) with 12 Gods, Trying Mars: As 12 Men, Orestes, and
Others, in Areopagus. And 12 Labors of Hercules; As the Sun in 12 Signs, and
12 Hours.

Rome was Built, 24 years After the First Olymp. and had 24 Gates: 24 Parishes:
24 Cardinals: 24 Articles. And How they parted, their Aes, and Estats; As their
Days; by 12: is observed, by Galen: in a Place worth Reading.

Britain had 24 Flamens (with their Watchers:) and as many Bishops; by 12 and
12. As in the Popes Letters, to Austine. And the Laws, permitted Marriage; and
required, Oaths of Fealty; at 12 years age: with Juries of 12. and 24 Aldermen.

Moses says, God Parted out the Heavens, to the Nations (and They parted them
by 12, or 24.) And again, When he Parted, the Sons of Adam, he set their
B^unds, As the Sons of Israel: which were 12. As 12 Light Hours, After 12 Dark:
As the Elder Brothers.

For, Time began, with Evening; before Morning: As in Diverse Nations. And is
counted by Nights: As Sevenights, and Fortnights, with English (who are
Hebrews) Calling Night, Even, to the Day: As First it was: and so, is still;
about the Equator.

Their Span, had 12 Digits: and the Cubit 24. As 240 Gress, or 400 Cubits, made
the Furlong; and 24 Furlongs an Hours way; they called ^ech. Whence our League,
or Leash; of 3 Miles.

Esaias says, God Spanned out the Heavens: which were parted, by 12: As Their
Span. And David Says, Thou have made my Days as a Palm: or Tap: of 24. as
Barley Corns: which being soonest ripe, was Measure, to their Measures. An Heb
word, akin, to That they use, for Thoughts, and Hayrs. As the English say, a
Thought more or less: and To an Hayr, or Hayrs breadth: and Cutting Hayr, is as
old as Hours, in Pliny.

And from Barley Corns, To Digits, and Inches. 12 Inches a Foot. As 24 the Rule,
or Regle (Foot in Heb:) 24 Foot, the Perch: as Stafford: and 24 of Hen. 8. in
the Exchequer.

24 Blancks, a Perit: 20 Perits a Droit. 24 Droits a Mite: and 20 Mites a
Grain. 24 Grains a Penny: and 20 Pennies an Ounce (of 24 Scruples:) and 12
Ounces, a Pound.

But the Hebrew Pound, 1200 Gerahs: 120 Drams (of 60 grains) or 60 Sheckles.
Whence the English Skales.

6 Obbols, made the Attick: 12 the Heb* Dram: and 24 their Shekle: and their
Selang, as the English Shilling, or 12 d. and 24 Aldermen.

3000 Shekels made the Talent, which was still 6000 Drams: But Double to the
Grecian. So that an Attick Talent of Gold, as the Sun, to the Jewish Moon; of
360 l. As Days in their year.

And if Paul of Times (at Areopagus) do allude to That of Moses: Then are Times
also parted, as the Sons of Israel, by 12.

Jacobs hand on Esau's heel (in Ezdras) the beginning of a New World. As One of
the 12 the Jews record, for Doubling the Old; as they speak. He was from Noah,
the 12th. and Born 12 years after the Death of Arphaxad: the 12th from Adam. As
we saw Chush; Mizraim, and Javan.

And as Eber (or Ever) had Jer^ah, the Moon: with 12 Brethren (as 12 Months, or
12 Hours of Night, in Hazar Maveth:) So, Jacob, 12 Sons of Light: as Ishmael
12, of Darkness. And at all Great Changes, of the World, we see a signal 12. or
24.

As Sodoms 12 years Bondage: as hours, of Darkness; Before the Light, with Ab.
Who had the Seal and Promise of Isaak, at 24: Or 99, from 75. His Eldest
Nephews, Ishmaels 12 (As Esaus) before Jacobs.

From Egypt, 12 Tribes: 12 Fountains: 12 Stones, in Jordan: 12 more at
Gilgali: and at Eball.

God Appointed 12 Princes; and Then, 12 Par^ers: to Divide the Land. And who
made me a Judge, or a Divider?

David, was the 12th from Jacob; and the 24th from Noah. Then, a Giant had 24
Digits. And his Last Battle, with Abner (Father of Light) destroyed 12, on
either side: with 360: for Days, and Hours also. To make a New World: at His
New Jerusalem. And Time Passed away, Upon Him, and All Kingdoms (As 1 Cron. 29,
30) As, Time Passes away, at the 7th Trumpet: before the New Jerusalem.

And for Watches, of 3 Hours. Samuel spoke to Saul, of 3 Days, 3 Men, 3 Kids,
and 3 Loaves. David had 3 Brethren with Saul (who had 3 Sons, Slain together:)
hid himself 3 Days; and then bowed, 3 times, to Jonathan; and had 3 Sons of
Serviah; with 3 other Worthies: 3 years of Famine, and 3 Days of Pestilence;
which he Chose, before 3 Months War, or 3 years Dearth. Absalon was banished 3
years, and had 3 Sons; and 3 Darts, in his Heart.

Elijah Stretched, on the Child, 3 times; and bid them pour water thrice, on
his Altar. Which had 12 Stones, and 12 Barrels, of Water. And Elisha, ploughed,
with 12 Yoke of Oxen; and himself with the 12th.

Ezra, from Ahava, the 12th Day: with 12 Priests, and 12 Levites: offering 12
Bullocks, and 12 Goats, at Jerusalem.

Nehemiah's Time had 12 Elders; and 12 Levites; keeping Watches, in Reading,
Singing, Praising, and Praying. Whence happily, Watching to Pray. And comparing
him, with Zech. we may find, 12 Gates; in his New Jerusalem, on the 24th of the
6th Month: As His Covenant, on the 24th of the 7th. As Daniels Great Vision was
the 24th of the first. Zechs the 24th of the 10 h: Haggies the 24th of the 6 t,
and 24th of the 9th: From this Day I will Bless you. As the 2 d Temple was
Founded, on the 24th; and afterward cleansed, on the 25th of the 9th; in Hag^y
and Machabes.

Our Savior, wi^h the Doctors, at 12 years: had 12 Disciples: 12 Baskets, and
7 Loaves: for 7 Days, and 12 Hours: and healed an issue of 12, and Raised one
of 12 years. Which may allude To the 12 hours of Darkness: As the 12 years of
Sodoms Bondage: which may be Types, of 12 Prophetic years before His Coming,
To fulfill That of Ab. and Melchizedeck: Blessing him, by the Most High God,
Possessor of Earth, as of Heaven before. As our Savior, (when he exulted in
Spirit) and the 24 Elders; or Presidents, of All the 24 Hours. At the Trumpet
of the 7th Month in Rev. 11. For, Every month began with Trumpets: But the
Feast of Trumpets did begin the 7th, For Atonement, Release, and Tabernacles.

The Jews, Holy things, in 12, and 24. The Common Title, of their Bibles, is,
The 24. And the First, has 12 Great Sections; As the last, 12 Little Prophets.

And the Priests, had 24 things from God: and offered, 24: or 12 Cakes, in 24
halves, Daily. And the Shewbread, was in 12, of 24 Omers. As 24 Leviticus. 12
Holy Garments, had 12 Precious Stones, in Ouches. K^hath, 24, Cities: Or Levi,
Twice 24. As the Little Sections of Genesis.

The Temple Courts, 24 Cubits high: and either walk, had 24 Pillars; of 12
Cubits, round: As the Brazen Sea, had 12 Oxen: and Both Temples. (As Ezekiels)
12 Little Chambers; on either side: As Day and Night, had 12 hours apiece.

Their Last Altar, 24 Cubits. As they took, Ezech 43: of 12, and 12. Though
some, of 12, by 12; or 144: As the Walls, of the New Jerusalem: With 12 Gates,
12 Pearls, 12 Fruits. The Woman in the Sun; with the Moon; and 12 Stars: As
Joseph's Dream, of Sun and Moon and 12 Stars.

All the Standers (or their Representatives.) As the Priests, and Levits, with
Nethinims: Singers, Porters, or Watchers (at 24 places) in 24 Courses: by
David: from Noah, the 24th.

The Camp and Levits, Under 4 Standards; as the 4 Watches. And our Savior,
walked on the Sea, at the 4th Watch. As the Roman Times, had 4 Watches; both of
Day, and Night; in Censorinus.

First, about Camillus Time, we find their Hours, in Livy. Watches, in their
Ancient Laws, and Histories. As Scipio, came to Trebia, the 4th Watch. Hanibal,
for Tarentum, at the 4th Watch. Antiochus, fled To Sardis, by Midnight: and to
Apamea, by the 4th Watch. Crassus jested at Dejotarus, Building in the 4th
Watch: or 11th Hour of his Life.

The Little Watches, had but 3 Hours, a piece. (Though some contend for 4; and
a Middle Watch, in Judges:) As, our Saviors Twelve Hours, parted, at the 3 d,
and 6 t, and 9th. And so, the Watchers (which is Daniels word:) Cried, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Thrice: As 3 Hours, in a Watch. But Ancient Copies, have it, 9
times: the square of 3: and both, were Sacred, to Others also; For their 3
Graces, and 9 Muses.

And, as 1 and 2, make 3: and 3 more, 6 (or twice 3:) So the Sum of These 3,
differs, from the next 3, by 9. and the 3 d 3, makes 24. As the 3 d from it,
42 (which is 24, Turned) 24, and 42, make 66. As the 7th 3: 60. and the 8th,
69. For, the Sums, differ All by 9. And They are, Up and down (or forward and
backward) the Same figures, 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. As in this Table.

1. 2. 3. = 06.

4. 5. 6. = 15.

7. 8. 9. = 24.

10. 11. 12. = 33.

13. 14. 15. = 42.

16. 17. 18. = 51.

19. 20. 21. = 60.

And supposing Numbers, to be Lines. As, there are, but 4 Simple Chords (as 4
Watches:) So, but 8, Simple Arks: As the parts of Day and Night, are Arks in
Heaven. And as 4, is the First, of All Sonares (as its Name in Heb.) So is 8,
of Cubes: which may All be Resolved, by 8: As Sonares by 4. And as 4 and 8,
make 12 (which is 3 times 4:) So, 3 times 8, make 24: As Hours, in All the
Watches: Arks, of Heaven. Which are All, easily parted by 3 (which is to Slice,
in Hebr.) As Each Ark, is made, of 3, differing, lesser Arks: or Sides, of a
Triangle. Which may also, be represented, by 3 Points; As a Chord, by 2.

And if we find, the Proper sound, of All these Characters; and give them
Proper Names: We may express, All Persons, Things, and Motions (with their
Moods and Times) In an Easy way of Speaking, and Writing. With an Alphabet, of
Natures plainest Characters (As Points, for Spirits, and Vowels: Chords, for
the 4 Liquids, and Simple Bodies: As Archs, for Mixed, or M^^es: which may be
made, Aspirate, Or Animate, by a Point or Spirit, in them.) and of Things also:
To be Known, by Characters; expressed, by Proper Sounds.

But to the Jewish Watches. As the Less, had 3 Hours apiece, so the Greater 6.
and so, the Greatest Harmonies, are made by Halves, and Quarters, to their
Wholes: As Eights and Fifts, and Thirds, in Music. And, As Day, or Night, had
4, of 3 a piece; So Both together, 4 of 6 apiece. As the 4 Corners, in 6 Sides,
of a Cube. To be resolved, by 6 also: As by 8.

Divids, Solomon's, and Nehemiahs, Day, was Parted, by 4 Parts. And so, the 4
Watchers, had 6 wings apiece: which made up 24. And so their Tap, or Palm, had
24 parts, in 4 Digits: of 6 apiece: and their Cab, had 24, in 4 Logs: and 24
Logs, made their Seah: 3 Seahs, their Bath (or Epha) 6 Hins; or 10 Omers. As 10
Ephas, made their H^mor; or an Asses Load: or Attick Corus. Whose Dragm, was 6
Obbols; and their Cadus, or Amphora, 12 Congii; Choes: and the very number of
Cad, in Hebr is 24.

The Temple Walls, 24 in Hight: to 6 Cubits breadth. And of 4 Kinds of Death;
They had 6, For strangling; and Thrice 6, for Stoning.

And in Sacrifice, God took 6 Parts. The Cheek and Breast, and Shoulder; For
the Upper Regions; and the Reins, and M^w, for the Lower: with The Midriff; As
the Firmament; Between the Upper, and the Lower Waters. As Psalm. 148.

Our Body, the Little World. Our Foot, the 6^ part of our Hight: As our Cubit,
the 4th. Our Head, the Heavens Ab^ve: with all its Spears: in Circles of the
Cerebellum. Our Jaws Open As the Horizon; between the 2 Hemisphears. And Jamb,
is akin, to the Hebr Jom, a Day (as Jam, Now: and I am, in the Present Tence.)
Our Ears, akin to Years: and the Heb. Years, akin to Teeth: or Shinne. Whence
our Chin: and Shin. And the Fewest Teeth, are 24; with 4 Watchers; Higher then
the Rest. As 4 Sabbaths, of the Month; with 24 Days. And Time, is Kept, in our
Temple Pulses: called Tempora.

Here also, the 7 Spirits, before the Throne (As 7 Planets:) in our 7 Nerves.
As the 7 Lamps, of the Candle-stick; before the Oracle: with its Cherubins of
Glory, Shadowing the Mercy-Seat. As our Eyes, with their Rain-bows: the Throne
of God, and Christ: in the little Pupil, of our Eye, they called Elshon: or
the Little Man of the Eyn. As Taking in, the Visible Species, at that Pinhole,
of the Dark Closet. And the Species may be Direct (and not Reversed) As Our
Eyes see them. But in One Eye, at Once: almost demonstrative.

Our Heart, the Earth beneath: with its Sphere, of Waters, in the Pericardium:
and of Air, in the Lungs. With a mutual Tide, of Light and Darkness, in
Respiration: and the Hears Diastole. Like the Altar of Incense, before the
Veil: With 12 Cakes of Show Bread; Made of 24. As our Heart, is Circled, with
12 Ribs, on either side (and 7 of them, Better then the rest:) and 24 Rackets,
of the Back: as 7 Spondils, in the Neck. And the same Heb words, are Thoughts,
of our Heart; and Branches of a Tree (which is also, the Backbone, or Spinal
Marrow) and for Sprouts of the Earth.

Our Bowels, The Waters under the Earth. And their Name, akin, to the Waves of
the Sea: and their Offspring, As the Gravel thereof (as Esaias 48.) and their
Yearings, or Yarnings, As the Tides of the Sea. With a Constant Circulation, of
Blood, and All Humors; for Intermitting ^eavours.

This Region, has our Stomach: As the Fire Altar, in the Lower Court, and
Laver. For, the Priest came (As our Savior, and Every Child) by Water; and by
Blood: and the Spirit, in the Blood. So that Here also, were All the 3
Witnesses, on Earth; As those in Heaven.

And the 7 Metalls, or Planets, of the Lower Heaven: In Our Spleen, Liver, Gall
(Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Above the Sun of our stom: As Venus, Mercury, the Moon,
below it:) Bladder, Reins, and Testicles. These Testes, draw down Fire, From
our Heaven Also.

6 Bowels. One Duodenum (or 12 Digits:) and the Ilia, 12 Times as Long. Their
many Folds, and Yarnings, are the Scripture shadow, of Gods Manifold Bowels;
akin to the Womb also. The Bowels, are as Many Cubits, as Hours, and Watchers,
in a Day: or Days, in a Month. As in Theon: long before the Italian, of our
Bodies Symmetry.

Mersennus Rules for Respiration, and Others, for our Pulses, in an Hour; may
show it possible, to reckon Times, as Canaan did, by the Flowings of Jordan.
Which had its, 3 Regions, and Seas, also. Merom, the Upper Waters; As our
Brain; Above the Firmament. And Kinsereth, the Harp and Heart, beneath. And
S^dam, Their Secrets: in Heb. As the Greatest Secret, in Nature: and Grace
also. When we see, the Return of Sodam, and its Great Mysteries: with Those of
Ester. The Misterious Daughter of Hades: akin to the Moon: and Myrtils: and to
Him, among the Myrtils, in the Bottom: with the Grim Horses, Speckled and
white, in Zechary.

Tides are Turned, at 6 Hours, in the Great Ocean: As the Sun and Moon: at the
4 Cardinal Points. Distant, 6 Hours apiece: As the Trepicks 6 Months. And the
Solstices. As the Poets make Proserpina, 6 in Heaven, 6 in Hell.

And 6, is the Number of Change and Motion: As 7 of Rest. And That, For Earth,
As This, for Heaven also. For, the I^ws distinguish the Watches, on Earth, and
Heaven: by Differing time. and themselves Dispute, whether the Little Watches
had 3 or 4 hours apiece. And (to end the quarrel) They had Either; or Neither:
at several seasons.

For, the Little Watches, of their shortest Day, had but 2 hours and half: and
their Longest, 3 and an half: which was signal with Them also, for daily
sacrifice, and for the Passover: at 3 hours and half, from Noon. As in the
Talmud. 3 and half, is half 7: and their Service, was at a 7th hour: as the
morning Sacrifice, at the 2 d 7th, or 14th hour; and the Evening, at the 3d
7th, or 21st. But the 9th Hour of the Day, from Morning: the Hour of Prayer,
and the Great Minha.

For, although the Morning was for Seeking, (as its Heb Names, imply) yet
Evening, was for Finding, God, in all the Bible. Who appeared, at the Evening
Sacrifice: the Time of Feasting. As the Marriage Supper; and the Supper of the
Lamb (or the Passover:) with the Lords Supper: As in Primitive Times: much
rather, then at Dinner: or in Morning. Which was M^urning Time: and for
Judgment: as Evening for Mercy. As if God, would come, and show his Mercies,
more, in the Close, or Evening, of the World, then in the Morning: which he
chose for Judgments.

So, to Sodom, Egypt, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: so, to Israel, also, diverse
Times. As at the Pestilence, in David. Who says,

My Rebuke, is in the Morning: Chastened every Morning: As the Scholar; called
up to School. And in the Morning, I will cut off the Wicked. and in the
Morning, the Righteous shall have Dominion over them: and when thou awakest,
Thou will despise their Image. And have thou considered the Morning Spring:
which I made, to shake the wicked out of the Earth? As the black Clouds, by the
Morning Light, as Job 38. and Rev. 2.

Esaias says, The wicked shall not know, the Morning of their Judgment. For,
the Bridegroom, comes at Midnight; and the Foolish Virgins Cry, in the Morning
Watch. As at the Red Sea. Zephany says, He brings his Judgments, to Light
in the Morning.

And the Scripture calls, for Judgeing in the Morning: or before the Judges
Head, or Heart is Clouded. As the Jews expound, That saying of Solomon: Woe to
Thee, O Land, where Princes Eat in the Morning: when they should be Praying: or
Judging.

Which may lead us up, To the First Judgment. Which they place at the 2 d
Morning, of Creation: When the Lord did Judge his Own Acts, of the Day before.
(As Examine your selves in Bed, and he still:) and That Judgment, did Separate
the Waters, on the Right Hand, and Left. Sending some Down: and Taking Others
Up: Above the Firmament. As the First Emblems of Election and Reprobation. As
the Goats of Seir (the Goat) and Lambs of Rachel, the Sheep (as in Heb:) with
Her Benjamin; or S^n of the Right Hand: As Leah, the Left. But, at the
Passover, the Goats were accepted; as the Sheep: and some, at all New Moons,
and Solemn Eeasts: for Sin Offerings.

But the First Judgment, was about, the 40th hour, of Creation, or 42. As That
Number, is, For Judgments, and Punishments, in all the Bible. As 40 Stripes,
and 40 Days, and 40 years, and 42 Months, or 42 Mansions. As 42 Children, by
the Bears of Elisha. And 42, is 6 times 7; or 7 times 6; and so the Great
Crisis of 6 and 7, which is, Rest and Motion. As Fine Twined Linen, called Six
(in Heb.) Doubled, on the Tabernacle Door: or Turned.

Every 6 hours, Turn the Sun and Moon, at Cardinal Points, or Quarters of
Heaven: called Spirits in Heb. As if Angels, stood, at the 4 Quarters of
Heaven, or 4 Corners of the Earth: as 4 Watches, and 4 Winds: Turning the Hour
Glass of Time. Which is but a change, and flux of Mite, which is Motion; or
Mites, or Moats (in Heb. The Uppermost part of the Dust:) As Sky does also
signify, in that Language.

As if All, the Tides of Time, and the Ocean, were but Turning an Hourglass:
of the Moon and Earth: about the Guilt Rundle of the Sun. And as One goes up,
it empties out the Moats, or Sand, or little Tinning atoms (in Hebr) To the
Other. So that, When the Moon is highest, the Earth is fullest, or the Waters
Highest, in the Sea: Or its Central Fire, makes it like a Boiling Pot, whose
water leaves the bottom. as the 64th of Esaias, with Job, and the Psalms.

6 hours, Turn the Sun and Moon: and 4 times 6, Turn Light into Darkness.
Which was first Done, at the 25t^ hour, of Creation. And 25, is the Lower Root,
of 666. That great number of Change, and Motion; to the Sun, Moon, World,
Church, and All: as anon.

6 times 6 hours, bring up the Sun, of the 2 d Day: and 10 times 6 the 3 d.
Which Turns downwards, at the 65 t and 66 (the signal Number in the Jewish
year of 24 and 42.) 6 times 6 is 36: and 10 times 36, or 360 Hours, bring up
the Full Moon: and so many Days, the Full Year: To the Eastern Nations. Egypt
added 5 Days: and at length, 6 Hours. And this became the Julian year: which
Caesar had from Egypt. 1461 Egyptian years (of 365 Days) make 1460 Julian.
Which they called the Great Cynick, or Sothiack year: As at the Do^-star. This
was just 200 more then 1260: which is 3 and an half 360.

Months, in the East, had 30 days apiece: and so we find 150 Days, in the 5
first Months, of the Flood: and 1260 Days, in 42 months. But they say, that if
the New Moon were seen in the 30th Day; It was counted for the first, of the
Month following. But of late, the Jews go by Mean Motions: and account 59
Days, For 2 Months. Short of the True Middle Motion, by an Hour, and about 29
minutes.

And though they found a way, to reconcile their Lunar months, To the Solar
year: we need it not. For, God has bounded out our way, by Days: when Ever
the year began. For, the first 14th Day, was the Passover: and 15th the Feast
of Unleavened Bread (for 7 Days more:) and 16th, for the First fruit Omer: and
the 50th next, was Pentecost. And the Feast of Trumpets, was the first:
Atonement, the 10th: and Tabernacles, 15th, of the 7th month of their year,
when Ever it began. Which From Egypt, was about the New Moon, next the Vernal
Equinox: which must be Past, they say, before the Passover. But we need not
dispute it. Though it might be cleared, by their best Authors: and by
Anatolius, and Eusebius: As of late, by Petitus.

With the Roman Yoke, (they shunned so, by Crucifying Christ) They were forced,
To the Julian Form also. Yet they kept their Feasts, by Moons: and made them
Tables, much like Ptolomies. In other things, they could admit the Julian year:
and the rather, because the 6 odd Hours, in single years, did keep their
Equinox, at a Cardinal point; or one of their Great Watches.

But others, kept the 6 odd Hours, Till they made a Day: and so, the 4th year,
was Bissextile: from the 6 t Calends of March (or 24th of February) Doubled.
That the Days of the week, or Feriae, might keep their wonted letters, in the
Common Cycle.

And there is Greater Harmony, by Julian years in 4. then seems to be known,
to them that first used it.

For, as the 4th Watch of Creation, brought up the First Light; and the 4th
Day, the First Sun; and the 4th Week, the Moon, to meet the Sun again: so, the
4th Year, brings them to meet in the same Day of the Week: and is not 2
minutes, more or less, then 14 days, above the Jubilie of 49 Moons. Which
still return, To the same Day of the Week.

And 8 years, have 3 minutes more, then a full month of Weeks, above* 98 Moons:
Or a day and half, with 41 minutes, less then 99. So that, in 8 score years,
they want, but one day, and one Hour, of meeting; as before: and in 1600
years, but 10 days, and 10 Hours.

So that, meeting, on the 11th of May, and 10 Houers, after noon, in the First
of Christ: They met again, in 1601: the First of May, just at noon.

And parting, the years of Christ by 4 (and so, the Julian Period, After 9, or
rejecting 9:) The Remainder shows how long, the year proposed, is After a
Bissextile: And the Quotient shows, that the Sun and Moon met, so many
fortnights, from their former meeting, As there be Units, in that Quotient.

Which being added, To the year proposed; and All divided by 7: The Remainder,
is the Day, of the Week, for the First of May (And by consequence, for the 2 d
of October. 3 d of Ap. and July: 4th of September and December. 5th of June: and 6th
of March and November.) For the year proposed: And, for the first, 8. 15. 22. and
29. of January following: and so forward, in the next year also.

But if nothing remain, at this Division, by 7, The first of May (and every Day
aforesaid) is the 7th Day, of the Week; the Jewish Sabbath.

Thus, we get the Days of the Week, for 2 years together: and the Mean Synods,
and Luminations. Which are Equal; and may differ, from the Visible, by 14
Hours: or as much, as the Longest Day, at Jerusalem: The Great Sun Dyall, To
the World.

And for Eclipses also. The Moons Latitude, is much alike in 4 years: and the
Suns Anomaly, returns, in 4 years. And 4, Julian years, have just 1461 Days: As
the Great Egyptian Soth, had 1461 years.

But if any choose another way of Epact. The Arabic Lunar year, is just, 10
days and 21 hours, less, then the Solar: of 365 days, 5 hours, and 48
minutes. But the Common Julian, Greater, then 12 Moons; by 10 days, 10 hours,
10 halfs, and 10 minutes. And the Lunar month, about a day and half, half hour,
and quarter, more, then a month, of 4 Weeks.

And though the Lunar year, is thus, too long, by 10 or 12 minutes, yet it
suits the Julian: which is so much also, too long. So that, the Equinox, is
changed, from Evening to Morning, in 65 years. Which may be one, of many
reasons, for the 65 days of the year, in Canaan: which Ptolomy places at 65
degrees of Longitude.

And a Great man did make the Suns Radius, 64, or 65, times bigger then the
Earths. And many make the Moons Greatest (or Mercuries Least) distance, to be
65, of the Earths Radij. And the Suns Mean Distance, 1288; and Greatest, 1334
(or 1335.) As Longom^nt. Which is but 2 more then twice 666: or 1332. or half
65 more, then 20 times 65.

And before the Flood, 2 were born, at 65 (Good Enochs Father, and Son:) One
After it. Eber, at Arphaxads 65th.

Twice 65, is 130. and 130 Hours of Creation, brought up Adam; As 130 years
Seth* Set, in Abels room; As Tabernacles, After Pentecost, 130 days. And in 130
years, the Equinox, changes an whole day: As 12 Hours, in 65 years.

Seth at 130, and Enos in 235 (which make 365:) and Then, they began to
Proclaim the Nune of Jehovah (as in Exodus 34.) in a way of Churches. And the
Paschall Lambs (to represent the Ch:) were set apart, and Tried, on the 10th
Day of the First month: Whose Noon is Hour 234, 235. And 235 Moons, do make the
common Cycle, which they call, the Golden Number: of 19 years, or Moons 235.
Which, bring the Synod, To the Same Day again. But He, that uses the former
Rule, has little want, of other Cycles.

Enos, at 235: and his Son, at 325 (which is 235 Turned:) and as, 235 Hours,
Tied up the P. Lambs: So 325, came, to the morning Sacrifice, of the Passover.
So that These 2, represent the mourning Chapter of God (which is still counted, but
as Sheep for slaughter:) As the name of Kainan may intimate. As Kain, and his
Son Irad, the Beast, or Kine, in our English Hebrew.

Kainan, Mourning: Mahalael, Blessing God: At his Fathers 70. Type of all the
70, through the Bible. As 70 Hours, To the Great Minha, of the 3 d Day. Which
begins, with the Jubilie, of 49 Hours: 7 by 7 (Return and Rest: Which are
both, in the Word Sabbath.) And the first 3 d day of Creation, brought up the
first Living things, as Herbs (Thy Dew is the Dew of Herbs: and the Earth shall
cast out her Dead:) and Thence it might be the day of Resurrection: As for
cleansing the Leper (on the 3 d and 7th) and Defiled, by the Dead. For, After 2
days, he will revive us, and the 3 d will quicken us.

And the First, Fruit Omer, was Heaved up, on the 3 d Day, after the Passover.
(As Christ, Raised, on the 3 d day; and its Evening Sacrifice at 70 hours: As
Mahalael, 70 years, after Kainan.

One of them was Born 1260 years, the other 1332, before the Flood. One dyed in
the year 1235, and the other 1290. the Times of the Mourning, and Rejoicing,
Churches of God; in all ages.

The First Fruit Omer, on the 6th Day, After the P. Lambs Tied: As Adam came
up, on the 6th Day of Creation. And the Morning Sacrifice of the 6th Day, was
at Hour 135: As the Evening of the 8th (For Circumcision and the Christian
Sabbath) was at Hour 187.

And from Pentecost, To the Great Hozanna, Days 135. As 187, in all, To the
Great Atonement. And 187, between the Vernall and Autumnall Equinox: in
Hipparchus and Ptolomy. As 187, in the Great Feast of Asuerus, in Ester: and
187 Chapters in the Pentateuck. And the Temple Courts, 187 Cubits, and 135.
Mahalaels name in Heb is 136. and his Son Jared, was born, 135, and lived 187,
After Kainan. And as 70 H^urs, are signal, in the 3 d Day, and 70 Days, in the
3 d month, for Pent: so 90 Hours for noon of the 4th Day (which was first to
the Sun at Creation) and 90 days, bring up the 4^h month: and 90 years brought
up the 4th man, Kainan: At his Fathers 90. So the 8th, Methusela, begat Lamech,
at 187: and Lamech Noah, at 182. which is twice 91. As 182, and 187, Hours, are
Morning and Evening Sacrifice of the 8th Day, for Rest, or Noah.

Kainans Death, from Lamechs Birth, 361: as his Birth, before Methusela, 362:
and twice 365, before Noah; 365, before Jareds End. And as Lamech, lived 777;
So Kainan, was twice 666, before the Flood; 669 After Enochs 365. As Mahalaels
Death, before the Flood, 365. And so, from the Flood, or Arphaxads Birth, To
Abraham in Canaan, 365. As the Jews reckon their Veins, and Negative Precepts.
As Days, in a year: and Hours, before the morning of the First Fruit Omer.
Which was 135 Hours after the day of Trial. Which began 1335 Hours before the
Morning Sacrifice of Pentecost (1260 Hours after the Preparation to the
^assover; or First of Hamans Lots:) And at Pentecost, the Lambs and Great
Peace Offerings of the Church, were Heaved up: with the First Fruits of Wheat:
an Emblem of the Churches Rising, in so many days or years: As in Daniel, and
the Revelation.

And now, seeing all these Harmonies, to meet, in Holy Enoch (who was Heaved
up, as the First Fruit Omer, After as many years, as Hours, To its Morning: or
Days in a year: and begetting his Son, at 65, as days to Pent and many other
65, in the Jewish year.) And the next came up, at 187, as Days, before
Atonement: and between the Vernall and Autumnal^ Equinox:) We need not doubt to
begin, our Great Jewish year, at Enoch: and to go forward, To all the Feasts,
and Fasts, of their year: Till at length, we come, To the Greatest Feast, of
Tabernacles and Release: which we are seeking.

Though it be not easy to fix the season of Creation: which is not agreed, in
the Talmud: but some place it, At the Great Day, of the 2 d Temple, and the New
Jerusalem, in the latter end of the 6th month. And they have a kind of
Tradition, as if Adam found his First Days shortning, and the Sun Declining. As
the Psalm for one afflicted, cries, Thou have shortened my Days; and I am like
a shadow, that Declineth. As Adam; At his Fall. Which many place, about the
Great Fast of Expiation.

As if, the Fall of the Leaf, in Autumn, were an annual Emblem of Adams Fall
(and eating of the Tree, from which, the Leaves Then fall:) and the Floods
Rising, at that season, were as Natures Weeping, over the Fall: or washing us
with Tears. As our Blushing (at the sense of Guilt) may seem the voice of
Nature, washing us with Blood: or crying, Somewhat Now is Done, that must be
washed with Blood: and without it, N^ Remission.

The Flood, was At the season, of the Sun in Aquarius: Then about the Winter
Solstice: just at Methuselas Death. As his Name in Heb: His Death a Dart, or
Deluge. And he Dyed, at 969 years. As Hours, to the Morning Watch of the 41st
Day of the year, at which, they say, he was Dead: When Noah was bid to fill the
Ark.

Which began, at His 480 year (As the Temple, at 480, from Moses Ark:) and of
the World, 1536. As Hours 1536, come just, To Pentecost: As 480, To the last,
and Great Day, of Unleavened Bread.

The Flood, was in the year, 1656: and Hours 1656, come just, to the 70th Day:
very like to make Great Changes.

There were 40 Days of the year, before the Death of Methusela; or filling the
Ark: and 40 days of Rain: and 40 days of Decrease, before the Raven.

40 Days, are Hours 960. As Methusala and Noah, lived, to the last, of twice
960 years. And again, there were 960 years, between the first and 2 d Ark, at
Shiloh (Peace and Rest:) a Type of Jacohs Shiloh:) 45 from Egypt, 430 from the
Promise, 365 from the Flood; which began, 120 years after the Ark, and man's day
of 120 years.

As some make the Equinox to Change a day, in 120 years: As from Moses Ark of
Bulrush, To the Flood of Jordan, when and where he dyed. As 120 Shekles of
Gold, in His Tabernacle. 120 Cubits, in the Temple Porch. 120 Priests; and 120
Trumpets: at Solomon. Who had 120 Talents, Given him; and offered, 120000 Sheep
at his Dedication. As 120 Levits of Note, in David: and 120 Christians, in Acts
the 1st. As 120 men of the Great Council in Ezra: who came in 120 days, from
Babylon; which had, 120 Provinces, in Daniels time. So the Jews, had 120 Days,
from the Day of Trial, To their Doomsday (As 120 years of Trial, before the
Flood:) and 120 days from Doomsday, To the Profanation of the Temple, on the
15th of the 9th. As from the Last of Pentecost, To the Great Fast, 120.

3 Times 120, makes 360; 3 and half, 420; and 3 of these, or 3 and half 360,
make 1260: the Time of the Ch Driven, or Trodden by the Beast. As at first, the
Beasts Reigned, till Adam came up to govern them. Which wasnot till 120 Hours:
or 5 Days: As between the Day of Trial, and the First Fruit Omer.

And as the first Ark began, 960 years, before the 2 d was fixed, at Shiloh; so
the Flood began, 960 years, before the Flood Kishon, sweeping Jabin, or Sisera,
before Barak and Debora. Types of the Churches Rest, in the 83 d Psalm: and 84
Hours, are 3 days and half. And Barak may allude, To the Flood, in That, of
Kishon; the Ancient Flood: (O my Soul, Thou have Trodden down strength!) And
Esaias says, You make a Ditch of the Old Pool: but regard not Him, that made it
Long ago.

And again, 960 years, between the 2 d Temple, and the 2 d Ark, which Flitted,
40 years, in the Wilderness, from the 20th day of the 2 d month; As the first
Ark floated, on the same day of that month, through the 40 days of Rain: and 3
times 40 more (as the 2 d Ark, 40 years, from the Philistines) before it rested
on Ararat. (As Those, that flew Senacherib: Compared to the Flood, in the 8th
and 17th of Esaias:) upon the 17th of the 7th month: which came to be, the 3^ of
Taberna^les. As if God would hint, his Churches Rest should Come, about the
Time, of the Feast of Tabernacles.

That 17th day, of the 7th month, did end the first 150 days of the Flood: and
150 Days have Hours 3600: As seconds, in an Hour. And 3600 years, come from the
Mourning Church, at Enos or Kainan, To our Savior: Or from Abraham's Call to
Canaan (whence we may begin the Churches Flittings in Tents and ^abernacles:)
To the year of Christ 1670, or 1675. And if That be the 3 d of Tabernacles,
Then, its First, is about, 1666.

First the Raven (or Evil spirit, sent or cast out, of Heaven, or the Church,
as in Revel 12. and Luke 10. 18.) and Then, the D^ve, both went, and came. As
the Good Spirit, on our Savior, Coming out of Jordan: As the First Baptized
Noah, did from the Flood. And the Olive branch (which must be Green, or else no
sign of the Floods decrease: for it might have Swum from the very first may
show us the season of the year: as Luke 21. 30.

About 292 days of the Flood: or year; as others reckon it. And Terahs 70, was
292 years After the Flood: and so the Jews account Abraham came and Lived with
Noah 58 years, as the number of Noah.

And Thus the Promise to Abraham or his coming to Canaan, was, as many years,
from Enochs Son; as Hours, from the day of Trial, To Pent. and from the Flood,
or Arphs. Birth, as many years as Hours, To the First Fruit Omer: or as Days,
in a year: Or in the Flood, if its months were Lunar. But if each, had 30 days
(as the first 5) It was more then 365 days: from the 17th in the 1st year, to
the 27th, of the 2 d month, in the 2 d year.

Which was much about 1332 hours, of That 2 d year; as it was, 1332 years,
After Kainans Birth. And Enochs Translation was about the middle: Or as near
666, After Kainan, as before the Flood: just twice 666, from Kainan.

And Enochs Birth, was 1326 (and so, but 6, less then twice 666) before
Abraham. Who recovered Sodom, by 3 persons, and 318 En^chs. in Heb. or
Catechists. As about 318 years of Eber (who was 666, After Noah: and about
twice 666, After Mahalael:) and twice 666, After Enochs Son, Methuselah.

The 4 Kings Conquered by Ab: As Types of the 4 Great Watchers, on Earth: or 4
Monarchies. Of Shinaar, or Babylon. Elam, M^des and Persians. Elas Sar, the
Prince of E^as, or Greece. And the 4th, was Head of the Gentiles or Gojim in
Heb. which may be Romans: though there were, especial Gojim, at the Sea of
Sodom; and Galilce of the Gentiles. As Harosheth of the Gentiles: in Josuah.

The 12 years Bondage, are 4320 days, or years: which added to the Floods 1656,
do make 5976. As the Preparation to the Sabbath of 7000: As the Suns Apogeum
comes about, in 7000 years: and 5976 want but 24 of 7000.

Abraham's Vision, has the Pigeon and Turtle, (as Abraham and Lot, the Good
Jews and Gentiles) unbroken, in the breakings or division of the Bullock (a
Script* emblem both of Egypt and Babylon, with its K. eating Grass as an Ox:)
and of the Ram, or Medes and Persians in Dan. and the Goat, for the Grecian
Monarchy. The Fowls, Chased by Abraham, may note the Romans: famous for Ravens
(in the Punick War) and Eagles; as in Daniel and our Savior. As the
Babylonians were, for Doves; in their Ensigns; and letters about Doves necks.
As, fly from the Dove of the North: and as a Trembling Dove, or Jonah, from
Assyria: Which also, worshipped the Dove, as That, which kept Semyramis: or
Semyrian, Kept by the Dove.

And Abraham's Vision, had All Beasts, and Birds, for sacrifice. And Diverse
Nations learned such a way of Covenants and Lustration. Cutting a Bullock (as
in Jeremy) with a Ram, and Goat also, in Greece. And the Macednians bowed To
the Goats Hans, in Justine and Plutarchs Pyrrhus.

And the Heifer of 3 years old may denote 1080 years, (as Days of 3 years; and
Clakins, of their Hours) As years from Abraham, To the Fall of the first
Monarchy: and Rising of the 2 d. (at the 7th year of Joash: or in Amazi^h:) Or
of Rome, and Nibonassar; with the Greek Olympiads, in Vzziah.

3 times 3 years, are 3240 Days, or years: From Babel Built, To the Christians
Taking J^rusalem. Or from the Covenant made with Abraham, or the Birth of
Isaak, To Ottoman: and the first Roman Jubilie. So also, From M^ses, To These
Days.

Abraham saw his Seed, should be gotten out, by many Plagues (As Sara, was
Recovered Thence, by Plaguing Pharaohs House:) and at Sunset: the very season
of their coming out, as Genesis 15. 17. Deuteronomy. 16. 6.

They were called up, at Midnight, after the Passover: but got not out, of
Egypt, till the next Sunset: at Hour 360. bringing up the Full M^on, (as
Days 360, the Full year) and That was Afterward, the season, of the First
Fruit Omers Reaping. Which was Heaved up, As They were; and Christ was to be.
And so they carried up the Bones, of Joseph and the Patriarchs: as Acts 7.

From Ramases, they came to Succoth (Tabernacles) and Then to Etham: in the 3 d
station. As our Savior said, I Walk to day, and tomorrow, and the 3 d day, I
shall be Perfect. As David also: Then, I shall be Perfect. Which is Faham, in
Heb. There they saw the Glory of God, in his Cloud and Pillar: Promised, to
every Cotage on mount Zion: and to All her Churches (which are therefore many)
in Esw 4. This might be Minba time, of the 3 d Day, from Egypt, or at Hour
430. As it was year 430.

They Past the Red Sea, upon the 21st of that Month (the Last and Great Day of
Unleavened Bread:) which began at hour 480. As the Temple, at year 480. and was
Dedicated, in the 7th month Ethanim, and Tabernacles: as alluding, both, To
Succoth, and E^ham.

The Red Sea in Heb, might be called Red, from the Great Trade for Mimum, and
Vermilion; at a Port of it: in very ancient Authors: or from Erythrus, that
ruled in the Islands: where Edom never was. Though once his borders reach to
Fzion-geber, on that Sea. But Israel did Compass Edoms Land, and might not
tread upon it: which was so remote from This Sea, that the Prophets say, His
Cry should reach unto it, at his Fall. But Edom is a Glutton, as Adam, in the
Oriental tongues: whence E^o and Eat, in many Languages. And though Edon. may
be Red also, yet improbable, to name That Sea: which reached unto India; in
very many Authors.

From This Sea, they came to Sur, or Sure, on the 22 d day: and in 3 days more,
To Marah (Bitter and Rebellion) much about Hour 666; or noon of the 28th day.
At Elim 12 Fountains and 70 Psalms. Which grow by Bowing: as their Heb name,
Tamar. As she, that grew Fruitful in her old age. As Psalm 92: the Righteous
flourish as Tamar, in the Hezrons of God. They bear much fruit in Old age: as
Tamar did, before Egypt; to encourage them. And Malachy says, Judah loves
the Daughter of a strange God (as a Cananite in Genesis) wherefore God will cut
off, Er and Oneh, in One day.

David might remember That of Tamar and Hezcon: when he read, how the women,
Blessed, his Grandmother, saying, Let thy House be As Tamars seed, To Judah. A
strange Emblem of the Church, by the seed of the Father: while she tarried for
Shelah, Shil^h.

From Elim To Sin (on the 15th of the 2 d month: as from Egypt, on the 15th of
the first) and There they Sin again: by murmuring: Till the Manna came, upon
the 3 d day, after the Time for the 2 d Passover: As the First Fruit Omer, on
the 3 d day, After the first Passover. And the Law, was at the Time of
^entecost.

The Golden Calf was in the 4th month: Then they fast, for Breaking the Tables.
And the Caldees, broke up the City, on the 9th of the 4th month.

In the 5th month, They Fast again for the Heavy Doom, of not Entering into
Rest. Which they reckon the Day of Both Temples Burnt. Or Doomsday.

In the 6 ^, they Fast again, for the Judgments on the Evil Spies. And the 7th
began with Trumpets: yet they Fast again, upon the 3 d, for Ishmacl. But the
10th is the Great Fast: for Adams Fall (as is thought) when the Sun declined
and Day shortened, Till the Flood. And thence, increased again, and at their
leaving Egypt, the Sun was in Aries (Horned, as the Egyptian Hammon) at the
Vernal Equinex.

And Moses promised, that God would make their Days, As the Days of Heaven.
Which Increased, till the Height and Heat of the Sun, and sin, and wrath (which
are all, in the Hebr Hamma.) brought a flood of fire, upon their City and
Temple, about the Height of the Summer Sun.

And at That Tropic, Their Sun Turned again, (as in Amos 8. And at Hezekiahs
sickness, and our Saviour^ Death:) and Declined, as their Days shortened (as
Isalm 102) Till the Autumnal Equinox: and Great Renewing of the year: or
Restitution of All things (Acts 3 d.) At the Great Release, and Feast of
Tabernacles: which we seek and Expect.

They Entered Canaan, on the 10th of the first month, (As Ezech. saw the New
Jerusalem upon the 10th of the 1st month) the very day, for setting apart, the
Paschal Lambs. Its Noon, is hour 234 (as before in Enos, and the Golden
Number:) And it was, 234 years, after Jacobs Death.

We may begin the Great year (we discuss) At This Entering Canaan: or Their
Leaving Egypt. Or the first Rearing of the Tabernacle: on the first Day of the
year. On which, the Earth appeared Dry, to Noah: and Hezekiah began to Cleanse
the Temple (as Ezekiel is Commanded:) and Ezra began to come from Babylon, the
first day of the year. Flee out of Bobylon, make have, and look not back: least
you partake of her Plagues: and Remember Lots Wife.

But Ezra came not to Jerusalem, till the first of the 5 ^. the Annual Fast for
the Death of Aaron: whom Ezra was to supply: and with Nehemiah, To repair the
City; Burnt, in that very month in which they came up Thither from Babylon. And
then he purged the people: which was finished, on the first day of the 2 d
year, From Babylon: As the Tabernacle was Reared, on the first of the 2 d year,
from Egypt.

1530 Hours of the year came to the Preparation Evening before the Pentecost:
beginning at Four 1536: As Noah's Ark began in year 1536. And so many years,
from Egypt, come to the Great Pentecost in Acts 2 d. As is more discussed, in
The N^w Island. Where is most, or All, or more then All, This Book.

And there can be, but 66 more Days, To the Great D^om: on the 9th or 10^h of
the 5^h Month. For, They assign it, to both those days. And it might be at
Evening, between them both

66 days, have 1584 Hours: and 48 more (for the day, Before, and After) make
but 1632. So that the Great D^om, Comes, in 1632 Hours, or Years, After the
Great Pentecost in Acts 2 d. Which was certainly, before the End of the 34th of
Christ. Although we do not yet, fix his Birth: but That it may be, 2 or 3
years, before the Common Account. And we Therefore use to say, About, such, or
such a year

And by this account, The Great D^om will be, About the year of Christ, 1665:
or at most, 1666. Which is 1632 years, After the Great Pentecost, in His 34th,
or rather 33 d; Which is most generally agreed, for the year of His P^ssion:
and the Great Pentecost, in Acts 2 d.

But I rather look for the Feast of Tabernacles: Which was, As many Hours,
After the Burning, of Both Temples: As These, were, After Pentecost. And I
suppose, the Burning of That City and Temple, by the Romans (within 40 years,
After the Great Pentecost, in Acts 2 d) To be the Fiery Trial, or Doomsday,
foretold in diverse places.

Ezech. and other Prophets say, God would deal Worse, with I^rael, then with
other Nations* and our Savior said, the D^om of That City, should be Worse,
then Ever was, or should be more. Which yet Daniel seems to place* At Their
Ri^ing again, About the Great Feast of Tabernacles, now coming. Which will be,
a Fiery Tr^al: and a Day, or Hour, of Great, and Sore, and Quick Temptation.

As the Jews Tradition is, that before their Feast of Tabernacles, God does sit
in Jud^em^nt, on the Dead of That Year. And so the use to Fast (as some now) to
know, Who Must Dye that Year, by their Shadows or Ghosts: as Job, and the
Psalms.

Which yet often call, for all the World, to leap, and dance, and sing, at the
Coming of Christ, to Judge the World. For, Lo he Comes! He Comes! to Judge
the World. And His Throne is White. And yet All run away; and call to the
Mountains to fall, and Cover them: As I shall do: If He be not very Gracious;
Which I hope he will.

And the rather, because he promises to gather All Tongues, and Nations, to
see his Glory: and When he Calls all Nations, and Kingdoms, to receive his
Doom, in Zeph 3 d. He Promises the Holy Ghost and Fire: with a Pure Language
(but to a Poor People:) that they may Al^ serve him with one Consent, or
Sechem, as before. Which I wish, and beg, and long for, more, then Firing, Any
Place, in all the world.

And for this Great Feast of Tabernacles, we may proceed, by Days, and Hours,
of the Jewish year: As we did before for Pentecost: or the Great Doom. Which
was, As many Days, After Pentecost, As Before Tabernacles.

And We may begin, That Great Year, At any Great and Noted Time; Before, or
After Egypt: But Rather, Before. For in Egypt, They seem to be, as the P Lambs,
Tied up before the Passover.

They reckon Amram, Born at 65, from Jacobs going Down (As Pentecost was 65 t
Day of the Year:) and 65 years more, To Aaron. Who dyed a little before the
Great Doom, in the 5 t month, or 65 Days, After Pentecost.

And about Aarons Birth, they place the Cruel Edict, of slaying the Male
Children: 84 years before their Coming out; and 84 Hours, are just, 3 days and
Half: Or the Time between the Day of Trial, and the morning of the Passe-over;
which was Past, before their Coming out. As if the Wrath of God, did Pass over
them, To the Egyptians: Before their Coming Thence. At the day of the First
Fruit Omer: and they passed not the bounds of Egypt, or the Sea, Till about the
Last Day of Unleavened Bread.

Which was, 45 Days, before Pentecost: As 45 years, before their settling in
Canaan, or Calebs Hebron, in Josh. 14. and 45 is half 90 (the 4th of 360:) and
90 Hours are just the Noon of the 4th Day. And the 4th of Creation was the
First of the Sun and Moon; the 2 Faithful Witnesses, in Heaven, as the 89th
Psalm.

From That 45th year After Egypt, we may begin Their Pentecosts; or from the
first Sabattical year in Canaan: As many years, from Egypt, As the Day of
Pentecost, is Days; from That on which, They came, from Egypt.

And so many years After Enoch, As there are Hours, in the year, To Pentecost,
or its Preparation Day, which began at Hour 1512; and ended at 1536, as before.

For Enoch, was, 669, before the Flood; which was 292 before Abraham (or his
Fathers 70:) and 75 more To his Call, or Coming to Canaan: and 430 more, To
their Coming out of Egypt, and 40 more, to Canaan: so that 6 more, make up
1512: the first Hour of the Preparation To the Pentecost. And if Abraham were
Born After his Fathers 70, There may be, as many years, from Enoch, To their
Entering Canaan, As there were Hours, To the first or last of Pentecost:
beginning at 1536, and Ending, in 1560.

And to go forward. From the First Pentecost in Canaan, To the First Born
stopped by Jeroboam: were as many years, As Hours from the first of Pentec To
the Close of the 23 d Day of the 3 d month (on which They still Fast, for That
of Jeroboam:) 456. Which is also, the more remarkable, because the Plots of
Haman held against the Jews, Till That very day, of the 3 d month, Est. 8, 9.

And From Jeroboam, To the Captivity, there were as many years as Days in a
year: or Hours From That 23 d of the 3 d To the 9th of the 4th: on which They
Fast for the City Taken: as in Kings and Jeremy. Which was, from the first of
Pentecost, as many Hours, As years, from the First Pentecost; To that
Captivity: about 860.

In the same month, They Fast again, for Breaking the Tables of the Law; 430
years After the Promise; and for Burning the Law, by Antiochus, 430 years from
the City Taken: and 430 Hours are about 17 Days; and their Fast, is on the 17th
Day of that Month.

In the 5 t Month, They Fast for Aarons Death: which was followed, by Arad,
Taking them Captive: and by Fiery Serpents: Till the Brazen Serpent Healed
Them. As Christ's Death was followed, by the Roman* Sack, and Firing the 2 d
Temple; on the Day of their Heavy Doom: and of Firing the First Temple.

Which was but a Type or Shadow, of the 2 d Fired, much about 666 years After
the first: and about 1536 years After their Entering Canaan. As Pentecost was
1536 Hours of the year: and the 9th of the 5 t month, 1536 Hours Afthe first
Hour; and the 10th, 1536 Hours After the Last Hour, of Pentecost.

Upon the 3 d of the 7th, they Fast again for Gedaliah, and the 70, slain, by
Ishmael. A plain Type of the Turk, or Saracen (whom They call Ishmael) who Took
Jerusalem, from the Christians, on the very 2 d Day of That 7th month (in Bapt.
Grammay, and others.) As they Fast the 3 d.

The 15th of That 7th month, must begin the Great Feast of Tabernacles; and it
can be, but 1600 Hours After the Day of Doom, or Burning of the Temples: and it
Therefore must be, within 1600 years (if an Hour be As a year) After the City
Sacked, in 69, or 70, of Christ. As the Blood of the Vintage (before the
Tabernacles) in the Revel ran out, 1600 furlongs, from the City; which was then
Sacked.

And if it were Burnt, in the very morning, of the 9th Day, of the 5 t month,
yet Tabs must come, at 1669, or 1670. And it seems, to begin sooner. As the
Sack, was rather, on the 10th then 9th, and so nearer, To the Tabernacles.

For they say, it was, the very same Day, and same Course (as the old H^b Ode:)
on which the First Temple was Burnt; and That, was the 10th Day; As Jer 52. 12.
Though the City Burnt, 2 or 3 days before, as 2 Kings 25.

And suppose, it were, the very First Hour, of the 9th day; yet there can be,
but 22 days, of the 5 t month, and 30 days of the 6 ^; and 15 more, to the
Close of the first of Tabernacles. When they first began their Dancing, and
Joy, of Pouring out Waters. Though the King did not begin to Read, the Law,
Till Afterward (As the Law Commanded it;) At the Close of the year, and Feast
of Tabernacles. As our Savior did not appear at That Feast, in John 7. Till
the Latter End. In the Last and Great Day of the Feast; He stood, and Cried, O
Every One that Thirsts.

22, and 30, and 15, Days, are 67: which are Hours 1608: and by This account,
the day of Tabernacles, must begin 12 Hours, or Years, before 1678; which is
just 1666. If we rightly account it, by the Hours of the Jewish Years.

We may Confirm This, by all the Cubits, Shekles, and other things, in the
Bible. As first, the Verses and Sections of the Pentateuch: in the Mazoreth.

Genes^s has 12 Great Sections (as the year 12 months) and 50 Chapters, as the
Lunar year, has 50 weeks (as 50 Days between the Passover and Pentecost:) and
1534 verses: As the year had Hours, To the evening sacrifice before the
Pentecost: and as the World had years, To the first Command and model of the
Church, in Noah's Arc (as we saw before) 120 years before the Flood.

Exodus has 11 Sections (As the year, had 11 months, After That in which they
came out:) and 40 Chapters, As 40 years, between the Exodus, and Canaan: and
1209 Verses, As hours from the Passover (at which they came out) To the morning
of Pentecost: and so many years there were, from the Ark to Jephta: or from the
Flood, To David: Or from Joseph's Death, To Ezra, or Nehemiah.

Leviticus has 10 Great Sections (as of Ten^hs for Priests and Levits: And the
Law was Given at Pentecost, 10 months before the End of the year:) and 52
smaller: As Pentecost was the 52 d day from the Passover: and Nehemiahs New
J^rusalem, in 52 days (as weeks of a Solar year:) and 859 Verses: or twice 430.
As years, from the Flood, to the Ma^riage of Isaak. Or From the Promise, To the
Law: and from Thence to David: or from entering Canaan, To Solomon; or from the
Ark at Shiloh, to the Temple: or from Thence To the Captivity: and 430 more, To
the Machabes.

Numbers has also 10 Great Sections, (as 10 days to the Trial of the P Lambs:
10 weeks To the Close of Pentecost: or 10 months, To the Great Dedication, in
the Machabes:) with 66 little Sections, which they call Sethume Secret: with
the flittings, of the Ark, and Camp, Through the Wilderness (its Heb name) in
1288 verses: as years, of the Church, in the Wilderness: As in Daniel 1290.
And so many Hours bring up 54 days: As from the day of Trial, to Pentecost: or
Preparation To it. And from Pentecost, To the day of Aarons Death: and Thence,
To the Great day of Creation: or of the 2 d Temple, and the New Jerusalem, in
Hag. and Neh. who began the 54 Law Lectures, for 54 days.

Deuteronomie has 1055 verses: as Hours, from the first Omer Heaved, unto
Pentecost: or years, from Abraham's Father To David: or from David, To our
Savior: or from our Saviors Death, (and the Great Pentecost, in Acts 2 d) To
the Christians, Reigning in Canaan.

All the Chapters of the Pentateuch, are 187: As Hours To the Ev. sic. of the
8th day, for Circumcision, and the Christian Sabbath: and as days, To
Atonement; and between the Vernal and Autumnal Equinox. of years again, in the
Temple Courts.

All its little Sections, are 669, as Hours To the Ev. Sac. of the 28 h, or 4th
7th day: the last of the month of weeks. as years, from Enochs Translation, To
the Flood; 669.

All its verses, 5945: As years, to the Preparation, To the Great Sabbath of
7000 years. In which also, the Suns Apogeum, comes about, To the same point,
it had, at first.

Shall we come to the Numbers in the Heb. Alphabet? when God did first write
the Law, as it is in Exodus, he left out, Teth, the first letter of their Only
word for Good: As hinting, that He gave them Laws, at first, Not Good: as in
Ezckiel.

Afterward he repeated it (as in Deuteronomy) with Teth added: and a special
Emphasis, upon the word of Good. That it may be Good, or well, with Thee, and
Thy Children, etc.

And the 9 first Letters, of that Alphabet (which end in Teth) are Units; and do
make 45: as years, from the Law, To the Ark, at Shiloh: or Caleb at Hebron,
Jos. 14.

The 9 next letters, are Decimals: and make 450. as years, from the Law, To the
Ark at Zion: and the first New Jerusalem; when David came from Hebron: Or from
Calebs being there (or the Ark at Shiloh) To the Temple finished

The 4 last, are Centenaries; making K. R. S. T (or Christ) and 1000. As years,
from the Temple finished, To Christ. who was, from the latter end of Moses,
1460 years, (As in the Great Ae^yptian Sot^, or Julian Cycle, before:) But from
Egypt, and the Law, He was just 1495 years: as the Number of the Hebr
Alphabet, by which God wrote the Law, at Horch. where Moses was, about 1495
years after Enoch: and 1495 years before our Savior.

The final letters (often in the Mazoreth) do make 3500. As years, of the
World, To Nehemiahs New Jerusalem: or his meeting with Ezras Great Counsel or
first Mazoreth. Or from Seth, To Alexanders being at the Temple, (or Babylon
Taken by Him, or Nicanor, and his Greek Era, in the Match:) or from Enos, To the
Contest of the Great Antiochus with Egypt, Dan. 11. Or from Kainan to
Hircanus, who began the Kingdom in the Machabes. Or from Mahalael, to Pompeys
sack of Jerusalem. Or from Jared, to our Savior. Or from Sem, to the
Christians at Jerusalem. And from the Birth of Jacob, to the very days in which
we live. And the Jews (as Esd^as) make Jacob, the beginning of a new World.

And those Last Letters, which are only Final, may lead us, to the very last
Days, of the Last Times; as Paul to Tim.

And that God intended somewhat of Times also, by those Letters which himself
used, may be probable, from very many words, in Scripture.

As the Word, for a year, does make 355, as Days in a Lunar year: and with
their usual Article, 360, as Days of their Solar year: and so its Common
Plural in Construction, Shene, 360. for, it has 2 Plurals: as Masculine, for
Solar; and Feminine, for Lunar years. And as the Full Moon came, in as many
Hours, as the year had days, so, the Word for Moons and Months, is in number
362, if its M final, be but 40. But if 600, it is then, as many, as the
Scripture owneth for Many Days. As Jos. 23. and 1 King. 18. 1. Where yet, it
was, but about 3 years. which is the Lowest Number, they use, in their Plurals:
who have a Duall for 2. Which might be pressed, on them for 3 persons, in the
plural Elohim: As all Grammers, have 3 persons, in their Verbs: and Theirs,
has All its words in 3 Classes; As the 3 Sons of Noah; filling all the World.

And the number of Noah, is 58, as They say, he lived years with Abraham in
number 243, or 248. as Hours into the Evening, After the Lambs set apart: as
Abraham's Family. As years from Abraham, To the Bondage in Egypt. But if M
final, be Here 600, Then Abraham's Name, has as many, as the years, between
the 2 Arks; of Moses, and Noah: whose Ark, is Tebeth (802.) And much akin to
the Month, in which Ester, was taken, into the Royal House: which was the 10th.
as Noah's Ark rested; and the Mountain Tops appeared; in the 10th of Tebeth.

Ishmael is 451. but one more then the numbers in their Decimal Letters. As
years from Ishamael to Canaan. Isaak and Jacob make 390. As from the Flood to
Isaacks Birth, and the Burning of Sodom: As Jerusalem was Burnt, 390 years
after Jeroboams Flood. Isaak lived 180 years: and the number of his Son Jacob,
is 182.

365 years from the Flood, or Arphaxads Birth, brought Abraham to Sechem: in
Heb Sechema: 365. And Melchisedecks Salem, 370. As years, from the Flood: or
from Jacob there, To the Ark at Salem: or Shiloh. 335. As it stayed there,
about 335 years. As from Abraham, to the Ark, in Moses time.

Which was 345, from the Birth of Jacob: As the number of Moses, is 345. And
his Birth 345, from Abraham's Call, or coming to Canaan: and Egypt: whence
they came out by Moses, to Jericho: in 345 years: As the Sons of Jericho, (in
Nehem and Ezra) just 345.

430 years brought them from Ramases: whose number is 430. And Etham 441. And
Succoth 480. And Metham 481. As we saw it before, at 480 Hours: and 480 years,
from Abraham to Moses: or from the Promise, to the Ark at Shiloh: or from
Egypt to the Temple.

From the Red Sea to Sur, (or Sure) 506. As the 3 d Hour of the 22 d day, when
they came thither: and 506 years after Abraham's Birth. who was 75, at his
coming to Canaan: and 430 more, are 505. So that, this year, was 506.

And they crossed Jordan, at 234 Hours of the year (the noon of the 10th day)
and 234 years after Jacob: and the number of Jericho (To which they then
crossed Jordan) is 234. So signal a number, that it may be Rule, or Regle (in
Heb 233.) to all the Rest.

335 at Shiloh (as its number) brought up Saul: 337. And the Ark was taken at
Elies Death: and Samuel succeeded (from the Sons of Corah, the sweet Singers of
Israel:) and his Name is 377. As years from Egypt, to His Call: or from the Ark
at Shilob (where the Lord did Call him) To his Great Victory at Ebenezer: After
the Ark Restored.

Of the Judges Times, we speak Else where; and of David's Noddings, and his
Tears, in the Noad of God; as himself alludes. He was the 14th from Abraham:
and the 24th from Noah. So his Name is 14, and 24. As diversely written, in Heb.

Solomon's Temple, was Finished about 1000 years, before our Savior Born: or at
most 1005. As His Songs, or Canticles, 1005; and his Parables 3000: As Dark
sayings of Old, or Times Past. As years from Creation (if Abraham were born at
Therahs 130.) He Dyed, before the first Captivity, To Bab. 375. As his Name is
375.

He Prayed, God would Turn their Captivity; If They Turned and Prayed: As he
might Take Levit. 26, 40. which we translate with If, not in the Text. And God
Turned Solomon's word, and made an Absolute Promise; I will bring them back:
for, I am Gracious: in Heb 1288. and 1335. As in Daniel; who took the promise
as Absolute: and so confessed, that They had not so much as Prayed, that they
might be Turned. And so does Nehemiah cite it as Absolute: although we There
also put alittle If, not in the Text. And the word used For the Princes, in
Ester, and for Daniels Partners, Hapartimim, is just 1335. As God Turned
Solomon's word: in 2 Cron. 6. 25. and Jer. 12. 15. and Zech. 10. 6.

Where his saying, He will save the House of Joseph; may Hint, Those Numbers,
do begin, from Joseph: As we found them Come from Thence, To Nehemiah.

And the word used for Finishing the first Temple, is 1336. As years, from the
Flood (if Abraham were at Terabs 130) and so, for Nehemiahs New Jerusalem,
Nehem. 6. 15. As from Joseph's Bonds To Nehemiah; and from Egypt, and the Golden
Calf, To the Great Dedication, in the Machabes; or Times of Antiochus; The Type
of Antichrist; and His 1260 Days.

We saw, How it came, from 120, which is the very Number of Moed, in Heb; the
word, used by Daniel, for a Time and Times: or Moed and Moadim. Gods Moods and
Tenses. As we saw before, in his Day of 120 years, of Repentance, To the old
World. As some make the Equinox, to Change a Day in 120 years.

And to glance, at the Hebrew Tenses, or Grammar Times. The Formatives of their
first Praeter, make 2167: As years to Jacob (the New World) if Abraham were
born at his Fathers 130.

Jacob was 75, at his Going, To Haran; As Abraham 75, at His Coming from it.
And the Letters added To Kall, in Hiphill, make 75. As in Hophal and Niphal 45
and 450 (As the Units and Decimals, in their Alphabet) and in Hithpael 3645.
As, from Creation, To Nehemiahs New Jerusalem. If it were, As Scaliger puts it,
in Artax. Mem. Or To Babylon Taken, by Alexander, or Seleucus; and the Greek
Era, in the Machabes. Or from Abraham's Birth, To the year of Christ 1645.

The Formatives of their first Present, Benoni, do make 1451. As the Decimals
and Centenaries of their Alphabet. Or years, from the latter end of Enoch, To
the Law. Or Thence, to Augustus and Herod. Or from the Ark at Shiloh, To our
Savior.

The Letters of their Greatest Future Legal, or Imperative, may make 1691 (a
signal Number, from Christ;) and their Future Evangelical, or Promissory, From
1245 in Kall, and 1400 in Niphal (which make 2645; As in Pyel:) To above 3400;
as in Hithpael. From their Bonds in Egypt, Till about These very Times, or 1670.

And to Come to Shekles and Talents: Cubits and Furlongs. Shekle in Heb, is
430: and as Abraham was told, His Seed must serve 400 years; He paid 400
Shekles, for his Burying place at Hebron, much about 400 years before Caleb got
it: 400 years before David, at the same Hebron, with its D^uble Cave, or
Machpela.

And tho, our Savior taxed some, that Painted Sepulchers, or were such, yet it
may be hoped, that Ere long, He also may come (as Nehemiah did) to visit his
Fathers Sepulchers; and Tombs of his Fathers Image also. Who promises to make
His Tredding Glorious; and that Earth, shall not only be E^ets (I will accept
it, as himself alludes, Ezech. 20. 40.) but Beulah, or Hephzibah, My Darling in
her; As the Queens Name, in Hezechiahs time.

The Holy Oil, in Exodus, of Myrrh and Cassia 1000; Calamus and Cyna^non, 500:
As about 1500 years Before Christ: the spirit of That precious Ointment: As in
the Psalms, and Canticles, and Gospels.

The Gold about the Tabernacle, was 730 Shekles (As years from Eber) above 29
Talents: As the Lunar Month is diverse Hours, above 29 Days. And the Arabians
(Who knew the Moon, and gave it, in their Ensigns) have a Cycle of 29, or 30
years; which may be more Considered.

The Silver, 100 Talents (As the Tab. Court, and length of the Temples Walls,
was 100 Cubits:) and the Brass 700; which together, make 800: As the Tab was
800 years, from Noah's Ark, or Tebeth, 802. If Abraham were at Terahs 70.

The Silver Shekles 1775. As years from Enochs Birth, To the Tabernacle. Or
from Noah's Birth, To Samuel, and the Ark Taken by the Philistines.

Or from the Flood, To the 2 d Temple. Or from Ebers Birth, To Ezra, or
Nehemiah. Or from Abraham To Antiochus the Great. Or from the the Promise, To
the Dedication. Or from Jacobs Death, To Pompeys Taking Jerusalem. Or from
Ishmaels Death, before Ebers, and Jacobs Ladder, To our Savior. Or from His
First Dwelling in our Tabernacle, To his Latter Coming, to the Great Feast of
Tabernacles now Coming. And their Proverb is, They know not Joy, that have not
seen the Joy of Waters, in the Tabernacles. Which themselves also make an
Emblem, of the Latter, Greater showers of the Spirit, in Moses song, and
Solomon's Prayer: with Esaias 55, and other Scriptures. As the last of Zech. For
Waters, on All, that Come, To the Feast of Tabernacles. And All Nations, are
invited, To it. And the Jews will Entertain Strangers, at that Feast, in their
Booths, at This Day; As Hebrews 13. And our Savior, seems to allude To their
Customs, and Singing Esaias 12. As they Drew Waters, with Joy, from the Wells of
Siloah.

And as He, Then appeared (after long Hiding himself) and came To the Feast of
Tabernables: so it may be Probable, He told his Disciples, that His 2 d Coming,
should Fulfill That Last and Greatest Feast of Tabernacles. As his Death,
fullfilled the Passover: and His Rising, The First Fruit Omer, or Barley Sheaf.
And the First Fruits of Wheat, at the First Fruits of the Spirit, in Acts the 2
d. So his next Coming, in Glory, should be, As to the Great Day of Tabernacles.
For, when Peter saw him in his Glory, on the Holy Mount, He cried, Let us make
Tabernacles. As if That, were only, proper, for the Joy of Tabernacles.

And the Revel. sings, Now is the Tabernacle, of God, with men. And He shall
wipe away all Tears. And Then, He that sat on the Throne, said, Behold! I make
All New! And he said, Write: For, These words, are True, and Faithful. Adding
also, It is Finished. And to Him that is athirst, I will give of the Fountain
of Living Waters. As alluding both to Beerlaharoi: and to what, he said, and
They did, at the Tabernacles, in John 7; And at his last Thirst, on the Cross:
when, Drinking Vinegar, he Cried, It is Finished.

The Psalmist says; His People shall be a Free, and Willing People, (as
Aminadab) in the Day of His Power: By the Beauties of Holiness. And He shall
drink, and lift up his head, etc.

And Aminadab offered 10, of Gold, and 70 Silver (As 10 Days to Trial, and 70
closing Pentecost, which they make, as other Great Feasts, of 7 days) and 130,
as Days from Pentecost, To Tabernacles. Each Princes Shekles were 210: As they
reckoned years of Israel in Egypt. All their Gold was 120, as years of Moses
Life: And All their Silver Shekles, were (as the Brass about the Tabernacle)
2400. For their 24 Courses; and 24 Hours of the Day; or 2400 days, and years,
To the Great Release. As from Abell, or Seth, to the Tabernacle. Or from the
Temple, repaired by Joash, and cleansed by Hezekiah, To These Days.

The Redemption Shekles (For the First Born) were 1365: but 30 more then
Daniels Number of 1335. As his 1290, is 30 more then 1260, in the Revelation:
written, about 30 years, After the Roman Sack.

1260 years before Christ, was the Famous Time of Gideon: and His Ephod (Or
First Idols of Israel) of 1700 Shekels (of earings) As it was 1700 years After
Enoch. And Gideons 300 Men, might note 300 years, from the Death of Joseph's
Brethren: and the Birth of Moses, in Egypt.

Achans Shekles, were 250; as the years from Israel first in Egypt, To their
Entering Canaan. But the 50 Gold, were as 600 Silver: and so, All his Shekles
may be 800. As years from the Flood to the Exodus: Or from Achan To the first
Captivity to Babylon: which might be Typed in His Babilonish Garment. As its
Golden Image, in his wedge of Gold.

Goliahs Armor, was 5600 Shekles As the years they were to press the Bodies,
or Souls, of Gods People: or to Roll over them (As the Name imports) From
Cain, or Tubal Cain (the 1st Vulcan) to These Times.

David gave to Ornan, 50 Shekles of Silver, For the Thressing Place, on which
he built the Altar: Then, 600 Shekles of Gold, For All the Hill of Moriah (the
Lords Teaching, or Wisdom, in Heb: But in Greek Foolishness, as Paul) where
Isaak was Bound; and the Temple Built.

And Though, 600 was a Common Number, (As 600 Danits Sacking L^^hish: and the
Guard of Saul, Or David was 600: As the Relics of Benjamin: Cum Sexeentis
aliis, in a Proverb:) yet It might hint out Times also. As from Abel, to Enoch:
From Jared to Noah: From Noah, to the Flood: From the Flood, to Jacobs Death:
From Jacob, to David: and thence, almost 600, To the 2 d Temple Finished. Which
stood 600 years. As it had 600 Pillars, in J^sephus: and the First Temple,
Targets of 600.

David had 600 Men to follow him; but recoverd his Wives, and others of Ziglag,
by 400: As it was 400 years, from entering into Canaan. And the Temple Pillars
had 400 Pomgranats: with so many Granes, perhaps, as Hours in a Year. For, the
Poets Proserpina, did taste 7 Granes, as the Moon was 7 Hours below the Horizon.
And the Pomgranat is the Badg of Canaan, in the Hand of Jupiter Cossins. They
are Rimmons in Heb. as the 400 Benjamites, at Rimmon. And Solomon's Rimmons, in
the Canticles, and on his Pillars, may denote years from Boaz, or Jachin, in
the 24 Courses, of the 24th of Cron. to another Jachin, with Eliashi^: As the
First was whose Names do signify, God will bring Back, and build up, and
Establish.

And Those Pillars stood 400 years, As the Square of his Altar, was 400 Cubits.
And so, some reckon, his Walks about the Temple Courts: a Furlong: or 400
Cubits.

And to come to the Bible Cubits.

Noah's Ark, was 300 Cubits long, and 50 broad. And Noah lived 300 and 50, from
the Flood. As also 300 and 50, to Abraham, at Terahs 130. But Cubits are for
days: of 24 Digits, in 2 Spans, with Jews and Others. As the Great Egyptian
King, had his Sepulcher, Circled with a Ring, of 365 Cubits: as Days in a year.

And as the month had 30 days, and then the Moon is Hid, (as the First Light
was hid in 30 Hours:) So the Ark, had 30 Cubits Height. And so, 300 Cubits
Long, may be 300 months; which by 50, Broad, do make 1250 years; of 30 days to
a month. Or if All, had not full 30 days; they may be 1260. Or, if we must
allow another Cubit, closing up the Ark at Top, as some reckon it; they may
come up to 1290: or 1335. And so, the Cubits of the Ark, may represent the
years, it should be Driven, by the Flood, out of the Dragons mouth: and be
filled, with Beasts, rather then men; and be Trodden, by them.

And if Abraham was born at Terahs 70; then 1250, or 1260 years, of the 1st
Ark, brought up the 2 d, to Zion: and 1290 the Temple. But if Abraham was born
at 130, then the Temple was, 1335, from the Flood: which was 350 years before
Terahs 130. And 350, with 75, and 430, and 480, do make up just 1335.

As from Jacobs Flight, or Service; Till Nehemiahs New Jerusal: or from the
Golden Calf, or Image of the Beast (in the Psalm) To the Great Dedication, in
the Machabes. And the Sons of Both Elams, in Ezra and Nehemiah, were 1254. but
6 less then 1260: or 6 more then the Hours of 52 Days, of Nehemiahs New Jerus.
As years from Israel, in Egypt.

And whether, Abraham's Birth, was at 70, or 130; yet it may be just 2000 years
before our Savior. As 2000 Cubits in the Levites City Suburbs: and 2000 Cubits
from the Camp to the Ark: and 2000 Cubits in their Sabbath Days Journey. As
their Comments on Ruth and Josua.

And Cubits might come to represent years: As days, are years, in the Prophets:
and the word for days, is also for years: and so, may Cubits also. Though the
Ark had Bulk enough, to show them in their proper use.

The Tabernacles Length (as the Arks Height) 30: by 10 in breadth 300, (as the
Arks Length) and by 10 in Height, 3000. that is 2000 (as the Levites Cities,
Arks Distance, and Sabbaths Journey) in the 1st Holy place: and 1000, in the
Oracle. Parted by a Veil of 10, by 10, or 100; As the First 100 years of
Christ's Body, Rent (as the Veil at his Passion) in the 1st Tearing of
Christians, and Jews also; From the City Sacked, To the Revelation: or the
Veil Removed, and Ark appearing, as Revel. 11. 19.

1000 Cubits in the Oracle, may hint the 1000 years of Christ, in Rev. 20. As
there were 1000 years, between the Temple and his Birth. Or from the Rev. Time,
unto the Christians taking Jerusalem: As a Type of the New Jerusalem.

The Tabernacles Court (as Ezekiels) 100: being added, to the former 3000; They
make 3100. as years from Abraham's Birth, to the Christians Taking Jerusalem: or
from this Tabernacle at Shiloh, To the Times in which we live. And the Cubits
of the Court before the Tabernacle, as the years to Shiloh, 45. 100, by 50
broad, are 5000: As the Greatest Church in the Acts, and 5000 fed at once by
Christ (as the Tabernacles Court, by 100 and 50.) As 5000 years from Adam or
Abel, To the Christians at Jerusalem. Or from Enoch To These Present Times.

Each side, 100 by 5 (in height) 500. As, Each Side, of the Temple Court. and
so, we may part, the 2000 years, from Abraham to Christ, by 500, To the
Tabernacle: and 500 more, To the First Temple finished: with All its Courts (as
1 King. 7. Where also, the House of Lebanon is, As this Tabernacle 30, 50, 100)
and 500, To the 2 d Temple: and 500 more, to our Savior.

The Inward Curtains of 28 Cubits, as the month of Weeks: but the outward 30
(As the Ark, Tabernacle, and Temple.) As their months of 30 days. And so they
say, Moses left his first Song, in 30 lines; his 2 d in 70.

These may show, How long the Church should be, in Veyls: or Skins of Beasts:
To hold it in; and Press it down: As the Ark before.

10 Inward Curtains, by 28, 280: and by 4 in breadth, 1120. and As, they may be
years After Christ, To the Christians Reigning in Jerusalem: So they may be
years Before: and perhaps, During the First Monarchy. For the 2 d and 3 d, are
Here, in their proper Skins; of Rams, and Goats (as in Daniel) and the Romans,
in the Badger. Or in Heb. Tax: Tachs. or Tahash. Of the Same Name, with one,
from the Concubine Reuma, Ruma, Roma, Genesis 22. 24.

And from Enoch To Jacoh, were as many years, as Cubits, in the Inward
Curtains: 1120. And from Jacobs Birth (or Abraham's Death) To the Tabernacle,
were as many years, as Cubits, in its Outer Curtains: 330. (that is 11 by 30.)
As there were also 330 years, from the Tabernacle, to Sampson: Or from the Ark
at Shiloh, To its Taking by the Philistines. And 330 Hours of the year, come
just to Noon of the Passover: and 330 days, from Passover, to Purim.

The 50 Tacks and Loops of the Curtains, may hint the 50 days, and Nights
between the Passover and Pentecost: as 50 Weeks, in the Lunar years: or 50
years, before the Solemn Meetings at Shiloh, or Sechem: where they were All
Tackt together.

330, by 4 (in breadth) do make 1320. And so many days, do make 44 months. and
beginning at Nisan, they end, at the 9th month (of the 4th year) which had the
Great Feast of Dedication for the Temple freed, from the Rams, or Goats, hair,
of Antiochus.

Or beginning in Tizri (as in Civils) They bring up All the 3 years Tithes, and
Offerings; with the First Fruits, and First born; and both Solemn Confessions,
and Doxologies (of Deuteronomy. 26.) At the Pentecost of the 4th year. Which was 1320
days, After the Passover (of the 4th year, before it:) As 1335 days After the
Feast of Trumpets, or the Trumpet of Release. As 1335 Hours, After the first
Hour of the day of Trvall. And so many years, come from the Tabernacle Reared,
To the Great Dedication, in the Machabes; and Death of Antiochus, or Nicanor:
As we may find, at the Temple Gate Nicanor.

If the 3 Outer Coverings, are equal (of 330 by 4, in each) They make 3960
Cubits (40 short of Ezechiels 4000: As the 40 years After Christ to the City
Sacked.) And to our Saviors First Acting in the Temple, there are just 3960
years of the World in Scaliger, and Those that follow him.

And from the Flood, so many years, come out about 1666, now coming: and so do
the 2 Utter Coverings, from Jeroboams Flood: As a Type of that, to Fill the
Breadth of Thy Land, O Emanuel: which come out at 1666.

The Badgers Skins, as uppermost, may be Largest, And 1335 (as in Daniel.) But
1320, come from Christ's Being in the Temple, or the Temples End; To the
Templers End, in one day: and the Popes Flying to Avignion: At the shaking
Times of Ottoman: and the Imperial States Protesting against the Popes Right,
in Electing Emperors. And from the Great Apostasy, in Julians days, They come
to the Times, in which we live.

But we come to the Temple Measures. And if Josephus rightly place the 2 d
Walls, on the first Pillars (called Solomon's Walks or Porches, in our Saviors
Time:) They were 500 Cubits; every side: As the Sept. and Vulgarlat. read
Ezech. 42. and not 500 Kanes, as others.

So that All the Sides of the Square, did make 2000. As the Levites Suburbs;
and the Distance of the Ark; and the Sabbath days Journey: and the Square
Cubits, in the Tabernacle; before the Oracle: And the years, from Abraham, to
our Savior, 2000.

We shall begin, As They Entered (with the Sun, from East to West) and so from
Haran, at first; and from Moab, Over Jordan: and from Babylon, and Persia: With
its Royal Shushan; on the first Eastern Gate, of the 2 d Temple, called
Shushan.

80 Cubits, to the Rising, of the Women's Court. As 80 days, before the Woman
came Thither, of a Woman Child. As Zion of her Daughter in Mic. 4. The
Man-child was not Born, till her Last Throws: as themselves express, on Es.
66.

As 80 Hours, of Creation, before the Moon, and Sun did meet: For, they were
not seen, till the 4th Morning.

And 80 years, From Shushan, and Cyrus, to Ezra: Seperating the strange Women:
and making This Women's Court called Aezra: from Ezra, Help. and so, they
Blessed (as the Ps. taught them) when the Women, or the Mourners took the Left
hand Walk: as others did the Right. The Lord Bless thee out of Zion: and send
thee Help; Out of his Holy Place: though thou may not come in it; But only look
toward it; As Jonah did, when he was cast out: of His Holy Place or Presence.

The 80th year from Cyrus, Taking Babylon (As he is called K. of Babylon, in
Ezra 5. And Thence he gave the Temple Vessels:) falls within the 80th Olymp:
or the 8th of Artaxerxes Long: and just 490 years before the Last of Olymp 202
d. Agreed for our Saviors Passion: by the Great Earth-make, and the strange
Eclips, in Phlegon, and many others.

The 13 First Cubits, in the Gatehouse (as Ezech. 40. 11.) may represent, the
First Light, coming up, at 13 Hours of Creation: and the 13 Days, of their
year, before the Passover: and the first 13 weeks, in the year, between the
Solstice, and the Tropic: As the 13 months of the year: and the 13 years
between the Temple Founded, and Finished: or at least Revived, in the 2 d of
Darius: in the 65 t Olympiad.

And the 65 Cubits, before the Holy Courts: As 65 Hours, to the Noon of the 3 d
Day: and the 65 Days, in the Jewish year (as before) and 65 years between the 2
d of Darius, in the 65 t Olympiad; and the 7th or 8th of Artax: When Ezra came
up, at Olympiad 80: and 80 years After Zerubbabel; from about 80 Degrees of
Longitude; To Jerusalem, at 65. As the first Fruits of Emanuel, in Esaias 7, were
65 years before Jerusalem was freed from Those 2 Kingdoms: and our Emanuel, 65
years before the Christian Persecutions, and the Roman Times: Shadowed in the
Cuthites, contending with Nehemiah. Who came after Ezra, full 11 years: and so,
there were 11 Cubits in the first Verge, of the Holy Courts, they called Heb
(Between The Hill, and the Help: As Heaven After Hell:) with its Stairs, and
Latices. As the Canticles allude: in the Gentiles, or Unclean: Under the
Stairs; and behind the Latices.

Then came the Women's Court (and Ezra's Great Work was To Separate the Women:
As their Ruin came by Women: Esaias 3 d and 32 d, with Ezra and Nehemiah:) just
135 Cubits Long, and in the Talmud, Square.

As 135 Hours, of Creation, before Any Woman: Or To the First Morning of Adam:
and From Tying up the Lambs, to Heaving up the First Omer; were 135 Hours. As
135 Days, between the Pentecost and Palms, or Great Hozannah, Closing the
Tabernacles. And 135 years, To the Great Era, of the Greeks, and Jews Great
Friend, Nicanor. And 135 more, to Antiochus: and their Great Enemy, Nicanor. As
the Gate Nicanor, At this Woman's Court 135 Cubits from Hell: and the Death of
Nicanor (on the 13th of Adar) 135 Days After the Day of Solemn Covenant (both
of Men and Women) in This Women's Court; At the close of the Tabernacles,
Nehemiah 8, and 9. As 135 years, before, from the First Temple Founded, to
Joash, who Repaired it.

From the Gate of Nicanor; The Inward Court of Israel and the Priests: In
length 187 Cubits (that is, 135, and 52, for Nehemiahs Days: As Weeks in a
year:) and 187 Hours, came to the Evening Sacrifice of the 8th Day, For
Circumcision and the Christian Sabbath: And 187 Days, To the Great Atonement:
As Autumnal Equinox, 187 Days, After the Vernal: And the Great Feast in Ester,
was 187 days. And the Pentatcuch, 187 Chapters.

And 187 years, From the 2 d Temple Begun, or Finished, To Alexanders Reign; or
Coming To it: Or Taking Babylon, and Dying at it; much about 11 years before
the First Nicanor. As there were 11 Cubits, From the Gentiles Court, To That of
Nicanor: and 11 more, from the Gate of Nicanor, To the Levits Railes, and
Ducans (parting Israel and the Priests:) As Twice 11 Before the Altar; Twice
11, to the P^rch.

And from Alexanders Death, to the Death of the Great Antiochus, 135 years; and
Then, to the Birth of Christ, 187. As, from Epiphanes, To the Baptism: Or, From
Nicanors Death, To the Death of Christ. which was, from Alexanders Death, or
Taking Babylon, As many years, As there be; Or they Reckoned; Days in a year.

And Thus, the 500 Cubits, from the Eastern Gate, to the Western, might denote,
So many years, From the First Temple Founded, To the 2 d: and From the 2 d, to
the 3 d, by Herod. Or at least, To the Times of Herod and Cop^nius (a Great
Roman Governor in Judea: Friend to Herod:) in the Western Gate of Coponius; As
Mark Antony, in the Tower of Antonia.

And we cannot doubt the Time of Nicanors Death; or of Antiochus, in the
Machabes: which tell us, Judas heard the Romans had beaten Antiochus, and
Philip, and Perseus (the Last King of Macedon:) which is clear enough, from a
Great Eclips, about the Last Battle, in so many. That tell us also, that
Afterward, Popilius went From Aemilius, To Antiochus: Who had not else, been
so Easily Charmed, in a Circle, with a Riding Rod. In That Rage (as Daniel
foretold) he leaves Egypt, and prophanes the City; and the Temple, in the year
145: and dies After Juda^ Cleansed it, in 148. And N^^anor followed, in 151,
or 2300 days (As Antiochus dyed, 1290 Days:) After the City Profaned: At Olymp.
153. Soon after the Last Battle with Pers^us. And Nicanor was Slain, in the 7th
year After: or about Olympid 155: and 188 years more, come to Olympiad 202: and
we all agree, that Christ Dyed, Before the 203 d Olympiad.

And before the year of Christ 1100 the Christians took Antioch: Which might
mind them of Antiochus: and Him, that made the Jews Free Denezons of Antioch
(as they were; when the Christians First in Antioch: as Josephus:) and soon
After Antioch, They Took Jerusalem, 1260 years after Antiochus: As a Type of
the New Jerusalem, 1260 years After Antichrist: Shadowed by Antiochus.

In 30 more, or 1290, From Antiochus, They had Gotten Tire also, and Caesarea:
and at length, Ascalon and Gaza. So that in 45 years, the Christians, were
Lords of Canaan (As the Jews in 45, After Egypt. As Daniels 45, between 1290,
and 1335.) Till Almerich joined with the Turks: and against his Faith, Invaded
Egypt; and at length his Posterity, lost the Kingdom, To Saladine, of Egypt.
And although there were more, Titular Kings, of Jerusalem; yet they did Little.
One being a Leper, and another Depozed, for Laziness: And the War diverted
Thence, Against the Albigenses. And Jerusalem was Sacked again, about 135 years
After the Christians had it. And again, After the Sicilian Vespers; and before
the First Roman Jubilie; the Rise of Ottoman, 1300.

The Porch, and House, and Oracle, were 70 Cubits: As the Dedication, 70 Days;
from the First of Tabernacles: and the 3 d Days Minha, was as 70 Hours.

And to Measure All the Bible Times by 70 years.

The 7th Man Enoch, was Translateed, 7 years After, 7 times 70 Doubled: at 987.
Abraham's Birth, or Terahs 70, was not Twice 7 less, then 28 (as Enoch 14) 70.
And The Promise to Abraham, 7 less then 29 times 70.

David was Jesses 7th Son, and from Abraham 14: and His 70 years, was just the
14th 70, from Abraham's Birth (75. 430. 475: in all, 980.) And from Daids Death,
To the Captivity, 6 times 70: and 70 more, To Their Return.

From the City Sacked, To Ezra, Twice 70: and 7 times 70 more (or Daniels Weeks)
To our Saviors Death. And so, there was, between the 2 d of Darius Nothus
(where some place the 2 d Temple) To the City Sacked, by Titus: in the 70th year
of Christ.

And as we saw All Changes, by 3, in 6, or 9, in the Watches: So is 1260 found,
to be 3 times 6 (or twice 9) times 70. the Great Age in the Ps. that says, The
Days of our years, are 70 years; As if, Every year were 70.

The 70 Cubits of the Temple Floor, were Higher, then the First Gate Shushan,
by 22 Cubits: and 22 times 70 years, are but 45 more, then Christ's Birth, was
after the Tabernacle Reared: 45 years, before it came to Shiloh.

The Altar, 22 Cubits from the Porch: and from the Gate of Nicanor also, 22. As
22 Letters, and 22 Hours, at the Daily Minha: 22 Days of the 1st and 7th month;
for Dismissing, and Blessing the People.

Solomon's Altar, 20 Cubits square: or 400 by 10, in height, 4000: As the Cubits
of Ezechiels Waters, are 4000. As 4000 years of the World, to Christ, or, the
Great Pentecost, in Act. 2 d. As the First Fruits of the Spirit. Or, from Noah's
Ark, To these Times: and a few years farther.

The Porch 10: and 120 (as before) 1200. As the Hours between the Passover and
Pentecest. And so the Temple 60 long, by 20 Broad, 1200: But the 2 d Temple 60
by 60, 3600. As the years from the Promise; Till 1670, or 1675.

The Holy Courts in length, 333 Cubits. As Hours to the Passover, and Days of
Hamans Lots, To Purim: and years from the Ark at Zion, To the Sack of Samaria:
Or Seige of Jerusalem, by Senacherib: Or from the 1st Temple: to Manasses
carried Captive: Or from Solomon, to Josiah: and 333 more, to Alexanders coming
to the Temple, much about 333, before our Savior.

To these Holy Courts, They did go up, by Steps of 7 Cubits (in Ezekiel. and
Josephus) from the Court of the Gentiles: who were to Tread these Holy Courts,
333 by 7: or 666 by 3 and an half, or 2331 years.

And Daniels Vision of 2300, was 31 years after the Chaldean Sack, in the 19th
of Nebuchadnezar. Who reigned 43, or 44: and Evilmerodack 2, (as Berosus, in
Josephus:) and Daniel had his Vision, in the 3 d of Belshazzar: Son to
Nebuchadnezar, (or at least, his Nephew:) and Born, before the Captivity: As in
Baruchs Epistles. Where, are also, diverse parts of Daniels Prayer.

And the 5 Steps, up, to the Women's Court of 135, do make 675, the very years,
from Daniels Captivity, to the City Sacked by Titus: 666 from the Chaldean Sack:
which held them but 60 years. As the 60 Cubits, of the Golden Image in Daniel.

And 60 by 6 (in Breadth) is 360: As Days in a year, or years from Their Return,
to Antiochus. And this Image is Father to that of 666. As the Talents of Gold,
to Solomen: and Sons, to Adonikam, in Ezra, 666.

15 Steps (for the 15 Psalms of Degrees) do make the Inward Court of 187, to be
2705. (As years from the 1st Temple, to These Times:) and the Outer Court of
135, at the Gate of Nicanor, 2025. And 2025 years, do come from Nicanor (There
with Alexander,) Till 1695: which may be very Signal, For the Little Horn,
from Alex. also.

For, if That, or the 2 d Woe, be the House of Ottoman (with Horses Spitting
Fire, or Gunpowder:) Their Howerglass may be Out, at 1695, or sooner: being a
Year, and a Month, and a Day, and an Hour, from 1300: the Rise of Ottoman, and
first Roman Jubilie of B^niface the 8th. Who did as much, for Temporalls; As
B^niface the 3 d, for Spiritualls: about the Time of Mahomet: 666 before
Ottoman.

And Purim (in the 7th Month from Doomesday: As 7 years of Release: 333 Days
from the Passover:) became the Feast, for the Death of Nicanor: After
Antiochus. As Types of These, and others, Ending all, at 7 times 333: or 3
times 666 and an Half: From Daniels Captivity.

Kainan was 666, before Enochs Translation; or twice 666 before the Flood: As
Enoch was Before Abraham or Methusela before the Promise, twice 666. As Kainans
Son, about 666 before Noah. And Noah, 666 before Eber: and Eber, 666 before the
Great Cecrops, or the Time of M^ses. As the Flood about 666, before the Death
of Joseph, and Bondage in Egypt. And Abr^hams Death, about half 666, before
the Tabernacle Reared.

And from Egypt, 666 years, brought up Joash of Judah, or Joas of Israel;
Sacking Jerusalem (in the 14th of Amaziah: As Josephus, with the Bible:) and
666 more, the Desolation of Antiochus. And that God would Raise them, at 666*
might be Hinted in 666 Sons of Ad^n^kam: or, The Lord will Raise up again: at
the Return from Babylon, in Ezea.

And Thus we might find 666, the Great Crisis, To the Greatest Kingdoms. As To
the First, and Oldest, in Greece, or Sici^n. As also, To Nimrods Babel; about
666 before the Exodus, and Twice 666, before its Ruin; in the S^n of Pull, or
Sard^napalus; 333 before Cyrus. As 666, from Solomon's 666 Talents of Gold; to
Alexanders Crown 333 before Christ. Who was Thrice 666, After Abraham, or 2000
as before. And so, between Their Birth years Thrice 666: and Twice 666, and an
Half, to These very Times, or to 1666.

And to fix our Eye upon Jerusalem (the Sun to its Moon, or Jerecho:) the Great
Sun Dyall, to the World; withal the Turns of Light and Darkness.

It was Built about Abraham's Coming to Canaan (in Jos. with Hegesip.) twice
666, before the Caldees Sacked it.

Taken by Judah, much about 666 from Terah, Babylon, or Ninive. By David, about
666 from Isaaks Death, or Joseph's Dungeon: and 444 (23 ds of 666) from Egypt.

By Shishack, 666 from Joseph's Death; or their Bondage in Egypt.

By Joas, 666 After Egypt, and 666 Before Antiochus: (As Joash Repair of the
Temple, was about 666 After Moses first from Egypt.)

By the Chaldees, 666 before Titus: and twice 666, After Abraham's Coming into
Canaan.

By Bag^as (under Ochus) 666 from David, or the Temple Founded. By Ptolomy Lag.
666 After Shishack, and 666 before Julian.

By Antiochus, 666 After Joas Sack: and twice 666 from Egypt. And from Cyrus,
so many years, as Days in their year.

By Pompey, 666 from Assyrs Sack of Israel, or Samaria. By Crassus, Robbing the
Temple, 666 After Senacherib Robbed it, of all he could get from Hezekiah: Then
beseiged it, with a vast Army: strangely destroyed, in Herodotus, besides the
Bible. A Type of what God means to do, when Antichrist shall fill the Land of
Emanuel; As Esaias 8. and 14. and 17, 18. Micha 5.

By the Parthians: and by Sosius, and Herod; about 666, from Babels first
Coming to Jerusalem, in Hezekiahs Time: or Manasseh Carried Captive.

By Titus, 666 After the Caldean Sack: and 60, before Adrian Raced it, 666
After Cyrus Built it.

By Julian, 666 After Ochus: and by Cozroes, 666 After Pompey: and by Omer, 666
After S^sius and Herod: 666 Before Ottoman.

Again by the Saracens, 666 After Adrian: and by the Caliph of Babylon, 650
from Julian: and Then, by the Turks, After Titus, 666.

Then by the Christians, 1260 from Antiochus: and by Saladin, twice 666, from
Antiochus and Nicanor. By Egypt again, in 1234: and by the Saracens, 1290. By
Selim, 1516.

And for the Fates of Rome: or Edom, in the Prophets: As the Jews Tradition is.
It rose, at Edoms Breaking Jacobs Yoke, and Carrying Judah Captive: in 2 Cron.
28. which caused Ahaz to hyre Assyria: which destroyed Israel, and Judah.

This was about 666, before Pompeys Sack: which was 666, Before Phocas and
Boniface. As Caesar's Julian Era, was 666 years (and odd days) before the Great
Hegyra, of Mahomet; 666 before Ottoman, and the first Roman Jubilee.

The 660th year of Rome, was signal, for Peace at home and abroad. But 666,
very Fatal. For the Massacre, of 15 miryads, of them, in One Day, in Asia, (As
the Danes in England:) and for the Civil Wars; which beseiged Rome, with 4
Armies at once: Till one Consul was slain, as Sacrifice at the Altar, and Cn.
Pompey, by Thunder: and the rest affrighted, by Prodigies: till Sylla diverted,
beseiged Athens, and took it, with the Flowr of Greece in a year.

And though Their Legions were not Constant; yet we may find 666, very signal
in them: or their Cohorts: and their Greater Legion, 6666.

And to Parallel Britain, with the Jews. As both, were invaded, in Caesar's
time; so both, revolted in Neroes: and although reduced to a Province, yet not
as others, at the Senates Order, but the Emperors Peculiers. Vespatian is
designed to quiet Both: and both, rebel again, in Adrian; about 666 before the
Saracens seized Jerusalem, and the Danes England. A Monarchy by Egbert: Though
Ina be Called the First, in the Saxon Laws; Taught by an Angel; Paid
Peterpence (but first to an English College in Rome) about 666, from Titus at
Jerusalem.

Austine was Here, in 600: and ere long, received a Pali from Rome (Tanquam
Grande Christi Sacramentum, ad Missarum Solennia:) with power to make 12
Bishops: As York had 12: in the Learned notes on Bid. The Monks of Bangor,
1250 (or 1260) in the Saxon Chronology: slain about 666, from Caesar Here, or
Pompey at Jerusalem.

In 636, Jerusalem is Sacked by Omar, and Cambridge by Sigebert (a King, and
ere long a Monk) Christiana factia and Catholica. In 637, we read of Parishes
(as Cambden:) but an old Mss brings them, To Theodore, about 666.

In That very year, the English received Latin Service, and other Ceremonies
(with the Popes Supremacy) As Bale and the Mag. Centuries.

Tithes, in Ethelbert; By K. Barons and Commons. As in the Confessors Acts. And
Ethelbert Dyed, 666, After Crassus at Jerusalem.

Lent Here by Parliament (As the Saxon Bid: which in Lat. is, Authoritate
Principali:) In Ercombert: Who Dyed about 666. And Then, was Bid Born.

Alfred, the First Adopted Son of the Pope: who Crowned him at Rome (But his
Will, owneth his Kingdom, To the Bounty of God and his Subjects: Free, as His
own Thoughts: in Menevensis:) about 666, before the Change in H. 8. When the
Parliament denied the Popes Supremacy: forbad Latin Service: or Commanded the
Bible in English.

Their settling All the Power, of the Pope Here, upon the Crown; might be a
Reverter, of what was There before (As often Adjudged:) Yet I know not, that
Ever before, the K. was left, to the Discretion of Cant (which had the Pall and
Belt; or Great Symboles, of Dependence on Rome, and Homage to it:) As the
Statute leaves him: For Licenses and Dispensations (and others of the Popes
Peculiers:) If the Archbishop judge it meet.

But After Times, did help the Crown, by giving it leave, To make its Bishops
by a Patent: As Edward the 6 t had made a preaching Sheriff: or many such
things; with Collations: and receiving Resignations; To most Spiritual Cures.

About 666 from Antiochus, This Land came to have 7 Heads, or Kingdoms (as
Rome:) and at Gogmagog Leap, or other Hill about it, a Dragon was seen, or
thought, so Great and Worthy, that it Surnamed a Great King, Vtherpendragon.
And its Image was Consecrate, and Dedicate, in a Great Cathedral: and from
Thence became the Royal Standard. That I speak not of the Dragon, slain by One
on Horse back: Or any other Beast, or Image of a Beast, slain by the sword: and
yet reviving, and admired, or adored, by All that were not written in the Lambs
Book of Life, before the Foundation of the World. Which must be opened, and
must Judge both Great and small: who have no Book of Works, to Judge them.

And the Dragon pursued the Woman, flying to the Wilderness (As Hagar did: and
is in Bondage with her seed To This day: as Gal. 4.) and made war with her seed.

The first Creature Animal, was the Dragon: we read it Whales, in Gen, 1. 21.
Created in the Waters: coupled with Dragons: as Esaias 27. Ezech. 29. and so in
Job, and diverse places. And Behemoth is next: the first on Earth, as the Dragon
in the Seas. It is Plural (as Dragons) in Heb. As many Femimine Beasts: Or
Mother of All the Beasts: As Wisdom is of All her Children: and yet she also,
is Plural, in Heb. As Behemoth. Which David applies to himself in the 73
Psalm. And I am Behemoth with thee. I am that Behemoth: more brutish then a
Beast: or Behemoth.

Those 2 Ruled, Till Adam came up: and had a Commission, which he did not
Execute. And yet we do not find All the Beasts, put under him: and the Serpent
was more subtle then the Beasts. But Noah's Patent, is a Promise also; Your
dread shall be on every Beast (that Conquered Adam) and upon All Fishes of the
Sea, or Dragons: Into your Hands they are Delivered. Thou have kept the Good
wine until Now.

The Dragon is Prince of Darkness (as it walks in Darkness: while the Beasts
are Couching:) and the shortest night of Darkness, in Judea, was of 10 Hours,
or Horns; as of 7 Heads, or Days, in a week.

And if their shortest Day, or Night, be as 1000 years (as Psalm. 90. and 91. of
the Dragon and Beasts:) Then is Every Hour, as 100 years. And so, the Dragon
and Beast, must Reign, about 1330 years: As They Reigned, 133 Hours, before
Adam was Created.

And if the whole Day and Night, be As 1000, Then the Longest time of Darkness,
in the Bible Meridian, is but 666: or 2 thirds of 1000; As one third of 2000.

But if their Little Watches, also, be 1000 (as the Psalm hinteth) Then is
Every Hour, 333. And so Platoes third part of an hour, may be 111. which is
also, the number of Kaveh: the Common Heb word, for a Measuring Line. And Thus,
666, may be parallel to the 6 Hours Turns of Tide, and Sun and Moon, at the
Cardinal points of Heaven: As before.

And the Jews parted all their hours, into as many Clakins, as days in 3
years: 1080. and each of them by as many more as their Sanhedrin: or Noah's
Nephews: or their Families, in Egypt: Or our Saviors Ancestors, in Luke: Or
years of Abraham's coming to Canaan. and 75, is the difference, between 1260 and
1335. but 3 more then Twice 666.

And for Hours, in the Revelation. The 2 d Church must suffer Tribulation for
10 Days. Which have Hours 240. And the 10 First Persecutions, lasted just 240
years. From 65, or 66, of Christ (when the Jewish War began) Till Constantine:
at 306. And the Southern Martyrs, of the 10th Perse^ution, are 144000; in
Eusebius and others. As the Lamb before the Sabbath had 144000 Clakins before
it: As First Fruits of Time and the Lamb for the Sabbath.

And if Constantine did close the 10 first da^es (as the P Lambs were Tied, and
Tried, in the first 10th day of the year) and That be in the 2 d. Chapter Then the
3 d, which stood, when Antipas was slain; and yet stumbled, at the block, of
Balaam and the Nicolaitans; must be with Constantine: or at his Times.

When poison sowed in the Chapter (as was written in the Lateran, at His Donation
to the Pope) was swallowed by the Clergy: which began to Prophecy for Hire; as
Baalam: the peoples Belly: or their Bell: as the Priests of Bell and the
Dragon. in Dan. Apoc.

And Nicolas, is one above the Laity: or proper to the Clergy. And Austin,
Eusebius. Clem. and Epiphan. may show us That which God abhorred in the Nicolaits,
was (somewhat besides Eating things to Idols, and Fornication) Demeaning
themselves, As Diotrephes (a Priest of Jupiter, or Belus:) and mixing Heathen
Rites, or Jewish, (which began in Peter's Time) with Christian Worship. Of
which, God is more Jealous, then of other Gods. As an Husband, is only Jealous
of Her, that continues a Wife: but with an Whorish dress, or forehead: As the
Lord Complains: and Threatens Desperate Sorrow, unto Planting Strange Plants,
about His Altars; which He so forbad, and abhorred.

This Spread, in the Church, as Arianism did; about the very first years of
Constantine, and Pope Marcel^us: who Created Cardinals, or Parish Priests; To
Bury the Dead, and to Baptize Infants. Which was presently followed, with Albs,
and Corporals, At the Altar; and with Tapers, and Candles, in the Sun Shine (as
a Prologue To the Flames, that followed:) and Compulsions to Religion: which
began, about the Time of the first Iudictions: (which we may Translate, by
Impositions:) First commanded, At the Council of Nice.

Meletius, the First Bishop, that opposed, and Degraded Arius; did first deny,
Restoring Laymen, Lapsed; Though perhaps, the fault was more, in Churchmen:
which on Penance, were Restored; but with diverse washings, and some Jewish
Rites. The Donatists opposed; with so much Zeal, that some affrm, They called
themselves the Only True Church: and Rebaptised.

The Cross, was found, they say, about those Times: and a Greater Cross, in
Arianism; with the Great Contests, for Easter Day: which Toar the Seamless
Coat, of Christ; the Soldiers Spared.

And though Paul, the Eremite; and Anthony, resisted; and began the Monkish
Orders; yet Those Times, had also, Sad Complaints, of Gluttony; among the very
Clergy: which were therefore called Priests of Bell.

As Jesabel (in the Revelation) may allude, to Jesus and Bell. As the Prophets
of Jesabel, with Those of Baall, or Bell: in Jesabel.

And so, we come, to the Temples Tredding down: or the Holy City: by the
Christian, Antichristian, Jebusites: for 1260 Days, or Years.

Which we found very signal, in Hours, and Days, and Years. As From the Birth
of Cainan, and Mabaleel; To the Flood; and Rising of the Church After it. As
from Enoch and Methuselah; To Abraham. Or from Noah, To M^ses and Aaron. From
the Flood, To the Ark in Zion; or the Temple. As from Joseph, and Jacob, To
Nehemiah. Or from Egypt, and the Wilderness: To the Dedication by the Machabees.

And Thence, to the Christians Getting Jerusalem.

As from Gideons Eph^d, To our Savior: and from the Romans First Taking
Jerusalem, To the Popes Decretals, and Council of Lateran: For Transubstant. In
the Time of Innocent the 3 d: Excommunicating the Emperor. As From Christ, To
the Sicilian Vesters; Or the First Roman Jubilie; with the Second Woe. or House
of Ottoman

As from the Sack of Jerusalem (or Revel. written) To the 2 d Roman Jubilee: Or
To the Golden Bull: and order of Iesuans, or Iesuats. As From the 10
Persecutions, ending in Constantine, To the Great Change, at Queen Elizabeth.
And From Iulians Time, To the Persans Taking Babylon; and to K. Charles in
England; and Free Religion in France.

And although, there were Great Defections (in the Christian Churches) before
Julian: Yet Then, was the Great Ap^stacy; which seems, Pointed out, To the
Thessalonians.

And the Last Oracles, said, that Christian Religion should Stand, but a Great
Year. Which came out, in Iulians Time: about 365. And Thence, the Roman Empire
did begin its Mortal Wound. As first, by the Gauls, about 365, of the City
Built.

And whatever else, the Revelation Beast may be: vet, we must All agree, To
That last verse, of the 17th Chapter. And the W^man, which thousawest, is That
Great City, which Reigns, over the Kings of the Earth. Which certainly, was
Rome: in some State or Other. That we say nothing, of Mysterium, written in the
Popes old Frontal.

In Constantine, the Empire Trembled: In the Western Legions drawing off, to
New Rome: with 7 Hills, also: but not 7 Kings, or Governments. And a Kingdom
Divided, cannot stand.

The Church, did Creep again, a little After Julian: But with standing stools,
and Forms, of some, that did pretend. to Teach it first to Go: with a strange
Chaos, of Jewish Rites, or Heathen. And the Tares of the Envious one, grew up,
Till They could not be Rooted out; but with Danger to the Wheat also.

First, in Lent only, Till Easter (which Crucified, all the Body of Christ:)
Marriage is Forbidden: And at Laodicea; the signal place, in the 3 d of
Revelation: Then at Other Times: and Then, To the Clergy, at All Times: in
Siricius. When, the name of Catbolique, came up: with the Golden Law, for Lent;
about 380. Then, Canonical Hours, about 390: A very signal Number, both to
Jews and Gentiles: for the Last Olympiad: and the First Use of Mass: with the
head of John the Baptist; and Then, the Bones of Samuel: and ere long of
Stephen, and Nicodemus: Brought into Europe.

The Empire shakes, upon Contest, of the Emperor, and Stilico: by whom,
Alaci^us was Beaten: Yet, so countenanced; That he sacketh Rome.

From That Deadly Wound, 1260 years, come out, about 1666: Or somewhat sooner.
At the End of the Three Great Years and half, or 3500 years, of Esaus Struggling
with Jacob. Which, Esdras makes, the End of the Old World: and Beginning of a
New. And all the Bible makes Them, the Great Types of Election, and
Reprobation: or of Children of Light and Darkness. The first Dragon, or Beast,
of the Bottomless pit: with 7 Heads and 10 Horns: or 10 Hours: for 7 days, of
the week. And the shortest Night, had 10 Hours. And as the Light, might Rise,
in 7 hours; so the Sun, might Rise, in 10. And Those 2 Numbers, of 7 and 10,
were Sacred, to others also. As in Justine, Curtius, Arrianus, and others, of
the Persians, and Alexanders Weeks: before the Roman: in the Attick Nights, or
Genial Days, and Saturnals.

And as, the Revelation has its 4 Watchers, and 24 Elders, for the 24 hours;
So, the 7 Spirits, For the 7 days of the week: which return in a Circle: As the
Months of Nisan and Tizri. Which were Sevenths, to each other: and had ^easts
alike.

As 7 equal Circles in a Ring of 6 and one, in the Center: as 6 Tones and 2
Halvs, in and an Eight, or Diapason. 7, being the only Number, of 3 Wholes and
a Half.

The Jews Law, had 7 Heads, to Noah: 10 Horns, to Moses: with 666 Sections, or
at most 669. And its Heb name, is akin, to Thorus, or Taurus (a Beast) which in
Hebr leters, makes just 666. And None might buy, or sell, among them (or be
Denisons;) that did not submit, to the 7 Heads, of Noah's Laws.

7 Things, were left by Moses, for the Poor. 7 Sabbaths: 2 in Tabernacles: one
in Pentecost: and 2 at Pass: (and 7 Passovers in Script.) besides Atonement,
and the weekly Sabbath. Which 2 last, forbad All work; the other 5, but Servile
only. 7 Servitudes, in the Judges. 7 Liquors, in Moses Song. 7 Lamps: and 7
Spirits, on the Messiah (Esaias 11) As 7 Spirits, before the Throne: or 7 Eyes:
or 7 Planets, in Heaven; and 7 Metals in Earth: seven pair of Nerves: and 7
Principal parts, in the Bowels.

So, they had 7 Elders, or Deacons, in their Churches, or Synagogues: which must
be of 10 at least. As usually, a Paschal Lamb, was for 10: Recorded. and so,
the Romans, could reckon them, at the Last Passover. And at 10 they brought
their Children, to Fast, and other points of the Law: and their Lowest
Consistories, were at places of 10 Families. As the Saxon Decennars, or
Tithings. And the Romans had their signal Tithings: and 10 Circuits, in their
Provinces: 10 Kingdoms, as Horns: on the Last Head of the Beast.

Which may be, the Great Spirit of the World: with 7 Heads, and 10 Horns. As
God also, pleased to manifest himself, in 10 Laws, and 7 Spirits: for 7 Days,
of the week: and One of Them, had also, a Deadly Wound: as it was the Jewish
Sabbath: but Got up again; and yet so changed, That it was, as an Eight Day;
and yet, but One of the 7: As the 7 or 8, Heads, in Revel.

But there is a Man can be our peace; when the Assyrian Overflows us. When he
shall Tread in our Palaces; Then, we shall raise against him, 7 Shephards, and
8 Principal Men. Yea, and the Spirit of the Lord shall set up a Standard
against him.

The Revelation does require, a Volume, by it self.

Now Only, the Holy City, Trodden down: As David Got it, from the Tredding
Jebusites: and Nehemiah, from the Cuthites: and Machabeus from Antiochus.

And Jerusalem shall be Trodden down of the Gentiles, Till the Times af the
Gentiles be fulfilled. Or, as Paul, Until the Fullness of the Gentiles: And
Then, All Israel shall he saved: or Redeemed: For the Time of your Redemption,
draws Nigh.

The 42 Months, are 1260 Days: as 5 months, of the First Woe, are 150 days As
the 5 first months of the Flood, quite hiding the Earth, in Water: as the
Baptists Mother, was Hidden, 5 months: and in the 6 t, the Angel came to the,
Virgin.

And at 30 Days apiece, 42 Months, are 1260 Days: As the Days of the Woman:
and the Beast also, 42 months. And yet, they do not seem to end together.
Except, we grant him, More, then his Reigning Time, of 42 Months, From his
Deadly Wound. For, he lives, and prospers so, at the End of 1260 Days, that he
kills the 2 Witnesses: and They lie Dead 3 days and an half: which may be 3
years and an half: or somewhat more then 3 days: or 75 Hours. and 1335, are
75, more then 1260.

And at Rising of the Witnesses, the 10th part only, of the City fell: whether
it be the Great City following (which Reigned over the Kings of the Earth:) Or
the Holy City Before: yet called Sodom, where the Lord was slain. As in the
Prophets. And the 10th of that City, may allude To Neehmiahs Time. When the
Tenths* of All the people, were chosen out by lot, to dwell in Jerusalem; so
that All that City was but, as the Tenth of Israel.

And the Tenth (in Esaias 6, and other places) seems a Type of Gods Elect: Or
else there may be somewhat more, in it. For, the First Fruits, are The Elect:
whose Heb name, is akin to That, of First Fruits. As we touch on David's Micol,
and Baburim: in another place.

But Tenths, are proper most, to the Jewish Church. And when the Fruits, of All
the Earth, come in (as All Kingdoms: At the Rising of the Witnesses:) It is no
great wonder, That Tenths should Fall. With All, the Ceremonious Pendants, To
the Jewish Levites.

And the very word for Dragon, is in Hebrew, Tan [or Tannin] and Levitan: akin,
to Levi Tan, or Ten: And the Levites crying, Ten, Ten; which is Give, Give, (as
the Horsleach:) Else I will Take it, with This Fleshook: by Force. And Levitan,
may be, Levi the Dragon: or Cruel Levi. As Their Father Jacob said. Adding
also, But my soul shall not be in their Secret, or in Sodam (As the word is
There: and makes just 666:) alluding unto Lots, flying out of Sodom, to Zoar.
As Moab, of Lot, is bidden, in Esaias 16. As, to mind, the Heifer of 3 years old,
in Genesis 15.

Moses told the Levites, they were a stiff, Rebellious Generation. Deuteronomy. 31.
25. 27. And it was a Levites Concubine, that played the Whore, at Bethlem: Till
at length, she was filled; and divided into 12. As the 10, and 2 Tribes:
scattered all about: Till there were not left 666, Relics of Benjamin. And
yet, he Had the Ruler, Saul (and He cut his Oxen, As the Levites Concubine:)
and then the Temple came, in Little Benjamin. The Lord must dwell between His
shoulders. And the Altar had a corner cut, that so it might be all in Benjamin.
To Devour the Prey, in the morning sacrifice; and to gnaw the Bones, in the
Evening: As Jacob first; and Then, the Prophets do allude.

And the Jews observe, the Levites were but 22000, to Teach their 22 Letters:
and for neglecting That, They were carried Captive, in their 22 d Generation.
As the Priests, cut off, by Saul: Before David's New Jerusalem: And Solomon Put
off, Abiathar also: the Relic of the Priests. And Nehemiah chased a Son of
the High Priest, allied to Samballat.

And when Solomon came to Dedicate his Temple (which perhaps, the Priests
expected: But) As soon, As all the people did agree, to Bless the Lord, and
sing, For he is Good: Because (a mighty word! As if, He were not Good, But
That) His Mercy does Endure for Ever: Then, the Glory of God, came Down, and
Filled the Temple so, that the very Best, of All the Priests, could not Enter:
or Durst not.

So that Solomon was fain, to Pray (will God Indeed, Indeed, come Dwell in
Clay?) and Bless the People. Which by Gods Command, was most Peculier, to the
Sons of Aaron: and Solomon was neither Priest, nor Levite; But of Judah, whence
our Lord did spring. And he cut off, 22000 Beasts, in One Day: which Themselves
compare, to the 22000 Levites. Adding also, that Pompey slew 22000, about the
Temple; and was Beaten, after it, by Caesar's 22000; To as many more, in Pompeys
Army. As 22000, in That of Apolonius, in the Machabes.

And when Joash came up, in the 7th year, and did desire, the Levites, to
Repair the Temple: or to help it forward: They Pretended, but it is said, They
Hastened it not. And again, in Twice 7 years, The Priests, had not Repaired the
House: as 2 Kings 12. with 2 Cron. 24. (as 12, and 24, in all, Temple matters.)
And at length, They consent, to Receive no more money: nor to Repair the House:
which was therefore, Put out (as the Vineyard) To Other persons: That did work;
and do it, Faithfully: without Priests and Levites. Which might be, a Type of
somewhat in our Saviors Times; and Farther. And though, we read, of First
Fruits still: Even in Ezechiels New Jerusalem: Yet of Tithes, very Seldom, or
never, that I find, in all the Bible, of the Gostel Times: but of the Pharisees
Boast, of Paying Tithes: and Tithing Mint, or Any-seed.

But the Tenth, might also Note, The Tribute, Paid to Kings, over them: Which
Samuel fixed by the Tenth, of All they had, or Got. And when the Romans Took
the Didragm (or half shekle, For Redemption of Souls: As in Matthew, with
Josephus:) They had Tithes also: The Common Tribute, to Hercules, with other
Demigods. And so the 10th days of all, or diverse, months, were mourning fasting
Days: as we saw before.

And thus, the Fall of the Tenth of the City (Whither it be Jerusalem, or Rome,
or Any Other: or All Others: For it may be, in All, Successively:) may speak
the Fall, of All Their Tolls, and Tributes, Tithes, and Offerings: or whatever
else, was Appendant to the Levitical Policy: or mearly Jewish: Or Legal Bonds:
or Bondage. And They, that defend Those things, should be sure, They come not,
to confess, They have Acted, As Jews: but were not: As in several of the
Churches. Which were much Distinct: Although, so near (in One Lydian, Asian
Province) That they might have soon made, One National Church (if That had been
the Only way:) and All their Angels, might have laid their Faults, upon One
High, Arch Angel.

But Ezechiels New Altar, rejects all the Old Levites, that stayed with
Israel: and Chooses the House of Zadoch (the Righteous) as Solomon took him,
for Abiathar.

And Ezechiel 45, determines All Tribute, to their King, also: with a strikt
Command, upon the Prince: To Take away his Exactions, on his People. whose
Exactors must be Peace. And One of 200, Lambs, with a 60th part of Corn: or 100
part, of Oil: is Fixed, for the Tribute.

But How Long, These Tenths, or other Tolls, may last: I know not any Text,
determines clearer, Then the 14th of the Revelation. Bringing us, To the Feast,
of Tabernacles (in the following Chapters:) After Harvest, and Vintage. As
Exodus 23. 16, and 34. 22. Deuteronomy. 16. 13.

As the Ark came Home (From 7 Months Wandering: as 7 years Release:) and Rested
in the Field of Josuah,) some Type of Jesus:) when the Jews were At Their
Wheat, or Last Harvest. Before the Showers fell: that were restrained, in
Harvest (As 1 Samuel 6. and 12. 17. and 2 Samuel 21. 10.) And Those Showers, might
hint, the Waters of the Spirit: To be Poured out, at the Joy of of Harvest. As
the Waters of Bethlehem, David Longed for, at Harvest Time, as 2 Samuel 23. And
Samson came to visit his wife, in Wheat Harvest: and Then Burnt, the
Philistines Corn.

And we may compare, Psalm 126. 129. Esaias 9. and 12th, and 18; With That, of
Jeremy. The Harvest is Past; and yet, we are not Saved (As we hoped, by the
Types:) But, Is there no Balm in Gilead? or the Witness Meetings? As of old,
for Jacob; at Gilead, and Mispa? Samuel also, Cried, at a Mispa, The Lord is
Witness: And They Answered: Witness.

And again, the Harvest is come; and Time of Thressing Babylon. Which yet, is
made, Too Narrow; by Confining it, to One, any One, City, or People, in the
World. It was, the Head of All Oppression, and Confusion: As it signifies. And
yet, it is, Too much, in my Heart. And Babell, is Lebab (the Heart, in Hebrew)
Turned Backward; or Distracted, and Confused. As Solomom says: Gods work is
much, to make men see, They are but Beasts to themselves (Shehem, Behema,
Hemma, Lahem:) and the World, is in their Heart: and Madness also; while we
Live, and After That, we Dye.

But O Judah! He has set an Harvest for thee. When I return, the Captivity of
my People, Hos. 6. 11. And, at the Valley of Iehosaphat (or Beraca) Put in the
Sickle; For, the Harvest is Ripe: get you down (and Hither, Cause, Thy Mighty
Ones to come:) For, the Wine Press is Full; and the Fats Overflow: For, Their
Wickedness is Great.

And so the Great Doom, and Feast of Tabernacles, in Zech. To which, our
Savior may allude, in the Last, and Great, Day of Tabernacles: and the Mighty
Ones, or Angels, to come down At That Day; in Joel, and Zech. For They must
Ascend first, and Then Descend, on the Son of Man.

As the Great Angel, in the 14th of the Revelation: or the Son of Man. Who bid
them, Let the Tares alone, with the Wheat: Till the Angel Reapers Came, at the
Harvest: or End of the World.

And as This Harvest, and Vintage, began with the Jews, and House of God (As in
the Prophets, Gospels, and Epistles:) So it is All, measured, From That City:
Sacked, and Pressed; As Grapes, in a Winepress: As in diverse places. So, that our
Savior, makes the Ruin, of that City, a Shadow, of the Great Judgment

And the Blood (As Moses Song, The Blood of Grapes) came up, to the Bridles of
the Horses: Tredding it (as, in the 2 d Woe:) and it flowed out, From the City
(Trod and Pressed) 1600 Furlongs.

And if Cubits, be proper for Days; Then, Furlongs, are proper, for Years. And
so, we may find them, in Many Places: and Cities Built, and Sacked, or Changed,
at a signal Number of Furlongs (or Miles) in their own Buildings: or Distance,
to some others: so, or so, Related to them. As the Olbian Tables, and
Characters.

And though, the Furlong, be with some, 400 Cubits (as before:) and a year,
have Fewer Days: yet They could not take a Round Number (as they call it)
Nearer; To Their Greatest year: which had, a full Month, of 30 Days, beyond the
Common year. As often, They were forced to allow.

When either, Floods, or Frost, did hinder, coming To the Passover: which God
dispensed, in Case of Sickness, and of Journey. Or, the Vernal Equinox, were
After That, which should be, the Passover. Or, their Barley, were not Ripe
enough; For Heaving up, the First Fruit Omer.

Then, the Jewish year, had near 400 Days. And so, the word, for 2 years space,
is, 800. If m, be only 40, in Shenothaim.

And the Attick Fuclong, had not so many Feet, as the Roman, by 24, or 25: and
was no more, then One did run, in a Breath: or 10 seconds. As we must Breath,
about 360 times, in an Hour: As Days in a year.

And the Ancients, measured a Degree, by 666 Furlongs.

The Revelation, was at Patmos; a Greek Island. Somewhat before 100, of Christ:
or 60, from His Passion: or 30, from the City Sack. And we may remember, All
these years, by That, of the Good Ground, bearing 30, 60, or 100.

And our Savior hints, somewhat in Furlongs. When They had Rowed 30 Furlongs
(as Himself, had lived, 30 years:) They fell, into a very Great Storm: which
might denote the City Storm and Sinking, in the War: that Rose, 30 years, After
Him: Who Walked, on the Sea, and Calmed the Storm. Although, They thought him,
an Evil Spirit. As we use to do, in All, of other Judgments, or Practice, from
us.

And his First Revelation, of himself, was at Emaus: when they had walked, 60
Furlongs. As the Revelation, was 60 years; After his Death: And the Roman War,
full 60 years, After his Birth. And 60 more, To Adrian, Rasing the City; about
130 years; or 1600 months, as Furlongs.

The New Jerusalem, is 12000 Furlongs. And, If they be Months, it is but 1000
years: as Chapter 20. But if Years: and the Circuit be 12000: Then Every side,
of the Square, is 3000. As the years, from Shiloh, To these Times, or very near
us. As we saw, at the Tabernacles 3000 Cubits. And if the Temple Cubits, be
Days: 30, by 30, make 3600: and by 20, 72000: or 6000 years. and the very
Porch, of 10, by 20, 200; by 120, 24000; of which before.

We saw, how Ninive, did Sack Samaria: and Babylon, Jerusalem: at 666. And They
were Distant, from them, 666 miles: and the Least of them, 444 Furlongs, about.
As the Biggest, 480.

And Judah, came, From Them, about 480, years, After the Temple Built, at 480
years from Egypt. Which is also, distant, by 240: and some parts, 480 miles. As
Haran was 430. And Abraham, coming Thence, was told, of 430 years. As Memphis
was, From the North of Canaan: but from Old Babylon, 960: As years, From Egypt,
to their coming from Babylon.

And Babylon, was 480 miles, from Damascus: As it came to be, 480 Furlongs, or
60 Miles, about. As one of its Castles, 60 Furlongs: and its Golden Image, 60
Cubits: And its River, had a Wall of 360 Furlongs. And Cyrus took it (as Jeremy
spoke) by 360 Sluices; as Days in a year.

Which was also, 240 year, of Iphitus Olympicks: or of Rome, 216: or of
Nabonassar, 210. As His Tygris, was 210 Furlongs, from Cyrus Susan. Which was
also, much about 210 Furlongs, in Circuit. As Cyrus Took Babylon, 210 years
before the Persians End, in Alexander Taking Babylon: 210 years, After Cyrus.
As Cyrus, 210, After Nabonassar: and 10 years, before his Son, began The New
Babylon, in Egypt: or was There: with his Sister Meroe: for Sheba.

Daniel speaks, of Cyrus 3 d year: and Xenophen, of 7, or 8, years Journeys:
and Ptolomies Canon, of 9 years, in Babylon. The Head of All the Monarchs.
Nimrod; Nabonassar: Nebuchadnezzer: Nabonidus; Darius the Med^; and Cyrus the
Persian: Darius Histasp: Alexander: Seleucus. All. Till Rome also, lost it self
(as Alexander did) by Gaining Babylon; or Parts about it. As Thera (in Justine)
akin to Abraham.

And Cyrus Took Babylon, about 1666 years, After its first Building: at 100
years, After the Flood. And Peleg was born 101: and His Name, is Scattering, as
at Babel.

And to look Westward. Creete is about 1600 Furlongs in length; and 666 miles,
from Jerusalem, Taken by Pompey: As That, by Metellus, 66 years, before our
Savior.

Eubaea, So many Furlongs Round, as Days in a Year. And Athens, Twice so many,
miles, from Jerusalem. Or from Canaan, about 666.

Rome was Built, as many years, After the First Olympiad, As there be Hours, in
a Day: and From the Flood, as many years, as Hours, from Pentecost, To the
Doom, of Both Temples. A little before Hoseahs Captivity: about 1666, from the
Birth of Sem. As about so many Miles, from the Tents of Sem: or 1600, from
Jerusalem.

And the Blood ran out, from the City, 1600 Furlongs. And there was, no place,
of Canaan, so far, from Jerusalem; or Any of Ezypt, much nearer.

But if it be, for years: from the First Christian Persecution, and the Roman
War, at 65: 1600 years, are fully out, at 1666. As at 1670, from the City
Sacked. Or 1695 from the Revelation. About 95: by All the Ancients, but
Epiphanius: who places it sooner. As before Thyatyra swallowed by Earthquake.
But it was soon Rebuilt again: As by the Subscriptions of Diverse Councels:
before Strabo and Ptolomy mention it, with All the Rest.

But the Revelation hints an Hour of Darkness, and Temptation, which must come,
and Try the World, immediately before the New Jerusalem: of Those, that
Conquer, in That Last and Great assault.

As when the Foul Spirit, was to be Cast out (at our Saviors coming Down) It
Tore the Child, most Sore; and left him As Dead.

This Last, and Great, Hour of Temptation, just before the New Jerusalem (As
Chap. 3. 10, 11, 12:) may be That, which afterward, is called The Slaying of
the Witnesses. Or Tearing, and Leaving, Them, As Dead. And some, long since,
described it, a Civil Death: rather then Natural. Or so, at least, That they
be not Buried, If Dead: but their Carkases, lie in the Streets of the City.

As the Hasidim (or Puritans) the very word, of the Psalm: cited in that famous
account of the Asideans, slain against the Public Faith: that All the People
said, There is no Truth, or Righteousness, in These; that have broken, the
Covenant, and Oath; themselves made, o^ Took. As both Books of the Machabes,
and Josephus: of Nicanors Time: at Purim: 333 days, from the Passover. As Ester
is in Heb, near 666.

Which might also, be shadowed, in the P Lambs: Tied up, 3 Days and an Half
(from the 10th, To the midst of the 14th;) And then, slain, 3 Hours and Half,
before the Paschal Supper: and 3 Days, before the Lambs, of the Congregation,
were Raised, or Heaved up, with the First Fruit Omer, on the 3 d Day. As Christ
was raised, on the 3 d Day.

And so, about the 7th Month also; Before the Great Feast of Tabernacles: The
Jews assert, a General Judgment on the Dead, of the year before. And, As the
Paschal Lambs, were Tied up, in the first month; So was Israel, in the 7th; To
a Solemn Fast, and Expiation (by Blood also:) Upon the 10th of the 7th. And
although, it were commanded, but for One Day: Yet They used Fasting much, for 3
or 4, Days together: as Preparation, To the Feast of Tabernacles.

But, They were not slain (as the P Lambs: and Christians, of the Primitive
Times:) but only, Lay, in Sackcloath, and Ashes. (As Rev 11th) Retired, or
Hidden, and Useless, To the World: but in Fasting and Praying: or the Last Act,
of Their Prophecy.

Which was hinted before, in the Seed Royal, slain by Athaliah: with Naboth,
and his Sons, in Jezerel (which is Prophets, or Prophesy, in the Seed of God)
By Jezabel: To which, the Revelation does allude.

But They shall Rise again: As we saw before, in Joash (or the Man Despairing:)
Raised, in the year of Release: As an Emblem, of some Greater Thing to follow.
Though he Then also, Repaired the House of God: but slew Zechariah, between the
Porch and Altar. As if Cutting off, the Lords Remembrance; Hinted, All things
New: and Forgetting Old; and all that is past: in Esaias, with the Revelation.

The First Witnesses, were Lambs, at Beershebah: the next, at Mispa, and
Gilead, the Stones of Witness: For Jacob, and his 2 Wives: as Emblems, of the 2
Churches; of Jews, and Gentiles. As David's 2 Wives; led Captive from Ziglag;
and detained, 3 days; and Then recovered. As the 2 Spies, of Jericho, were
Hidden, for 3 days: and Esters Fast, of 3 Days.

Which was also, the Time of Isaaks being Dead, in his Fathers eyes: and of
Egyptian Darkness: and of Preparation, for the Law: and again, for Entering
Canaan, and spying Jericho.

And for years also. Elijah prayed, till it rained not, for 3 years and Half:
Samariahs Seige, was 3 full years: and the Jewish Wars, 3 years and Half. The
Famine for Saul, was 3 years: and David's Pestilence, 3 days: As of Jonas in the
Whale: And of Jesus in the Grave: As Lazarus, 3 days, and part of the 4th.

And Paul had 3 days Darkness, at Damascus: and we read, of the 3 d day of his
Storm: Which ended not, Till the 14th Day. As the 14th Day, for Passover: and
14th year, in Genesis 14. And the Crises of Jerusalem, in the 14th of Amaziah; the
14th of Hezekiah. And Paul went up to Jerusalem, in the 14th year. And the 14th
Hour of the Day, brought up the morning Sacrifice: and 14th from the Morn,
Evening Sacrifice.

Which may be called, the Daily Witnesses. At the Tabernacle of Witness: the
Ark of the Testimony: and Altar of Witness: As in Iosuab: Judges: Ps. Unto which
the Tribes of the Lord go up: unto the Testimony of Israel. And the
Congregation, has an Hebrew Name, akin to Witness. And God calls them His
Witnesses: in diverse places: as in Esaias 43. and 44. As the Cloud of Witnesses,
in Hebrews 12.

Yet some, special Persons, are Especial Witnesses, in several Ages. As Moses
and Aaron: Caleb and Josuah: Barak and Deborah (Lightning and Thunder:) Elijah
and Elisha: Zorobabel and Joshuah: Nehemiah and Ezra: the Helper, and the Lords
Comforter: as Types of Jesus, and the Comforter. As From Jesus Christ, the
Faithful Witness: and again, Who is the Amen, the Faithful, and True Witness.
As in Esaias, You are my Witnesses: and He, whom I have Chosen.

And the Witnesses, in Revelation times are Diverse. As he saw, the Souls of
them beheaded, for the Witness of Jesus. And the Angel says, I am thy fellow
Servant, and of the Prophets, who have the Witness of Jesus. And again, The
Witness of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy: and All that had That Spirit, are
Witnesses. Yet in comparison, of others, They are very Few: and therefore,
called Two. As the Lowest Number, which the Law required, for Witness. And,
there may be Two, more especial, in the Latter Times also.

As the Outer Court, of the Tabernacle, had but Two only, Visible: and yet a
third Included. The Spirit, in the Blood (at the Altar:) and Water, in the
Laver: as the Pillar in the Cloud. And the 2 daily Witnesses, in the Morning
and Evening Sacrifice. As, the Minha with Perfume, at the Altar of Incense.
With the Loaves of Shewbread; and the Lamps; As Spirits, before the Throne: or
the Ark, and Mercy Seat, with the two Cherubins of Glory.

Like our two eyes, in our Face; and 2 ears, in our Head; and the Spirit,
within the Wheels. As in our Heart: with 2 Auricles: as 2 Loabs, of the Lungs.
and Two, yet Lower, called Testes, or somewhat of Witness, in diverse Languages
As putting the Hand, under the Thigh in solemn Witnessing.

As the Great World also, has its several Pairs; of Witnesses; in Earth and
Water; Fire and Air: and yet much Higher and Brighter; as the Eyes of Heaven:
called also the Faithful Witnesses (in the Ps.) the Sun and the Moon.

Which were, as Dead, or Hidden: Asleep in their Causes (as the Schools
speak:) for 3 days and an Half. Or Till the Morning, of the 4th Day of
Creation: when they first appeared. And at Every New Creation: or at bringing
up, a New Heaven, and a New Earth: The Witnesses, of That Generation, may lie
hid, and be as Dead: For 3 Days and an Half. Till a voice come from Heaven,
saying, Come up Hither. As at first, Let there be Lights, in Heaven: and it was
so.

Darkness, As the First Beast, or Dragon. Draco: Dark: and Tenebrae, the
Dragon of the Evening, in Hebrew: where also Eeve, or Eeph, is Darkness; and a
Beast, or Serpent, as in english, Evet. and the Jews tell us, that Adams Wife
was Lilis, First, or Night: and Then, Eeve: which is also Night; as in english
Eeve, and Evening. Day and Night, being as Man and Woman: Husband and Wife. As
the Womb of the Morning, in the Bible.

This Dragon, fights with the Two Faithful Witnesses; the Sun and Moon. Which
are weekly Hidden, 3 days, and half: or 7 nights in a week (as at first, 3
days and half together.) And when These Witnesses meet, with the Crossing
Serpent, in Heaven (or the Ecliptic; with its Nodes of Dragons Head, and
Dragons Tail) They be Eclipsed: which may hold 3 Hours and Half (as at the
Passion:) And the Moons monthly Hidings, are about 3 days and half (as
Emblems, of the Worlds, and Churches Changes:) and her Absence From the Sun,
and shinings, are about 3 weeks and Half.

And, for 666, in This Beasts Fighting, with Those Witnesses; we found, 6
hours, or Great Watches, Turning the Tides, as Sun and Moon, at the Cardinal
Points: and making up 666: and its lower Root, 25; the First hour, that Ever,
Turned, Light into Darkness.

And as many, make the Moons Apogeum, 65, or 66, of the Earths Rad^i: So do
some, make the Suns Radius, 65 times, Greater then the Earths: or his Apogeum,
Twice 666: as we saw before.

And all, made, his daily Motion, about a Degree; and some made, That, about
666 Furlongs: as Ricciolus from Posidonius in Cleomedes. Where also, the Moons
Periodick Month, is 27 days and half. Which in others, is, 27. but in Martiaw
Cap. 27 days, and 16 hours: but 2 less, then 666: which is also, very near the
Month for Anomaly, and Latitude: As, often, For Appearance; Though Uncertain.

And the Suns Monthly Rotation (now agreed) is from 26 days (as the Caroline
Tables) To 29 and half: and the mean is 27. Which is just 666 hours. As
Apelles, or Scheinar, and Galileus. When they found, One of the Semicircles, to
be 13 days, and 20 hours, and an half, Which doubled, makes 27 days, and 17
hours: but One less, then 666.

12 such Months, are 333 days: and 24, 666: and 666 Moons, about 54 years: As
54 Sections, of the Law, in 669 Little Ones.

And that the 7 Churches also, may shadow out Successive Times (as the 7 days
of the week: and 7 months of the Jewish year: and 7 years To Release:) I do the
rather believe, From the Glan^es, on Successive Times. As Paradise, and Tree of
Life, in the first Church: the Flood, or Egyptian Death, in the 2 d. The White
Stone and Manna, from Egypt, in the 3 d. And Breaking the 7 Nations by J^suah:
To the Times of Elijah, slaying the Prophets of Baal and Jesabel (the Type of
the Great Whore) in the 4th, and to the Coming of Christ, in the 5th, and the
New Jerusalem, in the 6 t, and General Judgment, in the very Name of Laodicea.
With All things New again, as the 3 last Chap. of that Blessed Revelation:
which does Blessits Readers, From our Blessed Jesus: who received it, to Give:
Or that he might show it, To his Servants.

Or beginning at Christ; or at That Revelation to John. The name of Ephesus,
may hint Declining Times, of the Primitive Church: As at Adams Fall, in
Paradise, There Named.

Smyrna, may signify Beaten Myrrh: As in the Christian Persecutions, and
Antichristian Jesabel: Till the Morning Star arise, before the Sun of
Righteousness: shadowed in Elijah, at Jesabel: and so to the coming of Christ,
and the New Jerusalem.

The Poets say, the Great Io, wandering came to Ioppa (built before the Flood:
in Mela, with Solinus:) Thence to Egypt: and there had a Son, from whom came
Belus, Father to Egyptus and Danaus, with Agenor. Who, returning to Joppa,
begat Cadmus, Phoenix, and Europ^; that played with a white Bull, Till he swam
away, with her, to Creet: and There, she had Minos, and other Judges in Hell.
From whom, they bring K. Erithrus and the Lycians. As Cilicians, from Cilix: an
other Brother to Cadmus.

Who being sent, to seek his Sister; came so near as Greece; and there was bid
to build a City; Where he saw, a Beast, Lie down: and Thence Baeotia; with
Thebes, in Greece, and Egypt also: from Thebeth, Noah's Ark, and Beasts.

And though he killed the Serpent, he became a Serpent, with his Wife: and
Children, very Miserable. One, being Mother to Acteon: Turned into a Stag; and
Torn, by his own Dogs, for seeing Diana Bathing. Two others, destroying
themselves, and Children. The 4th Burnt by Jupiter; Thundering, as with Juno:
But catching his Bacchus, from her, and Hiding him, in the Hollow of his Thigh.

Their Brother wanders up and down; till at length, One of his Ravisheth a
Child of Pelops; who had maintained him: But Then, Prayed, for Vengeance; Till
Oedipus, kills his own Father; and marries his own Mother, knowing neither:
Till some secret Characters discover it. And then, for shame and grief, They
hide a while, till all the Family destroy themselves, or one another.

But a Child comes out, at length, called Tisamenus: Or Revenged. And His, are
glad to leave the Country; and to wander, To an Island; That had Risen out of
the Sea, and was called Thera, The Beast. And thence, came Battus (As Batten,
and Batein, to Play the Beast) with His Cyrenians; in the Acts. And our Savior
bids us, not Battologise, as Battus did.

This may be more, than Hivites (that is Serpents) flying from Joshua: Though
the Times agree (with the Poets Penulus; and other Remains, of Hebrew Pillars:
or some flying from Canaan:) And their Brother Phoenix, is the Great Man, in
Phaenicia. Father, to another Belus (whence Sicheus, Pigmaleon, and the Famous
Dido:) As perhaps also, to the Red Sea: or Phaeniciax: that is Red: and a kin
to Erythr^^, Phin^us and Cepheus: with his Daughter; Saved from the Dragon by
Perseus. With Wings also; For flying, from These Dragons, or Serpents: and a
Flood, from the Dragons Mouth,

And the Phaenix (Rising out of her Ashes and Odors) may be an emblem of Him,
and Them, that were, by Death, to Conquer Death, and live, beyond the Phaenix.
Which yet lives 660, or 666 years. The Jews give it 1000: as the only bird
that did not taste the Forbidden Fruit: As they speak on that of Job, I shall
dye in my Nest, as the Phaenix. In Herodotus, or others; though the Romans knew
it not, till after Christ: or 66 of Augustus: 666 from Josiah (1666 from the
Flood: or 5 times 666 from Creation) Slain by a King of Egypt, or Sodom, where
our Lord was slain.

When Jacob cursed Levies Cruelty, He said, Let not my Soul be in their Secret,
or in Sodam, which in Hebrew is just 666. And Cheleem (that makes them Men: the
Number of a Man) 665. And God does much forbid Chelaim: their Mixing Seeds. As
they are caught in Chelaim; which some translate, the Stocks, in Isa. 42. And
Chelaim is Michael, Turned almost Backward.

Myster or Mystery, an Hebrew word; As Sithrah, and Hester, Hidden: Making 666:
As Thorus or Taurus, in Hebrew 666: and so is Satur 666, Secret, or Full, and
ready to vomit. As he speaks; at his Making All things New (In Laodicea:) As
at drinking, on the Cross. It is finished.

Which was from Egypt, as many years, as there were Hours in the year, before
Pentecost; or its Prep. and from the first Pentecost, in Canaan, as many years,
as That was after Enoch.

And as Moses Face shining, might represent our Saviors shining (with Moses)
in the Transfig. So might His Long stay in the Mount, denote, ours Saviors
stay, in Heaven: while the Chief Levite (or False Prophet) makes a Golden Calf,
or Image of the Beast: as Psalm 106. with Revelat. ^3.

And Moses Last Coming from the Mount, to make the Tabernacle; at the Feast of
Tabernacles; might denote our Saviors Last coming, to the Feast of
Tabernacles, yet to come.

And as 40 days Rain in the Flood, did show us, so many years, between the
first Ark, and the 2 d at Shilch; As there be Hours, in 40 days: So there
were, as many years, between the 2 d Ark, and 2 d Temple, As Hours, in Moses 40
Days: 960.

And Moses, Breaking the first Tables at his first 40 days, might note, their
Breaking of the Law; and their City Broken by the Caldees, in the same month,
and season, when he brake the Tables. And the Renewing of Those, by God, might
shadow, both, Their Renewall, by Joshua, Zorobbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah: And
the Law renewed, and written in our Hearts (As put in the Ark, and Mercy-Seat)
by our Savior: and His Making All things New: As at the Tabernacles, in the
Revelation.

And the Feast of Tabernacles, was After the Day of Pentecost (or giving the
Law to Moses;) 130 Days: or 3120 Hours: As there are 3120 years, from Moses,
To 1666. which is, from Christ, As many years, as from Creation, to the Church
Restored, After the Flood.

As If, His saying, The Days of the Son of Man, shall be as the Days of Noah;
did intimate as many years (from his speaking That, To his Coming There
described;) As there were Years, to Noah's Flood.

Which was, at the first Hour, of the 70th Day, of the World: Or at 1656 years:
As 1656 Hours, come to the 70th Day: ending at 1680 Hours.

And then He should come again, before 1680: or at most, about 1690. which is
from His speaking, As many years, as the Flood was from Creation.

And his saying, No man knew the Day and Hour, of the End of the World; may
teach us to measure Times, by Days and Hours, also. Which may be now better
known, since the Revelation.

And although, there may be Hints, of his Coming, To the Great Feast of
Tabernacles (As he came, and showed himself, In the Last, and Great Day of
Tabernacles, John 7.) yet i^ (...) be said, that No man knows the End of the
World, with its Day or Hour.

For though there must be a New Heaven, and a New Earth: yet All the Works of
God, and in special, The Earth* shall abide for ever* But the Meek shall
inherit the Earth: and Righteousness shall dwell in it, Righteousness and Peace.

Wait on the Lord, and he shall exalt thee, To inherit the Earth. And When the
Wicked are cut off, Thou shall see it. So that a man shall say, Verily there is
a Reward for the Righteous: Verily there is a God, that Judges in the Earth.

FINIS.

