THE DIGNITY OF KINGSHIP ASSERTED: In Answer to Mr. Milton's Ready and Easy
way to establish a Free COMMONWEALTH.

Proving that KINGSHIP is both in it self, and in reference to these Nations,
fa^^e the most Excellent Government, and the returning to our former Loyalty,
or Obedience thereto is the only way under God to restore and settle these
three once flourishing, now languishing, broken, and almost ruined Nations.

By G. S. a Lover of Loyalty.

Humbly Dedicated, and Presented to his most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the
Second, of England; Scotland, France and Ireland, True Hereditary. KING.

London, Printed by E. C. for H. Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, and for W. Palmer at the Palm Tree over against Fetter-late end
in Fleetstreet, 1660.

To the most Illustrious for Virtue, Constancy in Religion, and Heroic
Patience, under the most sharp Trials, and extraordinary Afflictions, wherein
(in imitation of his truly Magnanimous Royal Father) he has appeared more
then Conqueror, To the Glory of God, Honor of Religon, admiration of
Strangers, joy of Friends, confusion of Enemies, silencing of Scandals, and the
Heart-reviving refreshment of his truly Loyal, and for his long p^st, and
present Afflictions, cordially Afflicted SUBJECTS, CHARLES the Good, Hereditary
KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.
Most Gracious Prince,
THat I so mean and unworthy a Subject, (yet a Cordial welwisher to your Royal
Majesty, and who is one, among many thousands of your faithful Subjects, who
daily pray for, and constantly hope, and expect to see your restitution) should
address my self thus to Majesty, I neither know well to apologize for, nor yet
to omit. It is not, most Illustrious Sovereign, that I either account my self a
competent Champion, to manage your most just, and Princely quarrel, nor yet
that I think your cause (in it self considered) to need any defense, much less
so weak as mine; (for whom God protects, he certainly needs none of man's
Patronage) nor that I account the Authors scurrilous impertinencies (so far as
immediately they concern your Sacred Majesty) worth the Answer, nor is it an
itch or ambition of appearing in public, that has ivited me to this Reply,
least of all, is it any esteem of, or conceit of worth in my self, that could
make me presume to present this inconsiderable mite of my Service to your
Princely view, or that I should dare to imagine your Majesty's present
Afflictions, so to concern your esteem and Royal worth, as that any of your
Subjects might presume more now upon these exercising Trials of God upon your
Majesty, then if you were seated upon your Hereditarily due, and justly
deserved Throne, in magnificent Splendour. God forbid that my Breast should
Harbor such an unbecomming thought to Majesty, yours especially, which by your
Afflictions, has been really made, and apparently is seen more glorious, as
Gold by the fire is purified, or a precious Diamond upon the wheel is
polished, and made sparklingly resplendent. Since then, Royal Sir, It has
been none of the mentioned Considerations, give me leave with your Pardon to
show your Majesty the true Cause, First of this undertaking, and next of this
boldness of Address, in it self a Presumption not to be pleaded for, but only
through your Princely goodness pardonable. How your Majesty's Royal Father
was dealt with all is Englands ignominy, your Subjects infamy, Religions
Scandal, and the wonder, amazement, and astonishment of Europe, and the Actors
eternal reproach among all Naions, the Abettors Confusion, the punishment of
all our sins, and the inlet of a flood of miseries upon us ever since. This
detestable, execrable Murder, committed by the worst of Parricides,
accompanied, with the diselaiming of your whole Royal stock, dishinheriting
your Majesty's self, and the rest of the Royal Branches, driving you and them
into Exile, with endeavoring to expunge, and obliterate, your never to be
forgotten just Title, tearing up, and pulling down the Pillars of Majesty, the
Nobles; garbling, and suspending from place of Power, all of the Commons House,
that had any thing of Honesty, or relenting of spirit toward the injured Father
of three Nations, and his Royal Posterity, Acts horrible to be imagined, and
yet with high hand most Villanously, Perfideously, and Perjuriously,
prepetrated, by Monsters of mankind, yet blasphemously dishonourers of God, in
making use of his name, and usurping the Title of Saints, in these never before
paralleled, nor ever sufficiently to be lamented, and abhorred Villainies, this
Murder I say, and these Villainies were defended, justyfied, nay extolled, and
commended, by one Mr. John Milton, in answer to the most learned Salmasius, who
declaimed against the same, with most Solid Arguments; and Patheticall
Expressions; in which answer he did so bespatter the white Robes of your Royal
Fathers spotless life, (humane infirmities excepted) with the dirty filth of
his satyricall pen, that to the vulgar, and those who read his book with
prejudice, he represented him, a most debauched vicious man, (I tremble Royal
Sir to write it,) an irrelegious hater, and persecutor of Religion, and
Religious men, an ambitious inslaver of the Nation, a bloody Tyrant, and an
inplacable Enemy to all his good Subjects, and thereupon calls that execrable,
and detestable horrible Murder a just execution, and commends it as an Heroic
Action, and in a word, whatever was done in prosecution of their malice toward
your Royal Progenitor, and his Issue, or Relations, or Friends, and asistants,
he calls restoring the Nation to its Liberty. Yea to make your illustrious
Father more odious in their eyes, where he by any means could fix his scandals
he would not spare that incomparable piece of his writing, (his (...)) but in a
scurrilous reply thereto, which he entitled ((...)) he would not spare his
devout Prayers (which no doubt the Lord has heard, and will bear) in all which
he expressed, as his inveterate, and causeless malice, so a great deal of
wicked desperate wit and learning, most unworthily misbestowed, abused, and
misapplyed, to the reviling of his Prince, Gods vicegerent^on Earth, and the
speaking ill of the Ruler of the People. Now although your Majesty nor your
Royal Father, neither of you need vindication, (much less that elaborate work
of his) nor does any thing he has written in Aspersion of his Sovereign,
deserve Answer, (absolutely considered) yet forasmuch as he has in both showed
dangerous wit and wicked Learning, which together with Elegance in expression
is always, (in some measure at least) persuasive with some, and because in
these last and worst days, those dangerous times are come, in which many
account Treason to be Saintship and the madness of People like the inundation
of waters, has for many years overflowed all the bounds of both duty, and
obedience to Superiors, and Subjection with Loyalty to their Sovereigns, but
especially because in these your Kingdoms, by due title, and birthright,
Allegiance conscientiously adhered to, is reputed malignity; and treachery
only, and rebellion has for many years been the badge of a confiding man, or a
modern Saint, the poison of such books in short time creepes far, and infects
many, who perhaps before reading of them were conscientiously Loyal, insomuch
that I account it no Soloecism to affirm, that dangerous, villainous wits
misapplyed, have done more mischief with their Pens, then the Soldier with his
weapons, to your Majesty's cause, for by such Books and pamphlets the
inconsiderate Soldier, that before was but your mercenary Enemy, is now
persuaded, that in reviling your sacred Person, casting off your Authority, and
resisting your restoration, he both serves and pleases God, on which
Considerations dread Sovereign, I often wished, with sighs, that still some able
pen would undertake to confute such tractates, which together with malice to
your Cause and interest, manifested dexterity of wit in glozing their
Arguments, and traducing your sacred Person, royal stock and family, but alas,
to my grief, I found all men afraid and deserting, or at least forbearing with
their Pen to defend that Majesty, which God has for so many years so
graciously defended by his providence, by which means your Enemies grow
numerous, strong, and confident, being so backed, and abetted, by such who make
it their Work to fill men's ears with surmises, and false Rumors concerning your
Majesty's Person, and inclination, as taking for granted your Royal Father was
indeed such as he was represented by these defamers and Scandalizers of not
only most innocent, but most piously excellent Majesty, and upon this score
they have kept out your Majesty thus long, until according to what the Apostle
determinately concludes of such persons as have been your excluders, These
evil men and seducers have so daily grown worse and worse, and their impiety,
and villainy, not to your Majesty's Royal person only, and Relations, but to
the whole Nation in general, and at length the City of London in particular,
is made so apparent to all men, that now many of your Majesty's Subjects, begin
to be undeceived by the unmasking of your Enemies, who of late with the Devil
have apparently showed their Cloven Foot, so that your Restoration is
generally wished, and hoped for, and expected of all, but such whose Villainies
have made them every way so obnoxious, that they stand in fear of all Lawful
Authority, and therefore fear the return of your Majesty, as inconsistent with
their safety; which makes them leave no stone unturned to hinder (if possible)
this so great expected happiness to these sadly languishing, yea even almost
ruined Nations, whose Cure under God lies so in your Majesty's Restitution,
that scarce any but sees it evidently. Yet these Juglers of State, use their
utmost endeavor to cast a Mist before the people, and by Sophistry would
persuade them, That that is dangerous for them, which must be under God their
only Cure, and sole Remedy, for these (otherwise fatal) Distractions. Among
many of whom, Mr. Milton comes on the Stage in post have, and in this juncture
of time, that he may (if possible) overthrow the Hopes of all Good men,
endeavors (what he can) to divert those that at present sit at Helm, and by
fair pretenses, and Sophisticate Arguments, would easily delude an
inconsiderate Reader into a belief, First, That the Government of a Republique
is in it self, incomparably to be preferred before Kingship, whether we respect
men as men, or as Christians. But Secondly, as the Case stands with us, he
would strike us into a fear, namely, That to readmit your Majesty, is unsafe,
and hazardable, at the best, and may prove dangerous and ruinous to all:
Conclusions which a Loyal Breast would at first hearing, both abhor and
tremble at: Yet (as he with his fallacious pretenses seems to varnish them
over) not hardly to be distilled into such especially, who in these times of
Antimonarchicall Principles, have been before poisoned with prejudice against
your Majesty's Royal Father, who lost his Life in defense of that, which
Sophisticate Scriblers have since persuaded the deluded Vulgar, was attained by
his Death, namely Liberty, the name and pretense of which (but real slavery)
has been pursued with vast Expense both of Blood and Treasure, so undiscerning
are the Vulgar. No marvel then, if they be easily deluded by specious
fallacies, instead of Solid Arguments, betwixt which they are not able to
discern; which I taking notice of, and meeting with this forementioned Pamphlet
of Mr. Miltons, and upon perusal of it, finding it dangerously insnaring, the
fallacy of the Arguments being so cunningly hidden, as not to be discerned by
any, nor every Eye; observing also, the Language to be smooth and tempting, the
Expressions pathetical, and apt to move the Affections, but withal the drift
of it to be of desperate consequence, namely to undo (if possible) all our
hopes, to continue our misery, still upon us, nay to settle and fix it
irreparably, I thought it my duty (in these respects) to undertake this
professed Republican Champion, and to discover his fallacies, by which he
labors at unawares to ensnare (if it may be done) such who are otherwise
Judicious: And this I judged my duty more especially, because it was received
by many with Applause, and stumbled several whom it could not seduce, if not
to reject, yet to suspect and be jealous of Monarchy, or at least to lay aside
your Majesty, as an unsafe person, and set up another. This (most Judicious
Prince) was the true Inducement of me to this Undertaking, especially because I
saw none of a more dexterous Wit, to save me the labor, by appearing in your
Majesty's (accidentally necessary, but absolutely most just) Vindication, which
though the Accomplishment of your Princely merits need not in the least, yet
your Subjects want it, lest by the poison of the Times they be infected, and
for the Recovery of such, who are stumbled as to their Resolutions,
notwithstanding their Affections may be Loyally Cordial: To which end if any
Pains of mine may conduce, though but a little, I shall have sufficient reward
in the satisfaction that will thence redound to my spirit. In addressing to
your Majesty this inconsiderable Labor, Pardon Dread Sovereign my presumption,
since my real Intentions herein were not to expect your acceptance of it, but
to beg humbly your Royal Pardon for this boldness, the first being far beyond
my deserts, and the other genuine to your Natural Princely Disposition. My
chief fear is, (most Gracious Prince) lest I deservedly reap your Majesty's
disfavour, for attempting a thing, the due performance whereof, (considering
the ability of the Author to whom this is returned in Reply) might call for a
far more ready wit, and solid judgment then I can without folly ever hope
for; however, what is done, I can seriously profess in doing of it, my most
unfeigned Desire to have only been to serve your Majesty's most just Interest,
and as far as in me lies, to undeceive as many as I can of your Subjects, who
by such injurious, and most unworthy Endeavors, to darken your Royal Luster
may have been staggered, either in their cordial Affections, or unsettled in
their Constant Resolutions toward you; for whose prosperity, and speedy
Restitution to your Just Hereditary Rights, and long, and happy enjoyment of
the same, has been, is, and shall be (God assisting) the constant Prayer of

Most Illustrious Prince, Your Majesty's most faithful And Loyal Subject, And
humble Orator, G. S.

A Serious and Seasonable WORD TO A Sober People.
BEfore I come to what I intend shall be the subject of this ensuing Discourse,
I think it very necessary to make way for what I shall hereafter say, by
removing in the first place whatever in probability may raise a prejudice
against what I am about to write, that so nothing of exception may lie against
any circumstance, after once the matter of my Discourse is allowed.

First, I question not but my person will be enquired after, and perhaps soon
found out, and known, and it may be wondered at therefore why I do not as well
set down my name, as the two first letters of it: If so, let me crave of thee
(Reader) not to harbor any Prejudice against the subject matter of the
following Treatise therefore, which I did for the end to avoid prejudice
thereby. For I am not ignorant of the ability of Mr. Milton, whom the Rump
(which was well stored with men of pregnant although pernicious Wits) made
choice of, before others, to write their Defense against Salmasius, one of the
greatest Learned men of this Age, both for reality and reputation, who
therefore was Royal prefessor of Philosophy (as I take it, but will not be
positive herein) in the United Provinces, and at his Majesty's (the present
Scotch, and Hereditary English King's) request, undertook the Defense of our
Protoroyall English Martyr, against those of his Subjects who with as much
Treachery as Perjury, and with as much cruel inhumanity as both, murdered him
at his own Gate, in the face of the Sun, and in the presence of that God, and
before many thousands of that people, by whom, and before whom they had sworn
with lifted up hands, that they would with their lives defend his person,
Posterity, and just Power, with many other particulars contained in their Oath,
as may appear by it self, known formerly by the name of The Solemn League and
Covenant, taken by all the Members of both Houses that remained sitting at
Westminster, after such who had left them were withdrawn, and convened at
Oxford: Nor seemed it enough to them to take it themselves, but it was by their
authority tendered, yea strictly imposed, and upon severe penalties enjoined to
thousands of men, all the Kingdom over, besides a Vow and Protestation equally
sacred, and binding to the same things, which in the League and Covenant were
upon Oath promised, all which notwithstanding, this their Liege King was
murdered, being sentenced and executed by those very men that had sworn to
defend him, the Parliament Garbled (as to the Commons House) and dismembered (as
to the House of Lords) by those very men who had sworn to maintain and defend
its Rights and Privileges, and several both Nobles and Commoners lost their
lives, being sentenced by an High Court of Justice, (a stranger, and contrary
to our known Fundamental L^ws) which was chosen and empowered by those who had
Covenanted, and sworn to maintain with their Lives and Fortunes, the
Fundamental Laws of the Land. And yet these men thus acting, call themselves
by the name of Gods people, and the faithful adherers to the work of
Reformation, and the Good Old Cause, although nothing appear in their actions,
but Treachery, Perjury, Murder and Cruelty. Against which Rebellious
hypocrisy, the most learned Salmosius, under the borrowed name of Claudius
Anonymus, inveighed most justly and truly, as well as Oratorically, and no
less deservedly then Eloquently. Which Defense of his, no less judicious then
well-composed, (as for Language) did render the deserevdly abominable Actors,
both notorious and odious among the foraign Nations of Europe, the fame
thereof, by this Learned man's Eloquence (being written in the Latin Tongue)
sounding far and near. To remedy which inconvenience (if it might be done) the
Rump (which now began to stink in the nostrils of every honest and wise man,
this bloody butchery of theirs, vying with, yea out-doing, not only the
actions, but the worst of the Jesuits professed Tenants, and therefore to the
perpetual ignominy of the Reforming Protestants, justifying the fraternity of
Loyola and silencing the others) make choice of Mr. Milton to be their Champion
to answer Salmasius; who, as may be conceived, not vulgarly rewarded, for this
service, undertakes it, with as much Learning and Performance as could be
expected from the most able and acute Scholar living: Concerning whose Answer,
thus much must be confessed, that nothing could be therein desired, which
either a shrewd Wit could prompt, or a fluent elegant style could express: And
indeed to give him his due, in whatever he vomited out against his Majesty
formerly, or now declames against Monarchy in behalf of a Republique, he then
did, and does now want nothing on his side, but Truth, and the honesty of his
Cause, or Subject on which he did, or does discourse. So that it was wisdom,
as I judge it in me, (being to reply to so acute and universally owned a
learned man) to conceal my Name, at least, not to expose it obvious at the
first view, that the prejudice, which the known inequality of the Antagonists,
at the first sight, begets in a Reader, causing many Tractates to be thrown
aside without reading, being taken away, or at least suspended till the
Treatise is read; the thing contended about, may be judged according to the
weight of the Arguments on either side, and not according to the estimate of
the persons, allowing then Mr. Milton all the advantages which an acute wit,
ready invention, much reading, and copious expression will give him, I shall
only trust to the goodness of the Cause, for which I plead, in which had there
been any proportion or equality, between that which he, and that which I
contend for, I should not only doubt, but despair of conquest, of which as the
case falls out, I am assuredly confident.

But expecting to be known, both who, and what I am, I must expect to meet with
such Questions as these: What need you meddle with affairs not only out of, but
so far distant from your Sphere, your profession much differing from Politics,
and the Concernments of Majesty being far above your station? This Objection
(if not satisfied) because it may much prejudice the acceptance of what I
write, in the opinion, and esteem of many Readers, I shall therefore first
speak to it, before I proceed in my intended task, and whether what I shall
say, prove satisfactory or no, I shall leave to the judgment of the Candid
Reader, sl^ghting in the mean while the dissatisfaction of the obstinately, or
rashly censorious.

I answer therefore first, that though the affairs of politic forms are
besides my practice, yet not besides my cognizance; and Majesty though above my
capacity, yet is it not above my concernment, for in the latter I am concerned,
both as a man, and as a Christian, especially if I pretend at all to either
discretion or conscience; as a Christian it is my duty, and I stand engaged to
pray for the peace of the place I live in, and by consequence to study and
endeavor it, else my Prayers are but idle Prayers: Also what I pray for, I am
exhorted to, as a duty, and commanded as a Christian, to observe Gods dealing
in the Return of Prayers, else my praying is but mockery; I am engaged then
(though I yet see nothing but war and confusion) to be instant, and urgent with
God for peace and settlement, and consequently I am bound to take notice, how
far my prayers are answered, that I may be thankful, how far they are
denied, that I may find the cause, and be humbled for it, and as much as in me
lies help and remedy it. This also discreet policy will teach me, to endeavor,
and hope, and pray for the peace of that place in which I intend, (with Gods
help) to settle my self and my Posterity; of which if there be no hopes, it is
but indiscretion at best, if not madness there to settle. Let no man therefore
blame me for enquiring after the state of affairs, that I may see the cause of
our present unsettlement and confusion, and so far as advice will go, to apply
(if it lies in me) a Remedy. If the Cause be (as most certainly it is) the want
of a true and proper Government, and Governors, let us enquire how far the
defect extends, and every man in his Calling, those who are called thereto, by
action, others (as far as God has given wisdom) by counsel, do what we can
to supply that defect, and help that want.

Add to this, that we are to pray for Kings, to obey, and honor the King, and
that by divine command, and if so, then no man can blame me, if I enquire into
the Case, if or no I have by Divine Right, a King to pray for, to honor, and
to obey, and whether or no active, or barely passive obedience, be due from,
and required of me as a Christian, to those, who in exclusion of him, have
exercised the Power of the Nation in which I live for these several years. But
concerning this Subject I shall have occasion to enlarge, before the end of
this Discourse, it may suffice here, what I have more briefly touched only for
the anticipating of such an Objection which may be made: What matters of this
nature concern me, and which if unsatisfied, might prejudice many Readers, and
preingage their spirits against what I shall hereafter write.

Hoping then that I have impartial Readers now to deal withal, who casting off
all respects of Persons, (either comparing one with another, and taking for
granted, that one in regard of his eminent abilities, and learning, and
judgment, has the surer, safer, and better side, or accounting the Subject of
this Enquiry aliene from my employment, and so condemning the discourse,
without perusal of the same) I shall come soberly and modestly to take a view
of Mr. Miltons ready and easy way to establish a Free Commonwealth, etc. Which
I shall show not only to be the farthest way about, but an improbable way to our
Ever settlement; an impossible way to our present or speedy peace, and
therefore to be rejected, as a crooked, and unsafe path to walk in, And in
contradiction to his groundless position, I shall evidence clearly, and
undeniably, that Kingship is our only sure and safe remedy, under God, to
settle our distractions, Make up our breaches, secure our tottering
foundations, unite our divisions, cure our distempers, and in a word, to save
us from (otherwise) utter and inevitable misery, and ruin.

And here judicious Reader, let me crave thy attention, and beg thy candor, for
the Subject of the ensuing discourse will be not light, and trivial, but such
as concerns, thy present welfare, and the future good, and welbeing of
posterity.

Lord! what English man, that can without sighs, and briny tears, consider, and
recollect in his mind, what this Nation was formerly, and what now it is, once
the glory of Europe, flourishing in prosperity, and happiness, the pride of her
allies, the terror of her Enemies, the releif of the distressed, the succor
of the oppressed, the balance as I may call it, of the neighboring powerful
Princes, France and Spain, turning the scale either way, by its friendship or
enmity. How were our paths then anointed with Butter, and our hills dropped
fatness, until being filled with good things, our soul began to loath the
honey comb, or like an horse provender prict, we kict against our Rider, and
have gained to our selves a nominall liberty, but real slavery, accompanied
with infamy, and are now become the scorn of our neighbors, and the Common
byword of Christendom. Once we had our Kings not made, but born, whom at once
the sun beheld both men and Princes, who by a long continual descent, were
ennobled, and both by affinity, Consanguinity, and mutual benefits, bestowed
and received, were endeared reciprocally, they to the Nation, and the Nation to
them. We had a splendid Court, persons of honorable extraction, and excellent
accomplishments, a learned, and renowned Clergy, flourishing Academys and
Schools of Education for youth, A high spirited gallant Gentry, Rich Yeamon,
and farmers, and Citizens, Wealthy and numerous, A royal and powerful Navy, a
plenteous and expert Soldiery, and in a word we wanted nothing to make us
happy at home and renowned abroad. We wanted only thankful hearts to God for
these unvaluable blessings, and wisdom to esteem and value them and improve,
and make use of them as we ought. Now we find; not only the want of, but the
contrary unto, almost whatever before we enjoyed, having scarce any thing left
of our former happiness, but the memory, which only serves to aggravate our
present misery, (Dolet hoc, meminisse fuisse Beatos,) and that which makes our
condition more deplorable, our hopes of recovery, are in a great measure cut
off, only our eyes are to the hills, from whence comes our help. And for the
perpetuation, (if possible) of our maladies, and to make our wounds incurable,
our diseases desperate, and our miseries irrecoverable, I meet with many
Mountebanks of State who wilfully mistaking our disease, call that which is our
(without Gods great mercy) mortal malady, a State of happy Liberty, only take
notice of some troublesome Symptoms (which Luscus cannot but see by twilight,)
and for these they prescribe a cure, more dangerous, yea desperate, then the
disease it self; and this they call a Free Commonwealth.

Among many that shoot at this Mark, I find several sorts, some are
fantastically absurd, as Mr. Harrington with his Oceana, the answer to which
will be only ridiculous pastime by a winter fire, others are religiously
foolish, as he who in imitation of Gods work of creation, would make six days
work of his intended platform, and on the seventh day, and so consequently all
his life, contemplate upon his dotage, his performance in my opinion, deserves
to be rewarded with Midas purchase. Such, with many others, to the verefying of
the proverb have been shooting their bolts, and all, though they have in other
things differed wonderfully, yet in this one thing have agreed, namely in
excluding Kingship.

Such as these, like so many ridiculous State Morris dancers, I should
willingly have left to the answer of some Common Ballad-maker, being only so
many Quacks of wit, who betray nothing in their writing but want both of
employment and discretion, the reading of whose State whymses, I doubt not,
ever produced in any Reader a belief, but of their folly, unless it were in
some that were as shallow, and soft-headed as themselves, But in the mean time,
who would not bless himself to consider, that a Nation, in which have
flourished such incomparable men, for parts and judgment, of such eminent
learning, able wit and solid discretion, and that in all ages successively
since the Conquest, and that they making use of one another Resolvs, and
Experience, with long trial, mature deliberation, and accurate Caution, had
made and provided for themselves Lands, and a Government, and bequeathed it
unto us, under which we prospered, and were happy, in all civil, and religious
enjoyments, should now be brought to that State beggary, that we must have
(Asinos ad Lyram,) every State-Buffon to be forming England, Scotland, and
Ireland, into I know not what Vtopia, for want of a better, or at least a
settled Government, Quis talia fando, Temperet a Lachrymis?

True, we had our blessings allayed with that which must be expected, while we
are on this side perfection, some things were desired in our Laws, no Fathers
being able so to provide for posterity, as to leave them nothing to do, each
Generation has its peculiar concernments, which makes many acts useful to
Progenitors, to be unuseful to, and therefore repealeable by, their Children,
and many of no use or inconvenient to such as went before, absolutely
necessary, or at least very convenient to them that succeed, we also had both
errors and deficiency in the Execution of good Laws, and several things
inacted which had better been repealed, and put in practice, that more
desireably might have been omitted. The owning of this, is but to confess our
selves men, and that we enjoyed not entire complete blessedness, a thing not
to be expected in this life, but to find no cure for these deficiencies, but
the overturning of foundations, as it argued our almost incredible madness, so
it manifested the just displeasure of God against us, who had surfeited of
mercies, that we could not be content with what we enjoyed, because we wanted
what only he saw not fit for us at that present, unless we had expressed more
thankfulness for what we had in possession.

But to come to what I intend, namely to reply to, and answer what Mr. Milton
has objected against King-ship, and belched forth against our hereditary King,
and to dispel the mist which he like a state-Jugler has endeavored to cast
before our eyes concerning a Commonwealth, I shall make plain to every one that
is not wilfully blind, that we are and stand indispensably bound to our
Heriditaty KING CHARLES; And that morally as men, and religiously as
Christians, that the Injury done to his Royal Father and him, is undoubtedly
the cause of our former and still continued miseries, That doing Justice to
him, and his Relations, and repenting of that Great wickedness, under which
the Nation yet groans, and for which it has bled, of shedding not only
innocent, but Royal, and therefore sacred blood, is the only way left of
settling our distractions: whatever guilty men pretend or insinuate to the
contrary, all other ways, are but like Adams figleaves, or the prodigals
husks. This being proved and made undeniably manifest, were enough, but yet
besides I shall further demonstrate, that were that Royal stem, (which the
Lord forbid) quite failed, or decayed) nor one left, that could make legal
claim to the Crown, and had we come to this condition by Gods providence,
without any Sin or guilt of the Nation, much less those crying sins, of
Rebellion, Treason, Perjury, Murder, Oppression, Cruelty, and that which
aggravates all the rest, Hypocrisy. Yet it were the only interest of the
Nation, and way of its settlement, to come about, (as soon as is possible) to
its former Established monarchy. This if I evince clearly and undeniably, I
hope it may, (God giving a blessing,) have that effect upon those, who sit at
the helm, that because the justly detestable RVMP, contrary to Oaths
Covenants, and Protestations, and in defiance of their public professions and
declarations, did barbarously kill, and then take possession, they will not
justify that Murder, that the actors and abettors, may still keep the
possession. But why write I so, as if there were the least cause to fear, that
they themselves will not be as ready to protest against that horrid vilany, as
I know they inwardly detest it, and without spurring, to redress it, as
without controversy they abhor it, I know Noble Senators it is in your
minds, as you were innocent of that guilt, and washed your hands of it, so to
manifest your innocence, nay I rest assured, were there not difficulties to
wrestle with from without, there would not be the least imaginable let within,
in your noble breasts. But here is the mischief; The monstrous Villains, the
Actors, in cutting down that Royal Oak, had such loppings, and in the Ruin of
Majesty, they found so many, and so rich adherents, which, either were, or were
made necessary to be ruined therewith, that they were stored with unrighteous
Mammon, with which they made themselves unrighteous friends, so many, that for
a long time they were able to justyfie by the sword, what they executed by the
Axe, and to maintain by violence and force, what they ravished from the right
owners by rapine and villainy. Yea they could corrupt the pretended Divine
Oracles, and make them either speak only what was good, as the four hundred
Prophets did to Ahab, Or else with Micaja to be content to be fed with the
bread and water of affliction, until they learned either to change their tune,
or to be silent, at least, not to prophesy at Bethel. Thus many ripe but
pernicious wits were won, and fast engaged to their party, of which some
defended them in polemicall discourses, as my present Antagonist, others,
commended, and sought to eternize their memories by clawing, flattering
histories; but that which struck deepest, the Soldiery, and thousands others
were drawn in to an interest upon the score of purchase, to invite to which
very cheap penny-worths were sold, and all to secure, and indemnify their
Perjury, Treason, and Murder, So that I consider most worthy Senators, what a
duel must needs be ^ought, in each of your breasts, between Conscience, and
Discretion, Honesty, and Wisdom, Judgment, and Policy. The Consideration of
which, has imboldn'd and does encourage me, to go on in this task, it being
not so proper for your selves, as now being persons concerned. And the more I
am spurred on, considering what the most Learned, Judicious, and u^daunted Mr.
Prynne has written to this purpose duting the time of your forcible seclusion;
to whom (though unworthy to carry his Papers after him) I take it as my honor,
to Echo, and I hope for, and humbly beg of you, Noble Senators, your favorable
acceptance, of these my weak endeavors, as proceeding from a cordial desire of
what (I know) you aim at, the speedy, safe, and sure settlement of these sadly
distracted, and almost irrecoverably ruined Nations.

And now Mr. Milton I am at leisure to examine your pamphlet, which I find was
written since the resitting of the RVMP this last time, for whom it was
intentionally provided, a fit discourse, and worthy the patrons, Similes labris
lactucae. I shall pass by your prologue, not because it is not blamemeable,
but because what is only there hinted in naked expressions, is more largely
prosecuted in the following discourse, where, as I meet with it, I shall not
let it escape Animadversion.

The Parliament of England (you say) assisted by a great number of the people
who stuck to them faithfullest in defense of religion, and their Civil
Liberties, judging Kingship, by long experience, a Government but thensome,
expensive, useless, and dangerous, justly, and magnanimously abolished it,
turning Regal bondage into a Free Commonwealth, to the admiration, and terror
of our neighbors, and the stirring up of France it self, especially in Paris,
and Bourdeaux, to our imitation. Thus you go on, praising our Actions there
both at home and abroad, and our declarations and expressions both in public
and private, as testifying a gallant noble Spirit, and giving hopes of a Common
wealth, not feriour to the Greeks or Romans. From which premises you conclude
it, a great corruption in Judgment, degenerateness in Spirit, folly and
madness in practice, and that it will be ridiculous and disgraceful, unsafe
and dangerous, for us to return to our old bondage, (as you call it) of
Kingship, which degenerate relaysing, you foretell will fix us in our former
misery irrecoverably, in all likely hood or probability, which you persuade
your self and us ought to be interpreted ungratefulness toward God, in
rejecting his signal mercies, and deliverances, at least neglecting to make use
of them, and an undervaluing of the Lives and blood of Englishmen, who with
their Lives purchased and left us in this liberty. This folly of ours you tell
us how ridiculous it will make us appear to our neighbors, and render us the
common byword and object of laughter and derision of Christendom, who boasted
of a Common wealth, but having laid its happy foundation, fell into confusion
of factions, about erecting it, and so never brought it to perfection, which
manner of Government, you affirm has been by the wisest men in all ages
accounted, the noblest, maniyest, equallest, and justest Government, and most
agreeing to Civil and Christian liberty, most cherishing of virtue and true
religion, not only commended, but more then obscurely enjoined by Christ
himself, to all Christians with the mark and brand of Gentilisme, by him fixed
upon Kingship. Yea you say God gave the Israelites a King in much displeasure,
and imputed it to them as a sin, that they asked one. And so you go on to
interpret our Saviors words concerning the Kings of the Gentiles exercising
Authority over them, but expressly for bidding his Disciples to let it be so
among them, etc. which you conceive proved beyond contradiction, to be spoken
to them by Christ concerning civil Government. And to this precept you judge
no form so agreeable, as that of a Commonwealth, because in it the grea^est,
are perpetual Servants to the public, and drudges at their own cost and
charges, neglecting their own affairs, and yet not elevated above their
brethren, whereas a King you say must be adored as a Demi God, whose
expensiveness uselesnesse, burdensomness, and Danger, in and to a State, you
urge Oratorically, and Satyrically and conclude that if he happen to be bad as
sometimes he is, he is a mischief or malady in a State scarcely remediable,
without shaking, and hazarding the ruin of the whole: The contrary of which
you pretend to be in a free Commonwealth, where a Governor, or chief
Counselor, offending, may be removed, and punished without any commotion. So
you conclude them either mad or foolish, that build the hope of their happiness
on a single person, who if good, can do no more then another, but if bad, may
without control do more mischief then a million of others. Which doting on a
single person you further condemn, from its childish absurdity, and more then
brutish simplicity; citing that place of Solomon, where he sends the sluggard
to the pismire, to learn wisdom, where you squeeze out an inference, that
they who think themselves, or the Nation undone without a King, have not so
much true spirit and understanding as a Pismire. So you go on comparing
Kingship with the state of a free Commonwealth, extolling the latter and
vilifying the former, as making all under them Vassals, exalting their
Prerogative above the Subjects liberty, rarely (and then only for self ends)
convening Parliaments, and breaking them at pleasure, if they comply not with
their Lust and Interest. In which kind of Discourse I find you Satyricall, and
yet seemingly zealous of the public weal, wondering how any dare (as a
Christian) to King it over his fellow brethren in such a Gentilish way forbid
by Christ, to all his Disciples, who you say has left no King in his Church,
as his Vicegerent, and therefore, infer it is worse usurpation, for a Christian
professed, to exercise Regal authority over Christians, then for the Pope to
claim Christ's Vicegerency in the Church.

You proceed to show the Reason why we have been long delayed, and kept from
the enjoying of a Free Commonwealth, without King, Single Person, or House of
Lords; which you ascribe to the frequent Interruptions, and figgaries (in and
out) which the Rump have had, and met with. And of this you assign the cause to
be the Real Ambition of the pretended Army Saints, (the chief Commanders of
them especially) which you flatter your self, and the Army, was and is contrary
to their sense and minds, (to wit the generality of them) at least when they
were undeceived, and in their own power, which I presume, at least, doubt, was
never since they first rebelled.

You seem troubled that the small faggeend of the Parliament should be called
the RVMP, but would rather have them honored, as the remainder of those
Worthyes who freed us from Tyranny; which they have declared, and that (as you
conceive) most truly and justly they could not fully do, nor remain constant
to the trust first reposed in them, and secure our liberty, but by settling the
Nition into a Free Commonwealth, for the attaining speedily, firmly
establishing, and best ordering of which, you give your judgment, and that in
some things Paradoxall: but as you conceive the most necessary and best
expedient, to procure much good to, and preventing much mischief in, and
managing affairs most wisely, and experiencedly for the good of the
Commonwealth. And that is that the Grand Council of the Nation should sit
perpetually, of which you show the good and convenience on the one hand, and
the damage and inconvenience of the contrary on the other hand, which you
illustrate by instances, confirm by reasons, and show some Stumbling Blocks you
would have avoided, in following your advice, and Rules to be observed; namely,
not to harbor any such fond conceit in our Republique, as is the Duke in the
Venetian, or the Prince of Orange and House of Nassan in the Netherlandish
Commonwealths.

Thus in order you come again to compare a Republique so contrived, with
Monarchy, to admire the one, and decry the other, by showing the Justice,
Freedom, Plenty, and Peace of the one, and the difficulties, uncertainties,
and impossibilities of the like enjoyments under the other. You proceed then
more particularly to compare them together, in their allowing or disallowing
spiritual freedom, or Christian liberty, and herein also you give the priority
to a Commonwealth; concerning the promoting of which, you add some thoughts
of your own, concluding it an absolutely necessary thing for the obtaining or
continuing Civil peace, and will allow no Government so inclinable to favor
and protect it, as that of a Free Commonwealth, but on the other hand you show
the unlikelihood that Kingship should ever give way to it, as you instance in
Queen Elizabeth's not enduring Calvinisme, or the Presbyterian Reformation,
should be so much as proposed to her, during all her Reign, lest it should
diminish Regal Authority. Between which Queen of happy memory, and our most
pious Prince, you make a short but scurvy, scurrilous comparison, impudently
affirming him to be bad Principled from his Cradle, trained up, and governed by
Popish and Spanish Councils, and on such depending hitherto for subsistence.

From spiritual you come to Civil Freedom, which consists in the Civil Rights
and advancement of every person according to his merit, and for the attaining
of this end also you conclude a Common wealth far to excel, in opposition to
Kingship. And for the reaping the larger benefit in this kind, you propose an
expedite way in your opinion By having Legal Jurisdiction without Appeal in
each County, providing also for such Controversies which shall happen between
men of several Counties, that they may repair to the Capital City; to conclude
which head, having vomited forth much of your filth against monarchy, you close
your discourse with a Patheticall Peroration to the People, in which you do
briefly hint, and seem to wipe away what Objections may be made against a Free
Commonwealth, and so draw to this Conclusion, That if we do return back to
Kingship, on that score, that Jews would have returned into Egypt, for the
sake of Onyons, Garlic and Fleshpots, (trading to wit, which by our casting
off Kingship, has been decayed) our condition is unsound and rotten, and that
we are in the Road-way of all National Judgments and Calamities. You seem at
last to fear the success of what you have written, only hope the best, that
though these lines should move most men no more then stones or stocks, yet they
may out of some of these stones raise up Children to Liberty: That what you
have spoken is the Language of the Good old Cause, intended for the Conviction
of Backsliders, and if possible to give a stay or stop to our ruinous
proceedings, and to the general defection (as you conceive) of the abused and
misguided multitude.

This Sir is a short or summary Epitomy of what I understand by reading your
discourse, but how far wide it comes from Truth and Reason, I doubt not but
before I end to make manifest, and shall show your intended Model to be
unpracticable by us, if ever we expect peace and settlem^nt in these at present
distracted Nations. Your first stating of the Case is brief, and might pass for
current, among such who are, and have been strangers to the transactions of
this Nation, or whose memories are so short, as not to be able to recollect how
matters have been carried on by, and from the beginning of this Parliament, but
to others, the fallacy may appear at the first reading. Was it the Parliament
of England that abolished Kingship, and Kingly Government? Where were the
Lords? Did they concur in that action? Certainly no, for they by the same
power and Authority (if that can be called Authority which wants Justice to
support it) were abolished likewise, about the same time, and by the same
Engagement afterward, that excluded Kingship, cut off from having any share in
Government: And if they concurred not in that Act, how can any man (without
impudence) affirm, that it was the Parliament of England that abolished
Kingship? Or can the Parliament of England consist without a House of Lords? It
is most evident, that at the first sitting of this Parliament it consisted of
both Lords and Commons, who yet made no Parliament, without him, with whom they
were to parley, or consult, and that was the King. But it is not my task to
discourse as a Lawyer, but as an Orator intending to inquire into the truth and
Reason of things, and not to determine how the Case stands in point of Law.

Though Lords had been useless and unnecessary to sit as a House, and assist
in Government, yet they were absolutely of use, to the making of an English
Parliament; or else show me any Parliament that ever was in England without
them. You confess that the Parliament of England was assisted by a great
number of faithful Adherers to them, in the defense of Religion and Civil
Liberties, and were not they as well the Peers as the Commons? By what Power
were Armies first raised, Commissions granted, and Moneys levied, but in the
name of both Houses? If the first making of War, (which judicious and
conscientious men judge Rebellion, but I shall wave that Enquiry, nor hereafter
meddle with it) were for the defense of Religion, etc. the Lords as an House
can claim as great a share in the glory of it, as the House of Commons. Yea if
to have the honor of first kindling the fire, deserve praise, One Peer, with
Five Commoners, must share together. Was not the case of Kimbolton once
accounted of as high merit as that of Hoslerig and his fellow-partners? And the
Privileges of Parliament equally pretended to be concerned in the defending of
them all? Or if the management of the War, deserve commendation, (which you
call the assistance of the Faithful) did not the Lords personally act as
highly, and adventure as far as any Commoner? Or did not the faithfullest, (for
I observe you use the Superlative degree) appear before the new modelling of
the Army? True, there was no rebelling against all Authority, King, Lords, and
Commons at once, till that time. Sure, Sir, those Lords, who were forward with
the forwardest, adventured their lives, spent their blood, as well as others,
will have little encouragement to help, manage, and carry on such another War,
if we should find occasion to fight all over again, that has been fought, as
you after insinuate, unless they may have more thanks for their labor. You
must needs grant, that the War at the beginning was raised, and from the
first carried on, for the defense of Religion and Liberty, or else it was most
hypocritical and barbarous Rebellion, and all the blood shed therein
inexcusable murder: And if it were for the defense of Liberty and Religion,
from the beginning, without doubt every rational man must conceive, that they
who at first acted themselves in the War vigorously, and stirred up others to
it sedulously, and continued constantly, in the name of the Parliament of
England, with the distinction of both Houses, did never imagine the Commons
alone to be a Parliament.

But why speak I only of the House of Lords? Did the House of Commons abolish
KINGSHIP? Were not above three parts of four of them, not only not consenting
to, and active therein, but protesting against, and abhorring it?

So that in truth, it was not only not the Parliament of England, that did it,
but neither the Lords nor Commons House that either acted in, or consented to
it, but a factious Combination of some of the rotten Members of the House of
Commons, who assisted by the factious and rebellious part of the Soldiery,
without consent of, and in opposition to their Fellow Members, contrary to the
sense of the whole House of Lords, not minding their former sacred Vows, and
the scandal which the breaking of them would bring upon the profession of
Religion; murdered their KING, divided his Estate and Revenue, among
themselves, and their Abettors: and to secure themselves from justice, for
these Enormous Villainies, Vote down both King and Kingly Government, turn out
of doors the House of Lords, and all their Fellow members, and in their places
seat themselves, and vote themselves the Parliament of England, and this they
vote (as they call it) into a Free Commonwealth, to which they endeavor by
Conquest first to subject, and then to unite Scotland, and Ireland. Now how
just and how magnanimous this action was, let any rational man judge.

It Is strange, that if it were so, and that those Remnant of Patriots, who
delivered us from thralldome (as you are pleased to miscall them) could no
otherwise secure us from slavery and bondage, but by abolishing Kingship, that
no more of the Commons nor any of the Lords House, could perceive it but
themselves. And how came they so late to see it? Strange, that their eyes were
not opened so well before! Or did they see it before, and yet swear, and
compel others to swear, to maintain that with their utmost hazard of both
Loves and Fortunes, which they had found and experimented, to be burdensome,
useless, expensive, and dangerous, and upon just grounds to be abolished? Are
these things think you, consistent, Mr. Milton, how long experience had they of
the dangerousnesse, etc. of Monarchy, before they abolished it? be pleased to
tell us, if before they Covenanted, and protested, the more Villains they to
swear, if after it were good to be informed when; Were they faithful Patriots,
if they knew, and had experienced such a thing, and yet never disclosed their
minds to their Fellow Members, until upon a Treacherous surprise, they were
turned out of doors by their mercenary servants, the Army? Are these the acts
of men who are likely to secure our Religious and Civil Liberties?

Was it a Commonwealth that was fought for, or a Free Parliament? How then
comes a Commonwealth to be the Good Old Cause? Was it once in nomination at
the first taking up of Arms? Was not the thing pretended, the removing of ill
Counselors from about the King? and was there no way to do it but to send him
thither where no evil counsel can have access, even to Heaven? Did they not
vow to make his Posterity as well as him glorious, and was there no way to it,
but to rob the Heir of his Earthly Crown, that he might have the more leisure
to contemplate upon his Heavenly one? No way to make him a blessed and happy
Prince, but by intitling him ipso facto to one of the ten Blessednesses
pronounced by Christ, among others, to those of whom men speak all Evil falsely,
and revile them? Blessed God! if these be Saints, where shall we find Wicked
men?

But why Sir do you call Kingship a detested, and once abjured thralldome? Who
abjured it, and when? I am sure that there was searce a Rumper in ten, but
swore to maintain and defend it, besides the Oath taken by all Members at their
first admission, how I pray then, and when, was this Oath or abjuration taken,
and by whom? Lately, one, Praise God Barebone presented a Petition to that
purpose, which made his house appear like to a Bawdy house (for broken
windows) twice in a few days. I hope, Sir, you have not a private
Dispensation among you, to swear to maintain and abjure the same thing at your
pleasure and as often as you please.

I doubt not, but most of those who first assisted the Parliament, had they
heard but the least pretense this way from those who called them to their aid,
would have very hardly contributed the least Money to their supply, nor the
least help to defend their quarrel. Then it was for the Parliaments service, in
defense of the KING, and his Posterity, that all was pretended to be done; and
now can we believe the Original intention to be (all those facred pretenses
notwithwithstanding) to destroy the King and his line, and to abjure Kingship,
or Monarchical Government? God forbid, this is (certainly) no other then a new
Invention, suggested by the Old Serpent, and fomented, by his Instruments to
the Dishonor of God, whose sacred Majesty they appealed to, and swore before,
and the reproach of the true Protestant Religion, in the profession and
sincerity of which (made by, and immovably fixed in the hearts and breasts of
thousands of this (once famous) Nation) England was exemplary among all her
Neighbors, but now, by this act of some few of her perjured, yet Saint
professing Sons, made infamous, yea abhorred, and detestable among all that live
round about her. I grant you, Mr. Milton, that this action of ours (for ours we
must call it, till the Nation be vindicated from it, or punished for it) as it
was a damnable president, so it was commended to and labored very hard to be
made practicable and practiced in our Neighboring Kingdom France, so willing
are seared Consciences in sin, to involve as many as may be in the same guilt
with themselves, if not for their justification sake, yet to keep them from
open Reproach.

I easily believe Mr Milton, that nothing was wanting on the part of our
Regicides, that the same was not only meditated and attempted, but brought to
perfection and put in execution in France, being begun, (as you say) in
Bordeaux and Paris. But without doubt the protestant interest, never had such a
blow among Christians by profession as they had by this Act. How was this
formerlie the blot of the Jesuits, that they taught and allowed the murder of
their Princes, if once excommunicated by the Pope? And yet, how ashamed were
the Papists ever to own such a tenent, although they might consent to such a
practice, and be guilty of it. How were the Gunpowder Traitors branded by our
divines and Professors, with marks of infamy upon this score? Yet now behold a
Protestant King, not treasonably conspired against, but murdered, and that not
designed and brought about by a private unseen blow of Gunpowder, or stab with
a Dagger from a private hand? as English King James was designed for
destruction, by our English Papists, and French Henry was actuallie slain by a
Ravilliack. But, stand amazed O ye Heavens! for ye beheld it, blush O thou
great light of the day: which then saw it, this Protestant, Virtuous, Picus
KING, was solemnly cut off, at his own door, by his own Subjects, who claimed
then the name, and usurped then the power, of the Representative Body of the
English Nation, the PARLIAMENT or Supreme Authority of ENGLAND. Nor did they
for this Action to excuse it, plead such a thing as the Popes pardon or
dispensation, as the Papists did, acknowledging in that such an act to be, (in
it self) unwarrantable, and unjustifiable, but they style themselves the only
true Assertors of the Peoples Liberty, and the faithfullest part of Englands
Representatives, and therefore the Common wealths most constant and firm
Patriots. Nay no man could have any protection from the Laws, that did not by
Engagement justify this Act, no Minister enjoy his Living unless he give his
post consent to that, which but six years (at most) before, he had (to avoid
the like penalty) Covevanted, and entered into League, Vowed, and Protested
against, Solemnly, and with hands lifted up to the most High God. This a man
may believe (if he will be an Atheist,) to be Englands restitution to its
Religious and Civil Liberties, but he of discretion that reallie believes so,
may easily be brought to yield Light to be Darkness, and Darkness Light,
Conscience, and the fear of God, expectation of happiness in Heaven, and fear
of Hell, to be only juggles. Now what Prince, (that is not mad) would trust a
Protestant in power, nay tolerate him in his Dominions, if these are
Protestants indeed? who are neither to be believed when they swear, nor
confided in, if they can but get an opportunity; That will swear Alegiance to,
and murder the same King, and that not secretly but openly, nor seek to
excuse it when done, but justify, plead for, extol, and commend it, as a
performance worthy ren^wn, and fit to be trasmitted down as an example to
posterity. But let all who truly fear the Lord, say of these as Jacob of his
two bloody Sons Simeon and Levi, who killed only their Neighbor Idolatrous
enemies, who had deserved their hate, by ravishing their Sister, and were part
of the Nations, that were to be destroyed utterlie by Jacobs seed, yet with
whom they (in color at least) were then about to make a league of friend-ship,
and among whom they lived peceably. O my soul come not into their secrets, and
to their counsels, mine honor be not thou united! for in their wrath they
slew their Sovereign Lord, the King, and in their self will plucked up (to
their utmost) the whole Royal root, and dugge down the wall of Government, and
destroyed the foundations, the Laws. Boast not then Mr. Milton, how taking
this example was with the like spirited Mock Protestants, but really damnable
Rebels in France, for from such a spark as this was kindled that fire, which
formerlie wasted, and consumed the Hugonites of Paris, and of late the
Waldenses in Piedmona, and Savoy. Guilty art thou, O treacherous! Perjured!
Apostate Rump! of all this blood, the former of which thou have justified; and
the latter been isntrumental in causing to be shed. Blessed be God who has
clipped your wings, Pared your Horns, Broken your Talons, by which you soared
above the reach of justice and pushed at, and griped most horribly, whoever
durst but speak or write against your execrable murders, rapines and
Sacrilegious Villainies. And I hope that Christian Princes will in time be made
to understand, and given to see that this and the like actions of yours are not
consonant to the te^^nts of any true Protestants. Be confounded then and for
ever silenced, ye self-condemning wretches, who when at the beginning of the
war, such a design was charged upon you by the Royal l^yall party, you
rejected it with imprecations, and were sedulous (with the rest of your fellow
members, of the Commons house, and the whole house of Peers) to acquit and
clear your selves from such an aspersion (as you then called it) with
detestation, yea I am confident that then many of you (before your consciences
were since by monstrous impieties cauterized and rendered past feeling) did
cordially abhor, what you since have acted and endeavored to compel all men
(ministers especially) to approve of, and justify, and by a post engagement,
to consent to, in opposition to former Covenants and Protestations to the
contrary, I do verily believe: I say, that then you would have declard against
it, with horror, and trembling, however the Devil, bad counsel, and worldly
gain have since ensnared, and corrupted many of you.

Come we from what you have done in our name, to take a survey, of what you
have procured to us thereby, for although the end is but a fallacious rule to
judge actions by, nor is it wisdom to determine concerning the thing done,
that it is good or bad by the event, and success of it, yet it is a persuading
motive, to repentance and amendm^nt of such courses, which we are convinced to
be evil, when we find the smart of them, and see evident our condition to be
bad at present, and worse and worse in likelihood to be expected every day. It
is likewise a good conviction, and very suitable to, and seasonable for such who
will not believe, but these our present miseries, are only the fore-running
throws of a glorious Birth, and offspring, of which they seem to persuade
themselves, and would have us to believe that we are not only in Expectation,
and certainty, but in the present fruition, and possession, to wit Liberty,
both religious and Civil, in respect of which Kingship is a Yoke of Bondage,
thraldom, Vassalage, slavery, and infelicity. Good Lord! was ever such
ridiculous folly, such wilful madness known or seen! Have we any Liberty in
civil things, but if we please to antidate our Ruin and beggary? to spend all
one year or two, before our new found Patriots of, never before heard of,
Liberty squeeze all out of us, and get all from us. Have not the Keepers of our
Liberties, like theevish Promethews, dealt with our Liberties, as he did with
Pandoras Box, Let fly among us only plagues and miseries, and now they keep all
close, when there is left only hope, (and scarcely that) in the bottom? Where
is there any reality of Liberty in any of our enjoyments, either civil or
religious? and yet that, Oh that! is pretended as a sufficient reward and price
of our last blood, and expended Treasure. In our Courts, what unsettlement, and
upon every change, what turning out of office, whoever would not comply with
the horrible villainous practices, by which each interest supplanted another?
Look backward to the first gaining of this Nominal Freedom, and you shall find
many Judges discarded, Sergeunts at Law laid aside, Counselors their Gowns
stripped over their ears; Attorneys turned from the Bar, Sollicitours and
other attendants on the Law made incapable of either public employment, or
preferment, in a word all Officers of the Law in Civil as well as Common courts
of Judicature, put out of place, and by consequence cut off from all means of
livelihood, upon no other ground, then because their Consciences would not
permit them so far to slight their duty of allegiance (to which they were
likewise engaged, by a sacred and indispensable Oath) as to take another league
and covenant, a vow and a protestation in their judgments Cross to the former;
here was Liberty, (if ever) with a plague, and vengeance, I doubt not but this
with other things, has been the cause of the many Judgments since that poured
forth, and still continued upon this perjured Nation. How was the Solemn League
and Covenant obtruded upon all men, that had any thing to be plundered of? And
what Liberty had they in case of refusal? except we will account turning out of
place, of either honor or profit, the Imprisonment of men's persons, for a long
time, with barbarous cruelty during their imprisonment; the violent taking away
their estates, by Sequestrators to be liberty. No man could be permitted to
cross the Seas in almost any capacity, whether of Merchant, or Factor, or
passenger, unless he would first swallow this potion. Where then (I would
gladly be informed) lay our Liberty? Unless we will confess, (and that God
knows and we have all felt it is the truth,) with Cicero, Nomina rerum
perdidimus, jamque licentia militaris, libertas appellatur. We have left the
true names of things since now the Soldiers petulancy, is calthe Peoples
Liberty. And if we had such cause to complain of the beginning of these our
distracted calamities, when you seem to give the Army this Character, that they
were undeceived, and in their own power, with what reason may we lament, and
bewail the following times and changes, which have been ever since. And yet the
peoples liberty has been the thing cried up Continually. What think you Sir of
the Engagement? what agreement has it with the Covenant? And yet that must be
taken, or no judge must continue in office, no Army Officer in Command, no
Minister must preach, nor Schoolmaster teach School, nay, nor any man have the
benefit of the Land either as Plaintiff or defendant. And call you this
Liberty, Mr. Milton? I confess the tameness of our English Nation, beyond any
former (either Ancient or modern) president, gave the Rump liberty of
perpetrating and persisting in never before heard of Villainies, with as much
impunity as impiety, but accursed be that Liberty from the Lord which will only
give a company of Villains liberty to be as much Bloody, perjurd, murderers,
and unjust oppressive Robbers as they please, but abridge all other of former
means of living, unless they will assent to and approve of these actions, or
else appear so. The end of all this is impoverishment of the Nation, loss of
Trade, decay of Ingenious Arts, and manufactures, the ecclipsing of our former
credit, esteem, and reputation in the eyes of our neighboring Nations. That we
may truly say of England, Our glory long since is departed from us. How did the
Rump first by secret compliance and complots, animate the aspiring Commanders
in the Army, and then betray all their Counsel; to them? So that the Great
Counsel of England, the Glory of our Nation, the foundation, and fountain of
our Laws, having, first made war with their KING, and those who stuck to him
constant and faithful, were soon divided among themselves, and the greater
part thereof at last betrayed, and turned out of doors by a small number of
their own fellows, who with a mutinous Army, to back them assume the Supreme
Authority of England into their own hands, and declare, and act accordingly,
cashiering the house of Peers, cutting off their KING, disabling his posterity,
and to secure themselves in this unparelleld treason, and rebellious
innovation, form an Engagement, to be true to the Common wealth as it was then
Established, without a KING and House of LORDS. This and these like actions and
declarations, you call just, generous, and magnanimous, and such as gave hopes
of a glorious rising Common wealth, this you call our happily fought for and
succesfully attained Liberty, but I with more truth and reason, know and shall
justify, these actions to be rebellious, perfidious, and treacherous, the
declarations to be but heralds for infamous perjury, and discovered men made
impudent by victorious success, who with faces of brass, blushed not at what
the Sun could not but blush, who declare their sins like Sodom, and think
Villainies, (because prosperous) are heroic actions and noble performances.
What palpable prevarication is it (Sir) for you to give this for the happy End
of the many and bloody battles and skirmishes, which were fought between the
two Armies of the King and Parliament? Was the war begun, on such a design,
or wit^ that pretense? If not, when came it to be the cause? Mr Prynne, in his
historical relation of things as they were acted (in his vindication of the
secluded Members) cites their own votes, consultations, resolvs, and messages,
to, and from the chief Officers of the Army, and by all makes it apparent, that
the House of Commons were so far from making that to be the mark shot at in
their contest with the King, that many days were Elapsed before they could
make up the Quorum of a House of Commons, nor was the number of Rumpers to the
very last, greater then to argue our folly and misery, and to aggravate their
impudent imperiousness, in curbing a Nation (formerly so famous for valor so
long a time,) and of our shame this is none of the least part, that now hopes
of our deliverance (through Gods great mercy) is appearing, one should have so
much confidence as to appear in public, and to court us not only to keep on,
but be in love with our present shackles, and to declaim against our formerly
enjoyed, most happy Government of KINGSHIP. And as this fag end of the English
House of Commons, was inconsiderable in number; so was neither their quality
likely to argue an excellency in what they set up, beyond what we before were
governed by: for first, the two hou^^s after the end of the war, had
frequently treated with the King, and also had upon a late (yea their last)
treaty, determined and concluded, that his Majestys answers were so far
satisfactory as to proceed upon the settlement of the Nation. This last treaty
was occasioned by the Petition of the Citizens of LONDON, the remonstrance of
several Ministers, the addresses of many Counties, with several thousand
subscriptions in concurrence with that Petition of the Londoners. To this the
sad distractions by a long bloody war did seem not only to agree, but also
to enforce. Well, the two Houses being petitioned, and addressed to,
remonstrances made and sent them, Reason inviting, Religion binding, the
necessity of the Nations calling for it, petitions pressing, in a word, no
other safe, discreet, honest way appearing, treat with the King, God so orders
his heart, that they receive, (if not plenary satisfaction) yet so much as they
vote his Majesty's answers a ground on which to proceed to the settlement of
the Nation.

The RVMP, by help of the mutinous Army, dismember four parts of five, of their
Fellow Members, and unhouse all the Peers, then Vote against this Vote, as a
breach of Trust in the Voters, not considering they were the major part of the
House, but presupposing themselves the better part that had thus outwitted, and
by Force secluded the other greater? But if so, it is strange, that the number
of the RVMPERS was so long a making up, and so small at last. Good God! what a
condition was this Nation come to, that of so many who were Representors of the
People, so few should have the justice and magnanimity to perform such an
action, or approve it afterward, if it were indeed just and Magnanimous, as
Mr. Milton would have it? The whole House of Peers, (although excluded by an
after Vote) yet they spontaneously adjourned, rather than to have a hand in so
base and so barbarous an Action: Against which the godly Divines undauntedly
protested, the conscientious Citizens and Countrey-people jointly dissented by
Petitions, the Scotch Nation (equally concerned with the English) declared, and
thereupon, Preclaimed and Crowned their Hereditary King, by Succession, CHARLES
the Second, (whom God preserve.) The Irish Nation (not the Rebels) disowned so
irreligious Treason, and take up Arms, Where then is the Justice of abolishing
Kingship? The Peers have an Interest in the King, to whom many of them are
allied, and Kinsmen, and whom he in Honor vouchsafed to call Couzins, he is
the Fountain of their Honor, and they therefore an House of Parliament by
Privilege and Prerogative: Yet they are of us, our Lords and our Kinsmen, by
Estate and ability far above us, yet bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh.
What Justice was there in Discarding them (Mr. Milton) and cheating them of the
thing fought for, when in their custody and possession, after they had born a
considerable burden of mannaging the War? Put all the Cost together, and they
bore their full share, and therefore of due Justice ought to have had a Voice
in disposing of his Majesty, after the War, who had reduced him to that
Condition by War.

But alas! The Scots had expressly declared, that they would have the King to
be Treated with, with Freedom and Honor, and the Nobles with the Commons had
Resolved his Majesty's Answers to be satisfactory, so far as to proceed upon
them to settlement of the Nation: What Justice then can be pretended that one
part of six (if so much) of the House of Commons, should destroy the KING, and
abolish Kingship? Will you say, the Army would have it so? Then it was so far
from being just and magnanimous, as it was neither, but contrary to both. What
more unjust, then for a few to carry on a bloody Treason with perjury, not only
in contradiction to, but exclusion of four times the number of their Fellows,
and the whole House of Peers, equal in Power to them and their Fellows put
together; at least, so far equal, as that their Nay was a bar to any thing the
others would have enacted or repealed. What more sordidly cowardly, then for
fifty or threescore Commoners, who with their Fellows and the Lords had
managed Seven years War against the King and all his Forces, now in
compliance with a few Army Officers, to betray their Trusts, their
Fellow Members, the Privileges of Parliament, and all that is sacred and
honorable, to murder their King, break all their Oaths and Vows, only to
satisfy the Exorbitant Lust of some few aspiring Army Grandees, who all of
them were their Servants, Raised, Armed, Commissionated, Empowered, and Paid by
them, for other ends then to be commanded by them to act things contrary both
to their Oaths and Consciences. Could they, who but few years before had
engaged England in a bloody quarrel, and called in the Scots to their
assistance and all to defend (as they pretended) the Privileges of Parliament,
when their lawful KING, their sworn Sovereign, demanded but five of their
Members to a Legal trial, upon a Just Charge, which he proffered against them;
suffer their Servants, who received their pay, and had been sworn to their
Obedience, to secure, imprison and detain, forty at a time of their
Fellow Members, and after exclude and drive away nigh two hundred more? How
then did they adjourn, and continue to sit in a Committee in London, till that
pretended and (in comparison of this) not imaginable Force was removed? And now
can they keep their seats, and continue sitting? Then they resolved into a
Committee, now they remain as an House, nor remain only, but act, nor act
alone, but prescribe Qualifications to such as shall be readmitted to sit, by
which it is apparent, that they were not compelled by force of the Soldiery, to
what they did, (although that had convinced them of pusillanimous Cowardice, in
stead of Magnanimity) but they complotted with, contrived and invented what the
Rebellious Soldiery acted, among whom all were not alike to be taxed, for the
then General, now the Lord Fairfax, was so far from contriving or
countenancing, that he was unsatisfied with those proceedings against his
Majesty, which was indeed (as after appeared evidently) the sole Plot of OLIVER
the Copper-nosed Saint, and some other Schismatical Army Officers, together
with a few treacherous, perjured Commoners, who (forcibly secluding most of
their number, and the House of Lords willingly adjourning, till this bloody
Tragedy might be over, (unless by God prevented) and so Disavowing the Murder)
had the Honor to be infamous by themselves, an stained with Sacred Royal
Blood.

I grant you Mr. Milton, that these Patriots, as you style them, did this, but
while they did not own what they acted, but would seem to lie under the Armies
Force, (when indeed, they, and the Rebellious part of the Army mutually
complotted and contrived the whole business as it was after acted) where was
their Magnanimity? If the Action was good, and just, and honorable, why would
they seem unwillingly compelled to it? Why did they so often send to the Army and
demand the readmission of their Members? since they did not desire, nor intend
it, why did they pretend to desire it? Was that a part of their valor and
Magnanimity? To pretend a fear, and affrightment, from unarmed Petitioning
London Apprentices, who seized not a person of them, nor offered the least
violence, no nor yet menacing words, not daring to oppose the insulting
Soldiery, if they really disliked their Actions, nor yet having confidence
enough to own their Actions if they did (as since it appeared undenyably)
approve of what they did; who but Mr. Milton would style this a Magnanimous
Action?

If Perjury, Treachery, breach of Vows, Murder, Usurpation, Oppression, and
Sacrilege, be the demonstrations of a just action; if to be chosen for the
good of the Counties, Cities, or Buroughs choosing, in a joint, not divided
way, with, not without the House of Peers, to consult with the KING, not to
depose and murder him; and yet to do contrary to all for which they were
Elected: If to be returned by Indentures, to advise with the King about matters
of great concernment, to be sworn at admission into the House, to be true to
the King, his Heirs, etc. to maintain him, and all his just Privileges, and to
confirm this Oath by several after Oaths and Covenants, and Protestations, and
yet to butcher the same King, make War against, and proclaim Traitor his Son,
expel him out of one of his Hereditary Kingdoms, and wherein he was Crowned,
make it Treason to relieve him in Exile, yea Malignity to pray for him
publicly: If to make an Invasive War on Scotland, for Crowning a King, to
whom, and which, they were bound by Oath, without their consent, who had
murdered the Father, not only without but contrary to theirs, and contrary to
their own re-iterated Oaths and Duty. If I say, all these, and ten times as
many the like Actions, which all concur to, and center in the abolishing of
Kingship, be just, then next to the Devil, the Rumpers shall have my Voice to
applaud their Justice: And as for their Magnanimity let them commend it who
know not, or will not believe, how perfidiously they wrought with their own
stipendiary Servants, to rebel against those from whom they derived their
power, and by whom paid. It was the major part of the Commons and the Peers,
that always acted, empowered, ordered and disposed of all things, which how
magnanimously the Rump could usurp to themselves, we have seen, having an Army
at hand to back them, but so cowardly they were, that they durst not own
themselves to have a hand in any of these Transactions, but like a
Puppet-player drew the Curtain of a rebellious mutinous Soldiery before the
eyes of the spectators though quicker sights easily at first perceived the
juggle.

'Twil now not be unseasonable to consider the experience which the worthy
Patriots the restorers of us to Liberty had of Kingship, which is no more then
what themselves expressed in their Resolvs and Votes, (as is at large related
by learned Mr Walker in his History of Independency,) and the same is here laid
down by Mr M^lton their Champion, for the ground of this their abolishing the
same. They had found it by long experience, burdensome, expensive, useless,
and dangerous, so also they judged the House of Peers, unnecessary, etc.
Concerning this I have spoken already, and yet I must repeat the same
arguments, although not the same words, since that maxim in oratory holds ever
true, Nunquam nimis dicitur quod non satis intelligitur. Let us consider things
then, and if we want not memory, we shall not want instances enough to convince
as well the Rump as this their Champion, that this their old discovery, was but
a new forgery, and an expressly sinning against the light of their Conscience,
would any that had read the Speakers Speech to the KING made on the fifth of
November, 1640 at the first convention of this Parliament, believe that he then
had found Kingship or Kingly Government, such as the Rump since declare to the
world their experience thereof, nevertheless the same William Lenthal though he
then protested his Judgment, that the welfare of these Nations under God
depended on his Majesty and his Royal issue, and acknowledged with pretended
gratefulness, how under him and his Father, this Kingdom had flourished, yet
eight years after, behold, and stand in admiration the same man with a perjurd
tongue and double mind, sits Speaker to the Rump, and they pretend their long
experience, not only of the burden and uselesness, but the danger of Kingly
Government. Of Sir Henry Mildmay, and both the Vanes Cornelius Holland, and
several others, this I may say, and wrong neither them nor the truth. That if
ever Servants had a good Master, and he in requital false, wicked servants,
they and their murdered Master may be cited as full and clear Examples. And yet
these will needs be Saints, in opposition to the Apostle Paul, who says that
perhaps for a good Master some servant may dare to dye, never supposing or
imagining there should be such desperately treacherous Servants to circumvent,
and Murder their Master.

As for the burthensomnesse of Monarchy, which I presume we are to interpret
concerning our own Government by Kings, and more particularly of that
excellently accomplished, and first english royal Martyr King CHARLES. How
expensive I pray you, how burdensome was he? Could he or any other KING before
him, raise monys without a Parliament. As for his Family expense, did ever any
man before you tax him with profuseness? Did he or could he make war
without the advice of those Nobles who were of his Privy Counsel? Nay on the
other hand was not his Father so far given to peace, and peacemaking that he
gave for his Motto, Beati Pacifici? and reckoned it his honor to be accounted
one of that number? Was not the imputation laid upon him by those who make it
their business to bark at Majesty, and to speak evil of dominion, that he was
a Coward and one who would rather choose to buy a dishonorable peace, then to
make and manage an honorable War? was not he by the invitation of his allies
the Bohemian Protestants, as well as those of Rochell, the instigation of his
Peers, the addresses and encouragement of all his loving Subjects, stirred up
to a War in defense of both the Bohemians, and Rochellians? In prosecution of
which, was not his treasure exhausted, and a War left from the Father to the
Son, to the pursuing whereof, Conscience, Religion, and reputation bound him?
and yet how slack were the Parliaments for his supply, how earnestly on the
other hand did he desire it, and yet factious spirits being crept into these
grand Counsels, how was time spent in vain, and nothing effected? I speak not
now as an Historian, but as an Orator, my present task is to urge matters
granted, not to relate, but for things of fact, I shall recommend the Reader to
the larger history of Mr Sanderson, and the briefer of Lambert Wood Gent: both
relating the full substance, of what was done, and suffered by our happy (had
we known our happiness) King CHARLES the First, whole happiness as to himself
is (I question not) beyond mortal capacity, and whose glory, honor, and
renown for his Conquest in his sufferings, exceeds the most famous of all our
former English Monarchs.

Our Kings before these reforming times, had a splendid Revenue accommodated to
the Majesty of a Court, although much short of the expense which a warlike Camp
and navy Call for, to the former our Kings estate was fitted, of the latter he
was himself incapable, without the assistance of his Subjects, nor was this to
be had of them, without their free consents in Parliament, where neither the
Lords, nor Commons alone, but both together were in a capacity to furnish the
King. Good Sir, what burden was here? But moneys you say, were commonly
extorted out of the Commons no just cause appearing to them. Strange that Mr
Milton should write such a foolish absurdity, and yet considering him the
Author of (...) the defense of the people against English Salmasius, and the
Paradoxes concerning divorce, the subject meethinks befits the pen. How is it
possible for money to be extorted from the Commons in Parliament without their
Consent? When neither the Lords nor King, both concurring could impose one
Subsidy upon the Commons. Nor was it ever known that the Commoners sat in
Parliament under a visible compelling force, until these times of mysterious
reformation. It is certain, the major part of the house of Commons must vote a
subsidy or subsidys, or else the King must go without them, and this must pass
the house upon a full debate of the question. Now to imagine that monys
voluntarily given, should be extorted, and where the question is put and each
man without compassion has liberty of giving his Ay or No, without further
rendering an account of the reason of his dissent, more then he is free to, or
if he have reason (as you insinuate) and gave it, he is not liable to the least
question, for any freedom used, in expressing his mind in the house, who but a
man compounded, and made up, of ignorance and impudence, would say, that such
moneys, so given, upon such debate, and the question so often put, no man being
bound up to either consent or dissent, but as his judgment, and Conscience gave
him, were extorted without any reasonable Cause appearing.

To this I know what you would reply, namely, That the House of Commons had
within its Walls a Court faction, and without, both King and Lords, (who were
his Creatures) and all laboring to their utmost, to supplant the sincere part
of the Commons, who were zealous in defense of the Peoples Liberty. This Mr.
Milton is soon said, and Machiavell teaches you no less, but not so easily to
be admitted: The Commons are chosen by the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, for
which they serve, who usually choose such whom they most confide in, to the
Electors they are engaged by Indenture, or Covenant, and so where a Free Choice
is, there is less fear, that men chosen by all, empowered by all, and
representing all, and willingly engaging their Faith and Credit to all, should
contrary to their Trust betray all, and comply with the Royal Interest, to the
prejudice of those who Elected, and entrusted them to Represent themselves. We
know, Mr. Milton, that Elections then were Free, and no Prohibition laid upon
any that were by Law capable, either from Electing or being Elected. True,
since our Yoke (as you term it) has been shook off, and none are under
restraint, but only such who fear an Oath, and make Conscience to keep those
sacred ties inviolable, which judicially and conscientiously they took, we have
had at least nine parts of ten restrained from either choosing or being chosen,
so that the tenth part only has had liberty of Ordering the Election, and the
other nine parts, must upon penalty of being plundered, sit still, and call this
a Free Parliament, in such a House of Commons, as this I doubt not but many may
be found, who will betray their Trust, pretended to be committed to them,
because they indeed are not Elected by, but Obtruded upon the people: Thus we
have had not only Knights, but also Citizens, and Burgesses, more then formally
yea really, men (cum accinctis Gladiis) with their Swords girt, for Army
Officers have not seldom been the major part of the House, or else such with
the Officers, who held places of great profit, under the then ruling, or rather
Domineering Usurpers.

But if really these men had (as you say) experimentally found, and that upon
long proof, Kingly Government to be expensive and burdensome, what can they
pretend in excuse, that they should Declare publicly their intent to be, to
make this Kings Rvenue Larger and more Splendid? Was this intent real, or did
they make use of it as a decoy pretense to engage the Common people of their
side, without whom they could not perform their work? Yea I will appeal only to
themselves, had they not declared, protested, covenanted, vowed, and used all
sacred and solemn means, to persuade the Nation, that their real intent was
only to remove some bad Counselors from about the King, and to bring them to
Justice, but that to his Majesty's Person, and Royal Issue, they bore firm and
inviolable Allegiance, nor ever minded to abridge his just Prerogative, only
with it to confirm and secure, and settle the Liberty and Privilege of the
Subject, if (I say) they had not Declared this, do they think that ever Money
had been lent and raised, or so many men would have engaged their Lives and
Fortunes? No verily, those turbulent spirits (without these specious shows)
had been left at first, stripped of all Friends and Abettors, to the hand of
Justice, to have had their hot spirits cooled with deserved Imprisonment, or
perhaps with a Hempen Preservative, against future infection with a treasonable
Rebellious Spirit.

Well then, if the People by such pretenses were cheated into a Rebellious War,
it cannot so much be imputed to them, considering, what the Parliament with
sacred solemnity vowed and swore, (enough to induce any, but very discerning
Judgments, to side with them) but the blame must for ever lie at their doors,
who have acted so rebelliously and perfidiously on one hand, and dissemblingly
on the other.

Consider I pray you things upon the account of Justice, for Sir, there is
Justice among Thieves and Highway men, if they share their Booty fairly and
equally: could these Patriots, as you call them, of our liberty, (the Rumpers I
mean) with their own valor and wit, upon their own Charges, have defeated the
King, and all who should appear for him, upon the score of the expensiveness,
burdensomenesse, uselesnesse and dangerousnesse of his Office, and publicly
avowed this to be their quarrel? I Will grant you, then, their actings might have
been justifiable, upon the title of Conquest, and a posteriori, for Originally
they could not be so, considering the paucity of their number, but when it is
evident, that not they, but the major part of the Nation, many by actual
appearing in Arms, all by Countributing Moneys, carried on the War from the
beginning to the end, now at last for them by compliance with a corrupt
mutinous Soldiery, to employ the Victory to other, nay clean contrary ends,
then for which Arms were first taken, and Moneys raised, to turn out all, that
with them, for Eight years together carried on the War jointly, because at last
they could not in Conscience, and would not join with them in so detestable
perjurious actings, to murder, destroy, and plunder as many as durst oppose
these palpable Praevarications, if I say these actions do not point out Saints
in grain, the most barbarous of Murderers, to wit Regicides, the most
abominable sort of Thieves, to wit Sacrilegious Robbers, the most damnable of
Professors, to wit Hypocrites, the most corrupt of English Commoners to wit
Rumpers, I shall leave it to any of their friends, to consider, at least, if
ever God should open his, or their eyes, or they come upon their Deathbed: I
am sure no Cordial unprejudiced Englishman can think of those unheard of
practices, but with the like affection wherewith Aeneas at the Request of Queen
Dido made relation of his past miseries, which he with his Country suffered,

Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem. Yea I question not, Mr Milton, but
succeeding ages will esteem of it, next to the rejecting and crucyfying the
Lord of Life, Jesus Christ, the most detestable example that ever any people
who were really, or desired to be reputed the people of God, acted, or abetted.

But Sir whatever you have said as to this Argument, I shall have occasion to
meet with and speak to in proving my own assertions, and therefore I shall with
as much brevity, as perspicuity will admit discourse of, and by solid reasons
confirm the same.

Kingship I affirm, to be the only desirable government in the world, and of
all sorts of Kingly Governments or Monarchies, ours of England was most
exquisitely composed, equally tempered, and suited to a Nation really free, and
yet truly Subject, where Majesty and subjection made a true harmony, and the
most inferior members were as equally necessary to the good of the whole, as
the chief. In it the King was Supreme, the head of Law and Justice, and yet
himself never had power to make, or to execute any Law, the governed people
propounded, formed, and modelled, such Laws by which they were to be ruled,
The peers who also had a share in subjection, yet a degree advanced above the
Commons, they had likewise a hand in Laws; that were to be enacted, to whom
therefore they were brought for approbation. And being thus formed and
approved, they were lastly presented to the King for his Royal confirmation.
Thus the Commons propounding, and framing the nobles approving and Consenting,
the King signing and confirming, Laws were made. Where now is flavery? where
the bondage, and vassallage, which you made so great a noise concerning? Was it
in having any Laws at all? Truly Mr Milton, however you palliate things I
believe verily there lies the knot that troubles you, there your shoe pinches.
I find generally such Christian Libertines, as your writings show you to be one
of, come at last to throw off all external coercive, or binding laws, and
desire only to be governed by the Law within them, which in truth is a spirit
of Lawlesnesse. To this your doctrine of divorce seems to incline, therein you
complain much of bondage, and thraldom, vassalage, and what not, only for
standing indispensably obliged to your wife, after the Covenant of God mutually
passed between you, what wonder then, if you account it vassallage to be held
by an Oath of Allegiance? But as there have been, and are many who account
themselves at a much greater liberty, being engaged in an inviolable bond, to a
loving wife, (and considering the frailty of their nature, cannot abide a
single life) so I question not but thousands of sober spirits, Judged
themselves far more free, when we had our KING, and kept our Oaths by which
we were indispensably engaged to him Conscientiously and firmly, then since, by
Hypocrisy, Perjury, and Rebellion, we have gained this (much talked of)
Liberty.

But to return to our former, and not by humane Art amendable form of
Government if you will yield it convenient to have any Laws, what can be better
then those of the Peoples own making, they propounded, they framed them, unless
you would have their Resolves to be Laws, without any Concurrence of Nobles, or
Consent of the KING? If so, what monstrous Liberty would you have, when
virtually two thirds of the Nation must be content, with what the Commons do,
or as the Proverb is turn the buckle of their girdle behind them, and seek
their amends where they can get them? The KING his Family and Posterity, had a
Revenue of their own for which he was not engaged to the present people. He had
lands by due title as any Commoner in England, and was suable in case he
detained any man's Land, or other of his estate illegally, and the Law equally
free against, as for the King, Now the Royalties which belonged to him (as
supreme) viz. Customs etc. were his by descent, and ancient prescription, in
wrong of no Subject, or if any thing did pinch upon any Subject, as the
forfeitures of felons goods, wrecks etc. these (had the Commons, with the
Lords, adjudged them a burden) might easily have been taken away, and the King
would willingly have been content, with a more equitable income, of the like
value, The Nobles also had very large Estates, and Revenues. And so had
likewise the Bishops, and such who attended the se^vice of God, who had great
possessions. Who should represent these in a bare house of Commons? Experience
shows us, that no sooner were the Bishops, etc. put down, by these reformers,
but their Lands were all alienated from the Church, and sonld, and turned to
impious uses, namely to reward the Soldiers for what English blood they have
shed, and this done by those who never had the piety, to give any thing to the
Church. But of such Church robberies, I shall be silent hereafter because the
lands (thus ravished away from the true use to which they were intended) were
public lands, but being once dedicated to God, many good Christians, could
have wished, they had still been reserved to the same ends, though perhaps the
same persons might not be adjudge fit to possess them but of this only by the
way, however this is a lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

The people of England, as they had Liberties, which were their birthright and
precious to them, so also had the King as one of the Nation, for his being
King, and so Supreme although it added much to him, beyond other men, yet it
abridged him of nothing that was his, as a man, It was right the King should
have Liberty, in his Confirmation, of what the Peers, and Commons presented to
him, for his Royal ascent, or else they might, if ever both estates could
agree, at their pleasure, dethrone him, or limit, or alter his successors, or
what not injurious to him as a man, but much more as a King? So likewise the
Nobles of the Land, how should they be represented? Barely to be chosen among
the Commoners? If so what inconvenience of necessity must thence arise, and how
absurd it would be, a shallow discretion might easily apprehend, for first they
exceeding (for the Generallity) the Commons in estate, would be much more
popular, and so, if they could be courted so far out of their honor, as to
accept of popular elections, what Parliament could we expect but the majority
of them would be Nobles, and by this means they which in our present
constitution, are only revisers, and approvers of the Laws would soon become
the Law-framers, and Enactors. Or if you should imagine that few only of them
would be chosen, as of late, two of the house of Peers were Rumpers, what
inequality and absurdity would there be, when a small Borough shall elect two
Burgesses, and he who is Lord perhaps of twenty or more Buroughs, and the
chief man in three or four Counties as to estate, shall only be represented by
his own single voice, and some not at all? What siding, and factions this must
necessarily produce? Our Government then Mr Milton needed none of your Art to
mend it, no more then the Law of Marriage, needed your Divinity to explain and
limit it: and as by the latter you gained little credit among the Ladies or
such prudent sober men who made a Conscience of their Vow in Marriage, so the
former is less acceptable to true loyal breasts, and will be exibilated by
the vulgar, when once the fury of our former madness is a little allayed.

It Was strange that you could imagine no subordinate engagement to a single
person, but what is accompanied with Vassalage, when it is certain in faith,
that among the three persons, Christ the Son, and the Holy Spirit, who are
God blessed for evermore, are both Subordinately related as Persons to the
Father, and yet there is that blessed freedom and Liberty, that among them is
unity. But we will come to humane Governments, for concerning them will lie the
question, In society the first subordination is aeconomical of children to
Parents, and for to provide the better for a man's family, and to carry on
things more comfortably, comes in another relation, of servant and Master. Now
although the Man and Wife be head of the family, yet not separately but
unitedly, and the Wife her self is suborainate, being above all the rest, only
inferior to her husband, although in some cases equal. This state of society
admits no Democrasie, nay it is accounted a misery for a servant to have more
then one Master, insomuch that Christ says, it is impossible to serve two
masters, and adds for a reason, that he will hate that one, and love the
other, he will cleave to the one and despise the other. It was the Complaint of
Cyrus in the Comaedy, that he did not know, who, nor how many were his Masters,
and though he be brought in as a slave, yet this he laments as aggravating his
bondage. Here Mr Milton may observe diverse subordinations to one, and yet no
bondage, but all make up on free family, and live in peace, and Love, and
plenty together. The Wife is subject to her husband one to one, yet no Vassal
unless Mr Miltons doctrine of divorce may be admitted that he may turn her
off, as soon, or as often as his wayward spirit can find no delight in her. The
Children are subject to their Parents yet no slaves, and although they ow
obedience to both, yet their father is, in the family chief, and he makes and
usually executes all Laws, in his family, nevertheless no tyranny can be
charged upon the Father nor Vassalage imputed to the Sons, The Master and
Servant is another relation, the Servant bound by his own Consent, and to be at
the Masters command in lawful and possible things, yet would scorn the title
of a slave or Vassal, What need I instance in other societies, of Schools of
Learning, where one Pedagogue is found the best expedient, though he have
Vshers under him, so in Colleges, one Chancellor over an University, one
Rector or President over a Hall or College, so in a Ship one Master over a
Company, one Captain over a Regiment, one Colonel over an Army, one General,
and yet no slavery nor Vassalage. But to come nearer, in a family, where are
(perhaps) many Sons and Daughters, and a multitude of Servants, upon the
death of the Father, does not the supremacy (as I may call it, or chief rule,)
descend to the first born, both by light of Nature, and divine Commandment?
Surely Mr Milton never studied the dignity and authority of the r^ght of
Primogeniture, and that by Natures Law, and divine Institution, upon the score
of sleighting, and selling, whereof Esau gained the title of profane, and was
rejected, nor (having once despised his birthright) could he get the blessing
afterward though he sought it with tears, But old Isaac, subjected him to his
brother Jacob, that he should serve him, and bow down to him and yet was he no
slave, Nor were the Sons of Jacob (who were twelve) and his Grandsonnes,
(then a numerous multitude) Slaves, though all subjected to Judah, the
firstborn by divine praeheminence, and old Jacobs appointment, Ruben having by
his incontinency, (in defiling his own Fathers bed) forfeited that privilege,
which was next to death, (which he deserved therefore) a heavy, matchless
punishment. One would thing that if ever a Republique had been necessary and
useful, now it was when twelve Brethren, all living, and fatherless, had
under them a multitude of Sons and Daughters, Grandchildren, Servants, and
handmaids, yet then, one Judah is appointed Lawgiver to them all, and so
confirmed, until the coming of Shiloh, to whom the gathering of the Nations
should be, And this is not a Boorish way of a Dwindling Commonwealth, But the
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver (in the singular number,
mark that) from between his feet, etc. Yea, was not this part of the promise of
God to Abraham, when his name was changed unto Abraham, That Kings should come
out of his Loins? Before he had blessed him with fruitfulness, that he should
be the Father of many Nations, and his seed should be innumerable like the
stars of Heaven, or the sand upon the Seashore, but at last, and upon the
change of hi^ ^ame, he assures him that Kings should come out of him, not only
that his seed should be many, his posterity innumerable, but as an addition of
happiness, they should be advanced to the Majesty of a great and mighty
Kingdom, all which was fulfilled in Gods due time. With what face Mr. Milton,
can you brand that estate, with the base titles of Slavery, Bondage, Vassalage,
and Servileness, which God added unto Abraham as a corollary of temporal
blessings? faecundity even to innumerablenesse, as the Stars of Heaven or as
the sand upon the Seashore, he had promised him before, yet still he remained
Abraham, but when he ads this to his former blessings that his posterity should
flourish into a Magnificent Kingdom, then he alters his name into Abraham,
Whose other Son Ishmael, when Abraham groaned out his desires to the Lord, Oh
that Ishmael may live before thee, God answers him likewise concerning him, Of
him will I make a great Nation, I will multiply him exceedingly, and for an
addition or rather fullness of his earthly blessings? (Twelve Princes shall he
beget) So concerning Esau, the brother of Jacob, (from whom sprang the blessed
seed) the Scripture mentioning his temporal felicity, (for Isaac had blessed
him also with the fatness of the earth) records what Dukes sprang out of his
Loins, and what Kings reigned over Edom, before any King reigned over Israel.
Which makes it evident that Kingly Government is the most honorable,
majesticall Government, and argues a greater portion of Gods blessing powered
forth upon the Nation that injoyes it, then where any other inferior, and more
Contemptible Government is had.

It is a poor Sophisme that you use, Sir, that God gave Israel a King in wrath,
and imputed it a sin to them that they asked one, if it be certain, that God
had before blessed Abraham with the promise of Kings to come out of his loins,
and the Government of the seed of Jacob, was to be by a Scepter, and this to
spring out of Judah, and the King of Kings (God for ever blessed) was to be
clothed with humane flesh, from one that lineally descended of King David, and
his Grandfathers to be a continual succession of Kings. It argued only that
they asked unseasonably, and in unbelief, (for whoever believes, makes not
haste, but patiently waits the accomplishment of Gods Promises in his time)
they asked also upon a wrong principle, and for a wrong end, not to have the
blessed Promise of God accomplished, but to be like other Nations. Nor did they
consider, that then God was their King, Samuel ruling over them, and judging
them, who was known from Dan unto Beersheba to be a Prophet of the Lord, and to
have frequent Dialogues with his Maker. This was their sin, and God to convince
them of it, gave them their desire, a King in his wrath, whom he after took
away in his displeasure.

It Is strange, that God should make his Covenant with David, (even an
everlasting Covenant) which was so inviolable that sooner should the Covenant
of the Day, and of the Night be broken, then it, had he adjudged Kingship a
Government not so well-pleasing to him, as that of a Commonwealth: Yet at that
time, and before, the Sanedrim, or grand Counsel of the Seventy Elders, were
in being, nevertheless of none of them, nor of any of the Priests, though the
order of Aaron was Sacred and Noble, would Christ vouchsafe to come, but only
of the Kingly stock of the house of Judah, Two of whom David and Solomon, were
immediate Types of him, and Prophets Divinely inspired. Certainly Mr. Milton
this will argue something for Kingship, or Kingly Government.

But to proceed orderly in what I intend, I shall recapitulate some things, and
then proceed through the whole History of Gods People the Jews, urging what may
be necessary to my present purpose, (and this very briefly) afterward I shall
come to the times that have been since Christ, and shall take notice of some
instances, both modern and ancient, which have been delivered us by Historians,
concerning other places, especially Republics or Commonwealths.

First let us begin with Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, the first to
whom the promises, (which in his seed, were extended to all Nations) were made.
This Abraham was a great Prince, as was acknowledged by the Sons of Heth, so
great, that when the five Kings of Sedom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim and Zoar,
were overcome by the four Kings who came against them, and Lot among the rest
was taken Prisoner, he with his Confederates, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, went
out, gave them battle, overcame them, and rescued Lot. This Abraham was so
absolute a Monarch, that God testified of him, I know that he will command his
Family, and his Children after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to
do justice and judgment. See here, absolute command, and absolute subjection,
without tyranny on one band, or Vassallage on the other. The same power,
descended from him to Isaac, and successively to Jacob, and by him (being
Divinely directed) it was intayled upon Judah and his Offspring, over all their
brethren, until the coming of Shiloh, which Promise was accomplished (with the
blessing thereof) in the Anointing of David, especially when he was confirmed
King, over all Judah and Jerusalem.

During which interval of time, for the space of four hundred and thirty years
they were Sojourners, and in Bondage, in Egypt. But when the time of
deliverance came, God sent them a Captain, and a Redeemer, even Moses, who was
a Prince in Jeshuron, or Israel, concerning whom God said, That Aaron should be
unto him as a Mouth, and he should be unto the people as (or in the stead of)
God. What was this, but a KING, or Chief Ruler or Judge, as Stephen expounds it
in the Acts, This Moses (says he) whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a
Judge, or Ruler over us, the same did God send to be a Ruler and Deliverer. He
under God immediately, conducted, gave Laws to, yea he judged and determined
Controversies between them. And when the Seventy were chosen, by the advice of
Jethro (Moses Father-in-law) it was for his case, that he might not be worn out
by sitting all day to judge between them, to hear and determine their
Controversies: with a Reserve still, or an Always provided (as our Laws have
it) that the greater, and more difficult, and weighty matters be brought unto
Moses; by which it appears, that he under God was their Supreme Judge, Captain,
Leader and Conducter.

After Moses death, Joshua succeds him, of whom first it is testified, that the
Spirit of Moses rested upon him, that is, he was the Peoples Chief Captain, and
Judge, though the Sanedrim still continued, for that remained an Ordinance in
Israel, till the coming of the Messiah, (although perhaps with some variation)
yea it is further added, that the Lord promised to be, and was, with him, as he
was with Moses, and the people obeyed him, as they did Moses. I dare say, and
affirm, that no King of England ever did assume, nor any would hereafter desire
a larger extent of Authority, over Subjects, then Joshuah had and exercised
over Israel.

After Joshua succeed the Judges, who all of them exercised the authority
(although they wanted the title of Kings, yet one of the Sons of Gideon,
Abimelech, born of a Concubine, had both the power and title of a King, and was
a Tyrant; yet was he none, to whom, and in whom the promise of blessedness was
made, which was not accomplished till David's time.

Add to this, that the Glory of Israel was never complete but under Kingly
Government, no nor till the promised Kingly stock came. Before, they were sold
now to this heathen King, now to that, oppressed, burdened, and afflicted; yea,
and in the time of Saul, the Philistines oppressed Israel sorely, insomuch, that
you shall find Saul with a slender Army, and them following him trembling, on
the other hand, the insulting Philistims reproaching them, when they saw any of
them to appear, These Hebrews come out of their holes into which they were
crept to hide themselves: Until David, the Chosen of the Lord comes to sit
upon the throne, and to have the Kingdom established unto him over all Israel,
as well as Judah, then he fights the Battles of the Lord, and God gives him
Victory on every side, until the name of Jacob became famous among the Nations.

And it is worth observation, that after the death of Joshua, and the Elders
who outlived Joshuah, who had seen Gods great works, no Ruler being then in
Chief, the Children of Israel ask counsel of God, who shall go up first to
battle, and God gives answer, Judah shall go up first. Now the Sanedrim or
Commonwealth of Israel, had a time to be tried, how good a Government that
was, yet then you shall find, the Children of Israel making peace with the
Nations about them, contrary to the express command of God, by Moses and
Joshua, severely enjoined, and often reiterated: Then comes the Angel with that
sad message, which made them lift up their voice and weep, so remarkably that
the place from it took the name of Bochim, or place of weeping. Then was that
praevarication of Israel, not to be expiated but by reiterated, and tedious
servitudes, under Heathen, neighboring Princes, whom they forbore to
extirpate, according to the Command of God. Then comes the time of which the
Holy Ghost testifies that there was no King in Israel, and every one did that
which was right in his own eyes, This was the Interstitium of Government, (that
of the bare Sanedrim or Seventy Elders, being reputed by God as none at all) in
which the Levites Concubine was, with unheard of brutish inhumanity, ravished
to death, which barbarous abominable action was revenged, with almost the whole
extirpation of one great Tribe in Israel, to wit Benjamin, forty thousand stout
men, being lost in two preceding Battles, on the part of the Eleven other
Tribes, and after this, the Jabesh-Gileadites utterly cut off (all the males to
wit, and married women) because they were Anathematized by a Solemn Vow of the
Congregation, for not appearing before the Lord in Mizpeh, in revenge of this
detestable Rape upon the Tribe of Benjamin.

By which it is evident, that the Government of Moses, Joshua, and the Judges
was accounted by God as Kingship, and the want thereof, is by Divine
inspiration reputed as a total defect of Government. There was no King in
Israel, therefore every man did what was good in his own eyes: Yet at that time
it is evident, (by the same sacred authority) that there were Elders of the
Congregation, otherwise called the Chief of the Tribes, who consulted upon this
act, (of those of Gibeah) committed against the Levite, upon his Concubine, and
who, upon the Benjamites appearing armed to defend the fact, managed the War
against the whole Tribe, who devoted to destruction (by a solemn Curse in
Mizpeh) what City, Town, or Family soever, should not appear to revenge this
wickedness: Who repented after, that a Tribe should come so near to perishing
out of Israel, Who advised a way to the Benjamites, how to supply them (that
survived that great overthrow, and massacre of their Brethren) with Wives,
having before given an Oath, with a Curse (to all the people) upon whosoever
should give a wife to a Benjamite. A man would think, that here were Government
good enough, if a Republican Government were worth estimation: But
notwithstanding it is testified, that no King being in Israel, every man did
what was good in his own eyes. The miseries brought upon Israel during the
Interval, between Joshua and the Judges, Sampson and Samuel, were so great and
overwhelming, that David a great Warrior, and with whom God was, spent his
whole Reign, in fighting the Lords Battles, and making up those defects, and
amending such faults, which were committed during the space, that there was no
King in Israel, who therefore, being as the Holy Ghost styled him, a man of
blood, was put off from building the Temple of the Lord, (although it was in
his heart, and God accepted therein his good intentions) but this work was
reserved to Solomon his Son and Successor, a King of Peace, and blessed with
Plenty and all manner of Prosperity, (and so Chists Type) in whose days
Jerusalem was the renown of all the Nations round about, who paid Tribute to
Solomon, and counted it their glory and happiness to be his Friends and Allies.

Add to this, that during the Reign of David, Jerusalem first came to be
subject to Israel, (being formerly in the possession of the Jebusites,) which
was the only place chosen by God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, out of all the
Earth, to put his name there, here was Zion the holy place, out of which the
Lord vouchsafed to distill his blessing, First upon his chosen people, and by
their means upon all that fear him, in all Nations, making no difference. After
David, comes Solomon mighty in power, and extent of dominion, (for the
bordering Nations were his tributaries, to the great River, yea and beyond it)
splendid in magnificence, abounding in Riches, incomparable for Wisdom, yet
blessed with Peace, he builds a Temple for the Lord of Hosts, and a place for
the God of Jacob to dwell in, who sitting in the high and holy Heavens and whom
the Heavens of Heavens cannot contain, yet vouchsafed to dwell between the
Cherubims, which Solomon, had made according to the pattern given to him from
himself. Of this performance God himself testyfieth, that from the day that
Israel came out of Egypt, he had no house to dwell in, but was content to
dwell in Tabernacles, in which (being made according to the pattern, showed by
God to Moses, in the Mount) were put the Arc, with other holy things,
belonging to Gods worship, and so continued till Solomon's time, as showing that
God dwelt not, but did then only Sojourn, (as it were) with them sure til the
time of Solomon, then first among the Israelites was Religion, not only in
purity, but also flourished, Gods name was not only known to be great and holy,
but it also appeared most glorious. Then did truth appear triumphant in the
Beauty of Holiness.

After Solomon in the hands of several successive Kings the Government
continued, until the Captivity, although God to chastise the sins of
Solomon, (according to his Covenant with David his Father, in case his sons
should forsake his Law) rent ten tribe from his Son Rehoboam, and his seed
yet continued he the Government of Kings, till the Captivity unto them; among
whom some were more eminently good; prosperous and famous, as especially
Hezekiah, and Josiah, others wicked, and Idolatrous; forsakers of Gods Laws,
and therefore afflicted.

After the Captivity in the time of the second Temple, the Jews had many
changes of Governors, and Conditions as is largely related in the history of
Flavius Josephus, but flourished under none comparably to Monarchichal
Government, and although for a long time, the High Priest was, and ruled, as
their Prince, however he changed not the Kingly Constitution into that of a
Republique, as Historians will fully satisfy any man that desires information
therein, Yea and during the second Temple, before Christ it is certain, that
then was their time most troublesome, their Condition most lamentable, and to
be pityed, their distractions almost ruinous, when the true succession from
Shealtiel to Zerobabel, etc. was interrupted, then were they sold as it were,
for a prey to the neighboring Grecians; and to other enemies, who by frequent
incursions, and in a manner devastations of them almost ruined them, only now
and then God sent them Princes, who were deliverers and famous Captains, such
as the Machabes and others, of whom Josephus in his H^story instituted (de
bello Judaico) gives a clear large and full account.

To this agrees that the Jews always did expect the Messaih to be a Prince a
great Ruler and deliverer, and (to use the disciples words, to Christ when he
was about to leave the World) One who should restore the Kingdom, unto Israel.
And so (although in another form then the Carnal Jews expected him) Christ is
come, the true King of Jews which he denied not unto Pilate, when it was asked
of him. If or no he were a King, but answered, It was so, and added that for
this end he came into the World, to bear witness unto the truth, with truth
the blind Jews not perceiving rejected him, and in him their own mercy, yea
they crucified him and in him their true KING the Lord of Glory.

And now Mr. Milton I am come to that which you seem most willing to be at
(viz.) the Command and example of our blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ,
which as you conceive expressly prohibits Kingship to any of his disciples
branding it with the mark of Gentilisme.

Surely Sir, the Proverb is in you veryfied, None so blind as he that will not
see, (I speak not this of your Corporal blindness) for that, (God is my
Judge) I pity, but of your better eyes, (viz.) the understanding, which
(methinks) cannot be so palpably blinded, as you would make appear it is.

We shall easily grant you, that Christ there speaks of temporal dominion: but
he speaks to his Disciples, or rather Apostles, who were his family and
household, who to the very day of his assention knew not but that he intended at
last to appear a temporal Prince. Now Christ's Kingdom was not of this World,
as he himself testyfied when he was betrayed, if it had been his servants would
have fought for him, those days of his converse upon earth were the days of
his humiliation, in which his Kingdom though real was invisible, the Captain
of our Salvation, being to be made perfect by sufferings; So that the check his
Disciples received from him, concerning their ambi^ious desire not only disalow
Kingly Authority among them, but all temporal power. For it is apparent that
the two Sons of Zebede, by their Mothers intercession, did not desire to be
both Kings but only his chief favorites, in his approaching Kingdom, which
they carnally imagined, was near that one might sit at his right, the other at
his left hand therein, Upon which he teaches them the nature of his Kingdom,
that it was at present to be begun and carried on with suffering Upon the
indignation of the other ten, (when they heard this) follows this discourse
of Christ, in which he speaks not only of Kings that bear dominion, but of
those that are great and grandees, and are therefore called gracious Lords, Not
unlike to the Hoghen Moghen, Heers of Holland, What you insinuate of a Free
Commonwealth, Coming nearest as you conceive, this Pattern, and Precept: I
conceive you would have it understood of our blessed Republique from 48 to 53.
Wherein our humble Servants, (as you term them) who were also (if we be so mad
as to believe them) the servants of God, served both God and the Nation, whom
they pretended equally to be serviceable to, a scurvy trick, and in an
ill-favored way, breaking their Oaths and Vows with one, and their
engagements with the other.

But as for their serving at their own costs and charge, I wish you would be so
far a friend to Church and State, as to make that true; I am sure, for that
lamentable service they did for God, in silencing his Ministers, and almost
destroying his Worship, they took from him, whatever for many ages past, had
been piously dedicated to the maintenance of his service; and for the never to
be forgotten service done to the Nations, they did what they could both to
ruin and beggar Majesty, undid the Nobility and most of the Gentry, and
squeezed the Commons, till they wrung out from them, their radical moisture,
and almost their heart-bloud. As for their walking the streets like other men,
it would be well for them, as the case now stands, (blessed be God for it) if
they could do so, having deserved so much hate and vengeance from all.

But to return to your Scripture, you are not ignorant Sir, I make no question,
that many things which Christ said to his Apostles, and which he gave them in
Precept, was but for the time, and suited to the present occasion, as when he
commanded them to go forth without Provision, of Clothes, Meat, or Money, or
Staff, yet afterward he commanded, or rather advised them, That he who had
Money, should make use of it, and he who had no sword should sell his Garment
and buy one, He that expounds that precept of Christ, as given to all
Christians, and to be perpetually binding (which was by you cited) I dare
promise him he shall not stop at Kingly Government, but upon the same rule
shall in fine, reject all Authority. For at that time Mr. Milton, you know,
many of the Gentiles were governed by Republiques, as to their own Formal
constitution, although they acknowledged and paid a Homage to the Roman Empire:
Nor was it then out of memory, since the Romans were themselves a Formal
Commonwealth, the bloody disputes for it against Imperial Monarchy being ended
but a small time before the birth of Christ. You may read how our Savior
refused to divide an Inheritance between two brethren, and yet the Apostle
Paul, who thought he had the Mind and Spirit of Christ, (and I hope you do not
question it) accounted it a shame to the Corinthian Christians, that they were
either not able, or unwilling to determine a Controversy between Brother and
Brother. But I most wonder, that you in your reading did not observe, or would
not take notice, that this ambitious spirit of being greatest, was more then
once the fault and infirmity of the Disciples, and so more then once reproved:
When Christ took a little Child and set amongst them, and said, Whoever
receives not the Kingdom of God as a little Child, shall not enter therein:
That this spirit was the same of Temporal greatness, is certain, for they had
learned, that the power of Christ, and the Gifts by him given to them, were
freely bestowed, and so they were commanded freely to give them: No Divine ever
yet conceived, that they contended who should exceed in the gifts of grace, nor
does Christ's rebuke imply any such thing, for he proposed to them the example
of a Child, free from ambition and animosity. If you would from hence infer
the mannagement of Christian States, and Commonwealths by Children or Infants,
you might do it with the same Reason you made your forementioned Inference, and
I should reply that of the Prophet to you, Woe be to thee O Land! when thy
Prince is a Child. Your other Scripture by which you would confute those who
stand up for Kingly Government of folly and brutishness, I am sure is simply
brought in, and brutishly applied: Because the Wiseman sends the sluggard to
the Pismire, who without King or Ruler manifests unwearyed diligence in the
Summer to provide for Winter, that he may learn understanding from her, you
conclude (quite from the Text) that they who think themselves or the Nation
undone without a King, let them seem what they will, have not the true
understanding of a Pismire. It Is well Salmasius is dead, or else in recompense
of your allowing him to be only, and scarce a good Grammarian, he would from
this place have convinced you of want, of both Grammar Logic and Divinity, or
else that you are pleased to make little use of either here. Grammar will tell
you, that the Clause (having no Ruler Prince or Lord) is within a Parenthesis,
and may be left out, and yet the sense entire. Also that speaking to the
sluggard, and sending him to learn Wisdom from the Pismire, implies no more,
but that he would have him diligent, while the season calls for it, not that he
advises him to form or esteem States, and Politic Governments by her Example,
Consider her ways (says the Wise man) how she provides her meat in the
Summer, and gathers her food in the Harvest; he sends him not to consider her
Constitution, how she had no King, but her ways, or what she does, being so
without King, Ruler or Lord, Logic would also teach you, that the addition of
that Clause, by way of Parenthesis, does add only an Emphasis to his
Exhortation, or rather rebuke, and includes barely an argument a fortiori, and
absurdo, that if an irrational Pismire, without Lord or Ruler does thus and
thus, much more ought a rational Man, living under a wise and discreet Prince,
and Prudent Governors, use the same discretion and diligence, and what an
absurd folly, and foolish shame it would be, if he did otherwise. Divinity also
would teach you, not to wrest and torture Scripture, you know him who has
testified of many that do so to their own destruction: You cannot employ it to
a worse end, then by it to reproach and cast contempt upon Dignityes. Do you
think Solomon or the Holy Spirit by which he wrote intended any such thing in
them words which you gather from them? Himself was a great, glorious, and
Magnificent Prince, and begins his Proverbs with the addition of his title
(King of Israel.) So also his Book of the Preacher. I wonder that you could hit
on this obscure mentioning of a Prince, in one Text, relating to a sluggard,
and Pismires, and overlook many plain Texts, teaching honor, and obedience due
to the KING, My Son fear God and the King, etc. the fear of God and the King
are Coupled together, by an inviolable kno^ of Gods own making. So in another
place, Curse not the King, no not in thy heart, etc. But most evident is this
of the Proverbs, for the dignity of Kingship. See thou (says the wise man)
him that is diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, he shall
not stand before mean (or obscure men. It would be small encouragement to
diligence in business, if a man thereby should only prefer himself to be a
Slave and Vassal, as you insinuate, standing before Kings to be, he might
better neglect it, and enjoy the happy liberty of standing before mean and
obscure men, such as you would have our Commonwealth framed of: And we were in
a likely condition to have been brought to that pass, could your Favorites and
Patriots have accomplished their designs, concerning whose Quality, Mr. Walker,
in his History of Independency will satisfy any curious man, if he be
rational. To mention all places in the Scripture that mention with honor, and
command Conscientious Obedience to Kings, would be tedious, and it would be
only (agere actum) Mr. Prynne has fully and judiciously performed that: It is
enough that it was never questioned till these blessed times of Atheistical
Liberty. Christ was born under an Emperor, not during the time of the Roman
Commonwealth, under Augustus Caesar, at that time the whole world was at
peace, the Prince of peace then appearing, then was the Temple of Janus shut,
which never fell out during the time of the Republican Constitution of Rome:
And Christ, who was born in Bethlehem Judea, yet conversed chiefly in Galilee,
a Formal Kingdom, under Herod, besides its subordination to the Roman Empire,
where also he did most of his mighty works, where he appeared first, and
conversed chiefly after his Resurrection, and then no Christian doubts, but he
begun his Kingdom of glory, in his own person. In his life time, being asked
Tribute, although he first made it appear, that Peter and he, (being children
and not strangers) were free from the payment of Tribute, yet paid it, and
wrought a miracle to that end.

But I shall not urge this subject farther, forasmuch as the Scriptures
commanding us to pray for KINGS in the first place, the Precept of Christ to
render to Caesar what is Caesar's, with other Scripture Rules, of fearing God,
honoring the King, joined in one sentence, of branding such who condemn
Authority and despise Governments, of being subject for the Lords sake to all
that are over us, to the King as Supreme, etc. all being New Testament
Precepts, together with the paterns and practices, and professions of Primitive
Christians, have all been urged fully and satisfactorily to the Ingenuous by
learned Mr. Prynne the honor of our English Nation, in this time of the
general Apostasy and prevarication of this Nation, from their duty to their
King, and yielding obedience to Gods commands, and Christ's, and his Apostles
both Precepts and Presidents, and the Churches pattern and practice, for these
sixteen hundred years, and upwards.

I shall return to the assertion before laid down, namely that Monarchy was the
best of Governments, to which I added that ours was the best of Monarchies, as
to the dignity of Monarchy, or Kingship, (to use the new word put upon our
former Government by the Rumpers) to both of which I have already spoken, and
urged (as to the excellency of Kingly Government) Gods promise to Abraham, and
the accomplishment thereof under David and Solomon, that Nation never being so
famous, so glorious, and so flourishing, as during their Reigns, besides whose
examples, let the whole world be sought for instances, and never shall we find
the magnificence of a Commonwealth comparable to that of Monarchies. How did
the Roman Empire in Augustus time, excel in glory the same Roman
Commonwealth: And yet who knows not, that is moderately versed in the Roman
History, that their very Common wealths were but nominally so, really
Monarchies: What were the Consuls but in stead of a King, and the Senate his
Council. Which Consuls though two, yet how often stood one for more then a
Cipher? What was Bibulus joined with Julius, but as his shadow? What was
Antonius with Cicero, when he without mentioning the other, boasts of himself,
not privately, but openly, even to Envy, O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam.
You will say the Consule were changed yearly: Granted, but had they stood
longer it had been better, however the Senate being for life, and the Consuls
chose out of the Senate, they were better able to understand the series of
affairs, yet how did one Consul envying his Predecessor carp at what Laws
were made in his time? and labor to disgrace and repeal them? the other making
a party, stood up and maintained them? Thus the Agrarian and the Portian Laws,
with many others, that might be named, were polemically handled in the Pulpits,
and disputed in the field by bloody battles, that it was not amiss which was
said by one concerning the Agrarian Law, That the opposing and defending it had
cost as much blood, and made as many breathless Carcases, as would dung as
much Land, as was really benefitted by it. How were they during their
Common-Wealthsship plagued with continual aspiring minds, whose thirst and rage
was never quenched but with incredible bloodshed? Sylla, Marius, the Gracchi,
with many others may be reckoned up, whose ambition of overtopping all, proved
almost the Ruin of their Commonwealth, How were they enforced sometimes
voluntarily to choose, sometimes perforce to endure a Dictator which was a King
or Emperor, with a new name, not much unlike to our English Protector. When
Rome was sacked, the Senate slain, and all things desperate, the Capitol only
remaining (in a manner) of that great City, the rest turned into rubbish and
ashes, by the merciless flames, then something like a King was found necessary,
and that was a Dictator, who having done his work, and freed his almost ruined
Country, in plain hearted simplicity, resigned his Dictatorship, and was
repayed his good service, with the full measure of ingratitude. If upon a force
put, a King or somewhat like a King be the best expedient, it is doubtless
best always, for (non minor est virtus (quam quaerere) parta tueri) Furius
Garnillus found how ungrateful his countrymen proved when by his means they
were delivered, a good caution for men in Supreme Authority, to look to
themselves. But to return to the Roman Commonwealth, so much admired, by our
modern Statists, It will be no solaecisme to affirm that whatever was in it
worth admiration was performed by such who wanted nothing of a King, but the
name and settlement, for want of which they were ever rent with divisions,
Conspiracies and inbred tumults, often enforced to make, or to endure a
Dictator, or Protector, or High-Gonstable, call him what you will, but an
absolute Monarch he was until Julius Caesar came, who first being chosen
perpetual Dictator, after assumed the title of Emperor, and as an Empire Rome
flourished as long, and was incomparably more glorious; then in its own
condition when a Commonwealth. As for the Civil wars in the Empire that were
frequent and bloody, it must be owned, that peace and war are in the hands of
God, by whom Kings Reign, and enjoy peace or enmity at home and abroad. However
the Reign of Augustus Caesar and of several of his Successors, show evidently,
how happy and how peaceable it is possible (if God please) for an incredible
Monarchy to be for a long season: but the want of any example (at any time) for
the like in a Republique, shows it to be next door to impossible that is beyond
Imagination improbable. How glorious, how stately and magnificent was the
Babylonian, Assyrian, Persian, and Grecian, Monarchies? And at this day the
Turkish, Tartarian, Persian, Chinensian, Ethiopian, and Indian Monarchies?
with that of the Moors in Africa? These I name as Heathenish, but great
Monarchies, And of Christians the Russian, Palonian, German, Spanish, French,
and formerly English Monarchies, how famous are they, and were we. To which you
oppose the Venetian Seigniori, the Low Country Boores and the rude Switzer
Cantons. Because I find you good at Comparisons I shall be with you there and
let the effect speak the cause. And because I perceive you liked very well of
our Constitution from 48 to 53, as giving great hopes of a glorious rising
Commonwealth, I shall admit that time to come also into Comparison with our
selves under Kingly Government, during the Reign of our late King of blessed
memory, (although unfortunate to the infamy of his Subjects, as many as were
guilty of his Tragical misfortunes) before these sad divisions appeared, which
produced in your opinion so glorious an effect. As for the Athenian,
Lacedemonian, and other Grecian Commonwealths they were of so old a date that
the History of them is scarce to be had true, and certain, and therefore I
shall speak little of them, but as by the by, perhaps I may glance at them, as
you have done.

First then, as to the Venetian Seigniory, I yield its long continuance, its
abounding in Riches, and traffic, but withal, I suppose, you will easily
grant the power of its troublesome neighbor the Turk, and the fear of its
other neighbors who would soon swallow it up if divided, has been the chief
preservative of that Commonwealth under God, and given it so long a life. But
yet the Duke of that Seigniory, does not differ so much from a King, whose
being limited to a double voice, as things are carried, signifies as little to
abridge him of Kingly Authority, as the Nominal electiveness of the Emperor of
Germany, is a real bar to the Austrian family. Yet let the Venetian Policy,
thus far speak for the excellency of King-ship. That one Kingdom of Candia
which is in their jurisdiction, is the present irreconsileable bone between
them and the Turks, the one having gained the most of the Island, (all in a
manner) and having built Mosques there, and made places of buryall, is
prohibited by his religion, to yield up the same, by any treaty, or for any
Composition, the Venetians on the contrary, having no Kingdom belonging to
their Jurisdiction, but that will take no price to sell away the title,
although the defending of it costs them annually an hundred times its value,
whereas if they would quit it they might have both peace and a considerable
price for it, yet refuse it obstinately, of so great esteem, do they account
the title of a Kingdom. And to speak truth, the Venetian Government is suited
to their territoryes, they grew up with it, and were no sooner considerable,
but had such about them, who watched all opportunityes of swallowing them up,
that if they were convinced of a better way of Government, yet was it
impossible for them to change, a new Policy, being like a new Garment, though
never so much better then the old, yet will be a good while before it will fit
so well and be so easy, so that if they should endeavor a change, could they
use the Celerity of Angels, in shifting out of one form into another before
they could suit themselves to it, or it to themselves, they and their
Government would be griped, and wrested out of their hands, and they made a
prey, if not to their cruel and barbarous, yet at least to their ambitious
Neighbors. As for Hollanders, if they be a Commonwealth, none of the least
causes is because they are fit to make nothing else, being never but a limb of
Monarchy, yet as far as they are capable of it, have a Prince of Orange, who
differs little really from a King only he may be said to be Rex belluarum he
has a company of malapert swinish unruly Subjects, whose revenue to which he
is by the peace restored, lies part in the King of Spain, (his former Liege
Lords,) territories, some under the Emperor, some under the French. But among
them and out of those Provinces only that rebelled from the King of Spain,
should a King live and expect his Revenue he would be a ridiculous King of
boorish subjects. They indeed might be rich, but the King a beggarly Prince.
They must be then what they are perforce as a block of wood is best employed to
make Beetles to cleave other wood withal, if it be so knotty that it will
serve for nothing else, or at least nothing better. What a good Commonwealth
think you Holland to be? A Hotch potch of many Independent Jurisdictions,
joining forces together upon necessity, to keep them from being punished for
their Rebellion against, and abjuring their lawful King, that so they may
mutually secure, indemnifye, and keep harmless each other, among whom are to be
found some few relicts of Ancient Nobility, which appear among, and have
relation to the rest, as here and there a great Plum in a Niggards Plum
pudding, where not only the provinces are independent each on other but every
Village is a distinct and I may say Supreme jurisdiction, of it self. Only the
King of Spain like a great Wolf has dared them, (as a Hawk over a hedge dares
the small birds) and they herd together, to oppose him, as a herd of swine will
run together to oppose a Wolf, with their young in the midst, making a ring
to defend themselves. Some joint Rules of Confederacy, the united Provinces
(as they are called) have made among themselves but indeed they are but as so
many several flowers picked and made up into a Nosegay, which have no tie one
to another, but a string about all, thus they were at first united for fear of
a string or halter, and to this day they continue friendly to one another, and
to the whole world upon the same account, so far as they either get by them,
or cannot be without them. And for the Switzers by degrees rent from
neighboring Monarchies, who but he that is a Switzer born and so would not
defile his own nest, can commend or speak a word in commendation of their
Policy, so far from being desirable, that it is scarce tolerable. As for the
Genevah Commonwealth, the constant fear they live in, makes their political
estate, undesireable, yet are they not altogether independent, nor safe, but
under the wing of that Prince whom they chose for their Protector, And if the
Protector be more honorable then the protected, then the Monarchys of France,
must needs be preferred, before the Neithe landish Republique, the protection
of whom was offered to England and accepted by France. The Switzers also have
their Protector, and so the Hamburgers, the Genoeses, and in a word not any
without protection, formally granted on one hand and accepted by the other,
that bears the face of a Commonwealth. And the Protector and Patron is still
a Monarch, and therefore of the two, Monarchy is the more Noble and absolute
Government.

Such a Commonwealth (Mr. Milton,) as Holland is I suppose you could wish, and
would help to make England, but there is among them something that you do not
so well like and approve of, that is, the house of Nassau or Orange family,
Certainly, what honor or pre-eminence that family has, we may say as old
Tobit said to his Son, concerning the Angels having half of what was brought
back from their Journey, considering the many and good services he had done It
is due to him. So may we say, and the Dutch when time was acknowledged so much
of this Princes Grandfather, he deserved all they did or could bestow on him,
or his posterity. By his valor, prowess, friends, and Estate, at first they
rebelled prosperously, and by the same afterward, they were defended, from
punishment of this their Rebellion safe and kept secure, to save whose legally
forfeited lives and fortunes (if reduced) he hazarded and spent his own
fortunes, and lost his own life, while these merits of the Grandfather were
fresh in memory, and the Son surviving the Father might be, and was useful,
and serviceable in the same kind, what honor then too great, what accounted
too dear for the house of Orange, though since they have with sufficient
ingratitude forgot the merits of the Father, Grandfather and great
Grandfather, and would deal with the Issue of this their deliverer, as the
unthankful Sechemites did with the posterity of Jerubbaal. This revolt of the
Hollanders, I call it rebellion, as being its proper name, since it was a
total defection from, and taking arms against, and making war upon their
undoubted Sovereign, It Is true and I yield that they had provoking Cause but
whether upon this provocation, (and that very great) they did not show much of
Man, in the management of this revolt, I dispute not, only give it the proper
name of Rebellion, which in all cases is not absolutely sinful, though it
never will loose that its proper and unalterable denomination, as the Killing
of a man, in never so just defense, yet leaves the fact manslaughter.

But to return to their policy they are according to their own name, by which
they call themselves so far from being a Commonwealth, that in the plural
number, they style themselves the Hoghen Maghen estates of the Low Countries,
one juridically not depending upon the other, They were auntiently so many
Lorships, or (in their own Language,) Gravescapes, which being no way
subordinated to, or depending upon each other, agreed together only in a
mutual relation of Subjection, and equally owed allegiance to the King of
Spain. Whose minister in those parts the Duke of Alva by unparelled, and scarce
before heard of Tyranny, and barbarous Cruelty, especially laboring and
endeavoring to impose upon their Consciences; and to bring up amongst them the
bloody inquisition, that monstrous engine of inhumanity, exercised chiefly upon
the score of Religion, they were compelled to take up arms, and rebel against
their Liege King, which was prosecuted (on both hands) with that violence that
the breach was made irreparable, and so they for ever cast off, and solemnly
abjured his authority. So that now Zealand, Gelderland Vtrecht, Mastrecht, etc.
are distinct Jurisdictions by themselves, and independing as to Holland, Yea
the very great Towns of each province, Juridically depend not on any other,
but are absolute among and within themselves, and the States although they
convene together, it is not in the form of our English Parliament, or Grand
Counsel, but only to advise each with other, to consider and consult, and
thereupon to persuade, yet have not the least power to Compel, So that all the
other provinces together, cannot give one Law to Zealand, or to Gelderland, but
the Lords of each Province, may do what they will; further then they can be
won by persuasion, they cannot be commanded, by the rest, though altogether
agreeing. The same may be said of Amsterdam Roterdam, the Hague or any other
Town, whose own Lords or Heirs, are Autocraticall, or invested with full power
of themselves, nor own they any Commanding, or Prohibiting, or any way Coercive
Power, above, or without themselves, their own Walls bounding, not only their
Towns, but including Supreme jurisdiction from which lies no appeal. Such a
pass you would have England brought to, and your Country is much beholding to
you Sir for your goodwill. I suppose you expect no posterity to leave behind
you, that might curse the Fathers invention, should it take effect; You
contrive very readily to have each County to have Law, and education for youth
among themselves, and each chief Town, (if not so named before) dignified with
the Title of a City, that we may not come so far for Law and Justice, only
you are troubled at Controversies which may happen between two of distinct
Counties, and these you would have decided at the Metropolis, I suppose you
intend London, But because, it was always accounted as easy to found a New
City, as to form, and establish a New Government, it may be you have designed
another Metropolis in your Windmill brain. But be it as it will, why may not
the plaintiff sue still in the County where the defendant lives, unless he
can by accident find him, or by some device get him into and arrest him in the
County in which himself dwells? and what need in such case any Metropolis at
all? And so what needs a Grand Counsel, but only Conventions to advise and
Consult, but what matter of enacting Laws when every County may be within it
self Supreme? Certainly Mr. Milton, you were very inconsiderate when you wrote
that ready and easy way of establishing a Free Commo^-wealth. I shall not here
urge the unpracticableness of these your fanatique State-whymsis, but ask you
(presupposing them as you say easy, and ready just now to be put in practice)
Cui bono? In what shall we be bettred there by? and it is like you may answer me,
Peruse my advice and there you will find the benefits thereof. There I find you
give us hopes, that if we can but either Cantonize England, as the Switzers, or
imitate the Hollanders, or the Venetian, avoiding the Duke of the one or the
Prince of the other, We shall first be free in Civil and religious things, and
Secondly we shall have our minds made Governors, our Spirits enobled, our
Courages advanced, and be made Valourous, whereas otherwise we shall be curbed
of our Liberty, and have spirits suitable to our Condition base and degenerate.
Perhaps Sir you write experimentally. While you held your obligation to your
Wife, which as your learned doctrine of divorce testifies, was an insufferable
yoke, of which you could say, with the Apostle Peter concerning the Law, It was
a Yoke which neither you nor your forefathers could bear, During this
vassalage, I may imagine you, likewise to be so poor spirited as to fear an
Oath, and to be inslaved to your Allegiance, and so far to reverence
Authority, as not to dare to bark at the highest thereof, to wit Majesty. But
since you grew so wise, as to throw aside your Wife because your waspish spirit
could not agree with her qualities, and your Crooked phantasy could not be
brought to take delight in her, you then grew so free, that as for your
religion you could take the Christian Liberty, to turn a Libertine at large, or
in plain terms an Atheist, and as for your Allegiance, you found your self so
free set from it, that you could without remorse discharge your filth at, and
vomit forth your poison against majesty, then you grew so valourous, that you
could swear allegiance, and take the oath of Sovereignty, the Covenant also, or
Solemn League, with the Vow and Protestation, the Engagement, also without
boggling or starting; and reserve Courage enough, for twenty several, nay
Contradictory Oaths, if reformed Authority, (in plain terms rebellious
Usurpers) require it, and hope of profit or danger of loss, invite to, and
back it. Truly Sir you are in my judgment a valiant man grown, who durst not
only adventure against the most learned Salmatius, but had the impudent
confidence to snarle, and bark at the most ponderous, Judicious, and Matchless
piece, his Majesty's ROYAL MEDITATIONS, entitled (...).

But Sir, upon a serious, yea a slight enquiry, we shall find no such
qualities among either the Hollanders or the Switzers, as to make us in love
with them, but we may truly say, There is no King there, therefore, every man
does what is good in his own eyes. The Dutch is a Boorish Nation, where
Courtesy and Civil Entertainment is as much a stranger, as in most places in
Christendom: All that can be said, A man for his money shall have what he can
bargain for, that the Town or house (in which he is) does afford, but
ingenuity, learning, piety, misery, and whatever may move a charitable respect,
if by Gods Providence, they happen to be separated from money, a Turk, or a Jew
will afford a Christian as much relief, as a Dutch man will such a person, so
that it may be the Inscription there upon the Gate of every Town,

Ipse licet veneris musis comitatus Homere,
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.
They are rich I yield, their dexterity lying in that one thing (chiefly)
getting Money, for to compass which they account scarce any thing sordid,
their affability excells not the Scotch Highlands. Riches is the standard of
their advancement. And as they have Popular Rulers, so they receive from those
whom they govern but popular respect. Two North Country Farmers in England,
where one excells the other in Estate, show much more respect, the poorer to
him that is wealthyer, then the Dutch Boors give to their Heers. That this
rusticity, and surlynesse is the effect of their Government, is evident by
their neighboring Flandrians, who still retain their allegiance, no men in the
world more heartily open breasted, civilly courteous, pitifully charitable then
they, who were formerly one Arch-Dutchy with the other revolted Provinces, a
most clear argument of the degenerate effect of Popular Government, for when
Governors approach so near to the Governed, in quality, and deportment, they
become quickly like the block in the Fable, which Jupiter threw down to be King
among the Frogs. The bounce of it made the Frogs tremble, but when the flashing
of the water (which it caused by its fall) was over, they drew near by little
and little, and at last (casting away all fear) clambered upon and skipt off
from it, and in conclusion contemned it. So a Dutch Governor, or Lord, when he
flounces (as it were) upon a Their or Murderer, or Coyner of false Money, of
the like, he makes him to tremble; but, the rest casting away fear, will talk
irreverently to and slightly of their Heers, nor make scruple to curse them
bitterly, if either they really do displease them, or the others apprehend
cause of displeasure. As for the ennobling of the spirits of men, which you
fondly expect, or at least give hopes of, upon a Commonwealth account, it is
most evident by experience, that nothing is more contrary.

Let any man bust cast his eye upon, and observe the Switzers, a rude,
barbarous Nation, as to the generality, and although all of them profess the
Gospel, and many of them the Protestant Religion, yet as to the fierceness of
their manners, they may in Comparison of most Christian Kingdoms, be looked
upon, as Ovid in his banishment, accounted the Getae, and Sauromah, being put
in balance against the Romans. A savage Peasantlike Nation, fit only for the
wars, and to be employed by almost any that will pay them. Who will they not
fight for? yea, who will they not fight against for Money? Insomuch, that in
the Imperial, Brandenburgish, Polonian, Danish, Swedish Armies, yea almost in
all ezpeditions of the French; in the number likewise of the Transilvanian
Forces, you shall find the Switzers serving as Soldiers: So also in the
Venetian service, and most of the Italian wars; Rough hewn, desperate men,
ready to be employed for, or against any Prince, wanting one of their own, to
Civilize their ruder dispositions, and to employ their brutish valor in more
noble and honorable Achievements, for the glory, and enlarging of the
Territories, at least the Jurisdiction or Fame of their own Nation.

So the Hollanders, what are they but the Common Pedlars of Europe, that to get
a little Money, will comply with, speak fair to, and at the same moment, betray
the most confiding of their Allies, and irrecompensible Benefactors: How did
they promote, and foment our bloody intestine Dissentions, to the end that they
might scrape together a sordid gain by fishing in our troubled waters? How will
they manage an Huckstering warfare, as the Poet speaks, (Gauponantes bellum)
at one time besieging, and straitning with one hand, and with the other hand
relieving the same Town, or Garrison, as long as their Money lasts, and they
can but gain by the bargain, and make their own Rates? What have they so
Sacred, that they will not prostitute for Profit sake? What Articles of
Agreement, but they will evade, or at least run the hazard of breaking, openly
or urder-hand, and supply any place besieged, with not only Provision and
Victuals, but, with Ammunition also, and Weapons defensive, and offensive,
Ships of War, or any thing else, perhaps to the ruin of a Design, or at
least irrecompensable damage of their Professed Friend, who at that time with
perhaps invaluable Charge, and hazard of men's lives, has reduced his Enemy to
that strait, and yet in the mean while, they will profess as much love and
candor as can be, to him, whom they secretly thus injure? What almost is it,
that they act publicly, in reference to their Neighbors, that they act
above-board, but are either afraid, or ashamed, or unwilling to own? Nay what
is that even Impudence, and Impiety it self would be ashamed to act openly,
that they will not bring about by underhand dealing, if Profit invite to it?
How in their revolt from the King of Spain, did they encourage the revolt of
the Portugal? and how now do they assist the Spaniard against the Portugal? Who
can sufficiently set forth their sordid under-board play, with all, (and as
often) as they pretend to agree with, and are most friendly unto? And call you
these Heroic spirits, Mr. Milton? As for the advancement of men among them,
according to their merit, it is evident to all that know them, that the measure
of merit among them is only Money, which without either wit, or honesty, or any
Good quality, shall prefer a sordid Boorish Churl, to be one of their Hoghen
Moghen Heers. As for Liberty of Conscience which you so much dote upon, and
look upon it as inconsistent with any frame of Government, but that of a
Republic, I grant you that it is allowed in Holland, even to infamy, only they
are as severe against the Papists as any: And what I pray you may be thought
the reason of one, and the other? Not the Heroic disposition that is in them,
for what need they then fear the Papists? Or do they not think, that many
monstrous Religions are there tolerated, in comparison of which the Papacy may
be accounted Saintship? Only here lies the knot, which troubles them, The
Prince to whom they were before Engaged by Allegiance, allows publicly only
the Romish Religion, in his Dominions and Jurisdiction: Which Religion, if they
should admit, many they fear, would dwell among them, who might make a
Conscience of keeping Allegiance inviolable, and would urge against their
Protestanisme, that ungospellike rejecting their lawful King, (although
provoked by persecution) and would cite the practice of the Primitive Church,
unanswerably discountenancing, and their profession and Doctrine, loudly and
openly condemning the same, by which means the multitude might be brought about
to be undeceived, and willing to entertain, or at least desire, their former
Loyalty. So that Policy not Conscience, excluded from among them the Popish,
and a sordid desire of Gain, set open the Floodgates to all other Religions.
Among which (if that may be accounted a Religion) Athiesme is not excluded, but
finds its Sanctuary. Now I pray you Sir, where is the Magnanimity of Spirit,
that you boast of herein: When nothing that bears the face or carries the name
of Religion is disallowed, but that only which is the only public Religion of
their former Prince, lest by entertaining it, his Friends should be let in
therewith, to the shaking of their new laid foundation, the chief security of
which seems to consist in their National abjuring their formerly sworn to
Sovereign, not minding in the mean while the dishonor done to Gods name, by
those multitudes of abominable heresies, yea damnable blasphemous Doctrines,
which swarm in those Countries (Amsterdam especially) as Frogs swarmed in the
Land of Egypt, and yet they (the more the pity) are not at all troubled
thereat, because they bring profit and commerce along with them, but I wish
they do not hereby heap up to themselves wrath, which may be powered forth upon
them in the day of Gods Vengeance.

When no King was in Israel and every man did what was good in his own eyes,
then Micah made his graven and molten Image, his Ephod, and his Teraphim, and
hired a Levite to be his Priest. Then was every man at his liberty, what
Religion he would follow, a King only being so generous spirited, and noble, as
to Engage that Religion publicly to be professed, which appears to him, and
his most learned Divines, the true, and most agreeable to the pattern, and
precepts of Gods Word, and prohibit whatever strikes at this foundation, nor to
suffer any Rents or Schisms in the Church, (the inlets generally of far
greater mischiefs both in Church and State) whereas a Commonwealth being but a
puny Authority, is compelled to tolerate this, and that, and twenty Heresies,
because some rich men or other are Favorites to all, and nothing keeps the
most rustic Peasant from being created the Greatest Here, or Lord among them,
but want of a competent quantity of Silver, Gold, or Merchandise. Kings
therefore in Scripture, are promised to be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing
Mothers to the Church, but no such Promise concerning Republican Lords, let
them be never so high and mighty.

Nor is this degenerate baseness of spirit visible only in Religious, but as
well, and as much in Civil, yea Ordinary concernments; and there is a natural
reason for it, since according to the Proverb, According to a man's meeting so
is his greeting: Vulgar deportments find but vulgar respect; nor is it fit or
likely, that he who puts little value upon himself, should have greater put
upon him by others that are about him. Majesty and state may be kept without
adoration, but not without humble, and due submissive respect. Too much
familiarity in all relations, breeds Contempt. The state and distance which
Solomon kept, between him and his subjects, we find registered by the Penmen of
Sacred Histories, as part of his magnificence, and no small portion of Gods
temporal blessings cast upon him, as an additional Supplement to that, for
which he requested, to wit, Wisdom. And I find Paul the famous Apostle,
appealing to Caesar, from Festus, who was a subordinate Deputy to the Emperor,
hoping for greater shelter (as to Religion) from the Head of all Majesty,
Caesar himself, then from an inferior Substitute, or Lieutenant unto him: And
we read in the last Chapter of the Acts, how long, and how free he lived,
(considering him in bonds) at Rome, being arrived in prosecution of his Appeal,
an evident argument that he expected, and doubtless found more freedom under
the Wing of Majesty, then probably he should have had from an Inferior
Governor, nearer allied to the common rank of men. And as in the persecution of
Religion, the greatest favor is to be found (in probability) from Majesty it
self, so in the protection, encouragement, and advancement of Religion, Kings
and Emperors are unparalled Fathers, and Nurses thereof: Witness of old,
David, Solomon, Hezekiah, and Josiah, with many other godly pious Princes: And
of late, since Christ, Constantine and Theodosius, with several glorious,
truly Christian, and famous Emperors: And among us, Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and (without regard to your railing black mouth) our
unparalled Martyr King CHARLES; under whom how glorious was our Church, to
the admiration of many, and envy of some of our Neighbors. During whose pious
Reigns, if we will be poring only upon what was defective, and whining after
what was to be desired in our Church Discipline, we show our selves very
ungrateful to God and men, but if with thankful hearts, we could have
enjoyed, and prized what really was our Lot, beyond all who were about us, we
might have said truly, Our lot was fallen to us in a pleasant place, and we had
a goodly Inheritance, God not so dealing with every Nation, as he had with us,
who therefore might be named the darling of the Lord. It is the glory,
happiness, and true beauty of a Nation professing Religion, when the face of
man is not feared, but God is so far exalted, that none is acknowledged beside
him King in the Church, and therefore, not only Caterpillars, and Locusts are
destroyed, and Cattle which browse upon the Vynes kept out, but the Foxes, the
little Foxes are taken, that spoil the Vynes, they having on them tender
Grapes. How glorious a thing is it, for a truly zealous, and pious Prince, to
countenance and encourage the Priests and Levites, (such I mean who oversee,
and manage the service of the Lord) that out of the Church may be excluded not
only the abominable, and the unclean, but likewise every thing that offends?
What more dangerous in the Church, which is the Garden of the Lord, then
Factions and Heresies? but what so fatal as the plucking up its Hedge, and
throwing down its Wall? which is not, as many imagine a foolish agreement or
Covenant of the people one with another, but a Christian and conscientious
submission (for the Lords sake) to those who by Divine right are appointed, and
set over them, to maintain which pale inviolable, the King (when a true nursing
Father of the Church, as blessed be God we had many such) is next to God the
greatest defense on earth, on which score, not without cause, our Kings, have
had, and deserved the name (several of them) of Defenders of the Faith, to wit,
the true Christian and Apostolic Faith, concerning whose profession of, and
owning so honorable a defense, we were bound, and still are to say with good
Nehemiah, Blessed be God who has put such a thing as this into the Kings
heart; and to pray, that he would more and more be his Guide, Counselor,
Director and Protector, that under him Religion may flourish, and, we may once
more be a happy flourishing Nation.

It Is to be confessed, that while the Church is militant here upon Earth, there
will and must be Offenses, and Scandals, this Christ has pronounced, as
absolutely necessary, and the contrary impossible, (although woe to them by
whom they come) but for professed Christians, to be viewing, perusing,
overlooking, and examining the Constitution of the Church, they live in, to be
carping at, and inveighing against, the defects thereof, (practical
especially, where much that is practiced, is not allowed, and wished by the
Judicious, that it may be amended, as soon as may be with convenience) and
thereupon reviling, reproaching, and separating from the same, it argues, (in
my opinion) those who are but nominall, not real Christians; yet such is the
temper of most of our modern, Giddy-brained Phanatiques, who from Controversies
in Religion, fell naturally to dabling with State concernments, and have,
without Gods infinite mercy, kindled in both our Church and State, an
inextinguishable Combustion.

I shall come now briefly to take a short view of what we were before these
unhappy late Wars, and compare our condition then, with what we have been
since, that so an estimate may thence be taken, what we are like in the End to
come to, unless God in mercy prevent our ruin, as he has already, blessed be
his Name given us great hopes.

Our Government and Governors, were of two sorts, Civil, who ruled us as men,
and Ecclesiastical, who were set over us as Christians. Of Civil Magistrates,
our King was supreme, a true, but not an absolute Monarch: He had none above,
or singly coordinate with him, and in dignity he excelled and went before all
the rest: Howbeit, his Rule or Government was purely Paternall, for as a loving
and careful Father, (in managing the affairs of his Family) will consult with
his Sons, when grown, to age, yea and with his discreet Servants, so the
Royal Father of this great and flourishing Family, consulted, not only with his
Nobles, whom he honored with the Title of Kinsmen, and who were (the most
discreet and judicious of them) of his honorable Privy Council; but he
advised also with this Commons, who for that end, chose the Chief men of their
Shires, Cities, and Boroughs Corporate, and entrusted them with power in their
name, and for their welfare and benefit, to represent and lay open their cases,
wants and grievances, before the King and his Peers, and jointly to endeavor,
study, and find out a way of redress or relief of the same. They were still
the Masters of their own Purses, they not only raised, whatever Money was to be
levied, but advised together, and consented to the disposing of it. This grand
Council was the Physic (under God) for the Nation, when it was sick, or any
way distempered, which the King (like a wise Physician) called, as often as he,
with the advice of his Wise Counsel, judged it needful, either for the
necessary cure of a distempered State, or the convenient preservation, and
farther beautifying or adorning a flourishing one. While things ran in this
Channel, how happy was England in General? although some particular blemishes
or pushes in the Body politic, were lanced, fretted and made sore by this
means? But when the just indignation of God was come to its height, because we
were so unthankefull for multiplied blessings, he then suffered this
ungrateful Nation to loath Manna, and to long for Physic, to come into a
course of medicinal diet, and to linger after first a Trienniall, then a
perpetual Parliament, which we have enjoyed so long, nominally at least, though
really the Fagge end only, or Rump of that Parliament, which was also sore
Ague-shaken several times, by disgraceful and long Ejections, which yet they
(willing to perpetuate themselves) as often as they came on the Stage again,
called only Interruptions, however they cannot deny, but they made or suffered
tedious Exits, which were as long as the rest of the Play, and other Scenes,
nay whole Plays were acted in the Intervals, I say we have endured so tedious
a course of State Physic, till we experimentally, and to our cost, and shame,
found the Proverb verified, Medice vivere, idem esse, a^ misere vivere.

At the Convening of this Parliament, what was accounted grievous, and so
represented to his Majesty, but he was willing to redress it effectually?
Monopolies, Star Chamber, and High Commission, by his Royal assent abolished,
and the Council Table regulated so as to stand for little more then a Cipher,
by his Majesty's permission; and all because his people; whom he loved more
dearly then his own safety, showed a dislike of them and accounted them a
burden. T^^^age and Poundage, willingly laid down at his Subject^ feet: the
Militia, and Negative Voice so far granted from himself, that he left himself
only power to be made a Martyr at his Subjects pleasure: Yea and for the
Episcopal Dignity, he consented, they should be stripped of whatever the
Parliament thought fit, saving to them only their Office, which his Oath at
Coronation, bound him indispensably to maintain. O England! England! could
thou but then have seen the things that belonged to thy peace, which soon after
alas! were hid from thy eyes. Yea the Nation did see it, yea the Reverend
Senators were deeply sensible of it, the Nobles discovered evidently the true
and only cure under God for the Nations distempers. Nor do I blame them, nor
yet the major part of them, but know, and they since have been made sensible,
that a few restless; dangerous, factious, pestilent spirits, in both Houses,
first begat, and then fomented a misunderstanding between his Majesty, and his
Cardially loyal subjects, which Coal being once kindled, they by the same
cunning, but devilish policy, blew into the flame of a War; in which posture,
all things could not be defended on either side, but his Majesty wanting the
sinews of warra, could not possibly keep that discipline in his Army, which the
Parliament did in theirs, and so Gods Providence permitting, and our sins
procuring, his Royal person being captivated, and his Forc^s dissipated, those
whose loyal breasts only intended his welfare, and advancement in glory and
Revenue, which they in soverall Declarations protesting, and appealing to God
as a Judge and Witness of the truth of their intentions, enforce me (as
Christian) to believe to be their design, were convinced by several Treaties,
that his Majesty's, both actions, and intentions, were misrepresented to them,
by some Boutefeus of State, and therefore relenting toward him, and his Royal
Posierity, intended a speedy settlement of the Nation, in a Religious Peace;
and had done it speedily, I question not, had not some perjurious, detestable
Mon^^ers, who were Ringleaders, and after drew in other weak deluded Members,
to join with them, but free from matice, (as I confidently persuade my self)
cut off at once both the hopes and means of our settlement, and by that means,
cast us ever since into a Sea of Troubles, where floods of miseries have been
like quite to have overwhelmed us, had not God been gracious to us beyond our
deserts, and spared this whole Nation from utter ruin, for the sake of some
pious and precious men, who have stood up in the Gap, and interceded for, yea
prevailed with our long-suffering God, yet to spare us, to his Name be all
Glory and Honor for ever.

As for the Commonalty in the time of our former long enjoyed, (but not truly
prized) peace where could the world show a more gallant Gentry, where every
private Esquire having an estate in the Country, or about the City, was as free
in the enjoyment of himself and his estate, as the Prince himself, from whom no
man could legally demand one penny, which he was not free to in his Person, or
had not agreed to, in his representative, our Citizens had a rich Trade, and
for wealth, London could compare with any Metropolis in Europe. Our Nation then
was truly Noble, gallantly generous, famous for Civility, and courteous
entertai^ment. Then were promises strictly, Oaths, and Vows sacredly and
religiously observed, for what we did then, or achieved, was not only, nor so
much, for our private Credit, and reputation, as for the honor of our Prince
and Country. And those are the most honorable Enterprises, for he who looks no
farther then himself in his actions, may propound gain as his principal and
last end, which is most fordid at the best, and because the grace or disgrace
reflects only upon, and determinates in himself, he judges all by the narrow
scantling of his own spirit, which is often poor and inferior, whereas he
whose actions reflect upon another, this raises the mind to an higher pitch of
Gallantry, then is suitable to a man's own personal capacity. Thus a steward or
servant to a generous Noble man, how is his deportment, and carriage, above
that of a Farmer, or Yeoman, who perhaps is four times the richer man? Thus
Parentage, and Relations, make many to scorn those actions as dirty which
themselves would act confidently, and without check were their condition
separated from their Relation. What think you would a Dutch Boor forbear, that
were for his profit, for the honor of his Hoghen Moghen Heers? When the States
were low, and King James (one of the most Royal friends they had) wrote to them
and sent an Agent, to negotiate with them, for the suppressing of the Arminian
Heresy, how zealously did they persecute it, and yet afterward, when it had
been condemned for a heresy, at the great Synod of Dort, how sordidly did they
tolerate both it, and all other heresies, when their cautionary Towns were in
their own hands, and they judged themselves of strength considerable? And what
other reason can be given for it, but that their Towns might be the Common
sink of all heresies and factious Schisms, who with themselves might bring
their estates, and make an addition to their Trade? How did they seem to
mediate with the Parliament for the King, and yet when the most learned
Salmasius, the honor of Leyden, most judiciously, and learnedly defended our
martyred King CHARLES, to whom Mr. Milton (my present Antagonist) replied, how
did they heap indignities upon that learned Professor, for this most Christian
work of his? in compliance with the Rump, who for that sordid service, requited
them with Powder and bullets, to the endangering all their navall force, and
hazard of the utter ruin of their Trade. Afterward, how poorly did they buy a
peace with Clivet, and underhand supply the Spaniard, his then professed, and
their late reconciled Enemy? But let us consider our selves and our own ways,
and he wise, what Gallantry have we left in the Nation, but that we dare
Triumph in Villainy, and glory in our shame? What Magnanimity, but that in
defiance of a Deity, we can take, and break as many, and as Contradictory
Ouths, as Reprobate perjured Invention can find out? What assurance of Estate,
but still the Rump with Ahab coveted it? then could they (as nimbly as Jezabel)
find out Mercenary witnesses, to accuse a man of Malignity, and swear to the
accusation, which was Conviction enough, and followed immediately with Plunder
and Sequestration, if not total Confiscation? Such was the lot of the Noble
Lord Craven, and many others, whom if I should name, and give only hints at
their Cases, I should fill a Volume: only to show that their proceedings have
been the same, to the last of their Usurped Authority, Deputy Nodes Case is not
inconsiderable, who being a man of a true English spirit, and a better Patriot
then any of Mr. Miltons commended Saints, had his house secured, and his Money
violently and injuriously taken from him, which although it was restored as a
Captive Lamb from the Jaw of a Devouring Wolf, let him thank (next to Gods
Providence) the declining state and ticklish station of the Rumpers, from whom
(had their power been any thing Rampant, as formerly it was) the redemption of
his Captived Coin, had been equally improbable to the redemption of a condemned
soul from the bottomless pit. Blessed be the God of mercies, who has put a
stop to their merciless rage and fury, therein making good his gracious
promise, That the anger, or rage, or fury of man, should glorify him, and the
residue he would restrain. And we might well say, Our soul was redeemed as a
bird out of the snare, it was broken, and we were delivered: And surely had not
God been on our side, when men rose up against us, we had certainly been
swallowed up quick: They who Voted and put in Execution, the cutting down the
Posts, and taking away the Chains of the City, they who Resolved, and Ordered,
the breaking down and demolishing, the ancient Gates and Portcullices of this
so long famous City, had certainly, made an end of this their rage and malice
in the plunder and fire thereof, according to their often reiterated, and most
audacious threats: But God, whose Name we have cause for ever to bless, put a
stop to their merciless fury, Blessed be his Holy Name for ever.

And now Mr. Milton, when your thoughts are serious, take but a brief survey of
our former Government, which you brand with Tyranny, Oppression, and Cruelty,
and compare it with those worthy Patriots, whom your piety to your Country
would have perpetuated in a Grand standing Council. Did not they teally
perform, what Rehoboam only threatened to the Children of Israel, and by
threatening caused a defection of ten Tribes in twelve, from his Obedience? Did
breaking up of Parliaments afflict us? Behold a Cromwell, the Demigod of the
Rump, their Creator, their Director, and lastly their Master, breaking first
themselves, and then calling and breaking Mock-Parliaments as a Potter his
Earthen Vessels on the Wheel. Did that, which you called an Illegal Exaction of
Money vex you? Rejoice in your Rump, who took away the twentieth part of all
Real Estates, besides other Compelled Lones, Taxes, Excises, etc. from their
Friends, and all or most, from their Enemies, whose only Crime was loyalty to
their Prince. Did abridgement of Ch^istian liberty molest you? you have been
happy in the Fagge end of a Parliament, that would allow Anobaptisme, Ranting,
Quicking, Seeking, and what not? only abridged Episcopal men, (who were true
Sons of the Church,) really, and the Papists nominally. But in truth, when
were so many J^suites, and all sorts of Romish Emissaries (tolerated at least,
if not underhand allowed) as during these times? In a word, if God has not
proportioned your Judgment to your sin, to the amazement of Strangers, and
Neighbors, and the misery and smart of the Nation, then rejoice in your worthy
Patriots, and let them rejoice in you, otherwise let fire, (nay a fire has)
come forth of these Brambles, to the destruction of our tall and glorious
Cedars.

I have but a few words more, and I have done with you Mr. Milton, concerning
Queen Elizabeth's not enduring the Presbyterian Reformation lest it should
eclipse the Dignity of Monarchy. The necessary connexure of Kingship with
Episcopacy. The mercy of God to this City in preserving it from Pestilence
during this time of hopeful Reformation. And lastly, the suspicion of our
present Hereditary Kings being inclined to, and infected with the Popish
Religion, from his being necessitated for a long time, to crave and receive his
Maintenance, or means of subsistence, from the King of Spain, a Popish Prince.

As to the first, I find you acting like your self, (at least as you profess
your self to be principled) clawing the Presbytery, to engage it against
Monarchy. For your Author, by you cited, I count it not worth while to examine
him, if or no his sense by you be perverted, being most confidently assured,
that it is. He is an Author of worth, and lived in great repute, and esteem
with his Princes, whom he served; upon which score, I am satisfied that he
knowingly wrote nothing that was derogatory to Majesty: But if some kind of
Rigid Scotch Presbytery, entertain Tenants, which tend to eclipse the honor
and respect due (by divine right) to the Supreme Sovereignty, so far it is
condemnable, the Church of God disclaiming in its primitive purity, all such
Doctrines, and declining such practices. Or if Fame might represent to that
good pious Queen, things otherwise then they really were, (as we here
frequently and confidently reported of the Scotch Presbytery, that they teach,
and would practice the bringing their Kings to the Stool of Repentance) she
upon this misreport might suspect it. Or perchance, (and that is most likely)
she being a wise Princess, and having a choice Council, might observe the
tempers of their spirits, who stickled most in the promoting that Reformation,
and finding them to design, not only Innovation, as to the then settled reformed
Religion, but distinction also in State, might wisely put a stop to their
pragmaticall intruding themselves into matters somewhat above their
concernment: Otherwise, I seriously profess, that I know nothing in a sober,
moderate Presbytery, but what may agree very well with, and will with
Conscientious piety, yield all due reverence unto a splendid, powerful
Monarchy; they are consentaneous each to other, and may co-habite or dwell
together in a Land, as Moses and Aaron, David and Nathan, Hezekiah and Isaiah:
And this is most apparently manifest in the Reformed Hugonites, who are
Presbyterial Protestants, and yet keep their Allegiance firm to, and pay
Customs, Tributes, and all due reverence to their Liege Sovereign, the French
King, although a Papist; nor do they account their subjection, only compelled
upon that score, but conscientiously they do, not only outwardly obey him, but
in heart they honor him So the Waldenses in Savoy and Pi^m^nt, who being so
cordially loyal to their Popish Princes, can we imagine, that English
Presbyters would have been less subject to, and honourers of their natural
pious Protestant Kings and Queens, then others are of their Sovereigns? who
differ from them in Religion, and always may be suspected, to bear an ill will
to them, exercising not rarely most bloody cruelty in the massacring, and
murdering of them. Although I doubt not but the example of our English
King-killing Saints, being recommended by their Agents with what serious
motives they could invent, to their Neighboring Protestants, and perhaps liked
well, and approved by some false pretending Brethren, among the Hugonites, and
Waldenses, with whom many in Devilish policy, pretending to be Protestant
Converts, entertained such English bloody Tenants, with approbation and
applause, and by menacing threats, gave several Alarms to those Princes to
whom they owed subjection; commending the courage and Noble Valor of our
English RVMPERS, and boasting of help and supply from them promised, to attempt
and put in practice such another heroic feat in their Nations. Our Crimson
Saints on the other hand, boast and proclaim that this their practice shall be
a leading Example throughout all Europe: In the mean time, the true
Conscientious Protestants, protest against (both in public and private) these
damnable Tenants, and execrable practices; yet by this means the Princes of
those Subjects are made jealous and suspicious of the Protestants Fidelity,
(having such a dangerous president before their eyes) which Jeasousie, (through
the Villainy of false pretended Brethren) is blown to that height, that the King
finds no way of safety, but in chastising all, and cutting off many of these
his dangerous Rebellious Subjects; in which Massacre, those Villains, who first
kindled the Coals, make a fair Retreat, having betrayed so many innocent pious
Christians, as Sheep to be slaughtered, they only feeling their Princes rage,
who most abominate those Rebellious Tenants and Principles, by which their
Prince at first was provoked and enraged. Observe here as in a Landscape the
piety of our Rumpers, and what they have deserved of their Neighboring
Protestant Friends, by their Example, Counsel, and vainglorious boasting;
what a leading Card they had begun withal, and how it should be played round,
to the confusion and pulling down of all the Princes of Christendom: Hereby
they have betrayed and butchered many thousands of the Waldenses, by the Sword
of the Savoyans. And when God shall come to make Inquisition for blood, at
their doors will all that Christian blood be found lying, and of their hands it
will be required. If then the sent of the Rump were so noisome of late, how
will they stink in Ages to come? How will (the then innocent Babes) the Orphan
Children of those murdered Protestants, curse their memories? For ever shall
thou live in ignomy, and deserved infamy, O most Bloody Rump, and the Children
yet unborn, shall justly detest and abhor thy remembrance: They loved Blood,
and thou (O righteous God) give them Blood to drink, and let that be their
portion, for they are worthy of it.

But (by the way) I question not, but the sober, modest, and pious
Presbyterians will see your Delusion. You urge not Queen Elizabeth's averseness
to their Reformation, as accounting it to be indeed Reformation: Your
contrivance to eject Hirelings out of the Church, by taking away Tithes, shows
how well you like them, or any other true Gospel Preachers, when you discover
it to be your design to have all Maintenance for the Ministry, to be paid out
of the public Exchequer; for so, what could be expected more from such
Preachers, then was found in Ahabs Prophets? who eat their Bread at his Wife
Jezabels Table? It is a fatal Plot against Religion, to have the Maintenance of
all its Ministers, to proceed as a State Gratuity, bestowed upon them in
requital of their pains, and labor. For what could be hoped in such a case,
but that all must turn State-pleasing Preachers, or beg? and who upon that
score would educate their Children, that they might be capable of the Ministry?
or what conscientious man durst adventure on that Profession, in which he must
go against the light of his Conscience, or beg?

But I shall leave this, as having I suppose spoken to it satisfactorily, your
next whining complaint against Monarchy is, that Episcopacy and it are
inseparable. To which an Answer is ready, that Mr. Milton is grossly mistaken.
It is certain, that Monarchy is, where Bishops have no place, not are so much
as known, witness the Persian, Tartarian, Turkish and Indian Monarchies: and
Bishops on the other hand, have been for many years owned, and acknowledged,
and to this day are in place and esteem among those, who are not under Kings,
witness the Popish Cantons in Switzerland, the Venetians, Genoeses, and
Hamburghers, which last are a kind of Republique, although they owe and pay
Homage to the King of Denmark.

By which it is evident, that the Crown may return, without readmitting the
Mitre, and it is likely, that Episcopal Lordly power, will hardly get footing
again in the Nation, the Barons and other Nobles in Parliament, (who were
always firm to Monarchy) still opposing and endeavoring to lift out the Lords
Spiritual, from having jurisdiction among them, as is evident by very many of
their Speeches to that purpose, to this day publicly extant, yea and his
Majesty consented to the divesting them of all, but their Title and Office,
submitting their Lordly Jurisdiction and Revenues to the disposal of the
Parliament. Concerning whose Office, and extent of Power, it is not now
convenient, nor seasonable to argue, and dispute, nor Wisdom to determine
without Disputation; only I shall add, that if Monarchy and Episcopacy were
necessarily inseparably linked, it were a strong argument, for the excellency
of that sort of Church Government; but the contrary is most manifest, namely,
that what Government Kings most approve, is by them chiefly countenanced, or at
least, what the consent of most Divines under their Jurisdiction confirms, as
most agreeable to Scripture, that is permitted, and allowed: So the Presbytery
prevailed in Scotland to the ruin of Episcopacy, yet Kingly Government was not
upon that account rejected by them.

Add to this, that most of the Presbyters in the Nation, interceded for the
Kings life, protested, and Remonstranced against his Death, and the Scotch
Nation, (the most strict Presbyters, reputed) treated with, received, and
Crowned, our Hereditary now living King Charles the Second, Son to his murdered
Father, and yet readmitted not Episcopacy.

This only I shall say, that as a just splendid Monarchy, may be limited, so as
to consist together with the most absolute, and real true Freedom of a
flourishing State, so a pious Church overseeing Episcopacy, and a Godly
moderate Presbytery are (res diversae, nomine tantum) only nominally differing,
but really the same: Call the Bishop and the Presbyter by one name, and let the
wisest, gravest, and most Exemplary pious, be reputed the Moderator of the
rest, and let him be accounted worthy of double honor, and have it, and I see
no remaining real ground of animosity, but that both like Christian Brethren,
may go hand in hand together, to oppose the common Enemies of the Church, both
Popish and Sectarian.

As for that blessing which you take notice of, (Mr. Milton) that the Plague
has been for so long a time a stranger to London, it is a great mercy, and so
to be acknowledged; but I suppose your conclusion from thence, that our
Government during this time has been more well-pleasing to God, then formerly,
is most pitifully extorted, and therefore for shame, you do but obscurely bring
i^ in however it is clearly to be collected from your words, that you mean so.
Gods usage with his People, is not to be expounded recording to that Pattern of
yours: His own people the Jews before they were to enjoy the Blessing promised
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to them, and their seed after them, were first
brought down into Egypt, and there endured sore bondage, before this Promise
came to be accomplished. That a great Plague began the Reign of King James, and
a greater the Reign of his murdered Son Charles, in Gods usual way of dealing
with his people, (if it were significant) might argue an Elation of spirit in
those two Princes, in respect to the numerousnesse of the Subjects of the
Kingdom of England, which was lately united to the Scottish Diadem, in King
James the first Scotch King that swayed the English Scepter. But withal it
argued those Princes (with David) to be persons in esteem with God, and
therefore to chastise them he took them into his own hand, cutting off many of
their Subjects, which went very near to their hearts, as being the Fathers of
the Nation, and so they were affected with the Death of their Subjects, as a
Parent is with the Funerals of his children.

But when the Nation waxed wanton against God, through surfeiting on his
blessings, and rendered him not the thanks that was due to his Name, for so
happy an union of two Protestant Nations, and increase of Mercy, in the
successive Reigns, of three scarce before paralleled Princes in our Nations, at
least, so succeeding one another, and so long continued, the last being for
wisdom, piety, true valor, and yet Christian patience, not to be matched by
any that went before him, to whom (as under God the main prop and hope of our
happiness) the Lord had graciously given a plentiful, and most promising
Offspring, we I say being not only brutishly ungrateful for, but profanely
despising these so rare Mercies, it pleased God to deprive us of them,
suffering this our Josiah to be (not slain by Pharaoh necho, but) murdered by
his own Subjects, and as much as in them lay, branch and root to be cut off in
one day, blowing in his anger at once both in Church and State, taking away the
ancient and honorable in both, and suffering the Bramble, not only to King it
over the Trees, but a fire also to proceed out of it, to the consumption of
almost all the stately Cedars in our Lebanon: So that instead of a wise,
prudent King, for many Generations Royally descended, we had sometimes a
Link-boy, a Cobbler, and a broken Citizen, a Plowman, with some Apostate
Lawyers, and two or three unthrifty Sollicitors, with a few twenty pound a year
Yeomen, domineering over us with rigor, and swelling the least joint of their
fingers, beyond our murdered Kings loins, yet all pretending Reformation;
otherwhiles the Fagge-end of the House of Commons (dissolved actually by the
Kings death) insulting over their Fellow-brethren, and the Lords, and inslaving
the whole Nation, by usurping Supreme Authority, and squeezing all sorts of
people beyond any president, to satisfy their exorbitant lust and
covetousness. For some years we endured an aspiring Tyrant, oppressing,
grinding and afflicting the poor: Now and then we had the Army Officers Lords
paramount, but all oppressing the people both in City and Country, and writing
their Dictates in bloody Characters. Could any plague be worse then these
miseries? and slavish, being tossed from one Condition to another? changing not
only our Governors, but also the Government as often as a Harlot changes her
Paramours: Our Fanatique Rulers setting up, and again pulling down Governments
as often as they saw new light, leaving us to the sad choice of either dancing to
their fantastical pipe, or else being destroyed, agreeing in nothing but in
keeping out the true Heir, and his faithful Friends, under the notion of the
Common Enemy.

This God brought upon us for our great sins, one while giving up the whole
Nation, the Lords and majority of the Commons, to the odious servitude of a
perjured Rump, under whom, besides monstrous Taxes, (which they extorted to
maintain their Janisaries the Apostate Soldiers, by whose mutiny and
rebellion, they were first constituted, and by their assistance kept up (in
name and notion) as the Supreme Authority of England) men had not liberty to
avoid perjury, but at the utmost peril of ruin to themselves and Family;
Ministers especially, and all who were to be admitted to places of trust; nor
could they stand to their Oaths and Covenants vigorously, and act what they
covenanted solemnly to act and perform, but they were declared Enemies to the
Commonwealth, for continuing constant and true to their Vows, and were
rewarded with loss of Life, and Confiscation of Estate.

God at length gives a check to this Tail of Authority, by the chief
Instrument of their own Treachery, and Villainy, and sells them, and the Nation,
to the greatest Monster of cursed hypocrisy, and damnable rebellion, that ever
yet Nature brought forth: Who with reproach turns them out of doors, giving
them a serious, but true Reproof, calling them (as they were) a pack of
Whoremasters, Drunkards, and base self-seeking Wretches, and having thrown them
aside with deserved scorn and contempt, seats himself in the Supremacy, calls
and dasheth to pieces at his pleasure, several ridiculous Juntoes or
Mock-Parliaments, makes War with Spain, to almost the ruin of our Trade, and
Peace with France and Holland, etc. only to eject our Hereditary exiled,
distressed King from all Protestant supplies, sends away thousands of the
English to Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Flanders, which proved a grave to the Men,
and a waster of some Millions of Treasure; Orders Nineteen hundred thousand
pounds to be settled on him (as an Annual Revenue) which he took by the Sword,
and would have had confirmed to him and his Successors, by a Law of his own
making and imposing: Those who opposed him felt his fury, and as many as
disgusted his proceedings, he had Court-plots to ensnare them with, Witnesses
at hand, who would not fail to accuse, and Mercenary Judges, Attorneys
General, and Sollicitors to impeach, aggravate their crimes and condemn them;
and (for failer here) he had at his beck a Monstrous High-Court of Justice, who
like desperate Hounds would fly at, and fasten upon any that he pointed out to
the slaughter, who were hanged, beheaded, drawn, quartered, their bowels burnt,
and what not cruelties done to them, at the Tyrants pleasure? Others suffered
close and tedious imprisonment, till (with Nebuchadnezzar) their Hair became
like Eagles Feathers, and their Nails like Talons or Claws, in comparison of
what they were before; such was the monstrous villainy of this Tyrant, and
Usurper, and such cursed Instruments had he in readiness to execute what he
should command. Those who know not this, are very strangers in our Israel:
Lord! what Plague could equal the misery we suffered under this Monster?

At length God puts an end to his rage, Death arresting him with fury, madness
and despair: And his Son after him proclaimed, proved moderate, but was too
good to hold, God not yet seeing it meet to put an end to our plagues and
miseries: He through Gods judgment, lost that Usurped Government like an Ass,
which his Father got like a Fox, and managed like a Lion or Wolf.

And now again, by the Swords determination, the Rump was a second time
Rampant, and begin to act at first like themselves, that is, Monsters of
perjury and villainy. The Gentry of Cheshire are proclaimed Traitors, for
declaring for a Free Parliament, and the ruin of all their Estates, and some
of their Lives is agreed on, for attempting it: Praysegod is made chief
Sequestrator, with a Commission to pick the very flesh of all who should dare
to stand up for a Free Parliament, to the Barebones. Yet God in mercy to the
poor Nation, hearing the groans of the oppressed, did respite this Calamity,
and once more brought to ground the pride of the Rumpers, turning them again
out of doors by the same Instrument whereby it pleased him to defeat the
Endeavors of diverse of the Gentry, who labored after, and Declared for a Free
Parliament, and then the Army Officers fall to tampering with the Government,
and rule and domineer with as much insolency as impurity. And lest this Scene
should want its solemnity, the project of the Army Officers, (the Committee of
Safety) order Hewson and others to march into the City, where they triumph in
the innocent blood of unarmed Apprentices, whose only Crime was, that they
resenting their sad misery occasioned, partly by so many Changes, and woeful
distractions, but especially by the decay, yea almost total want of all Trade,
by which thousands were undone, and reduced to beggary, formed, and assayed to
deliver a Petition, to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council,
to incire them (if possible) to endeavor the removal of the cause of these
their pressures and burdens, greater then which were expected daily, the
insolent Soldier threathing the City, and Alarming it from time to time with
menaces of fire and plunder. These Swordmen, like Jehu, drove the Chariot of
their imagined Vtopian Common wealth with such fury; and (wanting Money
withal) ran upon so many Rocks and Sands, that with much baseness and
sordidnesse they were baffled, and the Rump reenters upon the Stage, with as
much scorn, contempt and disgrace, as Ballad-makers, and idle Pamphleters could
devise, but these things they minded not; Money they wanted, and were resolved
to have it, Quo jure, quave injuria, they made no matter; and having outwitted
and baffled Lambert, Fleetwood, Desborough, and the rest of the too petulant
Army Grandees, thought it now easy for them to bear all down before them with
violence, and on this persuasion, begun to be rough and resolute with the City:
The Citizens on the other hand, now at last wearied to the very soul, with the
constant Oppressions, Rapines, Exactions, and cruelties of this abominable
Fagge-end of Authority, and finding the Purses and desires of their Masters to
be bottomless, never filled nor satisfied, although themselves were almost
quite exhausted and ruined, and perceiving that their villainies would always
create new troubles, and the fears of them would call for new expenses daily,
Heroickly resolved, to see a legal Authority in being, before they would
contribute any more Moneys at the demand of any Usurped pretended Power under
Heaven. To curb these, and reduce them (as they called it) to obedience,
General Monk was employed in odious, dirty, hateful services, and unheard of
villainy was plotted against as many in the City as loved loyalty, whose blood,
and plunder, (if not the flame of the City) was resolved upon, to be offered as
a sacrifice to some Infernal Furies that sat in the Rump. However, the Posts
and Chains of London were demolished, several Aldermen and Common council men
were imprisoned, and to make a complete Tragedy, the most active Aldermen were
(as report gave it out credibly) appointed to be hanged one at each Gate of the
City. Yea to fill up the measure of their impiety to amazement, as well as
detestation, Praysegod Barebone, a Fanatique leading Zealot, appears with a
cursed Petition, to abjure, not only our Martyred Kings whole Royal Posterity,
but the whole Family of King JAMES, and to have the motion for, or defense of
Regal Government, made a Capital Crime, and that irrevocably, according to the
Law of the Medes and Persians, not repealable by any future Parliaments, but
the propounding such a thing (though in Parliament) to be adjudged Treason, and
the Offender to suffer loss of life and forfeiture of Estate, as in case of
high Treason, for the same. For which pious Petition, in which this must not be
omitted, that he would have no Minister preach, nor Schoolmaster teach
Scholars, and in a word, none to be admitted to any place of profit or trust,
either civil or military, but such only who could dispense with his conscience
so far, as to take that Oath of Abjuration, and actually did the same; for this
(I say) he had, by the Order of the House, the Speakers hearty thanks, while
two Noble spirited Gentlemen, Members Elected of the same Parliament, but by
force secluded, (the force of the Rebellious Army, as the self-condemning
Rumpers long time pretended) and still by force kept out, for a sober Petition
to their Imperious Fellow Members, for readmission, delivered in behalf of
themselves, and the rest who lay under that forcible restraint, from
discharging the trust committed to them by the people, at the time of their
Election, were committed Prisoners to the Tower. Then at last God saw it good
to hear and answer the multitude of Prayers put up to him by the oppressed
languishing Nation in general, and his faithful Servants in particular, and
restrained the residue of the Rumps fury, having glorified his Name wonderfully
by so much of it as he did permit, by which the Nation in general, and the
guilty in particular, saw their sin at first committed against their Liege and
gracious Sovereign, in the Looking-glass of its deserved and long continued
punishment: Which was, and has been by far so much the more grievous plague,
then the pestilence it self, wherewith formerly (to correct our less horrible
sins) God in justice (mixed with mercy) sometimes visited us, as it was more
afflictive to fall into the hands of merciless men, then into the hands of a
gracious God, and therefore the latter was chosen by David rather then either
the former or Famine: Yet the pestilence is a sharp scourge, but far to be
chosen before being sold to, and oppressed by a Forain Enemy, although this
last be less grievous then to be subjected, and inslaved, domineered over, and
kept under by the viler and baser sort of our own chosen Representatives, who
were elected and entrusted to stand for our liberties, and with their Lives and
Fortunes to maintain them, which yet they perfidiously and perjuriously
betrayed, and joined with the most unconscionable, rebellious part of the Army,
to wit the mercenary Soldiers, who being raised, empowered, and paid, to
defend the Liberties of those who made use of them, contrariwise employed their
own Moneys, and the Weapons with which they were armed, to inslave and subject
those who thus armed and paid them, and as much as in them lay, to perpetuate
this bondage and slavery (to posterity) unto a few sordid degenerate Gentlemen,
and Peasants, after all that were Noble and Honorable were thrown away, and
laid aside. This was our long continued Plague, often varying its symptoms, but
still appearing worse and worse, till at last mortal tokens (as I may call
them) began to be visible: Then all were instructed (each man in his place)
with (Gods high hand, that the mist raised) by factious, seditious spirits, at
the beginning of the War, made his gracious Majesty to appear to his cordially
loyal subjects, not as he really was, but his actions were scandalized, and
his intentions misconstrued by such Boutefeus of State who desired only to
kindle an unquenchable fire, as well in the spiritual as in the temporal
Government, which God to punish our sins, permitting them, they villanously
brought to pass. Boast no more, I pray you, Sir, how free this City has been
since these overturning times, from the Pestilence, which in probability might
have roosted the Rumpers out of their nest, in which they sat so long hatching
mischief and perfidious villainy; and so instead of a plague, might have proved
a blessing to this unhappy Nation: but themselves, and such who took occasion
to Vsurp, by their compliance and breach of Faith, and trust with the Nation,
being indeed tenfold the more cursed plague, and God (for our sins judging it
fit to continue this worst of miseries, (next to utter desolation) for a long
season, upon this sinful rebellious Nation, whom no Oaths (formerly taken)
could keep firm to our Loyalty, but even the Pulpits (the places of Divine
Messages) sounded of nothing but arms, blood, and confusion) kept off the
contagious Pestilence, and continued (with various changes between whiles) our
bondage to Usurpers as well as Rebels, for a long time, nigh Twelve years, by
this judgment of his to convince us each in our place) of our sins in
general, and in particular, our sin of ingratitude to God, for so many and so
pious Princes, succeeding each other, the last exceeding the former, their
Reigns so long continued, in which we enjoyed the Gospel of peace, with peace
and plenty, and in this Royal Stocks multiplied Branches, we had almost
confidence of the continuance of our happiness, to which sin of ingratitude,
we added the spirit of rebellion and perfidiousnesse, and both they brought
forth perjury, but still (in the act of villainy, to keep the show of piety) all
the rest of our sins shrouded themselves under the cloak of hypocrisy, Fasting
(many of us) Monthly, that with greater security, by this show of holiness, we
might smite with the fist of wickedness.

I speak not this of all the Nation, God forbid, as little of all the
Parliament, among whom, I verily believe, that six in seven (yea more) were
either cordially innocent, or barely seduced by the pestilent, pernicious wit,
and damnable diligence of a very few Incendiaries at first, whose poison spread
as a Canker, to the insnaring of many to act and uphold that in ignorant pious
zeal, which had they been nakedly uncased and discovered, they would have
abhorred. But the monstrous impiety of the Rump, has (blessed be God)
undeceived and opened the eyes of most, if not all that were inconsiderately
seduced in these three Nations, some of the grand Villains only excepted, to
wit, the eminent men who swayed the Rump, who were indeed the true
Incendiaries, and detestable Causers of our so long continued, sad calamities.
Concerning whose persons, and pardon, I shall advise nothing, it being
presumption in me to think such a thought, only my opinion is, that they are of
the number of those wicked, to whom if favor be showed in a Land of
Uprightness, yet they will not take notice of the Majesty of God: Let them be
respited from deserved death, with Shimei, and pardoned to their own content,
yet they will (through the just judgment of God) deserve, and come to a justly
merited reward of their former Treasons, by some after committed villainy. Now
Sir, as to the name of Rump, which byword, (as you term it) you mislike, give
me leave to give a reason of my use of it: How first it was given to them, I
shall not here inquire, though perhaps I might satisfy the Reader in that, but
as for the reason of that denomination, I think if weighed well, it will be
found too good a name for their bad deserts, if the name of a Rump or Rumper
may owe its Original to, and derive its signification from (rumpo) that so the
title Rumpers may be deduced a rumpendo, no notation can better agree to their
nature, and what they have done. How have they broke their Vows, Oaths and
Covenants with God? their Engagements and promises to men? the Privileges of
PARLIAMENT? The laws of the Land? the hedge of all Government both Civil and
Religious? their words at all times, with their friends? Articles with their
Enemies; peace with their Christian Protestant Neighbors? The Seals of both
their lawful King and usurping Protector, the staff of beauty, and the staff
of bands, by which the Nation formerly flourished, and were united together?
The bond of Love, both in reference to God and men? The hopes of good men
concerning them? The endeavors of pious Christians and true loyal Members of
these three Nations, for the healing our breaches? How did they by wicked
Prevarication break off all Treatyes that were made between the King and
Parliament, toward the settling of a sure and well grounded Peace? How did they
impiously break their bounds, and engrossed into themselves by usurpation all
the Power over these three Nations? In a word what have they not broke that is
either honorable or sacred, which ought to have been kept inviolably? They
have broken their faith, yea broken and trod down all ties of Conscience,
boundaries of Law, Parliament and King, Nobles and Commons, their own credit
and other men's, the estates of several both Noble and Gentile, yea that of the
Widows and Fatherless, The trade of the Nation, and its repute both at home and
abroad, the Gates of the City, their Posts and Chains, in a word, all hopes
(in a manner) of ever recovering out of this Condition, they had certainly
broken, had not God raised up one, and endowed him with a gallant heroic
spirit, who to be ever with these Rumpers, has happily broken their horns,
and abated their Power, broken their net and let out the Captive, broken their
Yoke and freed the oppressed, and the rod of Pride, and delivered the poor
Nation, that lay at the feet of their mercyless ambition, broken their plot,
and defeated (I hope) for ever their counsel, who otherwise, had in short time
broken the hearts of all that were not gifted with a base slavish spirit, to
submit to their lawless wills, and cursed Lust, and scorned to truckle under
their highflown matchless Tyranny. Here are Rumpers with a witness, nay rather
with a vengeance; Though I conceive, he who first was reported the Author of
that name, alluded in it to the Rump of a Sheep or Lamb, which is but a small
contemptible piece (compared to the whole Loyne,) and is usually at Innes of
Court the Cooks fee. So that if good it is of small value, in respect of its
bulk, but if tainted, is scarce good for dogs. At a Gentleman's Table it is not
of esteem, and therefore granted to Cooks as an inconsiderable part of the Doyn
which (if left on) adds nothing to the price or value of it, and being cut
off, diminishes not a whit from the worth thereof, In any of which respects,
this fagge end of the House very well might be called the Rump; for esteem of
all the Commoners being the most contemptible, especially when they are
apparently tainted, and might be followed by the sent, of Perfidiousness,
Perjury, Rebellion, Treason, Oppression, Murder, Sacrilege, and what not that
is odious either to be named or heard? I think not of their personal vices,
but desire to be understood only concerning their Villainies committed as a body
politic. Their number also was so inconsiderable, that being joined to the
other members they added but little of esteem or repute to them; the number
being sufficient to make a considerable House without them, but of them so
small, that they seldom exceeded much, never doubled the quorum of a House of
Commons and therefore they were compelled to make bold with the Law, and fetch
their fellows out of several Gaoles, lest the indisposition of some of the
rest, might make their House thinner then by the Law thereof its constitution
would bear: Some they adopted into their number, right or wrong, as five or six
Esquires, others they plucked in by head and shoulders, as for instance, two or
three Earls, who among them seemed Mungril Neuters between Peers and Commoners.
Thus the English House of Rumpers may hereafter go joined to the three places
which according to the Proverb, refuse no body, Hell, the Grave and Sea. They
may also very well be termed the Snuff of the House of Commons, the State of
England during the Commotions being properly compared to a Taper, which being
melted by the fire of War, and wasting it self with its own light, which was
blown aside by the blasts of Rebellion, ran down much of its wax into the
Socket, and declined apace. This snuff at last preying upon what was run down
by the heat of War, and the wind of Rebellion, blazed a long time, till all
that fed it was consumed, and then went out in a most insufferable stink. But I
shall leave them to their own melancholy thoughts, which perhaps may now check
them, and as Joseph's brethren, after almost twenty years security in that great
sin, which (for ought they knew) they were guilty of, to wit, their brothers
blood, when they were reduced to a great extremity, began to accuse themselves
one to another, We are verily guilty of the blood of our Brother: So these
Regicides, I hope in this their extremity, may be alarmed by their consciences,
with such like thoughts, We are questionless guilty of the blood of our KING,
when our own hearts told us that his person was sacred, and we our selves were
guilty of what we charged upon him, but he was innocent, and therefore now his
blood is required. This is the worst I wish them, if it were Gods will, but
their black fact I would have abhorred and detested for ever, and damned to the
pit of hell, where first it was hatched.

The last Engine by which Mr. Milton endeavors to hinder our much expected
settlement is, to persuade the people that our present hereditary King has
been from his Cradle trained up in Popish Principles, having lived so long, and
received his subsistence among, and from them, this if it were true, is a bad
argument to keep him from his Crown, if it be, as certainly it is, his
hereditary right and due. It was the unanimous resolve of the true Protestant
Christians, in Queen Mary's days, that notwithstanding the desire of pious
King Edward to the contrary, she, and not the Lady Jane, should be Crowned
Queen, although she was known to be a resolved Papist, and of a most furious
spirit, in requital of whom, she sent many of them to Heaven in Triumphant
fiery Chariots. Now were it to be admitted, that our King were of the Romish
Religion, yet his sweet inclination and disposition might take all suspicion of
danger from him. Had he been educated with the greatest indulgence and care
that were possible, in the true Orthodox Religion, and yet been seduced
accidentally by the fraud and policy of some Romish Agents, it had yet been our
duty to have prayed for him (as became true Christians) but withal, to have
submitted to him, for Gods sake, as became the true Children and Successors of
those Primitive Apostolic Saints, who did the like to Heathen Emperors and
Governors. But when God knows, this Nation has by unparalled Rebellion and
Treason, cut off the Father, with that impious solemnity as was never yet done
by the worst of Pagans, and neglected the Children with as much inhumanity as
unrighteousness, dividing (as a spoil) among themselves the ample Revenues
belonging to Majesty, and neither allowing the posterity any subsistence
themselves, nor permitting any other to do it; but upon penalty of high Treason
forbidding all relief to the Royal Orphans and Widow; when (I say) the Nation
has done this, (pardon me that I say the Nation, for I must lay the blame on
the Nation, till the Nation has wiped off the blot) if the King in
consideration of these monstrous impieties, perpetrated against his Father, and
continued against himself, had imputed the fault of the Professors to the
profession it self, and embraced Popery rather then refined KING killing,
Soveraign-despising Protestanisme, it had been our duty to have been humbled
for what was past, and by a more exact Obedience to have testified our
detestation of such principles, in order to the convincing his judgment, but
to have rejected him on this score, had, (I confidently persuade my self) been
adding impenitency unto sin, which is the greatest aggravation thereof: For,
without doubt, the whole Nation cannot wash their hands from the guilt of our
great sins committed against Gods Vicegerent, our undoubted Head and Sovereign
Lord, and his Royal Issue, for fear of man at least, or cowardly declining
their endangered King, and his Royal line was their fault; While Vows,
Covenants, Oaths and Protestations were made for his preservation and
happiness, it is no great wonder that fair words and promises ensnared the
simple, since I persuade my self, that those who made such promises were
themselves beguiled by the subtilty of the ringleading Rumpers, and the
Rebellious Soldiery, but when Oaths were palpably broken, and Majesty not only
contemned and in hazard, but upon the very point of ruin, had all who were
cordially loyal, then appeared against such monstrous impiety and villainy, had
they been not only unarmed and naked, but even sick and wounded men, they had
undoubtedly given a check to the Rumpers rage, and malicious, barbarous, bloody
impiety. In which respect our Humiliation ought to be National and serious,
since not only Dogs, Sorcerers, and such like, but the fearful and
unbelieving, shall be shut out of the heavenly Jerusalem: Yea, and when Christ
was crucified, it was not the whole Nation that did it, but the High Priest,
and Scribes, and some zealous Pharisees, nor the majority of the people that
consented to it, for they who plotted his death, durst not put their designs in
execution on the Feast Day least there should be an Uproar among the people,
who most of them accounted Christ as a good holy man, and a great Prophet: Yet
none appearing on his side when it was put in execution, that was long before
plotted, his blood lay upon the whole Nation, and dismal calamities many years
after came upon all, for the actual sin of some. So in likeness of our
Saviors sufferings, behold a pious Protestant King, not careful of his own
life, that by his blood he might seal his peoples Liberties, and the
privileges of Parliament, behold him I say, arraigned, with scorn, reproach
and contempt, condemned with impudence and the height of indignity, and
executed with the full measure of malice, tyranny and cruelty; yea and after
his death, the Injuries done to the Father as it were intayl'd upon the Son,
and extended to the whole Royal Issue, and Relations. Behold, a young Prince,
no sooner by villainous violence made a a lawful KING, but persecuted to the
death, War being made with all who gave him entertainment, nor peace
concluded with any, but upon condition of his being proscribed, and ejected out
of all their Dominions, and Jurisdiction, his natural Subjects prohibited,
(but upon condition of utter ruin) to own or relieve him, and yet see the
mercy and goodness to this poor Nation in this our King, his constancy in the
true Protestant Religion, and his undaunted profession of the same in the midst
of, and in despite of all these Injuries offered him from Protestant Subjects,
has been the joy of all his Friends, the admiration of Strangers, the envy of
Enemies, and is notorious in Europe, to the silencing of Momus himself, so that
his known practice can give the lie to the words or pen of any barking
black-mouthed Adversary whatsoever. This is the Lords doing, to his Name be
glory for ever. If then it had been our undoubted duty, to have received him
joyfully, and submitted to him cheerfully, and conscientiously, for the Lords
sake, though he had been a Romist, how much more ought we to do it, as the case
stands, and how ought every true Christian to long for his return, and not give
God rest, day nor night, but be instant in servent prayer till his Restitution
be accomplished: For whatever may be pretended as to settlement by a
Commonwealth, there is no way of firm settlement but by returning to our
former Allegiance. We came not to that pass we were lately in, but by the
means of treason, rebellion, perjury, murder, oppression, and sacrilege, for
which God certainly will visit: Could we imagine there were no God, as foolish
Atheists imagine, or that God were like to us, an Abettor of such Villainies as
we act and approve, it would yet be very improbable, that a (foolishly
intended) Commonwealth should ever be settled, forasmuch as the Interest of the
Nation is engaged to Monarchy, it is a Government we were trained up in, and
accustomed thereto, and our Kings not Fortaigners to us, but our own
Contrymen, who were themselves by blood allied to many (if not most) of the
Nobles, and they to the Gentry, they also to the Yeomen, and Countrey-Farmers,
that Interests were woven together so firmly, and the knots knit between all so
indissolvably, that the same cannot be undone, without the certain inevitable
ruin of all. And if Interests which have sprung up since the War (whose
foundation is illegality, enormity, and Villainous impiety) be in ten or twelve
years become so considerable, that for peace sake, the formalities of Law and
nyceties of Justice must be dispensed withal, and the rule (raptim vivendi)
since it is become Epidemicall, must be connived at as to the time past, or
else palpable and apparent danger might be of new Combustions; is it to be
imagined that so long continued, and so interwoven Interests, can be thrown
aside like an Almanac out of date, and all remain quiet? We see that those who
never were possessed of, nor quietly enjoyed the Government, but only reached
after, and aspired to it, can scarce be satisfied without enjoying what they
thus gaped for, but will rather endeavor to set all on fire, then go without
it, and is it likely, that such, who were legally and quietly possessed
therewith, owned by all, and Allegiance sworn to them by all, (as the Kings
Posterity was included in the Oath of Allegiance, and Supremacy, and all his
legal Successors, in defect of Issue) the Nobles also (who are numerous) whose
Franchise and Prerogative it was so far to participate in Government, as to
be the Peers of the Nation, and to make one House of English Parliaments, The
Gentry also who were firm to their Sovereign, whose Birthright it is to choose
and be chosen Commoners: Can all these be blown away with a puff, and breaches
be sodered up notwithstanding? 'twere a madness to imagine it. Certainly, if
to adhere to a King, who had piously and happily Governed nigh twenty years,
descended of Ancestors of happy memory, who with himself had almost completed
a Century of years in most happy tranquillity, were deserving sequestration,
imprisonment, (and death as some suffered) besides a loss of privileges, and
Franchises to themselves, yet must their innocent Babes be cut off likewise
with the Parents? and can peaceable submission nevertheless be expected?
Certainly no, Religion and reason both forbid it, no marvel then, if now at
length toward the Morning Watch, (the Day Star of our deliverance appearing)
the Righteous God has looked down through the Cloud of confusion and disorder,
and has troubled the Host of our Egyptian Taskmasters, taking off the
Chariot-wheels so that they drive heavily, and troubling their Counsels in such
sort, that I hope they will never be praevalent more, but if they continue
obstinately impenitent, will bring back upon them the Waters of trouble,
despair, agony, and final destruction, that so when these Egyptians are over
whelmed in those Floods, by which they intended to swallow up the Innocent, we
may with joyful hearts sing Praises to him our Deliverer; in the Church, and
pay our Vows in the Assembly of the Great Congregation: and I presume with
confidence, that if it shall please the Lord once more to return in mercy to
this poor Nation, to lay our Foundations firmly anew, to heal our breaches, and
to restore unto us our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning, we shall then be wary hereafter how we slight Gods Blessings, and
loath Manna, lest if we again relapse into the same or the like sin, a worse
Judgment overtake us. As for our King's being maintained during his Exile, it
has been almost a Prodigy in Providence; of his own he might say as David to
Saul, They banished him from the presence of the Lord, saying in effect, Go
serve other Gods; and if David the Chosen of the Lord, and a man after his
heart, when banished Israel, fled to Achish King of Gath (a Philistine) who
showed him kindness, and treated him with courtesy, who can condemn our
Exiled Prince far from Friends and Relief, hunted from England into the Low
Countries, and France, from thence recalled to Scotland, and as soon pursued by
that implacable Bloud-hound, (who had not quenched his thirst with his Royal
Fathers blood,) and by him persecuted, and driven into England, thence forced
again to fly to the Low Countries and France, where he had the relief and
converse of Protestants; but even this was envyed him by our late infamous
Usurper, who partly by force, partly by policy, ejected him out of both those
Jurisdictions, yet when destitute of Friends and succor, God put it into the
Tyrants mind to quarrel with Spain, our most profitable Ally, and that Prince
relieves our distressed Royal Orphans. Here was Gods goodness, triumphing
over man's baseness, his mercy over their cruelty, to him be the glory, but in
greater mercy he has kept our King and Royal Issue, from being tainted in
their Religion, which is a favor for which Immortal praise is due to his Name.

And thus Mr. Milton I have run through your Discourse, and in answering it I
have obviated whatever is material, in what you wrote against Salmasius, either
derogating from Kingly Government, or justifying that Execrable murder of our
lawful, and once happy yet (for ever glorious) martyred King CHARLES; and in
prosecuting my own Assertion in opposition to yours, I have (I conceive)
anticipated any material Objection, that might be made for future in behalf of
one, or against the other. I shall now conclude with you, wishing you heartily
true repentance, and a sound mind. Railing against Majesty, when insulted over
(by the permission of God) and casting scurrilities in the face of Gods
Anointed, is the mark of a Shimei, (let his profession of Religion be what it
will) and if God ever come to awaken your Conscience in mercy or in judgment,
you will find such a like reproof in your breast, as cursing Shimei had from
Solomon, Thou know all the wickedness that is in thy heart, and which it is
privy to, etc.) out of the abundance of which you belched forth your filthy
Expressions against him, of whom those who are truly pious (fearing God and the
King) give a different Character. But I hope all who are indeed wise, will be
enabled to judge of persons and things. You say, what you write is the Language
of the Good Old Cause: I am sure what I write is the Language, and according to
the sense of Good Old True Christians, and of the Scripture. What you wrote,
you wrote no more (you say) then if you had written to stocks or stones: And
what I reply to you or to the Ring-leading Rumpers, I am confident I write to
such, (that is) scared Consciences, and stony breasts, but as you hope your
writings out of those stones may raise up some Children unto Liberty, so I hope
these my Writings may meet with some, who, in simplicity are following Absalom
in Hebron, being by delusions won to desert their lawful KING in Jerusalem; I
mean, following an Usurping Aspirer, in contempt of true Authority, and the
true Church, deserting their True KING, and rejecting the true means of Grace,
to be only found in Zion.

But those who are True and Cordial Subjects and Sons, to their King, and of
the Orthodox Protestant Church, know, that David whom Shimei reviled, was a man
after Gods own heart, and one whom the Lord chose to make an Everlasting
Covenant with, so different is the esteem of good men being made by diverse
sorts of persons: As an Eye that is distempered and bloud-shot, dazles at the
Sun, or any clear Light, seeing by it nothing but blood, terror, and
amazement, nor can abide to behold it, but looking down on the green Earth, is
more contented, and pleased: So guilty minds, or restless spirits, cannot
endure the luster of Majesty, but go poring upon, and admiring that which is
more sordid and nearer the Earth, as suting best to their capacity. To both
which the Poet thus alludes, and shows the fate of each:

-- Sapiens domin abitur astris,
Vir Terrae (pronus sensibus) is suberit.
But I hope these (terrae filii) will be no longer Remora's to our long wished
for, and expected Deliverance, Settlement, and Joy, which that it may come
(certe and cito) both surely and speedily, is, and has been, my prayer, and I
hope every Cordial Subject, and loyal Breast in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, will say, Amen.

A PERORATION, To his EXCELLENCY the Lord General MONCK, and his OFFICERS;
AND, TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Two HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, Which are shortly
to meet, and Sit at WESTMINSTER.
Most Honorable LORD,
HAving in defense of Regal Government, against Mr. Milton's Ready and Easy
way to establish a Free Commonwealth, brought (by Gods good help and
assistance) my ^ntended task to an end, it remains, that I now address my self
to your Excellency, in a paraeneticall, or congratulatory way, for what you
have (through Gods blessing been instrumental in bringing to pass.

We are all deeply sensible, and thankfully acknowledge, that the Righteous God
for our many and great sins had corrected us, and brought us into such a state
and condition, as this Nation never before was in, since it first was known to
be a Nation to thi^ day. He had cut off from us the Ancient, and the
Honorable, had deprived us of our happy Governors, broken our once matchless,
peaceably settled, and long happily Government. Had set Ephraim against Manasse,
Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah, so that the Syrians before,
and the Philistims behind, did all seem to devour our Israel with open mouth:
Yet for all this his fierce anger was not turned away, but his hand appeared
stretched out still against us. Our Kingdom was divided, rent and tottering,
one part against the other, the Son envying, and betraying the Father, and one
Brother another, so that there was neither peace nor truth among us.

Our Church also was broken almost to pieces with Schisms, Factions and
Heresies, our profession scandalized, with damnable Errors and Blasphemies, so
that we had scarce the face of a true Church left among us. Our Principles were
tainted and corrupted with the crying sins of murder, sacrilege, cruelty, of
pression, hypocrisy, rebellion, and perjury, breach of faith, Vows, Covenant
and Oaths, with hard-heartednesse and impenitency; that it was hardly to be
discerned, if any spark of true Religion, and power of Godliness remained in
this (every way guilty) Nation or no, whose hands were deeply imbrued, and
(beyond washing) stained with the sacred blood of Majesty, nor was the cruelty
perpetrated upon the Father, so repented of, as to give glory to the God of
Heaven, but it was continued upon us, and justified by us, in the rejecting of
his whole Royal Line and Issue, and neglecting his necessitated Orphons and
Widow, although by profession we owned our selves Christians, and boasted of a
far greater Light, then had shone upon any of our Ancestors or Predecessors.
Yet among them, (in a time not much removed from Paganism) perjured Harold
permitted Edgar (the true Heir of the Crown) to enjoy a large part of his
Estate and Revenue, and to retain the title and command of Earl of Oxford, one
of his subordinate titles, had he been Crowned KING, as Harold by Oath engaged
to Edward the Confessor, he would see performed, when Edgar came to years, and
in the mean time himself would only assume the Title, exercise the Office, and
execute the Charge, of Guardian or Protector of him during his minority,
notwithstanding which, perjuriously he himself Usurped the Crown, Deposing the
right Heir, howbeit, left him the Title and Dignity of Earl of Oxford, with a
large Revenue, so far was he from conspiring against his life, though he
aspired (unjustly contrary to his Oath) to his Crown.

But among us (Saints by profession, enjoying the greatest light, which ever
appeared since the Apostles time) is found Harold's perjury exceeded fourfold,
and his cruelty a thousand fold: For besides one Oath of Allegiance, and
another of Supremacy given to all, also another Oath suitable to the former, at
Admission to sit in Parliament; the Authority of England (which was subordinate
to the King) in order to manage a War against him, with whom they were called
to consult, and to whom, and his Queen, (with his whole Royal Issue) they were
sworn to be true, to preserve his person, and to maintain, and defend his just
legal privileges, of themselves formed, and took a Vow and Protestation,
protesting their integrity in these intentions before the whole World, and
appealing to God as Witness and Judge of their intentions and actions,
according to the tenor of that sacred Protestation. After which they made, and
took a Solemn League and Covenant, entering into it with lifted up hands to the
most high God, nor took they it only themselves, (both Lords and Commons) but
pressed it, and compelled it, upon all in Office, both Religious and Civil,
upon penalty of being ejected in case of refusal. Yet these Vows, Oaths and
Covenants, not being regarded, the same King to whom they were made, (and he
excelling all that went before him for piety, and exemplary unblameablenesse of
life) was murdered (Oh dreadful to be remembered) at his own Gate, and his Heir
not only made incapable to succeed him, but not allowed out of his large
Princely Revenues, the least relief, nor any of his hereditary subjects
permitted to contribute ought to his maintenance, nor allowed publicly to do
that for him, which Christ commands us to do for our Enemies, viz. to pray for
him. This praevarication (at first) was not National, nor Universal in the
Parliament, but brought about by the Hellish Policy of a few pestilent infernal
Agents, and fomented by turbulent spirits, yet through the judgment of God,
these praevaricators being only an inconsiderable bit, or more properly the
Fagge-end or Snuff of the Commons House, known every where (for these many
Months last past) by the Name of the Rotten RVMP, struck such a terror into
the whole Nation, being backed with a powerful Apostate Army, that most in
silence only shook their heads at these Transactions, by which means, all who
appeared to oppose them vigorously, lost either Estate, or Life, or both. Being
thus by our own wickedness unsettled both in Church and State, our Overturners,
or Destroyers of Foundations, attempted many ways to come to a Settlement, but
laying the sandy Foundation of blood, cruelty, unmercifullnesse, and
oppression, their Building was still shook, and fell with every storm.

Being thus tossed like a Ship in a T^mpest, or a Ball in a large Country, God
was pleased to add impoverishment to our unsettlement, suffering us to be
turned, and wiped, like a Dish, until nothing at last be left sticking upon
it; our Vurped Govern^rs always wanting a potent Army to keep the People
obedient to them by force, who hated them for their unfaithful betraying the
trust reposed in them, this Army necessitated the continuance of T^^es, though
no cause appeared of keeping so great a Force on foot, or in employment, (but
only to inslave the Nation) in sense of which Misery, and seeing no hopes of
end otherwise, many contrived to free themselves and the Nation underhand, by
raising a Force to countermand the other, but God so ordering it, that all
those means proved ineffectual, conducing to, and bringing to pass nothing,
but the increase of the Usurpers fears, which caused the raising more Forces,
and they impoverisht the (almost bank^upted) Nation each day more and more,
besides the constant ruin of Estate, and often loss of life which attended,
and was brought upon such as endeavored the Nations Redemption, and fell our
so frequently, that two Thirds of the true Owners of Estates in the Nation,
were joint sufferers in this public Calamity.

Being brought into this Wilderness, and all means of deliverance, (unless
miraculous) appearing in a manner quite cut off, it pleased God, beyond humane
expectation, to give us in this Valley of Achor, a Door of hope, raising up
your Excellency, and so guiding your Counsels, (he being the great Counselor)
and raising your undanted spirit beyond difficulties, and so wonderfully making
your way even before you, that we may in all these Transactions of Providence,
see, admire, and adore God in the Mount, who knows how, and when, and by what
Instrument to bring Redemption to his People, to his Holy Name, as is his due,
we desire all honor, and glory may be given, and that your excellency may be
owned, and for ever acknowledged, as a matchless instrument, in this our
strange, unexpected, and scarcely to be paralleld deliverance.

How will Generations to come, and children yet unborn have cause to bless
you, and God for you, to eternize your memory with praises, and thankfully make
mention of your truly Pious deserts? How happy shall that County be that
brought you forth, and the Town in which you drew your first breath concerning
which it will be said, many ages yet to come. The Noble General MONCK, his
Countries deliverer, was born here, Undoubtedly most Heroic Soul, what Christ
said of Mary, in its kind will be veryfied concerning you, and this (never
sufficiently to be extolled) gallant service of yours in behalf of your gasping
Country, wherever this Nation hereafter shall be mentioned by any Historian,
this service of yours will likewise be remembered, to your deserved, never dying
Honor, and immortal Glory. Go on most Renownned Commander in these gallant
endeavors of yours; and the Lord God bless you out of Zion, grant your
request, and give you to see the most happy accomplishment of this your truly
pious achievement, and Enterprise. Yea I doubt not but he who put it into your
heart to begin, and gave you the courage to go on so far, will also prosper
you, and give success to your undertakings, so as by your means to accomplish
them. See I pray and observe the encouragements which God has given you since
your first breaking the Ice in this behalf; How unanimously the City honors
and respects you, and how all Counties echo back those deserved praises of
yours, which are from hence sounded forth all the Nation over. On the other
hand, how did the Rumpers design to make your Excellency an instrument to put
in execution their odious commands, and perform their dirty services, against
the honorable famous Metropolis of England, (London) and then to have
discharged you at leisure and left you to the fury of an oppressed enraged
people. But God gave your Excellency both wisdom and resolution, to discover
first and then to prevent these their cursed designs, and has returned the
hate thereof upon the justly deserving Authors, and Commanders of the same to
be indispensably put in execution. Here was mercy almost to a miracle, to both
your Honors self and these three bleeding, distracted, unsettled, yea almost
quite destroyed Nations. So that now the Scene is altered, and the Nobility, and
Gentry, Yeomen, Farmers and Country people, so honor the mention of your name,
as if it were of some heavenly Messenger, or deliverer, immediately sent from
God himself: The Citizens so prize you that they think no love too dear for
you, nor expressions thereof too great; but all (except some few troublesome
raging Sectarys) would in a manner pull out their very eyes to serve you. This
(my Lord) is a call from God himself to your Excellency, that as you have
happily begun, so (by means of the already convened Parliament, which in few
days is to begin its sessions) you may be isntrumental in the great work of
settling these Nations, once more upon a sure Basis of lasting peace and
settlement.

England, Scotland, and Ireland, call to you with stretched forth Arms, (not in
a dream as the man of Macedonia did Paul, but waking, in affectionate
addresses,) and sigh forth their desires and groan out their wants before your
Excellency, saying, come help us, We are but as water spil upon the ground
which cannot be gathered up again, because the banished is not called back from
exile, nor the heir restored to his right, we were robbed (my Lord) of our King,
(not legally deprived of him) by such who usurped the Title and Authority, of
the supreme power of England, but upon examination, were found not to be so,
but were proved Liars, we crave him, in whom we al have an interest, which yet
we never forfeited, however we were oppressed in it by the audacious impiety of
the Rumpers. Now then what hinders, but he may be restored to us, and we to the
enjoyment of him? My Lord we beg humbly your assistance herein, and blessed be
God we find such encouragement, and resolution, both from your excellency, and
your officers, together with the unanimous Consent of your whole Army, viz.
that you will acquiesce submissively in the determination and resolution of the
Parliament, Blessed be God who has put such a determination in the heart of
the General and such a concurring agreement in the whole Army, That we once
more find an Army acquiefcing in the resolves of, not prescribing work, and
giving Laws to the Parliament. This next to God is to be attributed to the
prudence, and upright heartedness of the General, in whom these three Nations
have already begun to be, and I hope, (nay I question not) will in due time be
made (under God) completely happy. For my part considering to what a height of
malapert unrulyness, the soldiery in England had arrived, in these almost
twelve years of Apostasy and Rebellion, (which was grown very familiar to most)
I seriously protest that I wonder, so much toward settlement could possibly be
performed in these Nations in so little time, considering how many and great
Commanders in the Army, differ as much from the pious Principles of his
Excellency the Lord General, and the submissive truly Christian temper of his
under Officers, as light does from darkness, by which is (more then
ordinarily) confirmed that true saying of the Poet

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. My Lord, England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the neighboring Nations take notice, and we who are concerned
desire gratefully to acknowledge, the great difficulties, and intricate
perplexities God has carried your Excellency through, in order to the bringing
to pass what we see. From whose high merits the fiery spirited friends to the
Rump would detract and asperse you with unfaithfulness to them, from whom you
received a Commission. We all know (that are sober) what you did, and how they
engaged your honor in dishonorable pieces of service, we know how your
Excellency declared against the force that lay upon them; through the ambition
of Lambert, Desborough, Fleetwood, and other aspiring Army grandees, and that
if any other force lay upon them, so as to render them not a Free Parliament,
you would endeavor to remove it, This your excellency fully performed, when
you restored the secluded Members to liberty of sitting; without excluding
forcibly the worst deserving Rumper, nor could it have been made good
otherwise. The Rumpers once laid the blame of the Members seclusion, on the
Rebellious Mutinous Army, by whose means and power it is certain that was
first effected: however since it appeared, to be a plot of the fagge end of the
Commons House, with the rebellious Grandees of the Army, who would be under no
yoke. None that was wise could expect other from your Excellency, who was once
one who hazarded your life in actual defense of his Majesty. Now my Lord, I
respect your excellency as so grave, wise, and judicious, that you would not
engage Life, fortune, reputation, and all that was dear to you, but where you
were conscientiously satisfied of the J^stice of the Cause. Yea and the worst
of your Honors friends own, that you continued to his Majesty actively or
passively constant, beyond being compelled, or won by force or flattery, so
long as his Majesty had either hopes, or any visibly appearing on his side. But
after when all was lost, had you followed him with the rest into Exile, you
could have been but a burden, at least no advantage to his Majesty or his
friends could have come thereby; But as Hushai David's friend pretending to
stand for Absalon, defeated (for David) the counsel of Achitophel, yet did
nothing but what became a pious honest man, and faithful Subject, and friend.
So your Excellency, by taking command of an Army after the War was ended, with
a resolution still never to fight against his Majesty, by managing also the Navy
as Admiral against the Dutch, and Spaniard, by leading an Army in Ireland
against the Rebels, and in Scotland with an Army, Governing the Nation with
wisdom, and in peace; you have been made under God isntrumental to do that
in order to a true firm settlement without blood, which for above these twelve
years has been prayed for without answer, and endeavored in vain, with the
loss of the lives of many, and the estates of thousands. This is the Lords
doing, for which your Excellency deserves by a Statue of Brass, and a Monument
of Marble, to be made famous to all posterity. I know the fame Soul lodges in
your Noble Breast, now as did then, the same Loyal blood runs in your veins,
and I am assuredly confident, that so soon as interests can be so reconciled,
and pacified, as that between his Royal Majesty, and his Subjects, (who by
sufferings have learned Wisdom, to prize a good pious Prince for the future)
there may be no jealousy, on either side, there will be no obstacle remaining
to hinder our long waited for happiness. In hope and certain expectation of
which I shall, and I doubt not but all sober men in these three Nations will
wait for the two Houses determination, and I beseech God, that all difficulty
may vanish before the Parliament, which is now shortly to fit, as smoke is
driven away and disappeares before a smart gale of wind, or as snow melts
before the Sun so let all obstructing disputes (I beseech God) wast away to
nothing.

AND thus, Noble, and Honorable Senators, I am brought in Order to address my
self unto your pious Wisdom, and Religious Discretion, having already made an
acknowledgement to his Excellency the General, for two Causes, First, because
he (under God) was the immediate and next cause of this your Convention, to the
disappointment of the Rumpers, who intended this last time to have Earbored the
Nation, and made us their servants for Ever. But especially because of his
performances we have already had the taste, and (in a great measure) fruition;
but the good to be reaped from your Honorable Consultations; is yet in
expectation, to you therefore I address my self as an humble Suitor, and yet
Confident Petitioner, but to his Excellency thanks is already due, for a large
portion of benefits which we have received of him in this kind: To which I may
add, that this being written, and intended to be published before your
Session, Reason and Order call for it, that I should in the first place
address my self to the Power in being (especially of whose good we have so
largely tasted) and next to the Power which is in Expectation shortly after.

My Address Right Honorable and Worthy Patriots to you is, to entreat you,
(not because I in the least doubt your own most ready inclination thereto) to
set your selves seriously to the healing of our breaches. Yea I know you will
do it, however it will not be amiss, nor I hope interpreted peremptorinesse,
for me your faithful Honourer, to submit a few Considerations to your most
judicious censure, first inviting to a settlement upon our Ancient Basis, and
only firm Foundation, not barely Kingly Government, but our most Virtuous King
Charles the Second, (to whom God grant a long and prosperous Reign) whose
Restitution I hope, and pray for, and doubt nothing (Right Honorable Senators)
but by your means to see accomplished. But Secondly, giving your Honors the
groun^s why I wish it may be effected and brought to pass as soon as possible.
I shall after conclude this Discourse, humbly begging that the great God of
Heaven would give you wisdom, and courage, that He who sits among the
Gods, may sit among you, directing and guiding you in the ready way to settle
these Nations in firm peace, that Religion may be countenanced and flourish,
our Rights as Men, and Christians, asserted, vindicated, and preserved, to the
glory of God, and the comfort of all that fear him, in all three Kingdoms.

This, Right Honorable Lords and Gentlemen, can be no way brought about but by
restoring the true Heir to his Inheritance, all other ways or means, are but
only suggestions of the Adversaries of the Nations happiness, who would
continue things in unsettlement, on purpose only to secure and indemnifie
themselves from deserved justice. Consider (I beseech you) how many prejects
have been contrived toward our Settlement, upon different Foundations, which
all proved sandy, and so the Building thereon raised, (though cemented with
Blood and Rapine) soon fell, and we were ever put after each Change upon
greater straits, and left in worse confusion, then we suffered before. So that
the change of our Medicaments, and Physicians, in order to the Recovery of this
sick State, has been far worse than our Disease it self, the one causing us to
languish in unsettlement, the other accelerating our Destruction, and
threatening our utter Ruin.

Which must needs be attributed to the Justice of God, who has forsaken us,
because we forsook him. He has seen and beheld all the guilt under which this
Nation lies, and if for two Transgressions, and for three, the Holy and
Righteous God, would not turn away the punishment of several Nations, what
shall be done to us for seven crying Sins? yea rather for seven times seven
Abominations? How have Rebellion and Treason, Perjury, Persidiousnesse, and
Murder, Hypocrisy and Sacrilege, besides all sorts of Heresies,
profaneness, beastliness, unmercifulness, cruelty, and oppression, reigned
in these Nations, and raged (as if) in contempt of Heaven? How has blood
touched blood? How have the Rumpers, and after them the Usurping Protector,
filled London, and the whole Land with Innocent Blood? the cry of which is come
up to Heaven? and there calls aloud for Vengeance? But now at last God in
unspeakable mercy has seemed to return to us, and as a Father does offer in
love to embrace us, to him be the praise. In answer of whose so great tenders
of favor, and future blessing, give me leave, Honorable and Worthy Patriots,
to groan forth my most affectionate desires before your Wisdoms. The cause of
our long continued Calamities, has been, and is unquestionably a spirit of
ungratefullnesse toward a signally gracious God, and a spirit of Rebellion
toward his Vicegerent on Earth the KING, also a spirit of profaneness, in
contemning his Worship, and Service, together with the Ministers and Dispensers
of the same. This wicked ungodly spirit like a fertile, (although accursed)
Root, has brought forth numerous branches of such crying sins, which at this
day are to be found among us, and formerly have been practiced, and remain yet
unrepented for. Now most Worthy Senators, it behooves you seriously, solemnly,
and industriously to endeavor a National amendment, of these National
Abominations: Nor is it enough to bewail the guilt, but by amendment, and
restitution, we must endeavor to wipe away the blot, and expunge the stain
contracted. The Villainy committe^ against the Father, and his Offspring, w^o
was the Father of these Nations, was committed upon a Na^all pretense, and
therefore it behooves it should be Ntiona^ly disclaimed. In that act God was
highly provoked by Oaths, Vows and Covenants, not more sacredly made, and
solemnly taken and entered into, but as perjuriously broken in the face of the
Sun, yet the perjury justified and defended, under the Cloak and pretense of
Religion.

(Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.) My Lords and Gentlemen, you are the
Successors of that Parliament, and many of you the very persons that sat
therein; It behooves you now to testify openly, and effectually against this
treacherous, perfidious perjury, which ended in blood, or else you will be
found Justifiers of the same. Gods wrath is not to be appeased without hearty
contrition, and repentance of these sins for time past, and an amendment for
future, which Amendment must be answerable unto that praevarication, wherewith
God was, and is provoked, else the Plaster will be too narrow for the Sore.
Consider my Lords and Gentlemen, our fault in all its branches, Ingratefulnesse
toward, an^ perjury against God, Apostasy from our Religious profession, to
the toleration of all Heresies and Blasphemies, and perfidiousnesse unto,
Rebellion from, with contempt and rejection of our Liege King, and his
Posterity, contrary to Duty, Oaths and Protestations, this must be adaequately
repented of, and satisfaction, reparation and restitution made to parties
injured, if ever we expect Gods return to us in mercy, and not a Visitation in
judgment.

For with Majesty many thousands were injured in the highest degree, to whom if
(at least) justice be not done for the future, and an acknowledgement of, and
taking shame for what is past, (where reparation cannot be made) God without a
miracle, can, and no doubt will make use of these, to be the Executors of his
Vengeance and fierce displeasure against this Nation, who then would be not
only here and there bespotted, but over head and ears plunged in those crying
sins, which the Lord (who is true and just) has declared he will not pardon.
But, Noble Senators, I am confident God will give you that wisdom, and true
piety, that you will effectually wash your own hands, and I hope, cleanse the
whole Nations (in general) from these crying, Land destroying, State
overwhelming impieties, by laying the fault and guilt upon those who are really
guilty of the same. That so once more our Foundations may be laid, and we may
be established in Righteousness: That this long afflicted, shattered Nation,
may once more take root downwards, and shoot forth branches, and bear fruit
upward, to the glory of God and the reviving, heart refreshing joy of all those
who fear him.

For this end I humbly beg of God in ^o^r behalf, and am (with good hope)
persw^ded, that these Two Houses will not undertake the Patronage of the grand
Causers of all our past, and still continued calamites, by desiring a general
Act of Amnesty, which will neither be for Gods glory, nor yet for our
settlement: It will skin over the sore, leaving it full of corruption in the
bottom. For the Lords sake I pray heartily, that your Wisdoms may be kept
free, from making your selves guilty of that innocent blood both of Majesty,
and several others, which lies yet only at the Rumpers door, and those who
were Members of that Monstrous Sloughter-house, the High Court of Justice, nor
upon all of them alike; for many I conceive to be free from all malice, and
known shedding of innocent blood; but only deluded and deceived by the
insnaring devices of the chief Contrivers; whose impiety as it amazeth my
spirit, so it staggers my Rhetoric, that I cannot find out fit expressions to
suit their execrable deserts. Blood defiles a Land, nor can it be cleansed from
it, but by the blood of those who shed it. Because Manasseh shed Innocent blood
much, so that he filled Jerusalem with it, therefore the Lord would not pardon
Israel from going into Captivity. The sins of those in Authority (blood
especially) is often (almost ever) punished by National miseries, the whole
Nation bleeding largely often times for the blood of a few innocent persons,
whose blood is not publicly required and avenged. Manasseh had shed innocent
blood much, which the Lord would not pardon, although Manasseh had been carried
Captive into Babylon, and there (as to himself) repented his Idolatry, Murders
and other Abominations. Josiah also followed him, a holy tender hearted Prince,
who restored the Worship of God to its purity, and made such a Reformation, as
none ever did before him nor after him, of whom it is testified, to his
Immortal praise, that no King was ever like him in Jerusalem, yet for the
bloodshed of Manasseh, the Captivity should not be turned away, God would not
pardon it. Doubtless many of the Nation were Isntrumental in shedding this
blood, some as false witnesses, others as Executioners, whom Manasseh (when he
repented) or his Son and Successor, good Josiah, ought to have rewarded with
blood, (without which Justice the Nation is not cleansed from the guilt
thereof) for want of which (in probability) most holy, unparalleled Josiah
contracts a guilt upon himself and the Nation, for which he in the flower of
his Youth falls by the hand of Pharaoh Necho, and all his people felt the
miseries of War, Bloodshed, Famine, and final Desolation, which ended in a
long, and grievous Captivity in his Successors days.

My Lords, and Gentlemen, God has given you wisdom, and I humbly implore his
Divine Majesty in your behalf, that he would be your faithful Guide and
Counselor in this particular. It was not the actual sin of the Nation, nor
of the Parliament of England, but of a Combination of the perjured, Treacherous
part of Englands Commoners, with a Rebellious Soldiery, (whom some
hypocritical grand Officers deluded into Rebellion against that Authority,
which raised, empowered, and paid them, and to whom they were sworn, and
engaged to be true, and obediently faithful) who plotted, contrived, and put
it in execution, whom it were as much pity as impiety to shelter from Justice.
However our King may truly be said to be (as was said of the Kings of Israel) a
merciful King. His sweet Disposition, notwithstanding the great provocation of
his Dear Father Blood, I know is so inclined to compassion, and to
forgiveness, that I doubt not, but all Offenses against his Father, and
himself, (save only the wilful malicious shedding Royal innocent blood) he
will (of himself) freely pass by; and of those who had their hands imbrued
therein, I doubt not, where Charity it self can excuse the Offender, to be
deluded, and not an Active Ringleader, he will be more inclinable to mercy
then justice: Yea, and even those whom Mercy it self cannot plead for, I know
he will pity and weep over their causeless malice, and obstinate impenitency.
Who can plead for such (Worthy Senators) who boast of that at which the Sun
even blushed, and count it their glory to have their hand in our (better
deserving) Kings Blood? Of whom one most impudently said, That he reputed it
his Honor, to be one, who was active therein, and would have the memory of it
Eternized upon his Monument, as a most heroic commendable Fact. Monstrous
Villain! of whose mind my self have heard others! for whom what can be
pleaded? Yea, my Lords and Gentlemen, pity these Rumpers, and their
Bloud-hounds, if ever they showed pity to any who crossed their corrupt
designs, have regard to their Lives and Fortunes, if ever they regarded Vows,
Oaths, Covenants, Honor and Honesty: Pity their Posterity, if they themselves
do it, whom they care not to enslave and destroy, while they secure only and
indemnifie their own persons. Endeavor to make their peace, if they have not
always endeavored, and desire still to inflame the Nation, and destroy you,
and yours, and are not now laboring to kindle a new fire, in these already
wasted Kingdoms. But if it be most certain, that they at first, unhappily and
impiously involved these Nations in blood and confusion, and still endeavor to
do the like a new, to continue our distractions, and hinder our settlement, and
are impenitently, stained yea overwhelmed in Royal innocent blood, Perjury,
and Sacrilege; which they obstinately justyfy, in gods name give them leave,
(who thus sow the wind) to reap the whirlwind.

-- Immedicabile vulnus,
Ense rescindatur, ne pars sincere trahatur.
Most Noble Senators, the Parliamens of England, were, and ought to be in most
venerable esteem, being the only Physic for the state in distemper, it is
next under God the staff, and beauty of the Nation, its strength and glory.
This title these Rumpers usurped, and killed their King, imposed perjurie by
force upon all, and who would not actually forswear himself (in imitation of
them) was denied all benefit of protection. The Vilanies by them perpetrated
are without president, only themselves may become a president for future, if by
connivance at these they be countenanced, Then (for future) forty Commoners, if
they can bribe a Competent force to abet, and back them may be supreme, unking,
and murder their Sovereign, disable his Posterity, unhouse the Lords, and make
their Fellow members (six times their own number) incapable of trust, power,
and privilege, both for present and future, and then what English man would
but loath the name of Parliaments for ever? Your privileges were broken, and
the breakers styled themselves the Patriots and true Assertors of the Nations
liberty, now the vulgar cannot discern between the name of a thing, and the
thing it self, The public faith (given by both Houses) O abominable to
consider! was made the by word of every Baliad singer. And what was the cry of
the people, but the Parliaments publicque faith was become a public cheat?

This my Lords, and worthy Gentlemen, must be protested against solemnly, and
effectually, to the undeceiving the people, else the glory honor and
reputation of English Parliaments is lost in England; till oblivion devour the
memory of these things. Without this be done, the King (whenever by God
restored, as most certainly he will be, in Gods due time may well nautiate, the
memory and mention of a Parliament, unless the Rump be disoned and disclaimed
as one. And so, if the Prince dislike, and the Common people contemn and
abhor, that (under God) which is the Nations strength, glory, and safty, of
what fatal consequence this must needs be I leave to your wisdoms maturely to
judge. What remains then, but that we conclude of the Rump, with like
expressions to those of Jerubbaal, concerning them who pleaded for Baal,
because some body had thrown down his Altar. Will ye yet plead for the Rump,?
Let them plead for themselves, at the Bar of Justice, Will ye yet defend the
Murderers of the King, Lord Capel, Doctor Hewit, etc. with the monstrous high
Court of Injustice? Leave them to the determination of Justice, and the mercy,
of his incomparable Majesty, the true inheritor of his Fathers Christian
virtues, and graces, to wit patience, compassion, meekness, long-suffering,
etc. as he is heir to his Kingly Diadem. Let as many as plead for the Rump, be
put to death, in this morning of our deliverance, because God by the means of
his Excellency the Lord General MONCK has thrown down their Pride, and cut
off their lawless power, and so put an end to their matchless fury, and
merciless rage, proceed therefore wisely, go on prosperously (Noble Senators)
and settle these poor confused Nations, call home our banished, yea I know you
will do it, God having instructed you with a high hand, walk not in the way of
the Rumpers. Observe the hate, scorn, and contempt which deservedly lies upon
them, and on the other hand the Joy, triumph, and jubilee, the bone fires
ringing of bells, the freeness of the Citizens in opening their Purses, toward
defraying public charges, and paying his Excellencies Army, upon hopes given
of your being convened. The expressions of gratitude (toward that noble
instrument) from the Citizens; each Hall and Company being ambitious to
entertain him and show all manner of thankfulness to him for his high merits,
in being isntrumental toward your calling, and declaring his resolved
acquiescency in your prudent determinations. All which speaks to you in most
patheticall expressions, Make up our breaches, Restore our King, Pity our past
distractions, even almost unto final destruction; Let us now be redeemed
indeed, and settled upon our true and lasting foundation, Let us not be lift up
to Heaven in joyful hopes, and comfortable expectation, and then cast down to
Hell, in heartbreaking disappointments.

My Lords, and Worthy Senators, you have before you to revive and restore, or
to kill and destroy us, choose the former, yea blessed be God, you have chosen
it and will perform it. Next to God our eyes are upon you, and we rest assured
that our hopes will not make us ashamed, nor our confidence confounded in the
conclusion. Let not any wicked lying spirit whisper to your selves or his
Excellency, and find credit, that high merits with Princes are repayed with
ruin of him, whose deserts cannot be recompensed. True, where an instrument is
assisting toward the exaltation of an usurper, contrary to duty and conscience,
the Tyrant (when seated) cannot endure him by whom he climbed, still measuring
the drift of the other, by his own spirit, and knowing that none out of
conscience would ever assist or set up an Usurper, but what is done in that
way, (let the pretense be what it will) the aim is only self preferment, So
that many times, an active Rebel aiming at his own grandeur, yet is content to
truckle under another, of greater repute, and who can make better pretense then
himself; still resolving, that if he can under that visor throw down lawful
power, he may after much more easily baffle him, whom he pretended to advance,
and side withal. Thus aspiring Oliver did by Fairfax, the Rump, Lambert,
Harrison, Vane, and many others. And so Lambert aimed to have dealt with
Fleetwood, Desborough, etc. and the restored Rumpers. But his Excellency,
(neglecting self interest) eyes cordially, (we hope and confidently believe) a
truly public national concernment, and good, and for that end was
isntrumental in readmitting the secluded Members, and so (the Rumpers noses
being wiped) to call, summon, and convene your Honors, and resolves to stand
satisfied with your conclusion and determination, that envy it self cannot say
of him, that he tampers with the Government, which it is equally presumption in
a General, to attempt (upon his own score) to set up, or restore, as to pull
down or dispossess; This prudent management of things in so distracted a time,
as it is praise worthy (beyond expression) so it is but the duty which he owes
to God, and his Country. In performing which had he no other recompense the
content of his own spirit would be ample satisfaction. But he cannot go without
thankful reward, having equally engaged his Country, with his Prince, from
the latter of whom, I know his generous spirit expects only his gracious
acceptance, whose most Princely disposition, I confide will lead him to return
the Author deserved Honor. His grateful Country also will requite his Piety,
with all possible acknowledgment, and perpetual celebration of his memory for
the same. It is one thing to serve a Tyrant, and Usurper, and deserve of him
beyond requital: another thing to serve a man's lawful Prince in lawful
things, and Country together. The former by what he deserves shows himself to
be void of all Conscience, and therefore may well be feared (for unless the
Tyrant surprise, and ruin, him, he seldom fails doing the like for the
Tyrant,) but here, the glory of the Act is ample satisfaction, and the justice
and honor of it, takes away all cause of jealousy from the King. Who can once
imagine that he who having an Army, and not wanting pretenses to make a claim,
(being of Royal descent,) should in sincere Loyalty, turn his eyes upon him
only whose right it is, and was, yet afterward when things are settled, disturb
the public, to set up his private interest? It is folly to dream of such a
groudlesse suspicion. Go on therefore undauntedly (most Noble Commander, Right
Honorable Lords, and deserving Senators,) perfect by Gods help and assistance,
the Nations happiness, fill up, and complete the measure of our joy, Oh!
restore to us our long exiled Prince, and our martyrd Kings whole Princely
progeny. God has given you an opportunity his providence has held forth to
you ample encouragement, all the good men in the Nation, in deep sense of our
past misery, with longing expectation yern forth their desires, Oh blessed, and
happy Parliament, called in a good time! (blessed and happy if you do it)
Restore our King.

Oh delay it not! do it early, Words spoken in season are like Apples of gold
in pictures of silver, such were the happy words of the General in that
memorable day of the first beginning of our deliverance, promising a Free
Parliament. How did the Bonefires that night, in every Street and lane seem to
scare the ^ight from overclowding our joys? Trust me, seasonable Actions are
no less welcome. Hope deferred is the rack of the Soul, whereas the
accomplishing of it, (before the spirits with long expectation faint) is like a
tree of life, Bis da^, qui Cito dat. Long deferred hopes are interpreted most
unkind, next to flat denyals. We have a long time been hopeless and desperate,
and now the day of our deliverance begins to dawn, we count the minutes, and
long to see the rising Sun.

Most Hnourable Patriots, The miseries we endured under the Rump, together with
their betraying the trust reposed in them by the people, their perfidious
breaking the true Parliaments solemnly engaged public Faith; their base
evading, and violating all Articles of War, and surrender their unjust causing
Irish adventurers to double, or lose their lent moneys, with several scandalous
villainies in the name, and under the title of Englands Parliament, and Supreme
Power, their frequent (long winded) interruptions. The calling and breaking,
(in the intervals of time) so many mock-Junctos, named and styled Parliaments,
with a thousand other such odious things, which in these twelve last years
Villainous usurpers have done, and the people suffered, by, and in reference to,
nominall Parliaments, have made the repute of them so contemptible, and their
esteem of so little value, That the honor which you have in the hearts of all
men upon expectation of good, and this good from you, and by your means, will
soon (with many) be turned into a light esteem, (ne quid asperius,) should
their earnest desire be delayed. But as the old men said to Rehoboam, If your
wisdom, (God blessing your Counsels) find a speedy way of answering the
Nations earnest hopes, and almost impatient expectation, your name will be not
only famous, but your Persons admired, (even almost to adoration) and you will
wipe off all that dirt, which lies upon and has long stuck to the name of
Parliaments. Then the Nations eyes will be opened, to distinguish clearly a
true English Parliament, from a domineering Rump, or the mimicall mock
Parliaments summoned, and picked, to serve an aspiring Usurper, Betimes
therefore (Noble Patriots) begin (in Gods name) to make this Nation happy. That
is, Oh! restore unto us our King.

Then shall the Murder of the Father lie at the offenders doors, and the sin
of rebelling against their King be wiped from off our English Parliament,
otherwise not, It was the Parliament began the war with the King, which
notwithstanding al Pretenses (according to the Kings prophetical prediction)
Ended in the Murder of Majesty, and extirpation of Monarchy, under the
retained name, and perpetrated by some Members, of Englands Parliament; who
styled themselves, the Supreme Authority of England. Though I am confident,
that the War was begun by means of a few Incendiaries, who did ill offices on
both sides, misrepresenting the King to the people, and the People to the King.
A distance being made, by the same Art, and pernicious industry the breach was
made daily wider, the Contrivers aiming at a war, and in it the total Ruin
of Majesty and his posterity, which the King foresaw, but most of both Houses,
keeping to the truly loyal maxim that the King can do no wrong, Endeavored
only to rescue the Kings person from bad Counsailers. And when the War in
earnest began, they made a Vow and Protestation, as also a League and Covenant,
which they took, and entered into, and set up in all Churches as a witness
against themselves, of the sincerity of their intentions as to the King and his
Royal branches, gave thanks solemnly (after Battles) for the preservation of
him, and his Children, owned all their Armies raised for his defense, and his
name, and commissionated them for the mutual defense of King and Parliament,
for the maintenance of the Liberty, and Privileges of the people, and their
represetatives in Parliament; as also the true Protestant Religion. And when in
zeal they had been incensed against his Majesty, (whom pestilent prevaricating
Rebels had represented as obstinate and stubborn,) and had been too exacting
upon his good nature, and were unsatisfied with his concessions which were,
even beyond what could be in reason expected, or without impudence desired, and
all this done, through suspicious, fears, and jealousies raised by the Rumpers,
in order to cut off all hopes of accommodation, no sooner did the Cordially
loyal discern this, but they relented in their spirit, toward his (too much
injuriously grated upon, yet patiently long suffering) Majesty, then lo! the
rebellious Rumpers,, unmaske themselves, and show themselves as they were. Upon
this the residue whom false surmises had led aside, to uncharitable thoughts of
the King, now find their error, and how they were deluded, and then what
indignation? what zeal? what clearing themselves? what washing their hands of,
and protesting against their (once fellow members) monstrous impieties? that in
all things they showed themselves innocent and free from the blood of their
innocent (sacred) Sovereign. However the mystery of Rebellion and Treason began
to work from the beginning of that Parliament Session, though not perceived by
the zealously incensed, truly Loyal members, whom the underhand pestilent
Rumpers, deluded by fair words, and false suggestions, and set against their
King, as crafty Ziba, by fained accusations and pretenses provoked holy David
against good Mephibosheth, to the unjust giving away from him all his land, to
this false accusing Servant. However the dark-sighted vulgar cannot see this,
nor will they ever come to be convinced of the truth of things herein, unless
your honors make up the breaches which the Rumpers made, by that practical
argument convincing the people that you disown their Tonents.

My Lords, let the dignity of the thing it self prevail with your Noble
Spirits. Mr. Milton, to vilify Regal Government, is so bold, as to affirm,
That a KING (if good) can do no more then another man: When as it is apparent,
that David's Subjects valued him at ten thousand of themselves, and the
Scripture promises KINGS (in the last days) to be given as Nursing Fathers,
and Queens for Nursing Mothers to the Church: And that KINGS shall bring their
glory and honor to the Heavenly Jerusalem, as an Accomplishment of her
splendour and luster. A thing not promised to any ten thousand other persons,
nor are so many private men, nor can they be capable of it. Behold a good, a
pious, patient, truly Christian, Protestant Prince, yet a man of Valor and
Courage, although made up of meekness and clemency, who may lead us and
conduct us in War, and preserve us in Peace. How have the Rumpers ecchoed to
their Usurping Protector in mannaging a costly, foolish, unprofitable War
with Spain, to the ruin almost, and loss of the Nations Trade, and the
beggering of several thousand Families, only to satisfy his, and their Lusts
and Animosities, in which War besides we lose three for one? Whereas a true
Father of his Country, would sooner empty his own V^ins of blood, then exhaust
his Subjects Pu^ses, for no apparent cause, and to no beneficial end. We have
had trial of Usurpers even to distraction, almost to destruction. Oh! now at
last, restore to us our true Prince and Governor, CHARLES our King: The
excellency of whose temper, and height of whose deserts, as they render him
truly more desirable, so they make him of more value then ten thousand common
men. Let the worthiness of the Subject plead for the maturity of your care.
And the great God, who is only able to direct guide and counsel you, be your
Counselor and stay: That so once more being settled upon the Foundation of
Truth and Righteousness, our perjury, murder, and oppression being repented
of, and the oppressed relieved, we may all have cause of solid and lasting joy,
which is the Earnest Prayer,

Most honorable Lords, And worthy Senators, Of your Cordial Honourer, And
most humble Orator, G. S.

THE CONCLUSION, TO His Royal, most Excellent, Sacred MAJESTY.
THus having most judicious, truly pious, and most accomplished Prince,
performed this defense of Regal Government and Authority, against an acute,
although scurrilous Antagonist, whose Reproaches of, and impious falsehoods
concerning your Majesty's most glorious Predecessor, and Royal Father, I have
wiped off, and discovered the Impiety therein, of him who cast them. Likewise,
having addressed my self to those in Power, (of whose good will we have already
had Comfortable Earnest) to stir them up, to the speedy Restoration of your
most deserving and desirable Person and family, to your undoubted birthright,
and inheritable, upon honorable terms: as the only way (under God) of putting
a period to our Long suffered miseries, calamities, and distractions, and
settling us upon the happy foundation of Peace, righteousness, religion, and
true, (not nominall) Liberty. Duty now commands and engages me, humbly to lay
down these my inconsiderable labors, at your Majesty's Royal feet, and to
submit them to your most judicious censure. The test of which far be it from
me, fondly to imagine that these trivial Lines can abide. However from your
most accurate censure, I fly to your most gracious Princely disposition,
craving your favorable acceptance of the will, and desire, I had sincerely to
serve your most just Royal Interest, that so I may be esteemed in your
Gracious breast, according to my truly loyal, most cordial intentions, and
not my weak, and every way Inconsiderable performance. (In magnis voluisse sat
est) Pardon also (I humbly beg of your most gracious Majesty) this double
presumption, of daring to trouble your more serious thoughts, with my no way
valuable Lines in comparison to your other many, most weighty, important,
Princely Affairs, since this last boldness is absolutely necessary in
consideration of the former, it being no way excusable, having begun my
Address to the Sun of Majesty, to end the same, in Application to any Star
of lesser magnitude. To you therefore (most incomparable Prince, and Sovereign)
as I humbly dedicated and presented, so I recommend this inconsiderable mite of
my service, to you it is due, were it of the greatest worth: However (as it is)
be pleased to accept it, and in it let your truly Divine, Princely goodness,
cover all defects, and imperfections, and receive it (I beseech you) as a
testimony of his most Cordial devotion to your service, with all possible
performance, to the utmost of his ability, to which he is truly, and
conscientiously obliged, and constantly resolved to stand immovably firm, in
all submissive Loyalty, and inviolable fidelity, who is,

My LIEGE, Your Majesty's unworthy, most humble Orator, G. S.

FINIS.
Books printed, and are to be sold by William Palmer at the ^alm-tree in
Fleetstreet, (...) Dunstans Church.
OCcult Physic, or, the three Principles in Nature Anatomized by a
Philosophical Operation, taken from Experience; in three Books. The first of
Beasts, Trees, Herbs, and their Magical and Physical Virtues. etc. By W. W.
Philosophus, Student in the Celestial Sciences.

(...). The Parley of Beasts; or, Morphandra Queen of the Enchanted Island:
Wherein Men were found, who being transmuted to Beasts, though proffered to be
disinchanted, and to become Men again; yet, in regard of the crying sins and
rebellious humors of the times, they preserre the life of a Brute Animal
before that of a Rational Creature, etc. By James Howel, Esquire;

Reader, be pleased to correct these following Errors of the Press with thy
pen.
Page 4. lin. 24. read of these, p. 11. l. 5. r. Yeomen, p. 13. l. 13. r. Laws,
p. 19. l. 12. r. then, l. 16. r. inferior, p. 21. l. 28. r. whence, p. 26. l.
4. r. the Jews, p. 33. l. 12. r. to a, p. 36. l. 16. r. gave, p. 40. l. 25. r.
lost, p. 42. l. 13. r. lost, l. 14. r. called, p. 43. l. 2. r. Law, p. 44. l.
21. r. of, p. 51. l. 12. r. and stained, p. 52. l. 4. r. no^, p. 58. l. 11. r.
the English people against Salmasius, l. 27. r. compulsion, p. 59. l. 2. r.
give, p. 66. l. 11. dele and, p. 68. l. 3. r. had, l. 13. r. adjudged, l. 26.
r. assent, p. 71. l. 6. r. the, l. 8. r. Syrus, l. 28. dele and, p. 72. l. 8,
9, 10. the stops are misplaced, p. 73. l. 8. r. think, p. 74. l. 14. r. Abram,
p. 78. l. 7. r. Israel, p. 85. l. 9. r. until, p. 86. l. 25. r. entitled, p.
87. l. 5. r. of the Jews, p. 88. l. 3. r. ascension, l. 14. r. disallowes, p.
93. l. 18. r. et absurdo, p. 100. l. 2. r. former condition, p. 104. l. 5. r.
goodly, p. 109. l. 9. r. Heers, p. 111. l. 3. r. generous, p. 112. l. 13. r.
Salmasius, p. 115. l. 9. r. Sauroma^i, l. 17. r. Expedition, p. 133. l. 9. r.
until, p. 138. l. 1. r. distraction, p. 146 l. 26. r. on Church, p. 159. l. 5.
r. it, p. 180. l. 17. r. happy, p. 185. l. 9. r. ordered. And if there be any
literal faults which have slipped my correction, which the Reader at first sight
cannot but observe, be pleased to correct it, and with candor attribute it to
oversight. Farewell.

From my Study, Mar. 29. 1660.
FINIS.

