THE MIDWIVES BOOK.

Or the whole ART of MIDWIFRY DISCOVERED.

Directing Childbearing Women how to behave themselves

In their Conception, Breeding, Bearing, and Nursing of CHILDREN.

In Six Books, Viz. I. An Anatomical Description of the Parts of Men and Women.
II. What is requisite for Procreation: Signs of a Woman's being with Child, and
whether it be Male or Female, and how the Child is formed in the womb. III. The
causes and hinderance of conception and Barrenness, and of the pains and
difficulties of Childbearing with their causes, signs and cures. IV. Rules to
know when a woman is near her labor, and when she is near conception, and how
to order the Child when born. V. How to order women in Childbirth, and of
several diseases and cures for women in that condition. VI. Of Diseases
incident to women after conception; Rules for the choice of a nurse; her
office; with proper cures for all diseases Incident to young Children.


By Mrs. Jane Sharp Practitioner in the Art of MIDWIFRY above thirty years.

London, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star at the West End of St. Paul's,
1671.

TO HER MUCH ESTEEMED, AND EVER HONORED FRIEND, THE LADY ELLENOUR TALBUTT, BE
THESE My Poor and Weak Endeavors Humbly Presented BY Madam

An Admirer of Your Virtue and Piety, Jane Sharp.

TO THE MIDWIVES OF ENGLAND.
Sisters.
I Have often sat down sad in the Consideration of the many Miseries Women
endure in the Hands of unskilful Midwives; many professing the Art (without any
skill in Anatomy, which is the Principal part effectually necessary for a
Midwife) merely for Lucres sake. I have been at Great Cost in Translations for
all Books, either French, Dutch, or Italian of this kind. All which I offer
with my own Experience. Humbly begging the assistance of Almighty God to aid
you in this Great Work, and am

Your Affectionate Friend Jane Sharp.

THE CONTENTS Of the several CHAPTERS.
BOOK. I.
OF the necessity and usefulness of the Art of Midwifry Page 1. CHAP. I. A
brief description of the Generative parts in both Sexes, and first of the
Vessels in Men appropriated to Generation p. 5. CHAP. II. Of the Seed-preparing
Vessels p. 6. CHAP. III. Of the Vessels that make the Change of the Red Blood
into a white substance like Seed. p. 8. CHAP. IV. Of the Cods, or rather the
Stones contained therein. p. 10. CHAP. V. Of the Carrying Vessels p. 14. CHAP.
VI. Of the Vessels for Seed p. 16 CHAP. VII. Of a Man's Yard p. 18. CHAP. VIII.
Of the Nut of the Yard p. 27. CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the Yard p. 28. CHAP.
X. Of the Generative parts in Women p. 33. CHAP. XI. Of the Womb p. 38. CHAP.
XII. Of the likeness of the Privities in both Sexes p. 40. CHAP. XIII. Of the
Privy passage in the Secrets of the Female Sex p. 41. CHAP. XIV. Of the
Seed-preparing Vessels in Women p. 54. CHAP. XV. Of the Seed-carrying Vessels
in Women p. 58. CHAP. XVI. Of Women's Stones p. 60. CHAP. XVII. Of the Womb or
Matrix p. 63. CHAP. XVIII. Of the fashion of the Womb, and the parts of which
it is made p. 73.
BOOK. II.
CHAP. I. WHat things are required for the Procreation of Children p. 87. CHAP.
II. Of true Conception p. 92. CHAP. III. Signs that a Women has conceived,
and whether it be a boy or Girl p. 102. CHAP. IV. Of false Conception, and of
the Mole, or Moon calf p. 106. CHAP. V. Of the Causes of Monstrous Conceptions
p. 116. CHAP. VI. Of the resemblance, or likeness of Children to Parents p.
120. CHAP. VII. Of the sympathy between the Womb and other parts p. 125 CHAP.
VIII. How the Child grows in the Womb, and how the parts of it are successively
made p. 132. CHAP. IX. Of the Posture the Child lies in the Womb. p. 153.
BOOK. III.
CHAP. I. WHat hinders Conception, and the causes of Women's Barrenness p. 163.
CHAP. II. Of the great pain and difficulty of Childbearing, with the signs,
cause, and Cure p. 166.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. RVles for Women when near their labor p. 187. CHAP. II. To know the
fit time when the child is ready to be born p. 205. CHAP. III. What must be
done after the woman is delivered p. 210. CHAP. IV. When and how to cut off the
Child's Navel-string, and what is the consequent thereof p. 212. CHAP. V. What
is best to bring away the Secundine or Afterbirth p. 217. CHAP. VI. Of the
great pains and throws some Women suffer after they are delivered p. 219. CHAP.
VII. Of the Cholick some women are afflicted with in the time of their travel
p. 220 CHAP. VIII. Of Women's miscarrying or Abortment, with the Signs thereof.
p. 221.
BOOK. V.
CHAP. I. HOw Women in Childbirth must be governed p. 228. CHAP. II. Of the
looseness of the Womb p. 236. CHAP. III. Of Fevers after Childbearing p. 243.
CHAP. IV. Of Women's Vomiting p. 248. CHAP. V. Of Women's diseases in general p.
250. CHAP. VI. Of the Green Sickness or white Fever p. 266. CHAP. VII. Of the
straitness of the Womb o. 299. CHAP. VIII. Of the largeness of the Womb p. 285.
CHAI. IX. Of the Terms in Women p. 288. CHAP. X. Of the overflowing of the
Courses, and immoderate Flux thereof p. 296. CHAP. XI. Of the Whites or Woman's
disease, from corruption of Humors p. 302. CHAP. XII. Of the swelling and
puffing up f^ the Body, especially the Belly and Feet of Women after delivery
p. 308. CHAP. XIII. Of Cold, Moist, Hot, Dry, and all the several distempers of
the Womb p. 313.
BOOK. VI.
CHAP. I. OF the Strangling of the Womb, and the effects of it, with the Causes
and Cure p. 317. CHAP. II. Of the Falling Sickness p, 328. CHAP. III. Of Women's
Breasts and Nipples, the Diseases incident to the same, with their Cures. p.
336. CHAP. IV. Necessary Directions for Nurses p. 351. CHAP. V. Instructions in
the choice of Nurses p. 360. CHAP. VI. Of the Child. p. 372. CHAP. VII.
Discoveries of the several Diseases incident to Children, with the Cure p. 377.
THE MID-WIVES BOOK.
BOOK. I.
The Introduction.
Of the necessity, and Usefulness of the Art of Midwifry.
THe Art of Midwifry is doubtless one of the most useful and necessary of all
Arts, for the being and well-being of Mankind, and therefore it is extremely
requisite that a Midwife, be both fearing God, faithful, and exceeding well
experienced in that profession. Her fidelity shall find not only a reward here
from man, but God has given a special example of it, Exodus 1. in the Midwives
of Israel, who were so faithful to their trust, that the Command of a King
could not make them depart from it, viz. But the Midwives feared God, and did
not as the King of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive.
Therefore God dealt well with the Midwives; and because they feared God, he
made them Houses.

As for their knowledge it must be twofold, Speculative; and Practical, she
that wants the knowledge of Speculation, is like to one that is blind or wants
her sight: she that wants the Practice, is like one that is lame and wants her
legs, the lame may see but they cannot walk, the blind may walk but they cannot
see. Such is the condition of those Midwives that are not well versed in both
these. Some perhaps may think, that then it is not proper for women to be of
this profession, because they cannot attain so rarely to the knowledge of
things as men may, who are bred up in Universities, Schools of learning, or
serve their Apprentiships for that end and purpose, where Anatomy Lectures
being frequently read, the sitution of the parts both of men and women, and
other things of great consequence are often made plain to them. But that
Objection is easily answered, by the former example of the Midwives amongst the
Israelites, for though we women cannot deny, that men in some things may come
to a greater perfection of knowledge than women ordinarily can, by reason of
the former helps that women want; yet the holy Scriptures has recorded
Midwives to the perpetual honor of the female Sex. There being not so much as
one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the
natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature
be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be
gained by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our
own sex. I cannot deny the honor due to able Physicians, and Chyrurgions, when
occasion is: Yet we find even that amongst the Indians, and all barbarous
people, where there is no Men of Learning, the women are sufficient to perform
this duty: and even in our own Nation, that we need go no farther, the poor
Country people where there are none but women to assist (unless it be those
that are exceeding poor and in a starving condition, and then they have more
need of meat than Midwives) the women are as fruitful, and as safe and well
delivered, if not much more fruitful, and better commonly in Childbed than the
greatest Ladies of the Land. It is not hard words that perform the work, as if
none understood the Art that cannot understand Greek. Words are but the shell,
that we ofttimes break our Teeth with them to come at the kernel, I mean our
brains to know what is the meaning of them; but to have the same in our mother
tongue would save us a great deal of needless labor. It is commendable for men
to employ their spare time in some things of deeper Speculation than is
required of the female sex; but the Art of Midwifry chiefly concern us, which,
even the best Learned men will grant, yielding something of their own to us,
when they are forced to borrow from us the very name they practice by, and to
call themselves Men-midwives. But to avoid long preambles in a matter so clear
and evident, I shall proceed to set down such rules, and method concerning this
Art as I think needful, and that as plainly and briefly as possibly I can, and
with as much modesty in words as the matter will bear: and because it is
commonly maintained, that the Masculine gender is more worthy than the
Feminine, though perhaps when men have need of us they will yield the priority
to us; that I may not forsake the ordinary method, I shall begin with men, and
treat last of my own sex, so as to be understood by the meanest capacity,
desiring the Courteous Reader to use as much modesty in the perusal of it, as I
have endeavored to do in the writing of it, considering that such an Art as
this cannot be set forth, but that young men and maids will have much just
cause to blush sometimes, and be ashamed of their own follies, as I wish they
may if they shall chance to read it, that they may not convert that into evil
that is really intended for a general good.

CHAP. I.
A brief description of the Generative parts in both sexes; and first of the
Vessels in Men appropriated to procreation.
THere are six parts in Men that are fitted for generation.

1. The Vessels that prepare the matter to make the seed, called the preparing
Vessels.

2. There is that part or Vessel which works this matter, or transmutes the
blood into the real desire for seed.

3. The Stones that make the Seed fructify.

4. There are Vessels that conveigh the Seed back again from the Stones when
they have concocted it.

5. There are the seminal or Seed-Vessels that keep or retain the Seed
concocted.

6. The Yard, that from these containing Vessels, casts the seed prepared into
the Matrix.

CHAP. II.
Of the Seed-preparing Vessels.
1. THe Vessels that prepare the matter to make the Seed are four, two Veins,
and two Arteries, which go down from the small guts to the Stones; they have
their names from their office, which is to fit that matter for the work, which
the Stones turn into Seed that is made fruitful by them, though it be a kind of
Seed or blood changed into a white substance before it comes to the Stones.

It will be needful that you should know that the fountain of blood is the
Liver, and not the Heart, as was anciently supposed, and the Liver by the Veins
disperse the blood through the Body. The two Arteries that prepare the matter,
arise both from the great Artery or Trunk that is in the Hearts and is the
beginning of all the Arteries, for the Arteries rise from the Heart, as the
Vein, do from the Liver; but the two Veins for preparation of Seed, are one on
the right the other on the left side; the right Vein proceeds from the great
hollow Vein of the Liver, a little below the beginning of the Emulgent Vein;
but the left Vein springs commonly from the root of the Emulgent Vein, yet it
has been seen to have a branch that comes to it from the Trunk of the hollow
Vein. Of these two Veins and Arteries there is one Vein, and one Artery of
each side; these two Veins in the middle part, pass straight through the Loins,
and they repose upon the Lumbal Muscle, having only a thin skin, that comes
betwixt them, and there they divide and scatter themselves into the skinny
parts that are near adjoining. All these Veins and Arteries so descending, are
called Seed-preparing Vessels, and they are covered with a skin that comes from
the Peritonaeum, the Vein lies uppermost, and the Artery under it. The lower
part of these two Veins goes beyond the Midriff to the Stones, and descends
with a little Nerve, and that Muscle which holds up the Stones, through the
doubling of the Midriff, but they pass not through the Peritonaeum, and when it
comes near the Stones an Artery joins with it, and then are these Vessels with
that skin that comes from the Peritonoeum twisted together as the young twigs
of Vines are, and so pass they to the end of the Stones. These two Arteries
have their beginning from the great Artery a little below the Emulgent, and so
they go downwards till they join with the two Veins formerly mentioned; the two
Veins they prepare and carry the natural Blood to make Seed of; the two
Arteries, they carry the vital Spirits or vital blood.

CHAP. III.
Of the Vessels that make the change of red Blood into a white substance like
Seed.
THese Vessels, as you heard before, are also four, two Veins and two Arteries,
that at their first descending keep near one to the other, carrying their
different blood, one from the Liver the other from the Heart, as fit matter for
the Stones to make Seed of; but before they come at the Stones, they twist one
with the other, sometimes the Veins going into the Arteries, and sometimes
again the Arteries going into the Veins, thus they join their forces, the
better to prepare the matter for the use of the Stones, and after that they
part again, which things are full of delight for a Man to behold, that he may
the more admire the excellency of the works of the great God that has so
wonderfully made Man. The two Veins and two Arteries, after they have joined
with many ingraftings and twistings together, appear but two Bodies crumpled
like the tendrels of a Vine, white and pyramidal, and rest one upon the right,
the other on the left Stone, piercing the very tunicles of the Stones with very
small veins, and so disperse themselves all through the bodies of the Stones.
The substance of these vessels is betwixt that of the stones and that of the
Veins and Arteries, being neither wholly kernels, nor wholly skinny; their
office is, by their several twistings, to mingle the vital and natural blood
together which they contain, and by virtue they borrow from the Stones, to
change the color of red blood into a matter that is white, prepared
immediately for the Stones to make Seed of.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Cods, or rather the Stones contained therein.
THe Cods is as it were a purse for the Stones to be kept in with the seminary
Vessels, and this purse is divided in the middle with a thin membrane, which
some call the seam, and may be seen on the outside of the Cods, making a kind
of wrinkle that runs all along the length of it, and just in the middle: This
member suffers many kinds of diseases and distempers, the property of it is to
be dilated and extended, by which means there arise sundry Ruptures, the Watery
Uly, the windy, the Humoral, the Fleshy, and the watery ruptures, and all this
happens by reason of too much repletion of the vessels of seed caused by much
gross or watery blood. Within this pursy and sobbing and chaking of the stones
which are two whole kernels like to the kernels of women's paps, their figure is
Oval, and therefore some call them Eggs.

The substance of the Stones has neither blood in it nor feeling; yet they
feel exqusitely by reason of the pannicles, and each stone has two Muscles
sticking to their pannicles, to lift them up that they hang not too loose. They
are temperately hot and moist, but the blood that flows to them is very hot,
by which means they draw as a Limbeck the matter of seed from the whole Body.
Physicians place them amongst the Principal parts for the Generation and the
preservation of mankind. They are fastened to all the Principal parts by Veins,
Arteries, and Pannicles, they are subject to mulplicity of diseases and
distempers. They are wrapped up in three several Coats; the outermost is the
purse or Cod common to them both, it differs from other skin that covers the
Body, because other skin is smooth, this is wrinkled, that it may observe the
motions of the stones, to extend or shrink with them, when they ascend, or
descend: they ascend in time of copulation, but in all violent heats, or
Fevers, or weakness, or in old age, the stones hang down, which is always a
very strong sign of much damage in sickness. The second Coat wraps up the
stones as the first purse does, but the second wraps them nearer, and is not so
wide as the first; and though the fleshy pannicle from which it springs be
thinner here than any where else, yet it is full of small arteries and veins,
that carry in vital and natural blood to keep the stones warm, which are of
themselves a very cold part The third Coat immediately wraps in the Stones, and
is white, thick, and strong to preserve the soft and loose substance of the
Stones. Some persons there are, yet not many, and those Monsters in nature,
that have but one stone, and some three stones, but one stone is oftener than
three; and unless it be some great failing in Nature, I rather think that the
other stone lies up close within the Body, as sometimes both stones do, and do
not come down into the Cod till such an age, or at certain times as is proved
by experience, where the stones lie within, and come not down; such persons are
more prone to venery, because the stones are kept warmer than when they appear;
yet the stones are tied with strings that are long and slender, which are
Muscles that hang by on both sides, to keep the stones from being overstretched
or oppressing the passage of the the seminal Vessels; if any ill chance befall
the stones then these Muscles are exceeding sensible of pain and subject to
swell by reason of it. The left stone is the biggest, and therefore some think
more femals are begotten than males, and the right is the hotter and breeds the
stronger Seed, and therefore it is generally maintained, that Boys are
begotten from the right stone, but Girls with the left. Those that have
hottest stones are most prone to Venery: and their stones are longer and
harder, and they are more hairy about those parts especially. The right stone
is the hottest in all, because it receives more pure and Vital blood from the
hollow Vein and the great Artery than the left does, which receives only a
watery blood from the Emulgent Vein. But both of them have an innate quality to
make Seed, and without the Stones no procreation can be; as we see that such as
are gelded lose the faculty of Generation, though they want nothing else but
their stones. The substance of the stones is very like to the Seed it self,
moist, white and clammy. There is yet another Vessel, or conduit belonging to
the stones, which is called the Vessel of ejecting, or casting forth of the
Seed, it comes from the head of the stones to the root of the yard overthwart
the stones in a small body like a Silkworm, by one end the carrying vessel
elutes the stones, and carries forth the seed, from the other end the casters
forth of the Seed passes and descends to the bottom of the stones, and bends
back again and is knit to the preparing Vessels, and returns to the head of the
stones, and so goes upward till it touch the bone of the small guts, keeping
close to the preparing vessels, till it pierce the production of the
Hypogastrium or lower belly, which is the upper part of the place where the
hair grows above the Privities; it reaches from the Navil to that hair, and so
it runs from thence through the hollowness of the hip and sides between the
bladder and the straight gut, till it come as far as the forestanders, and so
fixes it self, where it ends at the root of the Yard where it begins; so long
as it remains amongst the Coats of the stones, it is full of many windings
forward and backward, but near the end it has many little Bladders like Warts.

CHAP. V.
Of the carrying Vessels.
THe carrying Vessels on both sides, are certain small bladders, united between
the Bladder and the right Gut, the last of them, with the seminary Vessels, by
a little pipe ends in the forestanders: These carry and conveigh the seed that
is first fully concocted in the stones, by the great heat of them by reason of
the vital blood that is brought to them, to the seminary Vessels which are to
hold the Seed, till there is cause to cast it forth. They are but two white
nervous sinews, obscure, hollow Pipes, they rise from the Stones to the Belly
not far from the preparing Vessels, from the hollow of the belly they return
and go to the backside of the bladder; betwixt that and the right gut, and near
the neck of the bladder they are joined to the Vessels for Seed, which are like
a Honeycomb; these Honey-combs or hollow Cells have an oily matter in them,
for they attract the fatty substance from the Seed, and that they send forth
into the urinary passage chiefly in the act of carnal copulation, lest the thin
skin of the Yard, which is very quick of feeling should be hurt by the
sharpness of the Seed. The carrying Vessels fall at last into the vessels
ordained to the Seed till there is use for it. The carriers strengthen the
vessels for the seed, and are storehouses for it, that the whole store be not
wasted in one act; you shall find in some persons enough to serve for several
acts of copulation. They are hollow and round to contain the more Seed, and
they are full of membrances that they may be shortened or lengthened as the Seed
is more or less in quantity, and are full of meanders and turnings, that the
seed pass not away without a man's will.

CHAP. VI.
The Vessels for seed.
THe Vessels for Seed are such as you call kernels in your meat, we call them
here forestanders; they are two little stones seated at the root of the Yard, a
little above the sphyaster of the the bladder, they are wrapped up with a skin
that covers them, they seem to be round, but they are flat behind, and before,
they are loose and spongy as kernels usually are, and white, and hard, in some
persons more or less, they having a quick feeling to stir up delight in
Copulation; they have some small pipes which open into the common pipes through
which the Seed passes into the Yard: these kernels or forestanders being
pressed by the lower muscles of the Yard, besides the oily fat substance they
defend the urinary passage by, they also defend the Vessels that carry the seed
to them, lest by much standing and stretching of the Yard the carriers of seed
should be hurt; they have another use also, for lying between the bladder and
the right gut, they serve for cushions for the vessels to rest upon, to keep
them from violent pressing, and this is the cause why those that are costive
and cannot easily go to stool, when they strain to do their business, they
press those kernels and sometimes void some Seed, and also must needs make some
water, more or less when they go to stool. These kernels compass the vessels
that carry the seed, and through the midst of these passes the water or Urine
pipe, or common passage both for seed and Urine, or conduit of the Yard. At the
mouth of this conduit where the carrying vessels meet with it, there is a thin
skin that keeps the vessels for seed that are like a sponge in nature, that
they shed not forth the seed against men's will. But this skin is full of holes,
which open by the violent heat and motion in Copulation, and so the seed finds
its way out, for it is a thin spirit, and the rather by reason of motion, and
passes like Quicksilver through a piece of leather; there are no more holes to
be seen in this skin than in a piece of leather, unless it be seen in some
persons after death, who were in their lifetime troubled with a great running
of the Reins as it is called, but properly an involuntary shedding of the Seed,
because these holes are become so great, that the subtle seed cannot be kept
back by it; the reins are to part the Urine from the blood, and to send that to
the bladder by the conduits of Urine, but not to send forth seed or to provide
it, that is the work of the stones as I said. Yet by communication of parts, if
the reins be much offended, the seminary parts cannot perform their office as
they should, but an involuntary shedding of Seed will follow, until such time
as the reins be strengthened and cured. I shall give only one observation and
so conclude this Chapter: And that is a warning to all that cut for the stone
in the bladder, of what age soever they be who are cut; oftentimes in drawing
forth the stone they so rend and tear the seed vessels, that such persons are
never able to beget Children, they may hatch the Cuckows Eggs, and keep other
men's if they please, but they shall never get any themselves; these kernels are
a hard and spungy substance near as great as a Walnut.

CHAP. VII.
Of a man's yard.
THe Yard is as it were the Plow wherewith the ground is tilled, and made fit
for production of Fruit: we see that some fruitful persons have a Crop by it
almost every year, only plowing up their own ground, and live more plentifully
by it than the Countryman can with all his toil and cost: and some there are
that plow up other men's ground, when they can find such lascivious women that
will pay them well for their pains, to their shame be it spoken, but commonly
they pay dear for it in the end, if timely they repent not. The Yard is of a
ligamental substance, sinewy and hollow as a sponge, having some muscles to
help it in its several postures. The Yard and the Tongue have more great Veins
and Arteries in them than any part of the Body for their bigness; by these
porosities, by help of Imagination the Yard is sometimes raised, and swells with
a windy spirit only, for there is a natural inclination and force by which it
is raised when men are moved to Copulation, as the motion is natural in the
Heart and Arteries; true it is that in these motion is always necessary, but
the Yard moves only at some times, and rises sometimes to small purpose. It
stands in the sharebone in the middle as all know, being of a round and long
fashion, with a hollow passage within it, through which pass both the Urine
and Seed; the top of it is called the Head or Nut of the Yard, and there it is
compact and hard, and not very quick of feeling, lest it should suffer pain in
Copulation; there is a soft loose skin called the foreskin which covers the
head of it, and will move forward and backward as it is moved; this foreskin in
the lower part only in the middle, is fastened or tied long ways to the greater
part of the Head of the Yard by a certain skinny part called the string or
bridle. It is of temperament hot and moist, and it is joined to the middle of
the share bone, and with the Bladder by the Conduit pipe that carries the
Urine, and with the brain by Nerves and Muscles that come to the skin of it, to
the Heart and Liver by Veins and Arteries that come from them. The Yard has
three holes or Pipes in it, one broad one and that is common to the Urine and
Seed, and two small ones by which the Seed comes into the common long Conduit
pipe; these two Arteries or Vessels enter into this pipe in the place called
the Perinaeum, which in men is the place between the root of the Yard and the
Arsehole or Fundament, but in a woman it is the place between that and the cut
of the neck of the womb; from those holes to the Bladder, that passage is
called the neck of the Bladder, and from thence to the head of the Yard is the
common pipe or channel of the Yard. The Yard has four Muscles, two toward the
lower part on both sides, one of them near the channel or pipe of the Yard, and
these are extended in length, and they dilate the Yard and raise it up, that
the Seed may with ease pass through it: two other muscles there are that come
from the root of it near the share bone that comes slanting toward the top of
the Yard in the upper part of it, when these are stretched the Yard rises, and
when they slacken then it falls again, and if one of these be bent and the
other be not, the Yard bends to that muscle that is stretched or bent.

If the Yard be of a moderate size, not too long, nor too short, it is good as
the Tongue is, but if the Yard be too long, the spirits in the seed flee away;
if it be too short, it cannot carry the Seed home to the place it should do.

The Yard also serves to empty the Bladder of the water in it, and that is
easily proved by a Louse put into the pipe of the Yard, which by biting will
cause one to make water when the Urine is suppressed. The foreskin was made to
defend the Yard that is tender, and to cause delight in Copulation; the Jews
were commanded to cut it off. Many diseases are incident to the Yard, but a
priapisme or standing of the Yard continually by reason of a windy matter, is a
disease that properly belongs to this part, and is very dangerous sometimes.

The Yard of a man is not bony, as in Dogs, and Wolves, and Foxes; nor gristly,
for then it could not stand and fall as need is; it is make of Skins, Brawns,
Tendons, Veins, Arteries, Sinews, and great Ligaments; yet not so full of Veins
but it may be emptyed and filled again, nor so full of Arteries as to beat
always, yet you shall find it beat sometimes; it consists not of Nerves for
they are not hollow enough for the passages, but it is compounded of a peculiar
substance that is not found in any other part of the body; the place of it, as
I said, begins at the share-bone, and it is fast knit to the Yard between the
Cods and the Fundament, so that there is a seam that comes up along the Cods
and parts them in the midst between the Stones. The Yard is not perfectly
round, but is somewhat broad on the back or upperside, it differs a little in
some from others; the situation of it is so peculiar to Men, that they have
herein a preeminence above all other creatures. Some men, but chiefly fools,
have Yards so long that they are useless for generation. It is generally held,
that the length or proportion of the Yard depends upon cutting the Navel
string, if you cut it too short and knit it too close in Infants it will be too
short, because of the string that comes from the Navel to the bottom of the
bladder, which draws up the Bladder and shortness the Yard: and this beside the
general opinion, stands with so much reason, that all Midwives have cause to be
careful to cut the Navel string long enough, that when they tie it, the Yard
may have free liberty to move and extend it self, always remembering that
moderation is best, that it be not left too long, which may be as bad as too
short. There are six parts to be observed of which the Yard consists: 1. Two
sinewy bodies. 2. A sinewy substance to hold up the two side Ligaments and the
urinary passage. 3. The Urinary passage it self. 4. The Nut of the Yard. 5. The
four Muscles; and 6. The Vessels.

The two sinewy bodies are really two though they are joined together, they are
long and hard, within they are spongy and full of black blood, the spongy
substance within seems to be woven network, and is made of numberless Veins and
Arteries, and the black blood that is contained in them is full of spirits.
Motion and leisure in Copulation heats them, and makes the Yard to stand, and
so will imagination; the hollow weaving of them together was to hold the
spirits as long as may be that the Yard fall not down before it has performed
the work of nature. These side ligaments of the Yard where they are thick and
round, spring from the lower part of the share-bone, and not the upper part as
Galen supposed. At the beginning they are parted and resemble a pair of Horns
or the Letter Y, where the common pipe for Urine and Seed goes between them. It
is thus manifest that the greatest part of the Yard is made of two sinewy
parts, one of them of each side, and they both end at the top of the head of
the Yard, they come from two beginnings and lean upon the hip under the
share-bone, and so run on to the Nut of the Yard. Also their substance is
double, the outside is sinewy, hard and thick, the inside black, soft, loose,
spongy and thin, they are joined by a thin and sinewy skin, which is
strengthened by some slanting small Veins placed there like to a Weavers
Shuttle; they are parted at their first rising to make way for the water pipe,
but they are joined about the middle of the share-bone, and there they lose
near a third part of their sinewy substance.

The use of these two sinewy bodies that make the yard, is for the vital
spirits to run through the thin parts of them and fill the Yard with spirits,
and they are so thick and compact, and strong on the outside; that they hinder
these spirits from breaking suddenly away, for should they flee out, the Yard
will stand no longer but presently fall down.

In the inside of the substance of the Yard which is wrapped about by the outward
sinewy substance there is seen a thin and tender artery coming from the root of
the Yard, and runs quite through the whole loose substance of it: Besides these
there is a Conduit pipe placed at the lower part of the Yard that serves both
for Seed and Urine to be put forth by, as common to them both, and it runs
through the middle of the foresaid two sinewy bodies, and is of the same
substance with them, and is loose and thick, soft and tender, and runs equally
in all respects from the neck of the bladder to the top of the Yard, only it is
something larger where it begins than where it ends at the top of the Nut. This
pipe at first, as I said, has three holes where it rises from the neck of the
bladder, that in the middle is wider than the other two pipes or holes are
which stand on both sides of it, and which are derived from the passage that
comes from the Seed Vessels, and they carry the Seed into this great pipe. In
this great pipe where it is fastened to the Nut of the Yard, and with the two
sinewy bodies, there is a little hollow place wherein when a man is troubled
with the running of the Reins by reason of the Pox, some corrupt Seed or sharp
matter lies, which occasions great pains and Ulcers, and sometimes the
Surgeon is forced to cut off the top of the Yard; and sometimes from these
Ulcers there will grow a piece of flesh in the Yards passage for Urine, which
hinders the Urine that it cannot come forth till that piece of flesh be taken
away by conveighing something into that Urinary passage that may eat it off.
There is one thing more worth taking notice of by Chirurgions, concerning this
pipe or Urinary passage, that from the place where it begins and goes forward
from the neck of the bladder to the spermatick Vessels and forestanders, that
there is a thin and very tender skin which is of a most acute feeling, and to
stir up delight in the act of Venery, and it will make the Yard stand upon any
delightsome thoughts or desires. If the Chirurgions be not careful when they
thrust the springs in near that place, they will soon break this skin and undo
their Patient. This common pipe comes from the neck of the bladder, that is, it
begins there, but it does not take its being from it; for boil the bladder of
any creature, and it will part from it whereby it is plain, that it is only
joined to it, and so runs on to the Nut of the Yard.

CHAP. VIII.
The Nut of the Yard.
THe Nut is a piece of soft thin brawny flesh, that it may do no hurt to the
Womb when it enters; it is full of spirits and blood, very quick and tender of
feeling, yet will endure to be touched; the skin of it is very pure thin skin;
and if it be broken or rubbed off, it will soon grow again, but if the body of
it be hurt in the fleshy part, or once lost, it will never grow again; it is a
little sharp at the end, and made like to a top, that it may enter the better;
it is fastened as I told you, to the foreskin or the lower part with a ligament
or bridle, which is sometimes so straight tied, and is so strong, that it will
pull the head of the Yard backwards when it stands; but it is usually broken,
or gives way the first time that a man lies with a woman, for the combat is
then doubtless so furious, that a man feels no pain of it by reason of the
abundance of pleasure that takes it off, otherwise doubtless the part is so
quick of feeling, that no man were able to endure it.

CHAP. IX.
The Muscles of the Yard.
A Muscle is an Instrument for voluntary motion, for without that no part were
in a capacity to move it self. There is a little Book lately set forth and is
well worth the reading, concerning the reason of the motion of the Muscles. Of
these Muscles the Yard has four, two on each side to give motion to it. These
Muscles are a fibrous flesh to make up their body; they have sinews for
feeling, veins for nourishment, Arteries for vital blood, a skin to cover them,
and to part one Muscle from another, and all of them from the flesh, you may if
you please easily discern them in a leg of a Rabbit. Of each side of the Yard,
one of these Muscles is shorter and thicker than the others are, and they serve
to raise the Yard and to make it stand, and are therefore called raisers or
erecters; the other two are longer and smaller, and they open the lower part of
the Urinary pipe both when men make water, and when they cast forth the Seed,
and are therefore called hasteners, because they dispatch and hasten the work;
one pair of these Muscles comes from a part of the hip near the beginning of
the Yard; besides that they raise the Yard to make it stand, they also bend the
fore part of the Yard to be thrust into the womb, so that all things are so
exactly fitted by nature, that a blind man cannot miss it. The two longer
Muscles come from the sphincter of the Fundament, and are of a more fleshy
substance; and are full as long as the Yard, under which they go downward
ending at the side of the water pipe about the middle of the Yard; were it not
for these large Muscles to open the conduit pipe, the passage would be stopped by
repletion of nervy bodies, both when men should make water, or cast out the
Seed: They also hold the Yard firm, that it lean not to either side, and serve
farther to press forth the Seed out of the forestanders, all helping to the
sudden and forceable casting it out in time of Copulation, lest the spirits fly
away and the Seed prove unfruitful.

There are all manner of Vessels in the Yard, as Veins, Nerves, Arteries, yet
Columbus tells us, that Vesalius a great Anatomist, maintains that there is
neither Vein, nor Nerve in it, which is very false, for there are some Veins
and Arteries to be seen in the outward skin of the Yard, others are within, and
there the Arteries are far more than the Veins, and are dispersed through the
whole body of the Yard. The right Artery runs to the left side of it, and the
left to the right side, the veins that appear on the outside of it, and on the
foreskin, come from the under belly; and these Veins do swell with a frothy
blood when the Yard begins to stand.

It has also two sinews, the lesser of the two goes upon the skin, the greater
upon the muscles and body of the Yard. These sinews scatter themselves from the
marrow of that bone which is called the holy bone, and they pass quite through
the Yard, and cause exceeding great delight when the Yard stands, and they
prick forward in the action of Venery.

The Yard is stretched and made to swell by reason of fullness of Seed and
plenty of wind, and therefore all windy meats, as Pulse, Beans, and Pease and
the like, will make the Yard stand, and sometimes they cause a priapisme or
continual standing of the Yard, which will be more troublesome than if it
should never stand at all. It is not to be imagined what pains some have
undergone, who by indiscreet taking of Cantharides have fallen into this
grievous distemper, wherefore I would wish men to take heed lest they pay for
it at last, for the Proverb is commonly true, sweet meat must have sour sauce.
Sometimes the bladder is full of Urine, and the veins are very hot which make
the Yard to rise.

The Yard is placed betwixt the thighs, that it may stand the stronger to
perform its work with all the force a man is able, and at the lower end of it
to add more strength it is more fleshy, and that flesh is musculous, and
besides that it has two muscles as I said on both sides to poise it equally
when it stands, they are indeed but small muscles yet they are exceeding strong.

The skin of the Yard is long and loose that it may swell or slack as the Yard
does, and the foreskin of that skin sometimes covers the head of the Yard, and
sometimes goes so far back that it will not come forward again. This skin in
time of the Venerious action, keeps the mouth of the womb close that no cold
air get in, yet some think the action migh be better performed without it; the
Jews indeed were commanded to be Circumcised, but now Circumcision a vails not
and is forbidden by the Apostle. I hope no man will be so void of reason and
Religion, as to be Circumcised to make trial which of these two opinions is the
best; but the world was never without some mad men, who will do any thing to be
singular: were the foreskin any hindrance to procreation or pleasure, nature
had never made it, who made all things for these very ends and purposes.

The top of the Nut has a hole for the Urine and Seed to come forth by, and
nature has made a little round circle at the bottom of the Nut, with a fit
jetting out from the body of the Yard, and when the Yard casts the Seed into
the Womb, the neck of the womb with her own slanting fibers lays hold of it and
embraces it, and by this circle the Seed is kept in the womb that it cannot
fly out again. The Nut of the Yard, when it is half covered with the foreskin,
looks like an Acorn in the Cup, and therefore some call it Glans, which in
Latin signifies an Acorn, in this Acorn or Nut of the Yard lies all the
pleasure of Copulation, so that if the Nut were gone, many think there could be
no more tickling or moving in the Seed, but all fruitful Copulation would be
lost, or at least there would be no pleasure in the act of Generation, though
the Stones might move a desire to it by transmitting of the Seed which is made
by them. Let men be careful then how they enter too far, for it will be hard to
say which were the greater loss, of the Stones or the Nut.

CHAP. X.
Of the Generation or Privy parts in Women.
MAn in the act of procreation is the agent and tiller and sower of the Ground,
Woman is the Patient or Ground to be tilled, who brings Seed also as well as
the Man to sow the ground with. I am now to proceed to speak of this ground or
Field which is the Woman's womb, and the parts that serve to this work: we women
have no more cause to be angry, or be ashamed of what Nature has given us than
men have, we cannot be without ours no more than they can want theirs. The
things most considerable to be spoken to are, 1. The neck of the womb or privy
entrance. 2. The womb it self. 3. The Stones. 4. The Vessels of Seed. At the
bottom of the woman's belly is a little bank called a mountain of pleasure near
the wellspring, and the place where the hair coming forth shows Virgins to be
ready for procreation, in some far younger than others; some are more forward
at twelve years than some at sixteen years of age, as they are hotter and riper
in constitution. Under this hill is the springhead, which is a passage having
two lips set about with hair as the upper part is: I shall give you a brief
account of the parts of it, both within and without, and of the likeness and
proportion between the Generative parts in both sexes.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Womb.
THe Matrix or Womb has two parts, the great hollow part within, and the neck
that leads to it, and it is a member made by Nature for propagation of
children. The substance of the concavity of it is sinewy, mingled with flesh,
so that it is not very quick of feeling, it is covered with a sinewy Coat that
it may stretch in time of Copulation, and may give way when the Child is to be
born; when it takes in the Seed from Man the whole concavity moves toward the
Center, and embraces it, and touches it with both its sides. The substance of
the neck of it is musculous and gristly with some fat, and it has one wrinkle
upon another, and these cause pleasure in the time of Copulation; this part is
very quick of feeling. The concavity or hollow of it is called the Womb, or
house for the infant to lie in. Between the neck and the Womb there is a skinny
fleshy substance within, quick of feeling, hollow in the middle, that will open
and shut, called the Mouth of the Womb and it is like the head of a Tench, or
of a young Kitten; it opens naturally in Copulation, in voiding menstrous
blood, and in childbirth; but at other times, especially when a woman is with
Child, it shuts so close, that the smallest needle cannot get in but by force.

The neck is long, round, hollow, at first it is no wider than a man's Yard
makes it, but in maids, much less. About the middle of it is a Pannicle called
the Virgin Pannicle, made like a net with many fine ligaments and Veins, but a
woman loses it in the first act, for it is then broken. At the end of the neck
there are small skins which are called foreskins; within the neck, a little
toward the share bone, there is a short entrance, whose orifice is shut with
certain fleshy and skinny additions, whereby, and by the aforesaid foreskin,
the air coming between, they make a hissing noise when they make water.

The figure of the concavity of the Womb is four-quare, with some roundness,
and hollow below like a bladder.

There is toward the neck of the Womb on both sides a strong ligament near the
hanches, binding the womb to the back, they are like a Snails horns, and
therefore are called the horns of the womb.

About these horns there is one Stone on each side, harder and smaller than
Men's stones, and not perfectly round, but flat like an Almond; Seed is bred in
them, not thick and hot as in Men, but cold Watery seed.

These Stones have not one purse to hold them both as Men's stones have, but
each of them has a covering of its own that springs from the Peritoneum,
binding them about, the horns and each of them has a small muscle to move them
by.

The foresaid Seed-Vessels are plainted in these Stones, and are called
preparing Vessels, descending from the Liver Vein, the great Artery and the
Emulgent Veins; then there are other Vessels called carriers, that continually
dilate themselves and proceed as far as the concavity of the womb, where it is
joined to the neck, and they carry the Seed to the hollow of the Womb.

The many Orifices of these Vessels are called Cups, the menstruous blood runs
forth by them* and the Infant suck's its nutriment from them by the Veins and
Arteries of the Navel, that are joined to these Cups.

A Woman has no forestanders, for a woman's Vessels are soft, and do not hurt
the stones as they would do in Men because they are so hard.

The whole Matrix considered with the stones and Seed Vessels, is like to a
man's Yard and privities, but Men's parts for Generation are complete and appear
outwardly by reason of heat, but women's are not so complete, and are made
within by reason of their small heat.

The Matrix is like the Yard turned inside outward, for the neck of the womb is
as the Yard, and the hollow of it with its receivers, and Vessels, and Stones,
are like the Cods, for the Cods turned in have a hollowness, and within the
womb lie the Stones and seed Vessels, but Men's stones and Vessels are larger.

The place of the cut of the Matrix is between the Fundament and the
share-hone, and the place between both Arteries, is called the Peritoneum.

The neck from the cut by the belly goes upward as far as the womb, and the
place of it is between the right Gut and the bladder; all these are placed at
length in the cavity of the belly.

The womb is small in Maids, and less than their bladder, neither is the hollow
complete, but grows bigger as the body does. In Maids of ripe years it is not
much bigger than you can comprehend in your hand; unless when they come to be
with Child, yet it grows by reason of their courses. The sides of it are
fleshy, hard, and thick, but when a Woman is with Child it is stretched out and
made thin and seems more sinewy, and then it rises toward the Navel more or
less accordding as the Child is in bigness.

It has but one hollow Cell, yet this at the bottom is in some manner divided
into two, as if there were two wombs fastened to one neck.

For the most part Boys are bred in the right side of it, and Girls in the
left.

It joins to the Brain by Nerves, to the Heart by Arteries, to the Liver and
Lights by Veins, to the right Gut by Pannicles, to the bladder by the neck of
it; which neck is short, and comes not forth as Men's do; it is joined to the
hanches by the horns, the concavity of it is loose every way, and therefore it
will fall to the sides, and sometimes it will come all forth of the body by the
neck of it. Perhaps it is no error to say the Wombs are two, because there are
two cavities like two hollow hands touching one the other, both covered with
one Pannicle, and both end in one channel; No Man that sees a womb can well
discern it unless he be well skiled in the Aspects, concerning limbs, and
shadows, whereby Physicians are much helped in many practices as well as other
Artificers.

The womb by reason of that which flows to it, is hot and moist. It is of great
use to cleanse the body from superfluous blood, but chiefly to preserve the
Child.

It is subject to all diseases, and the whole womb may be taken forth when it
is corrupted, as I have seen, and yet the woman may live in good health when it
is all cut away. In the year of our Lord 1520, upon the 5th. of October,
Domianus a Surgeon, cut out a whole womb from one called Gentil, the wife of
Christopher Briant of Millan, in the presence of many Learned Doctors, and
other Students: and that woman did afterward follow her ordinary business, and
as she and her Husband confessed and reported, she kept company with her husband,
and cast-forth Seed in Copulation, and had her monthly courses as she was wont
to have before.

CHAP. XII.
Of the likeness of the Privities of both sexes.
BUt to handle these things more particularly, Galen says that women have all
the parts of Generation that Men have, but Men's are outwardly, women's inwardly.

The womb is like to a man's Cod, turned the inside outward, and thrust inward
between the bladder and the right Gut, for then the stones which were in the
Cod, will stick on the outsides of it, so that what was a Cod before will be a
Matrix, so the neck of the womb which is the passage for the Yard to enter,
resembles a Yard turned inwards, for they are both one length, only they
differ like a pipe, and the case for it; so then it is plain, that when the
woman conceives, the same members are made in both sexes, but the Child proves
to be a Boy or a Girl as the Seed is in temper; and the parts are either
thrust forth by heat, or kept in for want of heat; so a woman is not so perfect
as a Man, because her heat is weaker, but the Man can do nothing without the
woman to beget Children, though some idle Coxcombs will needs undertake to show
how Children may be had without use of the woman.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the secrets of the Female sex, and first of the privy passage.
SEven things are here to be observed: 1. The Lips. 2. The Wings. 3. The
Clitoris. 4. The passage for Urine. 5. The four fleshy Knobs. 6. The membrane,
or sinewy skin that joins these four fleshy knobs together. 7. The neck of the
womb.

The Lips, or Laps of the Privities are outwardly seen, and they are made of
the common coverings of the body, having some spongy fat, both are to keep the
inward parts from cold, and that nothing get in to offend the womb; some call
this the woman's modesty, for they are a double door like Floodgates to shut and
open: the neck of the womb ends in this, and it is as it were a skinny
addition, for covering of the neck, answering to the foreskin of a Man's yard.
These Lips which make the fissure of the outward orifice, are long, soft, of a
skinny and fleshy substance; in some kind spongy and like kernels, with a hard
brawny fat under them, and they are covered with a thin skin; but in those
women that are married, they lie lower and smoother than in maids; when maids
are ripe they are full of hair that grows upon them, but they are more curled
in women than the hair of Maids. They that have much hair and very young are
much given to venery.

The wings appear when the Lips are parted, and they are made of soft spongy
flesh, and the doubling of the skin, placed at the sides of the neck, these
compass the Clitoris, and are like a Cocks Comb. These wings besides the great
pleasure they give women in Copulation, are to defend the Matrix from outward
violence, and serve to the orifice of the neck of the womb as the foreskin does
to a man's Yard, for they shut the cleft with lips as it were, and preserve the
womb from cold air and all injuries: and they direct the Urine through the
large passage, as between two walls, receiving it from the bottom of the cleft
like a Tunnel, and so it runs forth in a broad stream and a hissing noise, not
so much as wetting the wings of the Lap as it goes along; and therefore these
wings are called Nymphs, because they join to the passage of the Urine, and the
neck of the womb, out of which as out of Fountains, whereof the Nymphs were
called Goddesses, water and humors do flow, and besides in them is all the joy
and delight of Venus. Those parts that are seen without are the Lips, the slit,
and the groin, but so soon as the Lips are divided there are three slits to be
seen, the greatest is the outmost and is first seen, and there are two less
slits between the wings, which serve to close up the parts the more firmly. But
that which is the great and long slit, is made by the Lips, and bends backward
toward the Fundament from the share-bone downward toward the slit of of the
buttocks, and the more backward it goes the deeper and broader it is, and so it
makes a trench like a Boat, and ends in the welt of the orifice of the neck of
the womb.

The Clitoris is a sinewy hard body, full of spongy and black matter within it,
as it is in the side ligaments of a man's Yard, and this Clitoris will stand and
fall as the Yard does, and makes women lustful and take delight in Copulation,
and were it not for this they would have no desire nor delight, nor would they
ever conceive. Some think that Hermaphrodites are only women that have their
Clitoris greater, and hanging out more than others have, and so show like a
Man's Yard, and it is so called, for it is a small exuberation in the upper,
forward, and middle part of the share, in the top of the greater slit where the
wings end. It differs from the Yard in length, the common pipe, and the want of
one pair of the muscles which the Yard has, but is the same in place and
substance; for it has two sinewy bodies round, without thick and hard, but
inwardly spongy and full of holes, or pores, that when the spirits come into
it, it may stretch, and when the spirits are dissipated it grows loose again;
these sinews as in a Man's Yard, are full of gross black vital blood, they come
from both the share-bones and join with the bones of the Hip, they part at
first, but join about the joining of the share-bones, and so they make a solid
hard body of the Yard; and the end is like the Nut, to which is joined a small
muscle on each side. The head of this counterfeit Yard is called Tertigo, and
the Wings joining cover it with a fine skin like the foreskin; it has a hole,
but it goes not through, and Vessels run along the back of it as upon a Man's
Yard; commonly it is but a small sprout, lying close hid under the Wings, and
not easily felt, yet sometimes it grows so long that it hangs forth at the slit
like a Yard, and will swell and stand stiff if it be provoked, and some lewd
women have endeavored to use it as men do theirs. In the Indies, and Egypt
they are frequent, but I never heard but of one in this Country, if there be
any they will do what they can for shame to keep it close.

The Clitoris in Women as it is very small in most, serves for the same purpose
as the bridle of the Yard does, for the woman's stones lying far distant from
the Man's Yard, the imagination passes to the spermatical Vessels by the
Clitoris moving and the lower ligatures of the Womb, which are joined to the
carrying Vessels of the Seed, so by the stirring of the Clitoris the
imagination causes the Vessels to cast out that Seed that lies deep in the
body, for in this and the ligaments that are fastened in it, lies the chief
pleasure of loves delight in Copulation; and indeed were not the pleasure
transcendently ravishing us, a man or woman would hardly ever die for love.

I told you the Clitoris is so long in some women that it is seen to hang forth
at their Privities and not only the Clitoris that lies behind the wings but
the Wings also, for the Wings being two skinny Caruncles, on each side one,
join almost at first, arising from a welt or guard of the skin, of a ligamental
substance in the back part the slit of the neck, and they ly hid betwixt the
two Lips of the Lap: they always almost touch one the other, and they go up to
the end where the share-bone meets, and when they join they make a fleshy
rising and cover the Clitoris with a foreskin and so they rise to the top of
the great cleft. They are longer from the middle upward, and sometimes they
will hang forth a little at the great slit without the lips with a blunt
corner; yet they are threesquare, like that part of a Cocks Comb that hangs
down under his throat both for form and color; they are soft and spongy,
partly fleshy, and partly skinny. In some Countries they grow so long that the
Surgeon cuts them off to avoid trouble and shame, chiefly in Egypt; they
will bleed much when they are cut, and the blood is hardly stopped; wherefore
maids have them cut off betimes, and before they marry, for it is a flux of
humors to them, and much motion that makes them grow so long. Some Sea-mem say
that they have seen Negro Women go stark naked, and these wings hanging out.

Besides these, under the Clitoris and above the neck is the passage of the
woman's water, for the Woman makes not water through the neck of the womb, nor
is it a common passage for Urine and Seed as in men, but it is only for Urine,
therefore they that will cast an injection into the woman's cleft to stop their
water from coming forth too much upon any occasion concerns their bladder, must
take heed they thrust not the spring into the mouth of the Matrix instead of
the passage of the bladder.

Near this are four Caruncles or fleshy knobs, in form like to Myrtle berries,
they are round in maids, but they flag and hang down as soon as their
maidenhead is lost, the uppermost of them is forked and largest, that it may
admit the neck of the urinary passage; the other three are below this on the
sides; they all serve to keep off air or any thing may offend the neck of the
womb.

Maids have these fleshy knobs joined together by a sinewy skin interwoven with
many small veins, and with a hole in the middle, and through that their Courses
pass, it is about the bigness of a man's little finger in such as are grown up;
this is that skin so much talked of, and is the token of Virginity wheresoever
it is, for the first act of Copulation breaks it; some think that it is not
found in all maids, but doubtless that is false, else it could have been no
proof of Virginity to the Israelites. Yet certain it is that it may be broken
before Copulation, either by defluxion of sharp humors, especially in young
maids, or by thrusting in of Pessaries unskilfully to provoke the Terms, and
many other ways.

The four fleshy knobs with this are like a Rose half blown when the bearded
leaves are taken away, or this production with the Lap or privity is like a
great Clove-gilleflower new blown, thence came the word deflowred.

The Arabians thought this skin called Hymen was the joining of five Veins
together as they are placed on both sides; but that is rejected.

Termelius thought the sides of the womb stuck together and were parted by
Copulation; there are many other opinions needless to trouble the Reader with.
Whatsoever it is, there are certain Veins in it which bleed in the breaking of
it; and the Hebrew maids were more careful to keep it unbroken, than the French
and Italian are; or else Columbus would not say it is seldom found; and
Laurentius professes he never could find it.

It lies always hid in the middle of the great cleft, and is peculiar no
doubt to all maids, it is as long as the little finger and is broad in the
middle, and is compassed about with a round hollowness, the fashion of it is
round, but it ends in a point that has a hole in it so long as the top of the
little finger may be put into it; it is partly fleshy and partly skinny; there
are also four skins, like Myrtle berries, as I said, at every corner of the
bosom one, and there are also four membranes or skins that tie these together,
and they go not slanting, but they run all right downward, from the inside of
the said bosom, and are each of them placed in the distance between the
foresaid fleshy skins, and with them they are almost equally stretched out; but
both these and they are in several bodies shorter or larger, and the orifice at
the end of them wider or smaller, the hole is then straitest when the fleshy
skins are nearest joined together; for this cause some maids suffer not so much
pain to lose their Maidenhead as others do; for when the Yard first enters the
neck of the womb, the fleshy membranes and caruncles are torn up, and the
caruncles are so stretched that a man would think they were never joined
together; some Vessels are opened by this means, and by reason of the pain puts
maids to a squeek or two, but it is soon over; the younger the maids are the
greater the pain, because of the dryness of the part, but they lose less blood
in the act because of the smalness of the Vessels: the elder they are, by
reason of their courses that have often flowed, the moisture is more and the
pain less, by reason of the wetness and looseness of the Hymen, but the Flux of
blood is greater, because the Vessels are greater, and the blood has gotten a
fuller passage thither; some pain there will be for all this but not much; yet
if they have their Courses then running, or have had them some three or four
days before, the membranes are so dilated by the moisture of those parts that
the pain is far less; which has been a reason why some persons have been
jealous of their new married Wives without a cause, thinking they had lost
their Maidenheads before. It is best therefore for maids new married to keep
their honor, and not to suffer any man to touch them during the time they have
their monthly Terms. Besides that it is forbidden severely by the Law of God;
and Physicians know, that those Children that are begotten during the time of
separation will be Leprous, and troubled with an incurable Itch and Scabs as
long as they live.

Also next to their caruncles lies the outward cleft of the neck, and is
placed as it were in the Trench of the great cleft, and is full of wrinkles and
like a narrow valley leads the way by a round cavity into the inmost parts, and
causes the outward orifice of the neck of the womb, by which the Yard enters,
to provoke the woman's parts to give forth their Seed, and to cast in his own.
There is a skinny ligament also in the back parts of the outward orifice of the
neck which is strait in Maids, and is covered by the Trench, but in women that
have born Children it is large and loose, and a certain sign, as well as the
former, that Virginity is lost.

The neck of the womb is the distance between the Privy passage, and the mouth
of the womb, into this the man's Yard enters in time of Copulation. It is eight
inches long if the Woman be of a reasonable stature.

The substance of the Matrix is fleshy without, but skinny and all wrinkled
within, that it may be able to retain the Seed, and that it may stretch
exceedingly in Childbirth.

The neck of it stands directly betwixt the Urinary passage and the right Gut;
which are the two great sinks of the body, that vain Man should not be over
proud of his beginning.

It has two membranes, and if you cut them you shall see a spongy flesh
between them, such as is found in the five ligaments of the Yard, and it
contains vital spirits, and causes it to swell in the time of Copulation, and
is full of numberless twigs of small Veins and Arteries.

The neck of the womb is the third part of it, and into it, as I said, the man's
yard passes, it is a passage within the passage of the Peritoneum called the
Basin or Laver, placed between the right Gut and the bladder, and it is whiter
than the superficies of the bottom; the cavity is deep, but the mouth or
entrance is much narrower, it reaches from the inward mouth of the womb to the
outward mouth or lips of the Privities. It is a fit sheath to receive the Yard,
and is long, that by it the man's Seed may be carried to the orifice of the
Womb; it grows longer or shorter in time of Copulation, and wider and narrower,
as the man's Yard is, so it swells more or less, is more open and more shut; the
length and wideness cannot be limited, because it is fit for any Yard: yet I
have heard a French man complain sadly, that when he first married his Wife, it
was no bigger nor wider than would fit his turn, but now it was grown as a
Sack; Perhaps the fault was not the woman's but his own, his weapon shrunk and
was grown too little for the scabbard.

The neck of the womb is continued with the bottom of it, yet it has a diverse
substance from it, for it is sinewy and skinny that it may with more care be
enlarged or contracted, not become too hard nor too soft.

The substance of it is spongy and fungous, like that of a man's Yard, that when
there is Copulation, it may close about the Yard, which it does by reason of
many small Arteries which fill up the passage with spirits and make it become
narrower. Wherefore in women that are lustful, it swells in that time of
desire, and the caruncles strut out, and the hole grows very strait.

In young maids it is more soft and delicate, but it grows every day harder as
they grow elder; after many Children, and in old women it becomes hard like a
gristle, by reason it is so often worn and by the Courses flowing forth.

It is smooth when you stretch it, and slippery, but otherwise full of
wrinkles, unless it be where it ends in the Lap. In the entrance of the passage
and in the fore part, there are many round folds and plaights, which cause the
more pleasure in Venus action, by the attraction of the Nut of the Yard. In
young women these folds are smoother and narrower, and the passage straiter,
that it will scarce admit a finger to go in, yet through this do pass not only
the Menstruous blood, but also corrupt humors in those that have that disease
is called the Whites.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Vessels preparing Seed in Women.
AS in Men so in Women, the Seed vessels are either preparing or carrying
Vessels. The Preparing vessels are neither more nor less than they are in Men;
for they are just four, two Veins and two Arteries; and they arise as they do
in men, for the right Vein is derived from the pipe of the great Liver vein
under the Emulgent, but the left comes from the Emulgent on the left side: both
the Arteries come from the trunk of the great Artery, yet I do not say that
there is no difference between these in men and women, for then it had been
needless to go over this subject any more.

The differences are chiefly two; 1. Because women's passages are shorter, these
vessels are shorter in women than they are in men, for women's stones lie in
their bellies, but men's hang without in their Cods, but women's Vessels have by
far more windings and turnings, hither and thither, out and in, than men's have,
that the matter they bring may be better prepared; their windings up and down
prove that they are not shorter, if they had room to go any farther as they
have in Men.

It is worth observing, that you may know that the Vessels of the womb have
union and communion one with the other, both the Veins and the Arteries; for
the vital and natural blood are mingled to perform this great work, and it is
thus brought to pass. The spermatick Veins passing by the side of the womb join
with the foresaid Arteries, and then they make this mixture, and this is easily
proved; for if you blow up the Seed Vein with a hollow pipe or quill, you shall
see all the Vessels of the womb to swell at the same time, and to be blown up
with it; which is enough to confirm that they are all mingled and united.

These four Vessels bring the Seed from all parts of the body, that they may
fit it and make it ready for Natures use. The right vein comes from the trunk
of the hollow Liver vein, below the Emulgent vein, nigh unto the great hollow
bone: but the left vein comes from the left Emulgent vein, for the great Artery
is seated on this side by the hollow vein, and that Artery beats and throbs
continually; and if the left Seed vein had come from the Trunk of the hollow
vein as the right does, it must have past over the great Artery, and then the
never ceasing beating of the Artery would have broken this thin Vein, if nature
had not provided the foresaid remedy against it. The Arteries both of them have
the same beginning as they have in men, for they come from the Trunk of the
great Artery, near the great bone under the Emulgent vein, and they are filled
with vital blood, as the two Veins are with natural blood. Yet they do not fall
out of the Peritoneum as the Arteries of men do, nor do they reach the
share-bone, because women have no reason to cast their Seed out of themselves,
but only into their own womb, which is but a short way; nor do these Arteries
interweave or grow together till they come into their stones; but with some
variation again they are divided; for in women they are supported with fat
membranes, and so brought to the Stones; yet by the way as they come they
inoculate the Veins with the Arteries, and after that they branch into two
parts, and the one part makes the Seed vessels, and that which is called Corpus
varicosum, affording to the Cods and stones some small twigs for to feed them;
but the other part is carried to the skin that cleaves to the bottom of the
Matrix, and supplieth the higher part of its bottom with nourishment, and feeds
the Infant in the womb also with blood: and moreover by these Vessels the
monthly Terms are voided forth, especially of such women that are not with
Child; but in Men they are all wrought up into one body which is called Corpus
varicosum.

The difference that they make in shortness from the same Vessels in men, may
be for this reason also, because the woman's Seed does not need so strong and
great preparing as men's Seed does; nor could their Vessels have been kept
within the woman's belly, had they not been made shorter than men's. But it is
admirable to consider how strangely these Vessels are infolded and wrapped up one
within the other to prepare the Seed: Yet because women's stones are but small
their Seed vessels needed not to be great; so that if they have any Prostates,
says Galen, to keep the Seed in, they are so small they can hardly be
discerned.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Seed-carrying Vessels in Women.
THese vessels that carry the Seed come from the lower part of the stones, they
are on each side one, and are propt up by the ligaments of the womb, they are
white and sinewy, they do not go directly to the womb, but with many windings,
and turnings, because the way is short, they are broad near the stones, then
they grow less, and again when they come to the womb they are enlarged, they go
to the horns of the womb and there they end, and by those horns they pass into
the womb, this may be plainly seen in other Female creatures as well as in
women though with much difference.

These vessels in their twistings are like to the Seed bladders as are in men;
full of wrinkles, and in the midst they have a hole or mouth like to a Trumpets
mouth, and it is curled up like Vine tendrils, they are more folded together
than in Men, because they are not to pass through the Peritoneum, for women's
stones do not hang forth as men's do. Also they do not come from the stones
presently to the neck of the bladder as with men, but they go from the stones
to the womb, and when they come to the sides of it, called the horns, there
they part, and one part which is larger and shorter enters into the middle of
the horns of his own side, or very near it, and there it delivers in, and so
into the cavity of the womb, Seed perfectly concocted; but the other part which
is longer though it be narrower, passes along by the sides of the womb to the
neck of it on both sides, and below the innermost mouth of the womb they are
implanted under the neck of it into the forestanders, which are not so plain to
be seen as they are with men, yet these hold the Seed there till it is the time
of Copulation, and then they cast it forth, for thus women great with Child do
spend their Seed, and not by opening the innermost mouth of the womb as some
falsely think; for so soon as a woman conceives, the mouth of the womb is most
exactly shut close, yet they can lie with men all that while; and some women
before others, will take more pleasure, and are more desirous of their Husbands
company than before, which is scarce seen in any other female creatures
besides, most of them being fully satisfied after they have conceived; but it
was needful for man that it should be so, because polygamy is forbidden by the
Laws of God.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Women stones.
WOmen have need of stones to concoct and digest their Seed as well as men; the
use of stones in both sexes is to make Seed fruitful, for if either the stones
of the man or woman be out of temper they must needs be barren and unfruitful,
nor is there any greater sign of health than when the stones are well; and of
this Jugement was that great Physician Hippocrates.

There are many differences betwixt the stones of both sexes. 1. In place,
because women are colder than men, their stones are kept within their lower
belly to keep them warm and to make them fruitful, and they lie on either side
of the womb, above the bottom, when women are not with Child; but when they are
with Child, these stones lie near the place where the hanch-bone, and the
holy-bone join, and they are contained in loose skins coming from the
Peritoneum, which skins cover also half the Stones, and they lie upon the
Muscles of the Loins within the Abdomen.

2. Woman's Stones have no Cod to hold them as Men's have; they have but one skin
to cover them, for lying within the body they need no more; but men's Stones
have four several skins to keep them warm because they hang without their
bellies. Also the Cod or rather coat for the Stones, is softer, and thinner
than the man's, and cleaves fast to them, that it seems to be the same body with
them; this coat also receives the Vessels of blood, and wrapping them fast
keeps the blood from shedding forth.

3. Women's Stones are not so thick, nor great, nor round, nor smooth, nor hard
as men's are; but they are small and uneven, and broad and flat both before and
behind; whereas men's are oval, smooth, large, round and equal; the upper side
of women's Stones are so unequal that they resemble small kernels of the Kall
joined together and they are long and hollow with small textures in them* and
they are full of a watery humor like very thick Whey when Women are in good
health, but when they are sickly they seem like bladders full of a clear watery
humor, and sometimes of a yellow color like Saffron, and will stink, so that
it oftentimes causes the strangling of the Mother, which Midwives call fits of
the Mother.

4. Their Stones are also colder and moister, and so is their Seed, and
therefore women have no Beards on their faces because of the coldness of their
Stones.

5. They have no forestanders.

Man's Seed is the agent and woman's Seed the patient, or at least not so active
as the man's. Aristotle denied that women had any seed at all; and Jovianus
Pontanus would prove this by the Moon, which Aristotle likeneth to women in act
of Procreation, who held that the Moon does nothing but bring moist matter for
the Sun to work upon in things below, but Hermetick Philosophy will prove, that
the moisture the Moon brings, has an active principle as well as the Sun: and
so doubtless women are not only passive in Procreation, but active also as well
as the man though not in so high a degree of action: her seed is more watery,
and man's seed full of vital spirits, more condensed, thick and glutinous; for
had the woman's seed been as thick as the man's, they could never have been so
perfectly mingled together.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Womb it self or Matrix.
THe Womb is that Field of Nature into which the Seed of man and woman is cast,
and it has also an attractive faculty to draw in a magnetique quality, as the
Lodestone draws Iron, or Fire the light of the Candle, and to this seed runs
the Woman's blood also, to beget, nourish, increase and preserve the Infant till
it is time for it to be born; for the natural and vegetable Soul is virtually
in the Seed, and runs through the whole mass, and is brought into act by the
Virtue and heat of the Woman that receives the Seed, and by the forming faculty
which lies hid in the Seed of both Sexes, and in the disposition of the womb
both Seeds are well mingled together at the same time in all parts of the body,
I mean as to the parts made of Seed, but as for the parts made with blood, they
are made at several times, as they can sooner or later procure nourishment and
spirits. The parts therefore next the Liver are sooner made than those that are
far from it, and those are first made that the mothers blood first runs to,
that is first the Navel Vein, and that being first made, by that the blood is
carried to other parts.

The Womb is like a Bottle or Bladder blown when the Infant is in it, and it
lies in the lower belly, and in the last place amongst the entrails by the
water course, because this is easily enlarged as the child grows in the Womb;
and the child is by this means more easily begot, and the Woman delivered of
it; nor is it any hindrance to the parts of nutrition while the woman continues
with Child; but had the Womb where the Infant lies, been seated in the middle
or upper belly, the child would have been soon stifled, for the womb could not
have stretched wider according to the growth of the Child, because the bones
that compass the upper belly would have hindered it.

The hollow part of the belly where the Womb lies is called the Basin, and it
is placed between the Bladder and the right Gut; the bladder stands before it,
and is a strong membrane to defend it; and the right Gut lies behind it, as a
pillow to keep off the hardness of the backbone, so that the womb lies in the
middle of the lowest belly to balance the body equally, and to contain the
Womb: the Basin is larger in women than in men, as you may see by their larger
buttocks. As the child grows, the bottom of the womb which lies uppermost,
lying at liberty and not tied, grows upward toward the Navel, and so leans
upon the small Guts, and so fills all the hollow of the flancks when women are
near the time to bring forth.

The Womb is fastened and tied partly by the substance of it, and also by four
ligaments, two above, and two beneath, but the bottom is not tied neither
before, nor behind, nor above, but is free and at liberty, that it can stretch
as need requires in Copulation, or Childbearing, and it has a kind of animal
motion to satisfy its desire. Galen says, that the sides are fastened to the
hanch-bone by membranes, and ligaments, coming from the muscles of the Loins,
and interwoven ofttimes with fleshy fibers, and carried to other parts of the
womb to hold it fast.

The neck of the womb is tied, but not every side, to the parts that lie near
it; at the sides it is loosely tied to the Peritoneum by certain membranes that
grow to it, and on the back part it is fastened with thin fibers, and a little
fat to the right Gut and the holy-bone, it lies upon that fat all along that
passage, and it grows into one with the Fundament, above the Lap, to which it
is joined before; if the Fundament chance to be ulcerated within, the dung has
been seen to fall out at the Lap.

The fore part is knit to the neck of the bladder, and because the wombs neck
is broader than the neck of the bladder, some part of it is fastened by
membranes coming from the Peritoneum to the share-bone; from hence it happens
that when the womb is inflamed, the Woman has a great desire to go to stool
and to make water, but cannot.

The lower strings that fasten the Womb are two also, called the horns of the
womb; they are sinewy, round, reddish, and hollow, chiefly at their ends, like
to the husky membrane; and sometimes this hollowness is full of fat; these
horns come from the sides of the Womb, and at their first coming forth they
touch the Seed-carrying Vessels. When these productions are stretched too much,
as they are ofttimes in hard labor in Childbirth, there happens to women a
rupture as well as to men, but they may be cured by cutting and strong
ligatures.

Fleshy fibers are joined to these productions after they come forth of the
Abdomen, and they are small Muscles called holders up, in Women they belong not
to the Stones as they do in men, because they join in men to the Seed Vessels.
When these ligaments come at the share-bone, they change into a broad sinewy
slenderness, mingled with a membrane which touches and covers the forepart of
the share-bone, and upon this the Clitoris cleaves and is tied, which being
nervous, and of pure feeling, when it is rubbed and stirred it causes lustful
thoughts, which being communicated to these ligaments, is passes to the
Vessels that carry the seed. Yet these holders up serve for other uses, for as
they are Muscles that hold up the Stones in men, so they hold up the womb in
women that it may be kept fom falling out at the Lap.

The parts then of the womb are two; The neck or mouth, and the bottom: The
neck is the entrance into it, which will open and shut like a purse; for in the
act of Copulation it receives the Yard into it, but after conception the point
of a Bodkin cannot pass; yet when the time comes for the Child to come forth,
it will open and make room enough for the greatest child that is conceived:
This made Galen wonder, and so should we all, to consider how fearfully and
wonderfully God has made us as the Psalmist says; The Works of the Lord are
wonderful, to be sought out of all those that take Pleasure therein.

The form of the womb is exactly round, and in maids it is no bigger than a
walnut, yet it will stretch so after conception, that it will easily contain
the child and all that belongs to it; it is small at first to embrace the Seed
that is but little cast into it. It is made of two skins, an outward, and an
inward skin, the outward is thick, smooth, and slippery, excepting those parts
where the Seed Vessels come into the womb; the inward skin is full of small
holes.

It is far different from the Matrix of beasts, which Galen knew not, for the
Grecians in those days held it an abomination to dissect any man or woman
though they were dead; all the knowledge of Anatomy they learned, was by
dissecting Apes and such Creatures that were the most like to mankind, but the
inside of men or women they saw not, and so were ignorant of the difference
between them. Whence it is confirmed, that they knew not the seat of some
diseases so well as we do, and therefore must need fall short of the cure; nor
would they use the means to find out what disease they died of, which true
Anatomy would have made known to them, and would have been a great furtherance
to preserve others that were sick of the same diseases that others died of
before.

It has been much and long disputed how many Cells are in the womb: Mundinus
and Galen say there are seven several Cells, and that a woman may, by reason of
so many places distinct one from the other, have seven Children at a birth, and
many midwives are of this opinion, but none that ever saw the womb can think
so; for there is but one hollow place, unless Men will say that those holes
where the seed vessels come into the womb are places for Children to be
conceived in. They that maintain seven Cells in the womb, say a woman may have
seven Children at a birth, three Boys, three Girls, and one Hermaphrodite;
others say a woman can have but two Children at once because nature has given
her but two breasts, she may as well go but two Miles because she has but two
legs, but it is usual for women to have three at one birth: In Egypt the place
is so fruitful they have sometimes five or six at a birth. Aristotle tells us
of one woman, that at four births brought forth twenty perfect living Children:
but Albertus Magnus tells us of one woman who miscarryed of two and twenty
perfect Children at once, and of another that had one hundred and fifty at
once, and every one of them as big as a Man's little finger, but believe him
that will: yet the story of Margeret Countess of Holsteed, whose Tomb is said
to be in a Monastery in Holland, is much louder, to have had three hundred and
sixty four living Infants born at a birth all living, and Christened. But to let
this pass, and come to what we know.

How comes it to pass that Twins are conceived at the same time, if the womb
have no more but one Cell?

Empedocles says, the cause is plenty of seed that is sufficient to make more
than one Child. Asclepiades ascribes it to the strength of the seed ejected:
And Ptolomy to the position of the Stars when Children are begot.

That twins are begot at the same act of Copulation is held by all Ancient and
modern Writers, for the seed say they being not cast into the womb all at once,
divides in the womb, and makes more Children; another reason they give is, that
the womb, when it has received the Seed, shuts so close that no more Seed can
enter.

I answer to the first question, That the beginning of conception is not so
soon as the Seed is cast into the womb, for then a woman would conceive every
time she receives it. But the perfect mixing of the seed of both sexes is the
beginning of conception, and it is hard to believe, that the womb that is so
small at first, that it will hardly hold a Bean, and having but one Cell, can
mingle the man and woman's seed together exactly in two places at the same time,
and it is certain it shuts so close that no place is left for the air to enter
in.

Second Answer, The womb does not shut so close presently but that superfluous
seed may come forth, and after conception the pleasures of Venus will open the
womb at any time, for it opens the Muscles willingly in such cases; nor do all
Authors agree that Twins are begotten at the same time, for all the Stoic
Philosophers hold that they are begotten at several times, and if you read the
Treatise of Hermes, he will tell you, that Twins are not conceived at the same
minute of time; for if they were conceived at once, they must be born at once,
which is impossible. Some may object, that the Treatise of Hermes speaks not to
a minute, but if it be true to a Sign ascending, it must be true to a Degree,
and to a minute, and Second.

All Authors allow of a superfetation, that is, the woman may conceive again
when she has conceived of one Child before she be delivered of that. So
Alcumena in Plautus Amphitrio, is said to have brought forth Hercules at seven
Months, and Iphyclus three months after. Hippocrates tells us of a woman of
Larista who was delivered of two perfect-living Children at forty days distance
one from the other. Avicenna holds, that all women that have their Terms after
conception, may conceive again before the first be born; and if they can
conceive so long after again before the first be delivered, much rather sooner
when the womb is not filled with the growth of the first. But to end this
dispute we read Genesis 4.2. That Eve conceived again and bare his brother Abel;
the Original signifies, she conceived upon conception, and bare his brother
Abel. And in the Treatise of Hermes you shall find a reason why two Children
may be conceived a month asunder and yet born about the same time, and a woman
may miscarry of one of them, and yet go her full time with the other, as
Hippocrates shows in his Book De natura Pueri: Nay he relates of women that
brought forth two Children at one birth, and a third fifteen weeks after. Let
then Midwives take heed that they do not force the second Child before its time
especially if there be no great flux of blood nor signs of labor appearing.

Question. Why do women desire Copulation when they have already conceived, and
beasts do not?

Pappea the Daughter of Agrippa a Roman, a lustful lass answered, because they
are beasts. Some say it is a virtue and prerogative given to women, but they
are those that call Vice Virtue. The truth is that Adam's first sin lies heavy
upon his posterity, more than upon beasts, and for this the curse of God
follows them, and inordinate lust is a great part of this curse, and the
propagation of many Children at once is an effect of this intemperance.
Hippocrates forbids women to use Copulation after conception; but I may not
wrong the Man so much. But these are the fruits of Original sin, for which we
ought to humble our selves in the presence of God, and pray earnestly for his
assistance against the effects of it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the fashion and greatness of the Womb, and of the parts it is made of.
THe womb is of the form of a Pear, round toward the bottom and large, but
narrow by degrees to the neck, the roundness of it makes it fit to contain
much, and it is therefore less subject to be hurt. When women are with Child the
bottom is broad like a bladder, and the neck narrow; but where they are not with
Child the bottom is no broader than the neck. Some women's wombs are larger than
others, according to the age, stature, and burden that they bear; Maids wombs
are small and less than their bladders; but women's are greater, especially
after they have once had a Child, and so it will continue. It stretches after
they have conceived, and the larger it extends the thicker it grows.

It has parts of two kinds; The simple parts it is made of, are Membranes,
Veins, Nerves, and Arteries.

The compound parts are four; the mouth, the bottom, the neck, and the Lap or
lips. The membranes are two as I said, one outward and the other inward, that
it may open and shut at pleasure; the outward membrane is sinewy, and the
thickest of all the membranes that come from the Peritoneum; it is strong and
doubled, and clothes the womb to make it more strong, and grows to it on both
sides: The inward membrane is double also, but can scarce be seen but in
exulcerations of the womb. When the woman conceives it is thick and soft, but
it grows thicker daily, and is thickest when the time of birth is Fibers of all
kinds run between these membranes, to draw and keep the Seed, and to thrust
forth the burden; and the flesh of the womb is chiefly made up of fleshy
Fibers.

The three sorts of Fibers for Seed do plainly appear after women have gone
long with Child, those that draw the seed are inward, and are not many, because
the Seed is most cast into the womb by the Yard, the thwart Fibers are
strongest, and most, and they are in the middle, but the Fibers that lie
transverse are strong also, and lie outward, because it is great force that is
required in time of delivery.

The Veins and Arteries that pass through the membranes of the womb come from
diverse places, for two Veins and two Arteries come from the Seed Vessels, and
two veins and two Arteries from the vessels in the lower belly, and run upward,
that from all the body, both from above and under, blood of all sorts might be
conveyed, to bring nourishment for the womb, and for the infant in it; also
they serve as Scavengers to purge out the Terms every month. The twigs of the
Vein that is in the lower belly, mingle in the womb with the branches of the
Seed veins, and the mouths of them reach into the hollow of the womb* and they
are called cups; through these comes more blood always than the infants needs,
that the Child may never want nutriment in the womb, and there may be some to
spare when the time comes for the Child to be born; but after the birth, this
blood comes not hither but goes to the Breasts to make Milk; but at all other
times it is cast out monthly what is superfluous, and if it be not it corrupts
and causes fits of the Mother; yet they come oftener from the Seed corrupted,
and staying there than they do from blood.

It is not only blood is voided by the Terms, but multitude of humors and
excrements, and these purgations last sometimes three or four days, sometimes a
week, and young folk have them when the Moon changes, but women in years at
the full of the Moon; which is to be observed, that we may know when to give
remedies to Maids whose Terms come not down, for we must do it in the time when
the Moon is new or ready to change, and to elder women about the time that
Nature uses to send them forth, because a Physician is but a helper to nature,
and if he observe not natures rules he will sooner kill than cure.

The sinews of the womb are small but many, and interwoven like Network, which
makes it quick of feeling; they come to the upper part of the bottom from the
branches of the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation, which go to the root of the
ribs, and to the lower part of the bottom, and to the neck of the Womb from the
marrow of the Loins, and the great bone. Thus they by their quick feeling cause
pleasure in Copulation, and Expulsion of what offends the part; they are most
plentiful at the bottom of the Womb, to quicken and strengthen it in attracting
and embracing the seed of man.

There is but one continued passage from the top or Lap to the bottom of the
Womb; yet some divide it into four parts; namely into the upper part, or
bottom, for that lies uppermost in the body. 2. The mouth or inward orifice of
the neck. 3. The neck. 4. The outward Lap, Lips, or Privity.

The chief part of these, which is properly the Womb or Matrix, is the bottom;
here is the Infant conceived, kept, formed, and fed until the rational Soul be
infused from above, and the Child born* The broader part or bottom is set above
the share-bone that it may be dilated as the Child grows, the outside is smooth
and overlaid with a watery moisture: there is a corner on each side above, and
when Women are not with Child the seed is poured out into these, for the
carrying Vessels for seed are planted into them* They are to make more room for
the Child, and at first it is so small that the Parents seed fills it full, for
it embraces it, be it never so little, as close as it is possible; the bottom
is full of pores, but they are but the mouths of the Cups by which the blood in
Childbearing comes out of the Veins of the womb into the cavity. The corners
of the wombs bottom are wrinkled, the bottom is softer than the neck of it; yet
harder than the Lap and more thick. From the lower part of the bottom comes a
piece an inch long like the Nut of the man's Yard, but small as ones little
finger, and a Pins point will but enter into it, but it is rough to keep the
Seed from recoiling after it is once attracted, for when the parts are
overslippery the humors are peccant, and those women are barren. Hippocrates
says, that sometimes part of the kall falls between the bladder and the womb
and makes women fruitless.

This part may well be reckoned for another part of the womb, for it lies
between the beginning of the bottom and the mouth, and there is a clear passage
in it. The womb has two mouths, the inward mouth and the outward, by the
inward mouth the bottom opens directly into the neck, this mouth lies
overthwart like the mouth of a Place, or the passage of the Nut of the Yard;
the whole Orifice with the slit transverse is like the Greek Letter Theta TH:
it is so little and narrow that the Seed once in can scarce come back, nor any
offensive thing enter into the hollow of the womb. The mouth lies directly
against the bottom, for the Seed goes in a straight line from the neck to the
bottom.

The womb is always shut but in time of generation, and then the bottom draws
in the Seed, and it presently shuts so close that no needle, as I said, can
find an entrance, and thus it continues till the time of delivery, unless some
ill accident, or disease force it to open; for when women with child are in
Copulation with men, they do give seed forth, but that seed comes not from the
bottom, as some think, but by the neck of the womb. It must open when a child
is born so wide as to give passage for it by degrees, because the neck of the
womb is of a compact thick substance, and thicker when the birth is nigh;
wherefore there cleaves to it a body like glue, and by that means the mouth
opens safely without danger of being torn or broken, and as often as the
passage is open it comes away like a round crown, and Midwives call it the
Rose, the Garland, or the Crown. If this mouth be too often and unreasonably
opened by too frequent coition, or in over moist bodies, or by the whites, it
makes women barren, and therefore Whores have seldom any Children; it is the
same reason if it grow too hard, or thick, or fat, also the Cancer and the
Schirrhus, two diseases incurable, which happen but seldom till the courses
fail, are bred here.

Thus I have as briefly and as plainly as I could, laid down a description of
the parts of generation of both sexes, purposely omitting hard names, that I
might have no cause to enlarge my work, by giving you the meaning of them where
there is no need, unless it be for such persons who desire rather to know Words
than Things.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
What things are required for the procreation of Children.
I Have in the former part made a short explanation of the parts of both sexes,
that are needful for this use, but yet some think that there is no need of
describing the parts of them both, because some have written that the
Generative parts in men, differ not from those in women, but in respect of
place and situation in the body; and that a woman may become a man, and that
one Tyesias was a man for many years, and after that was strangely
metamorphos'd into a woman, and again from a woman to a man, and that in regard
he had been of both sexes, he was chosen as the most fit Judge to determine
that great question, which of the two Male or Female find most pleasure in time
of Copulation. Some again hold that man may be changed into a woman, but a
woman can never become a man; but let every man abound in his own opinion,
certain it is, that neither of these opinions is true: for the parts in men and
women are different in number, and likeness, substance, and proportion; the Cod
of a man turned inside outward is like the womb, yet the difference is so great
that they can never be the same; for the Cod is a thin wrinkled skin, but the
womb at the bottom is a thick membrane all fleshy within, and woven with many
small fibers, and the Seed-Vessels are implanted so that they can never change
their place; and moreover their Stones are for shape, magnitude, and
composition too different to suffer a change of the sex; so that of necessity
there must be a conjunction of Male and Female for the begetting of children.
Insects and imperfect creatures are bred sundry ways, without conjunction; but
it is not so with mankind, but both sexes must concur, by mutual embracements,
and there must be a perfect mixture of Seed issueing from them both, which
vertually contain the Infant that must be formed from them. God made all things
of nothing but man must have some matter to work upon or he can produce nothing.

The two principles then that are necessary in this case are the seed of both
sexes, and the mothers blood; the seed of the Male is more active than that of
the Female in forming the creature, though both be fruitful, but the female
adds blood as well as seed out of which the fleshy parts are made, and both the
fleshy and spermatick parts are maintained and preserved. What Hippocrates
speaks of two sorts of Seed in both kinds, strong and weak seed, hot and cold,
is to be understood only of strong and weak people, and as the seed is mingled,
so are Boys and Girls begotten.

The Mothers blood is another principle of Children to be made; but the blood
has no active quality in this great work, but the seed works upon it, and of
this blood are the chief parts of the bowels and the flesh of the muscles
formed, and with this both the spermatical and fleshy parts are fed; this blood
and the menstrual blood, or monthly Terms are the same, which is a blood
ordained by Nature for the procreation and feeding of the Infant in the Womb,
and is at set times purged forth what is superfluous; and it is an excrement of
the last nutriment of the fleshy parts, for what is too much for natures use
she casts it forth; for women have soft loose flesh and small heat, and cannot
concoct all the blood she provides, nor discuss it but by this way of
purgation. The efficient cause of this purging, are the Veins that are burdened
with this superfluity of the remaining blood, and desire to be discharged of
it. Yet nature keeps an exact method and order in all her works; and therefore
she does not send this blood out but at certain periods of time, viz. once
every month, and that only in some persons: generally maids have their terms at
fourteen years old, and they cease at about fifty years, for they want heat and
cannot breed much good blood nor expel what is too much* yet those that are
weak sometimes have no courses till eighteen or twenty, some that are strong
have them till almost sixty years old, fullness of blood and plenty of nutriment
in diet brings them down sometimes at twelve years old: but commonly in
Climacterical or twice seven years they break forth, heat and strength making
way for them, and then maids will not be easily ruled, for their passages grow
larger, the humors flow, and they find a way by their own thinness of parts,
being helped by the expulsive faculty. Men about the same age begin to change
their faces and to grow downy with hair, and to change their notes and voices;
Maids breasts swell; lustful thoughts draw away their minds, and some fall into
Consumptions, others rage and grow almost mad with love.

The time of the courses is not so exact that it can be certainly determined by
us who are not of Natures Cabinet counsel. Sometimes sharp corroding humors
force the passage before it is time, and sometimes the blood is so thick that
it cannot break forth. Lusty and Menlike women send them forth in three days,
but idle persons and such as are always feeding will be seven or eight days
about it; but there is a mean between them both that proportions the time
accordingly, four days will be sufficient; but the quantity of blood that is
cast out is more or less, considering the circumstance of age, temperament,
diet, and nature of the blood, and that different according to the seasons of
the year: the places by which it comes forth are the Veins, and the bottom of
the womb, for the veins come from under the belly, and seed branches to the
bottom and to the neck of the womb, and when women are with Child, the
superfluous blood runs out by the veins of the neck; but maids and such as are
not with Child, send this blood forth by the womb it self; by this blood the
seed conceived increases, and when the Child is delivered, then it returns to
the breasts for to make Milk as we hinted at before. Though the blood be a
necessary cause, and nothing will be done without it that comes to perfection,
yet the seed is the Principal cause in this building; for the seed is the
workmaster that makes the Infant, and therefore the stones that make this seed
must needs be Principal parts, though some exclude them, making only the Heart,
the Brain, and the Liver; to be of the first rank; but the stones may in some
sort be put in the first rank, not only to make the body fruitful, but to work
a change in the whole; Take away a Man's stones and he is no more the same man,
but grows cold of constitution though he were never so hot before, and is
subject to Convulsion fits, also their voice grows shrill and Feminine, and
their manners and dispositions are commonly naught. Eunuchs may live without
them, and it has been an approved cure for the Leprosy in former times; but
Hippocrates tells us, that the stones are the strength and vigor of Manhood,
and that a convulsion of the stones threatens Death, and the firmness or
looseness of them is a great sign of good or evil, and that applications to the
stones are very effectual to the strengthening of the body. It is then very
needful for all to keep the Organs of procreation pure, and clean, that they
may send forth good seed to make the work perfect, and that Children may be
long lived, which they cannot well be, nor of sound constitutions, if they are
begotten from corrupt Seed or unnatural blood. Alchymists lay the cause of all
Childrens diseases on the Seed of the Parents; as plants have not the causes of
their destruction from the Elements, but from their own Seed; as also we see,
that when the Plague or any Epidemical disease rages, all are not infected,
because they have not that matter in them that will so soon take as it does
with others. That therefore the matter may be fit for the work of nature, there
are two things very useful, good diet moderately taken, and conveniet labor
and exercise of body. Ill diet causes ill blood, and excess in meat or drink
choakes the natural heat, causes raw, crude humors, which will never make
good blood, and ill blood will never make good seed, for every part has its
natural propriety to change the nutriment into its own likeness, as the Breasts
change blood into Milk, the stones change it into seed always supposing such-
previous preparations that are needful, or it cannot be done as it should be.

Temperance in eating and drinking will make both Parents and Children to be
long lived, and there is as much difference between good and bad nourishment,
as there is between pure Fountain water, and ditch water; but temperance is not
to be understood as if there were a set proportion for all alike, for it is
according to every ones constitution, what is too much for one Man or woman may
be too little for another; it is then such a quantity of meat or drink that the
stomach can well master and digest for the feeding of the body. Those that work
hard must eat more than Scholars that follow their studies, for the work of
the stomach is called off by the intention of the mind, their meat must be
less, and of easier digestion.

They that live in hot climates or near the Sun have not so strong stomachs, as
in colder regions, nor is it with us all one in Summer and winter, but every
man or woman of years, by good observation may know his own temper, and what
quantity will best agree with him, and so if he be not a fool he may be his own
Physician.

Youth and age cannot feed alike, Children are often feeding because they want
both for growth and nourishment, but old age not near so much; sick and
healthful differ in the same kind.

I never could endure that preposterous way that most persons observe to the
destruction of their Friends, that when they are sick they will never let them
alone but provoke them to eat, whereas fasting is the better Doctor, so it be
not out of measure.

The causes of great eating and drinking beyond the bounds of nature, are a
liquorish appetite, and a fancy beyond reason: But having found out the causes,
I shall prescribe some remedies withal. It is easy to know when you have eat or
drank too much, or what agrees not with you; when you find nature charged with
it, and is not able to digest it, vapors rising from the stomach that is
glutted will choke the brain, and cause defluxions and multitudes of diseases:
if you be sleepy after meat and drink, you have taken too much, for moderation
makes a Man cheerful and not sleepy. Also refrain from all meats and drinks
that agree not with your constitution, for they will never breed good blood,
but if you have done amiss in surfeiting your self, or over eating, or using
any thing that agrees not with you; remember that nature abhors all sudden
changes; and therefore you must not withdraw all at once but by degrees till
you can bring your selves safely to a moderation. This intemperance of Parents
is the cause that many Children die before their time; for what is too much can
never be well concocted, but turns to ill and raw humors, and if the stomach
turn the food into crude juice, or chyle, the Liver that makes the second
concoction can never mend it, to make good blood; nor can the third concoction
of the stones to turn that blood into seed, make good seed of ill blood; for
what is bad in the first concoction, the second concoction, nor third can ever
rectify, but if the chyle be good, blood and seed will be good.

But you must know that nothing furthers good concoction more than moderate
labor, for it stirs up natural heat; whereas idle persons breed crude humors.
And therefore Lycurgus the Lacedemonian Lawgiver commanded Maids to work, for
says he, this keeps their bodies in good temper, and free from crudities, and
when they come to marry, their Children will be strong. There Is as much
difference between labor and sloth, as between the earth in Summer and Winter;
in Summer the Sun by its heat makes it fruitful, in Winter it is chill for want
of the Suns, heat; Convenient labor sends the spirits to all parts of the
body; when the Elements are unequally divided, death follows, so the better the
spirits are distrubuted to the seed, the better will the seed be, and your
Children the stronger, which is no small effect of moderate exercise, when
sloth is the cause of their hasty dissolution: moderate labor open the pores
of the body, and by sweat or insensible transpriation sends forth all
fuliginous, and smoky vapors that choke the spirits and cause diverse maladies;
we find all this to be true in reason, and experience confirms it; for Country
people that work hard digest what they eat, and their Children are usually
strong and long lived. But Citizens and such as refuse to labor and live idle
lives, I do not say all, I hope there will be the fewer, for what I have taken
the pains to write now for their better instruction and reformation: then will
Men wonder no longer what becomes of so many Children as are born in the City?
one can hardly find as many living as are born in half a years time; I am
persuaded not so many can be found to have lived to seven years of age. They
that love their Children will take my advice, and they and their Children will
have good cause to thank me for it; and besides the avoiding the mischiefs of
intemperance to themselves and posterity, they shall find the blessing of God
upon them, as a great reward of this virtue of moderation, and the poor will
have just cause to pray for me and them, for what is wastfully spent by the
riotous, may be charitably bestowed upon their poor neighbors that stand in
need of it.

CHAP. II.
Of true conception.
TRue Conception is then, when the seed of both sexes is good, and duly
prepared and cast into the womb as into fruitful ground, and is there so fitly
and equally mingled, the Man's seed with the woman's, that a perfect Child is by
degrees framed; for first small threads as it were of the solid and substantial
parts are formed out, and the woman's blood flows to them, to make the bowels
and to supply all parts of the infant with food and nourishment.

Conception is the proper action of the womb after fruitful seed cast in by
both sexes, and this Conception is performed in less than seven hours after the
seed is mingled, for nature is not a minute idle in her work, but acts to the
utmost of her power; it is not copulation, but the mixture of both seeds is
called conception, when the heat of the womb fastens them; if the woman
conceives not, the seed will fall out of the womb in seven days, and abortion
and conception are reckoned upon the same time.

The Seeds of both must be first perfectly mixed, and when that is done, the
Matrix contracts it self and so closely embraces it, being greedy to perfect
this work, that by succession of time she stirs up the formative faculty which
lies hid in the seed and brings it into act, which was before but in
possibilty, this is the natural property of the womb to make prolifick Seed
fruitful, it is not all the art of man that setting the womb aside can form a
living child.

To conceive with child is the earnest desire if not of all yet of most women,
Nature having put into all a will to effect and produce their like. Some there
are who hold conception to be a curse, because God laid it upon Eve for tasting
of the forbidden fruit, I will greatly multiply thy conception: but forasmuch
as increase and multiply, was the blessing of God, it is not the conception,
but the sorrow to bring forth that was laid as a curse. We see that there is in
women so great a longing to conceive with child, that ofttimes for want of it
the womb falls into convulsions and distracts the whole body.

The womb as I said is fast tied at the neck and about the middle, but the
bottom hangs lose, so that it does ofttimes fall into strange motions. The
natural motion of it comes from the moving faculty, but the unnatural motions
from some unhealthful and convulsive cause; which is most commonly bred in it
for want of conception, and not bearing of children; we see no women ordinarily
that are better in health than those that often conceive with child, and some
are so fruitful that they conceive with many children about the same time; so
that considering his magnitude, surely no creature multiplies more than man,
for he has a priority in this blessing above the beasts. Twins are frequent,
and sometimes two or three children at one birth, are not the same thing with
superfetation, when children are got again before the first be delivered; you
must not think diverse Cells in the womb to be the cause of this multiplicity of
children; for there is no such thing in the womb to be the cause of this
multiplicity of children; for there is no such thing in the womb, but only one
line that parts one side from the other, but such women have larger wombs than
others, and so the seed divided finds place to form more children than one, if
their be sufficient strength in the several parts of the seed to do it. Yet
when Twins are begotten, they have no more than one cake called Placenta, that
both their Navel vessels are received by; though they have different Secundines
or Coats that cover them. It may be discerned but with some difficulty, that a
woman will have more than one child, by their heavy burden and slow motion,
also by the unevenness of their bellies; and that there is a kind of separation
made by certain wrinkles and seams to show the children are parted in the womb;
and if she be not very strong to go through with it in her Travel, she is in
danger both she and her children. If the twins be both boys or both girls they
will fare the better. Yet one is found by frequent examples to be more lusty
and longer lived than the other, be they both of one sex, or one a boy the
other a girl, that which is strongest increases, but the weaker decays or
fails by reason of the prevailing force of the other.

Sometimes the woman conceives again a long time after her conception, the womb
opening it self by reason of great delight in the action; though it were shut
so close as no air could enter: for the Matrix attracts and makes room for it.
And this may fall out not only for once but at a third Copulation, that a woman
may have one mischance and two children yet no twins. It may be discerned by
the several motions of the Infants, but the mother is in great danger of her
life by losing of so great a quantity of blood as she must needs lose at two
births in so short a compass of time. It is most dangerous to spurr nature to
delivery before her period, wherefore in such cases leave it to the work of
nature, using only Corroboratives and some such remedies as may facilitate her
progress therein. But women may avoid this mischief that often happens, if they
will rest themselves content when they have once conceived.

But that Story which I touched before, seems to me to be but a mere Romance,
of Margaret Countess of Hennenberge, and sister to William King of the Romans,
as some writers record; that when she was forty years old, she was delivered at
one birth successively of as many children as there are days in the year,
namely three hundred sixty five, the one half boys and the other half girls,
and the odd child was divided to both sexes, an Hermaphrodite, partly male,
partly female: and that the cause of this miracle was from a curse of her
sister, some say a poor beggar woman at her door, laid upon her for her
causeless jealousy; and farther it is constantly reported, that these children
were all baptized living at the Church of Lardune in Holland near the Hague,
and the boys were all called John's, the girls Elizabeth's; there were two Silver
Basins that they were Christened in, and Guido the Suffragan of Vtrecht keeps
them for to show to strangers, and one of these Basins, as it is reported, was
brought for a present to King Charles the second, before he came from thence;
and they say farther, that presently after they were baptized, the mother and
all her children died. Some write of another Countess in Frederick the
eleventh's days, who had five hundred boys at one birth.

But to leave this and to proceed to the causes of Conception: Notwithstanding
that God gave the blessing generally to our first Parent, and so by consequent
to all her succeeding generations, yet we find that some women are exceeding
fruitful to conceive; and others barren that they conceive not at all; God
reserving to himself a prerogative of furthering and hindering Conception where
he pleases, that men and women may more earnestly pray unto God for his
blessing of Procreation, and be thankful unto him for it: so Psalm. 127.3. the
Psalmist tells us, Lo Children, and the fruit of the Womb are an heritage and
gift that comes from the Lord. So Hannah prayed in the first of Samuel, and
gave thanks when God had heard her prayer. Some women are by nature barren,
though both they themselves and their husbands are no way deficient to perform
the acts of Generation, and are in all parts, as perfect as the most fruitful
persons can be: Some think the cause is too much likeness and similitude in
their complexions, for God having framed an Harmonious world, by a due
disposing of contraries, they that are too like of constitution can never beget
any thing; this I confess is hard to find, that they should agree in all
respects, no difference of complexion at all; yet sometimes Physicians judge
barrenness proceeds from too great similitude of persons; but I should rather
think from some disproportion of the Organs, or some impediment not easily
perceived; else how comes it to pass that some that have continued barren many
years, at last have proved fruitful. I remember a story that I heard of a
Watch-maker, who had an excellent Watch that was out of tune, and he could
never make it go true, what the fault was he could not find, at length he grew
so angry that he threw the watch against the wall, and took it up again, and
then he found it go exceeding true, and by that means he came also to know the
cause of the former defect, for indeed it proved to be nothing else but some
inequality in the Case of the watch, which by throwing it against the wall,
accidentally was amended; wherefore a small matter sometimes will remove the
impediment if we can but find what it is.

Some say again the cause of barrenness is want of love in man and wife, whose
Seed never mixeth as it should to Procreation of children, their hatred is so
great; as it is recorded of Eleocles and Polynices two Theban Princes who
killed each other, and when their bodies were afterward burned, (as the manner
of burial was in their days, to preserve only their ashes in a pot,) as if the
hatred still continued in their dead bodies, the flames parted in the midst and
ascended with two points; and this extreme hatred is the reason why women
seldom or never conceive when they are ravished, and it proves as ineffectual
as Onan's Seed when he spilt it upon the ground. The cause of this hatred in
married people, is commonly when they are contracted and married by unkind
Parents for some sinister ends against their wills, which makes some children
complain of their Parents cruelty herein all the days of their lives; but as
Parents do ill to compel their children in such cases, so children should not
be drawn away by their own foolish fancies, but take their Parents counsel
along with them when they go about such a great work as marriage is, wherein
consists their greatest woe or welfare so long as they live upon the earth.

Another cause that women prove barren is, when they are let blood in the arm
before their courses come down, whereas to provoke the Terms when they flow not
as they should, Women or Maids ought rather to be let blood in the foot, for
that draws them down to the place nature has provided, but to let blood in the
arm keeps them from falling down, and is as great a mischief as can be to
hinder them; wherefore let the Terms first come naturally before you venture to
draw blood in the arm, unless the cause be so great that there is no help for
it otherwise. The time of the courses to appear for maids is fourteen or
thirteen, or the soonest at twelve years old; yet I remember that in France I
saw a child but of nine years old that was very sickly until such time as she
was let blood in the arm, and then she recovered immediately; but this is no
president for others, especially in our climate, blood-letting being the
ordinary remedy in those parts when the Patient is charged with fullness of
blood, of what age almost soever they be.

There is besides this natural barrenness of women, another barrenness by
accident, by the ill disposition of the body and generative parts, when the
courses are either more or fewer than stands with the state of the woman's body,
when humors fall down to the womb, and have found a passage that way and will
hardly be brought to keep their natural rode; or when the womb is disaffected,
either by any preternatural quality that exceeds the bounds of nature, as heat
or cold, or dryness, or moisture, or windy vapors.

Lastly, There is barrenness by enchantment, when a man cannot lie with his
wife by reason of some charm that has disabled him; the French in such a case
advise a man to thread the needle Nouer C'eguilliette, as much as to say, to
piss through his wives wedding ring and not to spill a drop and then he shall
be perfectly cured. Let him try it that pleases.

CHAP. III.
Signs that a woman is conceived with Child, and whether it be a Son or a
Daughter.
YOung women especially of their first Child, are so ignorant commonly, that
they cannot tell whether they have conceived or not, and not one of twenty
almost keeps a just account, else they would be better provided against the
time of their lying in, and not so suddenly be surprised as many of them are.

Wherefore diverse Physicians have laid down rules whereby to know when a woman
has conceived with Child, and these rules are drawn from almost all parts of
the body. The rules are too general to be certainly proved in all women, yet
some of them seldom fail in any.

First, if when the seed is cast into the womb, she feel the womb shut close,
and a shivering or trembling to run through every part of her body, and that is
by reason of the heat that draws inward to keep the conception, and so leaves
the outward parts cold and chill.

Secondly, The pleasure she takes at that time is extraordinary, and the man's
seed comes not forth again, for the womb closely embraces it, and will shut as
fast as possibly may be.

Thirdly, The womb sinks down to cherish the seed, and so the belly grows
flatter than it was before.

Fourthly, She finds pain that goes about her belly, chiefly about her Navel
and lower belly, which some call the Watercourse.

Fifthly, Her stomach becomes very weak, she has no desire to eat her meat,
but is troubled with sour belchings.

Sixthly, Her monthly terms stop at some unseasonable time that she looked not
for.

Seventhly, She has a preternatural desire to something not fit to eat nor
drink, as some women with child have longed to bite off a piece of their
Husbands Buttocks.

Eighthly, Her Breasts swell and grow round, and hard, and painful.

Ninthly, She has no great desire to copulation, for some time she will be
merry, or sad suddenly upon no manifest cause.

Tenthly, She so much loatheth her victuals, that let her but exercise her body
a little in motion, and she will cast off what lies upon her stomach.

Eleventhly, Her Nipples will look more red at the ends than they usually do.

Twelfthly, the veins of her breasts will swell and show themselves very plain
to be seen.

Thirteenthly, Likewise the veins about the eyes will be more apparent.

Fourteenthly, The womb pressing the right gut, it is painful for her to go to
stool, she is weaker than she was and her visage discolored.

These are the common rules that are laid down.

But if a woman's courses be stopped, and the Veins under her lowest Eylid swell,
and the color be changed, and she has not broken her rest by watching the
night before; these signs seldom or never fail of Conception for the first two
months.

If you keep her water three days close stopped in a glass, and then strain it
through a fine linen cloth, you will find live worms in the cloth.

Also a needle laid twenty four hours in her Urine, will be full of red spots
if she have conceived, or otherwise it will be black or dark colored.

To know whether the Infant conceived be male or female I refer you to
Hippocrates, Aphor. 48. for it is a very hard thing to discover.

1. If it be a boy she is better colored, her right Breast will swell more,
for males lie most on the right side, and her belly especially on that side
lies rounder and more tumified, and the Child will be first felt to move on
that side, the woman is more cheerful and in better health, her pains are not
so often nor so great, the right breast is harder and more plump, the nipple a
more clear red, and the whole visage clear not swarthy.

2. If the marks before mentioned be more apparent on the left side it is a
Girl that she goes with all.

3. If when she rises from the place she sits on, she move her right foot
first, and is more ready to lean on her right hand when she reposeth, all
signifies a boy.

Lastly, Drop some drops of breast Milk into a Basin of water, if it swim on
the top it is a Boy, if it sink in round drops judge the contrary.

CHAP. IV.
Of false Conception, and of the Mole or Moon Calf.
MAny women themselves have thought that they had conceived with Child because
their bellies were swollen so great, and their courses were staid and came not
down according to natures custom; whereas this swelling of the belly more and
more, and stopping of the Terms proceeded from nothing else but an ill shaped
lump of flesh which grows greater every day in the womb, and is fed by the
Terms that flow to it; and this is that Midwives call a Mole or Moon-Calf; and
these are of two sorts, one the true, the other the false Mole.

The true Mole is a misshapen piece of flesh without figure or order, it is full
of Veins and Vessels with discolored veins or membranes of almost all colors,
without any entrails or bones, or motion; it is bred in the wombs hollowness,
and cleaves fast to the sides of it but takes no substance from it, sometimes
it has a skin to cover it and is empty within, sometimes it is long or round,
and some women have cast forth three at a time like the Yard of a man:
sometimes these Moles are without sense, sometimes they have an obscure
feeling; sometimes they are bred with the Child, and then is the Child in great
danger to be oppressed by them; sometimes they are voided when the Child is
delivered, or before or after. Widows have been known to have had these Moles
formed in their wombs by their own seed and blood that flows thither. But
ordinarily I think this comes not to pass, but it proceeds from a fault in the
forming faculty, when the man's seed in Copulation is weak or defective and too
little, so that it is overcome by the much quantity of the woman's blood, the
faculty begins to work but cannot perfect, and so only Veins and Membranes are
made but the Child is not made, yet this Mole is of so different kinds that it
is not possible to set them down according to their several varieties; but
doubtless a Mole is sooner formed if Men and Women ly together when they have
their courses, and the blood is not fit for formation by reason of impurity, so
that neither heat nor cold are the chief cause of this error, but the
uncleanness of the matter that is not endued with a forming faculty; from
corrupt seed or menstruous blood bad humors are engendered and nature works in
vain.

Some are called false Moles, and of those are four sorts, as their causes are;
for either they proceed from wind and are called windy swellings, or from water
flowing to the womb, and called watery swellings, or else diverse humors cause
this swelling, and sometimes it is nothing but a bag full of blood. If the
Child be conceived with a Mole, it draws the nourishment from the Child. Both
sexes doubtless contribute to the making of most Moles, the seed of the Man
being choakt with the blood of the woman, and wrapped both in a caul, Nature
will make something of it though nothing to the purpose. If it be true that
some widows have had them, they were neither of the same shape nor substance,
but voided will consume into water, and this can be supposed only of dead
Moles, for living Moles that have some sense or feeling or true motion in them
can never be produced but man's seed must be a part of their beginning; as for
Maids they cannot breed any true Mole, because a true Mole must be made of the
greatest part of the woman's blood coming into the womb, but the vessels and
passages in maids are too narrow, so that there is no flux of blood thither to
make this Mole of, as it is in women that have had the use of man: but without
dispute, the principal cause is women's carnally knowing their Husbands when
their Terms are purging forth, from whence Moles, and Monsters, distorted,
imperfect, ill qualified Childred are begotten. Let such as fear God, or love
themselves, or their posterity beware of it.

The windy Mole proceeds from an over-cold womb, Spleen and Liver, which breeds
wind that fastneth in the hollow of the part. Sometimes the womb is weak and
cannot transmute the blood for nourishment, but it turns to water which cannot
be all sent forth, but part of it remains in the womb; also the womb ofttimes
receives a great confluence of water from the spleen or from some parts nigh
unto it.

The Mole made of many humors flowing to the womb, proceeds from the Whites, or
ill purgations coming from the menstruous Veins. The fourth Mole is a skin full
of blood with many white diaphanous vessels, if you cast it into the water, the
skin coagulates like a clod of seed; and the blood runs away.

It is very hard to know a false conception from a true until four months be
past, and then the motion of the body of the thing conceived will show it; for
if it be a living Child, that moves quick and lively; but the false conception
falls from one side to another like a stone as the woman turns her self in her
bed, if it stir at all it is but like a sponge, trembling and beating, and
contracts and dilates it self like the beating of the pulse almost.

This false conception has many signs whereby it personates and shows like a
true Conception; for the Terms stop, their stomachs fail, they loath their
meat, they vomit and belch sowrly, their breasts and belly swell, cunning
Midwives and women themselves that have them are deceived taking one for the
other.

There are many other things bred in the womb sometimes besides these Moles;
Two famous Physician of Senon, tell us of a woman that had a Child in her womb,
that did not corrupt, nor stink, though it lay long dead there until it was
turned into a stone; cold, and heat, and dryness might keep the child from
corrupting, but there was also a petrifying humor mixed with the seed and
blood, or it could never have been turned into a stone; there, is but this
single History that I ever read of this kind, and Authors say the mother lived
twenty eight years after she was delivered of it; but it is no great wonder why
it did not stink nor corrupt in the womb, for many aged women live many years
with a Mole in the body, yet it never stinks nor corrupts though they keep it
in them till they dye.

As for Monsters of all sorts to be formed in the womb all nations can bring
some examples; Worms, Toades, Mice, Serpents, Gordonius says, are common in
Lumbardy, and so are those they call Soole kints in the Low Countries, which
are certainly caused by the heat of their stones and menstrual blood to work
upon in women that have had company with men; and these are sometimes alive
with the infant, and when the Child is brought forth these stay behind, and the
woman is sometimes thought to be with Child again; as I knew one there my self,
which was after her childbirth delivered of two like Serpents, and both run
away into the Burg wall as the women supposed, but it was at least three
months after she was delivered of a Child, and they came forth without any
loss of blood, for there was no after burden. Again in time of Copulation,
Imagination ofttimes also produces Monstrous births, when women look too much
on strange objects.

To distinguish then false conceptions from true, but if there be both true and
false at once that is very hard to know.

False Conceptions cause the greatest pains in their Backs, and Groins, and
Loins, and Head; their Bellies swell sooner, they faint more, their Faces, and
Feet, and Legs swell, their Bellies grow hard like a Dropsy, they have such
pain in their Bellies that they cannot sleep because they carry such a dead
weight within them; and though their Faces and breasts swell, they grow daily
soft and lank, and no milk in their Breasts but what is like water, or very
little; whereas women with Child about the fourth month have their Breasts
swollen with milk. Some women look well with these false Conceptions, but most of
them look pale, and wan, and ill favored: If it be a boy that is conceived he
will stir at the beginning of the third Month, and a Girl at the beginning of
the third or fourth month, and so soon as the infant moves there is Milk bred
in the Breasts as any one may prove that will. The Child that is alive moves to
all sides, and upward and downward without any help, but oftenest to the right
flanck. A false conception may have a motion from the expulsive faculty, but
not from it self, and being not tied by ligaments as a living Child is, it
tumbles to one side or other, and if she lie on her back and one press it down
with his hand gently, there it will stay and not remove up again of it self. If
she go with a Mole nine months complete her belly will swell more and more, but
she will wax lean and wan, and never offer to be delivered. Yet a woman may go
ten or eleven months with child before her time be perfect to bring forth, but
this depends upon the time when the child was begotten, and some women
ordinarily go longer or shorter before they come to bring forth.

Those that have Moles are usually barren, or their Privities are ulcerated,
for it hurts the womb and the whole fabric of their bodies.

The windy Mole will swell the belly like a Bladder, and it will sound like a
Drum, but it is softer than the fleshy Mole or the watery, it grows sooner, and
sooner disappears, and she will feel her self lighter when it abates, but
sometimes it will heat the belly with such violence as if she were upon the
rack.

The watery Mole is a fluctuation of water from one side to another, as the
woman turns her self when she lies, and then that lide will be higher where
the water falls, and the other side will sink down the more and grow flatter.

The Mole caused from many humors does not make the belly swell so much as the
watery Mole does, because the water comes more in quantity, and is clear,
whereas the humors are reddish and stink when they come forth, like water
wherein flesh has been washed.

There is one observation more concerning false conceptions, that when they
happen the Flowers stop presently and never come down, whereas they do
sometimes the first two months in true conceptions, because they are
superfluous in strong full fed persons before the child comes to want more
nutriment, also the Navel of the woman does not rise higher in false
conceptions, but in true it does.

Some women have their Terms well, and their wombs well disposed, yet their
bellies have swollen and the cause not discerned till they were dead, for being
opened, one or both corners of the womb have had little bags of water, or else
clusters of kernels and strange flesh growing in them. Some women have also a
piece of flesh hanging within the inward neck of the womb, fastened about a
finger broad at the root, and growing daily downward in form like a bell, and
sometimes fills all the privy members orifice, and may be seen hanging forth,
all these make the belly swell round, but are not properly Moles as they are
before spoken of.

Amongst false conceptions all monstrous births may be reckoned, for a monster
says Aristotle is an error of nature failing of the end she works for, by some
corrupted principle; sometimes this happens when the sex is imperfect, that you
cannot know a boy from a girl; they call these Hermaphrodites: there is but one
kind of Women Hermaphrodites, when a thing like a Yard stands in the place of
the Clitoris above the top of the genital, and bears out in the bottom of the
sharebone; sometimes in boys there is seen a small privy part of the woman
above the root of the Yard, and in girls a Yard is seen at the Lesk or in the
Peritoneum. But three ways a boy may be of doubtful sex. 1. When there is seen
a woman's member between the Cods and the Fundament. 2. When it is seen in the
Cod, but no excrement coming forth by it. 3. When they piss through it. But
Monsters most ordinarily falling out, are when the child born is of some
strange feature, or like a dog, or any other creature, as the Tartar lately
captivated by the Germans in their last war against the Turks; if the relation
be true, he had a head and neck like a horse, some think he was begotten of a
beast, a custom too frequent amongst those miscreants. Some are monsters in
magnitude, when one part, as the head, is too great for the body; or a Giant or
a Pigmy is brought forth. Sometimes in place, when the parts are displaced, as
when the eyes stand in the forehead, or the ears behind in the poll; many such
strange births have been in the world, and sometime children have been born
with six fingers on a hand, and six toes, like those Giants the Scripture
speaks of, and others there are born with but one eye, or one hand, one ear,
and the like.

CHAP. V.
Of the causes of Monstrous Conceptions.
WHat should be the causes of Monstrous Conceptions has troubled many great
Learned men. Alcabitius says, if the Moon be in some Degrees when the child is
conceived, it will be a Monster. Astrologers they seek the cause in the stars,
but Ministers refer it to the just judgments of God, they do not condemn the
Parent or the Child in such cases, but take our blessed Saviors answer to his
Disciples, who asked him, who sinned the Parent or the Child, that he was born
blind? our Savior replied, neither he nor his Parents, but that the Judgments
of God might be made manifest in him. In all such cases we must not exclude the
Divine vengeance, nor his Instruments, the stars influence; yet all these
errors of Nature as to the Instrumental causes, are either from the material or
efficient cause of procreation.

The matter is the seed, which may fail three several ways, either when it is
too much, and then the members are larger, or more than they should be, or too
little, and then there will be some part or the whole too little, or else the
seed of both sexes is ill mixed, as of men or women with beasts; and certainly
it is likely that no such creatures are born but by unnatural mixtures, yet God
can punish the world with such grievous punishments, and that justly for our
sins. Aristotle tells us that in Africa so many monsters are bred amongst
beasts, because going far together to water, they that are of different kinds
engender there, and so daily new Monsters are begotten. But the efficient cause
of Monsters, is either from the forming faculty in the Seed, or else the
strength of imagination joined with it; add to these the menstruous blood and
the disposition of the Matrix; sometimes the mother is frighted or conceives
wonders, or longs strangely for things not to be had, and the child is marked
accordingly by it. The unfitness of the matter hinders formation, for an agent
cannot produce the effect where the patient is not fit to receive it.
Imagination can do much, as a woman that looked on a Black-more brought forth a
child like to a Black-more; and one I knew, that seeing a boy with two thumbs
on one hand, brought forth such another; but ordinarily the spirits and humors
are disturbed by the passions of the mind, and so the forming faculty is
hindered and overcome with too great plenty of humors that flow to the matrix,
or the spirits are called off and gone another way. But the imagination is so
strong in some persons with child, that they produce such real effects that can
proceed from nothing else; as that woman who brought forth a child all hairy
like a Camel, because she usually said prayers kneeling before the image of St.
John Baptist who was clothed with camels hair: How the imagination can work
such wonders is hard to say, but there must be some strength of mind that can
convey the species from the external senses to the formative faculty, for by
this means there is a consent between the faculties superior and inferior. The
Soul is all in all, and all in every part of the body, yet it works in several
parts as occasions serves. The child in the Mothers womb has a soul of its
own, yet it is a part of the mother until she be delivered, as a branch is
part of a Tree while it grows there, and so the mothers imagination makes an
impression upon the child, but it must be a strong imagination at that very
time when the forming faculty is at work or else it will not do, but since the
child takes part of the mothers life whilst he is in the womb, as the fruit
does of the tree, whatsoever moves the faculties of the mothers soul may do the
like in the child. So the parts of the infant will be hairy where no hair
should grow, or Strawberries or Mulberries, or the like be fashioned upon them,
or have lips or parts divided or joined together according as the imagination
transported by violent passions may sometimes be the cause of it.

The Arabians say, a strange imagination can do as much as the Heavens can to
make plants and metals in the earth.

The second cause is the heat or place of conception, which molds the matter
quickly into sundry forms. But imagination holds the first place, and thence it
is that children are so like their Parents.

CHAP. VI.
Of the resemblance or likeness of Children and Parents.
THere are according to Philosophers and Physicians, three forms or likenesses
in every living creature.

First, Likeness of kind, as when a creature of the same kind is produced, a
man from a man, a horse from a horse; and herein the likeness proceeds commonly
from the matter; and because the female usually brings more matter than the
male, more children are like the Mother than the Father. So a she-Goat with a
Ram breed a Kid, but a he-Goat and a Sheep beget a Lamb.

Secondly, there is a likeness of sex, and the cause why the child is a boy or
a girl is the heat of the seed, if the man's seed prevail in mixing above the
woman's it will be a boy, else a girl.

Thirdly, there is a likeness of forms and figures and other accidents, that
the child by them more resembles, the father or the mother, as these accidents,
are found in it more like to either of the two; this, says Galen, comes from
the difference of parts and conformation of the members.

Hence one is black, another white, one with a high forehead or a Roman nose,
the other not. Sometimes the child is very like the father, sometimes the
mother, and ofttimes like them both in many respects, sometimes like neither,
but the grandfather or grandmother: and there are many examples where children
have been like to those who have had no part in the work; but a strong fancy
of the mother has been the reason of it. Authors and Travelers say, that the
Chinese children are like their Sires in many limbs and parts of their faces,
as the forehead, nose, beard, and eyes. In some Countries where they have Wives
in common, as a people called Cammate have, Men make choice of their children
by the likeness to themselves. There are also childrens marks, proper to some
Families, that are visible upon their bodies, Thyestes had the likeness of a
Crab, some of a star. The Thebans and Spartans a Lance: Delemus and his
offspring had their thighs crooked and like to an anchor, and that lascivious
strumpet Julia, Augustus's daughter, had no children but resembled her self,
for she was so cunning, that she would admit of none besides her husband till
she had conceived.

Some are of that opinion, that all this proceeds from the strength of
imagination, so Empedocles, so Paracelsus determine it, and the last thought
the Plague to be infectious only to those that fancy made it so. But the
Arabians ascribe so much power to imagination, that it can change the very
works of nature, heal diseases, work wonders, command all kind of matter, and
they impute as much or more to that, than Divines do to having Faith, to which
nothing is impossible; but I cannot be altogether of their opinion.

Imagination is powerful in all living creatures, for by it Jacob's Ewes
conceived spotted, and grisled, the peeled rods being set before them when they
were in conjunction.

Galen taught an Ethiopian to get a white child, setting a picture before him
for his wife to look on.

Their opinions also are not wide, who say the cause of this likeness lies
much in the motion of the Seed and the forming faculty, this was Aristotles's
judgment. We deny not but both may be true, for imagination can do nothing
without it, and by the forming faculty Imagination works this similitude, yet
so that they both concur to the business. The Soul lies in the Seed which
makes its own house, for all confess a forming faculty, and this faculty must
come from some substance that lies close in the seed, though it appear not in
the first act for want of fit organs to work with. Three things are requisite
to form a child.

1. Fruitful seed from both sexes wherein the Soul rests with its forming
faculty.

2. The mothers blood to nourish it.

3. A good constitution of the matrix to work it to perfection; if any of these
be wanting you must not expect a perfect child: But as for the marks, or
likeness to the Parents, sometimes this virtue lies hid some ages in the seed,
and appears not, and then the child comes to be like those from whom it was
descended by many succeeding generations, for H^lin had a white daughter by a
Black, but that daughter had a black son born of her, the forming faculty still
continuing in the seed when it has been stirred up by new imagination.

Plants being grafted, experience shows will bear fruit of the nature of the
graft, but the kernels of that fruit sowed will bring fruit like the stock it
was grafted on. Graft an Apricock on a Pear stock you shall have Apricocks, but
a stone of those Apricocks set grows a Pear stock. If the forming faculty be
free, children will be like their Parents, but if it be overpowred or wrested
by imagination, the form will follow the stronger faculty; if the mother long
for figs, or roses, or such things, the child is sometimes marked with them.
Avicen gives this reason for it, that the aerie spirits that are nimble of
themselves, are soon moved by the fancy, and these mingle with the
nutrimental blood of the child and imprint this likeness from imagination. This
is a deep speculation, but it may be compared and represented to our
understanding by those equivocal generations made in the air of frogs, and
flies and the like by the forming faculties of the Heavens, so are the forms
imagination sends forth engraven on the light spirits, for the quick spirits
receive all forms from the imagination, and the seed that passes through all
parts and is derived from the whole body retains the images of them all.

CHAP. VII.
Of the sympathy between the womb and other parts, and how it is wrought upon
by them.
IT is strange to consider that the womb should discern between sweet and
stinking scents, and to be so diversely affected with these smells that some have
miscarryed by smelling the snuff of a Candle, insomuch that some have thought
the womb to be a creature of a discerning quality, and it receives this
judgment from every part of the body, it is delighted with sweet scents, and
displeased with the contrary. Wise Men have been at a stand to give a reason
for it. Some refer it to a hidden quality, but that is still the last refuge
for ignorance. There are indeed many things in nature secret to us, of which we
can give no certain reason, as for the Loadstone to draw Iron; we see it is so
but we cannot say how it comes to pass. In fits of the Mother sweet smells are
good, for they disperse the ill qualities and venenosities of the Air, and so
by a peculiar quality strengthen the womb, by drawing down the spirits, and
humors, but the different way of applying them will do good or harm. For the
sweetest things that are, as Musk, or Civet, will cause fits of the Mother, if
you apply them to the woman's nose, for the womb consents or dissents by
sympathy and antipathy, and sweet things applied to the privities profit in
such cases, and stinking things to the nose, as burnt leather, feathers, or the
like. There is a great agreement between the womb and the brain, as Hippocrates
proves by a smoke to try barrenness by, and there is the like between the womb
and the Heart by Nerves and Arteries. Sweet scents are pleasing to all women's
wombs, and ill savours offend, but not in all women alike, for where the Matrix
is well disposed and not disaffected by reason of ill humors that it is
charged with* those Women are much delighted with sweet smells, but it is not so
with others who are unclean, for they cannot away with sweet smells, for no
sooner do they begin to scent them, but they fall into those fits, for while
the womb resents those sweet swells, the ill humors that lie hid in the womb,
especially where the seed is corrupted, fly up with the spirits and carry the
bad humors with them to the Heart, and to the brain, and so cause these
stiflings of the womb.

This is general for all sweet things, that the Matrix is pleased with them
rightly applied; for apply any sweet thing to the Privities, the womb is quiet
and well refresht by them, and so the humors are still, or else they move
downward, but contrarily stinking things by Antipathy with the womb are thrust
out by the spirits when we apply such stinks to the nose, for the spirits fly
downwards, and often there is an abortion thereby.

The womb cannot smell scents no more than it can hear sounds or see objects,
for scents belong to the nose which is the Organ of smelling, as colors to the
eyes that are the instruments of seeing, and the ears of hearing, but the womb
partakes with these scents by reason of a thin vapor or spirit that comes from
any strong smell, for the womb is affected as our senses are, very suddenly as
it feels exactly, which is in some kind a general sense, and is common to every
part of the body, our spirits are refresht with sweet vapors, not discerning
them but as they are placed and strengthened by them. But how does the womb
choose sweet smells and refuse the contrary if she cannot discern? I know not why
it is so, unless the reason be, because of the impurity of those vapors that
arise from stinking things, for all such things are noynoysome, and not well
concocted, and defile the spirts contained in the parts of Generation, and so
cause faintings, and swoundings, whereas sweet smells are pleasant, and refresh
the spirits. But why then does Ambergreece and Musk cause suffocations being so
extremely sweet scented; and Assafetida and Castoreum, two stinking cure it?
The Answer is, that all women are not so affected, but only they whose wombs,
as I said, are charged with ill humors, and then quick spirits arising from
sweet smells presently move the brain and the membranes of it; and so the
membranous womb is soon drawn into consent, the bad vapors that lay still
before being stirred and raised by the Arteries, flee to the heart and the
brain, and by secret passages cause such fits, but noisome smells being raw and
ill tempered, stop the pores of the brain, and come not to the inward membranes
to prevent them. Also Nature being offended with destructive ill qualified
scents, raises up all her forces as against an open enemy to oppose them, and
so casts out of the womb with the ill vapors the ill humors also from which
these vapors rise, so comes a crisis in acute diseases, if Nature be strong
she casts them forth; and when a man takes a purge, Nature helps her self
against the ill qualities of the Medicament, which she can no way conquer but
by casting it forth, and so what humors were peccant are cast forth with it.

It was the judgment of Hippocrates, that women's wombs are the cause of all
their diseases; for let the womb be offended* all the faculties Animal, Vital,
and natural; all the parts, the Brain, Heart, Liver, Kidneys, Bladder,
Entrails, and bones, especially the share-bone partake with it: but no part is
so much of consent with the womb as the Breasts are. The agreement between the
womb and the Brain comes from the Nerves and membranes of the marrow of the
back, some fee great pains in the hinder part of the head, some are frantic,
others so silent they cannot speak. Some have dimness of sight, dullness of
hearing, noise in their ears, strange passions and Convulsions.

It agrees with the Heart by the Arteries of the Seed and lower belly, and if
these be stopped or choked by a venomous air, the hearts natural heat is
dissolved, and faintings, and swoondings, and intermission of pulse follow with
stopping of their breath, so that you cannot perceive them to breath unless you
apply a clear looking-glass to their mouth, and if they breath at all there
will be left a dewy vapor upon the Glass, if not they are dead; for some of
these women draw in no more air than what comes in by the pores of the skin
into the Arteries and so goes to the Heart; and such persons sometimes lie in
such fits twenty four hours at least, and many of them have lain so long that
their Friends have thought them to be dead and have caused them to be unhappily
buried when they were alive, and would no doubt have revived when the fit had
been over. I speak this for a warning to others, to beware what they do upon
such occasions, and to give at least two or three days time before they put
them into the ground; some have been taken alive out of their Coffins long
after they were thought to be dead.

The womb and Liver agree by Veins running from the Liver to the womb, which is
the cause of Jaundies, Dropsies, and Green Sickness, if the blood be naught
that comes to it. And that the Kidneys by the Seed-veins consents with the
womb, is manifest by the pains of the loins women suffer when they have their
Courses; for the left Seed-Vein comes from the left emulgent or kidney-vein on
the same side. So the womb, the bladder, and the right gut agree, for if the
womb be inflamed, presently follows a desire to go to stool, and to make water,
by reason of the nearness and communion these parts have one with the other, by
the membranes of the Peritoneum, that tie the womb and these parts together,
and by common Vessels running betwixt, for from the same branch of the vein of
the under belly run small Fibers to these three parts* but the consent of the
womb with the breasts is most observable, the humors passing ordinarily from
one to the other, whereby we may know the affections of the womb, and how to
cure them, and of the state of the Child contained in it. Lufitanus tells us
that he saw two women that voided monthly blood by their Nipples when their
Courses were stopped. Hippocrates confirms this, affirming that women are in
danger to run mad when blood comes forth at their Nipples. Brassavolus tells us
of women's milk that came like blood, but it was raw unconcocted blood, and that
might be, for Nurses Courses are always stopped because the blood runs to their
breasts to make Milk. By the color of the nipples the state of the womb is
perceived; if the Paps look pale or yellow that should look red, the womb is
not well. Also if you will stop the Terms that run too much, set a great
cupping glass under the Breasts, for that will turn the course of the blood
backward.

Farther you may know the Child if it be a Boy to be three months old, and if
a Girl to be about four months old, if you find Milk in the Mothers breasts,
for at those times the Child first moves, and then is there Milk found in the
breasts of the Mother.

If the right breast swell and strut out the Boy is well, if it flag it is a
sign of miscarriage, judge the same of the Girl by the left breast, when it is
sunk, or round and hard, the first signifies abortion to be near, the other
health and safety both of the Mother and the Child.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Child grows in the Womb, and one part after the other successively
made.
MEn are of several minds concerning the time when each part is made; I think
they are in the right, who maintain that the membranes are first made which
wrap the Child, with the Navel-vessels by which the Child is fastened to the
Mothers womb, and draws nutriment from her, and all parts are made sooner or
later, as dignity and necessity of the parts require, but this is thought to be
the hardest piece of Anatomy, because it is seldom to be observed, because if
women dye in childbed they first miscarry and dye afterward. Some follow Galen
herein, who never saw a woman Anatomized* others Columbus, some Vesalius, but
few or none know the truth. The stones of a woman for generation of seed, are
white, thick and well concocted, for I have seen one, and but one and that is
more by one than many Men have seen. In the act of Copulation both eject their
seed, which is united in the womb* and Boys or Girls are begotten as the seed
is that prevails stronger or weaker, so the greater light puts out the lesser,
the Sun the light of a Candle. Nature desires to beget its like in all things,
a Man a Man-child, a woman one of her own sex; but we follow desire not nature
when we with the contrary. If the Horse or Mare trot, it were strange that the
Filly should amble.

The seed of both persons being joined, the Matrix presently shuts as close as
may be, to keep in, and to fasten the seed by its native heat, and so women's
bellies seem lank at their first conception. The first thing that works is the
spirit of which the seed is full, this is stirred up to action by heat of the
womb, and though the seed seems to be homogeneous and all one substance, yet it
consists of very different parts, some pure and some impure; the spirit then in
the seed divides between these parts, and makes a separation of the earthy,
cold, clammy, grosser parts, from the more aerial, pure, and noble parts. The
impure are cast to the outside, to circle in and keep close the seed which is
pure, and of the outside are the Membranes made, by which the seed enclosed is
kept from danger of cold and other ill accidents* just as it is in Trees so it
is here, the cold winter congeals the vital spirits of the Tree, but the Suns
heat revives it in the Spring, and opens the pores of the Tree, and separates
the clean from the which is unclean, making of the pure juice flowers, of the
impure and gross juice leaves and bark.

The first thing Nature makes for the child, is the Amnios or inward skin that
surrounds the Child in the womb, as the Pia matter does the brain: next is the
Chorion or outward skin made, which compasses the Child, as the dura matter the
brain* this is soon done by nature, for God and nature hate idleness, and no
sooner are these two coats made, but presently the Navel-Vein is bred, piercing
both these skins whilst they are exceeding tender; and conveighs a drop of
blood from the mothers womb-veins to the seed; of this one drop is formed the
Child's Liver, from the Liver is bred the hollow Vein, and this Vein is the
fountain of all other Veins of the body, so this being done, the seed has
blood sufficient to feed it and to form the rest of the parts by. It is a vain
fancy that some hold, how that all the parts are formed together, others that
the heart is first framed; it must receive a right construction what Aristotle
says, that the Heart lives first and dies last, for the Liver is made much
before the Heart. Nor is that if it be well understood to be found fault with,
that a Man lives successively, first the life of a Plant, then of a Beast, and
lastly of a Man. For first the Child grows, then it begins to move, last of all
it becomes a reasonable Soul. Next to the hollow Vein of the Liver being made,
are the arteries of the navel made, then the great Artery which is the Tree,
and all the small Arteries are but branches coming from it; and last of all the
Heart is framed, as Columbus proves upon very sufficient reason, for all the
arteries are made before it, for the Body receives its life by Arteries, and
the Navel arteries are bred from the Mothers arteries, and therefore are made
next to the Veins, to give vital blood to the Seed, as the Liver feeds it with
natural blood to build a frail house for poor mortals. Next in order, so far as
reason and Anatomy can guide us, the Liver sends blood to the Arteries to make
the Heart, for the arteries are made of seed, but the heart and all fleshy
parts are made of blood; last of all the brain, and then the Nerves to give
feeling and motion are produced. If the most noble parts were first framed, as
the Peripateticks suppose, then the brain and heart should be first made, which
is not agreeing to reason and observation. As for the forming of the bones in
order, I think Aristotle said true, that the whirl bones and the skull are
first made. I confess all these things have been questioned by some, but I love
not impertinent disputes, as it was the quality of the Grecians, who have made
a large dispute, whether the Elephants Tusks be Horns or Teeth. Hippocrates
divides the forming of the infant into four divisions:

First the seed of both sexes mixed have not lost their own form, but resemble
curdled milk covered with a film or cream: the next form is a rude draught of
the parts, or a chaos like a lump of flesh. And next in order there is a more
curious draught, wherein the three chief parts, the Brain, the Heart, and the
Liver, may be seen together with the first three, and as it were the warp of
all the seed parts, and this is called Embrion: But fourthly, To perfect the
whole work, all the parts are set in order and perfected, so that Nature has
nothing to do but to hasten to delivery, that this work of hers may be brought
forth into the world. When the spirit in the seed begins to work, it parts the
more noble from the base, and the pure from the impure, so that the thick,
cold, clammy parts are kept out to cover the more thin and pure parts, and to
defend and preserve them. Nature begins her conformation with the cold clammy
parts of the seed, and makes skins and membranes of them to cover the rest, and
stretches them out as need requires. Men have only two membranes, the outward
or Chorion which is strong and nervous, and wraps the infant round, and this
membrane is like a soft pillow for the Veins and Navel-arteries of the Child to
lean upon, for it had been dangerous for the Child's Vessels coming from its
Navel to pass far unguarded: but the inward Coat which is wonderful soft and
thin, called the Amnios or Lamb-skin is loose on each side except it be at the
cake, where it grows so fast to the skin that it cannot easily be parted; this
skin receives the sweat and Urine, and from thence the Child is much helped,
for it swims in these waters like as in a bath, and time is for delivery, it
moistneth the orifice of the Matrix, makes it glib and slippery whereby the
woman is more easily and more speedily delivered.

These two Coats grow so close together that they seem to be but one garment,
and it is called the Secundine or after-burthen, because it comes forth after
the Child is born, for the Child first breaks through it, and sometimes brings
along with it a piece of the said Lamb-skin upon the face and head, which is
called by Midwives the Caul, and strange reports they give of it.

Some think it ridiculous and fabulous, but as all extraordinary things
signify something more than is usual, so I am subject to believe that this
Caul does foreshew something notable which is like to befall them in the
course of their lives.

But notwithstanding all that has been said, some Anatomists do a little vary
from it, for they maintain, that within the first seven days wherein the
generative seed is mingled and curdled in the Mothers womb by the heats motion,
many small fibers are bred, in which shortly the Liver and his principal Organs
are formed first, and through these Organs the vital spirits coming to the seed
in ten days makes all the distinction of parts, and through some small Veins in
the Secundine the blood runs, and of that is the Navel made, and there appears
at the same time three clods of seed or white lumps like curdled Milk, and
these are the foundation of three principal parts, viz. the Brain, the Liver,
and the Heart. But the Liver is confessed to be first made of a blood gathered by
one branch of this Vein, for the Liver it self is nothing else but a lump of
clotted blood full of Veins which serve to attract and to expel; but
immediately before the Liver is made, there is a two-forked Vein formed through
the navel, to suck away the grosser part of the blood that rests in the seed.
In the other branch of this vein more veins are made for the spleen and lower
belly, and all of them coming to one root meet in the upper part of the Liver
in the hollow Vein, and from hence other Veins are sent out of the Midriff to
the thighs below, and to the upper part of the backbone; next this the heart is
made with its veins, for these veins draw the hottest part of the blood and
that which is most subtle, and so make the heart: within the membrane called
the Pericardium or skin that covers the heart, the hollow Vein runs through the
inward part of the right side of the heart carrying blood to it to feed it:
from the same branch of this vein and the same part of the heart is there
another vein that beats but faintly, therefore called the still Vein, amongst
the pulsative Veins, and this is provided to send the more pure blood by from
the heart to the Lungs, they are covered with a double Coat as the Arteries are.

The Artery called Aorta, that conveighs the vital spirits through the whole
body from the heart by the beating Veins or arteries, is bred in the hollow of
the left Vein of the heart, and under this artery in the same hollow place of
the heart is another Vein bred which is called the vein-artery, that brings the
cold air from the Lungs to cool the heart, for the Lungs are made by many Veins
that run from the hollow of the heart, and come thither to frame the Lungs; and
they have their substance from a very thin subtle blood that is brought thither
from the right hollow of the heart.

The breast is first framed by the great Veins of the Liver, and after that the
outmost parts, the legs and arms.

But last of all the Brain is made in the third little skin I speak of, for the
seed being full of vital spirits, the vital spirits draw much of the natural
moisture, into one hollow place where the brain is made, and covered with a
Coat which heat dries and bakes into a skull.

The Veins come all from the Liver, Arteries from the Heart, Nerves from the
brain, of a soft gentle nature, yet not hollow as Veins are, but solid; the
Brain retains and changes the vital spirits, from hence are the beginnings of
sense and reason.

After the Nerves the pith of the backbone is bred which cannot be called
Marrow, for Marrow is a superfluous substance made of blood to moisten and
strengthen the bones, but the pith of the back and brain are made of seed, not
to serve other parts, but to be also parts of themselves, for sense and motion,
that all the Nerves might grow originally from thence; also Bones Gristles,
Coats, and Membranes are bred from the seed, Veins for the Liver, Arteries for
the Heart, Nerves for the Brain, besides all other pannicles and coverings the
child is wrapped in. But all fleshy substance as the Heart it self, Liver, and
Lungs, are made of the proper blood of the birth; this is all ended in eighteen
days of the first month, and all that time it carries the name of seed, and
afterward is called the birth; and this birth so long as it is in the womb is
fed with blood received through the Navel, and therefore when women are with
child the courses cease; for after conception this blood is severed into three
parts, the best and finest serves for the child's nourishment, the next in
pureness though not so pure as the first, rises to the breasts to make milk,
and the grossest part of the three stays in the womb and comes away with the
birth and afterbirth.

But this is a long dispute how the child comes to be fed in the womb. Alcmeon
thought the child's body being soft like a sponge did draw nourishment by all
parts of its body, as a sponge sucks water, not only drinking from the mothers
veins but from the womb also. Hippocrates as well as Democritus or Epicurus
seems to say, that the child sucks both nourishment and breath at the mouth,
from the mother when she breaths, for these two causes.

1. Because it could not suck so soon as it is born were it not used to it
before.

2. There are excrements found in the Guts of a new born child; but all
creatures that suck will do it presently by instinct of nature; as Chickins
that never fed before, will presently pick up their food; and as for the
excrements found in the Guts they are not excrements of the first concoction,
for they stink not, but are gross blood that came from the Vessels of the
spleen to the Guts and are dried there; but now it is agreed by all since the
truth is found out, that the child in the womb is fed by its Navel, only they
differ about the food it lives on, the Peripateticks say it is fed by menstrual
blood which is the excrement of the last nutriment of the fleshy parts, which
at certain times is purged forth by the womb in a moderate quantity, but
primarily ordained for the generation and nutriment of the child.

But Fernelius, Pliny, Columella, and Columbus deny this, because such blood is
impure, and will, where it falls, destroy Plants, and Trees, Dogs will run mad
that eat it, and ofttimes hurts the women themselves, causing swimmings of the
head, pains, swellings, and suffocations, this then were ill food for a tender
infant.

But to answer all: If the woman be in good health, her monthly courses are no
bad blood for quality though they hurt in quantity being more than she can
concoct* and therefore she sends forth what is too much* but if her body be ill
affected, the blood that stays in the womb is naught as well as that she voids
by her terms, but when the courses are not duly voided but stay, in being stopped
beyond their time of evacuation, then they cause those ill effects formerly
mentioned, else not: but women have not these courses the greatest part of the
time they are with child, nor yet when they give suck, for the most part; if
the child be not fed with this blood what becomes of this blood when women are
with child? certain it is it turns into milk, when time serves, to suckle the
infant with. Yet Hippocrates was mistaken, who says, that the last part of the
time the child lies in the womb after it is quick, its fed partly by the
mother milk; but this is certain that the infant in the womb is fed with pure
blood conveyed in the Liver by the Navel-vein which is a branch of the great
vein, and spreads to the small veins of the Liver. And here this blood is more
refined, the thick, gross, crude part goes to the Spleen and Kidneys, and the
gross excrement of it to the Guts, and that is it is found in the Guts as soon
as they are born. The most pure part goes into the hollow vein, and from thence
through the whole body by small branches; this blood has a watery substance
with it, as all blood has, to make it run and keep it from clodding, and this
water in men and women breaths forth by sweat, and so it does in a child, and
is contained in the Lamb-skin, as I told you. This watery substance that is
joined with the blood, when the blood comes to the kidneys, parts from the
blood, and is sent by the kidneys, that make their separation, by the Ureters
to the bladder; nor does the infant piss as he lies in the womb by the Yard,
but the Urine is carried by the Vrachos, a vessel to carry it, which is long
and without blood, to the Allantois, ^or skin that is made to hold the child's
water in, so long as it remains in the womb; this Vrachos or passage goes from
the bottom of the bladder to the Allantois, and has no muscle belongs unto it,
that the child may void the Urine when nature requires, but when the child is
born it has muscles at the root of the bladder, to shut and open that we may
make it not a mere natural, but partly a mixed action, to follow our business,
and make water, not always but when we please; but this is not the course with
the child continually, for the first month the child's Urine comes out through
the passage of the Navel, but in the last month by the Yard* but it never goes
to stool in the womb because it takes no nutriment by the mouth. After forty
five days, the child lives, but moves not, commonly he moves in double the time
he was formed, and is born in thrice the time after he began to move. If the
child be fully formed in forty days, her will move in ninety days, and be born
in the ninth month, but he receives daily more food after the third and fourth
month to the day of his birth. A child born in six months is not perfect and
must die, but one born in seven months is perfect, but one born in the eight
month cannot live, because in the seventh month the child uses all its force
to come out, and if it cannot, it must stay two months longer to recover the
strength lost upon the former attempt that had made it too feeble to get forth
in the eighth month, for if it come not forth at the seventh month it removes
its station and changes it self to some other place in the womb; these two
motions have so weakened it, that it must stay behind a month longer, for if it
come forth before, it is almost impossible for it to live. But Astrologers
determine this business another way, for they affirm, that children born in the
seventh month do live by reason of the completing of the motion of the seven
planets, allowing one month to each of them, beginning with Saturn thus;
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna. Now if the child come not
forth at the seventh month, but stay till the eighth month, the Planets having
ruled every one his month, Saturn begins to rule again, who is an enemy to
conception in all his qualities, and so the child born in the eighth month will
be born dead, or live a very short time; yet other Philosophers maintain, that
Saturn is no enemy to conception, but ruling in the first month* by his
influence and retentive faculty, the child is fixed in the womb; but as the
celestial bodies have their influence upon the terrestial and upon all the
elements, they cause all the changes here below, and are not changed
themselves: for that the Heaven^, and the fixed Stars, and the Planets are
still the same they were in the first creation, and that the twelve Signs and
Planets do rule over the bodies of men and women; and how that Scorpio which is
the house of Mars, rules over the womb and makes it fruitful; and that Leo is a
barren Sign, because Lions seldom bring forth young, and so is Virgo for they
are no maids that conceive with child. But then why should not Taurus be a
barren but a fruitful Sign, when Bulls never bring forth any. But not to
trouble the reader with Astrological dreams. I think it is not the seven
Planets that by this complement of seven make the child to live, but I should
rather impute it to the perfection of the number seven, which is easily proved
by Scripture to be the most perfect number, and will appear so to be by the
Sabbath the seventh day of the week commanded for rest; also the Sabbatical or
every seventh year, and the year of Jubilee seven times seven. So that
Hippocrates was out in three books, where he endeavors to prove that a child
born in the eighth month cannot live; Aristotle, Plutarch, Galen, and others
were of the same judgment. But to oppose them, the writers of Spain, Egypt,
and of Nanas prove the contrary by diverse examples: Hippocrates might be also
misunderstood, whether he meant Solar months that consist of thirty one days a
piece, or very near, being the time the Sun is passing through the Zodiac, or
Lunar months, the time the moon is in any Sign of the twelve, and her stay
there which is but twenty seven days, with some few hours and minutes; besides
all this, the woman, Hippocrates mentions, might not make her reckoning right;
for if you trust to women's account you can be at no certainty, scarce one of a
hundred can tell you true. And as for Saturn, who is so much blamed for playing
the ill Midwife in the eighth month, he is as much commended for his good
office in the first month; but there is no man, or Planet that can always have
every man's good word; yet I am of opinion they do him wrong: but Astrologers
may say what they please without reason, for they never prove any thing but one
dream by another. Aries forsooth is not fruitful because it is the House of
Mars, and is not Scorpio which they praise for fructifying the house of Mars
too? Every Planet is maintained by them to rule the severai parts of man's body,
and that by degrees according to their signs and several Houses they are in. I
have found no Table concerning this business to have any truth in it, wherefore
I have drawn forth one exactly which you may safely rely upon, if upon any
Table at all, and by this Table you shall find that every Planet when he is in
Scorpio, which signifies fruitfulness of the womb, rules those parts of the
body which are under the same Sign: the two great Luminaries, I mean the Sun
and Moon, excepted, which do it by reception; a clear proof that they have a
great influence in framing the child in the womb, and that the two Luminaries
in that work; mingle their influence one with the other.

The Table.
The first month Authors give to Saturn to retain the conception, for he, say
they, fixes the seed. The Second month to Jupiter, and upon him they lay the
foundation of increasing, of sense and reason, but the true foundation is then
laid, when the Seed of both man and woman are well mingled. Mars rules the
third month to give heat and motion to the infant. Any Tooth good Barber. The
Sun governs the fourth month to give the child vital spirits, yet Mars gave it
motion a month before without any spirits at all: I cannot understand there can
be voluntary motion and no vital spirits. Venus in the fifth month adds beauty;
the body we all know is fashioned in thirty or forty days, but beauty must not
come till three months after. As for the sixth month that is Mercuries part, to
distinguish the parts of the child, which Venus it seems could never do with
all her beauty, as if the child were but a Chaos, and a rude mass till the
sixth month, yet it was very beautiful a month before. As for the seventh and
last month in the Planetary revolution, that is the Moons part, to make the
child complete. Here is much ado to small purpose. It is no error I confess to
impute much to the operation of the Planets; But they are much mistaken about
the times that such and such Planets do work, for doubtless the Planets do not
operate by succession as some would have it, so that when one rules, all the
rest are idle and lie still, but they cooperate and work altogether and that
continually. Their motion causes mutation, for the motion of the Sun, says
Potolomy, of the Earth, says Copernicus, distinguishes night from day. The
Sun gives heat to all things here below, the Moon moisture, and our life
consists in heat and moisture. The Sun is the Sire of all living creatures, and
is first active in the seed of both sexes, in the very middle of the seed, and
so he enlivens and moves every part to its proper action. That which Aristotle
speaks of the Heart, the Microcosmical Sun in man's production, is partly true
both in and after conception, to frame vital spirits and cause motion and
action. For as the earth is preserved by the element of water from being
scorched and burnt up by the beams of the Sun, so the Microcosmical Sun, the
Heart; but which is the Moon, the brain or the Liver is hard to say, adds
moisture to this conception from first to last, I mean as long as the child
lives, and thus the radical moisture is preserved. Aristotle thought the brain
by its coldness tempered the heat of the heart, and for my part I think he said
very true, I see no man give a sufficient reason to the contrary. There must
yet be something to balance the heat and moisture of the Sun and Moon, and
that they say is Saturn by his coldness, for he fixes them both in the work of
conception, and the dry bones are his work which are the Pillars and supports
of this frail building. But because there is no Generation but first there must
be corruption, for the corruption of one is the generation of another, whereby
it comes to pass that there is not a total decay in the world: the beams of the
Sun and Moon working upon the seed of both sexes fixed by Saturn are purified
and concocted by the equal temperament of heat and moisture that the Planet
Jupiter lets fall amongst them; but then comes Mars with his heat and dryness,
and what is overplus in the conception, as there must needs be some
superfluities, that Mars draws forth and turns to excrements, and hardens into
Coverings and Coats for the child by his calcining heat, what is bred by
moisture and heat, is fixed by cold and dryness. Mars heats with a fiery
calcination, but Venus she tempers the heat of Mars by her moisture, for she is
a cold moist Planet, and fitly added to abate the courage and violent heat of
warlike Mars: there is a great sympathy between Mars and Venus, and therefore
surely the Poets speak so much of their conjunction, for they are eminent in
this of man's generation.

You may by this find out the causes of sympathy and antipathy in natural
things; and seeing all things are made up of such contrary qualities, what is
generated must in time be corrupted, nothing is eternal in this world; but a
perpetual motion breeds mutation, and not man nor any thing else can continue
in the same stay. Mars and Venus do here play their parts in man's production,
for they are the nearest of the five Planets to the earth, but next to them is
Mercury, of a changeable disposition, and applies himself to the rest of the
Planets with several aspects, and he causes the desire of knowledge in man;
sense and reason also some maintain to be the work of Mercury by his influence
upon the child in the womb. It is not denied but a piercing acute humor
proceeds from him, which is most likely to effect not alone the sensible but
the rational part in man.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Posture the child holds in the Womb, and after what fashion it lies
there.
HEre Physicians are at a stand and are never like to agree about it, not two
in twenty that can set their horses together; the speculation is very curious,
insomuch that the Prophet David ascribes this knowledge as more peculiar to
God, Psalm 139. My reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb: I
will give thanks unto thee for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well; my bones are not hid from
thee, though I be made secretly and fashioned beneath in the earth; thine eyes
did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy Book were all my members
written, which day by day were fashioned, whenas yet there was none of them.

Yet Anatomists have narrowly enquired into this secret Cabinet of nature, and
Hippocrates that great Physician tells us in his Book De natura Pueri, that the
infant lies in the womb with his head, his hands, and his knees bending
downward, toward his feet: so that he is bended round together, his hands
lying upon both his knees, the thumbs of his hands, and his eyes meeting each
with other, and so says Bartholinus the younger of the two. Likewise
Columbus's opinion is, that the child lies round in the womb with the right
arm bended, and the fingers of the right hand lying under the ear of it, above
the neck, the head bowed so low that the chin meets and touches the breast,
and the left arm bowed lying above the breast and the face, and the right elbow
bended serves to underprop the left arm lying upon it; the legs are lying
upwards, and the right leg is lifted so high that the infants thigh touches
its belly, the knees touch the Navel, and the heel touches the left buttock,
and the foot is turned backward and hides the privy members; as for the left
thigh, that touches the belly, and the left leg is lifted up to the breast;
the stomach lies inward. But the expert Spigelius has the fashion of a child
near the birth, whose figure I have here laid down, and I believe it is very
proper, for, as well as I am able to judge by the figure, it is the very same
with that of a child that I had once the chance to see when I was performing my
office of Midwifry.

Here insert the Figure of the Child near its Birth.

anatomical depiction of the child near its birth The Figure Explained:
Being a Dissection of the WOMB, with the usual manner how the CHILD lies
therein near the time of its Birth.

BB. The inner parts of the Chorion extended and branched out.

C. The Amnios extended.

DD. The Membrane of the Womb extended and branched.

E. The Fleshy substance called the Cake or Placenta, which nourishes the
Infant, it is full of Vessels.

F. The Vessels appoint^d for the (...)



This is a general observation, that the Male Child most commonly lies on the
right side in the womb, and the Female on the left side; but Hippocrates lays
it down as the most universal way, to have his hands, knees, and head bending
down toward the feet, his nose betwixt his knees, his hands upon both knees,
and his face between them, each eye touching each thumb; but he is wrapped as he
lies in two mantles or garments, as I said, for a boy has no more; that which
immediately covers him and lies next to his skin, is called Amnios the skirt
or Lamb-skin, it is wonderful soft and thin, and is loose on all sides, only it
grows so fast to the Cake, that it can hardly be parted from it; the use of it
farther is to receive the Child's sweat and Urine, which moisteneth the mouth of
the Matrix also and makes the birth more easy, but the outward coat called
Chorion, is very strong and sinewy, and encloseth the child round about, and
like a soft pillow or bed bears up all the veins and Arteries of the Navel,
which would have been in danger, to have been carried so far, without some soft
bolster to sustain them.

These coats growing fast together seem to be but one coat, or one to be the
beginning of the other, and this altogether taken is called the after-burden or
Secundine, for when the Child is grown strong enough to come out of the womb,
and the time of his birth is at hand, he breaks through these coverings, and
the coverings come forth after the child is born: yet sometimes a piece of the
Amnios covers the child's face and head when he is born and women call it the
caul, and hold it to be a Sign of some great happiness that will befall the
child in the following part of his life, but some think it is neither here nor
there, one born without this caul may be as happy as he that is born with it.
There belong to the child whilst it lies in the womb some things that are
proper for it, some to cloth it, and are only for that time that it lies in
that place, and afterward of no known use, though some have tried to make use
of them in Physic and Surgery, but commonly they cast it away. Some things
again serve to nourish and feed it in the womb, and those are the Navel-vessels
which are four in number, two arteries, one vein, and that vessel which is
called Vrachos, which carries away the child's water in the womb to that skin
that is prepared to hold that water so long as the child stays in the womb and
it is called Allantois. The vein I speak of comes from the Infants Liver, and
when it is passed the navel, it brancheth into two branches; and these again
divide and subdivide, the skin called Chorion supporting the branches of it,
and these are joined to the Veins of the mothers womb, and serve to suck and to
carry the mothers blood from thence to feed the infant with, whilst it stays
there.

This Vein is for that end that the infant may be fed from the first time of
conception until it be born, and then its use is over as to the first
intention, when the child comes to feed it self, for then it has no need to
suck blood from the mother as it did before.

The Arteries are two on each side, and these spring from the branches of the
great artery of the mother that comes from the small Guts and these serve to
carry vital blood to feed the Infant with, when it is first well prepared and
concocted by the mother.

The next part for servile use, is a Nervous production called Vrachos, and it
comes from the bottom of the bladder of the child to its Navel, and it serves,
as the name also implies, to carry the child's Urine to the Allantois or skin
that must retain it. But Anatomists are not all of one mind about it, for some
say there is no such thing to be found in the after-burden of women, but in
beasts it is. Let their ignorance or disputes be what they will to no purpose,
I shall satisfy all by true experience, which cannot be contradicted; he that
reads the Anatomy Lecture of Montpelion in France, Bartholomew Cabrolius a
skilful Surgeon professes that he saw a maid whose Urine came forth at her
Navel, the ordinary passage of her water being obstructed: and Dr. John
Fernelius tells the same story, of a man who was thirty years old, who had a
stopping in the neck of his bladder so that for many months continually his
water came forth by his Navel, yet he found no hurt at all by it but was very
well in health, and Fernelius says, the reason was, because his Navel-string
was not well tied, and the passage of the Vrachos gave way because it was not
well dried. And there is another example that Valchier Coiler lays down of a
German maid of Noremberge, she was thirty four years of age. These distempers
are not frequent, because she must be a very unskilful Midwife that knows not
how to tie and cut the Navel string, yet these accidents are sufficient in such
a dark matter to prove that there is such a thing as a Vrachos or Urine-carrier
from the Navel in both sexes, men as well as women.

These four vessels, as I said, namely one Vein, two Arteries, and the Vrachos,
join together near the Navel, and they are tied by a skin they have from the
Chorion or outward coat of the Secundine, and so they seem to be a Chord or Gut
without any feeling, this is that that all People call the Navel-string, if
woman or man doubt of the truth of this relation, let him only take the child's
Navel-string when it is cut off, and untwist it, and open it and so they shall
be able to satisfy themselves. These Vessels are so joined for to strengthen
them that they will not be broken, nor yet are they entangled together; when
the child is born into the world then these Vessels as they hang without from
the Navel serve for no other use but to be knit fast and to make a strong band
to cover the Navel-hole. Yet experience has found a way to make a Physical use
of them, that what is spared from tying and to be cut off, may not be thrown
away; as for the Secundine and the parts of it, the parts of it are held to be
four. I shall show you a little more concerning the description and use of
them. The first part is that which is commonly called a Sugar cake in Latin
Placenta, and indeed it is very like a cake in the form of it, it is tied both
to the Navel and to the strong outward, sinewy Coat of the Child in the womb
called Chorion; and this is that which makes the greater part of the after
burden or Secundine; the flesh hereof is soft and of a red color, much like
the spleen or milt, tending somewhat to black, there are abundance of small
Veins and Arteries in it, and it should be probable that the chief use it
serves for, is to cloth and keep the infant in the womb. Columbus a very good
Anatomist, yet was much deceived when he affirms the Chorion or strongest and
outward membrane that wraps the Child in the womb to be no skin. It is
undoubtedly known, that the Chorion and Amnios do compass the child round,
above, beneath, and on all sides, but the Allantois that contains the child's
Urine does not so. Columbus he mistook this skin for the Placenta or cake, but
Hippocrates gives this name Secundine as general to the whole, in that book he
has written of women's diseases: for the Chorion is a skin very white, and
thick, light and slippery, and it is laced, and adorned, and branched with a
great many small Veins and Arteries, and we must not think that it serves only
for a covering of the child in the womb, for it serves farther to receive and
to bind fast the roots of the Veins, and Arteries or Navel-Vessels which I
spoke of before.

The Allantois or skin to contain the child's Urine in the womb is denied by
many that there is any such Vessel to be found in man's body, I must confess
reason must help us to discern it, for we can hardly see it or find it. It is
said that in Holland men are wont to be present at their wives labors as well
as women, and that few of the women use stools, but they sit in their Husbands
laps when they are delivered; and they say there is such a a thing. Galen
maintains, that there is as much reason and experience for it in men as in
beasts, good women as well as my self have done, may look for it, and find it
too if they please, a very fine, white, soft, exceeding thin skin, and it lies
just under the cake or Placenta, and there it is tied to the Vrachos from which
it takes in the Urine, and its office is to keep the Urine apart from the
sweat, that the saltness of the Urine may not hurt the tender Infant, which it
must needs do, were it not kept up in a place by its self. The Amnios is the
last and inmost skin, and it is wonderful fine, soft, white, transparent, fed
and interwoven with many Veins and Arteries; this skin not only infolds the
Infant, but also holds the sweat that comes from it whilst it lies in the
womb.

BOOK. III.
CHAP. I.
What it is that hinders Conception and may be the causes that some women are
barren.
BArrenness, as I said, is either by Nature, and that may be when two persons
are joined in marriage, that either both are deficient by reason of ill
conformity of the generative parts, or but one of them; for if both be not
perfect to all respects, as to that work of copulation, they shall never have
any children, and such marriages are not lawful by the Laws of God or man,
because that procreating and bearing children is one of the chief ends of
marriage; but accidental barrenness may happen to them by reason of some
curable infirmity, and when that is removed they may be as fruitful as others
that are naturally so. Physicians and Midwives have tried many ways to discover
when man and wife cannot fructify, where the fault lies, whether the
hinderance be from the man or from his wife, or from both; the best experiment
that ever I could find, was to take some small quantity of Barley, or any other
Corn that will soon grow, and soak part of it in the man's Urine, and part in
the woman's Urine, for a whole day and a night; then take the Corn out of both
their Urines and lay them apart upon some floor, or in parts where it may dry,
and in every morning water them both with their own Urine, and so continue;
that Corn that grow first is the most fruitful, and so is the person whose
Urine was the cause of it; if one or neither part of these grains grow, they
are one or both of them barren: almost all men and women desire to be fruitful
naturally, and it is a kind of self-destroying not to be willing to leave some
succession after us; nay it seems to be more general and to tend to the ruin
of the world, which cannot be continued without fruitfulness in copulation;
Virginity and single life in some cases, is preferred before Matrimony because
it is a singular blessing and gift of God, which all people are not capable of:
But for men or women to mutilate themselves on purpose, or use destructive
means to cause barrenness, besides the means prescribed of Prayer and fasting,
I cannot think to be justifiable, though some persons have presumptuously
ventured upon it. Let the Votaries of the Roman Church look to it, when they
make vows of chastity, which the greatest part of them doubtless are never able
to keep but by using unlawful means. I much doubt whether they pray and fast so
much as they pretend to. The principal cause of barrenness in man or woman
lies in the generative parts, and if children be born defective it is not we
that are Midwives can cure it, what Nature wants, Art can hardly make perfect.
It is not my design so much to speak of unfruitfulness in men, but of women in
relation to their Conception, and Childbearing; and I conceive the chiefest
cause of women's barrenness to be from the womb of them that is ill formed, or
ill disposed, and not as naturally it should be in those that may have
children. There are many infirmities that we women especially are made
unfruitful by, but God has appointed several remedies for most accidents, that
none need to despair of help: true it is that the Scripture relates of a woman
that had an issue of blood twelve years and could find no cure, but had spent
all upon Physicians, yet at last she was cured by touching the hem of Christ's
Garment: it is probable God would not have her cured by man, that her faith
might be confirmed by the surpassing virtue she found in Christ. But before I
come to speak of this, I shall speak of the things that are most proper to
follow in order, namely concerning delivery of women with child.

CHAP. II.
Of great pain and difficulty in Childbearing, with the Signs, and causes, and
cures.
I Have done with that part of Anatomy, that concerns principally us Midwives
to know, that we may be able to help and give directions to such women as send
for us in their extremities, and had we not some competent insight into the
Theory, we could never know how to proceed to practice, that we may be able to
give a handsome account of what we come for.

The accidents and hazards that women lie under when they bring their Children
into the world are not few, hard labor attends most of them, it was that curse
that God laid upon our sex to bring forth in sorrow, that is the general cause
and common to all as we descended from the same great Mother Eve, who first
tasted the forbidden fruit; but the particular causes are diverse according to
several ages, and constitutions, and conformations, or infirmities. For
sometimes Maids are married very young at twelve or fourteen years of age, and
prove so soon with Child, when the passage is very little dilated, but is very
strait and narrow; in such a case the labor in Childbearing must needs be
great for the infant to find passage, and for the Mother to endure it; and it
must of necessity be much greater if some diseases go along with it, which
happens often in those parts, as Pushes, and Pyles, and Aposthumes, that Nature
can hardly give way for the Child to be born. Sometimes the Bladder or near
parts are offended, and the womb is a sufferer by consent, and this will hinder
delivery: And so if her body be bound that she cannot go to stool, the belly
stopped with excrement will make the pain in travel the greater, because the womb
has not room to enlarge it self. So if women be too old as well as too young,
or if they be weak by accident, or naturally of feeble constitutions, if they
be fearful, and cannot well endure pain: be they too lean or too spare bodies,
too gross or too fat or if they be unruly and will not be governed, they will
suffer the greater pain in Childbirth; and it is not without reason maintained
also, that a Boy is sooner and easier brought forth than a Girl; the reasons
are many, but they serve also for the whole time she goes with Child, for women
are lustier that are with Child with Boys, and therefore they will be better
able to run through with it: the weaker they are the greater the pain, because
they are less able to endure it; and the strength of the Child is much, for it
will sooner break forth, than when it is weak though it be of the same sex; if
the Child be large, and the passage strait, as it is always, though not alike
in all, she must look for a great deal of pain when the time of delivery comes;
but none more painful and dangerous than Monstrous births. Sometimes the Child
does not come at the time appointed by Nature, or it offers not it self in such
a posture as that it may find a passage forth, as when the feet first present
themselves to the neck of the womb, either both feet together, or else but one
foot, and both hands upwards, or both knees together, or else more dangerous
yet, lying all upon one side thwart the womb, or else backward or arselong; or
two Children offer themselves at once with their feet first, or one foot and
one head; the postures are so many and strange, that no woman Midwife, nor man
whatsoever has seen them all. We have an example in Scripture of two Children
that Judah got incestuously upon his Daughter in Law Tamar, who offered
themselves to the Birth at the same time, Genesis 38.26. And it came to pass in
the time of her travel, that behold Twins were in her womb, and when she
traveled, one of them put forth his hand, and the Midwife took and b^und upon
his hand a scarlet thread, saying, this came out first; and it came to pass,
that as he drew his hand again back, his brother came out, and she said, how
have thou broken forth? this breach be upon thee, therefore his name was called
Pharez. And after him came his brother that had the Scarlet thread upon his
hand, and his name was called Zerah. We do not read but that she was safely
delivered of them both, and neither Mother nor Child died in the Birth. But we
find an example that will serve to our purpose concerning hard labor, and that
of Rachel, a good woman, wife to the Patriark Jacob, Genesis 35.17, 18. Rachel
traveled, and she had hard labor, and when she was in travel the Midwife said
to her, fear not, thou shall have this Son also, but her soul was departing,
for she died, etc. A single birth, and a Boy, which is easier labor as I said,
than of a Girl, and a young woman who had born one child before; yet
Childbearing is so dangerous that the pain must needs be great, and if any
feel but a little pain it is commonly harlots who are so used to it that they
make little reckoning of it, and are wont to fare better at present than
virtuous persons do, but they will one day give an account for it if they
continue impenitent, and be condemned to a torment of hell which far surpasses
all pains in Child birth, yet these doubtless are the greatest of all pains
women usually undergo upon Earth.

There are many more causes of great pains in travel than have been yet spoken
of; for if a woman miscarry before the due time of Child birth, if she come in
three, or four, or five Months after she has conceived, the womb at that time
is close shut by the course of nature, and must be forced to open, which, if
the Child come at the just time it should come, opens it self, but Abortion
makes the woman that she ofttimes never can conceive again, for she can hardly
ever retain the man's Seed any more, there is such a weakness caused in the
retentive faculty, or else she will hardly ever conceive again. And I have
heard some women complain that have miscarryed; of the great pains they have
endured at such a time, and to profess that they have found less pain in
bearing ten Children than when they have miscarryed with one.

But there is yet something worse than all this, when a Child comes to be dead
in the womb, and is of full age to be born; for then it cannot help the woman
because it stirs not, nor can it be turned that it may be brought forth but
with great difficulty; and if the woman have been long sick her self, the
infant cannot be strong in her womb, if she have by some accident had her
courses come down much, after she is conceived with Child, or had some
extraordinary flux, or looseness, and if the Child do not stir, as a living and
healthful Child will; these are signs of imbecility.

Moreover the Secundine which covers the Child in the womb, of which I gave you
the description before, that it is the Membranes, and Coats, Chorion and
Amnios; and these are ofttimes so strong that they will not break to make
passage for the Child to come forth, and it may cause hard labor; also if the
Secundine be too thin and weak so that it cleaves asunder before the child be
turned, or fitted to come to the birth, for by this means all the moisture and
humors run forth of the womb and leave the afterbirth dry, and the Birth can
hardly pass because the womb is not slippery wanting due moisture. Cold also
shuts the womb closer, and heat causes the woman to faint, if either of them
exceed, so that she must be kept in a due temper or her delivery will not be so
easy as it might be otherwise. Besides these, Diet is to be taken into
consideration; for sower and binding things will straiten the Orifice of the
Matrix; as Quinces, and Chestnuts, and Services, and Medlars, and Pears, all
these and such like cause dolor by contracting the womb; sweet scents cause
hard delivery, because they draw the matrix upward; too much hunger or thirst,
weariness, or watching extraordinarily, and to use cold baths after the fifth
month, or astringent mineral baths of Alum, Salts, or Iron, or of vegetables
that bind much, will produce the like painful effects. The woman may be assured
also by the pains she feels before travel, if they be above the Navel and in
the back only, and not below as they should be in time of delivery, that all is
not so well as not to put her to more than ordinary pain: the signs of easy
Birth are contrary to these; for then the pains bear downwards and not upwards
and so they are not so violent, if she have usually been delivered with ease;
if the woman have cold fainting sweats and she swoon away, and her Pulse beat
out of measure, there is much danger, but if she be strong and lusty, and the
Child tumbles and strives much to come forth, and the pains fall to the bottom
of the belly there is no fear; but know this, all women are most in danger to
miscarry in the first, and second month after they have conceived, for then
the ligaments and all parts of it are weak and easily spoiled and torn in
sunder, and about the end of her going with Child, the Child is heavy and the
womb begins to open, and so causes danger of abortion; but in about four,
five, or six months there is least danger in taking Physic, or letting blood
if the women be oppressed with it, for then she will not easily miscarry. I
told you before, that women are all ready to be brought a bed at seven months
end, for that number of seven is the perfection of all numbers; Pythagoras
says, that seven is the knot that binds Man's life, and Hippocrates, lib. de
Principiis, says, that the time of all men is determined by seven, every
climatericall or seven years breeding a new alteration in the body of Man:
Children cast their Teeth at seven, and Maids courses begin to flow at
fourteen. Seven times seven is of great danger to Man's life; and the great
Climaterical which few escape is seven times nine, which makes sixty three. But
the signs of miscarriage in Childbirth are, if the Child be fallen lower toward
the wombs mouth and so out of its true place; also if the woman have blackish
courses, chiefly if she be far gone with child, she is in danger to lose the
Child; many women have their Terms in the first months, but they are but
watery, pale colored, not fitting for the nourishment of the infant, and they
are also superfluous, so that nature at first sends them out as being useful
neither for nutriment for the Mother nor the Child. I said before, that the
breasts will show danger, and of Twins which is most likely to suffer, if the
right breast flag she will miscarry of a Boy, if the left of a Girl, and the
head shaking as with a Palsy, the body trembling, the face flushing with red,
the eyes pain^d inwardly, if the body be afflicted with wind, there is fear of
miscariage in child birth, but if she travel when she is sick of a sharp
Fever, or some such dangerous disease, seldom does either Mother or the child
escape death: but the ordinary causes of Abortion are, when the womb is too
weak, or corrupted by phlegmatic, slippery, slimy, or watery humors, so that
it cannot retain the Child, the pains of inflammation and Imposthumes hinder
delivery, extreme Costiveness of the body by straining to go to stool forces
the child downwards, and the dung staying in the right gut, when the woman is
bound, oppresses the child; if she fall into a Tenesmus which is a great
desire to go to stool and can do nothing, Hippocrates says, Abortion is like
to follow: Piles and Hemorrhoids cause pain and miscarriage, fat women have
slippery wombs, and lean women have as dry and want nourishment for the child,
neither are fit for childbearing. Bleeding is bad for childing women, unless
there be great need; purging, especially in the first, or second, or about the
last months, and vomiting is far worse; too much fasting starves the child, too
much eating and drinking will stifle it; great heats or baths, or stoves, force
the child to press for a more free air, and great cold is not good for it, all
immoderate exercises, passions, desires, longings, falls, strokes, and all
violent running, leaping, coughing, lifting and such like will bring on this
misfortune.

There being then so many causes, and accidents whereby women usually fall into
such mishaps, 't will be profitable for women with child to observe some good
rules beforehand, that when her time of delivery is at hand, she may more
easily undergo it, and not so soon miscarry. But as there are diverse causes of
miscarriage, so the times are diverse that we are to provide for, either before
or after conception. And before she be conceived with child, let her use means
both by diet and physic to strengthen her womb, and to further conception:
Drink wine that is first well boiled with the mother of Time, for it is a
precious thing. If the womb be too windy, eat ten Juniper berries every
morning, if too moist, the woman must exercise, or sweat in a Stove, or
Hot-house or else take half a dram of Galingal and as much Cinnamon mingled in
powder and drink it in Muskadel every morning, but if she use moderate labor,
perhaps she may have no need of this: but the most frequent cause of barrenness
in young lusty women that are of a choleric complexion, is dryness of the
Matrix, and this is easily known by their great desire of copulation. It is to
be corrected by cooling drinks, and emulsions made of barley-water; blanched
Almonds, white poppy seeds, Cucumbers, Citrons, Melons, and Gours, and to drink
frequently of this; all violent exercise, drinking of wine, or strong waters
must be forborne. The Oil of Nightshade is good to anoint the Reins; some
report, that the seeds of Mandrakes are very useful to cool and purge a hot and
foul womb, such diseases are common to salt complexions, and the dose of half a
dram of Mandrake seed bruised and drunk at once in a cup of white wine cannot
be dangerous, for though the leaves be cold, yet the seeds have a vital spirit
in them to beget their like; cold begets nothing; but heat is an active quality
for production. There are many conjectures concerning those Mandrakes that
Reuben found, and that Rachel so much desired because she was then barren, Genesis
30. it may be she knew that they were fit to cure her barrenness. I grant that
sometimes God is the cause of barrenness, who shuts up the womb, and will not
suffer some women to conceive; we have multitudes of examples in Scripture for
it, Rachel doubtless was not barren of her self, and she was angry with Jacob,
that she said unto him, Give me Children or else I die, but he acknowledges
God to be the chief cause of it, And he said unto her, Am I God, who has
withheld the fruit of the womb from thee? And again he makes the barren women
to keep house and be a joyful mother of Children.

Prayer is then the chief remedy of their barrenness, not neglecting such
natural means, to further conception and to remove impediments that God has
appointed, and those means are chiefly, either by a well ordering of the body
and mind, or else when need requires by taking of Physic. The good order of
the body consists in seasonable moderate eating and drinking of wholesome meats
and drinks, moderate exercise, for idleness is a great enemy to conception, and
that may be the reason that so many City Dames have so few children and if they
have any, they are commonly sickly and short lived; it is not so with Country
women who are always working, they usually have many children, and they are
lusty and strong, for moderate labor raises natural heat, revives the
spirits, helps digestion, opens the pores, and wastes excrements, comforts all
the parts, and strengthens the senses and spirits, help nature in all her
faculties, and that is the way to have strong and many children. As for working
too much, it wastes and destroys nature, but I think few women are guilty of
this fault. Moderate rest refreshes nature, as well as moderate work, but
there is a large difference between moderate rest and extreme idleness, which
dulls both mind and body, and hastens old age; and therefore Lycurgus commanded
all the Spartans to work at least four hours in a day. If women will be fair
let them work, as it is with the body so it is with the mind, the mind must
always be intent upon something that is good, yet this also admits of some
relaxation and rest, or else we are never able to endure; but above all we must
take heed of discontent, for that wonderfully hinders conception, whereas
content of mind dilates the Heart and Arteries and distributes the vital blood
and spirits through the body, which exceedingly recreates nature in all her
operations. Much might be said in Divinity against discontent, sullenness, and
murmuring, which many women, especially, are too much guilty of; for it
troubles the imagination, which should be pure in the act of conception; it
stirs up ill affections and draws away vital heat from the Circumference to the
Center, consuming the vital spirits; Discontent hinders People from what they
desire, denies God's Providence, and shows that our spirits are too much
fastened to the World; yet sometimes the best woman of us all cannot avoid it.
But it is the Physical part that I pretend to: And therefore let such as desire
to have children, look to it that their courses come down orderly, and be well
colored, for then there is no fear but such women will be easy to conceive,
but they must be sparing in the act of Copulation, else one act will destroy
another, like Penelopes web, what she spun in the day, she unreathed at night;
too frequent use makes the womb slippery, and therefore whores have but few
children, and some honest women conceive presently when their Husbands return
after a long absence; women will soonest conceive two or three days after
their Terms be staid; she must avoid all meats and drinks that hinder
conception, as drinking of sweet Wine the Hollanders call Stum, that keeps
women from conceiving, or eating Ivy berries, wearing Saphyre, or Emerald
stones about them; but a Laodstone carried causes concord and fruitfulness,
and so does the heart of a male Quale, for a man, of a female for a woman; to
eat Eringo root, or Ctyrions; take Castorium half a dram in Malmsey, spread a
plaster of Landanum and lay to the womb; take a scruple of Galingal in White
Wine every morning, or a dram of Fox or Boars stones in Sheeps Milk, or a dram
of a Bulls pisle; eat the brains of Sparrows and Pigeons, and the flesh too if
you please.

But to leave this which is concerning means before women have conceived, that
they may more easily prove with child, and retain it their full time, and be
afterward in due time happily delivered of it.

I come in the next place to show what the woman must do that is gone with
child; and first let her drink every morning a good draught of Sage Ale, for
though Sage do provoke the courses yet it will not do so here, but it
strengthens the womb; many things by sundry qualities they abound with, will
cause contrary effects; so Cinnamon a great binder for a looseness, will stop
the courses when they flow too much, and make them come down when they are
stopped. I have proved that Aurum Potabile will stay the bloody flux, yet if a
body be full of ill humors, it will purge sufficiently.

Garden Tansie Ale made and drank like Sage Ale is good if the woman fear to
miscarry; if you bruise the Tansie and spri^^le it with Muskadel and apply it
to her Navel, it is more effectual than a toast of bread that some dip in the
said wine and apply the same way. Let women that are in the said danger always
keep the sirrup of this Tansie by them, it is made with the juice of the herb,
clarified and boiled up with a double weight of sugar, give a spoonful or two
to the laboring woman, it may save many a woman's life, and her child's. Let her
abstain from all binding diet, let her boil Mallows when she comes near the
time of her delivery, or Holyhocks in fair spring water, and with Honey, or
Sugar enough to sweeten it, and add half a spoonful of white salt, for a
Glister. Let her eat meats and drink such things as nourish well, but take heed
of surfeiting or excess, and let her keep her body loose, roasted Apples eat
with Sugar in the morning will do it, or let her take a bolus of Cassia
Fistula, called Pudding pipe, about an hour or less before dinner, there is no
danger in it and it opens gently, she may make a Glister with Chicken or tender
flesh broth, adding course Sugar or Honey, and half a spoonful of white salt,
or let her boil Mercury in her broth to make a suppository with Castle soap or
Lard.

The Eagle stone, I have seen abundance of them every day to be sold in
Humburgh, and they are to be had in London; but they are of four kinds, the
best is brought from Africa, and is taken out of an Eagles nest, for the Eagle
some write, cannot lay her eggs if she want these stones by her; it has the
name from hence, and it is called from the likeness it has with it, a stone
with child: it is but a small stone with another stone that shakes and sounds
within it, it is but of a small body and easily beaten to powder; some say
there is a male Eagle stone and this is a female, I think there is both male
and female in stones and Plants. There is a second and that is called the male
Eagle stone, and it comes from Arabia, it is as hard as a gall, of a dark red
color, and hard to be powdered; the third is brought from Cyprus, not unlike
that of Africa, but it is much bigger. The fourth brought from a place called
Taphimsius, is so denominated also, it is round and white, and another stone
within it, it is found in Rivers, this is held to be the worst, but in some
respects very good, and the best of all the four as it is used for some
occasions: but herein must we needs admire the works of God, for I have proved
it to be true, that this stone hanged about a woman's neck, and so as touch her
skin, when she is with child, will preserve her safe from Abortion, and will
cause her to be safe delivered when the time comes; but since the fall of our
first Parents it is hard to find the virtues and secret qualities of the
creatures. But when I give these and the like rules, I know poor women are not
able to provide in such cases, but their rich neighbors should do it for them;
for I do not question but that all women will be glad to eat and drink well,
and to take all things that may do them good if they knew but what, and can
procure them.

A Bath for a woman great with child, and near her time to be delivered, is
very good for her to sit in, and it may be thus made: Holyhocks leaves and
roots two handfuls; Betony, Mallows, of each one handful; Mugwort, Marjerome,
Mints, Camomile, of each half a handful; Linseed, Pursly, Pursly bruised two
handful; put all in Bags together, and boil all in well-water sufficient for
the woman to sit up to the Navel in; when it is warm to sit in, hold one bag to
her Navel, and let her sit upon another, after this done, warm this Ointment
following and anoint her back, her belly, and secrets. Take Oil of sweet
Almonds, of Lillies, of Violets of each half an ounce, Ducks grease, and Hens
grease, of each 3 drams, Wax a little to make the Ointment; you may add if you
please to this Ointment in compounding it Holyhock roots, Fenugreekseed,
Butter, of each a quarter of an ounce, Quince kernels, Gum traganth, of each an
ounce; stamp the seeds, slice the roots, boil all in Rain water, take out the
mucilage and mix it with the foresaid Oils, then let the pounded Gum traganth,
and hens grease boil so long till the mucilage come to a Salve. Use this
annoynting every day for five or six weeks before she lie in. But before I come
to her time of delivery, I shall speak a word of one frequent cause of women's
miscarriage, and that is their longings, and sometimes of their unnatural and
unreasonable desires after they have conceived with Child: You must know, that
to exceed in the things not natural as Philosopers call eating and drinking,
fullness, emptiness, sleep and watchings, exercise and rest, and too great
intention of the mind, may hasten the birth, and cause abortion, Those women
that use moderation in the foresaid things, are not so often longing for what
they can not easily attain to. Nay sometimes you have Ladies at Court, and
Citizens Wives, and Country women too will long to eat sand and dirt; but their
Children seldom live long that are begun thus. That some women with child will
desire to steal things from others, this is no small argument that the Child
she goes withal will be a Thief; wherefore she must take care to give it good
education, and to bring it up in the fear of God. When nature is thus perverted
in what she desires, she is forced to leave the conception because she cannot
attain what she looks for. This may be prevented by a decoction of vine leaves
frequently taken; it may be provided by preparing a decoction strong of it at
time of the year, and to boil that into a sirrup, to use when need requires,
for it is said to be very proper for this distemper, though I cannot call it a
disease.

There is another cause not far unlike in the effects to women's longings, and
that is sudden fears, for many a woman brings forth a Child with a hare lip,
being suddenly frighted when she conceived by the starting of a Hare, or by
longing after a piece of a Hare; Miraldus thought so and many women cannot deny
it to be true; but he was a notable conceited old Philosopher, and he bethought
himself how he might find but a remedy to do poor women good, and it is this,
which is easily proved; let a woman slit her smock like her husbands shirt, and
that he says upon his knowledge will do it.

BOOK. IV.
CHAP. I.
Rules for Women that are come to their Labor.
ALl Women, Midwives especially should be well seen against this time of
necessity, and all things provided that may cause them to be easily delivered,
and Childbed linen at hand, having first invoked the Divine assistance by whom
we live and move and have our being.

When the Patient feels her Throws coming she should walk easily in her
Chamber, and then again lie down, keep her self warm, rest her self and then
stir again, till she feels the waters coming down and the womb to open; let her
not lie long a bed, yet she may lie sometimes and sleep to strengthen her, and
to abate pain, the Child will be the stronger.

Sometimes the Child is dead in the womb before, and you may know it to be
dead, when the Breasts suddenly hang down slack, Nature makes no Milk or
provision for them, for there is no reason she should.

Secondly, she is cold all the belly over, chiefly the Navel.

Thirdly, Her water is thick, and has a stinking substance that falls to the
bottom.

Fourthly, The Child moves not though you wet your hand in warm water and rub
it over her belly which is a true trial, and it will stir if it be alive.

Fifthly, She dreams of dead people, and is frightened with it.

Sixthly, Her breath smells filthily.

Seventhly, She longs to eat strange things unfit for to eat.

Eighthly, She looks ill favouredly, and sorrowfully.

Ninethly, The Child falls to the side she lies on like a lump of lead: But
Garden Tansey or the Eagle stone will bring the Child to its right place if it
be weak only; but if it be dead there is no way to help that but to hasten
delivery as fast as may be, for it is a misery beyond expression for a woman to
go with a dead child in her womb; as for two Twins to be born that grow
together and one of them dead, the living Child cannot long endure. Virgil
tells us of Mezenius a Tyrant, Dead bodies to the living he did place,
Joining them hand to hand and face to face.


Tenthty, Corrupt stinking humors run from the womb, chiefly if she have had
some ill disease.

Eleventhly, Her eyes look hollow, and her nose strangely, her lips wan and
pale.

Twelfthly, Her breath stinks if the Child have been dead two or three days.

The more of these signs appear at once the more certainty of the death of the
Child. Wherefore presently use medicines to expel it forth, or Manual and
Chirurgical operations with all care to save the Mothers life, for she is in
great danger of death also. The signs of greater danger to her are.

1. If she swoond in labor, or be in a trance and memory be gone. 2. If she be
extreme weak. 3. If she will not answer when you call, or very hardly. 4. If
she has Convulsion fits or shrinking together in travel. 5. If she loath meat.
6. If her pulse beat high and quick.
But if none of these signs appear, there is not so great danger; wherefore
presently hasten by medicaments to provoke the expulsive faculty to cast it
forth, but the physic must be stronger than for a live Child, for a dead Child
makes no way, wanting motion, but a living Child does.

The virtue of the Eagle stone in such cases some commend, but I fear it is but
a fancy of Miraldus, for I never saw it tried.

There must be no delay at such times especially to drive the dead Child forth
before it be corrupted, for then the Mother can scarcely escape, Nature is
sometimes strong and able to call forth a dead Birth without helps, but then
the danger is the more when help wants.

The causes that some Children dye in the womb are.

1. Want of nutriment. 2. Corrupt diet. 3. Gluttony and surfeiting, that choke
the Infant. 4. The Cups are sometimes broken by strokes, sudden fears, much
sneesing, coughing, violent motion, extreme joy, sorrow, or trouble of mind; or
by medicaments that corrode, or bitter drinks the infant loathes, or things that
provoke the courses, or by acute diseases, or lasty by hard labor or difficulty
in bearing of Children. These following Medicaments will, God willing, cause
her to be delivered of the dead Child, and her self escape death by them; make
her sneeze with powder of Pepper and white Hellebore snuft up into her
nostrils, drink a dram of Basil powdered, with white wine, it makes the
delivery easy, etc.
But if it fall out that these medicaments prevail not, as sometimes they do
not, that disease is beyond the power of medicine or ordinary Midwifry, then we
must come to surgery, and the method how to perform it is thus.

1. Lay the woman along upright, the middle of her body lying highest, and let
sufficient help keep her down, that when the Child is drawn forth she rise not
with it.

2. The midwife must first anoint her hands with Oil of white Lillies, Butter,
or Ducks grease, then holding down her fingers let her shut her hand and thrust
it up into the womb to feel how the Child lies, for sometimes it may be drawn
forth with the hand, but if it cannot be done so, then use Surgeons
Instruments, having first found with your hand the posture of the Child.

1. If the head come forward, fasten a hook to one eye of it, or under the
chin, or to the roof of the mouth, or upon one of the shoulders, which of these
you find best, and then draw the Child out gently that you do the woman no hurt.

2. If the feet come first fasten the hook upon the bone above the privy parts,
called os pubis, or by some rib or back bones, or breast bones; then draw it
not forth, but hold the Instrument in your left hand, and then fasten another
hook upon some other part of the Child right against the first, and draw gently
both together that the Child may come equally, moving it from one side to
another until you have drawn it forth altogether; but often guide it with your
forefinger well anointed; if it stick or stop any where, take higher hold
still with your hooks upon the dead child.

3. If but one arm come forth and you cannot well put it back again, the
passage being too narrow, or for some other reason, then tie it with a linen
cloth that it slip not up again, and draw it down gently till the who^e arm
come forth, and then cut it off with a sharp knife from the body, do so also if
both hands appear together, or one leg, or both, if you cannot easily put them
back or take them forth with the body; as you cut the arms from the shoulders,
so you must cut the legs from the thighs, your instruments being very sharp for
quick dispatch; when some parts are cut off from the body, then turn the rest
to draw it out the better.

4. If the child's head be swollen with watery humors, that it be too great to
come forth at so narrow a passage, then put in your hand, holding a sharp
incision knife between your fingers, and so cut open the head, that the humors
contained in it may come forth and the head abate; but if it be too great of it
self and not by disease, you must divide the skull and take it out by pieces
with instruments, for that purpose; if when the head is come out the breast be
too large to follow, then cut that asunder also and bring it forth in pieces,
and so must you do with the whole body, or any parts that are swollen too great.

5. If the child come sidelong, then anoint your hand and her secrets, and
turn the child to the best posture you can; the womb and all the Privities must
also be perfumed with such things as may dilate the place and make it slippery;
there are many medicaments prescribed in this book will be very proper for it,
but when all fails you must cut the child asunder and draw it out by pieces.

6. If the womb be diseased or hurt so that it be ulcerated,' whereby the parts
are made dryer and narrower, it must be dilated by oils, unguents, baths and
fumes, such you will find set down to help delivery for a living child, and you
must use them for a child that is dead.

You must observe in this work, that if by violent drawing forth the child, the
Privy parts and Genitals of the mother be so torn that her Urine and excrements
come out against her will, which often happens in such cases, the cure will be
the same as for the Palsy, and wounds of these parts, with a general
evacuation of her body; also make a Bath of all these herbs and roots
following, or as many as you can get, viz. of the decoction of Bay Leaves,
Sage, Betony, Brank, or some Hogs-Fennel, Origanum, Penni-Royal, Tannicle,
Tormentil, Plantane, Rupture-wort, Mugwort, Mouseeare, Lady-Mantle, St.
John's Wort, Cammomile flowers, Oaken leaves, Camphire-roots. The woman must sit
in this Bath, and presently after her bathing, she must anoint her Privities
and Fundament with this following Unguent.

Take Oil of worms, of Foxes, and of the Lillies of the Valleys, each alike,
boil a young blind Puppey in them, so long that his flesh part from the bones;
then press forth all strongly, and add to the straining, Styrax, Calamint,
Benzoin, Opopanax, Frankincense, Mastick, of each one dram, a little Aqua
Vitae, a little wax; mix them and make of them an Ointment; then let her drink
often of this Potion following.

Take Penniroyal, Balm, Motherwort, Mousear, Ladies Mantle, of each one
handful, Mace one dram, boil all in a Pottle of the best wine, strain it and
drink a little draught morning and evening, or boil nothing but Ladies Mantle
in her broth; drink a pint of it every morning fasting; or if her stomach will
not bear it, take but four or five Ounces at a draught.

The Cesarian Birth is the drawing forth of the child either dead or alive, by
cutting open the Mothers womb, it was so called because Julius Caesar the first
Roman Emperor was so brought into the world. Physicians and Surgeons say it
may be safely done without killing the Mother, by cutting in the Abdomen to
take out the child; but I shall wish no man to do it whilst the Mother is
alive; but if the Mother dye in childbearing, and the child be alive, then you
must keep the woman's Mouth and Privities open that the child may receive air to
breath, or it will be presently stifled, then turn the woman on her left side,
and there cut her open and take out the Infant. This is also a Cesarian Birth,
but it is not like that which is used whilst the Mother is alive. It is used
three ways.

1. The Mother living and the Child dead. 2. The Child living and the Mother
dead. 3. When both are living.
Mathias Cornax relates of a woman that carried a dead Child in her womb four
years, it was cut out of the belly and womb, and the Mother lived and conceived
with child again; she fainted not when her belly and womb were cut, and they
grew well again without stitching; but she had hard labor the second child,
and the Surgeon offered to cut her again, but the women would not suffer it,
so she fainted, but the Surgeon delivered her of a second boy, but this last
was dead.

Roderigo de Carstro says, th(...) child cannot live in the womb when (...)
Mother is dead, if it be not presently taken forth so soon as her breath is
gone, or vital spirits last, because when the Mothers life and motion cease,
the child's must needs cease that depends upon it; but it is an error, for the
child has a Soul and life of its own, and may live a while without the Mother;
but the Midwife must keep the womb open that it be not stifled till the
Surgeon cuts it out; you shall feel the Child leap when the Mother is dead.

Charles Stephen shows how to cut out a dead Child. And Francis Ruset says, a
live Child may be cut out of the womb and both child and Mother do well; it is
possible and sometimes necessary to be done, and it stands by reason, for women
receive sometimes wounds in the Peritoneum and the Muscles of the lower belly,
more dangerous than the Cesarian cut, and yet escape well enough.

A Child may be sometimes very weak, yet not dead, take heed you do not force
delivery in such occasions till you be sure it is time, for children may be
sick and faint in their Mothers bellies. But to prevent danger* burn half a
pint of white wind adding no Spice to it, but half an ounce of Cinnamon and
drink it off: if your Travel and throws come upon you, be sure it is dead; but
if it be but sick and weak, it will refresh it and strengthen it.

If the Child be dead in the womb, the juice of Garden Tansey anointed on the
secrets, or an oil made in Summer with the herbs before it run to flower, and
boiled in oil till the juice be wasted, and set in the Sun a month before you
boil it, is an especial oil for Midwives.

The Eagle-stone held near the privy parts will draw forth the Child, as the
Loadstone draws Iron, but be sure so soon as the Child, and after burden are
come away, that you hold the stone no longer, for fear of danger.

Any of these herbs half a dram in powder drunk in white wind will do much, viz
of Bettony, or Sage, or Pennyroyal, Fetherfew or Centory, Ivy-berries and
leaves, or drink a strong decoction of Master-wort, or of Hysop in hot water,
it soon will bring the dead Child forth; because the afterbirth is corrupted in
such cases and comes forth by pieces, it is fit to drink of the same drink till
all be come away, or the roots of Polipody stamped and warmed laid to the soles
of her feet presently works the effect.

The same things almost all are proper when the Child is living and comes to be
born, but if her Travel be long, the Midwife must refresh her with some
Chickens broth of the Yolk of a potched Egg, with a little bread, or some wine,
or strong water, but moderately taken, and withal to cheer her up with good
words, and stroaking down her belly above her Navel gently with her hand, for
that makes the Child move downwards: She must bid her hold in her breath as
much as she can, for that will cause more force to bring out the Child.

Place here the Picture of all sorts of postures of Children.

anatomical depiction of fetal postures in the womb

Take notice that all women do not keep the same posture in their delivery;
some lie in their beds, being very weak, some sit in a stool or chair, or rest
upon the side of the bed, held by other women that come to the Labor.

If the Woman that lies in be very fat, fleshly, or gross, let her ly
grovelling on the place, for that opens the womb, and thrusts it downwards. The
Midwife must anoint her hands with Oil of Lillies, and the Woman's Secrets, or
with Oil of Almonds, and so with her hands handle and unloose the parts, and
observe how the Child lies, and stirs, and so help as time and occasion
direct. But above all take heed you force not the birth till the time be come,
and the Child come forward and appears ready to come forth.

Now the danger were much to force delivery, because when the woman has
labored sore, if she rest not a while, she will not be able presently to
endure it, her strength being spent before.

Also when you see the after-buthen, then be sure the Birth is at hand; but if
the coats be so strong that they will not break to make way for the Child to
come forth, the Midwife must gently and prudently break and rend it with her
nails, if she can raise it, she may cut a piece of it with a knife or pair of
Sciffers, but beware of the infant.

Then follows presently a flux of humors and the Child after that, but if all
the humors that should make the place slippery chance to run forth by this
means before the child come, the parts within and without must be anointed
with Oil of Almonds or Lillies, and a whole Egg Yelk and white beaten, and
poured into the privy passage to to make it glib, instead of the waters that
are run forth too soon.

If the child have a great head and stick by the way, the Midwife must anoint
the place with Oil as before, and enlarge the part as much as may be; the like
must be done when Twins offer themselves; if the head comes first, the birth is
natural, but if it come any other way, the Midwife must do what she can to
bring it to this posture.

Sometimes the infant comes with the legs forwards, and both arms downwards
close to the sides, this way the Midwife may endeavor to take it forth if it
continue the same posture, by anointing and gently handling the place; but it
is safer if she can, to turn the Legs upward again by the Belly, that the head
may first come down by the back of the womb for that is the natural way.

If the child come forth with both legs and feet first, and the Child's hands
both lifted above the head, this is the worst for danger of all the rest; she
must strive to turn the Child, and if she cannot she must try to bring the
hands down to the sides, and to keep the legs close that it may come forth, or
else to bind the feet as they come out with some linen Cloth, and tenderly to
help delivery, but it will be hard to it.

Sometimes the Child will come forth with one foot, and the other lifted
upward. Then let the woman in Childbed be laid upright on her back and hold up
her thighs and belly, that her head be lower than her body; then let the
Midwife with her hand gently put back the leg that is come forth into the womb
again, and bid the laboring woman to stir and move her self, that by her
stirring the birth may offer it self the head downward, and if so, you may then
set her in a Chair as she was at first that she may have a natural delivery,
but if this cannot be done, then the Midwife with her hand must discreetly
bring forth that leg that is not yet come forth; but beware she put not the
Child's hands that lie close down by its sides out of their place; if the side
of the child come toward the passage, she must turn the child to its natural
posture, but if it come the feet forward and the legs abroad, she must join the
legs and feet together, taking care that she remove not the hands from the
place they should hang down close by the side.

If the infant with one or both the knees first strive to come forth, she must
put them back that both feet may first come down to the passage.

If the child come headlong with one hand thrust out, then she must put the
Child back with her hand upon the shoulders, that the hand may go to its
natural place; if this will not prevail, lay the woman upright with her thighs
and belly upwards that it may pass forth as it should do.

If both hands come out first, she must thrust the Child back by the shoulders
as formerly, till the hands hang down by the sides of the Child.

If it would come forth arsewards, the buttocks first, she must return it back
with her hands till the legs and feet may present themselves, or the head first
if it be possible, which is most natural.

If the infant present both hands and both feet together to come forth so all
at once, she must take the Child carefully by the head and put the legs upward
to take it forth.

If the shoulders come first, she must put it back by the shoulders that the
head may come first.

If it come the breast forward, the legs and hands lying behind, she must take
it by the feet or by the head as she finds it to be most easy, putting the
other part upward that it may come forth right.

If a Woman have two Children at once that come together headlong, she must
take forth one after the other, but beware the other retreat not back in the
mean time; so also must she receive them both that come together with the feet
forward, taking them out one after the other.

If they come one with his feet, the other with the head forward at the same
time, she must receive that first which is most likely, and next the passage,
and that which comes with the feet first, if she can, receive last, taking
heed that they do not hurt one the other.

But let this general rule be observed, still to anoint the passage with Ducks
grease, or Oil of Lillies, or sweet Almonds, or such things as may smooth the
passage and ease woman's labor, and Iikewise when she touches any part of the
infant, this will help much if there should be any aposthume in the place.

Particular helps to delivery, are to lay the woman first all along on her
back, her head a little raised with a Pillow, and a pillow under her back; and
another pillow larger than the other to raise her buttocks and rump; lay her
thighs and knees wide open asunder, her legs must be bowed backwards toward her
buttocks and drawn upwards, her heels and soles of her feet must be fixed
against a board to that purpose laid cross her bed. Some woman must have a
swathe-band above a foot broad four double, this must be put under her Reins,
and two women standing on each side of her must hold it up straight, and these
two persons must lift up the swathe-band equally, just when her throws come, or
else they may do her hurt, and two more of the standers by must lay hold on the
upper part of her shoulders, that she may with more ease force the child forth.
The woman must hold her breath in and strive to be delivered, and the Midwife
must stroke down the birth from above the Navel easily with her hand, for that
will, as I said before, make the Infant move downwards.

CHAP. II.
To know the fit time when the Child is ready to be born.
I Shall desire all Midwives to take heed how they give any thing inwardly to
hasten the Birth, unless they are sure the Birth is at hand, many a child has
been lost for want of this knowledge, and the mother put to more pain than she
would have been. Let not therefore the child be forced out, unless there fall
down an extreme flux of blood, for in such cases it is best to save the Mothers
life to drive forth the Child, but there is great skill and care to be used, or
the woman were as good be set upon the Rack. It is hard to know when the true
time of her travel is near, because many women have great pains many weeks
before the time of delivery comes. But I think the heat of their Reins is the
cause of these pains, but you may know whether the heat of their reins be the
cause of it or not, for if their legs swell their reins are too hot, and the
cure will be to anoint their backs, to cool the reins with Oil of Poppies,
water Lillies, or Violets: women whose reins are hot have always hard labor.
A strong decoction of Plantane leaves and roots in water, then strained and
clarified with the white of an egg, boiled then to a sirrup with its weight in
Sugar is excellent, take a spoonful or two when you please, or drink often the
water and sirrups of Violets and water Lillies.

But if the birth be at hand, you shall know when the skins Amnios and
Allantois, which as I told you serve to hold the sweat and urine of the child
in the womb, and by the means of which skins the infant is also supported in
the Matrix, do break by the violent motion of the child, so that these
excrements fall down to the neck of the womb, Midwives call it the water, and
when that runs forth then the Birth is near; this is the truest sign that is,
for when those skins are broken, the Infant can no longer stay there than a
naked man in a heap of snow.

These waters make the parts slippery and the birth easy, if the child come
presently with them, but if it stay longer till the parts grow dry it will be
hard, therefore Midwives do ill to rend these skins open with their nails to
make way for the water to come, nature will make it come forth only when she
needs it and not before; but if the water breakaway long before the birth, it
is safe to give medicaments to drive the birth after the water. But there are
other signs of the birth approaching, let the Midwife look well on the woman's
belly, for if the upper part of it be sunk and hollow, and the lower part big
and full, it is certain the child is sunk down; again, if the woman's Throws be
quick and strong, coming from the reins downward all along the belly and not
staying at the Navel but falling still lower to the groins, and inwardly to the
bottom of the belly, where lies the inmost neck of the womb this is another
sure sign.

Then let the Midwife, her hand anointed with fresh butter or with oil of
sweet Almonds, put up her hand, and if she feel the inward neck of the womb
open, or any substance to push forward, the child is coming; but if the skin
break and the waters come down, that is the last and surest sign, as I said,
when the waters precede and the child does not follow presently in some
reasonable time, these things following hasten and ease delivery.

Featherfew or Mugwort boiled in white wine, let her drink a draught of the
decoction, the sirrups of either may be made in summer with their juice
clarified and boiled to a sirrup with twice as much Sugar, a spoonful at a time
to be taken; or drink a dram of the powder of Cinnamon in wine or the distilled
water of Mugwort, Betony, Dittander, Peniroyal, or Featherfew.

Tansie bruised and applied, or the Oil of it, as I said, will do it, but the
Eagle stone held to the secrets, draws out both Child and Secundine, hold it to
no longer for it will draw forth Womb and all; Miraldus tells of many more
pretty ways.

But for more assurance take this powder made of Dittany, of Crele,
Penni-royal, Roundbirthwort, of each ten grains, Cinnamon and Saffron of each
twelve grains; beat them to fine powder, and let her drink it in wine, or some
fit liquor, in the decoction or distilled waters of red Pease, Penniroyal,
Parsley, etc.

Outward means is good applied to the secrets; take Agrimony leaves and roots,
but after cast it away lest it draw forth the Matrix; Henbane, Polypody, or
Bistort roots are commended for the same use. But let all hot and violent
remedies be avoided, for many times they bring the woman into a dangerous
Fever.

Also too much fasting, or too much eating breed peril to women in travel, a
woman that is with child cannot so well digest her meat as they can that are
not with child; Midwives therefore must ask how long it was since that the
woman did eat, and what and how much, that upon occasion she may give her
something to strengthen her in her labor if need be, as warm broth, or a
potched egg; and if her delivery be long in doing, give her an ounce of
Cinnamon water to comfort her, or else a dram of Confectio Alkermes at twice in
two spoonfuls of Claret wine, but give her but one of these three things, for
you may soon cast her into a fever by too much hot administrations, and that
may stop her purgations, and breed many mischiefs.

CHAP. III.
What must be done after the woman is delivered.
IT will be profitable when a woman has had sore travel, to wrap her back with
a sheep-skin newly flead off, and let her ly in it, and to lay a Hare-skin,
rubbed over with Hares blood newly prepared, to her belly; let these things be
worn two hours in winter, and but one hour in Summer, for these will close up
the parts too much dilated by the child's birth, and will expel all ill
melancholy blood from those parts.

This being done, swathe the woman with a Napkin about nine inches broad, but
anoint her belly with Oil of St. John's wort, and then raise up the womb with a
linen cloth many times folded, cover her flanks, with a little pillow about a
quarter of a Yard long, then swathe her, beginning a little aabove the hanches,
rather higher than lower, winding it even; lay warm cloths to her breasts,
forbearing those that repulse the milk till longer time, and the body be
settled, lest repercussives should do her hurt, let then her blood be first
settled ten or twelve hours, and that the blood which was cast upon the lungs by
violent labor may return to its own place; but you may ease the pains of her
breasts and comfort them, laying a linen cloth doubled and not warmed, dipped in
Oil of St. John's wort and of Roses, with the yolk and white of an egg beat
together, of each an ounce, with an ounce of Rose Water, and as much of
Plantan-water. Let her not sleep till about four hours after she is delivered,
but first give her some nourishing broth or Cawdle to comfort her; let her eat
no flesh till two days at least be over, for she may not use a full diet after
so great loss of blood suddenly, as she grows stronger she may begin with meats
of easy digestion, as Chickens, or Pullets; she may drink small wines with a
little Saffron, Mace and Cloves infused, equal parts, all tied in a piece of
linen, and let them lie in the wine so close stopped, she may drink a small
draught of it at dinner and supper for the whole month, and besides her
ordinary food she may if she will take nourishing broths and Aleberries; with
bread, butter, and Sugar. Let her drink her Beer or Ale with a tossed, she may
drink a decoction of Liquorish, Raisins of the Sun and a little Cinnamon: if
the child be a boy she must lie in thirty days, if a girl forty days, and
remember that it is the time of her purification that her husband must abstain
from her.

CHAP. IV.
When and how to cut off the Child's navel-string, and what is the Consequent
thereof.
THe Navel-string is twisted that it might be the stronger, and that the blood
by that delay might be better prepared: had the Vein in the Navel, or the
Arteries, or Vrachos that carrye the piss being single, the different postures
of the child in the womb, or the difference of the woman's standing, sitting, or
lying, might press a single vessel, and stop the passage of the blood in the
Vein, spirit in the Arteries, or water in the Vrachos, but the twisting has
prevented that.

The cutting of the Navel-string helps much, for it keeps the blood and spirits
in, after the Child is born. A Midwives skill is seen much if she can perform
this rightly.

The time to do it is so soon as ever the Child is born, whether he bring a
part of the Secundine out with him or not, for sometimes the infant brings a
piece of the Coat Amnios upon his head, and that they name the caul. I know no
wonders this Caul will work, but if you find this Caul on the child's head you
shall miss it in the afterbirth, if it be in the afterbirth it will not be on
his head. The reason why some Children bring it with them on their head into
the world is weakness, and it signifies a short life, and proves seldom
otherwise: But if it come with it or without it, so soon as it is come forth,
consider whether the Child be strong or weak, for by the Navel-string the
Mother gives both vital and natural blood to the Child; wherefore if the Child
be weak, you must gently put back part of the vital and natural blood into the
child's body by the Navel, for that will refresh a weak child; if the child be
strong you need not do it. Many children seem to be born dead that recover by
this means, as very weak children often do; but you must crush out six or
seven drops of blood out of the navel-string, I mean that part which is cut
off, and give it the child by the mouth to drink.

But in what place this string must be cut, Midwives and Physicians can scarce
agree. Elias lib. 4. c. 3. says, it must be cut four fingers breadth from the
body, but what is this, Midwives fingers are not equal, I suppose he means four
inches, for that was the opinion of the Ancients. Miraldus was critical in this
point, and from him some errors were begotten about it in late writers, and
Midwives. Hence it is, if Spigelius speak truth, that Midwives cut the Females
Navel-string shorter than they do the Males, for Boys privy parts must be
longer than women's, but it Females are cut short they say it will make them
modest, and their secrets narrower. Spigelius and others laugh at this conceit,
for if Midwives by cutting their Navel-strings can make their secrets wider,
all women that have hard labor have good reason to complain of their Midwives
for cutting their Navel-string so short. Miraldus bids cut the navel-string
long in both sexes, for that the Instruments of Generation in both follow this
proportion, if women's Navel-strings be cut too short, it will hinder their
Childbearing. Taisner an excellent Astrologer was of this mind. If Nature
framed the child by the Navel-string in the womb, there is no small use of it
afterward. Miraldus says, that if a child's Navel-string be cut off and let
fall to touch the ground, that child shall never hold its water sleeping nor
waking. Also if you carry a piece of a Child's Navel-string about you, you may,
says Miraldus, wear it for a foil in a Ring, you shall never be troubled with
convulsion fits, nor the Falling sickness. I have known all this tried, but he
says farther that it will defend those that carry it from Devils and
Witch-crafts, and one may try this if they please.

If the Child be very weak when it is born, put back gently the natural blood
by the Navel vein, and the vital by the Navel arteries and you shall see the
child almost dead before, to revive like one awaked out of sleep; if the child
seem full of life and spirits, then stop the navel-string near the Navel that
no blood nor vital spirits go back, and that will keep the child strong as it
is; having done this bind the Navel-string with a strong ligature, and cut it
not off too near to the string, least it unloose; you need not fear to bind the
Navel-string very hard, because it feels not, and that piece of the
Navel-string you leave on will fall off in a very few days; for the whole
course of Nature is soon changed in the Child, and another way ordained to feed
it. It is no matter what you cut it off with, so it be sharp to do it neatly.
The reason of so many nodes or knots in the child's Navel-string is, that the
blood and vital spirits might not come in too fast to choke the child, Nature
is a careful Nurse, but Midwives say, these knots in number signify so many
Children, the reddish boys, the whitish Girls; and the long distance between
knot and knot, long time between child and child; but all false, for all women
almost have equal knots, and more knots with their last Children than with the
first.

When the Navel-string is cut off, apply a little Cotton or lint to the place
to keep it warm, least the cold get in, and that it will do, if it be not hard
enough bound, and if it do you cannot think of a greater mischief for the
Child; when part of the Navel-string left is fallen off, Midwives use to burn a
rag to tinder and to apply to the place, a little powder of Bolearmoniack were
better, because it dries; Beasts can lick the Navel-string round enough to
keep out the air, but the curse lies heavier on women for our Grand-Mothers
first sin, than it does upon beasts.

CHAP. V.
What is best to bring away the Secundine, or after-burden.
WOmen are in as great danger if not more, after the young is born, but Beasts
are not; the Caul or inward chamber of the womb the child did lie in, stays
ofttimes long after the child is born, which should presently follow it, and when
it so happens, if it begins especially to corrupt as it will soon do, it
causes grievous pains and ofttimes death, wherefore make have to drive it
forth, but be sure the means you use be very gentle, for the woman is now grown
weak and her womb is quick of feeling but the Secundine is dead, let the quick
then cast forth the dead.

Midwives long nails may do mischief, I grant delays are dangerous, for if it
be retained till it corrupt, it will cause Fevers, Imposthumes, Convulsions,
and such like; know this, that what brings away the birth, will also do good to
call forth the afterbirth; then comfort the woman, let her snuff up a little
white Hellebore in powder to make her sneefe; but put the woman to as little
trouble as you can, for she has endured pain enough already.

The herb Vervain boiled in wine, or a sirrup made with the clarified juice, as
I told you, of Tansie, Featherfew, and mugwort do the same but hardly so
forcibly; Alexanders boiled in wine, and the wine drunk is excellent,
Sweet-Cecely, Angelica roots, or Master-wort do the same so used.

The smoke of Mary-Gold flowers taken in by a Tunnel at the secrets, will
easily bring forth the Secundine though the Midwife have let go her hold.
Mugwort boiled soft in water and applied like a Poultess to the Navel, brings
birth, and afterbirth away, but then remove it least it bring the womb after
all.

Women suffer great pains in Childbirth, because the womb that has many
Nerves and Sinews, by which the body feels, is strait till time of delivery,
and then it is stretched, which causes great pain; and some women have more
pain in bearing than others have, because some women's passages are narrower,
and their wombs more full of Nerves as Anatomy will show; and some think the
reason of the great soreness of some women is, because the share-bone and os
sacrum, or holy-bone do part or give way in hard travel; it was that excellent
Anatomist Doctor Reads opinion, and I believe it to be true; for nature strives
to the utmost in such times. Crook, and Columbus deny this, but the bones are
joined with Cartilages, and Ligaments, which being wet with much moisture may
give way though the bones open not, but in all labor, the Nerves that carrry
feeling through the whole body, are then stretched and cause soreness till they
have rest and be settled again.

CHAP. VI.
Of the great pains and throws some Women suffer after they are delivered.
SOmetimes a woman delivered shall for two of three days after, and now and
then longer, feel such bitter pains in her belly and above the Groin as if she
should be delivered again, these pains are not in the body and bottom of the
womb, but in the Vessels and Ligatures by which the womb hangs, and so it
passes to the sides and belly. The causes are, the cold air that is got in by
her sore travel in childbirth, or sharp or clotted blood sticking in the womb
and pricking for expulsion; these pains make the woman weak and very
troublesome, wherefore you must strive to abate them.

Some women are so hardy, that to hinder this, they will drink cold water so
soon as they are delivered; if the woman be choleric she may do it with a
crust of tosted bread, otherwise it is dangerous.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Chollick some women are afflicted within the time of their travel.
SOme women have the Chollick at the time they should bring forth a child,
which hinders the delivery, and the pains surpass the pain of their travel, you
can scarce distinguish one of these pains from the other, but whilst the
chollick lasts the birth comes not forward at all, the causes of this disease
are, great crudities, and indigestions of the stomach.

Let her take Cinnamon water one ounce, with two ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds
newly drawn; if this do it not, then give her a Glister against wind, or use
fomentations against wind, both are good in this cases. More remedies there are
against wind for Childbed Women, but these may suffice.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Women's Miscarriage or Abortment with the Signs thereof.
THere are abundance of causes whereby women are driven to abort, or miscarry;
and I have spoken somewhat of this before; I shall add a little more to it, the
better to know the signs, causes, and remedies against it; it is the bringing
forth an untimely birth or fruit before it be ripe, if it happen in seven days
after conception it is but an effluxion, but if in fourteen days after it is
an untimely birth; sometimes an untimely birth may be alive, but it is very
seldom that it continues, the elder and stronger it is the more hopes for life;
some women have such large wombs, or slippery, and full of slimy humors that
the Seed cannot be contained but slips away; sometimes it is an imposhumation
causing pain, that hinders retention, but this is rather Effluxion than
abortment. But sometimes the Cups or Veins whereby the conception is tied to
the womb, through which also nourishment passes to it, as we said before; are
stopped with viscous ill humors, and so swollen with wind, or inflamed that the
Cups break and the fruit is lost for want of food; this happens commonly in the
second or third month; so Hippocrates tells us, that this is the certain cause,
if the woman that miscarries be of a good state of body, not too fat nor too
lean. Sometimes the right Gut or the womb may have an Ulcer, or Piles, or the
Bladder or Ureters swollen with the Stone or Strangury, and the pains thereof
may break the Cups; or if she have a Tenasmus, great provocation to stool and
can do nothing, she brings forth her birth by straining downward, and that
before she should. Also great coughs make the woman feeble and consumptive, and
the child consumes within her, great bleeding at the nose, or any great loss of
blood, or too great flux of her courses after conception cause miscarriage, if
they flow in in the third month, else not. Also opening of a vein may cause it
if the woman want blood, but such as are sanguine may let blood after the
fourth month and before the seventh month, but it is good to see there be cause
for it, else not. Violent purging before the fourth month, or after the seventh
causes abortment. But gentle purging between the fourth and the seventh month
are safe. Violent fluxing, or vomiting make women strain too much, especially
lean folks, and may perish the child and break the Cups. If the woman hunger
much for want of food, Nature has nothing to spare to keep the child alive; it
is the same thing with Beasts, and Plants, that want nutriment, and too much
will choke it. Sharp diseases or Pestilential Fevers, Imposthumes in the
breast, Palsies, falling-sicknes kill the child, and sometimes the child is
sick in the womb. Also change of weather may cause miscarriage, says
Hippocrates, when the winter is hot and moist, and the Spring cold and dry that
follows it, the women that conceive in that Spring will easily abort, and if
they do not, they will suffer hard labor in childbirth, and the child will be
weak and short lived; the reason may be because the body is opened and made
more tender by the foregoing heat and moist weather, and then the succeeding
cold makes it more dangerous. Great labor, as dancing, leaping, falls or
bruises, great passions suddenly coming not looked for, may make a woman
miscarry; let all women beware of it for it is more painful than a true
delivery, because one is natural and the other against nature, nature helps the
one but not the other. Signs of Abortment I have spoken of in part, but
commonly about the third and fourth month women's bodies that will swell and
puff up with hardness and stiffness, stitches and windiness running about her,
yet she feels no more weight in her body, this is a sign of miscarriage if it
be not prevented.

There is nothing better after conception, to prevent abortment than good
natural food moderately taken, and to use all things with moderation, to avoid
violent passions, as care, and anger, joy, fear, or whatsoever may too much
stir the blood; use not Phlebotomy without great cause, nor yet violent
purgatives.

If the Matrix be too much dilated, use things that contract and fasten, as
Baths prepared, Unguents, Ointments, Fumes, Odours, Plasters. Some remedies
are specifical against miscarriage, and if the woman be in danger she may use
them, and that in diverse ways that she may take them; as thus, take red Coral
in powder two drams, shavings of Ivory one dram and a half, Mastick half a
dram, and one Nutmeg in powder, give half a dram in a rear egg, etc.

A Powder to hinder Abortion.
Take Bistort-roots one scruple, Kermes berries, Plantane, and Purslain seeds,
of each one dram, Coriander prepared two scruples, Sugar all their weight, take
every day one scruple with a little Maligo Wine if the body be not costive.

For an Ague.
Sometimes women with Child fall into an Ague, then take Barley meal, juice of
Sloes, and of Housleek a sufficient quantity, and with Vinegar make a
Cataplasme, and lay it upon a double cloth, and lay it often upon the woman's
belly, and this will preserve the child from it.

For the wind.
Some are much troubled with wind that will cause them to miscarry, then take
Cumminseed and boil it in water, give her four spoonful of it twice a week with
a dram of Methridate.

Against sudden frights.
Take Mastick, Frankincence, of each one dram, Dragons blood, Myrtles,
Bolearmoniak, Hermes berries, of each half a scruple, make them into powder and
give half a dram at once with White Wine or Chicken broth.

To strengthen the Child in the Womb.
Take two pound of the crumbs of the inward part of white Bread, Cammomile
flowers one handful, Mastick two drams, Cloves half a dram, bruise them and
mingle them well with some Maligo Wine and two ounces of rose Vinegar, boil
them to a Pultiss and lay it on a double Cloth to the Os pubis.

Purgations may not be used unless the belly be bound, and then a gentle
Glister, or some Manna or Cassia about half an ounce is safe to give by Potion.

Slipperiness of the womb is cured by an injection made of Pomegranate pills
boiled in Oil of Lillies. Or take Mastick, Myrtle, Gallia moscala of each half
a dram, mix them with Goose-grease, and Sheeps-Wool, and sew them in a linen
cloth and make a pastry and tie a string to it to pull it out again when you
have put it up into the place.

To strengthen the Matrix.
Take four ounces of the Oil of Nuts, Barrows-grease one ounce and half,
Cypress-nuts, Mastich of each one dram and half, boil them all about five
hours, and with this anoint her belly, womb, and reins of her back.

BOOK. V.
CHAP. I.
How women after Childbirth must be governed.
THere is great differences in Women's constitutions and education; you may kill
one with that which will preserve the other; tender women that are bred
delicately must not be governed after the same manner that hardy Country women
must, for one is commonly weak stomach'd, but the other is strong, if you
should give the weak woman presently after delivery strong broth, or Eggs, or
milk, it will cast her into a Fever, but the other that is strong will bear
it, but tender women must be tenderly fed, and nothing given them that is of
hard digestion nor yet what they have no mind to, provided that what she
desires be not offensive; but for the first week she lies in, let her have
boiled and not roast, Jellies, and Juice of Veal, or Capon, but no mutton Broth
for that may make her Feverish, let her drink barley water, or boil one dram
of Cinnamon in a pint of water, dissolving two ounces of fine Sugar in it, if
she will drink wine, mingle twice as much water or two third parts with it, but
let it be white wine in the morning, and Claret in the afternoon; she may
sometimes drink Almond-milk, but beware of crudities.

Some women when they lie in are still sleeping, some cannot sleep; if she
cannot sleep let her drink barley water well boiled not straining it at all,
but let her forbear it after the first week, lest it nourish too much, and stop
the Liver.

Baths for Childbed Women.
For the first week let her Womb and Privities be bathed with a decoction of
Chervil, a good handful boiled in a good quantity of water, adding to it after
it is boiled one ounce of Honey of Roses, this will draw away the purgations,
and cleanse and heal the parts; and it will take away all inflammations.

For the second week boil Province Roses, put in Bays, Wine, and water, and
with this decoction bath her secrets.

Keep her not too hot, for that weakens nature, and dissolves her strength, nor
too cold, for cold getting in will cause torments, hurt the Nerves, and make
the womb swell* Let her diet be hot, and eat but little at once; some Nurses
persuade them to eat apace because they have lost much blood, but they are
simple that say so, for the blood voided does not weaken but unburden nature,
for if it had not come away, long diseases, or death would have succeeded; some
say Oat-meal Candles are good for them, but oat-meal makes people troubled with
the green sickness by its binding quality, boiling will never make a binding
thing to purge ill humors as they say it does Childbed Women, but purging
things by boiling may sometimes be made to bind.

Let her for three days keep the room dark, for her eyes are weak and light
offends them; let all great noises be forborne, and all unquietness, remembering
to be praising God for her safe delivery.

First then, so soon as she is laid, give her a draught of white wine burnt,
with a dram of Sperma^cety melted in it.

Vervain is an herb that fortifies the womb, it is fit to gather in May and
June; you may dry it in the Sun, and keep it to boil with her meat, and drinks;
you shall profit more in two days with it than in two weeks without it.

If the woman be Feverish, boil Plantane leaves and roots with it, and if she
be not, yet they will do well together, for the heat of the one is tempered by
the coldness of the other. But if her purgations stop, for Plantane take Mother
of time.

If her purgations be clotted, and smell filthily, or the after-burden be not
quite come away, boil Featherfew, Mugwort, Penniroyal, Mother of time in white
wine sweetened with Sugar, let her drink that; new laid eggs and Sugar Penides
are best for her to eat often of moderately, and boil Cinnamon in all her meats
and drinks. Let her talk little, nor stir much, especially if she be weak, for
six or seven days after she is delivered; is a decoction of Mallows with a
little red Sugar is a good Glister if she be too costive Crato prescribes
Coleworts, and Chrysippus makes them to be a universal remedy for all diseases,
but they are too windy for women in Childbed.

After the first week if she be near clean of her purgations, she may use
Comfry and knot-grass in broths to close the womb that has been so much
opened, you may use a little purging with them. Therefore put in some Po^ypody,
of the Oak that is best, leaves and roots both being bruised, the quantities
are almost at your discretion.

Sometimes pains increase after delivery, Hippocrates says, women are most
subject to them after the birth of their first child; some Physicians think it
is by reason of the thinness and sharpness, others from the thickness and
sliminess of the blood, but if you use the former directions these pains may be
prevented. What I said of Vervain before is a good remedy, or else boil an egg
soft, and mingle the yelk with a spoonful of water of Cinnamon and let her
drink it; also a fume of the powder of bay berries cast on a chafing dish of
coals received at her secrets is a great help. And for present ease boil an
equal quantity of tar and barrows grease together; when it boyls put in a
little pigeons dung to it, spread it on a linen cloth and lay it hot to her
reins: she may drink half a dram of Bay Berries in powder in a quarter of a
pint of Muskadel; you may see by this that cold and wind cause these pains.

For Excoriation of the Privities.
Anoint them with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of St. John's- wort, which is
better.

Against the Piles or Hemorrhoids.
Take Polypody bruised and boil it with your drinks or meats.

Let her be let blood in the Saphena vein.

Cut a great hole in an onion, fill the hole with Oil, roast it and stamp it
and lay it warm to the Fundament.

Also take snails without or with shells, I mean either kind, and bruise them
with some Oil, warm it and lay it to the place; Sows or wood-lice called
Hog-lice so bruised with Oil are as effectual.

The Menstrual blood stopped.
We read Levit. 12. that a woman delivered of a Boy, must continue in her
purification thirty three days, and for a girl sixty six days. Hippocrates de
Natura pueri, says, a woman must continue purging her blood forth so long as
the child was forming in the womb that is thirty days for a Male and forty two
days for a Female. Hippocrates rules may be calculated chiefly for his own
Country of Greece, and the Levitical Law most concerns the seed of Abraham; but
this is to be observed though not so precisely to a day by all women after
delivery, for women that give their own children suck, have their purgations
not so long as those that do not. It is not good for a woman presently to
suckle her child because those unclean purgations cannot make good milk, the
first milk is naught, for even the first Milk of a Cow is salt and brackish and
will turn to curds and whey.

You shall know if a woman be well cleansed by her health, for if she be not,
she cannot be well and lusty. I showed you before what herbs will bring her
purgations down. She may if she please take every morning two or three
spoonfuls of Briony water to be had at the Apothecaries; or a dram of the
powder of Gentian roots every morning in a cup of Wine; the roots of Birth-wort
are as good, or take twelve Peony seeds powdered in a little Carduus posset
drink to sweat, and if it cures not do it again three hours after.

Against the too great running down of the Menstrual blood.
This disease seldom troubles women after delivery, if it should, Comfrey, and
Knotgrass are good remedies; or else take Shepherds-pouch boiled in drink and
powdered, or bramble leaves, a dram of either every morning in a little wine,
or a decoction made of the same.

Women when they ly in use to be cost;ive because they keep their bed, and some
foolish Nurses are so bold as to purge them with Sena before nature be settled,
whereby many sad accidents have followed, but neither loosning broths, nor
Prune broths, nor baked Apples are then good, but rather gentle Glisters and
suppositories taken twice a week will prevent mischief and make the breasts
abound with good milk.

CHAP. II.
Of looseness of the Womb.
THis may proceed from sundry causes, as when great fluxes of humors take the
ligaments and relax them; falls or great burdens carried in the womb will
unloosen them; or chiefly when women travel before their time, they overstrein
themselves because the passage is then shut, but unskilful Midwives often make
it so, when they thrust in their hand to pull forth the Secundine, they tear
part of the womb a way with it, for the Secundine is fastened to its bottom;
sometimes they cause the woman to cast out the Secundine by strong vomit, or by
holding Bay salt in her mouth. All causes, except those that come from strong
defluxions which must first be removed, will be cured by the same remedies.

Take Nuts of Cypress, and Galls, and flowers of Pomegranates, and Roch Alum
two ounces of each, Province Roses four ounces, Scarlet, Grains, Rinds of
Pomegranates, and Cassia Rinds of each three ounces, waters of Myrtles, of
Sloes, an ounce and half, Smiths water and wine of each 4 ounces and a half,
then boil two little bags, each a quarter of a yard long, in the said waters in
a new pot, then hold the woman's head and Reins low, and apply these bags first
one and then the other upon the os pubis, and chafe her often. Let her take in
the morning a little Mastick in an egg or some Plantan seed; but if the disease
be long confirmed, then make a Pessary half round and half oval of a thick Cork
with a great hole in the middle for her Terms and ill vapors to come out by,
tie a pack thread to the end of it to pull it out by, cover it over with white
wax that it may not be offensive, dip it in sallet Oil to make it go in, it
must be strait that it may not quickly fall out, when she does her need let her
hold it with her hand, take it not away till her purgations be over; the
thickness of the Cork makes the Matrix mount higher; if she be in Childbed,
the Midwife or Nurse must not suffer the woman to strain, but must keep her
with her hand or finger to keep back the Matrix, laying her head low and her
Reins high with a pillow under her hips.

Women that are troubled with this disease must not lace themselves too strait
for that thrusts down the womb, makes the woman gor-bellied, makes her carry
her Child upon her hips, hinders it from lying as it should in the womb, and
though the woman's wast may be made slender by it, her belly is as great and ill
favored. But sometimes there happens a relaxation of the skin that covers the
right gut, when the head of the child, when the woman begins to travel, falls
downward and draws it low; lacing Childing women too hard is a frequent cause
of it also, for this makes so much wind fly to those parts, that some are
deceived and think it is the head of the child, and the women can hardly stand
or go; let her then be kept soluble and eat Annis, and Coriander seed to
dispell wind, a fume of Sage, Agrimony, Balm, Motherwort, wormwood, Rue,
Marjoram, a little Time, and Cammomile, pick out the stalks, cut the herbs
small, mingled, put them into a maple platter, put hot cinders upon them and
another handful of herbs upon them, cover the platter close with a cloth, and
let her take the fume beneath.

The womb falls out of its place when the ligaments by which it is bound to
other parts of the body are by any means relaxed, it is bound with four
ligaments, two broad membraces and above, that spring from the Peritoneum, and
two round hollow nervous productions below; also it is tied to the great
vessels by veins and Arteries, and to the back by Sinews, but the Bottom of the
womb is not tied, the ligaments being only upon the sides of it; sometimes it
falls forward quite out of the Privities, but whether it can ascend and go
upward is doubted by some; Physicians say it will if sweet things be held to
the nose, if to the secrets it will fall downward; if stinking things be put to
them it flies from them, it may be discerned by their breathing and by some
meats the womb greedily accepts. But Galen says, it is very little that the
womb can go upward, it cannot reach the stomach the ligaments are so strong
that tie it down, and the falling of it down is only by reason of moisture
that relax the ligaments, but that will not make it ascend; and though it be
enlarged in conception, that is not presently but by degrees, nor are the
ligaments always much relaxed in Childbearing; but what is that if it be not,
the womb that may sometimes be felt to move above the woman's navel as round as
a Ball, that round ball is the woman's stones together with that blind Vessel
Fallopius found out, like to the great end of a Trumpet, and is therefore
called Fallopius hi^ Trumpet: the stones they hang, and the body of the Trumpet
is like a pipe that is loose and moving, and when they are full swollen with
vapors and corrupt seed, they stir to and fro, and come up to the navel; and
Riolanus says, this Trumpet and the stones make this great round Ball.
Whasoever fills them with corrupt seed and venomous windy vapors causes this
moving, and from thence suffocation of the womb; when these poisonous vapors
are freely carried by the Nerves, veins, and arteries to all the principal
parts, the Brain, the Heart, the Liver, and the rest, it is not extreme
dangerous, yet it may turn to the strangling of the womb if means be not used;
such as are good against suffocations of the womb, when they seem to be
strangled, but of that afterward. Sometimes it falls as low as the middle of
the thighs, and sometimes near the knees, when the ligaments are loose; it
falls by its own weight, when the Terms are stopped, and the Veins and arteries
are full that go to the womb; it is drawn on one side, if there be a Mole on
one side, the Liver veins too full on the right side, or the spleen on the
left, are the cause of it. But how it comes to be loose is questioned,
H^ppocrates says, great heat, or cold of the feet or loins, violent causes
external, leaping or dancing may do it, for these moisten and soke the
ligaments, if the woman take cold after she is delivered and the Terms flow.
Platerus ascribes it to the loosening of the fibrous neck the adjacent parts by
the weight of the Matrix falling down, but then the ligatures must be loose or
broken; but when a woman is so in a dropsy, it is the salt water that causes
it and that dries more than it moisteneth. The signs to know it are, that the
womb is only fallen down, if there be a little swelling within or without the
privities, like a skin stretched, but if the swelling be like a Goose egg, and
a hole at the bottom, there is then a great pain in the Os sacrum, the bottom
of the belly, the loins and secrets to which the womb is tied, because the
ligaments are relaxed or broken, but the pain will abate soon and the woman can
hardly go, sometimes the vessels breaking blood comes forth, the woman falls
into Convulsions and a Fever, and cannot void her excrements by stool nor
Urine; at first it may be easily helped, but hardly afterward, yet it is not
mortal, though it be filthy and troublesome, if it come with a Fever or
convulsion it is mortal in women with child, if the ligaments be corroded the
danger is the more. The cure is, thrust it up gently before the air change it
or it swell and inflame; first administer a gentle Glister to void the
excrements, then lay the woman on her back, her head downwards, her legs abroad
and thighs lifted up and with your hand thrust it in gently, remove the humors
with a decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Cammomile flowers, Bay berries,
Linseed, and Fenugreek, and anoint it with Oil of Lillies and Hens-greafe; if
it be inflamed, stay a while before you put it up; you may fright it in with a
hot Iron presented near it as if you would burn it, sprinkle on it the powder
of Mastick, Frankincense, and the like; when it is put up, let her ly stretched
out with her legs, and one leg upon the other for eight or ten days, and a
Pessary with a Sponge or Cork dipped in astringent wine, with powder of
Dragons-blood, Bole, or the ointment called the Caunlesses at the Apothecaries;
apply a large cupping glass to the Navel or breasts, or both kidneys; use
astringent Plasters to her back, and fomentations, baths, and injections; if
evil humors cause it to fall out, purge them first away because they sob the
ligaments, and then use drying drinks of Guaicum, China, Forta, use Pessaries
and ligaments, as for the Rupture to keep it in its place, of which see Francis
Rauset; you may use circles or balls in place of Pessaries, made of Briony
roots cut round, or of Virgins wax, with white Rosin and Turpentine when they
are dried, if it gangrene cut it off, or bind it fast that it may fall of it
self. Rauset shows when you may ty it or cut it off without danger: her diet
must be drying and astringent, and astringent red wine to drink. If it incline
to either side, apply Cupping Glasses to the other side, and the Midwife may
anoint her finger with the oil of sweet Almonds, and by degrees draw it to its
place.

CHAP. III.
Of Fevers after Childbearing.
THis disease frequently follows when she is not well purged of her burden or
the purgations are corrupt that stay behind, about the third or fourth day they
will be Feverish also by the turning of the blood from the womb to the breasts
to make milk, but this lasts not long, nor is it any danger: but you may
mistake a putrid Fever for a Fever that comes from the milk; for the humors
may be inflamed from her labor in travel, and corrupt, though they appear not
presently to be so, the next day after she is delivered, but from thence you
must reckon the beginning of the Fever; it is probable then that this Fever
comes from some other cause, especially if her purgings be stopped, it may
proceed from ill humors gathered in her body whilst she went with child, and
are only stirred by her labor; if she be not well purged after travel, the
blood and ill humors retreat to the Liver by the great veins and cause a
putrid Fever, but if they flow too much the Fever may come long after. A
fever from milk will come on the fourth day with pains in the shoulders and
the back, and the terms may flow well; if she kept an ill diet when she was big
with child, the Fever comes from ill humors if it come not from milk, if it
do it will end about eight or ten days after; but if it come from stoppage of
purgations, if she have not a looseness it is very dangerous; if black and ill
savouring matter purge by the womb it is safe. But if the Fever come from ill
humors and the body be Cacochymical it is worse, for that shows the ill
humors are many which nature cannot send forth by the after-purgings, and the
woman is weak already by her travel. Good diet and gentle sweating cure a
Milk-Feaver, but there must be purging and many remedies used for the other, as
bleeding in the foot, cupping of the thighs to provoke the after purgations;
but if the time of after-purging be over, if she be strong then open a vein in
the Arm.

It is dangerous to purge the woman after the seventh day as some do, when she
has a Pleurisy, because of her weakness after travel, and because purges
hinder the after-flux; but you may if the flux of blood cease, if need be, give
a gentle purge with Cassia or Manna, sirrup of roses or Sena or Rhubarb. Too
cold and sharp things are naught, take heed of cold drink, or too much drink;
let her diet by degrees increase from thin to thicker.

If the Fever came from too much milk or terms stopped, open a vein in her foot,
then purge a way the gross humors with sirrup of Maidenhair, Endive of each
one ounce, waters of Succory and Fennel an ounce and half a piece.

Sharp and putrified humors must be purged away with proper medicaments, as
water of Succory, and violets, of each two ounces, sirrup of the same of each
one ounce; cooling Glisters are good here; if there be need you may purge
stronger, but this is not usual. I shall give you one example, take two drams
of Rhubarb in powder, Diagridium four grains, let them infuse all night in
Succory and Anniseed water, two ounces and half of each, and one ounce of
Borrage flower water, warm them gently in the morning, and strain them well
through a linen cloth; add to the strained liquor one ounce of sirrup of
Succory, Cinnnamon water two spoonfuls, drink it warm.

Then after you have well purged away the ill humors you may gently sweat her
to open the passages of the body and womb, you will find examples of them in
the Treatise of the Courses stopped.

CHAP. IV.
Of the looseness of the belly in childbed Women.
THis may be thought a small matter in respect of other infirmities, yet this
is one of the most dangerous distempers and hardest to help in childbed women,
for stop the flux and you will stop her purgations; if you stop it not she will
perish by weakness, nothing almost is safely given. Physicians are at a stand
in such a case, but it is good be wary and moderate in what is done, and it may
be helped God willing. It is not safe to stop it presently, and if it continue
it may cause a Tenesmus or a dysentury, if it come from ill diet let her mend
that, and strengthen her stomach outwardly if yet it continue, use inward
remedies that corroborate the stomach yet hurt not the womb, as Barley water,
Honey and sirrup of roses, cleansing Glisters are good and to temper sharp
choleric humors. But the best way is, to observe what loosenes of the belly
she is molested with, for if it be that they call Diarrhoea, that will only
discharge her body of ill humors, therefore do nothing in that case but let
her take strengthening food, for when nature has eased her self sufficiently
she will stay both the looseness of the belly and her purgations from the womb,
and so no ill accidents will come; but if the flux be Lienteria that the food
comes away with the stools undigested, anoint her belly with Oil of Mastick
and of Myrtles, and give her some sirrup of dried Roses, pulp of Tamarinds, or
some torrified Rhubarb, to purge the belly and not hurt the womb: But if it
rise to a Dysentery called the bloody flux, then so soon as her Terms are
purged away, try to stay it.

1. By purging, as take half a dram of bark of yellow Mirobolans, and of roasted
Rubarb as much, finely powdered, sirrup of Roses, or of Quinces one ounce, pulp
of Cassia or of Tamarinds with Sugar half an ounce, Plantane or Oaken water
four ounces, let her drink this at once.

2. Abstersives are good, as of whey, or barley water, or Glisters of Mallows,
Mellilot, Wheat-bran and Oil of sweet Almonds.

3. Narcoticks to ease great pains, Philonium Romanum two scruples, Rose Water
two ounces, Maligo wine one ounce, give it when she goes to sleep, this is
excellent.

In this case astringents are to be used but not in the former distempers, here
they profit, there they are dangerous.

Of Women's vomiting in Childbed.
Women both before they fall in labor, and at the time of their travel, and
also afterward will sometimes fall to vomiting, and it may proceed from ill
diet or raw humors, or from weakness of their stomach, or consent of the womb
when the after flux is stopped, and sometimes they will vomit blood, for the
blood that is stopped below, runs back to the great veins and liver, and being
much and sharp finds a way into the stomach and so comes forth at the mouth. It
is ill after childbirth; especially the food being vomited there will be
nothing to make milk for the child, and sometimes in hard labor a Vein is
broken and this may cause a dropsy; if ill diet cause vomit, rectify that; if
ill humors, stop it not presently but purge gently; if blood come, pull back
by rubbing, or cupping, or bleeding, opening a Vein in the foot, ham, or ankle,
and urging the after flux. Sometimes the woman is costive, then give her a
suppository, with Castle soap or Honey, and then stay four or five days till
you may give a Glister with Manna or, Cassia. If her Urine run away against her
will, bath her parts with a decoction of Betony, Bays, Sage, Rosemary,
Origanum, Stoechas, and Penni-royal; for her vomiting, give her three spoonfuls
of Cinnamon water, one ounce and half of juice of Quinces, about a spoonful at
a time. The leaves of Rosemary dried and brought into powder, and so drank
about a scruple or half a dram at a time in a cup of wine will stay vomiting;
preserve or Marmalade of Quinces, or Medlars eaten, or Pears or sour Apples do
strengthen the stomach, juice of Barberries, or of Pomegranates or sour
Cherries with Mint water.

There are many topical applications to be made to the pit of the stomach,
which being laid on and so continued prevail much, as thus; take the crum of
the inside of a white loaf, and tossed it and steep it in good Maligo Wine, and
strew it lightly over with the powder of Cloves and Nutmegs, or sirrup of
Roses, Rhubarb, or pulp of Tamarinds, and astringents, of Roses, Plantane,
Coral, Tormentil, if the Terms flow not at all the belly must be kept loose,
but vomiting is so perilous that it ought to be stopped, always provided it be
done no sooner than it is needful and with good provisoes.

CHAP. V.
Of Women's diseases in general.
WHosoever rightly considers it will presently find, that the Female sex are
subject to more diseases by odds than the Male kind are, and therefore it is
reason that great care should be had for the cure of that sex that is the
weaker and most subject to infirmities in some respects above the other.

The Female sex then that it may be more nearly provided for wheresoever it is
deficient must be considered under three several considerations, that is, as
maids, as wives, as widows, and their several distempers that befall them
almost commonly respect either the womb or their breasts or both, and many of
these diseases and distempers are common to all the Female sex, I mean they
sometimes happen to them in any of the foresaid three estates of life, but
Virgins, or Maids diseases that are more peculiar to them, though not
essential, because many of them are incident to the rest, the causes may be the
same; they are that which is called the white Fever, or green Sickness, fits of
the Mother, strangling of the Womb, Rage of the Matrix, extreme Melancholy,
Falling Sickness, Headache, beating of the arteries in the back and sides,
great palpitations of the heart, Hypochondriacal diseases from the Spleen,
stoppings of the Liver, and ill affections of the stomach by consent from the
womb. But that I may make as perfect an enumeration as may be of all diseases
incident to our sex, and give you some of the best remedies that are prescribed
by the most Authentic authors, or what I my self have proved by long
experience.

Know then that there are some diseases that happen about the secrets of women,
as when the mouth of the Matrix is too narrow, or too great, when there is a
Yard in the womb like a man's Yard, when the secrets are full of Pimples or very
rugged, when there are swellings or small excrescenses in the Womb, or else
Warts in the neck of it, or the Piles or Chaps, Ulcers, or Fistulaes, or
Cancers, or Gangreens, and Sphacelus, or Mortification: all these and more that
may be reduced to these heads, are found in the entrance or mouth of the womb.

2. As to the womb it self it is frequently offended with ill distempers, being
either too hot or too cold, too dry, or too moist, and of these are many more
compounded, as too hot and too dry, too moist and too cold; these are all to be
cured by their contraries, cold by heat, moist by driers.

Or the womb is sometimes ill shaped and strange things are found in it, some
women have two wombs, and some again have none at all. Again the vessels of the
womb sometimes will open preternaturally, and blood run forth in abundance,
sometimes the womb swells and grows bigger than it should be: It may be
troubled with a Dropsy, with swelling of its veins from too much blood, also
it may be inflamed, displaced, broken, and it may fall out of the body.

It may be rotten, or else cancerated, and sometimes women's stones and vessels
for generation are diseased.

Further the womb may be troubled with an itch, it may be weak or painful, or
suffer by sympathy and antipathy from sweet or stinking smells.

Moreover the terms sometimes flow too soon, sometimes too late, they are too
many or too few, or are quite stopped that they flow not at all. Sometimes they
fall by drops, and again sometimes they overflow; sometimes they cause pain,
sometimes they are of an evil color and not according to nature; sometimes
they are voided not by the womb but some other way; sometimes strange things
are sent forth by the womb, and sometimes they are troubled with flux of seed
or the whites.

As for women with child they are subject to miscarry, to hard labor, to
disorderly births of their children; sometimes the child is dead in the womb;
sometimes alive, but must be taken forth by cutting or the woman cannot be
delivered; sometimes she is troubled with false conceptions, with ill
formations of the child, with superfetations, another child begot before she is
delivered of her first; with monsters or Moles, and many more such like
infirmities.

And as for women in childbed, sometimes the Secundine or afterbirth will not
follow, their purgations are too few or too many, they are in great pains in
their belly, their privities are rended by hard delivery as far as their
Fundament, also they are inflamed many times and ulcerated and cannot go to
stool but their fundament will fall forth. They have swoonding and epileptick
fits, watching and dotings; their whole body swells, especially their belly,
legs and feet: they are subject to hot sharp Fevers and acute diseases, to
vomiting and costiveness, to fluxes, to incontinence of Urine, that they cannot
hold their water.

As for their breasts that hold the greatest consent with the womb of all the
parts of the body, they are sometimes exceeding great or swelled with milk, or
increased in number, more breasts than there should be by nature; sometimes the
breasts are inflamed and trouble with an Erisipelas, or hard swellings, or
Scirrhus, or full of kernels, or tumors called the Kings evil, or strange
things may be bred in the breasts; besides this some breasts are diseased with
Ulcers, and Fustulaes or Cankers and some have no nipples, or are chopped or
Ulcerated, and sometimes women have breasts will breed no milk to suckle the
child with.

To speak then particularly to all these diseases that belong to our sex might
be thought to be over tedious; however I shall so handle the matter, that I may
not troubled the Reader with impertinences, that I shall apply my self to what
is most needful for the knowledge and cure of them all; but because many
diseases may be refered to the chief in that kind, and the remedies that will
cure one may be sufficient to cure the rest, the judicious Reader may,
according as he shall have occasion, make a more special application.

For it is in vain for any one to make use of what is written if they have no
Judgment in the things they use, in such cases it will be best for them to ask
counsel of others first, till they may attain to some farther insight
themselves, and then no doubt but when they shall meet with sufficient remedies
to cure the greatest distempers, they will be able to make use of the same
without farther direction in the cure of those diseases that are less; not
that I intend to omit any thing that is material in the whole, but that I may
not trouble the Reader with needless repetitions of the same things, as too
many authors do, which breeds tediousness, and can give little or no
satisfaction at all.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Green Sickness, some call it Leucophlegmatia, or Cachexia, an ill habit
or white Fever.
THough both wives and widows are sometimes troubled with this disease, yet it
is more common to maids of ripe years when they are in love and desirous to
keep company with a man.

It comes from obstruction of the vessels of the womb, when the humors corrupt
the whole mass of blood and over cool it, running back into the great veins.
For so soon as Maids are ripe, their courses begin to flow, Nature sending the
menstrual blood from the Liver to the veins about the womb, but those veins and
vessels being very narrow, and not yet open, if the blood be stopped, in that it
cannot break forth, it will corrupt, and runs back again by the passages of the
hollow vein and great Artery, to the Liver, the heart and the Midriff, and
stops the whole body, which may be easily known, for their faces will look
green and pale, and wan; they have trembling of the heart, pains of the head,
short breathing, the arteries in the back, the neck, and the Temples will beat
very thick; and though not always, yet sometimes they will fall into a Fever
by reason of these corrupt humors, but it is always almost attended with
disgust and loathing of good nutriment, and longing after hurtful things.

The whole Body especially the Belly, legs, and thighs swelling with abundance
of naughty humors, the Hypocondriacal parts are extended by reason of the
menstrual blood running back to the greater vessels, and they are much given to
vomit; but all these signs are not found in all persons alike, but they are
common to most, and in some you shall find all these meet. The cause is the
Terms stopped, and from thence ill humors abound, for when the natural channel
is stopped, the blood must needs return to the great vessels whence it came and
choke them up, and so spoil the making of blood, nothing but raw and corrupt
humors are bred which can never turn to good nutriment, or be ever perfectly
joined to the parts of the body; the blood is phlegmatic slimy stuff, and
sometimes it is bred from corrupt meats and drink that maids will long after as
well as Childing women; they will be always eating Oatmeal, scrapings of the
wall, earth, or ashes, or chalk, and will drink Vinegar: they are strangly
affected with an inordinate desire to eat what is not fit for food, whereupon
their natural heat is choked, and their blood turns to water, their body grows
loose and spongy, and they grow lazy, and idle, and will hardly stir; their
pulse beats little and faint, as the vapors fly to several parts so they are
ill affected by them; the heart faints, the head is dried and pained, and the
animal actions are hurt when melancholy is mixed with the humors in too great
proportion.

Sometimes this white Fever turns to a Dropsy, or the liver grows hard like a
stone that it can make no blood; some fall dead suddenly when the heart is
choked by ill vapors and humors flying to it; if the stomach be affected the
danger is the greater, but if only the womb be out of frame the remedy is much
more easy.

The best time of the year to cure Maids and those that are sick of the green
sickness is the spring, and the way of cure is, to heat the cold humors, and
make the thick gross blood thin, and this cannot be all performed by one work,
to draw away and to correct the whole mass of humors at once; wherefore you
must purge gently and often, mingling things that heat and attenuate, as well
as purgatives to carry the ill humors forth.

But first it will be good to give a Glister, and next to open a Vein in the
foot or ancle.

Moreover your physic must vary according to the parts of the body that are
most stopped, and where the humors float.

If they lie above the stomach and mesentery, then vomit, if you find the
Person fitted for vomit; likewise the Spleen, or liver, or womb must be
respected in their several kinds with Physic accordingly; and to save you the
labor of much reading, and me of writing too often of the same thing, under
several heads, you may find what is to be done almost in all respects, where I
write of the stopping of the Terms, and by this rule I wish the Reader to apply
the rest when he stands in need, which he can never well do, as I said, till he
have some judgment in it, and then it will become familiar to him.

But in this Disease principally for the cure respect the Liver, the Spleen,
and the Mesentery, or Midriff, for these are certainly obstructed and must be
opened; and above all be sure to keep a sparing diet and of a thin substance.

Secondly, Let blood in the arm first, though the courses be stopped, and after
that in the foot.

If the disease be of long standing, you shall do well to give a gentle Purge.

First of all to purge the humors; as

Take powdered Rhubarb two drams, Chicory and Anniseed-water three ounces
apiece; Infuse the Rhubarb all night, then let them boil one walm only, and
then strain it forth, and in the strained liquor, dissolve sirrup of Damask
Roses one ounce and a half, Diacassia half an ounce, Cinnamon Water half an
ounce, five grains of Diagridium, let her drink it in the morning.

Next after this use opening decoction of Succory and Madder, and Liquorish
roots of each half an handful, Anniseeds and Fennel seeds two drams a piece, a
handful of Hart's-tongue Leaves, Borrage Flowers and pale Roses of each half a
handful, one ounce of the roots of Sassafras, stoned Rasins one ounce and a
half, and half a dram of Cinnamon.

Boil all these in Fountain water to a third part only wasted, and then
sweeten it with sirrup of Lemmons, she may drink it when she pleases.

An Electuary made of the rob or pulp of Elder-berries boiled to a just
substance four ounces with one ounce of bay berries dried and powdered, two
Nutmegs, and one dram of burnt-hartshorn, half a scruple of Amber, and four
scruples of species Diarrhoda, mingled all with sirrup of Succory one ounce and
half, is excellent.

And finally, it will not be from the purpose, but very useful, to anoint the
womb and Liver with such Ointments, as will open their obstructions, made with
Oil of Spike, and bitter Almonds, of each two ounces; and juyces of Rue and
Mugwort half as much, and Vinegar a fourth part; waste the watery part of these
by boiling: then add Spikenard, Camels Hay, Roots of Asarum, of each one dram;
Cypress half a dram, Wax, sufficient to make an Unguent.

To provoke the Terms.
And that is effected with one ounce of the Five opening Roots, and with
Madder, Elecampane, Orris Roots, Eryngo, dried Citron Pills, and Sarfa, of each
half an ounce; Germander, Mugwort, Agrimony, of each a handful; two small
handfuls of Savin, an ounce of wild Saffron seeds, two ounces of Senna;
Agarick and Mechoachan, of each half an ounce; two Pugils of Stoechas Flowers;
of Galingal, Anniseeds, and Fennel, of each two drams: Boil all this to a Pint
and half, sweeten it for your Pallat, and add to it a spoonful of Cinnamon
water.

Quercetans Pills of Tartar, and Gum Amoniacum are commended; Take of each half
a dram, Spike a scruple, three drops of Cinnamon, Extract of wormwood half a
scruple; take a scruple, or twenty grain weight in pills an hour before Meat:
Conserve of Marigold Flowers is very good. Some, after good preparatives, use
Steel powder to much effect; giving first a vomit, if need require. This
Medicament is good for all stoppings; but, if the Liver be stopped, let the Steel
be finely powdered. Take prepared steel two ounces, Agarick, Species
Diacrocuma, and Darrhodon of each a dram; two drams of Carthamus seed; Cloves
one dram, Carrot seed, and red Dock Roots of each one dram and a half.

If the woman vomit, stop it not: but I approve not so well of steel taken in
substance, as by infusion, I am sure it must needs be the safest way. Take
steel (in powder) three ounces; three pints of white wine, and half an ounce of
Cinnamon, let all stand in the sun eight days, stopped close in a Glass; and
every day stir them well: the Dose is six or eight ounces for twenty days
together, four hours before dinner.

Steel is best used in the Spring and in the Fall: but always you must purge
the body, and exercise both before and after the use of it; and you must change
the form of your Medicaments, or the Patient will loath, and grow weary of it:
Sweating and bathing are good. Either Baths (by Nature, or Art) made with
Mugwort, Calamints, Niss, Danewort, Rosemary, Sage, Bays, Elecampane, Mercury,
Briony Roots, Ivy: When the Obstructions are opened, and the body purged, you
shall see all the former symptoms fly a way: But let the diet be meats of
good digestion, and good nourishment; The air must be temperately hot; all
crude raw things must be avoided: as green fruit, Lettice, Milk, watery Fish:
Wine is good drink: Sage and Cinnamon are good Sauce: put Fennel seed into your
bread, and let it be well leavened: Sleep moderately: Marriage is a Sovereign
Cure for those that cannot abstain. Maids must not be suffered to eat Oatmeal,
or ashes, or such ill trumpery, though they desire them never so much; for they
will breed and increase the disease: but Childbearing women, if they cannot be
persuaded, must have what they long for, or they will miscarry. Exercise, I
say, is always good to keep maids from this disease, and to cure it when it is
come: For idleness causes crudities; but motion makes heat, and helps to
distribute the Nutriment through the body: Yet moderation must be used; for it
will weaken faint people if it be too much.

First, therefore only rub and chafe the body, then by degrees, keep them from
sleeping too much; then increasing the labor, after that the body has been
well cleansed by purging.

Hippocrates commends marriage, as the chiefest remedy for Virgins sick of this
disease, if they once conceive, that is their cure: or as says Johannes
Langius, for this disease never comes till they are fit for Copulation, and
then commonly it hasteneth; and it is cured by opening of Obstructions, and
heating the womb; which nothing can so soon, and well perform, as the Venereal
acts, to make the courses come down; but yet it is very dangerous, when these
people are grown weak with this disease, and their bodies are full of corrupt
humors; therefore they must purge them away before they marry: for I have
known some that have been so far from being cured, that they died by it;
perhaps sooner than they would have done otherwise: It may be good sometimes,
when the disease is new, and the blood plentiful, to open a vein, when the
courses are stopped; and are not changed into some corrupt humor, you may then
b^eed freely; this was the right judgment of Hippocrates: but when the passages
are stopped, and the whole body is chilled with raw slimy humors, there is no
time to bleed then; for that will augment the disease.

And because we are now upon this remedy of marriage, for the cure of this
infirmity; though I touched it before, I shall a little further discuss the
matter: Whether all maids have that sign of their Maidenhead, which by Moses's
Law ( Deuteronomy. 22..) was so much to be taken notice of, and Physicians call Hymen,
which signifies a Membrane, some do absolutely deny, that there is any such
Membrane, or skin; and maintain also, that if any maid have it, it is only the
closeness of the womb, a disease in the Organ, and not common to all: And some
of the best Anatomists maintain the contrary; affirming that there is a skin in
all, or should be, that is wrinkled with Caruncles, like Myrtle-berries, or a
rose half blown: and this makes the difference between maids and wives: but it
is broken at the first encounter with man, and it makes a great alteration; it
is painful, and bleeds when it is broken: but what it is, is not certainly
known. Some think it is a nervous Membrane interwoven with small veins, that
bleed, at the first opening of the Matrix by copulation: Some think they are
four Caruncles fastened together with small Membranes: Some observe a Circle
that is fleshy about the Nimphe, with little dark veins; so that the skin is
rather fleshy than nervous. Doubtless there is a main difference between
Virgins and Wives, as to this very thing, though Anatomists agree not about it;
because, though all have it, yet there may be causes whereby it may be broken
before marriage, as I instanced formerly: and sometimes it is broken by the
Midwives.

Leo Africanus writes that the African custom was, whilst the wedding dinner
was preparing, to shut the married Pair into a room by themselves, and there
was some old woman appointed to stand at the Door to take the bloody sheet from
the Bridegroom, to show it to the Guests; and if no blood appeared, the Bride
was sent home to her friends with disgrace, and the Guests dismissed without
their dinner. But the sign of bleeding perhaps is not so generally sure; it is
not so much ^n maids that are elderly, as when they are very young; bleeding is
an undoubted token of Virginity: But young wenches (that are lascivious) may
lose this, by unchaste actions, though they never knew man; which is not much
inferior, if not worse than the act it self.

Amongst those signs of Maidenhead preserved, is the straightness of the privy
passage; which differs according to several ages, Habit of body, and such like
circumstances: But it can be no infallible sign, because unchaste women will (by
astringent medicaments) so contract the parts, that they will seem to be maids
again; as she did, who being married, used a bath of Comfrey roots.

Some judge (but falsely) that if a maid have milk in her breasts, she has
lost her Maidenhead: There can be no milk, say they, till she has conceived
with child. Maids want both the cause, and the end, for which nature sends
milk; namely to provide food for the child to be born: If a maids courses stop,
they corrupt, and turn not to milk. The Breasts have a natural quality to make
milk; but they do it not, unless convenient matter be sent to make it of; and
that is not done, but for the foresaid end.

Hippocrates, Galen, and there followers say, that maids may have milk in their
breasts: True it is, that it is a certain sign of a living child in the womb,
when there is milk in the Breasts; and of a mole or false conception, when
there is no milk: But that milk that maids sometimes have in their breasts, is
only a watery humor, when their courses are stopped, and cannot get forth of the
womb; then the Breasts by their faculty make whey, but cannot make milk,
without there be first carnal copulation: it is white as milk is; but not so
white, nor so thick: neither comes it to the breasts by the same veins that
that blood that makes Milk comes into them by; for this breeds in the veins of
maids from the superfluous nutriment of their breasts. But to enlarge a little
more concerning that distinction of Maids from Wives, by the straitness of the
Orifice of the womb: There are three diseases in this part of the secrets;
either the mouth is too strait, or too wide, or sometimes there hangs forth the
Yard of a woman. The Privity is too strait when there is not room for the
Foreman to enter; Such persons seldom child, and are delivered with great
danger and difficulty: and if this come from ill conformation, that nature has
made them so, it will be hard to cure them by any thing but copulation, and
bringing forth of Children, to enlarge the place: yet sometimes this straitness
comes from the use of astringent Medicaments, when whores desire to appear to
be maids; sometimes the passage is so close shut up on the outside, that
nothing can come forth but water and the courses, and sometimes neither of
them; because they are attracted not bored nor pierced by nature. This disease
is threefold; it is either in the mouth, neck, or middle body of the womb; it
is never good for copulation, conception, or for the courses to be voided by: I
remember I saw a woman that had the Orifice of the matrix so little, that
nothing but the Urine and her courses could pass through; yet she conceived
with child, no man can suppose how she received the man's seed, but by
attraction of the Matrix: the midwives (when she was to be delivered)
discovered the difficulty; and a Surgeon made the Orifice wider, and she was
by that means happily brought a bed of a Son: The cleft may be also close
stopped, by reason of some wound or Ulcer cured in that part. I saw a woman which
by the French disease, had been much eaten off, yet when it was healed, it grew
close together, that there was no passage left, but for her Urine to come forth
by: either proud flesh, in foul diseases, or else some membrane, by evil
conformation may stop the passage: if it be in the mouth of the secrets, it is
visible, but if in the neck it lies concealed; Unless it be when the courses
are flowing, or Copulation is used, it is not painful: and maids are supposed
to be with child; for the belly tumifies, and the body is discolored. The
terms cannot well come forth of the neck, or the Veins of the womb, if there be
an Ulcer or inflammation, you may know almost whence it came; but if a membrane
stop it, the place is white: if the flesh be red, and you touch it, the touch
will discover it; for a membrane is harder than the Flesh: the hazards are
great for childing women.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Straitness of the womb.
SOmetimes there are superfluous Excrescences, that fill up the Privites, and
are like a tail: I spoke something before of a Clitoris; but these are not
that: for a Clitoris, if it be rubbed, increases pleasure in copulation; but
these fleshy excrescensces are painful to be touched, and hinder copulation:
you may safely cut them off, if you can come at them, because they are
redundant.

There are a kind of wings in a woman's secrets, much like to the comb of a cock
for color and shape; it swells like a Yard sometimes (in lust it is full of
spirits) and is hard and Nervous at the top of it; sometimes it is no less than
the Yard of a man, and some women by it have been suspected to be men; it
proceeds from much nutriment, and frequent handling of the part that is loose.
To cure it you must first discuss, and dry it with easy astringents; then you
may go on to Causticks, that are not dangerous; as burnt Alum, or Egyptiac: if
these cure it not, then you may at last cut it off; or tie it with a horse
hair, or piece of Silk, till it fall off; but cut it not at first for fear of
pain and inflammation: The way to cut it off is taught by Aetius, to cut it
neatly between both the wings, causing as little pain as possible may be; and
after that, foment the place with an astringent Decoction of wine with
Pomegranate Flowers, Cypress nuts, Bay Berries, Roses and Myrtles.

Some call this disease Tentigro, when the Clitoris grows bigger by odds than
it should be; it is a nervous piece of flesh, which is lapt in by the lips of
the Privitie, and it rises in the act of Copulation; it hangs below the Privy
parts, outwardly, like a Gooses Neck in bigness; and it comes from a great Flux
of humors to the part, being loose, and often handled: The way to cure it, is
to purge superfluous humors forth, and to draw blood, and use a spare diet,
and very cooling, and to discuss with the leaves of Mastich tree, or of the
Olive: You may take away the excrescence by Soap, being boiled with Roman
Vitriol; and last of all, add a little Opium, make some Troches, and sprinkle
the powder upon the superfluous part; and after that cut it off, or cure it by
ligature as I said before.

There is another fleshy substance, that sometimes fills up the privy parts,
coming from the mouth of the womb, and hangs oftentimes out, like a Tail; it
may be easier taken a way than the former, by the same means of cutting or
binding with a thread, or silk dipped in sublimate water.

There are many other infirmities that stop up the secrets of the womb, of
which I shall briefly speak; but the straitness of the neck of the womb it self
is not so usual, as too much wideness is; you may know when it is too strait,
by the stopping of the Courses, and a weighty pain bearing down: It proceeds
partly from ill conformation by nature, and partly from Diseases; sometimes it
is so shut up outwardly, that neither the courses can come forth, nor the man's
Yard enter in; that it is not possible for her to be with child: if the
straitness be in the inward Orifice, the courses run back again for want of
passage, and hinder conception. It may happen when the caul lies to that, and
presses upon the neck of the womb; the stone in the bladder, or swelling in
the straight Gut, may cause it also; if the parts cling together naturally,
either soft red flesh, or a white hard skin causes this straitness as I said:
But the straitness of the womb it self, and its vessels are sometimes natural
by ill conformation; and such women will miscarry in the fourth or fifth month,
because the womb that naturally stretches, as the child grows in bigness, and
will after the woman is delivered, shrink as small as it was before, in some
women will not be extended. But if the straitness be in the vessels or neck of
the womb, Conception is hindered, because the terms cannot flow; gross humors,
especially when the womb is cold and weak, stop the mouths of the veins and
arteries.

Inflammations; or Swellings, or Scars, or Schirrhus, or the like, may be the
causes; sometimes thick Phlegm abounds, if there were a wound or the
after-burden were forcibly pulled out.

If the terms be stopped, from an old obstruction of grown humors, the cure is
hard; a Schirrhus, or humor that shuts up the vessels, cannot be cured; what
is to be cured, must first be done by general evacuations of purging and
bleeding; then use means to provoke the terms: if the straitness come from
diseases, first cure them.

Sometimes the Secrets of women are full of pushes, and scurf, with itching and
pain, wheals rising in the neck of the womb: They are of two sorts; some are
gentle, but most commonly they are venomous, and come from the foul disease,
and will impart it unto men: They proceed from burnt, sharp, choleric,
malignant humors, hard to be cured; Sirrup of Fumitory is very good in such
cases: it is also profitable to wash the parts with wine and Saltpeter.

Draw blood, if it abound, first in the arm then in the ancle: but first if be
the disease, drink the decoction of Sarsa and Guaicum for it: Avoid sharp sour
meats; it is good to purge with Confectio Hamech, or Fumitory Pills. You may
see the cause of this great itching, and scurf, if you search with Speculum
Matricis, an instrument Surgeons use. Sometimes Tubercles grow in the neck
of the womb, with heat and pain; you may see them them, for they are a kind of
swelling wrinkles, like the wrinkles you see when you close your Fist, but they
are much larger; and when they swell they make these Tubercles: they are usual
in the secrets, or Fundament, and come from the same malignant causes with the
former; and some are more enflamed, and painful, than others are: The swellings
are hard, proceeding from thick burnt humors; Powder of egg-shels burnt is
good to strew upon them to dry them up, if they be new, and there be no
inflammation; but if they be old and dry, they must first be softened. These
wrinkled skins, when they are many, resemble a bunch of Grapes: Cure the Pox
first, for usually that is the cause, and then they will vanish of themselves.

If Medicaments prevail not, some old authors bid us to use an actual Cautery,
and to burn them away. Likewise Warts in the secrets are bred by a gross dreggy
ill humor, and is of kind with the forementioned; Nature sends it forth to the
outward skin, and there it becomes Warts: if they be hard or blew, and painful,
you may know what they are, the Pox is in them, and hard to be got out, and
they lie where medicines can scarce be applied to them to remain: if you apply
sharp Topicals, use a defensative of Bole and Vinegar, that you hurt not the
parts; and so you may touch them with Aqua fortis, or Spirit of Vitriol, or of
Brimstone. There are several sorts of these Excrescences; there are those that
are called Myrmeciae, leave an Ulcer; if you cut them off Thymi, and Clavi will
grow again, but Acrocordanes leave no root, if they be once cut away.

The powder of Mulberries is good to cure Warts and swellings upon the
privities of men; and I recommend it to women in the same cases: Sometimes
women have the piles of the womb, like those in the Fundament; they proceed
from gross blood, that stays about the ends of these veins, in the neck of the
womb. Women that are thus troubled, look pale, and are very faint and weary:
this may come from too long flowing of the courses, and grow thick, and cannot
get forth; they are painful, and bleed disorderly; you may see them, by the
help of Speculum Matricis, and touch them: The cure is by revulsion of the
humor, by letting blood in the arm or heel; and by gentle applications if the
pains be great: if nature open them and they bleed moderately, you may give way
to nature; but if they run violently, open a vein in the arm two or three
times: Purge with Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and Mirobolans mingled: and use Topicals
to stay the blood. The blind Piles bleed not at all: they are cured by letting
young women bleed freely; and by softening the parts with emollient
Fomentations, to open the veins, and to dispel the humor, made with mallows,
Marshmallows, Cammomile, Melilot, Ma^lius, Linseed, Fenugreek: Anoint where the
pain is, with butter, Populeon and Opium; if the pain be gone, and they bleed
not, use Driers, of Bole, Ceruss, Alum, burnt Lead, washed; if the veins swell
with blood rub them with Fig leaves, or with Horse Leeches applied draw blood
from them.

This disease of the Piles of the womb differs from the flowing of the courses,
because this is with great pain; and moreover the courses run from the veins of
the womb, and the neck of it; but the Piles are caused when the blood runs too
much to the veins that force the secrets, and either stops there, or comes
forth sometimes by them: but some say they differ from the courses, namely, by
their great pain; but that they make the body lean, if they last long, and the
blood comes not forth so orderly, nor at certain periods, and set times, as the
courses use to do: Sometimes the womb has Ulcers bred there, some are cleaner,
and some again are sordid and malignant, all hard to be cured. They proceed
generally from a virulent Gonorrhoea, or the Pox; but they may rise from
inflammation, by abundance of sharp corroding humors, from abortion, or hard
labor, or sharp medicines, or when the afterbirth is pulled out by force, and
rends the womb.

The pain of Ulcers is biting, and increased by sharp injections of Wine or
Honey and Water: All Ulcers are hard to heal there, because of the sensibility,
and moistness of the part: and a light Excoriation, or rawness, will not easily
be healed; but eating Ulcers never are cured there almost but by Death. Ulcers
by Venery, if they be cured, you must first cure the Pox.

All Ulcers in the secrets of Wombs may be cured, if they be not Cankered: and
the way to cure them is by Purging and bleeding, to cleanse and carry away, and
divert the ill Humors and moisture from the Womb: if there be great pain,
abait that with Mucilage of Fleabane, and whites of Eggs; or, an Emulsion of
Poppey Seeds. Warm Injections into the Womb will help forward the Cure, made of
Barley, Lentils, Beans, Lupines, of each one Ounce; and two drams of Orris
Roots; and of Horehound, Wormwood, and a little Centry, of each half a handful,
boil all in Whey, strain it, and put some Honey of Roses, or Hydromel to it.
Turpentine washed and with Liquorish swallowed is good: Drink Sheeps milk
sweetened with Sugar. Fumes made with Frankincence, Myrrh, Mastich, Storax
Calamita, Juniper Gum, received by a Tunnel do good; if there be a jealousy of
the Pox, add a little Cinnabar; but Pessariers with Opium must not be held in
above half an hour, for it will hurt the Nervous part of the womb: a scruple of
the Pills of Bdellium, taken thrice a week, may be profitable: Vulnerary
Potions drunk, and astringent powders cast upon the Ulcers must not be
neglected.

Sometimes there are long Ulcers in the neck of the womb, like to those that
eat the skin, and are seen upon some men's hands and feet in Winter; sometimes
they are bleeding, and sometimes very dry, and have hard lips; much labor and
sharp humors to the parts may cause them: when they are new they are easier
cured; use a good moistening diet: if sharp humors cause them, purge them
forth; and anoint the Ulcers with Oil of Linseed and Roses, mingle them in a
Leaden Mortar with juice of Plantane, and the Yolk of an egg; when they are
hard anoint them with deers Marrow, Turpentine, wax, and oil of Lillies; when
they are malignant they are cured, as Fistulaes are; if they itch, or cause
pain, make an unguent of Populeum and Diapompholix, of either one ounce;
Camphire and Sugar of Lead of each a scruple: when there is a great itching of
the womb it is somewhat like the rage of it, then eat Sallets of cooling herbs,
Purslain and Lettice, with a few Spearmints, and oil and vinegar, or take
conserve of Mints, and of Water-Lilly-Flowers, of each an ounce, Lettice
candied six drams, Agnus Castus seeds one dram and a half, Coral one dram, Rue
feeds half a dram, Camphire a scruple, with sirrup of Purslain, make an
Electuary; anoint the Reins and secrets with Galen's cold ointment, with a
little Camphire.

As for the womb, it is soon ulcerated, because the parts are soft, and easily
corroded, and hard to be healed: and these ulcers are of many kinds; hollow,
crooked or strait; if the sharp humors be retained, it makes furrows and
divides the parts; which growing hard with a callous cannot join again; thus it
degenerates into a Fistula; it may be without pain, with hard Lips, and an ill
matter may be pressed forth of it: sometimes it corrodes the bladder, and then
the water passes forth by the Fistula, and sometimes to the Fundament, and the
Dung is voided by it: An old Fistula is harder to cure than a new; and a
crooked than a straight. General remedies, and a good Diet may do much; and so
leave the rest to nature to evacuate the excrements: but use a palliative cure
by often Sweating, and purging twice a year; and by Injections and
Corroboratives, laying on a Plaster of Diapalma: After general means, if it
be not past hopes, Vulnerary Decoctions may help, made with Centaury, Bettony,
Agrimony, Ladies mantle, and roots of male Fern. Topics are useful, first
dilating the Orifice with Gentian Roots, or with a Sponge; then make soft the
Callous with Turpentine, wax, Deers Marrow, and Oil of Lillies; then consume
the Callous, which may be effected: For a new narrow Fistula use black
Hellebore, Egyptiac, or Vigo 's powder, carried to it with a Pencil, or Aqua
Falopii; or take Rose, and Plantane water, of each six ounces, put to it
Sublimate half a scruple, set it on the Embers in a Glass; but if the Fistula
be toward the womb, beware of violent means: if it be foul, and a hard Callous
withal, a Potential Caustic may do good, but a Horrion is best; all these are
safe in the outward part of the Neck of the womb, but in the inward there is
greater danger.

A Cancer in the womb is seldom seen, nor can it be ever cured: but that which
is in the Neck of the womb I shall instance in; which is either with an Ulcer,
or without an Ulcer.

First, It comes without an Ulcer; but when long Applications are used to them,
hard schirrhus Tumors, which spring from burnt black humors, and Terms, that
flow to those parts, chang to an Ulcerated Cancer.

Secondly, It may be in the part not Ulcerated a long time, and not be known,
because it is without pain; but at length there will be a pain felt in the
Loins, and bottom of the belly: the swelling looks blew, and loathsome; when it
becomes Ulcerated it is worse, and a thin black stinking matter comes from it.
If much blood flow from it, that is dangerous; there will be a soft Fever, red
cheeks and loathing, by reason of the vapors that rise from it: Mild Remedies
are not felt, and strong means make it worse; it grows harder daily: keep it
from being Ulcerated, and you may live long with it. Prepare and Purge
Melancholy, from whence it proceeds: Use no sharp biting applications at first,
but only Diapompholyx, or juice of night shade, Plantane, or Purslane. Give
every day three or four Grains of a Powder made of Oriental Bezoar stone,
Saphyrs and Emeralds, of each one dram, in waters of Scabius, or Carduus; take
also juice of Nightshade six ounces, burnt Lead washed, and Tutty, of each two
drams, Camphire half a dram, put Cray-fish powder to them, and stir them well
in a leaden Mortar.

An Injection made with a Decoction of Cray-fish is held to be very good; and,
make a Cataplasm, and a Fomentation with milk, Saffron, water Lillies,
Mallows, Marshmallowes, Coriander, Dill, and Fleabane seed. Arsenick and
Antimony may be good in some remote parts, but are dangerous here.

There was a Noble woman who had a Cancer Ulcerated upon her Face, and sought
for help from all Countries; at last a Barber cut a Chicken in the midst, and
often applied that, and it drew forth the Ulciome, and the Lady was cured.

The womb is very soon corrupted by the many ill humors that flow thither, and
it will quickly Gangreen, and the parts mortify, the natural heat being
extinguished; by reason of some preceding Ulcer, the neck of the womb will feel
an unusual heat, and a Fever runs through the body; the part is discolored,
and neither beats nor feels any thing; prick it, or cut it, it stinks: The
Party that has it faints and decays, wherefore strengthen the heart with
cordials, and the principal parts, least the Spirits be infected; cut off the
dead flesh: stop the corruption by scrarifying it, if you can come at it, then
wash the part with a decoction of wormwood, and Lupines, and Egyptiac; apply
Epithems to the heart: it is worse when it goes to the womb, than when it comes
outward. Some have had their womb fall out and yet recovered, as to life, which
was before endangered.

The Neck of the womb is only subject to Ulcers: yet sometimes the substance
of the womb has been Ulcerated, and rotted away. A dead child in the womb may
cause an Ulcer; but all these Ulcers and Rottenness are to be dealt withal as I
have showed before: Sometimes there may be a Rupture of the womb; I never saw
but one, and that was exceeding rare, it happens so seldom.

The womb is so fenced by the adjacent parts, that it is seldom wounded, unless
the Surgeon chance to do it, in cutting the Child forth of the womb. There
is more pain in the neck of the womb, than in the bottom of it: but this
cutting may be cured by Injections and Glisters for the womb, made with
Decoctions of round Birthwort, Cypress Nuts, boiled in Steel water, and
Astringent Wine, and a little Honyed water, and Agrimony, Mugwort, Plantane,
Roses, Camels Hay, Horehound; If the pain be great use Anodynes, or Pessaries,
made with a wax candle dipped in Vulnerary Ointments; as, take Turpentine, Goose
Grease, wax and Butter, of each a dram; Bulls Grease, Deers Marrow, Honey, Oil
of Roses, of each two drams.

I have referred all the foresaid Diseases to a natural, or Accidental
straitness of the mouth, or neck, or Middle of the womb; all of them being a
hinderance to Copulation, and making compression upon the parts.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Largeness of the womb.
THe opposite to straitness of the womb is the largeness of the Orifice; and
sometimes more Cuts than nature makes; which may proceed from Copulation, or
bearing of Children.

By the largeness of the Orifice women are often barren, and sometimes the womb
falls out, as Hippocrates says: Nor do men desire to keep company with such
women.

The cure after Childbirth is with Astringent Fomentations, and Bathes of
Alum water; binding things of Bole, Dragons blood, Comfrey Roots, Pomegranat
Flowers, Mastick, Alum, Galls, of each half a dram; powder all, and make a
Pessary to thrust into the Orifice, dipped in this Mixture, made fit with steeled
water.

Hard Labor does sometimes cleave the Privy parts as low as the Fundament;
whereby the rent is made so wide, that it goes from one to the other hole; a
long piece of Alum (put into the cleft) may do good to help it: but if there
be many passages in the secret parts, it comes from an error in nature, there
being a passage open from the womb to the straight gut.

There are some diseases whereby Physicians are much deceived, thinking the
cause to lie in the womb when it does not; for women's stones, and Vessels of
procreation, may be sorely distempered, and their womb be no ways affected
with it.

Gasper Bauhin, and John Scenkius, tell us of a Maid whose belly was swollen, as
though she had been with child; but when she died, she desired to be opened, to
let the World know her innocence, and it did so appear; for her stones were
swelled as big as a white penny Loaf, they were blew, and spungy, and full of
water.

The womb is sometimes subject to great pains, besides what proceed from the
former Diseases, for there is that which is called the Cholick of the womb; it
is usual to women with child, as the Inflammation of the womb is, it binds the
belly and stops the veins; all women are subject to it, either from sharp
humors, or from clotted blood, that sticks to the hollow of the womb; Drinking
of cold drink may cause it: sometimes it comes from retention, and corruption
of the seed, that is cured as fits of the Mother; If it come from ill humors
that lie there, purge them forth; if from windy vapors, that rise from the
heat of ill humors, these must be discussed; give a Glister of Maligo wine,
and Nut oil, of each three ounces, Aquavitae one ounce, oil of Juniper and Rue
distiled, of each two drams, apply it warm: lay on a plaster to the Navel, of
Tacamahac, and Gum Caranna.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Terms.
THe Monthly courses of women are called Terms; in Latin Menstrua: quasi
Monstrua, for it is a Monstrous thing, that no creature but a women has them;
or else Menstrua because they should flow every Month: and they are named
Flowers because Fruit follows; and so would theirs if they came down orderly:
they are then a sign that such people are capable of Children; it preserves
health to have them naturally, but if they be stopped there must be danger; when
the woman is conceived, then they stop: they begin commonly at fourteen years
old, and stop at fifty, or in some at sixty years old; they are of no ill
quality naturally, but are only superfluous moisture and blood the Female sex
abounds withal; for when they stop, the Child in the womb is supplied by them.
The Terms run longer two or three days with some women than with others, for
they differ as women do, according to plenty, or less plenty of good diet, and
labor, or idleness, or the like,

Hippocrates says, They should bleed in all but two pints at most, or a pint
and a half, the color of the blood and substance differs, according to diverse
tempers; it should not be too thick nor too thin, without any ill scent, and of
a red or reddish color: and the veins of the womb are the passages, which are
double from the Spermatick and Hypogastrick double branch on both sides, to
send forth superfluous menstrual blood from all parts of the body; some say
this blood is venomous, and will poison plants it falls upon, discolor a fair
looking glass by the breath of her that has her courses, and comes but near to
breath upon the Glass; that Ivory will be obscured by it: It has strong
qualities indeed, when it is mixed with ill humors. But were the blood
venomous it self, it could not remain a full month in the woman's body, and not
hurt her; nor yet the Infant, after conceprion, for then it flows not forth,
but serves for the child's nutriment.

We read of a child but five years old, that had her monthly purgations: and
John Fernelius writes of one that was but eight years old that had them; but
certainly it must be a sign of a lascivious disposition, and of a short life.

Some women's courses stop not only by conception, but from other causes, that
have come again very well seven or eight months after; but if the terms fail,
there is either want of blood, or the blood is stopped: but some refer the causes
of stopping the courses to four heads, viz. 1. Corruption of the blood. 2. The
Womb ill disposed. 3. An ill habit of the body. 4. An ill Custom of the
faculties of the Body.


1. If the Womb be diseased, as it is subject; to many, the Terms will increase
or diminish wherefore the womb must be first healed.

2. If the blood be corrupt, it will be too thick, or too thin, by reason of
ill humors and ill diet.

3. If the body be ill disposed, it sends not blood as it should do: some
laborious Country Women become so hot and dry like Men, that they have hardly
any courses at all; as the Indian women have none: but they are barren, if they
abound with no more blood than will nourish their body: Blood is wanting either
because it is not made, or not dispersed where it should, but turned to other
uses: Old age, cold constitutions, diseased bodies, will not make blood; also
often bleeding of the great vessels, and much loss of blood, or from Issues to
make diversions, the womb is not supplied with it. Nature spends the blood in
Nurses that give suck for an other end; and fat women wear it on their backs:
sadness and fear not only wast, but cool and corrupt the blood.

4. The weakness of the woman hinders the courses; and so long as she continues
weak, she will have no^.

But all these things must be judged of by the relation of the party, whether
the whole body be diseased, or the defect be in the womb or vessels, or the
mouth of the womb turned aside: If the cause be from heat that her courses are
stopped, her Pulses are swift and strong, she is very thirsty, and her head
aketh, and such like signs of heat: If from cold, the woman is drowsy and
sleepy, her Pulse beats slow, and she is not thirsty, the Veins are ill
colored; if the woman be fat or lean that will discover the inward cause of it.

The usual cause of obstruction of the courses is thick slimy humors; or from
thick gross melancholy blood proceeding from a cold distemper of the Spleen
and Liver, by drinking cold Water, or eating gross Food.

The Roman women drank snow water, and that was the reason (said Galen) that
they had few or no courses; but in such cases they could not be very fruitful:
It will seem strange, that some women are so hot of constitution, that they
have conceived, yet never had their courses at all.

Courses stopped in maids, are not the same as they are in women, for the effects
are very different; Maids, they pr^^^ntly fall into the Green sickness by it,
the blood going to and fro all the body over, and is corrupted: but in women,
it runs to the womb commonly, and causes them to vomit, and to loath their
meat, or to desire unnatural things: You shall know a woman with child, when
her courses are stopped, from a maid that has hers stopped; for the one looks wan
and pale, the other lively and well: the one is sad, the other merry: the
woman's pains daily decrease, and the others increase. This obstruction causes
not only barrenness, but strange distempers, Suffocations, Swellings,
Imposthumes, Coffing, Dropsies, difficulty of breathings, urine suppressed,
Costiveness, Heaviness, Megrims, Vertigoes, Head ach, and many more fearful
distempers.

Hippocrates tells us, that when the terms are long stopped, the Womb is
diseased, with humors, imposthumes, ulcers, barrenness, Leucophlegmacy,
vomiting of blood, heart-ach and headache, if the symptoms be great there is
danger of death.

The best way to move the courses in weak women is to forbear Physic, and to
feed them high with nourishing meats and drinks; this is where the Woman is
lean, her Liver weak, and blood is wanting: but if blood abound, then give a
gentle purge, or Glister: then open a vein to draw down the blood to the womb;
open a vein in the foot, or ancle, one day, one leg, and another day the other,
four or five days before the time the courses should come down: use Frictions
and binding of the parts below, but Issues, and opening of the Emrods do hurt,
and draw from the womb: you may first loosen the belly with Hiera Picra, or
Pills de tribus. For Phlegmatic bodies use the Decoction of Guaicum, or Sarsa
and Sassafras, and Dittany fifteen drops, without sweating: purge with Agarick,
Mechoachan, Turbith, and Scamony; or drink wine of their infusions: if the
stomach be foul, give a vomit, lest it get into the Reins.

Things that provoke the terms are hot and thin: take sirrup of Mugwort, and of
the Fierwort of each one ounce and a half; Oximel simple, one ounce; Water of
Motherwort and Mugwort, of each two ounces; Pennyroyal and Nip, of each one
ounce, sweeten it with a spoonful or two of Cinnamon water, make a Julip to
drink at thrice. Pessaries are not fit for maids, but Fumes may be used; if she
be no maid bruise Mercury, with Centaury Flowers put in a bag for a pessary;
begin with the mildest remedies: if it be from a humor provoke not the Terms,
but cure the swelling. Some say that the blood going to other parts cause the
Terms to stop; but that is contrary, for the blood goes to other parts because
the Terms are stopped.

Authors agree not what veins must be opened to move the Terms; Galen thinks
the Ancle Vein, and most men conclude the same because it opens obstructions,
and brings down the blood; open the ancle twice or thrice rather than the arm
once: but in other diseases of the womb it is best to open a vein in the arm;
as when the Terms are too many, or drop, or the womb, is inflamed.

The Saphaena is opened by putting the foot into warm water, few terms flowing,
if the blood be but little there is no harm: Diseases grow when they are stopped
by thick blood, as the Cancer, Schirrhus, and Erisipelas; when the time is
near, then use the stronger remedies, the weaker having made a way for them.
Tender natures (as maids) must have but gentle remedies; as Aloes one dram and
a half, Agarick and Rhubarb of each one dram; Myrrh, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in
Vinegar, Gentian Root, Asarum, of each half a dram; Cinnamon, Mastich,
Spikenard, of each one scruple; five grains of Saffron, make a mass of the fine
powder, with sirrup of Mugwort, the Dose is one dram.

To urge the terms in strong Country people, take pills Aureae and
Aggregativae, of each two drams; pill Felid and Hiera, of each four scruples,
at the Apothecaries, Diagrid one scruple, Trochischi Alhandal half a scruple,
with a hot pestle mix them well in a Mortar; adding sirrup of Damask Roses, one
dram, oil of Anniseed olympical half a scruple; dissolve Gum Dragant in
Cinnamon water and make your pills, and let the woman take two scruples every
morning, before the time of their terms, at least three or four drops.

Ointments and Plasters are good also, and pessaries made of Aromatical
things, and sweet smells, and Fumes; as take Benzoin, Storax Calamita,
Bdellium, Myrrh, what you please; mingle them, and strew some on a pan of
Coals; the woman so placed, that she may receive the Fume by a Tunnel, broad at
the lower end, to keep the smoke in: but lest these Fumes cause the headache,
keep the Fumes down with clothes about the woman, that they come not to her
head: But do none of these things to women with child, for that will be Murder:
give your remedy a little before the Full Moon, or between the New and the
full, for then blood increases: but never in the Wane of the Moon, for it does
no good: Sometimes, but seldom the courses stop with Fullness; such must, says
Riolanus, be let blood in the arm, but with great care.

CAHP. X.
Of the overflowing of the Courses, or immoderate flux thereof.
THis distemper is contrary to the former, and Women are often subject to it;
and it brings many diseases, great weakness, loss of appetite, ill digestion,
dropsies, consumptions, pains in the back and stomach: Their ordinary
continuance should be two or three days, or four or five days in large
People; but if they stay longer it is not good; or if they come oftener than
once a month, I mean the Moons Month, passing through the twelve Signs, that is
twenty seven days and odd minutes.

The causes may be falls, or blows, or strains, or hard labor, over-heating
the body, which makes the blood thin; or from weakness of the retentive
faculty, and too much strength of the expulsive faculty; or from crude raw
blood and weakness, or too much moisture: and this is the cause that some women
have their terms by drops, and it lasts long, and there is pain, and the
secrets are always wet; if this be not remedied it may cause Ulcers and
inflammations: if the blood be superfluous open the arm, not the ancle vein; if
it be Cacochymical correct it; if too thin and sharp, correct and amend it, by
coolers and thickeners; and strengthen the wombs retentive faculty by
astringents, and convenient driers.

Many think that the overflowing of the Terms and Issues in women are the same
diseases, but that is not so (as Galen shows) for by superfluous Flux of the
courses only blood is voided, but in too great a measure: But women continual
Issues send forth not only blood, at certain periods, but various humors, that
cause the disease.

The Terms exceed when they flow in too great abundance in a short time or
continue longer than is needful; the one resembles violent rain, the other flow
rain, but lasts long: If too much blood be the cause of this superfluity, the
blood will be whitish and pale; if choler, the terms will be yellow: if
melancholy, they will be dark colored, black or blew: it weakeneth all the
body, and the Liver and Bowels; dip a clout in the blood, and dry it in the
shade, and then the color of the blood will show the humor that offends,
and accordingly prepare your remedies: Sometimes it causes swounding,
paleness, the whites or the dropsy: If fullness be the cause, abate blood,
opening the Liver vein of the right arm; repel, cool, bind, bleed little, but
often; use cuppings to the back and breast against the Liver, below the paps,
to draw the blood back; but scarifie not under the breasts: upon the
Salvatella, bind and rub the arms and shoulders. Waters of Plantane, Purslain,
Shepherds Purse, Sorrel, sirrup of Pomegranates or dried Roses, will cool and
thicken the blood; and so will Bole or Sealed Earth, sirrup of Poppeys,
Philonium, Laudanum are good. If it proceed from choler, purge with sirrup of
Roses, of Rhubarb, or with Senna, or Manna: if watery blood be the cause, the
Reins and Liver are out of temper, sweat with China, and strengthen those parts.

Do not force veins, but use astringents; take the juice of ass dung, sirrup of
Myrtles, of each half an ounce, with an ounce of Plantane water, let the woman
drink it and not know what she takes, lest it offend her; or give every day a
dram of the powder of Mulberry tree roots. When you use cold astringents temper
them so, that you stop not the Veins; use no Pessaries, except the Veins of the
neck of the womb be open. Cold and binding fomentations are better than baths,
for baths make the humors to flow more: wash the legs and hips in cold water.
If choler persist, Rhubarb powder in conserve of Roses is very good. The
principal causes of this overflowing are but four; viz. 1. Some of the Vessels
broken, or much dilated. 2. Violent Purgation. 3. Corroding humors. 4. Hard
travel in Childbed, or the Midwives unkind handling.


First, if the Vessels be broken, the blood gusheth forth in heaps; if flowing
of humors they come with much pain, though the quantity be small.

Secondly, All Physicians almost wish to stop the Courses first that are too
many, before you strengthen the woman: But I think it more reasonable to
strengthen nature first, and nature will help her self with less means; but
strengthen the womb, and anoint the reins and back with oils of roses,
Myrtles, Quinces; do this every night, lay a piece of white bays then next your
reins, upon the bare skin, and keep it there constantly; inject the juice of
Plantane into the Matrix, it seldom fails: You may drink of the decoctions of
Sage, Bistort, Tormentil, Knotgrass, Sannicle, Ladies-mantle, Golden Rod,
Loos-strife, Meadow Sweet, Archangel, Solomon's Seal, Purslane, Shepherds Purse,
red Beets, Bark, and Cups of Oak and Acorns: But I commend this medicine; take
of Comfry leaves or roots, of either a handful, and of Clowns all-heal the
same, bruise them and boil them well in Ale, drink a good draught when you
please, and it will help you, though the mouths of the Vessels be open. Too
much blood is lost in the overflowing of the courses when the faculty is hurt
by it, otherwise the quantity cannot be defined. The immediate causes are the
opening of the Vessels; but the mediate cause is the blood offending in
quantity or quality: Vessels are opened three or four ways by Anastomosis,
when the mouths lie open, by reason of a moist distemper, or use of Aloes or
hot and moist bathes; or from Diapedesis, when the blood sweats through the
Coats, this is not often; or from Diaeresis, when the sharpness of the blood
eats the Vessels in sunder; if a Vein be broken, Coral; Bole, Myrtles,
Comfrey, are good to bind; or a Poultis with astringent powders, and the White
of an Egg.

Thirdly, If a vessel be Corroded, a dram of the roots of Dropwort in a new Egg
will glutinate: Sleep long, use little Exercise, nor Venery; but eat little: if
it come from Plethory, use thin Nutriment, beware of hot things, always purge
the humor that offends; vomits are good to stay, and turn the course of the
humors: Take Conserve of Roses two ounces, of water Lillies one ounce,
prepared Pearls and burnt Hartshorn, of each half an ounce, Bole Ammoniac, and
Terra Lemnia, of each half a scruple, make an Electuary with sirrup of
Plantane, this is cooling, thickning and binding: or, in case of great
necessity take a Bolus made with old conserve of Roses, half anounce,
Philonium, or Requies Nicolai two scruples, or but a scruple of each; let them
drink Red Wine, or quench steel in their drink, or bloil Plantane Seeds, Leaves
and Roots in their drink.

CHAP. XI.
Of the whites, or Women's Disease, from corruption of humors.
WHen the body grows Cacochymical, women's Courses stop, or run very slowly, and
sometimes they abound; sometimes all humors run thither to a general vent, and
the whole body is purged by it: but the womb is not affected, it is a filthy
disorderly Evacuation, either before or after Terms, or when they are wholly
stopped, the color of the matter is blew, or green, or reddish, few maids have
this Disease, women with child may: it is not the running of the Reins, for
that is in less quantity, whiter and thicker; nor from nightly Pollutions,
which come only in sleep: The cause is some excrementitious humor, sometimes
like watery blood; a cold and moist womb breeds this Disease: or, when ill
humors are gathered in the whole body, or Liver, Spleen or stomach, they are
sometimes thus voided; nature, that uses to send forth good blood by the
Veins, casts forth these ill humors by them; they are of diverse colors, and
stink: If it be from a Phlegmatic humor, the Ligaments of womb grow loose, and
the womb falls out in time; they make thick veins, and they are discolored in
their Faces, short breathed: if the humor be not bred in the womb, it comes
from a Cacochymy of the whole body; if it comes from the whole, it is more in
quantity; if only from the womb it is but little: Many have had this Disease
long, and found no great hurt, but if it be not timely looked to, it will do
mischief; causing Consumptions, Faintings, and Convulsions, when the matter is
sent to the nerves and brain: You must not stop it suddenly, for so it will
find a way to the nobler parts. Bleeding is naught in this case: general
Evacuations, are good; and after particulars, according to the part diseased:
The whites, and overflowing of the Terms, I say, are a disease; and although
it resemble the Gonorrhaea, it is not the same; it is also like the matter that
flows from an Ulcer of the womb, but it is not that neither.

The running of the Reins in Men and women is not the same disease with this;
the running of the Reins is peculiar to unchaste women: but this flux of whites
may proceed from too much cold, or too much heat, and has many differences, as
will appear by the color of the matter sent forth; the color shows the
peccant humor; it is necessary for the cure to search whether it be a
Gonorrhaea or involuntary flux of seed, which both women and Men are subject
to, and the remedies are the same, as the causes are in both. Women commonly
call the whites the running of the Reins; but the running of the Reins comes
most commonly by unlawful Venery, or excess in that Act: but the proper cause
of the whites is too much superfluity of Excrement; but where those Excrements
are bred, is doubted: Some say these corrupt humors are daily bred in the
principal parts; others say they come only from the womb, and seed Vessels;
others say from the Reins only, and the womb is unaffected: But Galen plainly
shows that the whole body is affected, that discharges it self by the womb,
and therefore weak and phlegmatic women are most subject to have the whites.

To cure it, first observe a strict Diet; cleanse the whole body by purging;
letting blood, Sweating, and Diuretics: in very moist bodies prepare the
humors three or four days before purging; or take Cassia new drawn one ounce,
powder of Rhubarb one dram, with sirrup of water Lillies or Violets, take it in
the morning, dissolve it if you please in Posset drink, and about two hours
after take some broth: You may take every day a dram of Trochisci de Carabe in
Plantane water; or give every second or third day a dram of the filings of
Ivory in Plantane water, a very laudable remedy. To sweat also is very laudable
in this case; take Barley water three ounces, strong wine two ounces, drink it
warm, and lie and sweat. Conserve of Roses and Marmalade are excellent for this
disease: drink the decoction of Comfrey Roots, with Sugar to sweeten it, take
three or four ounces at a draught. Whites of eggs well beaten with red Rose
water, and made with Cotton, or Linen into a Pessary, and put into the Matrix,
with a string tied to it to pull it out again, is commended.

Diuretics are not good till the body be well purged, and then they will help
to drive the ill humor forth by Urine: Lest the womb be hurt with ill humors,
inject a decoction of Barley, Honey of Roses, and Whey with sirrup of dried
Roses. Take red Saunders two drams and a half, yellow Saunders one dram and a
half, red Roses three drams, fine Bole a quarter of an ounce, burnt Ivory one
dram, Camphire half a dram, white wax one ounce, oil of Roses three ounces,
make an ointment: This is not only good to anoint the secrets, but also to cool
the inflammation of the kidneys, stomach, liver and other parts.

If the Whites flow from abundance of superfluous humors, you may evacuate
much through the skin, by often rubbing of the body; but first rub easily, and
by degrees rub harder.

Of these fluxes there are three sorts, White, Red and Yellow; and there are
three kinds of Archangel, or dead nettles to cure them.

First, The White Flowers helps the Whites.

Secondly, The Red are to cure the Reds.

Thirdly, And the Yellow flux is cured by the Yellow.

Half a dram of Myrrh taken every morning is commended, or a scruple of the
Pills of Amber at night, often taken; they will not work till the day following.

Many strange things are oftentimes voided by the Womb, as Stones and Gravel:
And Peter Diversas relates, that a Nun voided a rugged Stone as large as a
Ducks Egg, and it gave her some ease; but there followed a foul flux of the
Womb that killed her.

Garcias Lopius saw a Woman that voided many Ascarides, or small Worms by the
Womb.

When stinking humors are cast forth this way it is not properly the Running of
the reins, for both sexes have sometimes the running of the reins; and most
commonly it comes from a foul course, whereas the whites come from a corruption
of humors: if it run white, and little; and thick, it is a true flux of seed;
if it last, and be not cured, it brings a wasting of body and barrenness: if
this flux grow from fullness of Seed, the buds of willow steept in wine will
cure it: if it proceed from a weak retention, give half a scruple of Castor,
and use astringents to the reins and belly; or a bath of willow leaves,
Myrtles, Quinces, each two handfuls; red Roses, Rosemary each a handful,
Cypress Nuts three ounces; let her sit up to the Navel, apply bags of the same
to the Loins and Privities, and anoint the said parts with oil of Mastich and
Myrtles.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Swelling and Puffing up of the Body, especially the Belly and the Feet
of Women after Delivery.
THe Swellings of these parts in Childbed women come either from a depraved
diet, used whilst they were with child, or else drinking immoderately after
delivery; or it may be they abound with more blood than the child could retain,
or her purgations discharge; wherefore it grows crude, being superfluous, and
makes the parts swell so much that a man would think she were with child again:
but it commonly cease if the woman be once largely purged, either by the womb
or the belly. Hysterical, or Mother fomentations are sufficient oftentimes to
cure it; or take a Sheeps skin of a Sheep new killed, and wet it with sharp
Wine, and lay it on.

If in travel they keep ill diet, the humors turn to Wind, and they fall down
to the legs, and make them swell: take heed of drink; and when the purgations
are over, use things that expel wind: take worm wood, Betony, Southernwood,
Origanum, Cammomile Flowers, Calamint, Annis-seed, Rue, Carroway seeds, boil
them, and make a fomentation for the feet.

If too much drinking be the cause, let her abstain from that; Medicaments that
heat and resolve, and are good for Dropsies, are very good in this distemper:
the infusion of Rhubarb is much commended, especially if the humor proceed
from ill habit and course of life. Hippocrates prescribes a Goats or Sheeps
Liver made into powder and taken with wine of the infusion of Elecampane; also
Treacle taken with Fumitory and Fennel waters: and to abate the swelling of the
Feet, make a decoction of Rose stalks and Cammomile Flowers, excellent to bath
them in: and for her belly swelled, lay on a Plaster of Bay berries, or of
Melilot; or take Bay berries and Juniper berries, of each one handful, Goats
Dung four ounces, Cammomile Flowers powdered half a handful, Cummin seed two
drams, pour spirit of wine upon them as you bruise them in a Mortar, make a
Plaster with a little oil of Spike added, and lay it over the woman's belly.

For the swellings of the Bellies of maids, if it come not by a masculine blow,
take Dittany root, and Cubebs, bruise them, and Cummin seeds, and Cow Dung, and
lay it to their bellies as hot as can be endured. Women after Delivery, are
also subject to have their Wombs inflamed, when the birth is very great, and
their labor hard, and the mouth of their Womb narrow, so that great violence
stretches it wider than they can suffer; and sometimes there is great loss of
blood, and the womb is torn by putting forth of the child; it must be cured by
such things as ease pains, as Baths and Fomentations; and such softening things
as are proper for the belly: This following Anodyne is very effectual; take
Flowers of Mallows, Marshmallows, Vervain, and Rue of each a handful, Self
heal, Agrimony, Cammomile Flowers, Melilot tops, red Roses, of each a handful;
cut them very small, sew them up in fine linen bags, boil them in Goats milk,
or equal parts of Plantane water and Wine, press them well between two
Trenchers, and make application of one after the other hot to the place
affected; but first anoint the part with Poplar ointments, or with oil of
Roses: after this cleanse all the secret parts with a sponge dipped in water of
Oaken Leaves, Self Heal, and of Plantane made luke warm, and injections put up
with a Syring, are effectual also, of Mel Passarum, and Plantane water mingled,
and cast in warm; or take Galls, Lentils, Flowers of Pomegranates, Seeds of
Kneeholm, Saunders and Roses, of each a like quantity; boil all in water, and
strain it, and with a Syring inject the decoction, and it will cleanse the
Womb. When the Mother is cleansed it will be proper to make the flesh
incarnate, if it be corroded; as take Centaury six ounces, Orris, Comfrey
Roots, Agrimony, of each three handfuls, Gum Tragant, Sarcocolla, Dragons
Blood, Frankincence, Hypocistis, Mummy, of each a dram, boil all in a
sufficient quantity of water to the consumption of half; then put to it Iron
refuse prepared one ounce and a quarter, boil it a while longer, and bath the
part with it.

If the womb be too hard, and she feel pain between the Navel and the Matrix,
then take Ducks grease, Deers, or Ox marrow, Neats Foot oil, Yolks of eggs,
Bdellium, of each a like proportion; two drams of Saffron, dissolve all in
wine, and mix oil of Lillies with them, and dip a tent of Linen or Cotton in
this, and thrust it up into the place; use this often, for this will ease it
and take away the pain.

And if the womb be foul with Ulcers, or the like, take half an ounce of Oxymel
of Squils, sirrup of Vinegar and Bizantine of each three quarters of an ounce,
Agrimony and Lovage Waters of each one ounce, water of Cichory two ounces, let
her drink this every morning early, and sleep upon it, and fast four hour after
it; the Urine will in a weeks time, or somewhat longer, become clean, and well
cleansed, and the party cured.

Women's bellies use to be mightily stretched in Childbearing, in so much that
they will be plaighted, and full of wrinkles ever after, that were plain and
smooth before, growing lank when they are delivered; but if it be but four
months past it may be helped by laying a linen cloth over the belly dipped in
oils of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Jessamine; and if the belly be already
wrinkled, then take Goats and Sheeps Suet, and oil of sweet Almonds, of each
one ounce, Sperma Ceti two drams, and with a little wax make an ointment: when
the Flux is past you may lay on the Cataplasie of Aetius, or anoint with oils
of Mastich and of Roses.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Cold, Moist, Hot, Dry, and of all the several Distempers of the Womb.
THe wombs of Women should be always kept temperate, that they exceed not in
any preternatural quality; if they do, the man's Seed will be like corn sowed
upon sand, and will prove unfruitful, if the womb be too hot, or cold, or
moist, or dry.

Those that have hot wombs have but few courses, and those are either yellow,
or black, or burnt, and fiery, that come disorderly; and such persons will fall
into Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and rage of the womb; if this be from their
birth, it will be hard to cure: yet it may, by good Diet, and proper means be
much mended by Medicaments, that cool and assuage Choler; but take heed you do
not cool too fast, and stop the courses: you may safely use conserve of
Succory, Violets, Water Lillies, Borage of each one Ounce, Conserve of Roses
half an ounce, Diamargariton Frigidum, and Diatrion Santalon, of each half a
dram, with sirrup of Lemmons or Oranges, or juice of Citrons; take a Nutmeg in
quantity at once, twice or thrice in a day: and anoint the back and loins with
Poplar Unguent, or oil of water Lillies, Roses, Venus Navel wort. Let her wear
thin clothes and use the cold Air; let her avoid hot and salt meats, Wine, and
strong drink; eat Lettice, and Endive, and cooling herbs, that she may sleep
well.

The contrary to this is a cold womb; and these are not fruitful, they are too
cold to nourish the seed of Man: it is from the birth in some, but in others by
accident; from cold Air, cold Diet and Medicaments, or from too much idleness:
the signs are quite contrary to the former, for the other are extreme desirous
of Venery; and, these abhor it, and take no pleasure in it: they have few or no
hairs about their Secrets; and their seed is watery and Slimy, their wombs are
windy, and they are subject to Gonorrhaeas, and the Whites: The Cure is long,
and hard to be done; but, they must use such things as warm the womb, with
drinking good wine, and sometimes Cordial Waters, and good warm nourishing
Meats, and of easy digestion; with Anniseed, Fennel seed, and Time: And
Fumigations are good, of Myrrh, Frankincence, Mastick, Bay berries, of each a
dram; Labdanum two drams, Storax and Cloves of each a dram, Gum Arabic and
wine, make Troches; put one or two upon a Pan of coals, and let her receive the
Fume at the Matrix.

Then take Labdanum two ounces, Frankincence, Mastick, Liquid Storax, of each
half an ounce, oil of Cloves and of Nutmegs of each half a scruple, oil of
Lillies and Rue of each one ounce, Wax sufficient, make a Plaster, and lay it
over the Region of the womb. But if the womb be moist (and this is commonly
joined with a cold distemper) it drowns the seed, like as if a Man should sow
Corn in a quagmire. The causes are almost the same as of cold; for it is
Idleness that is the cause in most women that are troubled with it, and such
women have abundance of Courses, but they are thin and waterish, and the whites
also; their Secrets are always wet: they cannot retain the man's seed, but it
slips out again. This must be cured as the cold distemper, by a heating and
drying Diet, and Medicaments, Baths, Injections, Fomentations, wherein
Brimstone is mingled; but take heed of Astringents, for they will make the
Disease worse, by stopping the ill humors in.

The fourth is a dry Distemper of the womb, this is natural to some, but to
most it comes when they are old, and past childing, when the womb grows hard;
if it be from any other drying causes, such women will be barren before they be
old: It may proceed from diseases, as Fevers, Inflammations, Obstructions,
when the blood goes not to the Matrix to moisten it; so that if they void any
blood, it comes from the Veins in the neck of the womb, and not from the
bottom; they have but few courses, little seed, they are of a lean, dry
Constitution; their lower Lip is of a blackish red, and commonly chapt: This
Distemper, if it be long, is seldom cured; moistning things must do it, as
Borage, Bugloss, Almonds, Dates, Figs, Raisins: Moistning and nourishing Diet
is good, and to forbear salt and dry meats; avoid anger, sadness, fasting, and
use to sleep long, and labor but little: rub the parts with oil of sweet
Almonds, Lillies, Linseed, sweet Butter, Jesamine, Hens or Ducks Grease.

Besides these four, there are compound distempers, as cold and moist wombs,
and hot and dry; but I presume I need not in particular speak of them, because
I have given sufficient remedies in the several qualitis already, which will be
easy to apply: I confess a compound distemper is harder to be cured than a
simple; therefore I shall add one or two remedies more.

First, If then the Womb be cold and moist, cure this with surrup of Mugwort,
Bettony, Mints, or Hyssop; then purge the cold humor with Agarick, Mechoachan,
Turbith and Sena: Sudorificks of Guaicum, Sarfa, and China are very good.

Secondly, If the womb be subject to a hot and dry distemper, you must put away
choler from the Liver, and from the whole body: those things that will do it
are Manna, and Tamarinds, sirrup of Roses, Rhubarb, Senna, Cassia, and the
like, which are very safe, gentle, and effectual Remedies.

BOOK. VI.
CHAP. I.
Of the Strangling of the womb, and the effects of it, with the Causes and Cure.
THe womb, by its consent with other parts of the Body, as well as by its own
nature, is subject to multitudes of diseases; and it is not to be uttered
almost what Miseries women in general, by means thereof, be they Maids, Wives,
or widows, are affected with: But amongst all diseases, those that are, called
Hysterical Passions, or strangling of the womb, are held to be the most
grievous: Swounding and Falling Sickness are from hence, by the consent the
womb has with the heart and brain; and sometimes this comes to pass by
stopping of the Terms, which load the heart, the brain and Womb with evil
humors: and sometimes it arises from the stopping in of the seed of
Generation, as is seen in Ancient Maids and widows; for by reason hereof, ill
vapors and wind rise up from the womb to the Midriff, and so stops their
breath: it is most commonly the widows disease, who were wont to use
Copulation, and are now constrained to live without it; when the seed is thus
retained it corrupts, and sends up filthy vapors to the brain, whereby the
Animal Spirits are clouded, and many ill consequents proceed from it, as
Falling Sicknesses, Megrims, Dullness, Giddiness, Drowsiness, Shortness of
breath, Headache, beating of the Heart, Frenzy and Madness, and indeed what
not. The same woman may be tormented with several of these at the same time,
when the seed and the Courses are mingled with ill humors, being once
corrupted. The Menstrual blood and seed are noble parts; but the best things
once corrupted, become the worst, and degenerate into a venomous nature, and
are little better than Poison.

When the Vessils of the womb lie near the Vessels of other parts of the body,
or there is near affinity of one part with the womb; then, by consent, are many
grievous Diseases produced.

The womb is of a membranous nature; and for that reason it consents
exceedingly with the nerves and membranes, and so the parts that are near are
soon offended by it; and it conveys its ill qualities to the whole body, by
Nerves, Veins and Arteries, the Brain has it by the membranes of the marrow of
the Back, and by Nerves; the arteries they carry it to the Heart, and the veins
to the Liver, and these are large in the womb; and by them all the noxious
blood, and poisonous vapors return.

The Veins of the Mesentery give it a consent with the stomach; and so do the
arteries carry all to the Spleen, which is the cause that some women in age
grow hypochondriacal by heat of their blood, because their courses did not flow
sufficient when they were young: It will be hard to distinguish these two
diseases in women, or to cure the one, and not cure the other,

The Breasts they consent with the womb by Nerves and Veins, that go from it to
them: so then it is clear that it holds a correspondence with the heart, the
Midriff, the Brain and Head, and all the instruments of motion and sense;
likewise with the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Bladder, Belly, Mesentery, Hips,
Back, straight Gut, Legs and arms, and is the cause of strange symptoms in
them all. For Galen says well, the strangling of the Mother, or Hysterical
Passion, is but one by name but the symptoms are scarce to be numbered. It
alters women's complexions, and they grow sandy, or pale and yellow, or swarthy,
and now and then their eyes and faces show red, and very sanguine.

When this strange affection falls upon them, they will gnash theit teeth, and
become speechless, for their breath is stopped: and it has been often observed
that they have been supposed to be dead; neither breath, nor Pulse, nor Life,
to be found for that time: and sometimes their breath is stopped so close and it
holds so long, that they have died of it.

The causes of this disease are very many; for a sudden fear, a bad news
related, has cast diverse women into these fits; for by this Melancholy gets
the mastery of them: it were but reason therefore for men to forbear relating
any sad accident to them, but with great proviso.

When the womb is strangled, no one disease can determine it; for that seldom
comes alone: sometimes only the breath is stopped, sometimes the speech and
animal actions of the brain fail, and the whole body is chill, and almost dead
by ill vapors that choke it rising from the womb.

The Malignant Vapors then sent from thence by the Nerves, Veins and arteries,
are the immediate causes of all the hurt that is done; and these vapors are
much like the wind, very powerful, and almost unperceived; they are so subtle
and thin, that they pass in a moment of time through the whole body: it will
choke the Patient when they fly to the Throat, as people are that eat White
Hellebore, or venomous mushromes. Ofttimes you shall see the woman to loath and
vomit, and draw her breath short, and her heart aches; if the vapor strike the
heart first, it will cease from moving, and she falls into a swound: but if it
fly to the brain, she is void of all sense and motion.

There is nothing worse than corrupt seed to offend the Body, Women with Child
are not free from this disease when corrupt humors rise from an unclean womb.

The chief seat of this ill humor lies in the Trumpet of the womb, and in her
stones; for the substance of it is loose and hollow, and the Stones lie in
bladders full of water; and women that have strangling of the womb, have this
water of a yellow color, and grosser than it should be.

Many Physicians have mistook the stones and the Trumpet for the womb it self,
when putrified rotten seed makes them swell, and windy humors cause them to
rise as far as the Navel; but I spoke of this before, when I showed the reason
how the womb is thought to ascend higher than nature has placed it: It has
sometimes a long time to breed in, and sometimes it comes suddenly, according
as the corruption of the humors is, which sometimes also lie still; and so
soon as they are but moved they evacuate, and send a poisonous fume into other
parts of the body: And nothing will sooner stir these vapors and humors in
women (who are subject to this disease) than anger, or fear, or such like
passions; or sweet scents, and smells applied to their noses, which is an
argument that the womb is delighted with sweet scents, but cannot away with
stinking things; for let Musk or Civet be held to such women's noses, they are
presently sick till they be taken away.

What Distemper this strangling of the womb is, Physicians agree not; some say
it is a cold distemper: but coldness is not the chief symptom, though cold be
great; others say it is a convulsion, or Syncope, or breathing stopped: but it
cannot be set forth by any one symptom; for though the venomous vapor be small
that breeds it, it goes many ways, and spreads through all the body. But the
true causes of this Disease are the poisonous vapors that rise from the womb:
it is not an apparent quality that this vapor works by, but a secret quality;
as the Torpedo or Scorpion small creatures prevail with to do great mischief,
as they are enemies to the natural heat and vital spirits: and when the heart
suffers, there can be no good animal spirits bred, because the vital are
corrupted; but blood and seed, whilst they are in their own proper vessels,
hurt not, unless they are mingled with ill humors.

Fernelius says, that the womb and seed, the place and matter of life, are the
breeding of the most deadly poisons.

Hipp^crates, in these fits, bids give them wine to refresh their weakness:
Avicenna bids give them no wine, but water, and forbids eating flesh, because
they engender more seed and blood: but when she is in the fit, wine is best;
for a little wine will not presently get to the womb.

Sometimes both maids and widows, from such like causes, are troubled with the
rage of the womb, that they will grow even mad with carnal desire, and entice
men to lie with them; they are hot, but not feverish, and they are inclined to
madness.

Modest women will die of consumptions, when they have this rage of the womb,
rather than declare their desire, but some women are shameless.

The cause is great store of sharp hot seed, that is not natural, but the next
degree to it, that bites, and swells, and provokes nature to expulsion: the
brain suffers by consent; the womb in the Nymphe is most affected, which swells
with heat, but the Clitoris, and not the Nymphe is the seat of lust: hot blood
and humors in the womb breed this, and they are increased by hot spiced meats
and drinks, idleneness and bawdy acts and objects; at first it may be cured,
but the end of it is frenzy and madness if it be neglected.

Maids must marry that cannot live chaste, or draw blood to abate the heat and
sharpness of it; let them purge these humors gently, and use cooling and
moistening meats and drinks, and all with moderation. Lettice, Violets, and
Water Lillies, and Purslain are good coolers, and take away the windiness of
the parts: the seed, leaves and flowers of Agnus Castus strewed in their beds,
or Camphire smelt unto are very good in such cases.

Let them use this Electuary; take conserve of water Lillies, Violets, tops of
Agnus Castus, of each one ounce; of red Roses half an ounce; of red Coral, and
emralds in powder, of each half a dram; of Coleworts, and Lettice candid, of
each one ounce, with sirrup of Violets and Water Lillies, make an Electuary:
lay a plate of lead to their backs.

Nuns, and such as cannot marry, may use t^ings, that by a hidden quality
diminish seed, but they cause barrenness: let them eat no eggs, nor much
nourishing meats, and sleep little.

Camphire, that is so much commended against this preternatural desire, is hot
and sharp, and bitter, it will burn and flame, and being of thin parts
penetrates deep; but it has cold operations, for it will cure burns and hot
swellings, and headache that comes of heat, by a likeness and affinity it has
to draw hot vapors to it; so Linseed oil is good against burnings.

Scaliger affirms that Camphire increases Venery; it may do so if it be used
seldom, but often used, it is certain that it will destroy it.

There is moreover (from ill tempered seed, and melancholy blood, in the
vessels near the Heart, which contaminates the Vital and Animal Spirits) a
melancholy distemper, that especially Maids and Widows are often troubled with,
and they grow exceeding pensive and sad: for melancholy black blood abounding
in the Vessels of the Matrix, runs sometimes back by the great arteries to the
heart, and infects all the spirits: when this blood lies still, they are well;
but if it be stirred, or urged, then presently they fall into this distemper,
they know not why: and the arteries of the spleen and back beat strongly, and
melancholy vapors fly up. They are sorely troubled, and weary of all things;
they can take no rest, their pain lies most on their left side, and sometimes
on the left breast: in time they will grow mad, and their former great silence
turns to prating exceedingly, crying out that they see fearful spirits, and
dead men; when it is gone so far, it is hard to cure: it is vain then to try to
make them merry, they despair and wish to die; and when they find an
opportunity, they will kill, or drown, or hang themselves: At first when the
blood is hot and fiery, open a vein in the arm, if they have their courses; if
not, in the foot or ancle to bring the courses down. Cooling, moistening
cordials, and such things as revive the spirits, and conquer melancholy, will do
much; driers are naught, for melancholy is dry. Confectio Alkermes is
commended for those that can away with it; but Confectio de Hyacintho is
better: use a moistening diet. To breed mirth, give her waters of Balm and
Borage, of each three ounces; sirrup of the juices of Borage and Bugloss of
each one ounce and a half; take this at twice, and use it often.

To purge melancholy, take six drams of Senna, Agarick one dram and a half;
Borage and violet flowers of each a small handful, two drams of Citron peels;
infuse all six hours in good Rhenish wine, strain them, and put to them sirrup
of Violets one ounce.

CHAP. II.
Of the Falling Sickness.
WHen Women, by reason of the ill affections of the womb, fall into Epilepsies,
and Falling sickness, it is worse than any other cause, as the symptoms prove:
for the poisonous vapor is not only in the Nerves as when it is from the brain,
but also in the membranes, veins, and arteries.

The same foul vapor that causes strangling of the womb, produces this; for
it causes diverse diseases, according to the parts it takes hold on: but when
it lights forcibly on the Nerves, then it causes the Falling Sickness.

Sometimes there is a convulsion of the whole body, and sometimes but of some
parts; as of the head, or tongue, hands, or legs, eyes, or ears; some cannot
hear, others cannot see, all lose the sense of feeling: some cry out, but know
not wherefore. They that fall, if the vapor be not too strong, when they rise,
they go to their work again, as if they had no harm: but here is not only
convulsions, as in those that have the Falling Sickness from other parts, but
stopping the breath, as in the strangling of the womb; but these seldom some
at the mouth, as those do, for the brain is entire, or not much offended; nor
is their hearing taken away quite by the vapor fastening upon the roots of the
Nerves of the ears.

Rue and Castor that cure fits of the Mother, are good here; the cure is almost
the same, only you must add some things that respect the nerves and the Brain:
Use these Pills twice in a week, before supper one hour, and take a scruple, or
half a dram; Take Senna and Peony root, of each half an ounce, Mugwort, Rue,
Betony, Yarrow, half a handful of each; boil them, and then clarify the
decoction; put to it Aloes one ounce and a half, of juice of the herb Mercury
one ounce let it stand and settle, pour off the clear liquor, then add two
drams of Rhubarb, sprinkled with water of Cinnamon, Agarick half an ounce,
Mastick and Epileptick powder, of each half a dram, make the pills with sirrup
of Mugwort.

To mend the distemper of the head and Womb, take conserve of Rosemary flowers,
and of the Tile tree, of Balm and Lillies of the valley, of the root Scorzonera
Candied, of each one ounce, Diamoschu dulce one dram with two drams of the
roots of Peony, and seeds of Agnus Castus, and sirrup of Stoechas, make an
Electuary to take at your pleasure.

Nor are these all the ill consequences of the wombs distempers, but sometimes
violent headache springs from it, which is the greatest pain of all the rest;
and sometimes it is all over the head, or but upon one side, or in the eyes,
the ill vapors rising by the veins and arteries of the Womb to the membranes
and films of the brain; when the vessels are full of a thin sharp blood, that
is carried from the womb to the membranes, it stretches and rends them, and
corrodes and bites so, that the pain is intolerable: the cure is to purge away
the peccant humor that lies in the Womb; for this is not as other headache
is, that comes from other causes: the pain runs also to the Loins and the
Membranes there, by some capillary veins from the womb. The pain of the head by
affection with the womb, is in all the head commonly, but is chiefly i^ the
hinder part of the head, because the womb being Nervous consents with the
membranes of the brain, by the membrane of the Marrow of the back: and hence it
is that women are more subject to the headache than men are, because of the
womb that holds such affinity with the Nerves of the head.

The violent beating of the heart and Arteries both in the Sides and Back, is
by consent from the womb, when evil humors therein contained, pass by the
Arteries, and Poisonous vapors arise to those parts; Cordials are good, as
Cinnamon Water, and Aqua Monefardi, or Mathiolas his water: the Disease seems
small, but it is not safe, because the cause of it is very ill.

In this Disease the Artery that beats in the Back beats strongly, because it
is part of the great Artery; but the Arteries that beat in the Hypochondrion
beat not so strongly, for they are smaller branches from the Spleen and
Mesentery, but the cause is the same. The Arteries are inflamed by the ill
vapors and humors sent from the womb, and the heart is exceedingly heated by
them: but this hot humor sometimes beats by reason of the great Artery quite
over the whole body, but it lasts not long, for there is little corruption of
the humors. Some say the blood in the Veins is too hot, and over-heats the
Artery; but if this heat of the Artery affect the Brain, the Patient will be
mad; if it go over the whole body she falls into a Consumption: lay your hand
on the left side, and you shall feel the Arteries beat much. So then, this
Disease has several considerations, and must be cured partly as
hypochondriacal Melancholy, partly as in the cure for stopping of the Courses,
and partly as Melancholy, arising from the womb.

Physicians can hardly tell which way to proceed oftentimes in these
Distempers, because it is hard to say what Disease the woman is sick of, when
the Spleen and left Hypochondry are afflicted from the womb.

The womb has two Arteries, the one from the Hypogastrick Artery, and another
from the preparing Arteries; that which comes from the Hypogastrick runs almost
through the whole Abdomen: when the foul corrupt blood in the womb runs
backward to the Hypogastrick Artery, it passes to the Caeliac Artery, and so
to the Spleen, and the parts near it: and it is Natures present way to thrust
ill humors to the ignoble parts. When the courses are stopped, these ill humors
are thought to be only in the Veins, but the veins and Arteries mouths are so
joined, that they pass from the Veins to the Arteries, and that is the reason
that elderly women, whose courses were stopped when they were young, are troubled
oftentimes with the Spleen, and hypochondriack Melancholy; These cannot endure
to smell to sweet Scents: they are short breathed, Costive, and Belch often;
they have pain in the left side, and are very sad, when the thin part of the
blood is inflamed they grow very hot, and red in the Face, but that lasts not
long; the disease it will produce (if not cured) is chiefly a Schirrhus of the
Spleen; open a Vein, if the blood be hot, and the Courses stopped, use Leeches to
the haemorroids; and Purge often, but very gently, with Quercetan's Pill of
Tartar, or Fernelius his Cum Ammoniaco, and Birth-wort; or prepared Steel to
open the Courses, and to cure Melancholy that arises from the womb.

When the liver is hurt by the gross blood running back to the holow vein from
the womb, as it often does if the courses be stopped, and blood abound; it breeds
raw phlegmatic blood, and causes the Green Sickness: for there are many more
great veins in the womb than in any other part of the body, and they are often
obstructed: and sometimes, by this stopping, not only sundry Diseases, but
Hair will grow over the whole body; for hairs grow from the Excrementitious
part of the blood, and if that Excrement be sent over the body, it will produce
hair: So Hippocrates tells us of a woman with a great beard; and it is not long
since there was a woman to be seen here in England which had not only a long
beard, but her whole Body covered with hair.

It is also by reason of the womb, or by consent from it, that many women have
no stomach, others have a very large Appetite; and sometimes a desire to eat
strange things, not fit for Food: they Vomit, and have the Hiccough, and many
such ill symptoms: as the vapors are, so are the Diseases; if Cold, then they
breed cold diseases; if hot, such diseases as proceed of heat: For these filthy
vapors, when the way is large, easily ascend from the Arteries of the womb, and
get into the Hypogastrick, and Caeliac Arteries: hot vapors cause Thirst, cold
vapors destroy concoction, and are the cause of many cruel diseases by their
Malignity. When the stomach is hurt by the womb, it is easily perceived, for
the signs of it go away sometimes, and come again, only when the Fumes fly to
the stomach: There is no cure for this, but by first curing the womb; for this
disease is worse than if the stomach were originally the cause of the
distemper: Cure the womb, and if there be no other cause, the stomach is cured;
first give a vomit to cleanse the stomach, and use often to take pills of Aloes
and Mastick, for these fortify the stomach.

If one womb in a woman be the cause of so many strong and violent diseases,
she may be thought a happy woman of our sex that was born without a womb:
Columbus reports that he saw such a woman, and that her secrets were as the
secrets of other women; and part of the neck out.

It will be needless to tell you what some have written, that it has been
often seen, that worms, and Hair, and Fat, and Stones, and many other strange
things have been found in women's wombs; but what a miserable case is she in
that was born with two wombs? Such a woman Julius Obsequeus related that he
saw: and Bauhinus speaks of a maid who had a Matrix like that of a Bitch
divided in two parts: But some perhaps may think these things fabulous; I
confess they are monstrous, and out of the ordinary course of nature; and I
know no cure for them, if such things should happen: I forbear therefore to
speak any more of them, and shall proceed to some things more material to be
known, and such things as few women living but have frequent occasion to be
provided with remedies for.

CHAP. III.
Of Women's Breasts and Nipples.
NAture, within some convenient time after the Child is conceived in the womb,
begins to provide nourishment for it so soon as it shall be born. The breasts
are two in number, lest by accident one Breast should fail, and sometimes women
have Twins, and more children than one to give suck to.

Some women says Gardan, have been seen with more than two breasts for they
have had two breasts on each side, but that is very rare. The form of the
breast is round, and sharp at the Nipple; yet these differ in many women, for
some have breasts no bigger than men, and some have huge overgrown swollen
breasts, by reason of much blood abounding, and strong heat to draw and to
concoct it.

The breasts should be of a moderate size, neither too great nor too small; not
too soft nor too hard; it is not necessary to have them over-big; though they
can hold but little milk, thee may hold sufficient: but large breasts are in
danger to be cancerated and inflamed; besides that the milk is not so good,
because their wants a moderate heat. The immediate causes of great Breasts is
partly natural by birth, the passages being loose and large; and sleep and
idleness furthers it, and much handling of them heats and draws the blood
thither: their causes are not many. It is best to prevent their growing too big
at first, for it is not easily done afterward: Cooling Diet, and drying and
astringent repercussive Topical means are the best. Binding things help loose
breasts, and make them hard; all cold Narcotick stupefying Medicaments are
forbidden, they will bind the Vessels, but they abate Natural heat, and will
let no milk breed.

When children are weaned, Discussers and Driers will do well to consume the
Moisture that is superfluous. Take the Meal of Beans and Orobus, of each two
ounces and a half; Powder of Comfrey roots half an ounce, Mints three drams;
Wormwood, Cammomile Flowers, Roses, of each two drams; when they are boiled
with two ounces of oil of Mastick, make a Cataplasme: or take red Roses, Myrtle
leaves, Horstail, Mints, Plantain, a handful of each; Flowers of sour
Pomegranates two Pugils, boil all in Vinegar and red wine, and with a sponge
lay it warm to the breasts, and let it dry on.

If Milk be too much in the breasts after the child is born, and the child be
not able to suck it all, the breasts will very frequently inflame, or
Imposthumes breed in them; they swell and grow red, and are painful, being
overstretched, whence hard tumors grow: too much blood is the cause of it, or
the child is too weak, and cannot draw it forth. Sometimes it goes away
without any remedies, but if you need help then hinder the breeding of more
milk, and try to consume that which is bred; if the child cannot draw it forth,
Glasses are made to suck it forth. The woman must eat and drink with
moderation, and use a drying diet: if she nurse not the child her self, or if
the child be weaned, to dry up the milk, take a good quantity of Rozin, mingle
it with Cream, and being lukewarm lay it all over the breasts; or make a
plaster to dry up the Milk, with Bean meal, red Vinegar, and oil of Roses, lay
it on warm.

If the Breasts be inflamed, keep a good reasonable cooling Diet, moistening
and comfortable; it is blood and not milk that causes inflammation: for milk,
when it grows hot, makes pain; and thereby the blood that stays in the small
capillar veins, being out of the vessels is inflamed and corrupt: it may also
come from Falls or bruises, or strait lacing of the breasts; if there be a
Fever and a throbbing pain, and a red hard swelling, the breasts are inflamed.
Inflammations may be without danger, but the breasts that are loose and full of
Kernels, will soon turn to a Schirrhus, or a Cancer: If the body then be full
of blood open a vein, but if the Courses be stopped open a vein in the Ancle, and
after that in the arm. You may purge bad humors easily with Manna or Senna: if
the blood be over hot, eat Endive, Lettice, Water Lillies, Plantane, Purslain,
use repercussives, and moderate cooling things.

Apply a cloth dipped in oil of Roses, with Honey and Water; when the strength of
the inflammation is past use Discussers as well as repercussives; as, take
white-bread Crumbs, Barley-flour, of each one ounce and a half; Flour of Beans,
and Fenugreek of each half an ounce; Powder of Cammomile Flowers, and red
Roses, of each tow drams, boil them, then mingle Rose Vinegar one ounce, and as
much of oil of Roses and Camomil, lay it over the breasts; then use only
Discutients, as take Bean Meal, Lupines, Fenugreek, Linseed, and Powder of
Camomil Flowers, each an ounce, make a Cataplasme; if the Matter begin to grow
hard, use things that soften and attenuate; as take a handful of Mallows and
boil them soft, Powder of Linseed, Marshmallows and Camomil Flowers each one
ounce, boil all again, and with an ounce of oil of Jessamine make a Cataplasme:
If you find that it will come to suppuration, lay on a Plaster of Diachylon,
if it turn to Matter, and the Impostume break; otherwise open it with a Lancet,
and let out the Matter, then c^eanse it thus; Take Turpentine, and Honey of
Roses, of each one ounce, Myrrh a scruple; it will be hard to cure the Ulcer
unless you dry the Milk in the other breast, because much blood will run
thither to breed Milk.

An Erisipelas of the breasts comes from great Anger, or some Fright, which
turns to an inflammation, and is cured as the former: apply no fat things nor
cold repercussives to discuss the thin blood that makes the inflammation; lay
on a clout dipped in Elder-water, and give her Hartshorn, Terra Sigillata, and
Carduus, with Elder-water to make her sweat.

Some women's breasts are too small, when the blood cannot find a way to the
breasts, but is repelled, and forced some other way; or when the Liver is dry,
and the woman Feverish, toils over much, or watches, or from some cause that
wastes the body: Therefore feed well, and foment the breasts with Warm water and
white wind, wherein softning things have been boiled, then anoint them with oil
of sweet Almonds, and rub the Breasts often to attract the blood.

Sometimes hard cold swellings will breed in women's breasts, and Phlegmatic
swellings, as we see in persons that have the Green Sickness, their breasts
will pill, for the part is loose and spungy; it is larger when the terms are
like to flow, and when they are gone it abateth for a while: If it come from an
ill habit of the body, derived from the womb, it is to be feared; otherwise it
may be discust, or dissolved: dry, and hot meats and means are best. If the
Courses be stopped open them, and cure the ill habit, then use Topics to
discuss, and strengthen the part; they must be temperately hot, otherwise you
will cause a Schirrhus by resolving the thin parts, and leave the thick to grow
harder. Make a ly of Colewort and vine Ashes, and brimstone; or a decoction
with Hyssop, Sage, Origanum, and Camomile Flowers, then anoint with oil of
Lillies, Bays, and Camomile; or take four ounces of Barley Meal, and half an
ounce of Linseed, and of Fenugreek, Dill and Camomile Flowers as much,: one
ounce of Marshmallow Roots, with oil of Dill and Camomile, make an application.
These Phlegmatic swellings must be discust at first, or they may turn into
Cancers: She must eat Bread well baked, parched Almonds, dried Raisins; let her
drink a decoction of China Roots, Sassafras and Sarsa; forbear Milk-meats,
unleavened Bread and Sleeping presently after meat.

Besides watery and Hydropick humors, there are Kernels growing in the breasts,
which are small round spungy bodies, and sometimes swell by humors flowing
thither: there grow sometimes other hard swellings caused by that they call the
King's Evil; it is engendered of gross Phlegm, or thick mattery blood, and grows
hard under the skin; the stopping of the Courses is the ordinary cause, when
the Menstrual blood runs back to the breasts, this will soon become a Cancer,
if it be not prevented by softning means, and a moderate thin Diet, keeping her
self warm, and using good exercise before Meats; avoid idleness, and meats of
hard digestion; Baths of Brimstone are good to be prescribed against windy and
watery swellings.

But Celsus says, That the Scrofula of the Breasts is seldom seen, for that
must proceed from a thick Phlegmatic humor, mixed with a melancholy humors it
is sometimes painful, and somewhat like a Cancer, or will soon be turned to
one, but stands often times at the same pass for many years: It comes from
disorder, or stopping of the Terms, there being so great consent betwixt the
breasts and the womb; you may feel the small kernels of the breast, but that I
speak of now is one unmovable humor, but the other are small: If it lie near
the skin it is soon dissolved, but if it lie deep it will hardly be dissolved,
because the substance of it is so earthy: first Purge, then bleed, after that
apply softning and discussing remedies that are strong, as you must do for a
Schirrhus humor; Take Orris Roots and boil them in Oxynel, and stamp them, mix
them with Ointment of Marshmallowes and Turpentine, of each three ounces, and
one ounce of Mucilage of the seed of Fenugreek; If you cannot discuss it, ripen
it, or cut it open, but take heed how you do it for this is troublesome and
dangerous.

All these humors, if they be unskilfully handled will soon turn to a
Schirrhus, from melancholy in the veins flowing to the breasts, and it is thick
phlegm dried; there are two kinds of it, one is bred of Melancholy blood, which
is gross and feculent, or thick phlegm mixed with it, and this feels no pain:
but the other is not so hard, for it is not yet fully come to its perfection;
and it is probable that it is mingled with other humors.

A perfect Schirrhus grows from the stoppings of the Spleen, whereby the
Melancholy blood is retained, and being in great quantity falls upon the
Breasts, or else the courses stopped fly thither.

There is a double intention for the cure:

First, Use emollient means to soften all that is hard and knotty in the
breasts, then keep a good Diet; and beware of salt Meats, and such as are
smoked, and hard of digestion, and moreover all things of a sharp corroding
faculty; use moderate Exercise and Mirth, provoke the courses if they be stopped,
and set on Leeches, or bleed in the foot.

Sena and Rhubarb are good to purge the body well; and when you have purged, do
so no more till you have used some Cordials, as Conserve of Bugloss, and Orange
Flowers, Confectio Alkermes, Electuarium Degemus, and Triosantules. Sometimes
phlegm and melancholy are mingled to cause this Schirrhus, but then it is but a
bastard Schirrhus; if burnt humors abound most it will be a Schrrhus, if
Melancholy a cancer.

Secondly, The perfect signs of a Schirrhus are, that it is very hard, and
feels no pain; if it feel any it is not yet fixed: it is colored according to
the humor, white, or black, or blew; a bastard Schirrhus is hot and painful, if
it go on it will be a Cancer, and the Veins will swell and look blew: if hairs
once grow upon it there is no hopes of cure; and the bigger and harder it is
the more incurable. Let general medicaments proceed, and cure the cause from
the Matrix and from the whole body: soften, attenuate, and discuss the
hardness, but take heed of hot things that will discuss the thin parts, and
leave the thick behind; neither use too many moistning softning means, for that
will ferment the matter, and change the Schirrhus to a Cancer, that is far
worse, but either soften, and moisten, and digest together, or by turns: A
Fomentation of Mallows, Marshmallows, brank Ursine, Camomile Flowers, Linseed
and Fenugreek are good; anoint afterward with oil of sweet Almonds Hens
grease, Marrow of a Calf, ointment of Marshmallowes, lay on the great
Diachylon, or the Plaster of Frogs, take the Fume of a hot stone, sprinkling
wine upon it; lay on a Plaster of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of
Squills, a bastard Schirrhus will soon Cancerate. Bleed, and purge away the
humor that breeds black blood; to hinder humors from flowing to it, anoint with
oil of Roses, and juice of Plantane if it be hot, beat them well in a mortar of
Lead till they show another color; then mix Ceruss, and Litharge of silver one
ounce, with wax make an ointment: or take one ounce of Mallow Roots, boil and
bruise them, let Sheeps Suet, and Capons greese, of each two ounces, be added
to it, with wax sufficient to make an Ointment.

But the disease (worse than a Schirrhus) is a Cancer of the breasts: and
William Fabricius says, that if it be not an Ulcerated Cancer, the woman may
live above forty years with it, and no pain molest her; but if you lay on any
thing to soften and ripen these swellings, she will dye in half a year. Many
orderly women have lived long with Cancers as if they ailed nothing.

Hippocrates bids not to cure an occult Cancer, if you do, the person will dye
of the cure: because the breasts are loose and spungy, Cancers are soon bred
there. Burnt blood flowing from the womb of one who is of a hot and dry
Constitution, and the Terms stopping, after a Tumor, they make an Internal or
External Cancer.

A Cancer that comes naturally undiscerned, is hardly known at first, being no
greater than a Pease, and daily increases with roots spreading, and Veins
about it; when the skin is eaten through it becomes a loathsome Ulcer: the
Matter is black, and the lips are hard; it is scarce curable, because it is
bred of black burnt blood that is malign: and the Vessels are loosned and
relapsed by softners and ripeners misapplyed to it; so that the passage is made
for the humors to pass to and fro, and serve to infect the rest.

Purge melancholy, and draw blood, but use no Topics to ripen or rot the part;
only Anodynes that will take away pain; as oil of Frogs and Snails, with Frogs
ashes made to an ointment, with Nightshade water. Ash^^ of Crayfish, or of the
herb Robert, or the i^ward Rind of an Ash-Tree.

Arceas shows the way to cut them for (...) and to burn the part if the Ulcer
be deep. ^bricius bids burn the roots first, and afte^wards to consume the
Relics, and to sto^ the blood when the root is cut up.

You must often Purge away melancho^^^ humors, and provoke the Courses, or the
Cancer will return. Mithridate and Treacle, with juyces of Sorrel and Borrage,
and Crayfish Broth, and Asses milk are approved good to palliate the Cure, and
to keep it from going farther, and ease pain.

This water is commended; Take Scrofularia roots and herb Robert, of each one
handful, Lambs Tongue, Nightshade, Bugloss, Borage, Purslane, Bettony,
Eybright, of each half a handful, one Frog, two whites of Eggs, with Quince
seeds, and Fenugreeck, each one ounce, a pint of rose water, and as much of
Eybright water, distill them in a Leaden still.

Cancers must not be handled like other Ulcers, for softners, Drawers and
healers exasperate, and kill the woman with great dolor.

Fichsius his blessed powder against a Cancer is this; take white arsenick that
shines like Glass one ounce, pour on Aquavitae on the powder of it, pour it
off again, and put on ^^^sh Aquavitae every third day, for fifteen ^yes
together; then take roots of great Dra^on gathered in August or July, slice
them, ^^d dry them in the wind, two ounces; and ^ake three drams of clear
Chimney Soot, make a powder, keep it close stopped in a glass, to use after one
year, and not before.

For the cure of any other Ulcers; or Fistulaes of the breasts, first try to
dry up the milk, and when the breasts hang down bind them up, that the humors
fall not down to them; cleanse them with a decoction of Rhapontick, Agrimony,
and Zedoary, to heal take six quarts of strong wine, and boil in it Rhus
Obsoniox, Cypress Nuts, of each four ounces, and two ounces of Green Galls, to
the thickness of Honey: If the Fistula be Callous, and hard about the edges,
open the Orifice with a Gentian root, and take the redness away, then cleanse
and heal as ordinary Ulcers.

Sometimes stones, hair, or worms are bred in the breasts from corrupt blood,
or milk, and so they may breed in the back, or Navel, Sometimes the Veins and
Arteries of the breasts are so straight that they can contain no blood to make
milk; it is either gross humors that stop them, as they do the Vessels of the
womb, or they are made so by the wombs vessels being stopped, or from hard humors
bred there.

Sometimes the Nipple has no hold for the child to draw forth the milk by, and
it was so made at first; or else it is from a wound or ulcer that leaves a scar
that stops it: The breasts then must needs pine away; but if the milk cannot be
sucked forth, and the breasts are swollen, the reason is that the Paps, or veins
for the milk are not as they should be.

When gross humors only obstruct, that may be cured, but a Nipple naturally
without a hole, or the hole stopped by a Schirrhus, or Scar, after an ulcer is
cured, cannot be healed; often rubbing of the breasts will open the veins for
milk: but the Nipples for the child to suck by are oftentimes deficient or lie
tied, either one or both, that women can hardly give suck; if an ulcer have
eaten away the Nipple, or it was not made at her birth, it will never be
otherwise; if the hole be never so small, so there be a hole, often sucking
will make it larger, especially by a sucking instrument

Clefts and Chaps of the breasts are troublesome, and usual to Nurses; and in
time those Chaps grow to foul Ulcers, and hinder giving of suck: You may
prevent this mischief if in the two last months they go with child you lay two
cups of wax made up with a little Rozin, to cover the Nipples.

To cure the Nipples take oil of Myrtles, of wax, ointment of Lead and Tutty,
or take Tutty prepared one scruple, and half a dram of Alum, Camphire six
grains, with ointment of Roses, and Capons grease make it up; or take Pomatum
one ounce and a half, Mastick a scruple, Powder of red roses, and Gum Traganth
of each half a scruple; before the child sucks wash the breasts with Rose water
and White Wind; and that it may suck without pain, cover the sore pap with a
silver Nipple covered with the pap of a Cow new killed: You may take what
quantity you please of Mutton Suet, or Lambs Suet, and wash it in Rose water,
when it is melted and clarified, and anoint the paps with it.

CHAP. IV.
Directions for Nurses.
BUt there is one consideration more for the Nurse before I leave this; and
that is, that she may not want good milk in her breasts, for if she do, the
child will suffer more than the Nurse, because he draws it from her to feed
him: Those that are fretful, lean, or sickly, have bad Livers and Stomachs, and
ill digestion, that they can have neither much, nor yet good milk, and bad diet
hinders much.

Such as want milk should drink milk wherein Fennel Seed has been soked, and
feed on good nourishment, and drink good drink, Barley Water and Almond milk
are good for hot choleric people; let her eat Lettice, Borrage, Spuriache, and
Lamb sodden, and eaten with Vervine, Calves or Goats milk nourish and breed
milk in the breasts; the eating of Anniseeds, Cummin seeds, Carraway seeds or
their decoction drank will help well, all things that increase seed ripen milk:
when you go to bed drink two drams and a half of bruised Anniseeds in the
decoction of Coleworts. Use this Plaster, take Deers suet half an ounce,
Parsley herb and root the like quantity, barley meal one ounce and a half, red
Storax three drams, boil the roots and herbs well, and beat them to Pap, and
incorporate all with three ounces of oil of sweet Almonds, and lay them to the
breasts and nipple.

There are many things hinder milk, either little blood to breed it, or the
faculty of the breasts is deficient and cannot do it, or the Organs are not
right as they should be; also much watching, and fasting, and labor, and
sweating, and great evacuations by stool or Urine, strong passions, or great
pains, sorrows, cares, or strong Fevers, and other discussers may destroy or
hinder milk in the breasts, so may also the child's great weakness who cannot
draw it thither; it is easily known by any of these causes; when the breasts
swell not but flag, and lie wrinkled, you know there is no great store of milk
in them: if the fault be in the Liver, that it breeds not good blood, you must
rectify the Liver; yet she may be in good health, sufficient as to other
things, but then the infant will be ruined by it: and it is for that end that
nature provides milk that the child may be fed.

The usual way for rich people is to put forth their children to nurse, but
that is a remedy that needs a remedy, if it might be had; because it changes
the natural disposition of the child, and oftentimes exposes the infant to
many hazards, if great care be not taken in the choice of the nurse.

There are not many Women that want milk to suckle their own children; so there
are some that may well be excused, because of their weakness, that they cannot
give suck to their own children: but multitudes pretend weakness when they have
no cause for it, because they have not so much love for their own, as Dumb
creatures have.

Nature indeed has provided some helps where milk is wanting for the child,
but those are not many; to show women that nature commonly does her part with
most mothers, to furnish them with milk without farther means than by good
wholesome meats and drinks: but there are abundance of things that will hinder
milk, or destroy it. For all things that are cold, or else hot and dry, are
enemies to women's milk; but none will breed it but such things as are hot and
moist, or not very dry, and of such things there are no great plenty.

Also they must be of easy digestion, and that will breed good blood, that the
milk that is bred may have no strong qualities with it to offend the infant.
You may lay a plaster of Mustard all over the breasts, and change it often,
and lay on another; all such things as being eaten (breed milk) will do the
like if you lay them on outwardly: or foment the breasts with this decoction,
as Fennel, Smallage, Mints, pound them, and lay them on, with Barley meal half
an ounce, the seeds of Gith one dram, and with two drams of Storax Calamita,
and two ounces of the oil of Lillies to make a Poultis.

Some say that by sympathy a Cows Udder dried in an oven, first cut into
pieces, and then powdered, half a pound of this powder to an ounce of Anniseed,
and as much of sweet Fennel-seed, with two ounces of Cummin seed, and four
ounces of Sugar, will make milk increase exceedingly; or boil a handful of
Green Parsley, and a handful of Fennel, with a small handful of Barley, and half
an ounce of red Pease in chicken broth, or sweeten the former decoction with
fine Sugar, and so drink it: Dill, and Basil, and Rochet, and Crystal also,
but this must be warily taken, not too often nor too much, are good to cause
milk in the breasts: some prescribe the hoofs of a Cows forefeet dried and
powdered, and a dram taken every morning in Ale; I think it should be the hoofs
of the hinder feet, for they stand nearest the Udder, where milk is bred. I
mislike not the experiment, but our Ladies thistle is by Signature, and (the
white milky veins it has) well known to be a very good help to women that want
milk.

A woman may be of a good complexion, and yet want milk in her breasts: and
there is a Royal Person now living, that I will not be so bold to name here,
that when his Nurse wanted milk, the Physicians, Doctor Mayhern and others,
were desirous to put her off from being nurse, because (they said) she had not
milk sufficient to supply the child with; but his Sacred Majesty of Blessed and
Glorious Memory spoke in the woman's behalf: when the Physicians confessed, That
the milk she had was very good; What says his Majesty, is not a pint of Cream
as good as a quart of Milk?

Some women there are that are full of blood, lusty, and strong, and so well
tempered to increase milk, that they can suckle a child of their own, and
another for a friend; and it will not be amiss for them when they have too
great plenty to do so, if they be poor, for it will help them with food, and
not hurt their own child: for if a child suck too much milk, it will soon fall
into Convulsion fits, if the children be full bodied; and if milk be too much
in the breasts, it will clodder and corrupt, and inflame the blood if it be not
drawn forth.

When blood first comes to the breasts to make milk, though it come in great
plenty we may not stop it, but afterward labor to diminish it by a slender
diet, and eating things that breed small nourishment; or else lay repercussive
medicaments to the veins under the arms, and above the breasts, to drive the
blood back; you may also open a vein: Calamints and Agnus Castus, Coriander
seed and Hemlock are enemies to breeding of milk.

When you suspect that the blood will be inflamed by too great plenty of milk,
then make a Poultiss of Housleek, Lettice, Poppies, and Water Lillies, this
will drive it back.

They that are desirous to put forth their Children to Nurse may use this
decoction; of Bays, Mallows, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Mints, half a handful
of each, to foment the breasts, and afterward they must anoint them with oil
Omphacine made of sour grapes; then take Turpentine washed with Wine and
Rose Water three ounces, and two or three Eggs, with one scruple of Saffron,
and a sufficient quantity of wax to make a Plaster; lay this on upon the
breasts fresh every day before Supper, but leave a hole in the middle of the
Plaster for the Nipple to come forth.

If the milk be much, and stay long in the breasts, it does curdle, when the
thinner part evaporates, and the thick stays behind and turns into kernels and
hard swellings, which being the Cheesy part of the milk will soon grow hard,
and this will easily inflame and impostumate; besides the plenty, it may be
salt or sharp, or exceed in many other ill qualities: when milk is too much it
will cause pain in the breasts, and clefts; but to hinder it from clotting and
congealing, make a pap of grated white bread, new milk, and oil of Roses,
seethe them all together, and lay it warm over the breasts; let her use to eat
Saffron, Cinnamon, and Mints with her Meats, and observe a moderate Diet with
moist Meats, which breed but thin milk: but if the milk be clodded and
inflamed, pound Chickweed and lay it warm over the breasts, or anoint them
with the mucilage of Fleawort, Purslane seeds, and Fenugreek, made up with wax
to an ointment.

But sometimes the woman takes cold, and falls into an Ague, then lay on a
Poultis to the breasts made with Melilot, Camomile, Fennel seeds, Anniseeds,
Dill seeds, Linseeds, Fenugreek, Southernwood, Basil, and Ginger, with oil of
Camomile; to hinder the curdling, take two ounces of Coriander seed, and as
much of Mints, and one ounce of oil of Dill made to a Livint, with a little
wax: and to dissolve what is already curdled, take an ounce of each of these
roots, Fennel, and Eringos, and half a handful of green Fennel tops, and one
dram of Anniseeds, boil all to a pint, add Oxymel Simple two ounces, and as
much of the sirrup of the two opening roots at the Apothecaries.

It is a thing to be wondered at, how Nature sometimes will find strange
conveniences and passages that are not ordinary in some women; for some have
voided their breasts milk by their Urine, and sometimes by the womb; and it
has been a great Dispute by which of the two the milk came forth: the shortest
way for the milk to return, is the way the blood came to the breasts to make
the milk, not from the veins of the breasts to the hypogastrick Veins, and next
to the womb, but from the breast veins to the epigastrick veins, and from them
to the hypogastrick, and so to the womb; but this is seldom seen or heard of:
but strange things have come forth of the breasts, and sometimes the menstrual
blood unchanged runs forth this way at certain seasons.

Hippocrates Writes that when the blood comes out of the Nipples, those women
are Mad: yet Ama^us Lusitanus tells us, of his own experience, that he saw two
women at whose Paps their Monthly Terms came forth and yet neither of them was
Mad. But we must rightly understand Hippocrates meaning, for he does mean of
her fiery blood that flies up and enflames the party; whereof part goes to the
breasts, and much to the the brain; causing pain and inflammations, and that is
a forerunner of Madness: but it is not menstrual blood will do this, unless it
be endued with some extraordinary malignant quality; for that is ordained to go
to the breasts to make milk, which is the reason that Nurses have few or no
Courses, because the blood goes to the breasts to make milk, as I said.

But if this accident fall out, that the blood runs forth at the breasts
undigested, not changed by the faculty of the breasts into Milk, as it ought to
be, then open the Saphaena vein in the Foot, and that will pull it back again;
and cure this Distemper.

There is so near agreement between the breasts and the womb, that any
distemper of the womb will change the very color of the Nipples; and therefore
it is not well to prejudicate, and to think they are not Maids when their
Nipples change color, when it is only a sign that their wombs are distempered.

The Nipples are red after Copulation, red (I say) as a Strawberry, and that is
their natural color: but Nurses Nipples, when they give Suck, are blew, and
they grow black when they are old.

If there be pain in the breasts from abundance of milk only, the pain is not
very great, it is only by overstretching them; but if the milk be sour, or
sharp, or salt, or corroding, the pain is more, and will be greater if there be
inflammation; but when there is an Ulcer, or a Cancer; the pains are out of
measure great: you may know the c^use of the pain by the greatness of it; and
you have sufficient directions before how to cure them.

But having made way for it, I shall now proceed to speak a few words of
Nurses, and Nursing of Children.

CHAP. V.
How to Choose a Nurse.
THis dispute about Nurses, who are fit for it, and who are not, is much
handled by Physicians; and some there be that will tie every woman to Nurse her
own Child, because Sarah, the wife to so great a Man as Abraham was, nursed
Isaac: And indeed if there be no other obstacle the Argument may carry some
weight with it; for doubtless the mothers milk is commonly best agreeing with
the child; and if the mother do not Nurse her own Child, it is a question
whether she will ever love it so well as she does that proves the Nurse to it
as well as Mother: and without doubt the child will be much alienated in his
affections by sucking of strange Milk, and that may be one great cause of
Childrens proving so undutiful to their Parents.

The Lacedaemonians chose the youngest son after his Father to succeed in the
Kingdom, and rejected all the rest; because the mother gave suck only to the
youngest.

Tacitus gives a reason why the Germans are so exceeding strong; because (says
he) they are commonly sucked by their own Mothers.

Yet Alcibiades, a strong and valiant Captain, was thought to have come to his
great strength, by sucking the breasts of a Spartan woman: for they are great,
vigorous, and usually very strong women.

I cannot think it always necessary for the mother to give her own Child suck;
she may have sore breasts, and many infirmities, that she cannot do it.

Moreover a Nurse ought to be of a good Complexion and Constitution; and if the
Mother be not so, it will be good to change the milk by chosing a good
wholesome nurse, that may correct the natural humors of the Child drawn from
the ill complexion of the Mother.

Many children dye whilst they are sucking the breasts, or else get such
Diseases (if the milk be naught) that they can hardly ever be cured, and the
chief cause is the Nurses milk. If a Nurse be well complexioned her milk cannot
be ill; for a Fig Tree bears not Thistles: a good Tree will bring forth good
Fruit.

But few can tell, when they see a Nurse, whether her complexion be good or
not: wherefore I shall give you such Rules whereby you may be able to know
that; and I have gained most of it by my own experience.

Many Physicians have troubled themselves and others with unnecessary
directions, but the chifest is to choose a nurse of a sanguine complexion, for
that is most predominant in children; and therefore that is most agreeing to
their age: but beware you choose not a woman that is crooked, or squint-eyed,
nor with a misshapen Nose, or body, or with black ill-favored Teeth, or with
stinking breath, or with any notable depravation; for these are signs of ill
manners that the child will partake of by sucking such ill qualified milk as
such people yield; and the child will soon be squint-eyed by imitation, for
that age is subject to represent, and take impression upon every occasion: but
a sanguine complexioned woman is commonly free from all these distempers,
unless by accident it fall out otherwise; and her milk will be good, and her
breasts and nipples handsome, and well proportioned; she is of a mean stature,
not too tall, nor too low; not fat, but well flesht; of a ruddy, merry,
cheerful, delightsome countenance, and clear skinned that her Veins appear
through it; her hair is in a mean between black, and white and red, neither in
the extreme, but a light brown, that partakes somewhat of them all: Such a
woman is sociable, not subject to melancholy, nor to be angry and fretful; nor
peevish and passionate; but jovial, and will Sing and Dance, taking great
delight in children; and therefore is the most fit to Nurse them: whereas all
the other tempers, except sanguine, as Phlegm, or Choler, or melancholy, breed
milk that will agree well with no child; and their own constitutions are not
agreeable to the nursing of children: though her complexion then be not exactly
sanguine, for that is seldom found, let it suffice if blood be predominant
above the rest. Moreover, be her temper naturally never so good, yet if she be
diseased she is not for your turn; or if she be above forty years old, or
under eighteen years: she must be of ability to live well, that there be no
want; and one that has had good Education to instruct her; for if she be not
well bred, she will never breed the child well: she must have prudence and care
to see to it. But there is one rule from the Sex; That a female Child must suck
the breasts of a Nurse that had a Girl the last child she had, and a Boy must
suck her that lately had a boy. But the Nurse must not company with Man so long
as she gives suck to the child, for if she conceive, the child will suffer by
it: she must live in a well-tempered pure, Air; she must sleep well when she is
sleepy, that she may soon wake if the child cry. She must use moderate
exercise, and indeed the Dancing and Rocking of the child will hardly suffer
her to be idle: and therefore all such as put their children to Nurse, should
do well to consider the great care and pains of the Nurse, by well rewarding
them, when they have made a good choice: for, if the Nurse be not good, they
had better be without them.

Nor is it only a present Gratification from the Parents that is answerable to
the Nurses pains: But children should remember, when they come to years, to be
thankful to their Nurses that bred them up, and to requite their great care and
pains, having them in little less esteem than their own Mothers that bore them.

The Nurse on the other side must not neglect her Duty, and doubtless some
nurses are as fond of their nurse Children as if they were their own.

If the nurse use good Diet and Exercise, it will breed good blood, and good
blood makes good milk: but let her forbear all sharp, sour, fiery, melancholy
meats; or Mustard, and Onyons, or Leeks and Garlic: and let her not drink much
strong drink, for that will inflame the Child, and make it choleric: all
Cheese breeds melancholy, and Fish is Phlegmatic. Gross and thick air make
gross blood, and heavy bodies, and dull wits. Places that are near the Sea
side, and Bogs, are very sickly and unwholesome; but a clear air, that is pure,
is as needful as Meat and Drink, it makes the body sprightful, and the reason
and understanding ready, good vital and animal spirits are bred by it, whereby
all things to reason become more subservient; opinion, fancy, judgment,
resolution, apprehension, imagination, memory, knowledge, mirth, hope, trust,
joy, urbanity, and what can be said almost are produced: Meats and Drinks feed
the body, but the air guides the mind in almost all its actions; and life and
health, sickness and death depend most upon it.

If the nurses milk be too hot, Succory, Purslain are good herbs for her to
eat; and if it be too cold, then Vervain, and Mother of time, Cinnamon, Borrage
and Bugloss, and all wholesome Herbs and Meats and Drinks, that a little exceed
in heat mend her milk.

If the child be ill the Nurses milk is commonly the cause of it; if wind
oppress the child, let the Nurse but put Fennel seed, and Anniseed into her
meats or broths, and the child will be well; but of that more by and by, as I
pass on to speak of the diseases and infirmities of children: but before I part
with the Nurse it will be but reason to enquire when the Nurse should part with
her child, and wean it from the breasts.

I know there can be no general rule for all, because some children are weak,
and must stay longer before they be weaned.

Avicenna says two years is the time children should suck: I have seen some in
England that have kept their children sucking near four years, who would carry
their stool after their Nurses to sit down on to give them suck; but a year old
is sufficient to most children; yet they are loath to leave the Dug till they be
driven from it.

Breast milk is very sweet, and of good digestion and therefore some that are
fallen into consumptions in their riper years, are cured by sucking a wholesome
woman's breasts: but sucking is not proper for children so soon as they can
concoct other nutriment. Milk is for Babes, but strong meat for men.

I have known some women so fond of their children, that they would never wean
them by their good will: But when children suck so overlong, as three or four
years, I seldom hear of any of them that ever come to good; insomuch that many
women have repented of their folly when it was too late. Their children by
overcockering, growing so stuborn and unnatural, that they have proved a great
grief to their parents.

It seems God sometimes thus punishes women for their folly; and the children
thus tenderly bred, for want of stronger meat than breast milk in their
childhood, grow lame, and weak, and sick of the Rickets.

Some women will not be contented with such children as God sends them, but
they will be mending the feature of their noses, and their bodies, till they
make them very ill favored, that would have grown in good shape: and some
though they have Daughters, will not be contented unless they may have a son.

God sometimes hears their prayers, and sends them a Boy, it may be a Fool,
that will be a boy as long as he lives.

I have showed you that children, be they Boys or Girls, unless they be weak,
should not suck the breast above a year; and if it be a nurses breasts, and not
the own mother that they suck, it is the same thing for time; yet the Nurse
should be chosen as near to the constitution of the mother as possibly you can,
for then there will not be so great alteration in the constitution and manners
of the child; a Nurse is best after her second child, if she be but between
twenty and thirty years of age, her milk must not be above ten months old when
you choose her; nor under two months old, for that will be too new.

If the nurses milk prove ill, she must take a gentle purgation; but if it be
to purge the child, it must be very gentle indeed, for that purging quality of
the Medicament passes to the milk, and will operate upon the Child, which
cannot otherwise be purged by Physic.

It has been much argued whether the mother or some other women be best to
nurse the child; surely I should think the mother, in all respects, if she be
sound and well, because it agrees better with the child's temper; for the milk
of the mother is the same with that nutriment the child drew in, in the Womb.
But yet it will do good sometimes to change the nurse, if the mothers milk
contract any ill qualities, or be too sharp, or salt, or otherwise offensive to
the child; for if the child do not take rest well, or cry and complain,
doubtless the milk it feeds on is distempered: Good milk is neither too thick
nor too thin; too thin is raw and breeds crudities; too thick is hardly
concocted by the infant: it must be white and sweet scented; if it smell sour,
or burnt, it will corrupt in the stomach; and so it will if it taste salt, or
sour, or bitter, or have any ill taste: drop a drop of breast milk on your nail,
or upon a Glass, and if it show very white, and neither stick like glue nor run
off like water, but be off a middle nature, you may conclude that it is good.

When the blood is too full of Whey it breeds thin milk, which gives little
nourishment, and the children by sucking of it fall into Fluxes, and looseness
of the belly; and sharp milk makes them scabby: purge away the whey of the
blood if it be too hot and choleric with Rhubarb, otherwise with Mechoachan,
or sirrup of Roses: cold and moist breasts are mended by the contraries, that
is by hot and dry things: If wheyish humors come from the Liver, that must be
mended: hot and dry things (that profit) are bread, well baked with Anniseed,
and Fennel seed; Roast-meat, Rice, sweet Almonds: but broth, and Fish and
Sallets, and Summer fruits must be avoided: good exercise breeds good blood;
gross diet makes thick and gross milk; and sometimes a hot and dry distemper of
the breasts will burn up the thin part of the milk: purge away thick humors
from the blood, and eat meats of good digestion, as Veal, Chickens, Kids flesh;
and use a moistening and attenuating Diet; Fried Onions, and all sour spiced
meats, will communicate their qualities to the milk, that you may find both by
smell and taste.

Strong passions of anger, or fear will cause chollerick and melancholy milk,
which makes the child lean, that it cannnot thrive: Hence come gripings, and
wringing pains in the belly, Thrush in the mouth, and Falling Sickness; good
wine moderately drank sometimes, will help the ill smell and taste of the milk.
Let the Nurse be sure to observe a Diet that is most proper for her milk, and
may not corrupt it; and also to avoid all passions and venereous actions during
the time she is a nurse; and if for all this the milk prove ill, she must purge
away evil qualities, according to my former prescriptions.

CAAP. VI.
Of the Child.
CHildren that look white and pale when they are born, are weak and sickly, and
seldom live long; but if it be of a reddish color all over the body, when it
is first born, and this color change by degrees to a Rose color, there is no
doubt of the child but it may do well: if it cry strongly and clear, it argues
a great strength of the breast. Take notice of all the parts of it, and see all
be right; and the Midwife must handle it very tenderly and wash the body with
warm wine, then when it is dry roll it up with soft cloths, and lay it into the
Cradle: but in the swaddling of it be sure that all parts be bound up in their
due place and order gently, without any crookedness, or rugged foldings; for
infants are tender twigs, and as you use them, so they will grow straight or
crooked: wipe the child's eyes often, to make them clean, with a piece of soft
linen, or silk; and lay the arms right down by the sides, that they may grow
right, and sometimes with your hand stroke down the belly of the child toward
the neck of the bladder, to provoke it to make water: But the first work to be
done, so soon as it is born, is to cut the Navel-string, and to bind that up
right; I showed you how to do it before; when the Navel-string is cut off,
strew upon it a powder of Bole, Sarcocolla, Dragons blood, Cummin and Myrrh, of
each the same quantity, and bind a piece of Cotton, or Wool over it, to keep it
from falling off again; and if the child be weak after this, anoint the child's
body over with oil of Acorns, for that will comfort and strengthen it, and keep
away the cold; wash the child next with warm water; pare your nails, and pick
out the filth from the child's nostrils; open the Fundament that it may incline
to go to stool, and keep it neither too hot nor too cold, nor in a place that
is too light; let not the beams of the Sun or Moon dart upon it as it lies in
the Cradle especially, but let the cradle stand in a darkish and shadowy place,
and let the head lie a little higher than the body; for a child that is very
young to look upon the light of a candle will make them pore blind, or
squint-eyed: so will the light of the Sun; set not a candle behind the head of
it, for the child will turn its eyes to the light. Take heed the child be not
frighted, for it will soon be fearful if you let it sleep alone, so soon as it
awakes and misseth the Nurse; keep it not waking longer than it will, but use
means to provoke it to sleep, by rocking it in the cradle, and singing
Lullabies to it; carry it often in the arms, and dance it, to keep it from the
Rickets and other diseases: let it not suck too much at once, but often suckle
it as it can digest it.

After four months let loose the arms, but still roll the breast, and belly,
and feet to keep out cold air for a year, till the child have gained more
strength. Shift the child's clouts often, for the Piss and Dung, if they lie
long in it, will fetch on the skin, and put the child to great pain: you may
suffer the child to cry a little, for it is better for the brain and lungs,
that are thus opened and discharged of superfluous humors, and natural heat is
raised by it, it does most good before they suck, and when the former suck is
digested; but too much crying will cause rheums to fall, and oftentimes the
child will be broken bellied by its overstraining: change the breasts as you
give suck; sometimes let it draw one, sometimes another; and for the first
month let it suck as much as it can, so the stomach be not too full. Give it
some pap of barley bread steeped a while in water, and then boiled in milk;
children that are lusty may be fed with this betimes, but they must not suck
till it be a full hour after it, and thus they should be dieted till they breed
teeth. So soon as the teeth come forth, let it eat more substantial meat, that
is easily chewed and of quick digestion; also give it Cows milk and broths: let
not the child rest too soon upon its legs, for if the legs be weak they will
grow crooked, by reason of the weight of their bodies. When the child is seven
months old you may (if you please) wash the body of it twice a week with warm
water till it be weaned, Let the teeth come forth most part, especially the
eye-teeth, before the child be weaned, for those teeth cause great pains when
they are breeding, and Fevers, and grievous a king of their Gums proceed from
them: the stronger the child is, the sooner he is ready to be weaned; some at
twelve months old, and some not till fifteen or eighteen months old; you may
stay two years if you please, but use the child to other Food by degrees, till
it be acquainted with it. Let the child drink but little wine, that it do not
over-heat the blood: the best time to wean the child is either the Spring or
the Fall of the Leaf, the Moon increasing.

For seven years give the child nourishing meats and an indifferent plentiful
diet to make it grow; cocker them not over much, nor provoke them to passions:
I cannot tell which may do most hurt. Too much play, as children are prone to,
will over-heat the blood; and want of play and idleness will make them dull:
Some Parents are too fond of their children, and leave them to their own wills:
some are too froward, and dishearten their children; the mean is best for them
both, and so they shall be sure to find it.

I have as briefly as I could, touched upon all occasions for women and their
children; and some things may seem to be needless to to tell those that knew
them before: but by their leave, they that know some things may be ignorant of
other things: what one knew before, it may be another knew not: and what she
knew not, another might know.

There are many things here that most women desire to know: the reason is the
same why all meats are eaten, and all Maids may be married: for if we all were
taken with the same thing, there could be no living in the world.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Diseases that Infants and children are often troubled with.
I. SOmetimes the child, so soon almost as it is but new born, will fall into
strange throws and convulsions.

Hippocrates divides childrens diseases according to their several ages:
Children (new born) are subject to inflammation of the navel after it is cut,
to moistness of the Ears, to Coughs and Vomitings, and Ulcers in the mouth; to
Fears and watchings. When the Teeth begin to breed, there are Fevers,
Convulsions, and Fluxes of the Belly, chiefly when the Eye-Teeth breed: when
they grow older the Tonsils are enflamed, the Turnbones of the neck are laxated
inwardly, they have short breath, and are troubled with the stone in the
bladder, round worms, and Ascarides, Strangury, King's Evil, and standing
Yards; as they grow, still new diseases come on: as the Measels, Smallpox;
some are Tongue-tyed until the Ligament be cut that is too short, and hinders
their Speech. Use no strong Vomitings, or purgings, or Glisters to children,
nor bleed them; but give them gentle means, such are Suppositories, and mild
Glisters, with a little Sugar and Milk: give stronger Physic to the Nurse, if
need require, to purge the child: strong medicaments given to the nurse may
endanger the child that sucks the breasts; but weak purges are sufficient to do
it good. You may give the child a Glister thus; take Mallows, and violet
leaves, of each one handful, flowers of violets and camomile of each a small
handful, boil them, and take four or five ounces of the decoction, and with
four or six drams of sirrup of roses, and half an ounce of oil of Violets, make
it ready to give lukewarm, or something more hot, as it may well endure.

II. If a Child be troubled with phlegm, lay it not on the back, for you may
soon choke it; but turn it to lie on one side or the other. Keep the belly
loose; thrust up a suppository of Castle soap, rubbed over with fresh butter,
to make it more smooth and gentle to pass into the body; a spoonful of sirrup
of Violets afterward will force down the phlegm: you may, if the child be
temperate in heat, mingle half the quantity of sweet Almond oil, with half so
much sirrup of Violets; but rub the belly down with sweet butter, as often as
it is undressed.

III. If the child's Codds be swollen, observe whether wind or water be the cause
of it; the water will sweat out if you chafe the part with fresh butter: if it
be wind swing the child well and dance it, and put the decoction of Anniseeds
in their drink: but there may be many causes of the swelling of the Codds; if
wind be the cause, the Codds will show thin as a horn, and be as stiff as a
Drums head* too much crying may cause an inflammation, or bursting. If the
swelling arise from heat* cooling herbs will cure it; but for wind, boil a
handful of bay leaves, of Dill, Camomile, and Fennel, of each a handful, Rue
half a handful boil all in a quart of Beer wort to a pint: strain it out hard,
and with the liquor boil as much Bean meal as will make a poultis putting to it
two or three spoonfuls of oil of Camomile, apply it hot to the Codds.

IV. If the child's Fundament slip forth, as it will oftentimes in many
children, when they are bound, and strain to go to stool, or have taken cold,
or the Muscles are relaxed by moisture, when there is a looseness of the Belly,
and a Tenesmus or Needing, then the Muscle that binds up the hole will come
forth; if it come from straining it is easily cured at first; but too much
moisture causing it, will be hard to overcome, especially when the belly is
loose, for then the Medicaments are driven off.

For the cure then; if it be swollen, and will not be put in, bath it first with
a decoction of Mallows, and Marshmallows; or anoint it with oil of Lillies,
then try to put it up, having cast some astringents upon it; or take Galls,
Acorn cups, Myrtle berries, dried red Roses, burnt Hartshorn, burnt Alum, and
flowers of sour. Pomegranates, of each a like quantity; make a strong decoction
in water, and whilst it is warm bath the Gut with it, and put it into its
place: and, to make it flag up, spread a little melted wax, Frankincense and
Mastick together, upon a Linen Clout, and lay it to the Fundament, so bind it
on, and take it off only when the child goes to stool: sprinkle the Gut with
this following powder: Of red roses and sour Pomegranate flowers, of each half
a dram; Frankincense and mastick of each one dram.

V. If the Infant be too loose bellyed, and cannot contain its Excrements; this
proceeds either from breeding of Teeth, and that is usually with a fever, or
from concoction depraved, and the nourishment corrupted, or from much waking,
or great pain, or Feverish humors stirring in the body: or when they drink or
suck too much, being over-hot: taking cold may also bring a Looseness; if the
Excrements be yellow, and green, and stink, some sharp humor is the cause of
it: When children breed teeth it is good to have the belly somewhat loose; but
if it exceed it must be stopped, for the child will consume. If the Excrements be
black, and the child feverish, it is an ill sign. But a Sucking child needs
not be cured so much as the Nurse; mend her milk, or get another Nurse; and let
her avoid green fruit, and Meats of hard digestion. When the child is past
sucking, then purge, things that leave a binding quality behind will do it;
such are sirrup or honey of red Roses: You may give a Glister of two or three
ounces of the decoction of Milium and Myrobolans, with an ounce or two of
sirrup of dried red Roses. If it proceed from a hot cause, cleanse first, then
give sirrup of dried roses, Quinces, Myrtles, Currants, Coral, Mastick,
Hartshorn, or powder of Myrtles, with a little Dragons blood, and anoint the
belly with oil of roses, of Mastick, of Myrtles. In a cold cause the Excrements
will be white; then give sirrup of mastick and Quinces, with mint water; and
take half a scruple of Frankincense, and of Nutmeg as much, temper it with the
juice of a Quince, and give it the child: Lay a plaster to the child's belly
made with the seeds of red Roses, Cummin, Anniseed, and Smallage, Barley meal,
and juice of Plantane, with a little Vinegar, boil all together: When the
stools are red, or yellow, a spoonful or two of red Rose sirrup, or of
Pomegranates, with Mint water, may do much good; or beat some Sorrel-seeds to
powder, and give it to eat with the yolk of a roasted Egg; or bruise the seed,
and boil it in fountain water, and let the child drink of it twice a day.

If the child be costive and cannot go to stool, this comes oftentimes from a
cold and dry distemper of the Guts, from the birth, or form slimy phlegm that
sticks to the Guts, and wraps up the Dung: this last comes from the milk, when
the Nurse drinks little, or eats hard meats, or astringent diet; or else it
may come from a hot distemper of the Kidneys and Liver, that dries the
excrements; or want of choler to provoke expulsion.

A dry distemper of the Guts is not easily helped: when there wants choler the
body looks yellow, and the dung is white, because the choler is gone some
other way. When the child is bound, the Head will ache, and there is pain in
the belly: wherefore it is more healthful if the belly be loose, so it be
moderate.

A hot distemper is remedied by bathing it often in a bath of boiled Lettice
and Succory, to mosten and cool it: In a hot cause use coolers, in a moist
drying things; let the nurse abstain from binding meats in dry causes, as from
Quinces, Medlars, Pease, Beans; and anoint the stomach and belly of the child
with fresh butter, oil of Lillies, hens grease; if the child be grown give it
the decoction of red Coleworts, with a little Honey and salt: Phlegm is cured
with sirrup of Roses, or with Honey; and to cool, sirrup of Violets is
effectual, or emulsions of the four cold seeds: When choler will not come from
the Gall to the guts, to move the expulsive faculty, let it drink a decoction
of Grass roots, Maidenhair, Fennel, and Sparagus; if it will not yet void the
Excrements, make a suppository of Honey boiled hard, let it be as big as a date
stone, or a little bigger, and as long as your little finger, or you may make
it of the stalks, or roots of Beets, or flower de Luce, dip them in oil, and
thrust it up into the Fundament; lay a piece of wool dipped in oil to the childs
navel, and give it the quantity of a Pease of good honey: When the child sucks
give the Nurse a gentle purge to loosen the belly, if soluble meats will not do
it; you may safely lay a plaster over the childs belly, made of Mallows and
Marshmallowes, of each one handful, Holyhocks two ounces, ten Figs, Fenugreek
and Linseed of each one ounce, boil all in water and then stamp them in a
mortar, make it up with butter and hens-grease, of each two ounces, Saffron one
scruple, spread it on a Linen Cloth; or apply to the navel a walnut shell
full of hens-grease and Ox Gall, and anoint the belly with softning things, as
with oil of sweet Almonds and of Linseed; bran, with the juice of Dwarf Elder
will make a loosning Poultis for the belly.

VI. The child may be troubled with worms that breed in their Guts, some like
mites of Cheese, and some like earth worms; and some children have been
observed to have them in their Mothers bellies, for they have voided them so
soon almost as they were born: but the chief cause is by mingling milk with
other meats, when the constitution is hot and moist; or from Summer Fruits, and
sweet Meats that worms love. These worms are broad and small, or round and
long: you may know when they have worms, when their Mouths water much, and
their breath stinks when they gnash their teeth, and start in their sleep, and
cry, when they have a dry cough, loath their meat, are very thirsty, when they
vomit and hicket, when their bellies swell, and they are much bound, or very
loose, when they make thick white water with pain: when their belly is empty,
and the worms want meat, their face is covered with a cold sweat, and their
cheeks flush with red color, and suddenly become pale; by this you may know
what worms they are, for these signs show round worms commonly rather than
flat: sometimes children have no great hurt by it when they have worms, till
the worms grow too strong, and then dangerous symptoms follow. Long round
worms are worst, for they will eat quite through the belly; and when there is a
Fever the danger is greater: Those that do least hurt are white, but the fewer
and smaller the worms are, the less is the danger.

It is best to eat meats of good juice, with Oranges and Pomegranates,
forbearing all slimy sweet fat meats, Fish, and milk, and Summer fruits; and to
take some powder of hartshorn, and drink thin wine mingled with Grass and
Sorrel waters; these will keep worms that they breed not, which is better than
to let them breed, and drive them out afterward.

Keep the child's belly loose with Glisters, when you know they have worms; or
give them the decoction of Sebestens before meat; Scordium and Wormwood are
good, but children will not be persuaded to take bitter medicaments; wherefore
you may give them Grass water, with juice of Lemmons, or one or two drops of
Spirit of Vitriol.

These things following will kill Worms, and cast them forth; eight grains of
Mercurius Dulcis steept all night in Couch-grass water, strain it finely, and
give nothing but the water: Wormseed, Hartshorn, or Coralline are good; lay
Peach-leaves bruised to the Navel, or a little Ox Gall, Saint John's wort, and
Wormwood; Knot-grass water drank with milk; Ox Gall and Cummin-seed laid to the
Navel are good against great worms; mingle with your juice, of Wormwood, and Ox
Gall of each two ounces, of Coloquintida one ounce, made into a Cataplasme with
Wheat meal, lay it over the Belly and Navel. If there be a Fever withal use
such cooling remedies as are here prescribed against a Fever; you must use
several medicaments, for the worms will quickly grow familiar with any
medicament, and will not stir for it: the best time to administer your remedies
is about the new, or full of the Moon, for then they will sooner move than in
the quarters; let the child be fasting, and go to stool first if he can, and
give the medicament to destroy the Worms when they are hungry,, and the time
the child (that is of age) is wont to eat his breakfast, for the worms will
look for it.

VII. Sometimes children have Convulsion Fits, and the Falling Sickness; it is
natural to some from their birth, but others have it by accident; the nurses
ill milk may breed it, let her cleanse her body, and not use too much moist and
cooling diet; nor let the child suck too much at one time, to over-charge the
stomach. The Male-Peony root hanged about the child's neck, and a small quantity
of the powder of the same given to the child (in any convenient way) with milk,
or pap, or broth, or drink is much commended, and so is the seed: it is good
for the child to smell to Rue, and Assafaetida, and sometimes rub the Nostrils
with a drop of oil of Castor, or of Costus; it may proceed from ill milk in the
child's stomach, or by consent from other parts, or from worms in the Guts, or
from ill vapors that ascend where bad humors abound: These prick the Films of
the brain, and cause the child's distemper; it may be originally bred in the
brain, or arise from some sudden fright, or from breeding of teeth; this last
will be gone when the pain of the teeth is over.

Many young children die of this disease: it may come with the Small Pox or
Measles, and when they come forth it will be cured, if nature be strong; the
Nurses good diet is a great furtherer to the cure: in the fit you may give
Peony or Lavender Water, and rub the Nape of the neck with a drop of oil of
Amber, and touch the Nose with it; an Elks hoof, or an Emrald are useful to
hang about the neck, and may be given inwardly.

If it proceed from corrupt milk in the stomach, dip a feather in oil of
Almonds, and thrust it down the Throat to cause vomit.

The Florentines with a hot Iron burn the child in the nape of the neck to dry
the brain; and Celsus maintains it to be the very last remedy.

But Paulus Aequineta says, It would be sure to kill him with waking pain; he
would scarce be able to sleep after it.

To prevent this mischief, so soon as the child is born give him this following
powder; male-Peony roots, one scruple, gathered in the Moons decreasing,
magistery of Coral half a scruple, with Leaf God.

VIII. Convulsion Fits come when the brain labors to cast off what offends its
many die of it, for the cause lies in the nerves and marrow of the back;
wherefore wash the body and back with a decoction of Marshmallows, Lilly roots,
Peony and Cammomile flowers: The Sun-flower boiled in water is good to wash the
Infant with, and anoint the back with man's grease, or Goose grease, or with
oils of Foxes, or of worms, or of Lillies, or of Mastick, or Turpentine: This
disease comes either of indigestion, or of weakness of the attractive faculty,
especially in such children as are fat and moist; the back may be anointed with
oils of Rue, or of Flower de Luce; or bath the Limbs with a decoction of
Primroses, or of Cowslips, or Cammomile flowers; if you find great heat then
mingle oil of Violets, and oil of sweet Almonds, and anoint with that.

IX. Sometimes the child's navel swells, and sticks out, that should lie in; the
reason may be because the navel-string was not well tied, and too much of it
was left behind which sticks forth, sometimes it may come from the child's
crying, or coughing, and that looseneth the Peritonaeum, it is without
inflammmation: but sometimes the navel has an Ulcery and the Guts fall into
it. It falls out often so soon as the string is cut, wherefore take Spike and
^eeth it in oil of sweet Almonds, mingle a little Turpentine with it, dip in a
piece of Wool, and bind it on the part: but if crying, or coughing, or bruise,
or tall, be the cause of it, then use bitter Lupines mingled with the powder of
an old Linen cloth burnt to ashes, mingle all with red wine, dip in Cotton and
apply it to the Navel: if the navel be inflamed the Navel feels hard, else it
will feel soft, and is neither hot nor red, but will last longer than when it
is enflamed: if the Peritonaeum be loose only, and not broken, it will be no
bigger when he cries, nor does the Navel come forth much; but it will increase
if it be broken, if he either cry or stir much, but it will not be seen when he
lies on his back: ill outting of the Navel string is not so much dangerous, as
it is troublesome to the child; it may be cured at first, though it be too
long, or has an Ulcer: but in time, if it be neglected, the guts will fall
into it, and cause inflammation, and an Iliack passion, which will kill the
child: wind puffs up the Navel when the Peritonaeum is loose; then take the
powder of Cummin-seed, Bay berries and Lupines, with red wine; or a bag of ^ike
and Cummin-seeds boiled in red wine for a Cataplasme, and roll it on.

If the Peritonaeum be broken, let the gut be first put in, then lay on
astringent Powders of Cypress-nuts, Mirrh, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, Mastick,
Alum, and Isinglass, of each a like quantity, and make a Poultiss of it with
Whites of eggs: give the child inwardly such remedies as are good against
Ruptures. When the Navel is inflamed, it looks red, and is hard, hot and pants
much; this shows it was not well tied, for the pain draws the blood to it: If
it turns to an Imposthume and break, the guts will come out, and kill the
child. To ease the pain take two ounces of Mallows boiled and stamped, Barley
meal half an ounce, with two drams of Lupines and Fenugreek, make a Cataplasme
of them with oil of Roses; drive back the blood with an application, made of
one dram of Frankincense, with Fleabane seed, and Acacia of each half a dram,
incorporated with the white of an egg: Keep it if possible, from
imposthumation: but if it cannot be kept, then take half an ounce of
Turpentine, two ounces of oil of Roses, and with the Yolk of an Egg lay it on.

X. If the child be burst, as young children often are, it may be easily cured
at first, the Peritonaeum is either loose or broken, and the small guts fall
into the Cods; when the child coughs much, or cries, or by some violent fall,
or straining to go to stool; elder people are not so easily cured of this:
sometimes it is only a rupture which falls out of the belly into the Cods, and
the Peritonaeum is well.

If a Gut be fallen, it is but of one side the right or left Groin, and you may
see it and feel it, and the hole too through which the Gut fell: but the watery
rupture is all over, even alike; this will vanish of it self so soon as the
water is consumed. Keep the child loose, and from crying and violent motion;
lay it upon the back, and thrust up the gut gently, the head lying low, and the
heels up; then take Emplastrum ad Herniam, or an ointment made of Comfrey
roots, with a thick bolster steeped in Smiths water, and lay it on: keep the
child quiet, and see the Bolster come not off; never unbind it, so in time the
hole will grow narrow, and the gut larger, and will stay in its place.

You may lay on a Plaster made of Gum Elemi steept in vinegar, till there be a
cream on the top, with that and oil of eggs make it up; or take Frankincense
one dram, Aloes, Acacia, Cypress nuts of each two drams, with a dram of Myrrh
and Isinglass make a Plaster. The watery rupture is cured with oil of Elder, of
Bays and of Rue; or else make a Cataplasme of Bean flower, Fenugreek, Linseed,
Cummin seed, Cammomile flowers, and the oils aforesaid.

XI. Sometimes children are weak, that they are long before they can go;
wherefore it is good to strengthen their legs and thighs, that they may be able
to go betimes; and that may be done thus, take the juice of Marjoram, of Sage,
and of Danewort an equal quantity of each; fill a glass viol with these juices,
and with Past lute it round; and when you set in household bread in the oven
then set in your glass, when you draw it forth break the glass, and save the
ointment you shall find in it; melt this with some Neats-foot oil, and rub the
Child's Legs and Thighs with it on the hinder parts.

XII. Children have many diseases, that chiefly happen about the head
outwardly; as many ulcerous risings and pushes, which come chiefly from the
Nurses ill milk; wherefore purge the nurse, and give the child some sirrup of
Borrage, or of Fumitory; bath the Scabs with softening decoctions, then dry
them with Alum Camphoratum.

If these milky Scabs called Achores and Favi be not well cured, they turn to a
Scald, or scabby stinking Ulcer, called Tinea a moth, because like a moth it
will fret as they eat Garments.

The milk scab comes at the first sucking, and after that the Achores, which
are scabs that are not white, and are only upon the head; but the white scabs
run over all the face and the body: Those Ulcers in the head especially still
run with matter; they are of several colors, as white, red, yellow, black; but
they all come from excrementitious, watery, salt, thick, and thin humors, that
itch, and make them to scratch; they were gathered in the womb, and bad milk
increases them, in time they cure themselves, if the cause be not too bad, but
if the matter be too fierce, it will pierce the Scull; when it runs it does
children good, if it stink it may cause the Falling sickness.

Carduus and Scabius water, and good cordials will drive them out; coolers and
binders are naught, for they strike them in.

The nurse must keep a good diet, and prepare her self with Bugloss, Borrage,
Fumitory, Succory, Hops, Polypody, and Dock roots; then purge with Senna,
Epithymum and Rhubarb; forbear salt, spiced, and sharp meats: Conserve of
Succory roots and Citrons candied of each half an ounce; of Borrage, Bugloss,
Violets, Fumitory, and Succory, of each one ounce; Hartshorn, Diarrhodon,
Diamargariton frigid, of each a scruple, make an Electuary with sirrup of
Gilliflowers, let the nurse take daily two drams.

Purge the child with Manna, wash the Head with a decoction of Mallows,
Barley, Wormwood, Celandine, Marshmallow roots boiled in barley water, and boys
piss; make an ointment to use after it with oil of bitter Almonds, oil of
Roses, and some Litharge: or wash the head with Soap, if you fear it may turn
to a Scald head, or eat into the skull; and then with the former decoction: or
take Ceruss, Litharge of each two drams; of Agarick and Pomegranate flowers of
each one dram, oil of Roses and Vinegar make an ointment.

If it come to be a Scald head, it is a dry Ulcer in the head only, called
Tinea; but Achores are moist Ulcers in the head and body sometimes.

A Scald head is infectious, it proceeds from a salt sharp melancholic humor,
from the Mothers blood, or from corrupt Milk: These Scabs are like bran
sometimes, or Scurf, with Scales, sometimes slimy; and when the Scab comes off
you shall see red quick knobs of flesh, like the inside of a fig, some of them
are malignant; they run but little, but that which comes forth stinks much. An
old black or ash-colored scab is hard to cure; the other is not so when it is
new, and yellow matter comes from it: The hair will scarce ever come again when
it is cured, the skin is so exceeding hard; rub the skin and if it will not
seem red, there is no hopes of hair. The salt humors make the skin thick and
dry, wherefore it will be good to moisten with laying on a Beet, or a Colewort
leaf spread with Hogs grease, and remove the scab with such things as cleanse
and are some what sharp.

When the child comes to age, and is able to bear it, purge with Senna,
Rhubarb, and Agarick, then take Brimstone two drams, Mustard half a dram,
Briony roots, and Staves-acre, of each one dram, Vinegar one ounce, Turpentine
and Bears grease of each half an ounce; this ointment will make the scab fall:
or if you beat Hog's Grease, and Watercresses together, and lay it on the scab,
it will fall off in four and twenty hours: when the scab is fallen use a pitched
Cap to pull out the hair by the roots; then use softeners to correct the dry
distemper.

Apply things that will consume the excrements that lie deep in the skin; as
take one ounce of each of these following roots, of Docks, Lillies, and
Marshmallows; of Mallows, Fumitory, Sage, of each two handfuls, and boil all in
vinegar, and Ly, and wash the head daily with it: Then make a Cerot of Tar and
Wax; or take Saltpeter one ounce, Oxymel one ounce and a half; or mingle with
Hogs grease live Brimstone one ounce, with Hellebore, and Staves-acre, of each
two drams; but beware of poisons, such as are Arsenick, or Pigment, or Mercury,
for they are dangerous to corrode the part that lies so near the brain.

XIII. Sometimes childrens heads swell with water, and are very big; the water
is either without the skul, or within the skul; for this water lies either
between the skin, and the pericranium, or between the bone and the pericranium,
or between the bone and the membranes, called the Dura and Pia Matter. Sometimes
abundance of vapors get between the bones and skin of the head, and make the
head so great, that they kill the child; If it be water the child will be
giddy, and have Epileptick fits, nor can it rest. If it be only, wind between
the skin and the pericranium a decoction of Sage, Betony, Calamint, and
Origanum, of each one handful; of Anniseeds and Fennel seeds of each two drams,
with a handful of Cammomile flowers, and of Melilot and red roses the like
quantity boiled in water with some wine will cure it. The watery humor is
hardly cured: A humor from water within the brain is smaller and harder than
when it is out of the skull, but it is more hard to cure, and almost incurable.
A humor of wind is seldom without water that breeds it; apply discussers that
make the humors thin, to the head, the nose, and the ears; as Cammomile, Rue,
and Origanum. Take thirty snails in their shells, of Mugwort, and Marjoram of
each one handful, stamp them, then put to them Saffron half a dram, and a
scruple of Camphire, and make a poultiss with oil of Cammomile: Also take
Nutmegs, Cubebs, Cloves of each one scruple; Frankincense Bark, Calamus, of
each half a dram; Marjoram water three ounces, snuff up this water often, and
drop hot oils into the ears. If the water be not dissipated in twenty days,
you must open the skull, and let out the water by degrees; and beware that the
child take no cold: If such means as are outwardly applied will not help it,
the last remedy is by the Surgeon.

XIV. Sometimes children are much vexed with the Hiccough, or Hickets, or
Huckets as they call it, it comes commonly from too much repletion, and
fullness; wherefore dip a feather in oil, and put it down the child's Throat and
make it vomit: It may come from a cold stomach, then anoint the stomach with
oil of Cammomile, of Worm wood, of Mastick and Quinces, and dissolve a scruple
of the Troches of Diarrhodon in the Nurses Milk, and give it the child.

If this disease come from too much Milk, the belly swells, and the child
vomits: if the Nurses Milk be bad it comes from thence: and the Excrements will
smell of stinking Milk.

This is no dangerous disease unless the cause be violent, for then it will
fly to the Nerves, and cause a Convulsion, Falling sickness and death.

Give the child sirrups of Mints and Betony, to strengthen the stomach, and
anoint it with oil of Mints, of Mastick, and of Dill.

There is a disease like the Hickets in children, from grief, or anger, when
the spirits fly from the Heart to the Midriff, and stop the breath, but it is
soon over.

XV. Children are sometimes subject to vomiting from too much, or from ill
milk, or from phlegm that falls from the head to the stomach; a moist loose
stomach is the immediate cause; if they vomit milk they are better for it: if
the milk be naught, the matter that comes forth will show that, for it is
yellow, green, or filthy colored, and it stinks.

Worms may make them vomit, but that will be known by the signs: children that
vomit often are best in health, and thrive best, because their stomach is kept
clean of ill humors; but to vomit too much will make them wast away: cleanse
the stomach with honey of Roses, and strengthen it with sirrup of Quinces, and
of Mints.

When the humor is too sharp and hot, give the sirrup of Pomegranates, or of
Coral, or of Currants: Coral has a hidden virtue, and some hang it about their
necks.

Anoint the stomach with oils of Mastick, Mints, Quinces, Wormwood, of each
half an ounce; oil of Nutmegs (by expression) half a dram; oil of Mints
chymically extracted three drops, or dip bread in hot Wine, and lay it to the
mouth of the Stomach.

XVI. If the child be griped, and pained in the belly, you shall know it by the
great unquietness, and crying, and turning it self from side to side; it is often
with a scowring, and from bad milk, that breeds sharp windy humors; it gets to
the guts and gnaws them; and sometimes it is from worms: if it be wind it will
cease when they break wind; but ill humors cause a constant pain. Tough phlegm
binds the belly, and the Dung is slimy: sharp humors cause a green and yellow,
flux; if this pain last long, it casts them into convulsions, and
falling-sicknesses, and is dangerous: Foment the belly with a decoction of
Lavender, Fennel, and Cummin seed; or take oil of Olives, and Dill seed, and
dip a piece of Wool in it, and lay it over the belly warm.

Give the child some oil of sweet Almonds, with Sugar Candy, and a scruple of
Anni-seeds, and purge it with Honey of Roses, which is good also when the body
is swollen with wind, or too much milk not digested: and use a decoction of
Cardiaca, Cammomile flowers, and Cummin seed; or boil the top of dwarf-Elder,
and of Elder in white wine, and bath the parts that are swollen with it.

If the griping pain comes from the sharp milk, sirrup of Succory with Rhubarb,
or sirrup, or Honey of Roses; or a Glister of the decoction of bran, and
Pellitory of the wall, with sirrup of Roses is very good, using an outward
Ointment of oil of Dill, and Cammomile.

XVII. Sometimes children will sneeze mightily, it may come from an imposthume
in the head; then cooling oils and ointments are commended; but if any other
cause produce it, put the powder of Bazil into the nostrils: If heat cause it
the child's eyes will sink in; then bruise Purslain leaves, and with oil of
Roses, Barley meal, and the yolk of an egg mingled, make an Application to the
Head.

XVIII. When the child is Feverish and hot, the nurse must eat cooling and
moistening things; and anoint all the parts of the child with oil of Roses, and
Unguent Populeon; and lay to the breasts clarified juice of Wormwood, Plantane,
Mallows, Seagreen, made to a Cataplasme of Barley meal.

XIX. It falls oftentimes out that children are squint-eyed, and that comes
when they lie in their Cradle, and the Candle, or light stands behind them, or
on one side: It may come from the Falling Sickness, or by birth, but that is
seldom and not curable: if ill custom have bred it, put your candle on the
other side, or a Picture, till the child's eyes come to look right; but you may
prevent all if you set the candle before the child, and not on either side, for
the child will stare after the light; you may when you find the child's eyes
distorted, hang cloths of all colors on the other side, to make the child to
turn the eyes the contrary way, to gaze on them till it be cured.

XX. Sometimes children have sore eyes with great pain, with Ulcers, and Worms,
and inflammations; for childrens brains are very moist, and there are many
excrements which nature casts forth at other places, because the natural
Emunctories will not carry them all out; much of this goes to their ears, which
will be very sore, that they will cry, and not suffer them to be touched; it is
dangerous, for it will not let them sleep, the heat and pain is so great; it
causes the Falling Sickness, and fouls the spongy bones, and breeds Worms, and
sometimes makes children deaf so long as they live; you cannot use strong
remedies to children; drop a little hemp seed oil with Wine into their ears; to
allay the pain, use warm milk about their ears, or oil of Violets, or the
decoction of Poppey tops: to dry up the moisture use honey of Roses, or water
of honey to drop in their ears.

XXI. The usual painful disease of all children is the breeding of their teeth;
it is very dangerous to some: about the seventh month, first come forth the
fore teeth, then the eyteeth, lastly the grinders: first the Gums itch, then
they prick like needles, by reason of the sharp bones, which causes watchings,
and inflammations of the Gums, Fevers, Convulsions, Scourings; especially when
they breed their eye-teeth. The beginning of the seventh month is the time that
discovers it, and the child's putting his finger into his mouth, and holding the
nipple faster than they were wont; when the tooth is coming forth, the Gum is
whiter than in other parts: the watching breeds choleric humors, and inflames
the body, and brings a Fever.

If the teeth be long before they can come forth, children commonly will die of
Fevers, and Convulsion fits: they that scowr have seldom any Convulsion.

When the gums are thick, the teeth can scarce get forth; wherefore soften the
Gum with rubbing it with Honey and Fresh Butter; or let the child chew a candle
of Virgins Wax: Let the Nurse keep a moderate Diet, inclining to cold, as
Barley Broths, Water Gruel, Lettice, Endive, Rear-eggs: take heed of salt
spiced meats, and wine; but anoint the child's Gum with a Mucilage of Quinces,
made with Mallows water, or with the brains of an Hare.

XXII. If the Gums be ulcerated, let the Nurse rub the child's gums, and Wheals,
and Pushes with her finger, and anoint them with Hens grease, Hares brains, oil
of Cammomile, and Mel Rosarum, or sirrup of violets, with Plantane water; and
if the inflammation be great, boil Pomegranate flowers, Roses, and Sanders of
each two drams, Alum half a dram, in water, strain out three ounces, and
dissolve in it the sirrup of Mulberries half an ounce. If the Pushes and Wheals
be white, take Pomegranate flowers, Amber, Cypress nuts of each two drams,
Roses, and Myrtle flowers of each half a handful, boil them in water, add to
the decoction one ounce and a half of honey of Roses.. Sometimes there rises
between the Gums, and the great teeth a little fleshy substance, to consume
that wash it with a deccoction of the roots of Plantain, Bugloss, Agrimony of
each a handful, Barley a small handful, and red Roses a handful; four Dates,
Flowers of Pomegranates two drams, Liquorish one dram and a half.

XXIII. Children are very much molested with destillations, Coughs, and
Catarrhs: if the humor be sharp and hot that falls from the brain, the child
will look red in the face; if it be a cold humor much matter will run forth at
the nose and mouth; then keep the child resonably warm, and give it Sugar
candy, with oil of sweet Almonds: wash the child's feet with Ale boiled with
Betony, Marjoram, Rosemary, then anoint the soles of the feet with Goose
grease: rub the breast with fresh butter, and oil of sweet Almonds, and lay on
warm linen cloths; for slimy humors give it a spoonful of sirrup of
Maidenhair, or of Liquorish and Hyssop mingled, Take also Gum Traganth,
Arabic, Quince seeds, juice of Liquorish, and Sugar Pelets, mingle them, and
in new milk let the child take of it every day. Where the cause is cold that
makes the Cough; beat a little Myrrh to powder and give it the child, with oil
of sweet Almonds, and a little honey when it comes from heat, make a decoction
of Raisins in water, and with white poppey seed, and Gum Dragant each two
drams; seeds of Gourds four drams, beat all together, and give the child a four
penny weight in the foresaid decoction.

XXIV. If the breath be short let it take an Electuary of Honey and Linseed,
and anoint the ears and parts about them with Olive oil.

XXV. If the child's nose be stopped, put a little Ointment of Roses, and good
Pomatum into the Nostrils to soften the hard matter.

Wash the inflamed, or Gummy eyes, that will not open, with breast milk, or
Plantain and Rose Water: Childrens moist brains breed moist humors that run to
their ears; make them clean with a rag, and drop in Honey of Roses mingled with
oil of bitter Almonds.

XXVI. If the child new born be in great pain, then rub it with Pellitory of
the wall and fresh Butter, or with Spinach and Hog's Grease, and lay it to the
Navel, take care it be not too hot; or make a cake of oils of eggs and of Nuts
for the Navel; give it a Glister if it need with Milk, Sugar, and the yolk of
an Egg.

XXVII. Children are subject to all sorts of Fevers, but chiefly to Fevers
from corrupt milk, and Fevers with breeding of teeth.

They have epidemical Fevers sometimes that cast forth the Meazles, or small
Pox; the mothers menstrual blood is the original cause, but the corrupt air
stirs it up; for as the air is pure, or impure, so these diseases are more
raging, or less: It is oftentimes infectious, and the humors so corrupt, that
worms breed under the scabs, and corrode the bones and inward parts, as has
been proved by opening some that died. If it be a Feverish time, that it
spreads much, give good Antidotes, and change the air; but all children almost
will have them first or last: Before there is a Fever you may fortify nature,
and give a a gentle purge; but for my part I approve not of purging, or
bleeding in these distempers, unless it be long before: So soon as you see the
fever, drive them out by Cordials, and prefer the eyes and throat, and prevent
deformity.

The first signs of this disease (for they are both from one cause) are pains
of the head, redness in the eyes, a dry Cough with a fever, then little
pimples break forth all the body over, but chiefly they aim at the throat and
face.

The small Pox is dangerous to all, but most to those that are of an ill habit
of body; and if they come forth in heaps and not orderly; or if they look blew,
black, or ill colored, they are exceeding dangerous. If the child suck, the
nurse must use a moderate diet; she may eat Hen broth, with herbs of Succory,
Borrage, Bugloss, and Endive boiled in it: Let her drink this drink following
to make them come easily and quickly forth; take peeled Lentils half an ounce,
fat figs two ounces, Gum Lac two drams, Gum Traganth and Fennel seed of each
two drams and a half: boil this in fountain water, strain it, and sweeten two
pints of it with Sugar, and sirrup of Maidenhair, let her drink half a pint
fasting. If the child be weaned give it a Julep of cordial waters two ounces
and a half, sirrup of Lemmons one ounce, use this often; and four or five hours
after, give it some Unicorns horn and Oriental Bezoar in powder.

To preserve the eyes anoint the Eyelids with Plantane and Rose water, and a
little Saffron: To preserve the nose take Rose water, and Betony of each one
ounce, Vinegar half an ounce, and as much powder of peels of Citrons, add to it
Saffron six grains, let the child smell to it often; dip some cotton in it, and
stop the ears to keep the Small Pox from thence. You may preserve the mouth,
the tongue, and the throat with a handful of barley, and leaves of Plantain,
Sorrel, Agrimony, and of Vervain, of each a handful, all boiled in water to six
ounces, dissolve in it sirrup of Pomegranates, and of Roses of each half an
ounce, Saffron half a scruple, make a Gargarisme: sirrup of Juniper, of
Violets, and of Water Lillies preserve the Lungs.

When the Pox are fully out, then to make them die quickly rub the face with
fresh hog's grease, old Lard melted, and strained, and mingled with water, or
with oil of sweet Almonds.

When the Pox are dead, and begin to fall away, to keep them from Pock-holes
anoint the face with a feather dipped in an Ointment made of Chalk and Cream, use
this two or three days, it will smooth the skin handsomely, and take away the
spots.

XXVIII. Children are exceedingly prone to breed Lice more than men of age,
though all people are troubled with them: They breed from the Excrements of the
head and body; it is not only filth that breeds Lice, but a certain matter fit
for them; for fleas will not breed of the same that lice are bred of. Children
and women that are hot and moist have many excrements to breed such things
withal. Some meats breed Lice, as figs by their gross juice, which naturally
tends to the skin, and variety of meat. Lice breed most in Childrens heads, and
stick fast to the skin, and roots of the hair; some have died of Lice: and Lice
will leave some when they are dying. To prevent Lice comb and keep childrens
heads clean, let them eat no rigs, but meats of good juice, and purge them with
hot drying, thin medicaments: Use ^o Mercury, nor Arsenick to childrens heads,
but use this Lotion, take parts alike, of round Birthwort, Lupines, Pine and
Cypress leaves, boil them in water, then anoint the head with powder of
Staves-acre three drams, of Lupines half an ounce, of Agarick two drams, quick
brimstone one dram and half, Ox Gall half an ounce, all made up wirh oil of
Wormwood.

XXIX. If the child fright in the sleep, give it good breast milk, but not too
much; let it not sleep presently, but carry it about till the milk descend to
the bottom of the stomach: give it sometimes the oil of sweet Almonds, or honey
of Roses two spoonfuls. To cleanse the stomach strengthen it with magistery of
Coral, or Confection of Jacinths with milk; anoint the stomach with oil of
Wormwood, Nard, Mints, Mastick, Nutmegs; if it be from worms, you have the
remedies before: It is for the most part ill vapors that ascend by the Weasand
and veins to the head, when children cannot concoct what they have in their
stomachs.

XXX. Sometimes children cannot sleep, it is by reason of corrupt milk that
disturbs the animal spirits; hence arise Catarrhs, Convulsions, Fevers,
dryness; let better milk be given it; the Nurse must eat Lettice, sweet
Almonds, Poppey seeds, but sleeping medicaments are not good for infants. Wash
the feet with a decoction of Dill tops, Cammomile flowers,, Sage, Osiers, Vine
leaves, Poppy heads: to the Temples use oil of Dill, or oil of Roses, with oil
of Nutmegs, with Poppey seeds, Breast milk, Rose, or Nightshade water, with
Saffron. If the Child's brain be very dry, moisten the covering of the Cradle.

XXXI. Bad and sharp milk hurts the child's stomach, for it cannot endure it,
for it breeds bad humors: all these diseases spring from it, the Thrush,
Bladders in the Gums, and inflammation of the Tonsils.

Bladders in the Gums are cured with powder of Lentils husked, and strewed upon
them; or with a Liviment of the flour of Milian, and oil of Roses.

The inflammation of the Tonsils (I suppose) it is that disease in children
called the Mumps, that commonly comes between eleven and thirteen years old;
the parts being then so hard, that the humor cannot breath forth: always keep
the belly loose, and anoint outwardly with oil of sweet Almonds, or Cammomile,
or St. John's wort inwardly; first repel, secondly mix resolvers with
repellers, and lastly only resolvers, but not too hot; in age Gargarismes are
best. Infants may take Diamoron, Honey of Roses, sirrup of Myrtles and
Pomegranates.

XXXII. Sometimes childrens string of the tongue is so short that they cannot
suck, a skilful Surgeon must help it: or use this Liviment, boil clarified
honey till you can powder it, then dry yolks of eggs in a Glass in an Oven,
powder them, take a dram weight, Mastick and Frankincense, of each one scruple,
burnt Alum six grains, make it up with honey of roses. The Frog is, when the
veins under the tongue swell with gross black blood; and if the phlegm sweat
forth, and stick in the passages, the swelling is like Mushromes, and make them
stammer; take Cuttlebone, Salgem, Pepper of each one dram, burnt Sponge three
drams, make a powder; or of Honey of Besome; rub it under the tongue, and lay a
plaster of Goose dung, and Honey boiled in Wine till the Wine be consumed,
under the Chin.

XXXIII. Some children grow lean, and pine away, and the cause is not known; if
it be from Witchcraft, good prayers to God are the best remedy: yet some hang
Amber, and Coral about the child's neck, as a Sovereign Amulet. But leanness may
proceed from a dry distemper of the whole body, then it is best to bath it in a
decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Branc-Ursine, Sheeps heads, and anoint with
oil of sweet Almonds; if it be hot and dry add Roses, Violets, Lettice,
Poppey-heads, and afterward anoint with oils of Violets, and Roses. The child
may be lean from want of milk, or bad milk from the nurse, remedy that, or
change the nurse, for little, or bad milk will breed no good blood, and the
children cannot thrive by it: sometimes worms in the body draw away the
nourishment, sometimes very small worms breed without the body, all over, and
in the Musculous parts, and stick in the skin, and will not come quite forth;
but after you rub the child in a Bath they will put forth their heads like
black hairs, and run in again when they feel the cold air; they breed of slimy
humors, shut up in the Capillary veins, which turn to worms for want of
transpiration; if you rub the child with Yarhound on the back, and especially
with Honey and Bread, you shall see their black heads; when you see the heads
come forth, run over them with a Rasor, do it often.

XXXIV. Children used to be galled with lying in pissed clouts, and the scarf
skin comes from the true skin; the skin looks red, change the clouts often, and
keep the child clean by washing it, then anoint the sore with Diapompholix, or
cast on this powder finely sprinkled, of burnt Alum, Frankincense, Litharge of
Silver, and seeds and leaves of Roses.

XXXV. Some children cannot hold their water, but piss the bed when they sleep,
the bladder-closing muscle being weak; so when piss pricks it, it comes forth.
The stone in the bladder may hurt the Muscle; the cause of weakness is a cold
moist humor, from superfluity, or from tough and gross meats; in Age it will
be hard to be cured, but in infants it easily may. The nurse must use a hot
drying diet, with Sage, Hyssop, Marjoram; the child must drink little; anoint
the region of the bladder outwardly with oil of Costus, or Flower de luce, and
other like driers; use Sulphur and Alum Baths, with oaken leaves: And give it
this powder, take burnt Hogs-bladders, Stones of a Hare roasted, and Cocks
throats roasted, of each half a dram, and two scruples of Acorns, Mace and Nip
of each a scruple, give half a dram with Oaken leave Water.

XXXVI. Childrens Urine is sometimes stopped, either by gross matter, or the
stone, you may try with the Catheter; you must purge the humors with honey of
Roses, Cassia, Turpentine, with a decoction of red Pease, also Grass-water, and
Restharrow, and Dropwort water are good; take Hares blood one ounce, Saxifrage
roots six drams, calcine them, the Dose is a scruple, or half a dram, with
White Wind, and Saxifrage Water. The Stone in the bladder is as common with
children as the Stone of the Kidneys with men and women, crude gross meats and
unclean milk breed it; there is also a weakness in the Liver and stomach when
they do not well part gross blood from the pure, but much earthy juice remains
in the child; sometimes it is natural from the Parents, they piss by drops; and
what comes forth is like clear water, or whey, or milk, and sometimes blood
comes forth; it grows daily, and at last they must be cut if they be not cured
in time. Let then the belly be always kept loose, and the nurse eat no slimy
gross meats; anoint the bladder-with oil of Lillies, and of Scorpions, and lay
on a Cataplasme of Pellitory of the Wall boild in oil of Lillies, or give two
drops of Spirit of Vitriol, with half a drain of Cypress Turpentine. Take
Magistery, or Crabs eyes, white Amber prepared, Goats blood of each a scruple,
give it frequently, with water of Parsley.

XXXVII. There is one disease more I shall end with, and that is called
Siriasis, an inflammation of the membranes of the brain, it is from phlegmatic
blood putrified, and grows hot and choleric; hot weather, windy milk, and
nurses ill diet may cause it. The forehead grows hot and hollow the face is
red, they are dry and Feverish, want an appetite. The fore part of the head is
hollow, where the sagittal and Coronal Sutures meet, for there the bones are
membranons, and harden in time; it is dangerous and some say deadly. When this
bone or membrane falls there is a pit and the brain falls down, they commonly
die in three days. Give a glister of sirrup of Roses, or Violets, lay on
coolers of the juice of Lettice, Gourd, Melons, or split a Pompion in two
pieces, and lay it on, but cool not the brain too much, anoint it with oil of
Roses, let the Nurses diet be cooling, or change her for a better. Take oil of
Roses half an ounce, Populeon one ounce, the white of an egg, and an emulsion
of the cold seeds drawn with Rose water two drams; after the inflammation is
abated, and the flux stopped, lay on oil of Cammomile one ounce and a half, of
Dill hal half an ounce, with the yolk of an egg.

Thus by the blessing of Almighty God, I have with great pains and endeavor
run through all the parts of the Midwives Duty; and what is required both for
the Mother, the Nurse, and the Infant; desiring that it may be as useful for
the end I have written it, to profit others, as I have found it beneficial to
Me in my long Practice of Midwifery. To God alone be all Praise and Glory, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, or Sold by Simon Miller, at the Star, at the West End of S.
Paul's.
Quarto.
PHysical Experiments, being a plain description of the causes, signs and cures
of most diseases incident to the body of man; with a discourse of Witchcraft:
by William Drage Practitioner of Physic, at Hitchin in Hartfordhire.

Bishop White upon the Sabbath.

The Artificial Changeling.

The Life of Tamerlane the Great.

The Pragmatical Jesuit, a play; by Richard Carpenter.

The Life and Death of the Valiant and Renowned Sir Francis Drake, His Voyages
and Discoveries in the West Indies, and above the World; with his Noble and
Heroic Acts. By Samuel Clark late Minister of Bennet Finck London.

Large Octavo.
Master Shepherd on the Sabbath.

The Rights of the Crown of England as it is Established by Law; by E. Bagshaw
of the Inner Temple.

An Enchiridion of Fortification, or a handful of knowledge, in Martial
affairs, demonstrating both by Rule and Figure, (as well Mathematically by
exact Calculations, as Practically,) to fortify any body, either Regular, or
Irregular. How to run approaches, to pierce through a Counter-scarf, to make a
Gallery over a Mote, to spring a Mine, etc. With many other notable matters
belonging to War, useful and necessary for all Officers, to enrich their
knowledge and Practice.

The Life and Adventures of Buscon, the witty Spaniard.

Epicurus's Morals.

Small Octavo.
Daphnis and Chloe, a Romance.

Merry Drollery, complete; or a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs, Witty
Drolleries, intermixed with Pleasant Catches, Collected, By W.N. C.B. R.S. J.G.
Lovers of Wit.

The Midwives Book, or the whole art of Midwifry discoverd, directing
childbearing women how to behave themselves in their Conception, Bearing,
Breeding, and Nursing of Children, in six Books.

Butler of War.

Tractatus de Venenis; or a Treatise of poisons. Their sundry sorts, names,
natures, and virtues, with their symptoms, signs diagnostick and prognostic,
and antidotes. Wherein are diverse necessary questions discussed; The truth by
the most Learned, confirmed; by many instances, examples, and stories
Illustrated; And both Philosophically and Medicinally handled; By William
Ramesey.

The Urinal of Physic. By Robert Record Doctor of Physic. Whereunto is added
an ingenious treatise concerning Physicians, Apothecaries, and Surgeons, set
forth by a Doctor in Queen Elizabeth's days; with a Translation of Papius
Ahalsossa concerning Apothecaries Confecting their Medicines; worthy perusing
and following.

Large Twelves.
The Moral Practice of the Jesuits Demonstrated by many Remarkable Histories
of their Actions in all parts of the World, Collected either from Books of the
Greatest Authority, or most certain and unquestionable Records and Memorials by
the Doctors of the Sorbonne.

Artimedorus of Dreams.

Oxford Jeasts Refined, now in the Press.

The third part of the Bible and New Testament.

A Complete Practice of Physic, Wherein is plainly pescribed, the Nature,
Causes, differences, and signs, of all diseases in the body of man. With the
choicest cures for the same; By John Smith, Doctor in Physic.

The Duty of every one that will be saved, being Rules, Precepts, Promises and
Examples, directing all persons of what degree soever, how to govern their
passions and to live virtuously and soberly in the world.

The Spiritual Chemist; or six Decads of Divine Meditations on several
Subjects; with a short account of the Authors Life; By William Spurstow, D. D.
Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Hackney near London.

Small Twelves.
The Understanding Christans Duty:

A Help to prayer.

A new method of preserving and restoring health, by the virtue of Coral and
Steel.

David's sling.


