DAVID'S Deliverance and Thanksgiving.

A SERMON Preached before the KING at WHITE HALL Upon June 28. 1660.

Being the DAY of SOLEMN THANKSGIVING FOR THE Happy RETURN of His MAJESTY.

BY GILBERT SHELDON, D. D. AND Dean of His MAJESTY'S Chapel Royal.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the Little North Door of S. Paul's.
1660.

PSALM. 18. 49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the
heathen, and sing praises unto thy Name. The words before run thus.

Verse. 46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and let the God of my
salvation be exalted. 47. It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people
under me. 48. He delivers me from mine enemies, yea thou liftest me up above
those that rise up against me; thou have delivered me from the violent man. 49.
Therefore, etc.

WHat the Argument of this Psalm is; why, when, and by whom written, the Title
shows, and tells us, that 'twas David's, made in the day that the Lord delivered
him from all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. It Is recorded 2 Samuel 22.
after the Rebellion of Absalom and Sheba, and it is thought by some to be one of
the last, if not the very last, that ever he made. I shall not meddle at all
with the mystical or Prophetical sense of it, either as it relates to Christ or
his Church, matters more proper for other times; but only with the Historical
or Literal, as it concerned David, and by his example all that succeed him in
the like Dangers and Deliverances; even us at present, and proper and fit it is
for us. For it is a Psalm of Thanksgiving throughout, and the Verses read unto
you are a sum of the whole, a recapitulation of all that went before, where
after a Commemoration of Gods several Deliverances, he infers his own Duty, and
so by consequence ours, in the words of the Text: Because thou have so
graciously, so mercifully delivered me from so many and great dangers,
Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Heathen, and sing
praises unto thy Name.

Wherein be pleased to take notice with me of these three particulars. 1. Of
David delivered. 2. Of God his Deliverer. 3. Of David's thankfulness for his
deliverance.


Of these in order; and first, of the person delivered.

I. DAvid, 1. David delivered.
a King, and Saint, both which entitle him to an especial interest in Gods good
Providence: Kings are his Deputies, Saints his Friends; and David no ordinary
King or Saint, but eminent in both relations; an excellent Person, Act. 13. 22.
and gracious King, one after Gods own heart, a Type of Christ; and no marvel
if such be delivered by him, if God have an especial care of him. The wonder
is, how so good a Man, so gracious a Prince, should have Enemies and Rebels,
should fall into such dangers and afflictions, should need so many deliverances.

But if we consider it well, it is no wonder neither; never was, never will be:
For if we look to the eminentest persons in all Ages of the World, from the
first man to this day, we shall find that the best of Men and most godly, have
ever had many afflictions, many enemies, and many the more for being so. The
Prophet complains 'twas his case, and that he suffered much because he followed
the thing that good was, Psalm. 38. 20. And St. Paul assures us, that All (all
without exception) that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. and if there were no other cause, even for their
godliness: their Virtues are a reproach to the wicked world, and cannot well
be endured.

But reason enough for it there is besides; for even in the best, there is
something amiss; no corn without chaff, nor gold without some dross: All
Saints are sinners, and sin will be punished in Gods children soonest of all,
he least endures it in them: Psa. 17* 14.
It Is the wicked usually that have their portion in this life, and that come in
no trouble like other men, Psalm. 73 5. Prosperity in sin is their curse, a sad
sign of utter destruction, and the very next step to Hell fire: But they who
are designed for Heaven, must pass thither through much tribulation, Act. 14.
22. There is ever an Egypt in their way to Canaan. Only this is their comfort,
that being under his Rod, they are not out of his Care: Afflictions are their
Physic; and by them, Prove. 27. 21.
like Gold in the Furnace, they gain luster, and lose no weight, are mended
here that they may be saved hereafter. No marvel then if a Saint fall into
trouble, if he need deliverance; especially if a King, if a Saint-Royal.

For no state or condition of men in the world is so obnoxious to dangers as
theirs: For man by nature is proud and querulous, impatient of government,
greedy of liberty, ever restless and pressing after new desires, always
displeased with the present, and thirsting after change; scarce any content
with their condition. Some are ambitious and would be greater; others covetous
and would be richer; have suffered a repulse in some unreasonable suits, have
been restrained in some exorbitant desires; injuries not to be forgiven or
forgotten. Some are necessitous, and so greedy; some revengeful, and will be
quarrelling; some envious, some turbulent, and delight in mischief, and many
the like. Now all this crowd and throng of inordinate passions and humors
discharges it self upon those in power and place, and hope to find ease by
some public disturbance, which they endeavor by all arts and ways
imaginable, that so in troubled waters they may catch that which quieter times
would have derived upon persons of better merit.

And the condition of Kings gives some advantage to such designs; for they
stand high, all eyes are upon them, nothing they say or do escapes observation
and censure; if any thing be amiss (as in the distraction of many cares, and
multiplicity of much business, it is impossible but that some slips should
happen, some errors be committed) they are sure to hear of them to their
greatest disadvantage: a Mote will be* called a Beam, a Gnat a Camel; and a few
will be multiplied into many.

'Twere happy with the world, were every man as wise as he thinks himself; but
the opinion of Wisdom is the greatest part of Folly, and that the common
disease of Mankind: And so much the worse, because they ever think themselves
wisest in other men's business, are ever complaining they do not their duty,
especially Governors, whose great misfortune it is, that if all be well with
us by their care and wisdom, we thank our selves for it; if any thing amiss, we
blame them; and what falls upon us by our own sins, we usually with great
injustice impute to their errors. And which is still worse, if they cannot be
justly charged with any miscarriage, yet that helps not: Innocence is no
protection for them; their place and power is crime enough to pull them down,
others would be where they are, who like the Devil (as St. Bernard) Malunt
misere praeesse, quam feliciter subesse; had rather be miserable in power, then
happy in subjection; and then to make way for their ambition, faults must be
found, though there be none; and it is strange how far impudent calumnies
prevail with a discontented people, and gain belief beyond all imagination,
ever against sense and reason.

And therefore if you look upon the best of PRINCES in profane Stories, The
best of Princes most exercised in Afflictions.
you shall find them by these Arts and ways exercised as much as any, if not
more; by Mutinies, Seditions, Rebellions: I forbear instances very obvious, and
shall only touch upon some we find registered in Scripture. And first upon
David in the Text.

A virtuous and pious man, DAVID.
a great Soldier, a gracious Prince, one that wanted nothing to oblige a
people to obedience and respect, a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
proposed as a pattern to Solomon, with a promise to entail his Kingdom and
blessing upon him and his posterity, if he would but walk in his steps, 2 Chronicles. 7. 17* 18. the measure and standard by which the succeeding Princes were
judged His heart was not perfect, as my servant David's; so of many: Or, he did
according to all that my servant David did; so of others, and that was thought
commendations enough* His Virtues outlived himself, and many generations fared
the better for him; Solomon the Father, and Rehoboam the Son, and many more
preserved from utter ruin for his sake. And in the days of Hezekiah (above
Three hundred years after) Jerusalem her self in greatest distress, defended by
God, for his own sake, and for his servant David's sake. 2 Kings 19. 34.

Yet this rare and excellent person, this gracious Prince, the very light of
Israel, as his Subjects styled him, 2 Samuel 21. 17. was restless all his days; I
cannot reckon his troubles, because he himself says they were innumerable,
Psalm. 40. 12. nor his enemies that hated him without cause, and sought to
destroy him wrongfully, for they were mighty, Psalm. 38. 19. and more then the
hairs of his head, Psalm. 69. 4. and that of all sorts, from the gravest that
sat in the Gates, (the place of Judicature) verse. 12. down to the Drunkards
and very scum of the people, the one made songs, the other put scorns upon him,
Psalm. 35. 15. slandered his Person, traduced his Government, which God himself
never found fault with; and at last took Arms against him, drove him from his
House and Imperial City, forced him to flee he knew not whither, glad to take
any way for present safety: And to make up his sorrows to the full, who should
head these Rebels but his dearly beloved Absalom! who drew into conspiracy with
him, besides the most of his Subjects, even his own familiar friends whom he
trusted, which did also eat of his bread; such as he had most obliged, his very
Favorites, as he complained Psalm. 41. 9. and Psalm. 55. 13. where he bemoans
his own present distress, and the perfidiousness of his own principal Servants
and Counselors, who, with Absalom, sought his Life and Crown: Nay, they
suffered him not to die in peace; for Adonijah, another of his darling Sons,
obtrudes himself a Successor upon him, without his consent or knowledge, and as
it were to bury him alive. 1 Kin. 1. 5, 6.

Thus was this excellent King used. SOLOMON
And though he left behind him a Successor, a glorious type of Christ, Solomon,
the wisest King that ever was, or ever will be; yet he fared little better. He
was himself the wonder, and made his people the envy of the world, by the
affluence of all temporal blessings; they had Silver and Gold as stones, 2
Chro. 1. 15. they were multiplied as the sand of the sea, eating and drinking,
and making merry, 1 Kin. 4. 20. a state of life one would think that no
discontent could lodge with. But peace and plenty, which are thought to make
men happy, cannot always make them quiet and content; nor can any benefits
though never so great, stop the mouth of ingratitude and impatience. While all
the world thought them the happiest people under the Heaven, they murmur and
complain at I know not what imaginary burdens, which they call heavy, and a
grievous Yoke, 1 Kin. 12. 4. and so little to be endured, that they were ready
to break out into Rebellion against him, had not God's mercy and his mercy
prevented it, even in his time: And he no sooner dead, but ten tribes, for that
reason, cast off the Government of his son, with what success we all know.

But these two, David and Solomon, had their faults, and great ones too, for
which they were punished! It Is true, they had so; but none to provoke their
people to disobedience; they were private and Personal, not of public
concernment; their Government was just and moderate, never taxed by God as
their faults were; and if this must be assigned a just cause of disturbance,
that they were Governed by Men not by Angels, by those subject to humane
infirmities like themselves, all the world will be in a combustion, and none
left to govern in peace.

But what say you then (in the last place) to Innocence it self, one against
whom nothing could be justly objected, Moses.
either as a private or public person? sure he must needs escape the malice
and machinations of all male contents! No, he did not; his condition as bad as
any. 'Twas Moses I mean; so rare a person, that (as St. Ambrose) he blotted out
all that was man in him by the purity of a conversation wholly celestial. And
Josephus tells us, that his affections were so governed by wisdom, that he
seemed utterly to want them, and that he knew only the names of those pasons,
which he perceived to be too active in other men. Most certain it is, that he
was an excellent person in himself, and an excellent Governor to them: I cannot
insist upon his particular Virtues in either kind; sure I am, he wanted none
that might oblige his people to obedience. Yet, besides and above all, what a
series of Miracles were wrought by God, to give him authority and credit among
the people? And sure all this might have been sufficient to secure his quiet in
a Government so poor and burdensome* and such as was impossible for any else
to manage without the same miraculous assistance of God.

And yet all this could not do it; for notwithstanding all these advantages,
what a wearisom life did he lead in a continual succession of murmurings,
mutinies, conspiracies, rebellions of persons neither few nor mean, and some of
his own blood? How many faults do they charge him with? Ambition,
misgovernment, a design to bring the people out of Egypt to perish in the
Wilderness, as if there wanted graves there, and these reproaches often
repeated: And with a wonderful strange impudence they call him Tyrant, a
killer of Gods people, for what is that else? And this more then once or twice,
Numb. 14. and Numb. 16. And though God chose him to that command for his very
Meekness, Ecclus 45. 4. and he was indeed the meekest man upon the face of the
earth Number. 12 3. yet he is traduced by them as a Killer of God's people, as a
Tyrant; such is the justice of Rebels. It cannot then be thought strange that
any after him should suffer under the like calumny that deserved it as little:
For if any way faulty, 'twas in too much Lenity.

Thus you see how impossible it is for Governors to escape these scourges,
whether they deserve them or no, whether inocent or guilty. For if Moses the
meekest, David the best, Solomon the wisest of Kings, felt the smart of popular
murmurings, tumults and rebellions; persons as excellent as ever the world had
any, or ever will have; if they could not escape, what good Prince should
forfeit his patience by it? think it strange, or be discouraged at it? Or how
dare any mis-judge or censure them for it, as if forsaken of God, because
abused by men? or designed for utter ruin, because under his fatherly
correction. Consider who these were, what they did, and what they suffered, and
then let him that dare pronounce amiss of any in their case and condition.

It Is clear then by what has been said, that the best of Kings may be under the
Cross, as much as any, and more than any have been, and certainly will be so to
the world's end; and so will, as much as any, need deliverance, and shall
undoubtedly have it, they especially, they before and above others. For they
are God's peculiar care, they are his Officers, his Deputies, his honor is
concerned in them, and the preservation of them is the good of many; Thou art
worth ten thousand of us, say David's Subjects to him, 2 Samuel 18. 3.

But though delivered they shall be, and ever will be, yet it is not always at
the same time; some continue longer under the Cross, some are eased sooner: Nor
in the same manner and way; some he preserves and supports in danger, and at
last gives them safety and peace; others he delivers from danger, by taking
them to himself. The first was the Deliverance of the three Children, when they
came untouched out of the fire; the second of the Maccabees, and thousands
more, whom by a glorious Martyrdom he took to himself. Great Deliverances both,
but that of the Maccabees much the greater, much the better; when from a fading
Crown, a Scepter clouded with cares, and a troublesome Life ever tending to
Death, they are delivered up to a Crown of Glory, and a Life Eternal in the
Heavens. He that looks not on this as the better of the two, deserves neither;
and one of the two they, and all his Servants, may be sure of. So that let the
troubles of the righteous be many and great, as indeed many and great they
usually are, yet first or last, one way or other, and ever to his best
advantage, the Lord delivers him out of all, Psalm. 34. 18. And so I pass from
the Person here delivered, to the Lord that delivered him, the second thing
proposed to your consideration.

II. THat all Deliverance comes from (him, 2. God the Deliverer.
from) the Lord, 'twere needless to multiply Proofs out of Scriptures, which
are but the Registers of his Providence, and you cannot look besides them
there. And it is no less apparent unto Reason; for that (with great clearness,
and by a degree of evidence even beyond knowledge, as those old Philosophers
Hermes and Jamblicus express it) finds that there is a God, and from thence
(with as great evidence) demonstrates a Providence. So that should I lead you
out of the Church into the Schools of Philosophers, Poets, Historians, Writers
of all sorts among the Heathens, you would find them, by the very instinct and
impression of Nature, acknowledging the same truth; ever ascribing all good
successes to their Gods, and accordingly giving thanks, offering sacrifices,
instituting Feasts and Holy Days, putting Garlands upon their Images, leaving
part of their spoils taken in their Temples: A Truth so visible, that even
blind Nature saw it.

But to our great shame and greater grief be it spoken, His particular
providence.
we have some among us (I hear many) more heathenish than the Heathen, that
will not allow God to govern in his own House, that deny him any care of things
below; so far from delivering us out of danger, that he neither regards how we
come in, or how we get out, nor at all looks after any thing else we are
concerned in. A persuasion extremely cross to the common notions of mankind,
and impressions of Nature, that wholly makes void and ridiculous the duty we
are about, and indeed all other; for it is totally destructive of all Virtue,
Religion* and Government, none of which can possibly subsist, without a belief,
a sense, a reverence of some Divine Power that will be sure to call for an
account of whatsoever we do. Yet they say, these are the great Wits of the
time, the only men of parts among us. I wonder at it; 'twas not so thought of
old; the language of the Psalmist elsewhere imports not any great esteem of
them; Nay, he is so far from it, that he wonders at their sottishness: O ye
brutish among the people, and ye fools, when will ye be wise? Ps. 94. 8. He
speaks of such as when they do wickedly, say; Tush, the Lord shall not see,
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, v. 7. He will neither take notice, nor
punish, he looks after nothing here below, we may do what we please for him.
Now let who will admire them, yet these are the men he calls bruits and fools,
and he does it not once or twice, but very often. The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God, Ps. 14. 1. that is, no Judge, no Providence, (as the
word there signifies.) And again, Psalm. 53. 1. and often elsewhere, if not in the
same words, yet to the same sense and purpose. I hope you will not think the
term uncivil, it is not mine, but David's. And if you doubt whether they deserve
it, you shall have it from a wiser than he, and I hope one they will
acknowledge wiser than themselves too, even from Solomon, who being the wisest
of all men, might have the privilege to be bold with them, as one that best
knew what they were; yet he brings them in wondering at the reward of the
Righteous, which they believed little of, and putting upon themselves that
scorn and title, We fools counted his life madness, Wisd. 5. 4. We thought our
selves wise in pursuing pleasure without check or restraint, and him mad for
not doing as we did: but now we find* (too late indeed) but find it we do, and
that to our confusion and horror, that his Madness was Wisdom; and our Wisdom
folly; We fools thought so, but Fools we were, for so thinking. Now what fools
say is little to be regarded; the Sun shines though the blind see it not, and a
God and Providence there is that sends Deliverance, though the fool say, There
is not: and so let the Atheist pass under David's and Solomon's Character,
while we to our great comfort (one of the greatest we are capable of in this
world) acknowledge, believe, and visibly see, and by experience find, That
there is a good Providence over us that orders all the affairs of the world
from the least to the greatest; from Empires and Thrones to the falling of a
Sparrow on the ground, and the very numbering of our hairs, as our Savior S.
Math. 10. 29, 30.

That as it is He, and He only, that brings us into danger, that lays
afflictions on us for our sins; (for who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to
the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom they had sinned? For they would
not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his Law, therefore he has
powered upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, Isa. 42.
24, 25. Just our case, we served him so, he served us so; our great sins
brought his great judgments upon us. And) so again it is He, and He only,
that must remove those afflictions, that must deliver out of those dangers:
For, who is God but the Lord? and who has any strength to do it except our
God? It Is David's question at ver. 31. of this Psalm, and our answer must be,
None can do it else, none but he: Neither Men, nor Angels, nor any nor all the
Creatures of Heaven and Earth can give it. They may be Instruments in his hand,
which he moves, directs, orders, limits and restrains, when he will and how he
will; he delivers by them if you will; and he too without them when he will* no
Means too weak with him, none strong enough without him; but whether with or
without means, it is still he that does it, he that delivers, and none else; For
the help that is done upon Earth, he does it himself, as it is in the Old
Translation Psalm. 74. 13.

Sure I am, Application.
we found it so; all we did, or could do, toward a settlement proved nothing
worth, all attempts vain, no Treaties, no Armies, no Endeavors by our selves or
others that wished well to our Peace did us good, though never so probable,
never so hopeful; they were all lost and frustrate, all vanished into nothing.
How visible was Gods hand in it, when all rash and unreasonable attempts
prospered with some, while others failed in the best and most probable? And
either the worst Counsels were followed (as it usually happens when God
determines to judge and afflict a sinful Nation) or the best never prospered,
but when brought to ripeness miscarried in the birth. Thus it constantly was,
and thus it would have been till we had been utterly consumed, had not he had
mercy on us, had he not raised up a Deliverer, never to be mentioned without
Honor, nor to be forgotten in the Prayers of all good People, that God would
multiply his favors and blessings, both temporal and spiritual, upon his
Person and Posterity for many Generations.

But whoever were the Instruments of our deliverance, we must still remember to
raise up our thoughts to him by whose power they wrought it, and give him the
glory of all; since nothing is more certain that none did it, none could do it
but he; and having this experience of his power and goodness, it must be a
warning to us hereafter, that we loose not our labor in seeking it elsewhere;
that we have patience to wait for it till he is pleased to give it; that we
suffer not our eager desires or fears to hasten it, by unlawful means, to
purchase it by sin.

Were we right in our Faith, We must not do evil that good may come of it.
we should think it impossible to be had without him (as indeed it is, unless
he permit it for our greater mischief; for who can resist his will?) and were
we right in our Wits, we should not think it worth the having, but by him; for
he that to escape Danger, runs into a sin, is much like the starting Horse, who
to avoid a shadow upon one side the way, leaps down a precipice, to his ruin,
on the other, and like him that for fear of a lesser, runs into a greater
mischief: and to avoid a Pot-gun, throws himself into the mouth of a Cannon. A
sad bargain it is, let the State-Atheist think what he will, to buy deliverance
from the greatest temporal mischief, by the least wilful sin; to save Wealth,
Honor, Crowns and Scepters, Life it self, any thing we have, or all, at the
loss of our God, at the expense of our Soul, which exceeds the whole World in
value, and all it has in it.

But there is a further degree of Folly in this course, still a greater
blindness; for we sacrifice the comforts of this Life, and hopes of a better,
(which every wilful known sin robs us of) for just nothing: We believe indeed
we purchase deliverance by sin, and think we have it, when at the best it is but
an exchange of danger, and that too the little for the great; some trouble
here, for eternal damnation hereafter: Nay it is not always, not often so much
neither, as an exchange of danger, (though that bargain is made sad enough by
the disproportion) but a doubling of it if you will; a contracting a new danger
by a new sin, and but a running from the old one way, to meet it another; a
bringing of what we labor to avoid, with more speed and greater certainty upon
us.

Would you have Resolution of a Council of State-Atheists in the case, and see
how it sped? You shall find it at the 11 chap. of St. John's Gospel, verse. 47.
48. What do we? (say the Priests and Pharisees sitting in Council against our
Savior) for this man does many miracles, and if we let him alone, all men will
believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and
Nation. What was resolved on? what was done upon this? Why, the fear of this
danger put them upon a horrid sin, the shedding of most innocent blood, they
murdered him: And did that avoid the danger they feared by it? No; the Romans
did come, and for the punishment of that very sin, took away their place,
carried them captive, destroyed their Nation. It Is St. Augustine's observation,
confirmed by the experience of all Ages.

I will not say it always happens so; a speedy Repentance may sometimes give a
stop to the ordinary course of Gods Judgments; but it very often, it most
commonly happens so, as all Histories witness, and our own Experience can tell
us, perhaps in our own particular affairs; in the Public it has ever been too
too visible, when Reason of State is opposed to God, prudence (falsely so
called) and cunning, to Justice and honesty. For when we begin once to distrust
that God cannot, or will not provide for our safety, and fall to shift for our
selves by such ways as he approves not, we forfeit our title to his good
providence, (which one way or other would most certainly save us, did we depend
upon it) and bring upon our selves the sad effects of distrust, by changing our
probable fears into certain sufferings, and very often into the same we run from;
for we very seldom do wickedly to prevent a mischief, but that very mischief
falls upon us, as a punishment for that wickedness. A hundred instances might
be given out of Story, and most men's breasts would be found Registers of this
sad Truth, would they be pleased to search them well* So clear is that of the
Preacher. That wickedness shall not deliver those that are given to it. Eccles.
8. 8.

And therefore if we do indeed believe this most certain truth, That all
deliverance is from the Lord, we must show the fruits of that Faith, when in
distress. And if we cannot by good ways compass our safety, never strive to
do it by ill; but submit, and expect with patience till he is pleased to give
it: For then, and not till then, 'twill be a Deliverance, indeed. We must not
run to the Creature for relief in dangers but to him; nor expect deliverance*
but from Him, nor seek ^t but in his way, by him, and at his time: And when we
have it, to be sure with David to thank him for it, to pay our Tribute where it
is due. And so I pass to the last particular proposed, David's thankfulness
for his Deliverance. I will give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Heathen,
and sing praises unto thy Name.

3. David's thankfulness
III. YOu have had the Person delivered, and He that delivered him; now follows
the Duty to be performed upon the deliverance: Where we may observe, 1. The
person performing it, that is David: I will do it, says he. 2. The Duty it
self, that is Thanksgiving: I will give thanks. 3. The Manner how he will do it,
and that is, 1. Publicly, diffusively not only in the Church, but among the
Heathen too: 2. Cheerfully, I will sing praises.


Something of each of these in the order proposed. And first of the Person.

4. The Person, [I will.]
1. I will (says David,) and good reason he should, He in the first place, He
to lead the way, to give the example. The blessings were public, and he a
public person, so more concerned in them then any other, yet others concerned
too as well as he, though not so much, even in those Dangers that aimed only at
his person* For that being of public concernment, his Dangers and Deliverances
could be no less: As the Members for the Head, hurt that, and all suffer with
it, even the lowest, the meanest, the mischief descends to all and every one,
deliver that from danger, and all rejoice with it, all the better for it, so
that if the King have cause to give thanks, if he say I will do it, all and
every one of his Subjects must do it too.

It Is a great shame and folly too, as well as a great sin, so to mind our
private as if we had no relation to the public; no Obligation to mourn for, to
endeavor to remove National calamities; or to give thanks and rejoice for
public Mercies and Deliverances, since the public interest is each
paticular's; for Quod examini expedit, idem api; What Is good for the whole, is
good for every part: And therefore we should be as thankful for common
blessings, as if they were bestowed only upon us; since we have our full share
in them, and in our proportion as much as any. To instance in that which most
concerns us; peace is a collection of all temporal blessings, and that is Omnium
tota and singulorum, every one has it as much as any, as much as all: Every
one has by it a comfortable and quiet enjoyment of all that belongs to him,
every one has His person and relations secured from violence, his fortune from
rapine; and though He have not so much perhaps as others, yet his All is as
much to him as all theirs to them; and these blessings are as full to thee, as
if thou only enjoyedst them; and more to thy Security, because others enjoy
them with thee. And therefore since every Man is concerned in the Benefit,
every man must betake himself to the Duty; that is Thankfulness. I will give
thanks. The next particular.

2. And here the time is very observable: Our Prophet was no sooner delivered,
2. The Duty. [Give thanks.]
but he made a right use of that blessing, he fell to his Duty of Thanks for
it; a thing not so usual, either with Kings or meaner persons. For if any
disturbance intermit our sinful pleasures, no sooner that over, but we return
to them again, and with more greediness. David will not do it; Now (says he) I
see the tempest over, the clouds dispersed, my troubles at an end, shall I
wanton it as before? No, I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord.

And this example speaks our duty; for as he did, so must we: In ill we follow
Kings fast enough, tread upon their heels, if not out-go them; their example
works much upon us, too much; why not in Virtue: why not something at least
that way? In a duty so necessary it should, a Duty we cannot avoid without
great sin as here we cannot. For Gratitude is an act of Justice, the paying of
a debt, and no part of Justice more necessary, even to preserve the very frame
of Nature and humane society, which subsist by nothing more, nothing else, but
a mutual exchange of good offices; take away these, the whole world and all in
it must perish: for no Man can live of himself, nor can any thing subsist of it
self, there must be a mutual gratitude and exchange of offices to preserve all.

But the subject is infinite, should we take it at large; we must restrain it to
the present occasion, and follow David's steps as close as we can; his case was
much like ours; we equaled him in danger, let us match him in thankfulness; in
him great blessings, and great thanks met well together; we come not behind in
mercy, let us not fall short in gratitude. Do it we must, and do it to the full
we should; that our Thankfulness may in some measure (at least as far as our
ability will carry us) answer his great bounty; since, where much is given,
there is not a little required. We have his promise indeed, for deliverance out
of danger, but it is ushered in with one command to ask it, and followed with
another to be thankful for it, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the time of
trouble (there is the command to ask it) and I will hear thee, (there is the
promised deliverance; for his hearing is delivering:)* And thou shall praise
me; there is the duty enjoined. The two first are past with us, God be thanked
for it. We prayed, we asked, we called; he heared, he delivered. Now remains
our duty, our praise and thanksgiving.

A small Tribute, The duty easy.
God knows; a duty so easy, nothing can excuse us from it. Other duties want
not excuses, have some just impediments in some persons, and at some times; as
poverty, impotency, sickness, or the like; this has none* can have none: All
may do it, and at any time; the rich and the poor, the sick and the well, the
lame* and the sound: He that wants not an heart, though he want all things
else, though a tongue, may yet give thanks and praise; Ipsum voluisse, laudasse
est; non enim verba quaerit, sed cor, Aug. in Psalm. 134. When all other ways of
expressing our thanks fail us, if sincerely and in earnest we would do it, we
have done it. 2. Little.


And as what he requires is easy, so it is little, very little; little in it
self, what can be less then Thanks; but compared with his great mercies, then
this little is just nothing. The Patriarch Jacob confessed to God, that he was
less then the least of his Mercies, Genesis 32. 10. Yet he a Giant in virtue and
worth, we, the best of us, but Pignies to him; and if He (as great as he was)
were less then the least: What are ^e to his great mercies, but just nothing.

Yet such poor wretches we are, it is All we have for him, All we can return to
him; and if he will have any thing, he must have this nothing. And so gracious
he is, that he calls for it, he accepts it, he is content with this nothing,
such as it is: Requires no more from us, then thanks and praise; and a great
vouchsafement it is, that he will suffer us to do it, so great and glorious he,
so vile and despicable we; yet he will have it, he is pleased with it.

But that too for us, 3. Profitable to our selves.
not for himself; we gain by it, not he; it is nothing to him, much to us; he is
neither the better, if we thank him, nor the worse, if we thank him not;
whether we praise or dispraise him, he is still the same; but we are both,
better or worse, as we do it, or neglect it; it is ever better with us when we do
it, worse when we do it not. Cast any thing up toward Heaven, it falls down
upon thee again; send up thanks and praise, and they descend in new favors and
blessings; send them not up, and look for no more; Accipiendis indignus, qui de
acceptis ingratus, Bern Nay look to lose those thou have, for be sure they will
wither and come to nothing; either they will be taken away, or if they stay,
they shall not minister comfort, not that very comfort which in their own
nature they seem to bring; they are not, they shall not be blessings to thee;
the comfort is gone, and that is not all; they turn to curses, become
aggravations of sin, additions to judgment: Such a wretched change does
unthankfulness make.

Do but observe how uneasy some men are in the affluence of all earthly
blessings, how froward, how discontent, how little joy they take in them? (and
God grant it be not many a man's case amongst us, and even in the enjoyment of
our present blessings,) examine the cause, search the root of this mischief,
and 'twill be found nothing but Ingratitude to God for them; who though he
leaves the things themselves, yet takes away the blessing, the joy, the comfort
of them. And who can say, but that a slight esteem, a negligent acknowledgment
of his great favors, deserves all this?

Since then this duty of praise and thanks is so profitable, if we do it; so
mischievous, if we do it not; since we are happy, if we do it, (for do that,
and God will do the rest: Continue to multiply his blessings upon us, preserve
what we have, and give more, even more then we need, more then we ask;) and on
the other side we are utterly undone, if we do it not; for then there is no
keeping of what we have, or if the thing stay by us, the blessing of it will be
taken from us, and we shall be as miserable in Peace, and much more then we
were in war. And as we cannot keep what we have, so we cannot hope for what we
want: Our Ingratitude has stopped the passage, dried up the Fountain of his
Mercies toward us, all our hopes are at an end.

And the case being thus, it is most necessary that our next enquiry be, What
this duty of thankfulness is, and how we may discharge our selves of it as we
ought,

GRATITUDE in its general notion, Gratitude.
is that virtue, by which we make some convenient or fitting return to another,
for some free benefit received from him, and the several acts, parts, or duties
of it, are three.

1. To acknowledge the benefit. 2. To thank and praise the Benefactor. 3. To
repay him with the like, or some other kindness, as our ability will serve, and
opportunity is offered.
So that it is in the mind first, then in the mouth, both full of praise and
thanks; yet the duty not full, until it fill the hands too; conceived it must
be in the heart, declared it must be by the tongue, perfected it must be by the
hand: And that all these may do their parts, we will a little consider them
apart,

1. And first, 1. In the heart.
the root of this lies in the heart, the fountain of every good action:
Gratitude must begin there, by an inward acknowledgment and just esteem of the
benefit received; not to acknowledge, or deny it, is an impudent piece of
Ingratitude; to forget it, base; and to undervalue it, comes not far behind
either. All these sins I fear we have much to answer for; and such as brought
our late judgments upon us. Now a just estimate of what we have received, is a
remedy against all these: For if we find that great, especially in any high
measure, we cannot for shame, either deny, undervalue, or forget it; and
therefore, that we may do our duty in the business we are met about, our main,
first, and chiefest work must be, to fix upon our hearts a due esteem, a true
sense of the worth and value of the great blessing we have lately received from
God, and are here met to pay our thanks for; and the best measure of it, is
taken from the consideration.

1. Of the Giver. 2. The benefit it self. 3. The manner of giving. 4. The time
when. 5. And the persons upon whom bestowed.
All or any of which use either to heighten or lessen a benefit received.

1. And first, 1. A due esteem of the Giver.
the Giver commends the gift; the hand it comes from, adds value to it: A
little favor from a great person is ever much esteemed; a small Donative from a
Prince, more valued then greater matters from an ordinary person. And there is
reason for it; for, besides the honor we get with others to be so valued by
those of high esteem, it brings satisfaction and comfort to our selves,
especially in our present case between God and us, to have such an assurance,
such an earnest of his good will, who is able to do so much for us: It lets us
out into new expectations of receiving still more and more, from a bounty so
great, so lasting, so boundless, so endless. Indeed, between men the difference
though much, cannot be so much to heighten the benefit; not more then between
one piece of earth and another, the Mountain and the Molchill at the most; but
in the comparison between God and us, we shall be utterly astonished, utterly
lost; that he so great, so glorious, so infinite in all perfections, beyond all
we can say or think; should yet vouchsafe to look down upon us, to be kind to
us, so poor, so weak, so vile, so despicable Creatures, even nothing, and worse
then nothing in comparison of him. What a condescension is this in him? What an
honor and comfort to us? How much does it commend any favor, even the least,
to be an earnest of so infinite a bounty? And therefore in all such cases our
Gratitude must not arise so much from the solace that nature finds in any
blessing bestowed upon us, as from the consideration of the bounty and goodness
of so infinite a Majesty toward us.

2. Thus you see the Giver is great, 2. Of the Gift.
greater then all givers else put together, great beyond compare. What is in
the next place, the Gift it self? That Is great too; and though all are so that
come from him, yet some are greater then others, and this in its kind as great
as any, both in respect of the mischiefs we are delivered from, and the
Blessings we receive by it. There Is no descending to particulars on either
side, they are infinite, easy it is to begin to speak of the one, or the
other; the Miseries of War, or the Blessings of Peace: But we know not where to
end, since both are innumerable; and the bare names of War and Peace, carry to
every man's understanding a summary, a collection of all temporal mischiefs and
blessings. And if there be any in Heaven or Hell upon Earth, these are they,
and the distance as great; however, they are excellent Hieroglyphics of both;
no two things in the world resemble them better.

So that if we consider what we have escaped, the miseries of War, and of a
Civil War, the worst of all wars; and what we have gained, the blessings of
Peace, and Kingly Government the best preserver of them; a gracious PRINCE, and
together with him our Laws, Liberties, Properties* the free exercise of
Religious Duties, indeed all that is or ought to be dear to a Christian
Commonwealth in this world: If we consider I say what he has removed from us,
and what he has given to us, the Blessing will appear in it self wonderful;
and in its kind, beyond compare.

3. And yet his Love and Liberality in the manner of bestowing it, 3. Of the
Manner of giving it.
is as wonderful as the Gift it self, and more; and that in a double respect.
For first; he did it graciously, freely, Nullo antecedente merito, nullo
expectato commodo; he saw nothing in us before to move him to it; he looks for
nothing after from us for it, but only that we should be kind to our selves
in a right use of his benefits; that so we may be capable of more and greater,
which we long not so much to receive, as he to give. And

Secondly, Because what he gives in frowns and thunder to others, he has
reached out to us smiling, and in his still voice, what they buy by all the
miseries of War, and think it a good purchase often at the expense of much
treasure, and a sea of Blood, is freely cast upon us without more cost or
trouble then of a few Concessions of a gracious Prince; now so great a blessing
at so easy a rate, so much for so little, must needs highly commend his
bounty, and make the manner of his giving equal to the gift it self

4 And as the Manner most gracious, 4. Of the Time when.
so was the Time too. A little thing seasonably done, deserves much: This was
great in it self, gracious in the manner, seasonable for the time; it is danger
that makes deliverance sweet. Placet cunctis securitas, etc. says St Bernard,
Security is pleasing to all, but to him most that feared most; and to be
snatched out of the jaws of Death, gives a double Life. This was our case;
rescued, when ready to perish, when Church and State, Religion, Learning, Laws,
were not only in danger, but already devoured, in the hope and expectation of
our enemies; when Atheism, Ignorance and Barbarism, were in a full and fierce
torrent, breaking in upon us, and we at the very brink of a remediless
confusion, ready to be made the pity and scorn of the whole world, as they
stood affected to us; Then, even then, in this pressing necessity, at this most
acceptable Time, did the day begin to break, and his mercy to shine upon us;
then we first discerned our deliverance dawning, which, by several gracious
steps and degrees, he has since worderfully perfected.

5. And as at a Time most seasonable for our necessities, 5. Of the Persons to
whom.
so, to make the mercy on all hands complete, at a Time too, when we seemed
most incapable of it, most unworthy of it: For who, or what were we, that such
a blessing should be cast upon us? not only undeserving, but ill deserving, and
that in a high measure; most worthy to be utterly consumed, most unworthy to be
preserved: And you know the less worth in the Receiver, ever the more favor in
the Giver. But to take a right esteem of our selves, we may do well to consider,

1. What our condition was before these Judgments fell upon us. 2. What under
them. 3. What at the time of our deliverance from them.
1. At first, 1. What our condition was before our troubles.
Blessings we had so many, so great, as no Nation under Heaven enjoyed more or
greater: But did we grow the better by them? were we thankful for them? Far
from it; God knows we forgot many, undervalued more, abused all. In stead of
the fruits of so great a bounty, nothing to be seen among us but horrid
impudent sins; Non furtiva scelera sed in publicum missa (as the Stoic of his
time;) not sneaking, private, concealed sins, as fearing the Laws or shame of
the World; but open, public, and National sins; Drunkenness, Reeling in the
streets, Blasphemy sounding in the Marketplace, Perjury in Courts of Justice,
Churches themselves not free, Pride and Oppression, Luxury and Profaneness,
Lust and Uncleanness, and what not? But above all, our base Ingratitude amidst
the greatest Blessings, ever restless and impatient, complaining of the Times,
and murmuring at those under whose blessed Government we enjoyed them with so
great security. Our own hearts must needs witness against us, That the
accusation is most just; and it is not a time to trifle with our selves, to
palliate and extenuate our sins, but freely and fully to confess them, if we
mean not to make void his present Mercies, and pull yet greater Judgments upon
us. This sin made us think our Peace a burden, and gave us no quiet till we had
thrown away those inestimable blessings; and for want of other Enemies, with
our own hands pull mischief upon our selves, mutually scourging and afflicting
one another by all the miseries of a bloody, civil and unnatural War: And thus
came his Judgments upon us.

And now to proceed.
2. When Gideon returned from the pursuit of the two Kings of Midian, 2. What
under them.
and had torn the men of Succoth and Penuel with the thorns and briars of the
Wilderness, it is said, that with them he taught the men of Succoth, Judge. 8.
16. because afflictions and punishments use to do it, use to teach men Wit and
Virtue, use to restrain them from their wicked courses. Did our mutual tearing
of one another flesh teach us? Had it so good an effect upon us? Alas no: we
grew not better, but worse by it; our sins multiplied with, and much beyond our
sufferings, especially Atheism, Profaneness, Sacrilege, Perjury, Oppression,
innocent Blood of all Degrees, Vulgar, Noble, Sacred and Royal; not to be
mentioned without tears of blood to bewail it.

So that when we were come to this height of wickedness, and made our selves
the reproach of the whole world, what could we in reason expect, but that the
full Vials, and the very dregs of his wrath should be poured down upon us, and
we utterly destroyed from the face of the earth?

3. Yet so wonderful was his mercy, 3. What at the time of our Deliverance.
even in in this state and condition, when our provocations reached up to
Heaven, seemed to contend and prevail too, both against his Love and Anger,
abusing the one, contemning the other, and profiting by neither; when thus full
ripe for destruction, yet, as if he were resolved not to be overcome by our
ingratitude, nor suffer any thing to hinder his gracious purposes toward us,
he has, by a Miracle of Mercy, removed his Judgments from us, and becalmed
that tempest that lay so heavy upon us, what can we do less then cry out with
our Prophet, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he does for the children of men. Psa. 107.

And now if we be not wholly drowned in sensuality, if we be not guilty of a
stupidity beyond what humane nature seems capable of, we must needs be highly
and passionately sensible of so melting, so surprising, so amazing a Mercy; so
exceeding great in all considerations: So great the Giver, so vile the
Receivers; the Gift so great, the Manner so kind, the Time so seasonable, and
We so unworthy of it: what can be more to commend it to us? And therefore, if
we have but near that relish of it in the heart as we ought, and as it
deserves, it will break out at the mouth, and break out it must into Praise and
Thanksgiving: For that was the next part of David's Gratitude, and must be so of
ours.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and sing praises to thy Name, among the
Heathen. 2. If Gratitude be in the heart, 2. Gratitude in the tongue.
if all be right within, something will appear without: If there be that
apprehension, that estimation of the blessing as it deserves, it cannot be kept
there no more then fire in the bosom, it will break out in thanks and praise;
the full heart will run over at the mouth, it must have a vent by the tongue:
And so indeed it should, both for our own good, and for others too. The tongue
was principally given (you know) to set forth his praise and glory, and it
concerns us to use it accordingly. We offend with it as much as with any
member, and therefore should by it endeavor to make some compensation, and
take care it be as serviceable as before sinful. We pull down Judgments by it,
and it is but meet we give thanks with it for our Deliverance; else we shall be
found guilty of cold affections, dull resentments of his favors: We rob God of
his Glory, and others of the benefit of his Mercies to us, for whose sakes we
receive them as well as for our own; that they, as well as we, may have
comfortable hopes of Deliverance, when in distress; and learn by our example
to give Praise and Glory to his Name.

Necessary then it is, 1. Publicly.
that the Tongue have its part in the discharge of this duty; our thanks must
be vocal, and more then that, they must be public too and diffusive. David
would not pay them privately, and to a few, but publicly, even among the
Gentiles in the Church and without, even to all mankind. He was a Prophet, and
foresaw the conversion of the Gentiles, and that the Psalm he composed should
be sung to the praise and glory of God among them, that his example should
minister matter of thanks to all succeeding ages. But I promised not to meddle
with the Prophetical sense at all; the Literal reaches far enough to our
instruction, and may suffice to teach us to imitate him in publishing our
thanks as he did, who (that none might be ignorant of his Gratitude, who had
heard of his Deliverance) would do it in the great Congregation, and among much
people, Psalm 35. 18. He calls to others to assist him, and join with him; to do
it themselves, Tell the people what things he has done. Psalm. 105. 1. O come
hither and hearken, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul. Psalm.
66. 16. And, O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together.
Psalm. 34 3. O be joyful all the Lands; and many such like. He will do it to
every body, that all may praise God as well as he; he will not be ashamed, nor
should we, to own and confess, and acknowledge, and publish his bounty in all
places, and before all persons, as occasion and opportunity is offered. A heart
truly affected with a sense, and due esteem of his mercy, will do it, cannot
forbear to do it, is restless till it have done it. Both publicly and
cheerfully too, another circumstance in the manner of giving our thanks; of
which likewise,

The Prophet gives here an example, 2. cheerfully.
for he will not only say, but Sing praises unto his Name; declare a
joyfulness as well as thankfulness. And so it should be, and so it must be. For
as to Feast when God calls to Fast; to sing, when he calls to sigh, is in the
Prophet, an iniquity not easily purged, Isai. 22. 12, 13, 14. (To frolic it
under his judgments, and to despise them so much, as not to seem sensible of
them, is a great sin, and I fear no small part of our former guilt.) So, on the
contrary, to carry sour countenances when his shines upon us, to entertain his
mercies with a sullen and sad heart, an unfeeling disposition, or but with an
indifferency; not to be at all transported, at all moved with them, is a sin
that deserves a desertion, a recalling of his favors, a doubling his judgments
upon us. A sad example we have in the people of God. Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. Because
thou did not serve the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of
heart, for the abundance of all things: Therefore thou shall serve thine
enemies in hunger, thirst, and nakedness, and in the want of all things. An
heavy doom, and the reason of it is; where there is no joy without, there can
be no hearty thanks within. For how can we esteem any thing a blessing that
delights us not? And how are we delighted if we show no signs of joy for it?
And how does he value a Deliverance, that expresses no comfort he takes in it?
This is certainly a great sin, an high provocation of God. What shall we say
then to those sour and over-leavened natures, that with the same countenance
keep a Fast and a Festival, a day of Humiliation and Thanksgiving, both alike,
with sighs, and groans, and cast down looks; as if griefs and groans were a
certain sign of Grace and Godliness, when the Devils howl and are tormented.

But I would not be mi^^aken; it is not a profane rejoicing, a sinful mirth we
plead for; far be it from us: How much those usual expressions of jollity,
singing, feasting, and the like, are abused to Luxury and Riot, Excess and
Wantonness, Novimus and Dolemus, (as the Father) we know it, we grieve for it,
we detest it as much as any. An horrid sin it is, in stead of thanking God, to
sacrifice to Bacchus; to express Publicum gaudium per Publicum dedecus, as
Tertullian of the Heathen: That Is to pay thanks with unthankfulness, to make
Mercy the Mother of Sin, to return evil for good, the worst, the highest, the
basest Ingratitude.

The corruption of the best things is ever the worst, and what is most necessary
in the use, is ever most dangerous in the abuse: And so it is here; abuse Mirth
and nothing worse, use it right and nothing better; keep it within its bounds,
suffer it not to transport us beyond our duty into sin, and it is the Balm of
this Life, the Earnest of a better, the Condiment and seasoning, that which
makes pleasant all actions Moral and Religious.

It Is an excellent Rule of Life St. Bernard gives, Do well, and be merry; as
merry as you will, the more the better; keep to the first, you cannot offend in
the second. And let me tell you, that Virtue and Religion are the most
cheerful things in the World, however some make them sour and severe; they
are, like God himself, all light and serenity, joy and comf^rt, especially in
his service.

God loves the cheerful Servant, and who does not? We may judge it by our
selves. Who cares for him that goes to his work as if he went to the Stocks or
a Prison? All parts of Gods service, even the sowrest and severest (had we time
to show it) are mixed with comforts, and should be performed joyfully; this of
Thanksgiving above and beyond, and more then any: For here we swim with the
stream. We are naturally cheerful after a mischief avoided, a danger escaped;
and being so well prepared for it, should with all alacrity sing out our thanks
and his praise, declare an exultation of mind in all innocent and decent
expressions of joy and gladness.

'Twas ever the custom of all mankind to do it, in all Ages and places:
Instances are infinite both within the Church and without. But in this have we
need go no further then the Prophet David, who in the Book of Psalms, for his
several deliverances, is ever at [I will sing,] or [O sing unto the Lord:]
either doing it himself, or calling others to do it, not coldly or faintly, but
zealously and heartily; Sing aloud, make a cheerful noise; Sing lustily unto
him with a good courage. But this will not serve the turn neither, unless he
call for Instruments, as well as men to assist; Bring hither the Tabret, the
merry Harp, and the Lute, blow the Trumpet too, all to incite quicken and
inflame his heart and affections, even to a transporting extatick joy of
gratitude.

We should indeed labor to foment it in us as much as may be, for the greater
joy without, the greater sense and esteem of his bounty within; and the greater
that is, ever the more, and the more sincere Gratitude; which if it be not
heard in our Tongues, is certainly not felt in our Hearts, and therefore there
it must be also.

And when this is done, the second part of Gratitude is performed; the Tongue
has done her part, but all is not yet done; this is but Gratiarum dictio, it
reaches no further then words, and something must be done as well as said.

The thanks of some are vocal enough, 3. Gratitude in the hand.
too much, because nothing else, nothing but sound and noise; and better a dumb
heart then not sincere. Words are a cheap way of payment, and the world
delights much in it; Gods benefits are not words, but deeds, and our Gratitude
will be found short if it reach not beyond words to deeds. Nay, Honesty and
Reason require, that the compensation exceed the benefit received, that the
return be made both in greater measure, and with greater alacrity (if it may
be;) Because he that gave was, not obliged, he that returns, is; the one comes
from a free and liberal mind, the other is a piece of Justice, and a Debt: And
though we have paid what is due to Justice, in returning as much as we received;
yet we are not upon even terms, unless we suffer one kindness to beget
another, and return something over and above, and more then we received. A good
man will do it when he can, and have a good mind, an earnest desire to do it
when he cannot. And so should we to God, since it is impossible to make him
answerable returns in fact, we must do it in voto, in desire. And though
neither our deeds nor desires can in any degree equal his Bounty, but we must
needs fall infinitely short in both; yet if we do what we can, and heartily
wish we could do more, it is accepted with him.

And something (sure) we can do, and that something we must do* Now to learn
what it is, we must consider; why we were afflicted, and why delivered?
afflicted we were for our sins, delivered that we might sin no more. What those
sins were that pulled down his judgments upon us, you heard before; how many,
how great, how public, how bold and daring; how our provocations multiplied
with and beyond his judgments. And now being delivered, we must remember, that
mercy is ever showed propter spem, in hope of amendment; and therefore take
care to avoid those sins hereafter; at least to be sure to prevent their being
public and national any more. For if instead of improving this blessing of
Peace to his glory, the good of others, and of our selves, we abuse it to pride
and vanities, pleasure and sensuality, excess and riot, we may be assured it
will prove no blessing at all, but an aggravation, both of our guilt and
misery, in bringing a worse War, and heavier judgments upon us, then we have
yet felt.

But this is not all, 2. In doing good.
we have more to do, to be thankful as we should, then this; then barely to
avoid sin; we must do good too. For the general end of all his blessings upon
us, his mercies to us, and deliverance of us, of what kind soever, is to lead
us to a holy, virtuous, and religious life, St. Luke 1. 74, 75. We are brought
into danger and distress, because bad, delivered that we may be better. And
this is the right giving of thanks, the best return we can make him, and the
best esteemed by him: And so (you see) there is much more required to make up
this duty, then words; much before, and much after, the heart before, and after
the hands. If the first (the heart) be wanting, words are but wind, not better,
nor so innocent as the prattling of a Parrat. Gratitude is heartless without the
one, and lame without the other. When either is wanting (the heart or hands)
the Tongue is an Hypocrite, and gives lies instead of thanks; real thanks are
good deeds, and they praise him best, that obey him best.

But now among those many duties a good life comprehends, 1. By giving.
and we in gratitude are obliged unto; some are more seasonable, more proper
for this time and occasion. And to make the choice, we shall especially
consider, that as God has done great things for us, so it is necessary we do
something again for him: As he has given to us, so we to give to him. Alas,
how can that be! since our goods reach not to him, he needs them not. True
indeed, but His do; the poor need, and by them our goods reach even to Him too.
We relieve him in the poor, visit him in the sick, cloth him in the naked,
redeem him in the prisoner: For in that we do it to these, we do it to him,
Matthew. 25. 45. And no time more seasonable to do it in, none fitter then this:
That at a public rejoicing none may be sad, nor fast when others feast: And
therefore, being cheered, refreshed, and comforted our selves, let us cheer,
refresh, and comfort others; and being delivered our selves, let us deliver
others from distress and want; those especially that have suffered in the late
disturbances, the sick, the maimed, the lame, the desolate Widows and Children
of such as fell in the Service. Let Us be sure to make them (as well as our
selves) sensible of Gods favors to us: Let the blessings of peace distill from
the head to the skirts, to the very meanest among us: Works of Charity are a
proper sacrifice of thanksgiving at such a time as this.

But besides giving, 2. Forgiving.
there must be forgiving too, a duty at this time as seasonable as the other,
if not more; for it is the best part of our Gratitude to God, and the most
acceptable to him, and we shall be without excuse, if we do it not. For shall
God forgive us Thousands of Talents* sins many in number, great in weight? And
shall we stick at a few pence, a few petty injuries of our Brethren, neither
great, nor many; but such as for number or weight can stand in no comparison
with ours against him? Shall God, so great, so glorious, after so high and many
provocations, condescend to be at peace with us, and give us an assurance of
it, by removing his judgments, and crowning us with many blessings? And shall
we (poor worms) be at enmity among our selves for trifles, and that to the
hazard of all the comforts of this life, and hopes of a better? Shall we retain
the memory of former unkindnesses, and make a Public Act of Oblivion, which we
expect a public lie; without either fear of God, or shame of the World? This
is not to have peace, or enjoy it; but with great ingratitude to throw it at
him again; it is but to change one war into another, the open into secret,
hostility into treachery; and, by pretending peace and kindness, to smooth the
way to supplantation and injury, the most base, serpentine, unmanly thing in
the World.

And therefore I beseech you, take care that we* strip our selves of all unruly
passions, that we may have peace within, peace from turbulent, revengeful
affections: For unless we have this, what is outward peace worth? Certainly no
more to thee then health in the City, when the Plague is in thy bosom. Let Us
all seriously and sadly look back, consider, and bemoan one another: For what
we have mutually done and suffered from each other; let us all be sorry for it,
and all mend, perfectly forgiving what is past, and returning to as great a
kindness as ever, and a greater then ever; that so, by all mutual good Offices
we may make amends for our former Animosities.

It has been our custom indeed (and more shame for us) to forget benefits, to
write them in sand, but injuries in marble; we must now invert the order, write
Gods benefits in marble, others injuries in sand, if we write them at all;
never forget the one, never remember the other; that is the best, the most
Christian memory, which (as Caesar's) forgets nothing but injuries: We should
all do it, and Princes above all; for it becomes a Public Father, to look upon
all as sons, upon the Prodigals, with more kindness and tenderness, when they
once come to themselves, acknowledge their errors, when he sees them returning,
though afar off, to run, and meet, and caress them; to call for the Ring and
the Robe; to set some marks of favor upon them more then ordinary, that may
give assurance to the World and them, that the promises made them, were not the
effects of necessity, but the fruits of a gracious Princely mind, inviolably
resolved to outdo all his Promises and Engagements.

Lastly, 3. By persevering in both.
and to conclude, Let every one of us (I beseech you) think upon these and the
like duties, which this time and occasion call for, and continue them at all
times. Gratitude is not the business of a day or year, but of our whole life.
Benefits new and fresh, are usually entertained by us with warm affections, but
(more shame for us) a little time cools them, deads them: And dangers are too
often at once past and forgotten; or if we set apart a time, a Day of
Thanksgiving (as now we do) when that is past, commonly our thanks pass with
it, and we return to our old vanities again. David does not so, he gives a
better example; he says, I will give thanks, I will begin, (and indeed he had
begun before he said it) but he says not when he will end, he sets no time for
that; nor could he, because it should have none, it should be without end: And
therefore elsewhere he is at it; Every day will I give thanks unto thee, and
praise thy Name for ever and ever, Psalm. 145. 2. It Is undecent, and indeed
unjust, our Thanks should be transitory, when the Benefit is lasting. Now that,
(if we forfeit it not by unthankfulness) lasts as long as we; we are, and ever
shall be, the better for it; For had we perished in the danger, we had utterly
lost the benefit of this and all succeeding Mercies. Our Thanks then should
last as long as it lasts, and that is as long as we last, and must not end
before us. and therefore let every one of us, as we are obliged, take up David's
resolution and practice, and say with him, Praise the Lord, O my soul; while I
live will I praise the Lord, as long as I have any being will I sing praise
unto my God. Psalm. 146. 1. And thus saying, and thus doing, we shall continue
those Blessings upon us, which may make this and succeeding Generations happy.
Which God, etc.

FINIS.

