THE KINGS Majesty's most Gracious MESSAGE TO THE PARLIAMENT, By Sir Peter
Killegrew.

Sent from the Commissioners with His Majesty at Newmarket, about His
Majesty's being at Richmond, and coming to His Parliament at Westminster, for
settling of the Kingdom in a safe and well grounded peace.

His Majesty to come on Thursday next. And His Majesty's resolution for passing
such acts as shall tend to the peace of the Kingdom.

London Printed for John Willet, June 23. 1647.

HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE To the Honorable Houses of Parliament assembled at
Westminster.
Honored Sir,
HEre has been Sir Peter Killegrew, who is dispatched to the Parliament with
his Majesty and the Commissioners their Answers to the houses, concerning his
Majesty's remove from hence.

The Votes of the houses being communicated to the King, for his Majesty's
remove from hence to Richmond, with the Commissioners, His Majesty gave not so
positive an answer at the first, as afterward.

His Majesty has returned answer to the Parliament, by the Commissioners, to
whom his Majesty declared his mind herein, as also to Col. Whalley, who
commands the party of forces that are there.

The substance of the one, and a Copy of the other, I have sent you here
enclosed.

Mr. Peter's has been with his Majesty, and kissed the Kings hand. His Majesty
asking upon his admittance, who he was, and being told, that it was Mr. Peter's
the Minister, the King gave him his hand to kiss, and said, that he had often
heard of him, but never saw him before: then his Majesty had some discourse
with him, wherein Mr. Peter's declared what a precious thing, and honorable it
was, for a King to have the love of his subjects, and above all to be godly,
and how much heaven is more excellent then the things of this world.

The King seemed to like his discourse, and commended it, and said, that by
what had bin told him of him, he did not expect such rational solid discourse
from him Mr. Peter's told his Majesty, that if he pleased, he humbly desired his
Majesty to give him leave to preach to him. The King answered no, he was not
satisfied in that point yet, to hear any, but such as he has already
propounded, in a Church way,

The King lies at his own house here at Newmarket still, it is a very fair
spacious house and excellent good air, a fine garden and in every respect
better accommadation then at Holmby, and his Majesty is much better satisfied
by being here, then he was at Holmby, and besides that it gives his Majesty
better content, because it is nearer to London.

His Majesty goes often out with the Commissioners to Bowls to Col. Russels
house (who was persuaded lately of the day of Judgments near approach, and
thereupon prepared for it, a very precious godly man,) it is about five miles
from hence, and about four miles on this side the Isle of Ely, a very handsome
fine house.

Here is no discontent here, but all things carried on very fairly.

The Kings Majesty seems to admire at the Atmies discreet carriage in this
present business, and diverse others at this time concurring with it.

We are now in a capacity to come near to you, as you may see by the enclosed;
and then you shall hear further from

Newmarket June 20. 1647. Your most humble servant, W. SHARP.

A Copy of the Votes of the Houses delivered to the Kings Majesty at Newmarket,
for his Majesty to come to Richmond.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the General be
required to deliver the person of the King to such persons as both Houses shall
appoint, to be placed at Richmond under such Guards, and in such manner as they
shall think fit, to the intent that the Propositions agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, may be speedily presented unto His Majesty, for the settling of a
well grounded Peace.

Ordered further, That the persons to whom the General is required to deliver
the Person of the King to be placed at Richmond, shall be the Commiscioners
formerly appointed to receive the person of the King at Newcaftle, or any three
of them.

Ordered also, that the Guards appointed to receive the Orders and directions
of the Commissioners in attending and guarding the Person of the King, shall be
Colonel Rossiter and his Regiment.

The Kings Answer and Resolution upon the delivery of the Votes to his Majesty
at Newmarket, being the substance of what was sent by Sir Peter Killegrew to
the Parliament.
I. THat his Majesty is content to remove to Richmond, it being nearer to His
Parliament. II. That to remove from Newmarket to Richmond, is agreeable to what
himself has always desired in his late messages to the Houses. III. That it
being nearer to his Parliament, it is much more convenient for treating with
the houses, and concurring in such act as shall be passed for the peace and
security of the Kingdom, IV. That on Thursday next his Majesty may go from
Newmarket to Richmond, according to the Votes of both houses. V. His Majesty
desires that there may be such a concurrence between his Majesty and the
houses, and so the Army also, as may conduce to a safe and well grounded peace.
FINIS.

