A Word in season: OR, A Check to Disobedience, and to all lying scandalous
Tongues, with manifest conviction of a general received SLANDER; IN VINDICATION
OF The Right Honorable, John Warner, Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of
LONDON: CONCERNING The justness of his Actions upon Christmas Day, Calumniated
by Evil-affected Men.

By G. S. Gent.

Jan. 13. 1647.
Imprimatur

G. Mabbot.

Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people,

Act. 23. 5. For there is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained
of God:

Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake:

Romans 13. 1, 5. London, printed for Laurence Chapman. Jan. 14.

FOrasmuch as the Office and Authority of the Civil Magistrate is the Ordinance
of God, and that Magistrates just Commands, and Peoples willing Obedience, is
the main foundation, or the two chief upholding pillars to the being or
welbeing of all Kingdoms and Commonweals, as well as particular Cities and
Families; Therefore Injustice in the one, or Disobedience in the other, have
been, and necessarily must be, the destruction and utter subversion of the
greatest Monarchs and most flourishing Kingdoms, and of all humane Societies.
But commonly the defect on the Peoples part, casting off the yoke of obedience,
is much more mischievous to a Commonweal, then Injustice in the Magistrate
commanding; For many States, Commonweals and Kingdoms have prospered long under
ill Commanders; but where ever the People have refused to obey, and contemned
the Authority of the Magistrate, that State, Commonweal or Kingdom has
inevitably fallen into confusion and desolation. All Historians conclude this as
a Maxim, That an ill Government is better then none; the Laws of a Tyrant and
his Tyranny may dye with him, Justice and Clemency may revive after him to
everlasting posterities; but the yoke of obedience being once cast off, against
the lawful Authority of the Magistrate, it is like the opening of many
floodgates to all wickedness and destruction, as the breaking in of the Ocean
with an overflowing and destroying deluge, which is sudden and remediless.

It is well observed of one, That a wise Statesman being asked, how it came to
pass that the City or Commonweal of Sparta so long flourished, when other
States and Commonweals fell into distractions and confusions? The wise
Statesman answered. It was not because their Magistrates commanded better then
other, but because the Citizens and People obeyed Magistrates willingly. In
this is utility and safety.

We know hy what undissolved Ties Antichristian Rome bind their Subjects to
obedience to the Pope, his Laws, Edicts and Ministers; and they know they have
been thereby established. We may learn of the unjust Steward to be provident;
the wisdom of the Serpent, and the Doves innocence may stand well together. We
know likewise, how all Popes successively have by the craft and activity of
their seducing Jesuits, stirred up divisions and factions in all States and
Kingdoms throughout Christendom, and thereby procured Rebellion, by which they
have ever prevailed, and have more enlarged their Dominions then by the Sword;
for this is their Maxine and practice, First Divide, then Conquer. Do we not
see what fearful Divisions they have raised in England, Scotland and Ireland at
this day? for it is the only act of the Jesuits; they first kindled the fire,
and they still bring more fuel to make the flame greater; yet we will not take
notice, that divisions and factions are as so many armies besieging us, yea
almost entered as Conquerers upon us.

Whence was our late bloody War in England and Scotland, and that hellish
Rebellion in Ireland, but from Romes Jesuits? God only has broken that
snare, and we are escaped; but our pride, our contumacy, our envy, has again
involved us into a greater labrynth, and who but God can deliver us? Does not
pride, both Spiritual and Carnal, prevail? Are not men more full of
self-seeking and vainglory then ever? Is not Jone in her own conceit as good
as her Lady? Does not Jack think himself a Gentleman? the Servant beards it
with his Master, the Peasant equals himself with the Peer, and he that should
be commanded, contends with him that commands; these are horrid and unjust
things. Is not Magistracy despised and calumniated? consider well; Are we not
brought into the last and worst condition of destroyed Jerusalem? Does not
opposition in faction carry us beyond the mean to two Extremes? Some that too
much affect Monarchy, Deifie their Prince, as at least equal with God on Earth,
and will rebel against God, his Law, and Christ their King, rather then submit
to holy Writ, or omit one Ceremony that their Prince likes. Others in the
contrary extreme, despise Authority, refuse to do the thing they are commanded,
because they are commanded it; although they would do the same if it had not
been commanded: These would have the Magistrate in a worse condition then the
Cobbler that mends their Shoes; they will not allow him to mend a fault, nor to
correct their wry-goings. Thus the common Enemy have overwitted us, and will
(if not prevented by our reconciling and unity) overcome us.

That all this is but the fruit of Gods anger against us for our sins, I know;
and that it is a large addition and aggravation of our former sins, I would
have all men take notice; for this our iniquity will be our ruin, if not
timely prevented by Humiliation and by Reformation. God has sent unto us his
Ministers and Messengers (as to the Jews) to beseech us, Because he had
compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: they have foretold us of
wrath long before it fell upon us; we have some years past seen and felt it, to
the bitterness of our souls. Gods Ministers have fasted and prayed for us, and
with us, when we with one accord joined with them, and God did graciously hear
and answer; but our hearts are now lift up with pride, like the heart of
Hezekiah after his great deliverance, and we have not rendered to God according
to what we have received, therefore wrath is come upon all England. Do we not
now neglect to seek God by prayer and fasting? Do we not interpret our Solemn
Covenant to our own Ends, and turn Religion into Policy, and Law into Liberty?
Did not God spare the natural branches, and shall God spare us? how can we
think it?

Korah and his company despised the Government of Moses, and the Ministry of
Aaron, but the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. If I should enter
into particulars, and give instances of these times, parallel to the Rebellion
of Korah and his company, I should exceed my sheet, and multiply it by tens. I
shall confine my pen to one only, which is indeed my chief aim; and that is,
to reprove that desperate and wicked Affront offered to the Right honorable
(John Warner) Lord Major of the honorable City of London for the time being, on
the 25. day of December last, commonly and ignorantly called Christmas day; and
to vindicate his Name from the calumnious Reproaches, and horrid lying
Slanders, cast upon him, and upon his Authority, by some sons of Disobedience.

In brief thus; The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament being sensible of
the too much superstitious keeping the day called Christmas day, and the
superfluity in all excess, which are altogether unsuitable to our sad Times of
Calamity; according to the National Covenant against all Superstition, and for
Reformation, have thought fit to reform that abuse; And because some Episcopal
men, Divines in the City, were resolved to preach that day, being the 25. of
December last, with intent to kindle greater fire of Contention, rather then to
edify their hearers in the Faith of Christ, An Order came from the House to
the Lord Major on the Even, to command such men not to Preach on that day; some
obeyed, and some disobeyed; little was said or done to any, but admonished, and
they are where they were (for ought I know) as full of Superstition as before.
The same 25. day of December the Lord Major being at Guildhall, sitting in
Committee of the Militia, complaint was made before them, That a tumult was
gathered together in Cornhil, near Leadenhal, where in despite of Authority
they had set up Holly and Ivy on the top of a Pinnacle, a high work or building
in the middle of the street, which they with these green things had adorned;
and made some glory in it. The Lord Major and the rest of the Committee, sent
the Marshal of the City, with his man, and some other of his Lordships
Officers, to pull down these gawds; but not suffered to do it, were by the
multitude abused; One was in danger to be killed, the Marshals man, as the
rest, seeking to escape their hands, was pursued by some of them, and forced to
take a house for safety; some of the rude multitude assayed to break in upon
him, and said, they would have him, and they would kill him; but he escaped by
a back-way, and came back with the rest to the Committee of the Militia, where
the Lord Major was: The Lord Major presently fearing some mischief might be,
arose, and took horse, being accompanied with one of the Sheriffs, (the other
being necessarily absent) rode to the place aforesaid, taking with them some
Holbertiers to guard his Lordships person, and to keep the perce: Their
presence gave some dump to the company, many of them were submissive; but some
gave Affront, insomuch that one of the Officers struck one of them on the head,
and brake his head, his name was Price ap Williams, on whom they laid hold, and
on some others, who were all sent to the Counter; but the Lord Major blamed him
that struck, saying, he came thither to keep the peace, etc. The third day,
after Examination and admonition, they were set at liberty, and all well, only
Price Williams wore a plaster to his broken pate. This Price Williams it seems
was servant to Mr. William Garraway a Merchant, but not his Apprentice: He was
first Sir Henry Garraway's Footboy, afterward he went abroad to seek
preferment, but returned empty to this Mr. Garraway, son to Sir Henry Garraway,
where he is employed to go of errands, and to wait at Table, where he now is,
well and sound, as ever he was since he came first out of Wales, his Native
place. This is the full and whole truth of the business, though Envy have
spread another Report.

For those seditious instruments of the Devil, who was a liar from the
beginning, and is the Father of lies and liars, maliciously by the secret
suggestion of the old Serpent, first whispered abroad that Price Williams was
dead of the wound in his head, and that the Lord Major commanded his Officers
to knock him down, and that he was a man's son of quality, born to a great
Estate, Apprentice to Mr. Garraway, who had in money Three hundred pounds with
him, and that the Lord Major was in great trouble about it. This report being
thus secretly spread by wicked and turbulent men, it grew by the eighth day of
January to a public talk in all places within the City, and divulged into the
Countries, so as the thing was by very many believed with such confidence, that
many to this day will not believe the contrary; And the rather, because these
malignant persons, to make some Insurrection or Rebellious Mutiny, had incensed
many Apprentices to indignation, so as there were several papers set up upon
posts to meet together to avenge the blood of their brother Prentice.

These things being so frequently talked of, put me to a diligent enquiry of
the business, which I really find as I have related it in every particular.
And for my better satisfaction, I caused these Reports to be made known to the
Lord Major, who made this wise and grave answer to it, That the thing did not
nor should not trouble him at all, innocence and an upright heart was defense
and support to him against all malice of men: Saying farther, It was a business
below him to take notice of, it being his own case; and rather made that use of
their slander, that David did of Shime^'s cursing* then seeking any revenge
upon the persons of any: And as wise Pyrrus did in another (the like) case,
when a friend came to him and told him of one in the City of Ambracia that
coutinually spak^ ill of him to all men, and desired he would put him out of
the City (...) Pyrrus gave this answ^r, Let him alone; if he speak ill of me
while I have not offended, and when I have done him no harm, how much more will
he speak ill of me if I should banish him.

Truly the conside^rtion of all this put together, his Lordships innocence,
patience, and the horribl^ slander cast upon him, enforced me to write this
sheet in his Vindication, whose fidelity, piety and Justice is to me well
known: And he that will not vindicate himself by the Sword of Authority, has
need, and justly deserves to be defended in so just a cause, by the Pen of a
friend, though I confess his merits do challenge, and call for more then I will
or can express; for I hate to flatter, only to wash the stain that
black-mouthed Hellhounds have sough^ to cast upon him, I have dipped my Pen in
ink, not in gall, for they want none.

Now to conclude, I shall endeavor to do them good for evil, and entreat them
to take advice from me, to leave lying, as they love their souls; for the
Spirit of God says plainly, All liars shall have iheir part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone: humble your selves therefore, ye sons of
Belial, that dare speak evil of dignities, and bring false accusations against
the just and lawful Magistrate, whom God has styled with the honor to bear his
own name, as they do his image, he has called them gods, though they must dye
like men. Ye children of your Father the Devil, know your selves, and seek God,
repent of your horrid wickedness, and pray, if possible, your sins may be
forgiven you; for you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity: yet ye may be as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; But if for my
well wishes ye rail against me, by reproach of the tongue, I say no more to
you, but what the Apostle Jude said to your Father, The Lord rebuke you.

FINIS.

