ADVICE TO Young Persons, Relating both to Faith and Practice: Contained in
some Plain Directions how to Demean themselves.

Together with some few Motives to the Observation of what is here recommended.

Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word, Psalm. 119. 9.

London, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. Price 2d.

To his much Honored Patron: The Author.
Though it is our great Calamity to live in a most corrupt Age, Yet by the
Influence of the All-wise, and All powerful God, (who can derive good out of
Evil) you are so Prudent, as to make an Advantage of it: and to raise the value
of your Virtue, and to add to the Luster and Worth of your Reputation and
Family, by being untainted in the midst of most dangerous Temptations.

SIR, I might tell the World, that the following Lines were drawn as a faint
Copy from the fair Original which you give, and that the ensuing Precepts are
taken from your Pattern: But lest I should call up the Blood into your Cheeks
by offering Violence to your singular Modesty, or throw my self under the
Suspicion of Flattery, I will convert my just Praises of you, into earnest
Prayers for you, that that good God who has hitherto preserved you, would
still preserve you, that you may go on by an Unspotted Life still to glorify
him; and by your most agreeable Temper, to win over others to Piety and Virtue:
and to answer the Care and Kindness of that Learned and Worthy Person, by whom
your tender Mind was informed, and your early Manners cultivated; from whom (in
your Minority) I received the largest share of what I have; and so stand
perpetually obliged to return the most grateful Acknowledgment. And lastly,
That you may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
until you come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. This is
the earnest Prayer of, Sir,

Your most Obliged, Most devoted, and Most Humble Servant.

ADVICE TO Young Persons.
FOrasmuch as it is generally acknowledged, that to persuade Young Persons to be
Dutiful and Good, would prove an Effectual Means to recover Souls out of the
hands of Satan, to reform the World, and to retrieve Religion and Virtue:
therefore this small Treatise is sent abroad on purpose to exhort, and (if it
be possible for it) to persuade those, who in their younger days are more
especially beset with Temptations, and more easily invited into a compliance
with them; that they should by God's Grace preserve their standing: Or if
fallen, that they should speedily rescue themselves out of their Slavery, and
henceforward fear the Lord always, and keep his Commandments. And may that same
Good God, who puts into our hearts good Desires, by his continual help, make us
to bring them to good Effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

First then, Let me persuade young Persons to lay such a steady and Unshaken
Foundation of Faith, that the Gates of Hell may never prevail against it. For
them who design to answer the main End of Christianity, this Advice is always
seasonable. But never was this Advice more seasonable than it is in our present
Age, An Age, wherein almost every particular Person is ready to broach some
particular Opinion; Insomuch that the old Landmarks of Faith are removed, and
the main Principles of the Gospel of Grace and Salvation by Christ, doubted of,
disputed, and denied.

O let it be your great concern then,

First. To believe in God the Father, who has made you, and all the World.
Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed you, and all mankind. Thirdly, in
God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies you, and all the Elect People of God.

First then, let it be your Concern to believe in God the Father, who by the
Son, Heb. 1. 2. and by the Efficacy of the Holy Ghost, Genesis 1. 2. Made the
whole World, Heaven and Earth, and all created Beings which are contained
therein. And upon this Belief let it be your Business to give God the Father
that Reverence that is due unto him, as our Wonderful Creator. This is that
great Lord who made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is,
Acts. 4. 24. This is our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 6. 9. In his Hand are
all the Corners of the Earth, and the strength of the Hills is his also, the
Sea is his and he made it, and his hands prepared the dry Land: And therefore,
O come let us Worship, and fall down, and kneel before him! Psalm. 95. 3. And
say with the Psalmist: I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well, Psalm. 139.
14.

Secondly, You are steadfastly to believe in God the Son; For that he is truly
God the Apostle expressly declares, Romans 9. 5. where speaking of Christ he
says, that he is over all God Blessed for ever; and so St. John, we are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God, and Eternal
life, 1 John. 5. 20. But we are not only to believe this Son to be God, but
also that he redeemed us, and all mankind. And that this Son of God paid the
Price of Redemption for all Mankind, who can doubt that believes the Scripture?
for there is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. And again, he tasted Death for every
man, Heb. 2. 9. And here common Gratitude prompts and directs you to your Duty.
For since ye were bought with a Price, even with the Price of the most precious
Blood of the Son of God, You are (strongly obliged) to glorify God in your
Bodies, and in your Spirits, which are his, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Thirdly, You are faithfully to believe in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies
you, and all the elect People of God, that the Holy Ghost is God, is plain from
Acts the 5th. verses the 3 d. and the 4th. in the 3 d. verse St Peter proposed
this Question, Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? and
because Ananias thus lied to the Holy Ghost, he tells him verse the 4th. Thou
have not lied unto Men, but unto God. Nay, before that, when the Pharisees
(upon our Saviors casting out a Devil) ascribed the operation to Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils: our Savior called this Sin, that Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, which shall never be forgiven. By which words (the most Learned and
Reverend Bishop Pearson observed, amongst several other Arguments to that
purpose, that) it appears, that there is a Sin or Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost distinct from all other Sins and Blasphemies committed against God the
Father, or the Son of God; that this Sin has an Aggravation added unto it
beyond other Sins and Blasphemies: But if the Holy Spirit were no Person, the
Sin could not be distinct from those sins which are committed against him whose
spirit he is, and if he were a Person created, the sin could receive no such
Aggravation beyond other Sins, and blasphemies. and consequently it remains
that he is God.

But we are not only to believe this Spirit to be God, but also that he is the
Sanctifier of us, and of all the elect People of God. For what can be more
positive and plain, than that the Sanctification of God's people is ascribed to
this Holy Spirit? for thus it runs in the words of the Apostle, Elect according
to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the sanctification of the
spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 2. And therefore from this Principle of your Belief, you
cannot but infer this to be your Duty, that since ye are a chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People, you are obliged to show
forth his Praises, who has called you out of darkness, into his marvelous
light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Thus then in the Divine Essence which is but one, there are three distinct
Persons viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, thus plainly
distinguished by their peculiar Properties. Nay, the Scripture does not only
mention these Properties, but also proceeds to the exact numbering of these
Agents or Persons in the Divine Essence, For there are three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1
John, 5. 7. and so again, Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out
of the Water: and lo, the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the spirit
of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. And lo, a voice from
Heaven, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 16.
17. I mention no more Places to this purpose (though many occur) lest I should
swell this little piece beyond its designed bounds: but that of St. Matthew.
Chap. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And yet
notwithstanding this Distinction of Agents, or Persons there is but one entire
Essence; for there is none other God but one, 1 Cor. 8. 4. and the Lord our
God, is God only, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. And now, O young Man! since here is a main
Principle of thy Profession, here comes in a main Rule fot thy Practice. since
there is a God, since there is but one God, therefore thou shall Worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4. 10.

But that the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet that
there is but one God; how thus it is, and as to the manner how these things can
be, this falls not within the Comprehension of thy Reason here on Earth; but
hereafter in Heaven will (in all probability) be the subject of a most pleasant
and endless Entertainment. Thou may with far more sense, offer to contain all
the Waters of the vast Ocean in the hollow of thine hand, than pretend to
measure such unfathomable and infinite Mysteries, by thy dark, and narrow, and
shallow Understanding. No, all that thou have to do in this case, is firmly to
believe these, and all other Divine Revelations and Principles of thy Holy
Profession, as the Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Life, and the like;
and instead of prying too narrowly into these unfathomable Depths, which the
clearest and most enlarged Understanding of Mortals cannot bottom or find out,
thou art to proceed to Practice. For secret things belong to God, but revealed
things to us and to our Children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and if thou can not take
measure of one of the Divine Attributes, nay, if to unfold the manner of thine
own Existence would puzzle thee, O never pretend here to discover the exact
manner of the Being of a God! And yet; if upon the exercise of thy Sense and
Reason, thou believe the Existence of the one viz. thine own Being: then upon
the truth and goodness of God, and the exercise of thy Faith, believe the
other; and so I pass forward from Faith, directly to Practice, which is the
Second thing I proposed.

First, Then let me advise all Young Persons, as a main Spur to all Goodness,
as a strong Safeguard to all their Virtues, and as a powerful Antidote
against, and restraint upon all Vices, to have an awful Regard, and constant
Remembrance of the Divine Omniscience and Omnipresence, and the power of the
Almighty. O consider that God's eyes are over all your ways; and that his
eyelids try the children of men, Psalm. 11. 4. That he is about your Beds, and
about your Paths, and spieth out all your ways. and that there is not a word in
your tongue, nor a thought in your heart but he knows it altogether. Alas!
it is in vain for thee to offer to draw the Curtain betwixt this all-seeing eye,
and thy Deeds of Darkness: for the Darkness with God is no Darkness at all, but
the night is as clear as the day, the Darkness and light are to him both alike,
Ps. 139. 12. All thy wanton and foolish Extravagancies and Rambles, all thy
stiffness and stubbornness to all thy natural and political Parents, nay to thy
spiritual Pastors and Teachers, all thy head strong and untamed Passions in the
full career of Lust and Licentiousness, all thy forgetfulness of thy God and
thy Duty in the days of thy Youth, all the strong Biasses that thou art ready
to clap upon thy Soul, bearing thee down to Sensuality and Sin, all thy jests
upon Religion, and matters of the greatest moment, and things of the most
serious and an eternal Concern, all thy trifling with, and turning thy back
upon the best of Friends, Friends that offer thee the most wholesome Counsel, and
the safest Advice, Advice that (if followed) will preserve thee from Danger and
Evil, and counsel that (if observed) will enrich thee to all Eternity; all thy
backwardness to do good, and all thy promptness and aptness to do evil, all the
windings and foldings of thy heart, all thy fig-leav'd excuses for thy past
Iniquities, and all thy pretenses for and palliations of thy present
Transgressions; thy God plainly observes, he clearly beholds.

Nay consider, that as this all-searching Eye beholds and observes all these
things; so this all-powerful God is able to punish thee to the Uttermost, and
none can stand before him when he is angry. He is able to consume thee with the
least breath of his displeasure, and to post thee away to Hell in the midst of
thy sins, in the midst of thy strength, when (as Job speaks) thy breasts are
full of milk, and thy bones are moistened with marrow, Job. 21. 24. And thou who
can not now endure the least of thy fingers to continue in a flame, how will thou then abide the consuming Fire, how will thou be able to dwell with
everlasting burnings! Isa. 33. 14.

But then on the other hand thou who mindest thy Duty for thy encouragement,
consider that this is the eye that neither slumbers nor sleeps, but is
continually intent upon all thy holy Works, all thy pure Words, all thy pious
and chaste Thoughts and Purposes: and this good God registers all thy good
Deeds in the Book of his eternal Remembrance. And he is not unrighteous to
forget, he is not unable to recompense and repay thee for all thy labors, for
all the Talents which thou have employed and husbanded to his Honor, and to
thine own Advantage. As God sees, and so will punish the wicked; so the Lord
beholds the Righteous, and his Portion shall be with Plenty and Peace. And
therefore, to restrain thee from Sin, and to push and spur thee on to Virtue
and Goodness, O remember thy Creator, (this all-seeing and all-powerful God) in
the days of thy Youth, Eccl. 12. 1.

Secondly, Consider, ye Young Persons, the Boundless Love of your most Gracious
God toward you. He raised you up into Creatures of a sublime and noble Being,
whereras he might have made you mere Stocks and Stones, or Creatures more
deformed and ghastly than they. He paid a Ransom for you of inestimable value,
even the Blood of his only begotten Son, a Gift as great as Heaven could
bestow, or man receive. Nay your Lot (to whom I write) is fallen in a wealthy
Place, and you have a goodly Heritage, it is the kindness of good Fortune, nay
of a good Providence, and of tender Compassion, that you are born of Christian
Parents, that you are received into the Bosom of the Church, that you are
entered into Covenant with God, and have vowed Obedience to him, and have put
your selves under his Divine Protection, and the Promises of his Grace. Nay
more, you are now grown strong, and fit for Gods service, and the Discharge of
Duties. And now shall he that bestowed on you Life, He that has ransomed you
from eternal slavery with the Sacrifice of his only Son, He that gives you
Temporal and spiritual health and strength; shall he have no Return for these
many, these endearing Uouchsafements? Certainly you are of better Dispositions
than to requite so good a God so foolishly, so unworthily, so Ungratefully.
Certainly you would not deal thus with your natural Parents, with your fellow
Brethren, with your hired Servants, and much less surely with your God, Who
gives you life, and breath, and all things, the mercies of the right hand, and
of the left, the Blessings of this present life, and the Overtures of another,
and a far better. O often reflect and meditate upon the Love of God! and then
if there be the least spark of Grace, of good nature in you, it must needs draw
you on to serve the Lord, and to keep his commandments.

Thirdly, Let me persuade Young Persons to live in a cheerful Obedience to them
that are set over them. Now those that are set over them are their Temporal, or
their Spiritual Governors. Their Temporal Governors are the King and those
commissioned by him, or their natural Parents, or Masters. And O how inviting
and endearing, how pleasing and praiseworthy is an humble, and Obedient
deportment to each of these! Nay it is not only endearing and praiseworthy, but
also attended with the Blessing of God, and crowned with temporal comforts. And
as they who make little or nothing, of the Breach of this great Duty many times
suddenly perish, and come to a fearful end: so, (that, the God of Order may
signalize his Divine Providence in the World) those that hono'r their Father
and Mother, their days are often prolonged here: or if sometimes they fall
short of that, they are lengthned out in an eternal Canaan, in the City of God,
in the Land that the Lord gives them. Nay it is a common Observation, that as
stubborn and contumacious children often come to be whipped in their own Rod, and
to read their sin by their punishment, by having children of their own as
stubborn and stiffnecked, as they were to their Parents: So obedient children
have a full Recompense returned into their Bosom, by having afterward children
as observant of, and as Dutiful to them, as they were formerly obedient to
their Parents. Or if herein they fall short, God makes up the want in some more
signal, and supereminent Grace, and Favo'r. As ever therefore you hope to gain
the good Opinion of men, the Grace and Favo'r of God, and to have Obedient
children and submissive Servants show your selves submissive, and obedient to
your Temporal Governors. Honor thy Father and Mother, which is the First
Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6. 2.

But besides these Temporal Parents, there are your spiritual Pastors and
Teachers; and let me persuade you young Persons to carry it to these with a due
Respect, and esteem. The same God who is the God of Order has appointed these
to watch for your souls, Nay these are the Ambassadors of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 29.
But though they are thus appointed, though they plainly prove their Commission from
Christ, though they preach nothing but sound words and the Will of God, nay more,
though they labor in the Word and Doctrine: yet if thou despise their Labors,
and take up low Opinions of their Abilities and Endowments; you then frustrate
all their Pains and Patience as to your selves; and their Prayers, (as to you)
and exhortations, and the word preached will be of none Effect; not being mixed
with Faith, (and esteem) in them that hear it. Those ministers therefore that
are chosen by God, that are selected and set apart by the Pastors of the
Church, that are established by the Laws of the Land and set over you; as long
as you may obtain the means of salvation under them, as long as they preach
nothing contrary to a holy Faith, and good manners, and as long as there is
nothing sinful in their communion; O keep ye steadfastly to them, and encourage
their Labors by your constant communion with them! and by this means, you will
highly contribute to the preserving of Peace in the Church, in the state, in
your Neighborhood, and in your private Families. I conclude this head with the
words of the Blessed Apostle, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.

I beseech you Brethren (even you young men as Brethren) to know them (i. e. to
own and acknowledge them with respect) which labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and admonish you: and to esteem them very highly in love for their
works sake, and be at Peace among your selves.

Fourthly, Let me advise young Persons to weigh and consider things, before
they are too intent upon them, and too eager in the pursuit of them. Youth
indeed is the peculiar Age, and scene of much haste and Precipitancy: and
consequently of Wisdom and prudence not over much. How many Young Persons have
done that by one overhasty Act: Which they have repented of afterward, all the
days of their Life? How many have done that with more haste than good speed;
Which they could not but repent of all the days of their Life? How many by a
wild Debauch have broken their healthful, and strong Bodies in pieces, and ever
after carried crazy constitutions along with them even to the Grave? How many
upon a Venturous Resolve have thrown away upon the turn of a Die the largest
Demesnes; and ever afterward either shabb'd upon their Relations and
Neighbors, or else have taken desperate Courses, or down right Beggary for
their Ordinary Companion, and common course of Life? How many by a sudden fit
of Anger have broacht their Brothers blood, and thereby so blotted and blur'd
their own Escutcheon, that all the Waters of Repentance afterward could never
wash out the stains? Nay how many out of an eager thirst of Revenge, have found
themselv's most miserably disappointed: and instead of ridding the world of
their Adversary, have sent away their own souls at the point of their enemies
spear? these and the like are the rash attempts of youth: and these and the
like Consequences are the fruits of their Folly. O let me advise you then,
before you put your selv's upon these, or the like desperate Attempts,
seriously to consider what the end of these things will be. O weigh your
Pleasures and your Pains in an equal Balance, and for a minute of mistaken
joy, never truck away an Eternity of solid satisfaction! O never show your
selves so foolish, as for once gratifying of your Bodies, of your passion: to
ruin and damn both soul and body for ever! O show your selves to be persons of
more sense and Reason, and where there is the deepest and most lasting sorrow
shun it; where there is the most perfect and long-lived Pleasure pursue it; and
take the Advice of the excellent Son of Syrac: Ecclesiasticus the 7th. 36.
Whatsoever thou take in hand remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss.

Fifthly, Let me persuade Young men to mind, and to be diligent in their
respective Vocations and callings, this is the very Age that is most proper for
labor, and is peculiarly adapted for Business. Children indeed have neither
strength nor Understanding for the dispatch of Business: and old Age is
commonly attended with that feebleness, and those Infirmities which are
inconsistent with heavy Burdens, and hard Toil. No, it is you, (who have
vigorous spirits, and strong sinews) that are to bear the burden, and heat of
the Day. And for you then to fold up your hands with the Sluggard, and to cry
out a little more sleep, a little more slumber, Prove. 6. 10. when the Task is
required of you in the midst of your spring: What is this but to defame, and to
darken your Glory; by showing your selv's to be lazy sots, and drowsy Drones?
Nay let me tell you, that in this Age, your spirits are so brisk and active,
that you cannot but be intent upon some Action or other: Either busy you must
be, with those things that are Virtuous and good: or else your minds will be
bent upon those things that are base and Vicious. Nay he that in this Age
stands in the market Place all the day idle: he exposes himself as a chapman to
Satan. And whereas the Devil goes about the Earth to and fro' seeking whom he
(may entangle and allure,) devour and destroy, 1 Pet. 5. 8. This silly Soul is
taken Captive by him at his Will, and does the Devils Work to his hands, and
falls a Victim to him, without the pains of a purchase. It Is sad to consider
(but a most certain as well as a much to be lamented truth) that Idleness is
the very Mother and Nurse of much Evil. And that when we have nothing to do, I
mean when we will have nothing to do: Then the Guards of our Souls are taken
off, and then the Young Man lies open to all the Instigations of Satan, and to
all the Allurements of all the Devils Factors and Agents. And then we are
easily drawn in to Company keeping, and from that, we are wheedled to
Drunkenness and Debauchery, and so forward, to gameing and Lewdness: and often,
too often to those Courses, which bring a Man to Temporal Death too soon, as
well as to eternal. O if these things are dreadful to be the entertainment of
your Thoughts: See that ye kill the Cockatrice in the shell, and shun the Cause
and occasion, that so ye may more easily avoid the dismal consequence and
Effect! And be not slothful in Business, Rom, 12. 11.

Sixthly, Let me beseech Young Persons not to busy their Fancies about Modes
and Fashions: but to apparel themselves in modest attire. I well know that it is
easy and common to reply in this Case, that Pride is lodged in the heart: and
so is not to be learnt or known from the outward habit. And that some Beggars
are as proud of their shreds and rags, as other Persons of Worth and Honor are
of their distinguishing Garments, and their gorgeous attire. I grant indeed,
that as there are Distinctions of men; so there should be Distinctions of
Apparel: and that such a Garb which would be too fine and splendid for one;
would be a suit too sorbid and mean for another. I grant also that as
Distinction of sexes ought to be showed by Garments, so also different Ranks,
and peculiar Persons and Officers are to be known by distinguishing habits,
Since these things are agreeable to the Laws of that Great God who is the God
of Order. Nay I grant still further, that Pride lies in the heart, and not in
the outward habit, and that one man may carry an humble and lowly Soul in a
rich Dress, Whereas another may have a lofty and exalted Spirit even in a
borrowed, or unpaid-for Garment. But still let me advice thee who aboundest
with these expressions, and Excuses for thy gay clothing; to have a great
Jealousy, and a strict watch over thy heart and ways. Thy Savior tells thee,
that the Tree is known by its Fruits, Luke, 6. 44. And our Desires and
Affections are discovered and remarkt by our words and Actions. And there is
scarce any plainer Indication of the Levity (I had almost said of the
Wantonness) of our Minds; than by the Levity and Gaudiness of our Garbs. Away
then with those Excuses that thou may be lowly, and that thou art humble at
thy heart and Soul when at the same time thou deckest thy Body with a Garb
which is not suitable for, but Vastly beyond thy Birth and Rank. Nay how will thou answer it to thy great Creator who made thee thus and thus? Whereas thou
offerest to disguise, to correct his Workmanship; and in effect say unto
him, Why have thou made me thus? How can thou imagine that he will own thee
for his Creature? When thou offerest to Mould thy self as it were into another
Figure by thy strange Guises, which neither tend to the preserving of health,
nor to the differencing of Sex, nor the distinguishing of Order. O show thy
Humility of mind by thy works and decent Apparel! and instead of these florid
Fashions Which one Flower in thy Garden, one single Tulip far out-shines: be
clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. and put on the Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, Which is in the sight of God of great Price. 1 Pet. 3. 4. And since
Garments were given as a covering of Nakedness, Genesis 3. 21. O Never make thy
shame thy Glory, and be not Proud of thy loss and want of Innocence and
Perfection!

Seventhly, Let me persuade Young Persons carefully to avoid evil Company: And
to join themselv's to the Society of such as Serve God. As ever they value
their Reputations, as ever they tender the Welfare of their Souls and Bodies,
as ever they mean to secure their safety, as ever they design to promote their
temporal and their Eternal Interest: this is a Duty which is principally to be
regarded. Evil Company is the very Bane and Rust of Religion and good morals.
And all the seeds of Virtue which Christian Parents have most carefully sown,
(tho having taken Root, and grown up into a Strong blade, yet) they have often
been soon blasted and consumed, by a swarm of these worse than Egyptian
Locusts. O what but wicked Company has made Young Persons who have afforded
the most promising hopes of an enriching Crop and harvest, most fatally to
miscarry: and to become twice the Children of Hell more than they that
inveigled them! O let the sad Misfortunes, and lamentable Ruin's of such, make
thee to shun their steps, since the end of those ways is Death! And though their
Conversation be never so accomplished, Witty, and inviting: yet shun their
fellowship as much as thou Would avoid his, who though he may be smooth and
seems endearing, yet has the spots of an infectious Plague upon him. And that
thou may do this effectually, join thy self to, and enter into close
fellowship with them that love, and serve God: Where thou may be Religious
at an easy Rate, and gain not only plain precepts, but also inviting Patterns
to goodness, which will silently slide into thy Soul, and almost insensibly
draw and carry thee on, and convey thee into the Land of the Living. These will
whet thy Desires, and sharpen thy Appetites, and inflame thy longings after God
and Goodness, and strengthen thy Resolutions, and abett and improve thy
Christian Courage, and show thee how to be an hardy Soldier of Christ Jesus,
and make thee more than Conqueror through Christ that loves thee. O keep that
Company that shall be instilling some good Lesson, some excellent Advice into
thee, and that shall prescribe a good Example: But shun that Society that
infuses Poison into thy very Vitals, and corrupts thy precious Soul by their
Words and Works, by their ill Counsels and worse Conversations. And always
remember the Words which the Apostle recites, ^ Cor. 15. 33. Evil
Communications corrupt good Manners.

Further, Let me persuade Young Persons to be Courteous and Obliging, in each
Relation wherein they stand. Are your Fortunes fair, and your Estates large,
show your selves to be such as are Free born: by such a carriage as may loudly
proclaim your Birth and Education. Or are your Estates confined in a narrow
Compass: you have much less Reason to boast, and to bear high, to disoblige and
to provoke: since you know not how soon Poverty may steal in upon you and how
soon you may stand in need of the help, of the Relief of those very Neighbors
whom you now despise. Nay you own your selves to be Christians, and therefore
learn of the Holy Jesus to be meek and lowly, Who, when he was reviled, reviled
not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him
who judges righteously, Heb. 12. 3. He was so suffering, and so kind in his
sufferings, that he died for his Enemies that they might live for ever. And for
those enemies which put him to Death he thus prayed, Father forgive them for
they know not what they do, Luke, 23. 24.

And now can thou read, can thou hear this Passage with any Roughness, or
Impatience upon thy Spirit? with any Anger or Indignation against those who
affront, or scourge thee? O since the Holy Jesus my Innocent Savior thus
suffered (may thou say) who never did, nor spoke, nor thought any thing
amiss, Well may I justly smart, who act, or speak or design few things well.
And since he bare his Burden patiently, and prayed even for his Persecutors,
for his murderers: O it is much more my bounden Duty to forgive, as I have
great, and often need to be forgiven my self; and to be obliging, pitiful, and
Courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8.

Lastly, Let it be your daily Business as it is your Duty, to pray earnestly to
God, to work in you both to Will and to do according to his good Pleasure.
Never think that either you or your Teachers are able to give you Grace, or to
secure your Virtues: without the helping Hand of Heaven, that gives to all
liberally that ask him: Or without that Watchful Eye that neither slumbers nor
sleeps. No, every good and Perfect Gift comes down from above, James, 1. 17.

And Paul may Plant, and Apollos may Water: But still it must be God that gives
the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. And therefore that the hand of God may hold you up,
that his watchful Lie may be over you, that he may Guide you into the ways of
Truth and Peace, and that he may Strengthen, Stablish, Settle you, it is your
Interest no less than your Duty, to beg his Grace. Nay it is your Honor, no
less than your Interest and Duty, thus to repair to your God. For you who are
dust and Ashes to speak unto the Lord, for you, who are worthless Beings to
have free Recourse to a Principle of absolute Perfection, for you, who are
notorious Sinners to draw nigh unto the Holy Lord God of Hosts, for you, who
are the meanest of Subjects to unbosom your selves to, and to beg Boons and
Favor's of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: this is so great a Privilege
and Hon'or, that (methinks) it needs no further Motive to enforce it. Only let
me remind you, that the manifold, and great Temptations which your Age exposes,
and too often inclines you to may justly make you to cry mightily unto your
God, and often; and earnestly to beg saying; Save Lord or ^^^ perish, Mat. 8.
25. Often pray for the Pardon of your Sins past, and for the Supplies of Gods
Grace for the time to come.

And now in a Word, that I may not omit recommending any important Duty which
appertains to you, Often consider, and duly weigh those short, but most
comprehensive lessons drawn up for you in your Church Catechism: which I desire
you frequently to peruse, and faithfully to remember; now there you thus read.
My Duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him with all
my heart, with all my Mind, with all my Soul, and with all my strength: to
Worship him, to give him thanks to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him,
to hono'r his Holy Name and his Word and to serve him truly all the days of my
Life.

And my Duty toward my Neighbor is to love him as my self, and to do to all
men as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor and succor my Father
and Mother. To Honor and obey the King, and all that are put in Authority
under him. To submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors
and Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt
no Body by Word or Deed. To be true and just in all my Dealings. To bear no
Malice nor Hatred in my heart. To keep my Hands from picking and Stealing, and
my Tongue from Evil-Speaking, Lying and Slandering. To keep my Body in
Temperance, Soberness, and Chastity. Not to covet no^ desire other men's Goods;
But to Learn and Labor truly to get min^ own living, and to do my Duty in that
State of Life unto which it shall please God to call me.

And now I pass on directly to the last thing which I proposed, and that is: to
lay before you a few General considerations, on purpose further to promote the
Practice of that Advice which I have already given.

First, Consider how easy it is for you, in comparison of some others, to be
Religious and good. Whilst you are untainted, whilst the Powers and Faculties
of your Souls are Vigorous and Lively, whilst you have not accustomed your
selves to any evil way, whilst you are strangers to the fashionable sins of the
Age, whilst you have not run with others to the same excess of Riot, whilst the
Hellish Language of Oaths and Curses is terrible to you* and all manner of
profaneness appears to you in a Monstrous and ghastly Shape: it must needs be
easy to restrain you from what you dread and abhor. Nay if you have sometimes
fallen, and received some few bruises, yet how far more easily may you recover
your selves than those who for many years have lain wallowing in their
filthiness? Moreover, to your great encouragement consider, that now your Souls
are active, and your limbs strong, to run with patience the Holy Race that is
set before you: and you may well fight with the greatest Assurance the good
fight of Faith: Now ye are strong, and may easily overcome the wicked one, 1
John 2. 14.

Secondly, To move you the more, consider how acceptable your early Piety will
be, to that God which ye Worship. Your remembering your Creator in the days of
your youth, and your first fruits will be a Sacrifice wherewith God will be
well pleased. Whereas the Oblation only of dry bones, and decayed sinews,
especially such bones as have been drained by sin, such sinews as have been
enfeebl'd by Iniquity, will be only an abomination unto the Lord. If ye offer
the blind for Sacrifice is it not evil? and if ye offer it now unto thy
Governor: will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person says the Lord of
Hosts? Malac. 1. 8. Now if a Temporal Prince will reject such a present with a
most fiery Indignation: With what confidence then can we lay such a Sacrifice
upon the Altar of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords?

But this is not your Case at present ye Young men: and God Grant that
hereafter (when old) it may never be your Fate. Now you need not to doubt, but
that if you offer up the strength and Beauty of Holiness, it will be accepted.
If now with the wise Virgins you get oil, and trim your Lamps: you will ere
long be received into the Bride-Grooms Chamber.

Thirdly, Please to consider how much your remaining life depends upon your
present Religious Efforts: and how gradually you will go on, when you are once
well begun. How easily will you damp and dispirit all the enemies to your
salvation, and under what Discomfiture and despair will you send them away,
when you baffle and rout them in the first Assaults that they make upon you?
Nay how much may your early and firm Resolutions tend to the reclaiming of this
degenerate Age, or at least to the reforming of the next Generation? If the
skill and conduct of one man made way for his Son to conquer all the parts of
the world which he became acquainted with: how far then may your united Forces
extend to the pulling down of the strong holds of Satan, and the subduing of
the powers of darkness: to the vanquishing of Sin, and to the raising and
establishing of the Throne of Virtue? O consider how far you may spread these
Spiritual Victories and Triumphs, and may make your Companions and those that
come after you, more than Conquerors!

Fourthly, please to consider, that you (notwithstanding all your health and
strength) may soon be called away to another stage, either of endless weal or
woe. Go and take the Dimensions of the Graves in your Church Yards, and you will
find many of a shorter size than your selves. And I am sure that you had not,
nay that you have not a more certain Lease of your lives, than they had. O
therefore make no long tarrying to turn unto the Lord your God, and put it not
of from day to day; lest your Fate, lest your God come suddenly, and snatch
you away and there be none to deliver you. Consider that Time and Opportunity
will soon be no more. And therefore instantly make it your business to spend
your days to good purpose, in reading the Word of God, in pious and profitable
meditations, in reflecting upon and renewing your Baptismal Covenant, and in
frequent receiving the Holy Communion. And above all, labor to be true, and
just, and good at your very hearts and Souls; and industrious, and Useful, and
benificial in your Generation. And strive earnestly to fit and qualify your
selves for an Eternity of the purest Pleasures: that so you may relish the joys
of Heaven whenever you shall be received into those everlasting mansions, and
may delightfully feast upon that fullness of joy which is in the presence of
God, and with continual desire drink of those Rivers of Pleasure which flow at
his right hand for evermore. And may be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance
of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. And in the prospect of these enriching
possessions, of these never fading Pleasures break off all delays, throw aside
all hindrances and excuses, and say not, I will begin to be good, when I begin
to stoop toward the Grave, and when old age tells me that I must soon leave
this World, then will I prepare for the next; and when I feel this earthly
Tabernacle to tremble and ready to dissolve, and to be taken in pieces: then
will I seek out for another Fabric, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. But instead of these uncertain, frivolous, and foolish Delays: to
day if you will hear Gods voice harden not your hearts. And remember that the
wisest Man in the World is not able to foretell what one day may bring forth. Ye
know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? It is even as a
Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, James 4. 14.

Since then the day of your departure is so uncertain, be ye always ready: that
so when the King of Terrors shall seize you, he may not with astonishment
surprise you; but that Death (being disarmed of its sting) may serve to compose
you for the Sweetest sleep, and so you may lay you down in Peace and take your
rest. O watch continually, for ye know not at what hour your Lord will come,
Mat. 24. 42.

Lastly, For a full inducement to the Practice of these Precepts, and for the
Observation of whatever is good: often remember, that the more Religious you
now are, and the more that you influence others to be Religious here: the more
you shall be rewarded hereafter. Know and be assured that if you carefully
husband, and industriously (by Gods Blessing) improve your talents, you shall
receive a proportionable Recompense of Reward from your Gracious Lord and
Master, Mat. 25. 21. And let the words of the prophet Daniel continually dwell
with you, Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament: and they that turn many unto Righteousness as the Stars for ever and
ever.

These things out of pure tenderness to your immortal Souls O ye young Persons!
I recommend to you. And now God of his infinite Goodness give you Grace to
observe them, that so ye may reap the Rewards of your Religion, and be happy
for ever.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost be all Honor and
Glory, both now and evermore, Amen.

PRAYERS.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the Sins of all them that are penitent, create and make in me a new and
contrite Heart, that I worthily lamenting my sins, and acknowledging my
wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all mercy, perfect Remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

ALmighty and Everlasting God give unto me the Increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and that I may obtain that which thou do promise, make me to love
that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

O God who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass man's
Understanding; pour into mine heart such love toward thee, That I loving thee
above all things, may obtain thy Promises, which exceed all that we can desire,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

ALmighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; keep me both outwardly in my Body and inwardly in my Soul: that I may
be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from all
evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord Amen.

O God the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, I humbly beseech thee for all
sorts and conditions of men, that thou would be pleased to make thy ways
known unto them, thy saving health unto all nations; more especially I pray for
the good Estate of the Catholic Cburch, that it may be so guided and Governed
by thy good Spirit, that all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be
led into the way of truth, and hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the Bond
of Peace, and in Righteousness of life, finally I commend to thy Fatherly
goodness all those who are any way afflicted, or distressed in Mind, Body or
Estate; that it may please thee to comfort and relieve them according to their
several necessities, giving them Patience under their sufferings, and a happy
issue out of all their Afflictions. And this I beg for Jesus Christ his sake
Amen.

ALmighty God Father of all mercies, I thine unworthy Servant do give thee most
humble and hearty thanks, for all thy goodness and loving kindness to me, and
to all men. I bless thee for my Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings
of this Life. But above all for thine inestimable love in the Redemption of the
World by our Lord Jesus Christ; for the means of Grace, and for the hope of
Glory. And I beseech thee give me that due sense of all thy mercies, that mine
heart may be unfeignedly thankful, and that I may show forth thy Praise, not
only with my lips, but in my life, by giving up my self to thy service, and by
walking before thee in Holiness and Righteousness all my days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory,
world without end. Amen.

LOrd of all power and might, who art the Author and giver of all good things:
graft in my heart the Love of thy Name, increase in me true Religion, nourish
me with all Goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRant O Lord, that as I am baptized into the Death of thy Blessed Son our
Savior Jesus Christ; so by continual mortifying my corrupt Affections, I may
be buried with him, and that through the Grave and Gate of Death, I may pass to
my joyful Resurrection, for his merits who died and was buried, and rose again
for us, thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

PRevent me O Lord, in all my doings, with thy most Gracious Favor, and
further me with thy continual help, that in all my Works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, I may glorify thy Holy Name and finally by thy mercy may obtain
everlasting Life through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose Name and words I call
upon thee further, saying Our Father which art in, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with me now, and evermore Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN page 10. l: 24 for thou, read you; p 23. l 20. for advice, r. advise; p 34
l. 1. after offer, r. the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it p. 36. l. 19.
for benificial, r. beneficial.


