TWO SEASONABLE DISCOURSES Concerning this present Parliament.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1675.

The Debate or Arguments for Dissolving this present Parliament, and the
calling frequent and new Parliaments.
As they were delivered in the House of Lords, November the 20th. 1675.
THat it is according to the Constitution of the Government, the ancient Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, that there should be frequent and new Parliaments,
and the practice of all Ages, till this last, has been accordingly:
Parliaments, both long before and after the Conquest, were held Three times a
year, viz. Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas, during the space of Eight Days
for each time, and so continued with some variations, as to the times of
Calling, and length of Holding; but always very short until the Reign of Ed.
3. in the fourth year of whose Reign there was a Law made, That Parliaments
should be holden every year once, or more often, and how this Law is to be
understood, whether of a New Parliament every Year, or calling the Old, is most
manifest, by the practice not only of all the Ages before, but of some Hundred
or Years since that Law: Prorogations or Long Adjournments, being a thing neve
heard of until latter Years.

And it is most unreasonable, that any particular number of Men should for many
Years ingross so great a Trust of the People, as to be their Representatives in
the House of Commons; And that all other the Gentry; and the Members of
Corporations of the same Degree and Quality with them, should be so long
excluded. Neither is it agreeable with the nature of Representatives to be
continued for so long a time; and those that choose them, not to be allowed
frequent opportunity of changing the hands, in which they are obliged to put so
great a trust. The mutual correspondence and Interests of those who choose and
are chosen, admitting of great variations in length of time. How many in this
present House of Commons are there, whose business and acquaintance has not
given them the occasion of the correspondence of one Letter, (for these many
Years) with any Person of those places for whom they serve? How many may there
be in future Parliaments, if continued as long as This, that may be Protestants
when they are chosen, and yet may come in so many Years justly to be suspected
to have changed their Religion? Nay, How many in this present Parliament are
there, who were chosen by the People when they were of the same adequate
Interest with them, and in length of time, by the Favor and Goodness of the
Prince, and their own great Merits, are become Officers in the Court, and about
the Revenue? This is not spoken to reflect on them, for many of them have
behaved themselves very worthy of those places; but yet themselves cannot say,
that they are equally as free to act for those that choose them, as they were
before: Nor are they of the same Interest, as when they were chosen; for now
they gain, and have the advantage by the Peoples payments: And if they should
say, They are the same Men they were, We may call their Fellow Members that
have sat with them to witness, whether the Proverb be not true, that Honores
mutant mores, whether they have the same Opinion, and the same Freedom they had
before. Nay, may it not be said without offense, that even in this House of
Commons, there are not a few, who, when they were chosen, were looked upon as
Men of Estates; and are either since grown or discovered to be of that indigent
condition, that they are much fitter to receive the public maintenance, then
give the public money; and it may be charitably supposed, that those Gentlemen
are so modest, as to be willing to lay down, if they could, the public Trust.
But it is most certain, that those places they serve for, would not be willing
to continue them in it. There is no question, but it is the Kings undisputed
Prerogative to call and end Parliaments when he please, and no man, nor number
of men can limit him a time; but the greatest Prince cannot avoid the being
limited by the nature of things; Representatives of the People are necessary to
the making Laws, and there is a time when it is morally demonstrable; that men
cease to be Representatives, there heing Circumstances and Proprieties that
distinguish every thing, as well as Person in the World: So that to conclude
this head, We Owe the Prince the observance of his time and place, both for
calling and duration of Parliaments, and the Prince owes us, not only the
frequencies of Parliaments, but that our Representations should be preserved to
us in them.

And further, if you consider the constitution of our Government, where the
King as Head (from whom all the vital and animal Spirits are diffused through
the Body) has the care of all, whose Interest is to seek the welfare of the
whole; all being his, the strength of the Nation being his strength, the riches
his riches, the glory and honor, his glory and honor, and so on the contrary;
But least passion mistake flattery, or the ill designs of those about the
Prince, should make him grow cross to his Real, and follow a destructive
imaginary Interest: There is an Estate of Hereditary Nobility, who are by
Birthright the Counselors of the Kingdom, and whose Interest and Business it
is, to keep the Balance of the Government steady, that the Favorites and
great Officers, exceed not their bounds, and oppress the People, that Justice
be duly Administered, and that all parts of the Government be preserved entire;
Yet ever These may grow insolent (a Disease Greatness is liable to) or may by
Offices, Dependencies, hopes of Preferment, and o her accidents, become, as to
the major part of them, ra her the obsequious flatterers of the Court, then
true suppoters of the publck and English Interest, and therefore the Excellence
of our Government, affords us another Estate of Men, which are the
Representatives of the Freeholders, Cities, principal Buroughs, and
Corporations of England, who by the Old Law, were to be new chosen once a year,
if not oftener, so that they perfectly gave the sense of those that chose them,
and were the same thing as if those were present that chose, they so newly
coming from them, and so quickly returning to give an account of their
Fidelity, under the penalty of shame, and no further Trust.

Thus you have in our English Government, the House of Commons affording the
Sense, the Mind, the Information, the Complaints, the Grievances, and the
desires of all those People for whom they serve, throughout the whole Nation.
The People are thus secure, no Laws can be made, nor Money given, but what
themselves, though at home, fully consent and agree to. The Second Estate in
this Government, is the Lords, who are the Council, the Wisdom, and Judgment
of the Nation, to which their Birth, Education, and constant employment, being
the same in every Parliament, prepares and fits them. The last, and supreme of
all, is the King, One who gives Life and Vigor to the proceedings of the other
Two; The Will and Desires of the People, though approved by the wisdom and
Judgment of the Lords, are Abortive, unless he bids them be an Act.

Humane reason can hardly contrive a more excellent Government. But if you will
alter this Government, in any of the Three Parts of it, the disorders and
Inconveniences incident to the nature of such alteration, must necessarily
follow; As for instance, the long continuance of any such as are entrusted for
others, especially of such as have so great a power over the Purse of the
Nation, must necessarily produce Caballs, and Parties, and the carrying on of
private Interests and Court-Factions, rather then the public good, or the true
Interest either of the King or Kingdom. How vastly is the privilege of a
Parliament man increased since the middle of the Reign of H. 8.? Before, it was
several times agreed by all the Judges, and observed as the Law, That a Member
and his Servants, were exempted only from Arrests and Outwlaries, but might be
impleaded, sued, and Attached by his Land and Goods; yet now they must not be
sued in any Case, nor dispossessed of any thing during the time of Privilege;
nay, these two last Sessions the Privilege must extend to exempt them even from
the Judicature of Parliament it self: As also before the same King's Reign the
House of Commons never thought of Judicature, as being in the nature of their
Constitution incapable of it; But since they are not only become Judges of
their own Privileges, condemning and imprisoning their fellow- Subjects at
pleasure, and without an Oath, and also Judges of all Elections, by which very
often they, and not the places, choose their fellow members: But now it is come
to that, that the House of Commons pass sentence on the Lords proceedings, make
new crimes, and add Preinstruments to them by their own Authority; If you will
ask the reason of this change, it is plain that Parliaments began in Hen. 8's
time to be longer than they ought, That Prince knowing that long Parliaments
were fitted to make great Changes, they have been too frequent since, but never
of that length as this; Besides all this, the long continuance of
Representatives renders them liable to be corrupted and won off from the
Publique-Interest; it gives them time to settle their Cabals and Interest at
Court, and takes away the great Security the Nation has; that if it be possible
to happen that the Spiritual Lords because of their great dependence on the
Crown, the Popish Lords being under the pressure of so severe Laws, together
with the Court Lords and great Officers should in any future Age make up a
greater number of the House of Lords, and should pass things very prejudicial
to the Public, yet all should prove ineffectual, and the Nation remain safe in
an House of Commons lately chosen that have not had time to learn new
Sentiments, or to put off their old Principles at a good Market. How great has
been the modesty of this present House of Commons, that having bad the Purse of
the Nation thus long in their hands, as being those that first begun the Grants
of Subsidies and Aids to the King, and so by consequence have all the Addresses
made to them, when ever the wants of the Crown (which in this active Age are
very often) require it, that they have not made use of it to the prejudice of
the Public, or to their own advantage; It was a very high Temptation, and
might easily have rendered them in their own Opinion more than Lords, and they
are rather to be commended that they insisted on no higher Terms with the Lords
House, than wondered at for what they did; Considering the matter, ground, and
the circumstances wherein they stood, and yet they were certainly mistaken, and
not a little forgot themselves, when they would not allow the Lords House a
power of lessening the Sums in any Bill of Subsidy or Aid that they had once
set; which was not only directly contrary to the Interest of the People that
chose them, but against the ancient and express Rule and Custom of Parliament,
whereby it is clear if the Commons grant five Subsidies, and the Lords agree
but to four, that Bill of Subsidy need not be sent down to the Commons for
their consent to such an alteration. And they certainly were grown very high in
their own Opinion, and had a very low esteem for the Lords, when they neglected
the safety of their best Friends in that House, and did almost with scorn
refuse the passing of the Bill for the more fair and equal Trial of Peers,
which in several Sessions was sent down to them. How great were the
apprehensions of all sober and wise Men at every meeting of this present
Parliament during these late years, and how much is to be ascribed to the
goodness of our Prince, and to the virtue of the Members of this present House
of Commons, that Honors, Offices, Pensions, Money, Employments and Gifts had
not been bestowed and accepted, and the Government, as in France, Denmark and
other Countries, made absolute and at the will of the Prince? How easy this
may be done in future Ages under such Princes, and such an House of Commons as
may happen, if long and continued Parliaments be allowed for Law, may be made
some measure of by this, where though the Prince had no design, and the Members
of the House of Commons have showed so great Candor and Self-denial, yet the
best Observers are apt to think that we owe it to the strong and opposite
Factions at Court, that many things of great Alterations have not passed.

And moreover, it cannot be passed over with silence, nor considered without
great thoughts of heart, to what a price a Member of the House of Commons place
is come; In former times when Parliaments were short and frequent, The Members
constantly received their wages both of their Counties and Buroughs; many of
the poorer Buroughs petitioned to be excused from sending Members, as not
being able to bear their charge; and were so: Laws were made in favor of the
Gentry, that Corporations should compel none but their Freemen of their own
Town to serve for them; Nay you shall find in all the ancient Returns of Writs
for Knights of the Shires, their Sureties for their appearance returned with
them: But now the case is altered, 1500 l. and 2000 l. and lately 7000 l. is a
price Men pay to be entrusted: It Is to be hoped the Charity of those worthy
Persons, and their Zeal for the Public Interest has induced them to be at
this Expense; But it were better to be otherwise, and there is a scurvy English
Proverb, That Men that buy dear, cannot live by selling cheap. And besides all
these, the very privilege of the Members, and of those they protect in a
Parliament of so long duration, is a pressure that the Nation cannot well
support it self under; So many thousand Suits of Law stopped, so vast a Sum of
Money withheld from the right owners, so great a quantity of Land unjustly
possessed, and in many Cases the length of time securing the possession, and
creating a Title; And it is an Observation not unworthy the making, that all
this extent of Privilege beyond its due bounds has first risen from the
Members of the House of Commons; That House to this day pretends to forty days
privilege before and after Parliament, the House of Lords but twenty, and yet
the privilege of Parliament is the same to both: and if the House of Commons
obtain their forty days to become Law and Custom, the Lords will certainly
enjoy the same privilege; But the cure of this Evil is very easy in frequent
and short Parliaments, The Members will affect no larger privileges than are
necessary and useful to them, for such as oppress and injure others cannot
expect a second choice, and the present time is but short.

To all this there are two Objections that make a great sound, but have really
nothing of weight in them; The first objection is, That the Crown is in danger
if you call a new Parliament. If those men be in earnest that urge this, it
were to be wished they would consider well what are the Men are likely to be
chosen, and they are not difficult to be guest at through the whole Kingdom,
Men of Quality, of Estates, and of the best Understanding; Such will never
affect change, or disturb the Kings Government: A New Parliament will be the
Nation, and that will never stick at small matters to render themselves
acceptable to their Prince. Would the King have acquaintance with his People?
this is his way. Would he have yet more the love of his People? Thus he is sure
to have it. Would the King have a considerable sum of Money to pay his Debts
and put him at ease? Thus he cannot fail of it, nay he shall have it as a
pledge of endearment between him and his people, they give it themselves, and
they know the King receives it as from them. The English Nation are a generous
people, and have at all times expressed themselves ready to supply even the
Humors, and Excesses of their Princes, and some of the best beloved Princes we
have had were such as by War, or otherwise put us to most Expense: Witness
Edward the 1st, Edward the 3d, and Henry the 5th; but then always they were
satisfied that the Honor of the Nation was preserved, and what ever private or
personal Excesses the Prince had, yet the Nation was secure, there was no
design upon them, neither should their money or their strength be used against
them; All this is the happiness of our present state under our most gracious
King. But how shall the People know and be secure it is so? but by those they
annually send up to Parliament from amongst themselves; Whereas if the King
should have a great Sum of Money given by this Parliament, it would be looked
upon as theirs, not as the Peoples gift, and the best of Men with their
Circumstances cannot avoid the suspicion, when they give much to have received
some; and men will not so cheerfully undergo the Burden of a Tax, and their
own Wants in the time of this general Poverty, when they apprehend others have
the Thanks, and perhaps the Reward of their Sufferings.

The second Objection is with great apprehensions and passion urged by the
Bishops; That the Church and this Parliament fall together. Which Objection how
vain it is you will easily confess, if (as was said before) the persons that
are like to be chosen be considered; The dissenting Protestants may very
probably find more favor and ease, but the Church can never suffer, either in
her Lands or Dignities she now enjoys, by an House of Commons consisting of Men
of the best (Quality and Estates in England, as the next certainly will do:
But, on the other side, what do the Bishops mean by this Assertion? most
certainly it is not their intent to make the Interest of the Church and the
Nation direct opposite and inconsistent one with the other; and yet in saying
this they confess, that this House of Commons are not the true Representatives
of those they serve for; that the People and they are of different minds; that
if they were to choose again, they would choose other men of other sentiments;
And it must be confessed that what ever is not natural is by force, and must be
maintained by force. A standing Parliament and a standing Army are like those
Twins that have their lower parts united, and are divided only above the Navel;
they were born together, and cannot long outlive each other. Certainly that man
is no friend to the Church that wishes it a third incorporated with those two.

To conclude this Debate, the continuance of this present Parliament any longer
is unpracticable; the breach this House of Commons has made upon the Lords is
as unlikely to be repaired with these present Men, as it is to be renewed by
another House of Commons of a new Election; If you consider the Power, the
Courtship, and the Addresses that these Men have for so many years enjoyed and
received, they may almost be forgiven if they think themselves greater Men than
the Lords in the higher House; besides it is very well known that many of the
ablest and most worthy Patriots amongst them have carried this Difference to
the greatest height with this only design, that by this means they might
deliver the Nation from the danger and pressure of a long continued Parliament:
Whereas a new chosen House of Commons, especially if it were fixed, and known
that it could not remain long, could not be apprehended to have any affectation
to exceed their just bounds, nor to renew a Contest, where the Interest of the
People is manifestly on the Lords side; for besides the undoubted Right and
constant Practice that the Lords enjoy in the Case of Appeals from Courts of
Equity, all other Expedients when will considered, give the Crown, the
Favorites and Ministers the power over every man's Estate in England.

Thus you see it is the Interest of all sorts of men to have a New Parliament;
This will give the King constant and never-failing Supplies with the hearts and
good will of his People: This will not only preserve the Church in the Honors,
Dignities and Revenues she now enjoys, and make her the Protectrix and Asylum
of all the Protestants through Europe, but will also increase the Maintenance
of the Ministry in Corporations and great Towns, which is now much wanting, and
of great concern to the Church. This will procure the dissenting Protestants
Ease, Liberty, and Protection: The Papists may justly expect by this to be
delivered from that grievous pressure of penal Laws they lie under, if they can
be contented with being deprived of access to Court, bearing Offices or Arms:
The great Officers and Ministers may under this enjoy their places undisturbed
and in quiet, and be secure with a moderate Conduct, and reasonable
Condescentions to attain that in a new Parliament which they have by experience
found is impossible in the old. In a word, there is not to be imagined an
Interest against this, unless there be an inveterate party still remaining in
our World, who to compass their Revenge, and repair their broken Fortunes,
would hope to see the Act of Oblivion set aside, and this happy Monarchy turned
into an absolute, Arbitrary, Military Government; But Charity bids us hope
there are no such Men.

FINIS.
A List of the Lords who were present at the Vote for an Address to the King
for Dissolving the Parliament, November the 20th. 1675.
For the Address.
His Royal Highness D. of Buckingham M. Winchester E. Marshall, E. Norwich E.
Kent E. Dorsett E. Salisbury E. Bridgwater E. Westmerland E. Bullingbrooke E.
Chesterfield E. Stamford E. Peterborough E. Manchester E Berkes E. Mulgrave E.
Scarsdale E. Sunderland E. Clarendon E. Essex E. Cardigan E. Shaftesbury E.
Powys Vic. Fauconberg Vic. Hallifax Vic. Yarmouth Vic. Newport Ld. Sandys Ld.
Morley Ld. Sturton Ld. Wharton Ld. Peter Ld. Arundell of Warder Ld. Lovelace
Ld. Tenham Ld. Mohun Ld. Bellasis Ld. Carington Ld. Delamere Ld. Townsend Ld.
Gray of Rolston These Lords present 41 gave 7 Proxies. 48
Lords absent and sick that gave Proxies for this question.
E. Denbeigh Ld. Hollis
Other Lords absent that were for this Address.
E. Bedford E. Burlington Ld. Fitzwalter Ld. Ewer. And Others.
Against the Address.
Ld. Keeper Ld. Treasurer Ld. Privy Seal Ld. Great Chamberlain E. Northampton
E. Bristoll E. Bath E. Craven E. Alisbury E. Gilford, D. Lauderdale Ld. Windsor
Ld. Pawlett Ld. Maynard Ld. Howard of Eastcreck Ed. Byron Ld. Lucas Ld V^ughan,
E. Carbery Ld. Gerrard Ld Frechvill Ld. Butler, E. of Ossery Ld. Arundell of
Trerice 21 Lay Lords 13 Bishops, who were all that were in the House. These 34
Lords gave 16 Proxies. 50.
The Protestation, with Reasons of several Lords for the Dissolution of this
Parliament, entered in the Lords Journal, November 22. 1675. the day the
Parliament was Prorogued.
WE whose Names are underwritten, Peers of this Realm, having proposed, That
an humble Address might be made to His Majesty from this House, that he would
be graciously pleased to Dissolve this Parliament: And the House having carried
it in the Negative, for the Justification of our Loyal Intentions toward His
Majesty's Service, and of our true respect and deference to this Honorable
House; and to show that we had no sinister or indirect Ends in this our humble
proposal, Do with all humility herein, set forth the grounds and reasons why we
were of opinion that the said humble Address should have been made.

1. We do humbly conceive, that it is according to the ancient Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, that there should be frequent and new Parliaments, and
that the practice of several years, has been accordingly.

2. It seems not reasonable; that any particular number of Men, should for many
yea s, ingross so great a trust of the People, as to be their Representatives
in the House of Commons: And all other the Gentry and the Members of
Corporations of the same degree and quality with them, should be so long
excluded. Neither, as we humbly conceive, is it advantageous to the Government;
that the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, should be confined for so long a time
to such Members as they have once chosen to serve for them. The mutual
correspondence and interests of those who choose and are chosen, admitting of
great variations in length of time.

3. The long continuance of any such as are entrusted for others, and who have
so great a power over the purse of the Nation, must in our humble opinion,
naturally endanger the producing of Factions and Parties, and the carrying on
of particular interests and designs, rather then the public Good.

And we are the more confirmed in our desires for the said humble Address, by
reason of this unhapp^ breach fallen out betwixt the tw^ Houses of which the
House of Peers has not given the least octasion; they having done nothing but
what their A^^e^tors and Predecessors have in all times done; and what is
according to their duty, and for the Interest of the people that they should
do; which notwithstanding the House of Commons have proceeded in such an
unpresidented and extraordinary way, that i^ is in our humble opinion, become
altogether unpracticable for the two Houses, as the Case stands, jointly to
pursue these great and good ends for which they were called.

For these Reasons we do enter this our Protestation against, and Dissent unto,
the said Vote.
Buckingham Winchester Salisbury Bridgwater Dorfett Westmerland Chesterfield
Stamford Berkes Clarendon Shaftesbury Fauconberg Hallifax Yarmouth Newport
Sandys Wharton Peter Mohun Delamere Townsend Gray of Rolston

These were all the Lords that were in the House early enough to sign the
Protestation before the Parliament was Prorogued.
FINIS.

