THE JOURNAL OF Monsr. de Saint Amor Doctor of SORBONNE, CONTAINING A full
Account of all the Transactions both in France and at Rome, concerning the Five
Famous PROPOSITIONS Controverted between the JANSENISTS and the MOLINISTS, From
the beginning of that Affair till the POPES Decision.

Faithfully Rendered out of French.

A like Display of the Romish State, Court, Interests, Policies, etc. and the
mighty influences of the Jesuits in That CHURCH, and many other CHRISTIAN
STATES, being not hitherto extant.

ACT. IV. Verse. XX. Non enim possumus quae vidimus and audivimus non loqui.

ornament of a crowned rose

LONDON Printed by T. Ratcliff, for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown in
S. Paul's Churchyard, 1664.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of ELGIN, Baron of WHORLETON, etc.
MY LORD,
IF the Greatness of the Subject may serve to justify the Inscription of a
Book to so Great a Name, I may with reason affirm that none ever treated of an
Argument of more weight, extent, and difficulty then This; and consequently
hope, that the Considerableness of the Matter will supply for the little Title
which the Translation has given me in it, and upon which I have presumed to
present it to your Lordship. Fatality and Liberty were disputable Points in all
Ages of the World, and in all Religions. But the Controversies about them have
been infinitely multiplied amongst Christians, and scarce any Questions
agitated with greater heat both in the Purer and the Unreformed Church. The
Hypothesis of Absolute Predestination and Physical Predetermination of all
Events, has engaged its Promoters in the defense of sundry Consequent
doctrines, of very great importance, yet no less controverted then their
foundation. Of which no more need here to be mentioned, besides those contained
in the Five Propositions of late years with incredible subtlety and artifice
contested between the Jesuits and Jesuitical Faction on one side, and the
Jansenists on the other, in the Roman Church, viz. touching The Possibility of
keeping Gods Commandments, The Resistibility of Grace, The Liberty of the Will,
The Efficacy of Preventing Grace, and The Universality of Redemption.

In these Points the doctrine of the Jansenists is in some respects different
from that of the Calvinists; yet not so much, but their subtle Adversaries took
advantage of the Conformity, to contrive Five Propositions capable of a double
Construction, namely, both according to the opinions of Jansenius, and those of
Calvin; that by this means they might involve the former in a Censure of the
latter, which they doubted not to obtain, as being equally condemned for
heretical by either dissenting Party, the Adherents of the Jesuits, and the
Disciples of Jansenius, or (as they style themselves) of S. Augustine. The
Intrigues, Confederacies and solicitations for the accomplishment of which
design are the matter of this Journal, as some Manuscript Pieces concerning the
same affair are of the adjoined Collection.

I know not whether at any time so ample an Account has been given the world
of the manner of Proceeding held by the Roman See in passing a Decision of
Doctrine. But I persuade my self, that whosoever shall impartially peruse This,
cannot have any great opinion of the Popes Infallibility (which yet is the
Basis, at least of all points held by the Romanists in opposition to the
Protestants) when he finds that the Pope professes himself no Divine, and the
Cardinals pretend to no more but a Prudential Judgment (that is, such as is
requisite to be passed in point of interest) that the Popes meaning in his
Constitution is as much controverted as the Cause it determines, while one
Party adheres to what he writes, and the other to what he speaks; and that the
Authority of the Church as well as that of the Fathers, is made use of to
establish Contradictions, (That I mention not the disparagement of the so much
pretended Unity of that Church.) Nor can any Exception lie against the Relator
who was a principal Agent in the Affair, and upon all occasions makes as great
profession of zeal and affection for the Roman Church as he does of Truth and
sincerity.

I pretend not, my Lord, to exhibit your Lordship a Patron of the Cause, by
dedicating the History of it to your Honorable Name. It Is not more indubitable
that the Church of England has delivered her sense upon these Points with
singular prudence, caution, and moderation, then that your Lordship has been
always a most firm Propugner of that Church, even in the worst of times. And
truly the late happy Revolution, in which your Lordship was so active as to
venture all earthly Interests, has redounded highly to the advantage of the
Church, as to these very Doctrines: Since whatever Ecclesiastical Government
might have been established during our Distractions, no Terms of Communion
could be more rigid and unreasonable, as to these Points, then those required
by the two most prevalent Factions of those Times; as appears by the published
Confessions of Faith of the Assembly and the Congregations.

Should I here take occasion to mention your Lordships indefatigable Industry
and Assiduity, Fidelity and Disinteressedness, in the Service of the State,
certainly no man could be more justly accused of a superfluous undertaking,
since I should speak no more then what is already most perfectly known to the
whole Nation, at least in its Representative. Nor is it to be doubted but that
being now in a higher sphere, your influences will be as great for the Public
Good, since you are still accompanied with the same Virtues which rendered you
a Peer of both Kingdoms by Merit, before you were so by Inheritance. Nor shall
I attempt to give a Character of your Lordships personal accomplishments; as,
an Extraordinary Measure both of Divine and Humane Learning Perfection in the
Modern and ancient Languages; together with singular Generosity and
Beneficence (of which a more illustrious proof could not be given then your
late vigorous actings for relief of the Sufferers by the late times.) It may
suffice me to say that I have found particular effects of your Lordships
goodness, and that I should but little care to own the Translation of this work
so publicly, did it not give me so fair an opportunity to declare the honor I
have to be,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble, obedient and obliged servant, G. HAVERS.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE, Giving an Account of the publishing of this JOURNAL.
THe Affair of the Five Propositions being become by its Consequences so
considerable, that it is at present the principal part of the Church History of
this Age, those very consequences which were soon foreseen and by diverse of the
most eminent Bishops of the Gallicane Church committed to me to represent to
the H. See, caused me always to consider it as of very great importance: and
the exact Account I conceived I ought always to be ready to render to those
Bishops and the Church of all that I had done and could observe had passed
therein, obliged me to apply my self about it with so much greater care, for
that I esteemed it a Matter above me, and as a particular Engagement imposed on
me by the providence of God, who is sometimes pleased to make use of weak
Instruments about the greatest Matters. Hence it came to pass, that when after
my return from Rome, I went about to reduce all I had acted and remarked
therein into a Body of History, I found I had scarce any thing more to do but
to transcribe the Memoires I had formerly prepared at Rome, and to join
together the principal Accounts I had already gvien of this business. There
are, I doubt not, many Histories more delightful then this for style and
variety of matters, but perhaps there never was any more exact and faithful. I
have not writ any thing but what I saw or heard, and that while it was fresh in
my memory; It has been always my care to speak nothing false, or that might
be exprobated to me, not only before men but far more before God; well knowing
that if it be pronounced Universally, That we shall be justified or condemned
by our words, it more eminently belongs to words of such importance as these,
by which a public Testimony is rendered to the Church of what has been acted
in an Affair wherein she is so highly concerned.

Truth then has been the proper scope I aimed at in writing, which because it
is not always seasonable to publish, and never unless great and weighty
considerations require it, though many made me desirous to print this Journal
as soon as it was finished, yet others restrained me, and some made me wish if
possibe wholly to suppress it. Several years were spent in this Irresolution;
but at length the Relalations full of falsities which have been offered to the
world concerning what passed at Rome in this Affair, and the numerous false
rumors spread abroad about it convinced me of my Obligation to undeceive the
world, by giving it a true History thereof. The different things which have
been spoken about it, have made all learned men desirous to know the truth of
what has passed; and they have thought it serviceable to the Church, that a
History so conducing to the elucidation of the present Contests should not
remain longer in the confusion and obscurity wherein it lay.

I was confirmed in this thought by the extreme satisfaction which the Assembly
of the Clergy of France in the year 1655. expressed to my Lord the Bishop of
Lodeve, now Bishop of Mont-pellier, with the Relation he made them of what he
had learnt from the mouth of Innocent X. about this matter; it being so great
that they desired he would give it them in Writing, to the end it might be
inserted in the Verbal Process which they caused to be printed a little time
after. For hence I inferred, that, if that Illustrious Assembly was so well
pleased with that Account (in which things are not resumed from the bottom, but
in gross and confusedly enough) that they judged it deserving to be published
under their name and by their orders; there would be other grounds of
satisfaction, both to the Clergy in general and the rest of Christians, to
behold distinctly and orderly the particulars contained in this Journal
touching the same matters which were related but in a word in that Account.
Moreover, the care Pope Innocent X. told the said Bishop of Mont-pellier, he
had taken to cause all transactions in this Affair to be compiled in a Volume,
and deposited in the Archives of S. Peter, after he had declared the same in
the Consistory he^d to that purpose; this Care (I say) clearly showing that
Popes desire to preserve to the Church the remembrance and information of all
that passed in this Affair, and the said Volume being not likely to contain
other Pieces then what are either entire or sufficiently set down in this
Journal, I thought I should second his good intentions by presenting the same
to the Public.

I considered further, that besides those Pieces there were many things in this
Journal which might be verified, not only by other proofs which I can produce
thereof, but also by the Testimonies of the considerable Persons whom I call to
witness by mentioning them: diverse of which being since the finishing thereof
passed to another life, I feared that if I longer deferred the publishing of it,
I might one day be reproached for attesting only the dead and persons incapable
of gainsaying me. Wherefore the faithfulness I have used herein, keeping me
from fearing that any person might find any thing in it that were not most
true, I judged that the sooner I divulged it, it would be the better, in regard
of having the more witnesses of all that I have said, and of the sincerity with
which I have said it.

These considerations induced me to resolve upon the Impression which I have
caused to be made this present Year 1662. that so I might consummate the Work
of the Commission, in which it has pleased God to employ me however incapable
and unworthy of it, and dye with more quiet, having hereby paid the Churuh what
I conceived I owed to her.

But because this Journal was written in the end of the Year 1653. and in 1654.
I advertise those that shall read it to be mindful thereof, lest they be
mistaken in some things which should have been expressed otherwise, had it been
written at the present time. Thus, by those words [M. the Archbishop of
Toulouse that died last,] M. de Marca is not meant, but M. de Montchal his
predecessor; they not being intelligible of any but him when I writ them, and
likewise when they were printed. When I name the Pope, Innocent X. must be
always understood, because it was under his Pontificate that all this Affair
was transacted and reduced into writing. And when I speak of My Lord Ghiggi, or
M. Cardinal Ghiggi, it must always be understood of Pope Alexander VII. who
sits in S. Peter's Chair at this present; because during all the time I was
employed about this Journal, there was no other Cardinal Ghiggi besides him.

At Paris this 25. of November 1662.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
A JOURNAL of what observations I made of things passed at Rome, touching the
matter of the Five Propositions.
The Division of the Work. THE FIRST PART. Containing that which passed at
Paris in reference to the matter of the Five Propositions, particularly in
sundry Assemblies of the Faculty of Divinity, held during the years, 1646.
1647, 1648, and 1649, page 1. CHAPTER I. OF what passed in the Assembly of the
Faculty on the first of October 1646. Of a Speech pronounced in the Grand
Chamber by M. Omer Talon, Advocate General, on Friday the 10th of May 1647. And
of the Arrest issued forth on the 15th upon his remonstrances. p. 1 Chap. II.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the first of March 1647.
concerning a Scandalous Libel against Petrus Aurelius. p. 3 Chap. III. Of what
passed in the Assemblies of the Faculty on the 2d. of May, the first of June,
and the first of July in the year 1648. touching a Libel of F. Veron. p. 4
Chap. IV. Of diverse things which passed in several Assemblies of the Faculty in
the same year 1648. touching the Number of such of Mendicant Orders as might be
admitted into Licenses and Assemblies. p. 5 Chap. V. Of what passed heretofore
in the year 1626. touching the number of the foresaid Orders admitted into the
Facultie's Assemblies; and of the ancient adherences of M. Cornet with them and
the Jesuits. p. 6 Chap. VI. Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on
1. July 1649. in which M. Cornet produced the Five Propositions, to cause them
to be censured. p. 10 Chap. VII. Of what passed during the rest of the month
of July, consequently to the deputing certain Doctors named by the Faculty for
the examination of the said Propositions. p. 13 Chap. VIII. Of the Writings
published the same month of July by the Disciples of S. Augustine concerning
the Propositions. p. 15 Chap. IX. Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty
on the first of August following, and the rest of that month, upon occasion of
a Petition which we presented to the Parliament against the enterprise of M.
Cornet. p, 16 Chap. X. Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the
first of September the same year, 1649. p. 19 Chap. XI. Of a false Censure
published in September against the Propositions. And of a second Petition which
we presented to the Parliament. ibid. Chap. XII. Of the Arrest which followed
upon the said two Petitions, and of what passed in the Parliament about this
matter. p. 21 Chap. XIII. Of what passed during the Months of October and
November, touching the Election of M. Hallier to the Office of Syndic. p. 26
Chap. XIV. Of what was done in the Assembly of the first of December 1649. in
order to the agreement which the First President desired. p. 29 Chap. XV. Of
what passed after that Assembly in prosecution of the propounded agreement till
the seventh of December. p. 15
THE SECOND PART. Containing a Relation of diverse things which passed, and
which I learnt at Rome during four or five Months of my residence there, from
the end of November 1650. till June 1651. when I returned back thither about
the affair of the Five Propositions. p. 37 CHAP. I. OF my Voyage from Paris to
Rome in the year 1650. And of what I learnt concerning the prosecutions against
M. Hersent, whilst I was at Venice. p. 37 Chap. II. Of the Letter of M. de
Vabres. The Design of the Jesuits against (the book called) the Hours,
translated into French. How odious such as are called Jansenists, were at Rome.
p. 38 Chap. III. The Complaint of the Venetians. The ill usage of the Kings
Ambassador. The Kings Letter to the Cardinals in complaint thereof. A
conference with Cardinal Barberini about the Hours and the Letter of M. de
Vabres. p. 41 Chap. IV. A false Censure of the Propositions sent to Rome to be
confirmed. A Letter written to Paris about that matter; and Others received
from Paris. p. 43 Chap. V. Diverse visits, in which the five Propositions were
spoken of; and a remarkable Circumstance touching the same. How few people at
Rome well understood those matters, and the reason. p. 45 Chap. VI. Letters
written to Paris containing the reasons whcih persuaded the good there would be
in sending to Rome, and others which dissuaded it as unprofitable or
prejudicial, concluding nevertheless, that it seemed best to send thither. p.
47 Chap. VII. News from Paris of a check which M. Hallier received in the
Assembly of the Faculty on the first of February, 1651. Discourse with Cardinal
Lugo. Certain Propositions taken out of the Sermon of M. Hersent accused and
justified. A strange secrecy concerning what passes in the Inquisition. p. 48
Chap. VIII. A visit to Cardinal Lugo. The fasilfication of the Bull of Urban
VIII. The vehemence of M. Albizzi against S. Augustine. The Censure of
Vallidolid. p. 51 Chap. IX. Of what passed at Paris during this time. The Irish
solicited. Complaints of some Bishops to the Nuntio of the practices of the
Jesuits to get the Letter of M. de Vabres signed. Those Bishops deliberate of
sending to Rome. A Proposal of a Conference. p. 53 Chap. X. That the Haereo
fateor, is that which rendered Jansenius so odious at Rome. Sundry declarations
of Cardinal Barberini that the Bull of Urban VIII. is only provisional, and
reaches not Jansenius's doctrine. The zeal of the Generals of the Dominicans
and the Augustines for S. Augustine, joined with fear of incurring displeasure
thereby. p. 55 Chap. XI. Intelligence of my danger of being put into the
Inquisition. Of the Molinomachie of Aurelius Avitus. The Explication of Haereo
fateor. Such as were believed inclinable to defend Jansenius, removed from the
Assemblies of the Inquisition. An audience of the Pope. p. 58 Chap. XII. Diverse
confirmations of the intelligence given me of the danger wherein I was. A
Resolution of the Bishops to write and send to Rome. Difficulties about that
sudden dispatch. A perfect discovery of the design there was to stop me. My
leaving Rome. p. 60 Chap. XIII. A Letter written from Florence to excuse my
self absolutely from returning to Rome, though I had promised so to do. What I
saw most considerable at Milan. p. 62 Chap. XIV. A Letter from Paris received
at Genua, to engage me to return to Rome. Which I accordingly resolved upon
notwithstanding my former resolution to the contrary. My return to Rome. p. 63
THE THIRD PART. Containing what passed at Rome after my return thither as
Delegate from the Bishops, 15. June 1651. till the end of the year. p. 67
CHAPTER I. THe Letter of the Bishops to the Pope. Deliberation whether it were
fit to deliver it. Resolution to do so. p. 67 Chap. II. A Visit to Cardinal d'
Este, who gave me to understand that it was not safe for me to abide at Rome;
But I was not moved therewith. Diverse Visites upon the occasion of my return.
Discourse with F. Annat. p. 69 Chap. III. Visites at the end of June and
beginning of July, in which I discovered the objections made against the
Hours. Notice of an intention to put me into the Inquisition. p. 73 Chap. IV.
Audience of the Pope on the 10th of July at my delivering him the Bishops
Letter, and declaring the subject thereof. p. 77 Chap. V. A Relation of all
that passed in the business of the Hours. An answer to all objections made by
the Jesuits against them. That they were put into the Index only because of a
Bull of Pius V. pretended to forbid the translation of the Office of the Virgin
into the vulgar language. The violence of M. Albizzi. p. 79 Chap. VI. Diverse
Visites in the end of July and beginning of August, principally to the
Cardinals Spada, Roma, Barberini, and the Ambassador who was returned to Rome
from Tivoli. p. 89 Chap. VII. Visits during the month of August to the
Qualificators of the Holy Office. Letters of M. Hallier full of falsities.
Sundry discoveries of the false Censure sent to Rome in the name of the
Faculty. p. 91 Chap. VIII. Visits in September. A writing full of falsities by
an Augustine Doctor of the Faculty, which was dispersed secretly at Rome. Of the
Bull of Urban VIII. Of F. Lemos; and of the zeal of Clement VIII. for the
doctrine of Grace. Frequent prohibitions to speak of Jansenius. p. 98 Chap. IX.
The History of the fraud used by M. Hallier in sending a vagabond Cordelier
named F. Mulard in quality of Deputy from the Faculty. With what boldness the
said Cordelier (who had been sometimes a Capuchine and afterward an Apostate
and married) took upon him that quality in his address to the Pope. p. 106
Chap. X. Visits in the end of September and beginning of October. A story of
Clement VIII: Manuscripts of the Congregations de Auxiliis in the Library of
the Augustins. Of that whereof I took a Copy from thence. The Jesuits endeavor
in vain to draw the Dominicans to their side. p. 114 Chap. XI. Letters from
Paris confirming the resolution of the Bishops to do nothing but in a regular
Congregation where the Divines of either side might speak in the presence of
their Adversaries. p. 117 Chap. XII. An Audience of the Pope 17. October. A
Letter of the Bishop of Grass delivered to the Pope at that Audience. p. 119
Chap. XIII. Visits in the end of October and the whole month of November. The
Manuscript of the Bull of Paul V. against Molina in the Library of the
Augustins. Of the secrecy used in the affair of the Propositions. A Lie of M.
Hallier and F. Mulard. Violences of M. Albizzi. p. 112 Chap. XIV. Of the
arrival of other Deputies on 5. December. and the Visits we made together till
the end of the month. p. 130 Chap. XV. The Account of some Sermons made by M.
Brouse upon the way at Die, against the Calvinists of that place, touching the
Possibility of keeping God's Commandments. p. 133 Chap. XVI. Passages at Paris
toward the end of the year 1651. An accusation against me by M. Grandin the
Syndic at the instigation of the Nuntio, as if I had styled my self at Rome the
Deputy or Agent of the Faculty. The Jesuits confidently boast that the
Propositions will be condemned at Rome. A scandalous Libel of F. Brisacier a
Jesuit, against the Religious Virgins of Port Royal, censured by the
Archbishop of Paris. p. 135
THE FOURTH PART. Containing the things which passed during the first six
Months of the year, 1652. p. 139. CHAP. I. OF what passed both at Paris and at
Rome, during the first three weeks of January. page 136 Chap. II. Of the first
Audience we had together of the Pope, January 21, 1652, at the end of which we
gave him our first Memorial. p. 141 Chap. III. The verification of the original
of the Memoires of M. Regna Dean of the Rota, touching the Congregations de
Auxiliis. Diverse things which we did during the rest of January and beginning
of February. p. 147 Chap. IV. Of what we did till the end of February. A
Promotion of Cardinals, amongst whom the Lord Ghiggi was one. Of a Memorial we
presented to the Pope against a book of Father Annat, which was under the
Press: and of the Visits we began to make to all the sacred College. p. 151
Chap. V. Of the Visits which we continued during the first days of March, as
well to the sacred College as to the Consultors and Qualificators, ordinarily
employed at Rome about matters of Doctrine. p. 155 Chap. VI. The continuation
of the said Visits; and of what passed till the end of March. Of the necessity
of M. Brousse's returning into France for his health-sake. Of the two Copies of
the Memoires of M. Pegna, which we caused to be prepared very exactly with the
original: and, of the success of our Memorial against F. Annat's book. p. 161
Chap. VII. Of a small Tome of the principal works of Saint Augustine against the
Pelagians and Semipelagians, which we put to printing after Easter, and of the
obstructions raised against the said Impression. p. 168 Chap. VIII. An
incidental History of the exemplary punishment of the Subdatary Mascambrun,
convicted of sundry forgeries, which happened at this time, and whereof I learnt
very weighty particularities by an assured way. p. 176 Chap. IX. Of an ancient
Manuscript which fell into my hands, touching an Affair of M. Grimani Patriarch
of Aquileia; by which I found that the ground of all the matters in question
had been examined, and decided by the Council of Trent. p. 186 Chap. X. Of
other less important passages (besides those of the three foregoing Chapters)
during the months of April and May; amongst others, Of the arrival at Rome of
MM. Hallier, Lagault and Joysel, Doctors of our Faculty; and of the Declaration
they made to us in the presence of the Ambassador, that they came to demand the
Censure of the Five Propositions as of things already condemned, without making
any Examination or Congregation. p. 187 Chap. XI. Of what passed during the
whole month of June and the beginning of July. p. 192
THE FIFTH PART. Containing what passed during the last six months of the Year,
1652. page 201. CHAP. I. OF the Declaration made to us on the eleventh of July
by Cardinal Roma, that the Pope had constituted the Congregation which we
desired of him. Of the Visits we made till the twenty first, to the Cardinals
which were of it; and, of a Letter we writ thereupon to the Bishops who sent
us. p. 201 Chap. II. Of the first suspicions we had, that our Adversaries
endeavored to hinder what was most essential to the said Congregation, namely,
an open hearing in the presence of one another. Of the solicitations we used
to that end the rest of the month; and our discovery of an intention to put
into that Congregation persons wholly suspected by us. An incidental Letter
very considerable which I received at that time. p. 206 Chap. III. Of the
distribution we made in the beginning of August of our little Volume of Saint
Augustine. p. 211. Chap. IV. Of an Audience I had of the Pope August 9, when I
presented the said Tome of Saint Augustine to his Holiness. p. 213 Chap. V. Of
the extraordinary summons given by Cardinal Roma at the solicitation of M.
Albizzi, to provide in a fortnights time all the Writings we had to deliver. Of
the two first which we got ready by that time, and signed on Saint Augustin's
day. p. 214 Chap. VI. Of two Conferences held at Paris during the month of
August, between M. de Sainte-Beuve Doctor and Professor of Sorbon, and F. l'
Abbe a Jesuit. Other Letters written to us from Paris during the same month,
to instruct us not to appear but in presence of our Adversaries. p. 216 Chap.
VII. Of what was contained in our two first Writings; the one treating of what
had passed in the Affair of the Five Propositions; the other of the authority
of Saint Augustine. p. 218 Chap. VIII. Of a certain Writing of M. Hallier and
his Colleagues, which came accidentally to our hands. p. 221 Chap. IX. Of our
solicitations during the whole month of September, to obtain that the Writings
which we should present to the Cardinals, might be communicated to our
Adversaries. Of the death of Cardinal Roma which happened in the said month. Of
the private Congregations which began to be held at the Palace of Cardinal
Spada. p. 223 Chap. X. Letters written to us from Paris in September,
continually enjoining us not to engage our selves in the Congregation, but on
condition to be heard in presence of our Adversaries. Two or three remarkable
things which happened to the Jesuits about this time. p. 233 Chap. XI. New
endeavors for the communication of our Papers: and of a new Writing of M.
Hallier, which came to our hands. p. 235 Chap. XII. Of Letters written to us
from Paris during the month of October, concerning the proceeding which they
understood there was used at Rome in the Congregation. p. 245 Chap. XIII. Of
our Negotiation during the whole month of November, chiefly endeavoring to
get an Audience of the Pope, that we might deliver our Papers to him, and
obtain that the same might be communicated to our Adversaries, with an Epistle
to his Holiness to that purpose. p. 248 Chap. XIV. Of what passed at Paris
during the said month; chiefly of the violences used by the Jesuits against
some Doctors disciples of Saint Augustine, to deprive them of their employments.
p. 256 Chap. XV. Of the continuation of our endeavors during the month of
December, to get the Audience of the Pope we desired, to the end we might
present our Papers to him; With two Memorials: one to obtain that our Writings
might be communicated; the other against F. Modeste, M. Albizzi and the
Jesuits. p. 257 Chap. XVI. How we were at length constrained to take occasion
of the Popes return from taking the air, to present those Papers and Memorials
to him. Of a conference with the Ambassador, and other things which I learnt
till Christmas, in the year 1652. p. 263 Chap. XVII. Of a consultation between
my Colleagues and me, whether, in case they should persist at Rome to refuse to
receive from us in order to the examination and sentence, any other then secret
and private informations, we should at length yield and deliver such. The
reasons we had on the one side and the other. Of the Letters we writ to Paris,
and the Answers we received thereupon. p. 264
THE SIXTH PART. Containing the passages of the first six months of the Year,
1653. p. 275. CHAP. I. NEw endeavors used at the beginning of the Year 1653.
for the communication of our Writings, Discourses upon that matter with diverse
persons, particularly with Cardinal Spada and the Ambassador. p. 275 Chap. II.
Of Cardinal Spada's offer in the end of January, to hear us in the Congregation
held at his house, and our Answer, That we were ready to appear there as soon as
justice should be done us upon the conditions which we had desired. Of a Letter
I writ thereupon to my Lords the Bishops, who had deputed us. p. 282 Chap. III.
How we observed that the Congregation held at Cardinal Spada's house, was only
a part of that of the Inquisition. Of the hearing given there to M. Hallier and
his Colleagues. Of the Letter I writ thereupon to the Advocate General Bignon;
and a Discourse I had with the Ambassador, touching what had passed between us
and Cardinal Spada. p. 288 Chap. IV. Of what I understood passed at Paris and
elsewhere upon occasion of these Contests, by Letters written to me during the
said month of January. p. 291 Chap. V. Containing what passed in the first
days of February, particularly of a Memorial prepared by the General of the
Augustins, touching the Five Propositions; And, of a Letter which we writ to
the Bishops, signifying, that the Congregation chosen by the Pope, took upon
them the quality of Congregation of the Holy Office. Of a writing of M.
Hallier; which accidentally came to our hands. p. 293 Chap. VI. Of the
conference between M. Hallier and his Colleagues on the one part, and the
General of the Dominicans and some principal Fathers of his Order on the other
part, February 14. p. 298 Chap. VII. Of a long Audience I had of Cardinal
Ghiggi the same day. p. 304 Chap. VIII. Of two Memorials our Advocate presented
in our behalf to the Pope at an Audience which we had of him, February 17. p.
306 Chap. IX. Of the Papers the General of the Dominicans intended to present
to the Pope, with his Memorial to intervene in this Affair. p. 309 Chap. X. Of
what passed at Rome from the 19th of February till the last of the same month.
p. 310 Chap. XI. Of diverse Pieces published at Paris by the followers of M^lina
during the month of February. Of diverse rumors and threatenings which they
spread there. And of the Letters written to us from Paris during that whole
month and the beginning of March, both touching that matter, and the Answers
we had given to the offers of Cardinal Spada p. 313 Chap. XII. The confederacy
of M. Hallier and his Colleagues with the Jesuits, manifested by the Papers
these Doctors presented to the Consultors, and printed at Paris under the Name
of F. Annat; which I endeavored to discover to the Cardinals Ghiggi and Spada,
but in vain. A new discovery of a Paper of M. Hallier concerning the third
Proposition p. 320 Chap. XIII. Proposals to me by Cardinal Barberini about the
Doctrine of the Thomists. The beginning of the Congregation. The Reconciliation
of the Pope with Madam Olympia, who entertains him at Dinner on the day of the
Annunciation, together with his Nephew, by whom in vain he is dissuaded from
applying himself to the said Congregations p. 322 Chap. XIV. A Visit I made to
the Ambassador concerning the said Congregations. Assurance given me by him
that we should be heard selemnly, and as much as we desired. New Propositions
delivered to the Congregation as equivalent to those under examination, but for
the most part comprised in more odious words. The judgment M. de Sainte-Beuve
made thereof as soon as he saw them. Four Congregations held eight days before
the Pope p. 327 Chap. XV. The arrival of F. Des-mares and of M. Manessier at
Rome. A notable change of a zealous Disciple of Molina, who became an ardent
one of Saint Augustine by reading the little Volume I gave him, and the twelve
chief Maxims of the Christian belief touching Grace, which he reduced into so
many Latin Distiques. A scandalous Memorial dispersed through Rome and all
Italy, as presented to the Pope by the Clergy of France concerning this Affair.
Another Paper of our Adversaries contrived to delude the Dominicans, and full
of falsities p, 330 Chap. XVI. The Declaration of our opinions concerning the
sufficient Grace of some of the Thomists, approved by the Fathers of that
Order. A Congregation held on the 18th of April by the five Cardinals and M.
Albizzi without Consultors. An Audience we endeavored for F. Des-mares and M.
Manessier. A remarkable saying of a Gallicane Prince. The reason which induced
the Pope to be willing that we should be heard in his own presence. p. 335
Chap. XVII. Of the Letters written to me from Paris during the whole month of
April, concerning how the posture of this Affair stood at Rome. p. 337 Chap.
XVIII. Of the first certain News I received on the fourth of May, that the
Constitution was made against the Five Propositions; and of the Audience which
F. Des-mares and M. Manessier had of the Pope that day. p. 340 Chap. XIX. The
Discourse of Cardinal Ghiggi with an other Cardinal concerning the new Bull in
the Consistory, May 5. Reasons which moved us to inform the Pope, that we
should be ready to appear before him whenever he pleased, and in such manner as
should seem fit to his Holiness. p. 343 Chap. XX. Our signification of this
Resolution to the Ambassador. The care he took to intimate the same to the
Pope, and demand a day of him for that purpopse. Notice given to him by M.
Hallier and his Colleagues, to be ready to appear likewise before the Pope a day
or two after us. Our Visits upon this occasion to the Cardinals of the
Congregation. The Bull prepared, and revised by those Cardinals by turns. p.
345 Chap. XXI. Of the Papers we prepared to present to the Pope at the end of
our intended Audience. p. 348 Chap. XXII. Of the Audience the Pope gave us May
19. which was the first and last we had of all that had been promised us. p.
354 Chap. XXIII. The Letter we writ May 26. to the Bishops who sent us,
touching the grand Audience the Pope had given us. p. 380 Chap. XXIV. Endeavors
to get permission to print our Papers in order to present them to the Cardinals
and Consultors. Visits to the Cardinals of the Congregation to present them our
Piece of the Distinction of senses, and thank them for being present at our
grand Audience. Congratulations received thereupon from their Eminences and
others. The Calumnies which Cardinal Rapaccioli informed us were uttered to
himself by M. Hallier and his Colleagues against our Doctrine. p. 395 Chap. XXV.
New rumors of the Bull against the Propositions. A considerable saying of
Cardinal Ghiggi in our favor concerning the same occasion. The public entry
of Cardinal Pimentelli into Rome, who takes this opportunity to dissuade the
Pope from the purpose of this Bull, but without effect. M. Hallier and his
Colleagues are not heard before the Pope, and the reason. The last conference I
had with Cardinal Ghiggi. The pretension of F. Modeste to be General of his
Order frustrated. p. 399 Chap. XXVI. Of the Letters written to me from Paris
during the months of May and June, concerning what passages at Rome I had
related during May. p. 402 Chap. XXVII. Of certain things we were informed of,
and of our Visites from the first of June till the thirteenth. In what manner
the Constitution against the Five Propositions was published. With what
restriction and circumspection we resolved to subscribe to the Condemnation in
case the Pope should require it of us. p. 408 Chap. XXVIII. M. Hallier and his
Colleagues desire audience of the Pope to complain of the public joy we
testified throughout Rome, for the declarations the Pope made to us at our
audience of parting; which the Pope confirms to them. The General of the
Augustins gives us Letters of Association to his Order. The Ambassador by a
letter to the Count de Brienne secetary of State confirms in what manner I
spoke in all the Account we have had of the Propositions, and that the Pope
has condemned them. Chap. XXIX. Containing a relation of what passed in the
Assembly of the Curees of Paris on Monday, 9. June 1653. and in the King's
presence on Wednesday after in reference to that Assembly.
THE SEVENTH PART. Containing what passed at our departure from Rome, and after
till our arrival at Paris; and what particulars I observed after we were
arrived there, till the conclusion of this Journal. CHAP. I. COntaining the
Popes Constitution against the five Propositions; our departure from Rome; our
arrival at Florence; a Letter we writ from thence to the Bishops; some
Reflections we made upon our departure from Rome; our departure from Florence;
our arrival at Venice; the stay we made there. Chap. II. Containing the Letters
which I received from Rome concerning the Pope's new constitution during our
stay at Venice. Chap. III. Containing the Letters writ to me from Paris, as soon
as the certain news of the Pope's constitution was arrived thither; and the
Answer F. Morin Priest of the Oratory made to one of his Brethren who consulted
him about the said constitution. Chap, IV. Of our Journey from Venice to Paris,
and our passage through Switzerland. Chap. V. Of particulars which came to my
knowledge after our return to Paris. A calumny spread at Rome that we had
caused a book to be printed at Venice against the Popes Constitution. The Pope
informs the Consistory of his Constitution and with what submission it was
received. The Imprisonment of F. Nolano a Dominican falsely attributed to the
doctrine of Efficacious Grace. p. 440 Chap. VI. The return of M. Hallier and
his Colleagues. Calumnies which he spread against me. News come from Rome
toward the end of the year, 1653. p. 442

ERRATA.
PAge 1. b l. 15. read spoke of two. p. 3. a l. 60. and 61. r. Nuntiature.
ibid. l. 66. r. being taken. p. 4. a l. 5. r. generously. p. 8. a l. 39. r.
against. p. 13. a l. 10. r. ago, and. ibid. l. 24. r. and for that. p. 14. a l.
3. r. Appeal. ibid. l. 19. r. signified to M. Ch ibid l. 53. r. command. ibid b
l. 12. because of this. p. 16. a l. 29. r. statum and vires. p. 19. b l. 8. r.
vanish. p. 22. b l. 49. dele and. p. 23. a l. 9. r. Arnauts. p. 26. b l. 48. r.
Syndicate. p. 33. b. l. 5. r. they had. p 35. b l. 21. r. Doctors. p. 37. b r.
moved. ibid b l. 7. r. manners. p. 42 a l. 52. dele late. p. 47. b l. 1. r.
with affections. ibid l. 2. r. with that. p. 49. a l. 5. r. signified to me.
ibid l. 40. r. Chapel. p. 52. a l. 26. r. Baius instead of Bavis, and
elsewhere. p. 57 b l. 17. r. these contests. p. 61. a l. 21. r. spinosity. p.
69. b l. 6. r. moved. p. 70. a l. 12. Had I not before. p. 78. a l. 13.
erection. p. 85. a l. 61. Cities of Italy. p. 87 a l. 40. Consulted the
Ballerie. p. 89. b antepenult. Baius. p. 62. a l. 7. little skilled. p. 94. b
l. 7. of a solemn. p. 103. a 57. tecta p. 117. b l. 55. effect of them. p. 125.
a l. 40 dissensu. p. 126. b l. penult. Baius. p. 221. b l. 22. report not. p.
224. a l. 23. hindered it. ibid. a l. 64. theirs to us. p. 230. a l. 11.
resumere. 29. to discuss. p. 225. b l. 4. a little health. p. 254. a l. 1
cheering. l. 22. an Audience. p. 256. a l. 39. we aimed. p. 257. a l. 12.
Molinistae. l. 14. habituros. l. 19. gloriantur. p. 262. a l. 42. He has made
it appear. p. 265. b l. 14. safer course. p. 268. a l. 7. restore peace. l. 10.
dele the. p. 269. b l. 6. concernedness. p. ibid. l. 57. dele the. p. 270. a l.
5. being there are. p. 250. a l. 40. depresse. p. 309. a l. 2. are no parties.
p. 303. b l. 2. moreris. p. 313. a l. 55. and they. l. 56. 1602. p. 315. b l.
2. mitis homo. l. 38. exigi. l. 55. at length given you. p. 316. b l. 48. your
Writings. p. 407. b l. 36. your audience. l. 38. Thus. l. 46. fained. p. 408. a
l. 20. by which. p. 409. b l. 28. the Nieces. p. 410. a l. this Abbots. p. 411.
b l. 3. the condemnatory. p. 446. a l. 13. rigorously. b l. 10. dele that.

In the Collection.
Page 77 a l. 56. sensu unquam. p. 79. a l. 22. qui quocunque modo. b l. 40.
quas ipsi. p. 91. b l. 26. postea de. p. 92. b l. 57. Ista def. p. 95. b l. 5.
scrutandi. p. 97. b l. 3. non posse. p. 98. b l. 5. premit haec objectio. p.
107. a l. 20. culpa tribuitur. p. 114. a l. 19, scd eum adjuvat. b l. 27.
offenderet. p. 115. a l. 53. habere in manu. p. 118. b l. 42. esse in omni
homine. p. 119. a. l. 6. ut justus fiat. p. 124. a l. penult. Sine isto Sancti.

A JOURNAL Of what Passages I observed at ROME Relating to the Matter of The
Five Propositions.
The DIVISION of this Work.
WHat has passed at Rome in reference to the Five Propositions is so well
worth knowing, and yet so little known; that I account my self obliged to set
down in writing all the Occurrences concerning them, which during two whole
years, wherein I was employed about that affair, arrived to my knowledge; and
also to fit the same either to be printed in my own lifetime in case occasions
so require and permit, or else transmitted to the notice of Posterity by the
help of some Copies which I shall take care shall be made and reposited in
Libraries.

During the space of those two years I was careful to write down daily every
thing that I either did or learned concerning this business. The principal
particulars whereof I likewise every week sent into France, according as I was
obliged. So that for the framing of my intended Narrative I shall only need to
select out of the Journal I made then, and the Copies of Letters I preserved,
such things as will not be unworthy the public Eye, leaving apart such as
deserve not to be produced thence. Possibly I may relate some few that will
seem at first View superfluous, or little important; but I hope even those
which appear least considerable in themselves, will be in the sequel found
serviceable to the illustration of such as are more so. However, I am secure I
shall not mention any but what is most true; it not being possible for One who
speaks only such things as he knows, and according to his knowledge, to utter
falsities, unless he will himself; from which by God's grace my Intention is
perfectly free.

I shall divide the Journal of Passages at Rome into Four Parts; Each of which
shall comprise Six Months of those two years: whereunto I shall add a Fifth,
containing what came to my particular knowledge from the time of our departure
from Rome till the end of the year 1653. But because the Propositions were not
carried to Rome, but in consequence of the Motion made in Sorbonne in the
Assembly of the First of July 1649. by M. Cornet, Doctor, and at that time
Syndic of the Faculty of Divinity of Paris, for the nomination of Doctors to
examine and censure them; there shall be Two Parts antecedent to the mentioned
Five; the former of which shall comprehend what passed at Paris concerning this
matter; wherein, that I may not omit any thing contributory to the
manifestation of this business, I shall relate other things which preceded that
Assembly, without the knowledge of which, neither the Judgments of some
Doctors who delivered their sentence thereupon would be so well understood, nor
the sequels it had sufficiently apprehended. The Second shall treat of what I
learned at Rome in the first journey I made thither in the H. Year 1650. at
which time this affair seemed wholly laid asleep amongst the Faculty. For after
I had sojourned there three or four Months, although it was no part of the
design of my residence, yet I occasionally learned some things of reference to
it; and possibly what I writ to Paris thereupon, was the inducement to some
Bishops of France to engage my return to Rome about this affair, when according
to my own purpose I was upon the way back toward France. The account of the
Seven Parts of the Work is as follows.

The First shall contain what passed about this matter at Paris particularly in
several Assemblies of the Faculty in the years 1646, 1647, 1648, and 1649.

The Second shall comprise sundry things which passed, or which I learned at
Rome, during four or five months of my residing there upon my private account,
from the end of November 1650. till May 1651.

The Third shall recite what passed at Rome from the time of my return thither
as the Envoy or Delegate of some Bishops, at the end of June 1651. till the end
of the same Year.

The Fourth shall set forth what passed at Rome during the first Six Months of
the Year 1652.

The Fifth shall relate the Passages of the last Six Months of the same Year.

The Sixth shall show what passed from the beginning of the Year 1653. till the
Month of June, when we departed from Rome to come back to France.

And the Seventh shall declare what occurred from the beginning of our voyage,
till our arrival at Paris, and also what came to my particular knowledge, after
our return till the end of the same year 1653.

THE FIRST PART.
October 1646. Containing what passed at Paris concerning the affair of The
Five Propositions, particularly in several Assemblies of the Faculty of
Divinity, held in the Years 1646, 1647, 1648, 1649.

CHAP. I.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty, 1 October. 1646. Of a Speech
pronounced in the Grand Chamber by M. Omer Talon Advocate General, on Friday 10
May 1647. and, Of the Arrest issued from thence on the 15 th, upon his
Remonstrances.

AT the beginning of the year 1646. my time of Licentiate being accomplished,
and the Ceremonies of conferring Degrees deferred till after Easter, I thought
fit to employ that interval of time in a journey to Italy, invited thereunto by
the company of M. de Souvre, Chevalier of the Orders of the King, and first
Gentleman of his Chamber, and of M. the Abbot de Bassompierre, now Bishop of
Xaintes, and of some other persons of quality whom I had the honor to know at
Court. M. Bourgeois Doctor of Paris, and M. Duchesne an ancient Professor in
Philosophy, were then at Rome by Order of my Lords the Bishops who had licensed
the Book Of Frequent Communion, to defend the same against the prosecutions
used by the Jesuits there to get it censured. During the short abode I made
there, M. Bourgeois and M. Duchesne told me the Book Of Frequent Communion was
wholly acquitted, but the Jesuits had turned all their forces against another
Book, to which That had given occasion, namely, that Of the Greatness of the
Roman Church. Nevertheless that they conceived they had so clearly evidenced
to diverse Cardinals the validity of the passages of the said Book, (which
establishes in the two Princes of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul, the
Authority in question) that they believed it now out of all danger of Censure.

In these very terms I informed of this matter diverse of our Confreres who
requested intelligence thereof at my return, which was in the month of August
the same year. And in September following, having received the Doctor's Cap,
the first time I had the honor to enter into the Assembly of the Faculty,
(which was 1 October. 1646.) M. Cornet, then Syndic, acquainted the Faculty that
the Nuntio had told him, that certain Manuscript Gazettes [or Mercuries] were
come to his hands from Rome, which spoke two Doctors there who pretended to be
Delegates from the Faculty for the maintaining a Book as Orthodox, which
undertook to show, That there may be two Heads in the Church; Of which he
advertised the Faculty in regard of their concernment therein, and entreated
them to declare to him, whether they had sent the said Doctors to Rome for the
defense of such Book. This proposal was made after a manner so odious and
captious against the said Book, that M. Chastellain (who was friend to M.
Bourgeois, and was satisfied of the goodness of the Book defended by him at
Rome, in which also he knew it was not maintained That there may be two Heads
in the Church) conceived that enough would be done both for the Book and for M.
Bourgeois, if it were declared to the Nuntio, That no person of the Faculty had
so much as heard speech of any Book written to that purpose; and accordingly he
nominated M. Pereyret and some other Doctors to carry this answer to the
Nuntio. This disowning of an Imaginary Book, was very well pleasing to the
enemies of the True Book which M. Bourgeois defended. For they saw well, it
would not be difficult for them to involve the true one in it. So this advice
was universally assented to, though with different ends and aims.

My turn of suffraging came not till the last: but I did not forbear to give
some intimation of the ill use I feared would be made of this Declaration;
which when I saw ratified by the Conclusion of the Faculty, speaking after the
Assembly with the Doctors (to whom, upon the assurance given by M. Bourgeois
and M. Duchesne, I had signified that I conceived the Book out of danger of
Censure) I told them that after this Declaration of the Faculty, I judged the
Censure would indubitably follow, and believed two Months would not pass
before its appearance. Moreover, because I saw the reputation of M. Bourgeois
and M. Duchesne unjustly impeached, I gave such a testimony of them in this
Assembly as I believed I was bound to do, being so lately returned from Rome,
where I had seen (as I assured the Assembly) that they took not upon themselves
the quality of Delegates of the Faculty, that all people of honor that knew
them, looked upon them as sent by those of my Lords the Prelates of France who
had given approbation to the Book Of Frequent Communion; and that none but
framers of Gazettes [or Mercury-mongers] could speak otherwise of them.

However, upon that Gazette which came to the Nuntio, and from him to the
Faculty, the Conclusion passed. M. Pereyret went to visit him, according to the
commission given him so to do: and although he had received none to leave any
thing in writing with the Nuntio, yet he declined not to give him a Memorial of
what he said to him, which he drew up as himself pleased, without communicating
any thing thereof to the Faculty.

The term of publishing the Decree of the Inquisition of Rome, which appeared
against the mentioned Book, consequently to the Declaration of the Faculty, was
longer then I imagined it would have been: for it was deferred till the 25th.
of January the following year 1647. being the very day of the Conversion of St.
Paul, which I cannot but observe here, because I doubt not but it was designed
by the authors of the Decree.

Some time after, this Decree came into France to the Nuntio, with command from
the Pope to cause it to be printed, and sent to the Ordinaries of places; by
which order, and for which purpose it was printed by Sebastian Cramoisy. I
shall mention no other particulars of this Decree, but what are in the Speech
of the deceased M. Talon Advocate General, whereof, and of the Arrest which
followed it, I had a Copy; which I shall insert here to preserve the same to
posterity, though they have been printed since in flying and perishing
pamphlets.

A Speech delivered in the Grand Chamber by Mons. Omer Talon, Advocate General,
on Friday 10 Maii 1647.
Gentlemen,
WE received on Wednesday an order from the Court to make inquiry concerning a
Bull printed a few days since, and a Sentence issued forth by the Provost of
Paris on Monday last; whereby he has condemned a small Writing and Book
containing one sheet of Paper; which Writing is contrary to the authority of
the said Bull. Moreover the same day we heard what passed in the presence of
the Queen touching the same affair, where you were pleased, Sir, (addressing
himself to the first President) to express the sentiments of the Company, and
their reasons for opposing the enterprise of the Popes Nuntio, who goes about
to establish a new Jurisdiction in this Realm: After which discourse, the Queen
having called us and heard from our own mouths something of the particulars of
this affair, and afterward conferred of it with M. the Cardinal Mazarin, M.
the Chancellor gave us to understand, that there was a difference to be made
between a Bull issued by authority of the Holy See, for the printing and
publishing of which there is the King's Privilege, and one set forth by the
Mandate or Certification of the Nuntio, who makes no part of the Bull.

Whereupon, Gentlemen, to tell you our thoughts concerning this Bull, we have
found in it three things especially to oppose;

First, that there has been printed in France, published, and endevour'd to be
executed, a Decree of the Congregation of the Inquisition of the Holy Office,
and that it has been intitul'd, Decretum Sanctissimi D. N. D. Innocentii
divina providentia Papae, under pretense that the Pope assisted and was present
at that Congregation. For in France we acknowledge the authority of the Holy
See, and the power of the Pope head of the Church, common Father of all
Christians. We owe him all sort of respect and obedience. This is the belief of
the King, eldest Son of the Church, the belief of all Catholics, and of all
such as are within the true Communion. But we acknowledge no Authority nor
Jurisdiction of Congregations held in the Court of Rome, which the Pope
establishes as seems good to himself. But the decrees and arrests of these
Congregations have no authority nor execution in this Kingdom; and when upon
occasion of contentious businesses such decrees have been presented (as in the
matter of Dispensations, Nullity of Vows, translation of Religious persons,
and the like), the Court has declared such Briefs null and abusive, with a
salvo to the parties to have recourse to the ordinary ways, that is to say in
the Chancery, in which Acts are expedited in the Name of our Holy Father the
Pope, in whose person the lawful authority resides. And for what concerns
matters of Faith and doctrine, they ought not to be determined in these
Congregations, except by way of advice and counsel, not of power. It Is true, in
these Congregations are censured Books suspected of Heresy and bad doctrines;
here is made the Index Expurgatorius, which increases every year; and here have
sometimes the Arrests of this Court been censured; as namely the Arrest issued
against Jean Chastell, the History of Thuanus, the Liberties of the Gallicane
Church, and all others which concern the preservation of the sacred persons of
our Kings, and the establishment of Regal Jurisdiction.

Now, were the Decree in question, and others of the like nature published and
authorized in this Realm, it would be in effect to receive the Inquisition into
it, and that for this Remark, which seems to admit of no answer. The
Congregation write themselves Generalis and Vniversalis Inquisitio in Vniversa
Republica Christiana adversus Haereticam pravitatem; hence they assume a power
of making process against the Kings Subjects, and think they have a right to do
the same against Books printed within the Kingdom. Wherefore having examined
the Title of the Decree issued from the Inquisition in the aforesaid terms,
which testify a pretension to Universal authority, we thought our selves
obliged to notify the same to the Court, that we might make our protestations
thereupon according to the duty of our Offices.

The second thing we observed, is the Mandate or Certification of the Nuntio to
the King's person at the foot of the said Bull, wherein he styles himself
Nuntio to the Kings person, and the whole Realm of France; which is a Title
unusual and extraordinary: for the Nuntio performing the Office of an
Ambassador in France, and being capable of executing no other, it follows that
he has no other in this Kingdom: besides that, if he thought fit to speak of
the Kingdom, he ought to have mentioned the Kingdoms of France and Navarre; it
being certain that the omission of the latter is ordinarily affected, and that
not without design.

There is a second observation to be made upon this Commission, and it consists
in one word, viz. That the Nuntio says he received the Pope's command to cause
the said Decree to be printed. Now Printing being a thing purely temporal, and
relating to policy, cannot be allowed but by the authority of the King or his
Magistrate.

The third Consideration arises from that he says, That the Original of the
Decree aforesaid remains in the Records of his Nuntio's Office; which manner
of speaking agrees not with our Customs; because the Nuntio has neither Court
nor Records in France, no more than the Ambassadors of other Princes, or than
the King's Ambassador has when he is at Rome.

In the last place he has added, That this Bull shall be sent to the Bishops
and Archbishops within his Nuntiature; as if the Office of Nuntio had any
certain and limited Territory. Now in as much as this manner of speaking is a
new and springing incroachment, we think there is reason to provide against it.

This Speech was followed by an Arrest comprised in the following words.

An Extract of the Registers of the Parliament of 15. May 1647.
THis day the Court having deliberated upon the Remonstrance and Arguments of
the King's Advocate General contained in the Registers of the tenth of this
Month concerning a certain Paper entitled, Decretum Sanctissimi D. N. D.
Innocentii X. divina providentia Papae adversus propositionem istam [Sanctus
Petrus and Sanctus Paulus sunt duo Ecclesiae Principes qui unum efficiunt] and
libros in quibus ista propositio asseritur and defenditur, printed at Paris by
Sebastian Cramoisy, the King's Printer in ordinary, this present year 1647. at
the end of which is the Copy of an Instrument made at Paris on the thirteenth
of March last, signed, Nicholaus Archiepiscopus Athenarum, whereby the said
Archbishop of Athens styles himself Apostolical Nuntio to the most Christian
King, and the whole Realm of France, and declares, that by special Mandate of
his Holiness given at Rome, he has caused to be printed the Copy of the said
Decree according to its Original kept in the archives of his Nuntiative to send
the same to all the Ordinaries within the said Nuntiative, and others to whom
it might appertain: which is an innovation and incroachment upon the authority
of the King; wherefore the aforesaid Decree made in the Roman Inquisition on the
25th. of January last, and other Bulls and Briefs having taken into
consideration, The said Court prohibits and forbids all Archbishops and
Bishops, their Vicars and Officials, Rectors and Deputies of Universities to
receive, publish, or put in execution the Decrees and other Acts of the
Congregation of the Inquisition of Rome, as also any other Bulls or Briefs
whatever, without the King's permission confirmed in this Court. Provided
nevertheless, that the supplying of Benefices and ordinary Dispatches
concerning the affairs of particular Persons, which, according to the orders of
this Realm and laws of State, are obtained in the Court of Rome, be not
included in the abovesaid Prohibition. Moreover, this Court has ordained, and
does ordain, That all the Copies of the said Decree of the Inquisition bearing
date on the 25th. of January last shall be seized on at the suit of the
Attorney General, and brought to the Bar of the said Court to be suppressed.
Also, it forbids all Persons to have, keep, or retain any Copy of the same
under the penalties provided by Law in such Case. And requires all Printers and
Stationers to keep and observe the Rules and Orders made about the matter of
Printing, under penalty of being fined at pleasure. Lastly, The Substitute or
Deputy of the said Attorney General is hereby required to be diligent in
causing this Arrest to be put into execution, and to certify the Court thereof
within a Month, to which end it shall by the care of the said Attorney General
be forthwith sent into all Bailywicks and Precincts throughout the Realm.

Given in Parliament, the 15th. of May, One thousand Six hundred Forty seven.
Signed, Du Tillet.

CHAP. II.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the first of March, 1647.
concerning a scandalus Libel against Petrus Aurelius.

AMongst the Libels published this year by the Jesuits or their Partisans,
there was one in Latin, entitled, The Divinity of Petrus Aurelius, or, His
principal Errors against Faith and Good Manners, a Libel full of abundance of
falsifications and calumnies, charging that famous Writer with errors directly
contrary to his sentiments, and fixing the name of Error upon Catholic Truths.
In the Assembly of the Faculty on March 1. M. Pereyret, according to
appointment formerly laid upon him to read the said Libel, and make his report
of the same that day, declared, that he had found that It contained a hundred
Propositions, most of which were drawn entire and word for word out of the
Works of Petrus Aurelius, and the rest made up of his words taken out of
several places, and so put together as to make perfect sense: that the Author
of the said Libel had to every one of those hundred Propositions added as many
Conclusions, by which he attributed sundry Errors to Petrus Aurelius. That
moreover it would be not only unprofitable but prejudicial to set upon the
examination of the said Libel, because it would cost the Faculty not only some
Months but even many years, multos annos, to discuss the sincerity of the
extracted Propositions, and the truth of the consequence drawn from them,
according to their accustomed diligence and fidelity, and to the rules of
Theology; Wherefore he concluded that he judged it suitable to the interest and
dignity of the Faculty to bury the whole Matter in silence, especially seeing
the Epistle prefixed to the Libel was already torn by the Hangman's hand, and
the Book condemned by a sentence of the Lieutenant Civil at the request of the
Agents of the Clergy. This subtilty M. Pereyret made use of to engage the
Faculty to abandon him who had so generally defended them. And for that men are
easily led to such course as exempts from trouble, this Motion met with no
opposition.

CHAP. III.
Of what passed in the Assemblies of the Faculty on the second of May, the
first of June, and the first of July, in the year 1648. upon occasion of a
Libel of F. Veron.

IN the year following (1648.) was published another Libel, entitled A Gag for
the Jansenists and Arnaudists, whereof F. Veron was the Author. It was sold by
all the News-Sellers of Paris in the end of Lent. It contained Maxims so
scandalous and prejudicial to the salvation and edification of Christians; it
was filled with so many injuries and calumnies, and was so apt to trouble the
public Tranquillity, that the Lieutenant Civil having taken notice of it,
thought himself obliged not to fail in the duty of his Office to cause it to be
suppressed. To which purpose he sent for the Syndic and Jurates of the
Booksellers, forbad them to sell it, and gave order that the said Prohibition
should be printed and fixed up in public places.

F. Veron was rather exasperated by this Prohibition, than convinced of the
mischief his Libel might do. He had published it at first without any License,
and therefore sought to get one; but not finding any at Paris, he procured one
from a Cordelier Doctor of Tours, and forged another of another Doctor a
Cordelier at Chartres; with which approbations he caused his Book to be
published and distributed again after Easter.

Amongst the Errors and Calumnies wherewith this Libel was filled, especially
against the ancient Fathers and Councils, in the sixth Page of the first
Impression he writes, That anciently many judged that it was not commanded by
Jesus Christ to make Confession even at the time of death, much less that there
was any Precept to do it before Communicating, even by such as had sinned
mortally; conceiving that Contrition alone was sufficient: And that there was
in those times no Precept to confess every year; but that it was so ordained
only by the Fourth Council of Lateran in the year 1215. And Page 7. That the
use and practice of the Sacrament of Penance, and Confession for Mortal Sins,
either before the Communion, or at the time of Death, appears very rarely in
Antiquity.

The new publication of the Libel, with the said approbations being likely to
propagate the seditious Maxims contained therein, and do wrong to the Faculty,
by reason of the approbations of those of their Body wherewith it was
authorized, M. Guillebert Doctor of Sorbonne made complaint in the Assembly of
the second of May following against the said Libel and the Doctors that
appeared Licencers of it.

As Soon as they who were in the Assembly heard M. Guillebert read one or two of
the Maxims of the Libel, they were so moved thereat, that they were ready to
nominate certain Persons to read it, and make report thereof, according to
Custom, in the Assembly following. But M. Cornet diverted them from so doing,
by desiring that before they debated upon this business, the Doctors who had
given the Licenses might be sent for to give account of what they had done.
Whereupon the Faculty demurred, and gave charge to F. Lavaux, who was then
Warden of the Cordeliers, to write to them to that purpose.

In the Assembly of June, F. Charruau appeared and justified his Approbation
with all imaginable boldness, proceeding from the assurance he had of a Party
in the Faculty sufficiently potent to protect and bring him off. He discoursed
with great vehemence against the Book Of Frequent Communion, and that of
Jansenius; so long as he pleased to speak, he was not interrupted by any one,
but heard peaceably. But when M. Guillebert offered to represent with singular
moderation and few words some of the principal Points, and most pernicious
Maxims he found in the said Libel, he was interrupted several times by diverse
Doctors, and particularly by M. Cornet who omitted nothing he could do to
disturb him every moment, to disorder the coherence of his Discourse, and to
keep him from being heard and understood. At last, the time of this Assembly
being elapsed, and having been spent in several altercations, which clearly
appear affected for that end, it broke up, after they had given charge to M.
Guillebert to make an Extract of the Propositions of the said Libel which he
should find most dangerous, and represent the same to the Faculty in the
Assembly following, which was to be on the first of July.

M. Guillebert performed his Charge, and on that day presented to the Faculty a
Paper, in which he had reduced what he found worthy of Censure in the said
Libel, to three principal Heads; The first of which contained what F. Veron had
there written to destroy Confession; The second what he had urged against
Penance; And the third what he maintained against the authority of Councils.
M. Cornet made himself likewise in this Assembly F. Veron's Protector, as he
had done in the former. He took upon him to justify F. Veron, in that he
opposed the Propositions of the Bishop of Ipre; which, he maintained, it would
also be necessary to examine, if this Libel were examined, (although that which
M. Guillebert reprehended therein, had no affinity with those Propositions.)
Which also he formally made a request for, for fear, if the Faculty should
examine and disallow the Libel alone, it might be a kind of Fore-judgement in
favor of those against whom it was written. Hereupon M. Pereyret failing not
to represent at large, as he had done in the foregoing year, the length of time
and greatness of pains it would be requisite to spend in that examination;
insomuch (said he) that to do it well, Jansenius, S. Augustine, and sundry other
Books must be read from one end to the other; and after ten years employed
therein, there will be no great Progress made: The Faculty concluded, that for
the interest of peace it was fit to forbear examining both F. Veron's Libel,
and the Propositions opposed.

I have lightly passed over this affair, omitting sundry very considerable
Circumstances, that I might not stay upon any thing but what makes to my
purpose: yet Two there are which I cannot pass in silence. One, that M. Cornet
drew up the said Conclusion on the first of July, 1648. as he liked himself;
and when it was read on the first of August following, M. Guillebert moved the
Assembly that the same might be corrected, as being neither true, nor
correspondent to what he had represented to the Faculty, touching the Libel.
Yet this was hindered by the artifices and slights of M. Cornet.

The other is a clause annexed to the said Conclusion, importing that if
notwithstanding the difficulties which rendered the examination so laborious at
that time, that it was not to be thought on, it should please God to inspire
any one to present to the Faculty any Propositions to be examined and decided
by them, it should be free for him to do so after two months. In which, besides
the manifest contradiction appearing in the thoughts of these people, who make
semblance of being lovers of the tranquillity of the Faculty, and nevertheless
are ready to disturb the same within two months; who at this present judge an
examination so difficult, which yet they are at the same instant disposed to
undertake two months after. It is visible that they had already in their
breasts a settled purpose of attempting the Five Propositions, the performance
of which they deferred till July, in the following year, only by reason of the
broils of Paris. For when the proposal thereof was made in Sorbonne, on that
day M. the Abbot de l' Isle, Marivault Doctor of Navarre, told one of his
friends from whom I learnt it, that M. the Bishop of Rhodez had told him before
the Kings departure from Paris, on the day of the Three Kings 1649. that the
said Propositions had been already shown him, to be censured on the first day
by the Faculty.

CHAP. IV.
Of sundry things which passed in several Assemblies of the Faculty, in the
same year 1648. touching the number of such of the Mendicant Orders as might be
admitted into Licenses and Assemblies.

IN the same Assembly of the second of May 1648. wherein complaint was made of
F. Veron's Libel, another seed of division brake forth, which was of much
longer continuance. Almost all the Religious Mendicants, Doctors of the
Faculty, were so linked to M. Cornet and Pereyret, that they had no other rule
of judgment in any matter under debate, but the opinion of the said two
Doctors, insomuch that their Suffrages were almost always conceived in these
terms, Sequor sententiam Domini Pereyret; Idem cum Domino Pereyret. In
acknowledgment of which good offices, and to multiply voices they were so well
assured of, these Doctors conspired with such other Secular Doctors as they
could draw to their party, to get received into Licenses, and advanced to the
degree of Doctor, as many Religious Mendicants as they could introduce, above
the number prescribed by the Statutes of the Faculty, and Arrests of
Parliament. In this Assembly, two Jacobins desired to be received as
Supernumeraries, besides three Cordeliers and another Jacobin who had been
already received as such. I signified to the Assembly, the Statute which
hindered us from doing them this favor, and declared that if they proceeded to
effect it, I would oppose it; nevertheless it was carried by the plurality of
voices. I opposed the Conclusion, and M. de Roux Doctor of the house and
society of Sorbonne, joined with me in the opposition.

We presented our Petition to the Parliament, and an Arrest passed thereupon,
whereby the parties that pretended to take benefit of the said Conclusion; were
summoned to the Court on the first day; and in the mean time prohibited to make
use of it.

This Arrest was signified to the Faculty on the third of June, and all the
Secular Doctors (excepting perhaps M. Cornet and his intimates) who had
consented to do that favor to the said Religious Mendicants, only out of
compliance, and had not been instructed in the matter, followed joyfully with
one voice the judgment of M. Messier; which was, That the Arrest was to be
obeyed, leaving the Religious to present themselves, if they thought good,
before the Kings Ministers, and represent to them their reasons if they had any.

The four Mendicant Orders interposed in behalf of their Batchelors, who were
concerned in the cause, which was pleaded on the eleventh of August. The said
Arrest was confirmed, and besides it was enacted, That without regard to our
Petition, but in justice, according to the Arguments of the Kings Attorney
General, the Arrests of the year 1626. (whereby, conformably to the Statutes
and other Arrests, the number of Mendicant Doctors that might be admitted into
our Assemblies, is restrained to two of each Order) should be read every year
on the first day of October in our Assembly, to the end the memory and
performance of the same may be perpetual, with injunction to the Dean and
Syndic to see to the observation of the same, as they would answer the contrary
at their peril.

The University having heard the report of this Process, and considered the
importance of it, concluded on June 13. to interpose therein, if need were; but
the Arrest passed without mention made of their interposing, or concerning
themselves in the cause.

This last Arrest of the eleventh of August, was signified and read in the
Assembly of the first of September. But it was so far from being executed by
the Religious Mendicants, that on the contrary, not only they, but also diverse
Secular Doctors, swayed by M. Cornet, became together opposers of its
execution. They were summoned to the Court upon this opposition, and September
3. appeared at the Palais with the said Mendicants, to the number of eighteen,
amongst whom were MM. Pereyret, Morel, le Moine, Amiot, Grandin, Bail, Denis,
Guyard, and others. The Mendicants were heard by their Speaker Friar Bernard
Guiart, a Jacobin, and the Secular Doctors by M. Pereyret. The Result of the
day was, that they should be heard more at large about their causes of
opposition, on the first day after the feast of Saint Martin, but in the mean
time the abovesaid Arrests should be observed.

Which yet they were not in the Assembly of the first of October, though the
said Result was declared there, and notwithstanding all the instances M. de
Roux and I could use to procure the execution of the same. On the contrary,
there arose new resistance on the part of the Mendicant Doctors, and those
Seculars who joined themselves in the cause with them. Of this, M. de Roux and
I having made new complaint to the Court of Parliament, another Arrest passed
on the 27. of October, by which it was again enacted, that the aforesaid
Arrests should be observed; that to that end MM. Viole and Broussel should with
one of the Substitutes of the Attorney General, repair to the Assembly of the
Faculty, which was to be held on the fourth of November following; and that
what should be done and ordained by the said Counselors, should be executed,
notwithstanding any oppositions or appeals whatsoever, but without prejudice to
the same.

On the fourth of November following the said MM. Broussel and Viole,
accompanied with M. Becheser, Dean of the Substitutes of the Attorney General,
and M. Boisleau, Clerk of the Court, and two Ushers, repaired accordingly to
our Assembly in the Sorbonne. There they caused all the Arrests I have spoken
of above, to be read by M. Boisleau, and afterward added sundry arguments and
injunctions to oblige the Mendicant Doctors to obey those Arrests, and M.
Cornet to procure the execution of the same, according to the duty of his
place. But neither the Mendicants nor Cornet yielded to any thing said to them,
or enjoined by Broussel and Viole; but on the contrary, they and some other
Secular Doctors made replies to them very little respectfull, which obliged
them, after signifying their displeasure therewith, to profess that they would
charge them with a verbal Process for it, and inform the Court of the
disobedience they found to their Arrests in this Assembly. Hereupon they arose,
and by name forbad M. Cornet to continue the Assembly after their departure,
judging the same unlawful, because there were in it more then two Mendicants
of each Order. However he did not forbear to continue it after they were
departed.

Diverse Doctors, to the number of above fifty, amongst whom were M. Messier,
Dean of the Faculty at present, M. de Heu Cure of S. Severine, M. de Mince, M.
Hennequin, M. the Cure of S. Roch, M. Duchesne of Sorbonne, M. Breda Cure of S.
Andrews, M. Dabes, M. Sachot, M. Renier, and several others, who were not
suspected of any adherence to the doctrine decry'd for new, to purge themselves
from the reproach they conceived the resistance offered to the Arrests of the
Court in the face of the Commissioners, sent by it to cause them to be
executed, deserved: after the Assembly declared, that they were so far from
bearing a part in such resistance, that on the contrary their will and
intention was to observe the said Arrests, and that they accounted it very
important for the glory of God, the honor of the Church, the preservation of
the authority of the Pope and other Ecclesiastical Prelates, the service of the
King and State of France, the peace and perfect liberty of the said Faculty, in
all its resolutions and conclusions concerning doctrine, as also for its policy
and discipline; that the abovementioned Arrests should be maintained, kept,
and executed inviolably, as the words of the Writing run, signed for that
purpose by them on 4. November 1648. and the days following.

The purpose of MM. Broussel and Viole was, to make report to the Court of all
that passed in the Assembly, before the first of December following, to the end
the Court might as they thought fit, take for whatever course they should find
necessary to be obeyed, and get their Arrests put in execution. But so great a
number of unusual and strange things passed in the Assembly, that M. Broussel,
who besides his slownesse and ordinary exactness, was encumbered with
multiplicity of other affairs, had not perfectly framed his Process verbal
before the end of November, and could not make report of it in the few days
which passed till the first of December, when the Parliament had assembled
again after the feast of Saint Martin.

Thus was the Report deferred till the month following. But in the mean time M.
Cornet made his, I mean, the conclusion or relation of what passed in our
Assembly of the fourth of November, which he drew up according to his own
pleasure, to cause it to be read according to custom in the Assembly of the
first of December, which was accordingly done; but it was so full of falsities
and calumnies, that M. de Mince complained of it, and desired a copy of it of
M. Bouvot, the Register of the Faculty, who delivered him one forthwith; and
that M. de Roux and I thought our selves bound to present a new Petition to the
Court, against the injurious words M. Cornet had put into his relation or
conclusion to our d^sadvantage, wherein we beseech the Court to ordain them to
be rased and expunged; that by doing this, the said conclusion would be
reformed and reduced to the terms of the Process verbal, drawn up by the said
MM. Broussel and Viole, referring our selves moreover to the Court for means
to hinder M. Cornet from using hereafter such like falsifications and
enterprises as we complain he had used since our first opposition of his
designs, to multiply more and more Religious Mendicants in our Faculty.

This request was suddenly followed by another, which M. de Roux and my self
found it requisite to present, against a Libel composed and dispersed by the
Mendicant Doctors, in which we complained were contained many things scandalous
and opprobrious, not only against our selves and the ancient Doctors who joined
with us in prosecuting the execution of the Arrests, against the Notaries that
made the Process verbal of what passed in the Assembly of the first of
September, and against the Usher of the Court, who made that of the first of
October, but also against the honor and respect due to the Court and its
Arrests.

But before the report of all these things could be made in the Court, that sad
Division happened which made a combustion in the whole Kingdom, and held Paris
besieged the three first months of the year 1649. for which cause a more calm
and favorable time was to be attended, to provide for the particular concerns
of the Faculty.

CHAP. V.
Of what passed heretofore in the year 1626. touching the number of those of
the said Orders admitted into the Facultie's Assemblies; and of M. Cornet 's
ancient conjunction with them and the Jesuits.

BEfore I proceed further in my designed relation, it will be worth considering
what was the principal ground upon which M. Cornet withstood all the said
Arrests, and all the arguments used by MM. Broussel and Viole, to move him to
see to the execution of them in the Assembly; for though it may seem a little
remote from my principal matter, yet it may be somewhat contributory to the
perfect elucidation thereof.

In the year 1626. appeared in France a Book printed at Rome, composed by a
Jesuit named Sanctarel; which Book was dispersed there, and is still, to this
day, with the permission and approbation of the Superiors. As Soon as it was
seen in France, and the sentiments of the said Author were found seditious and
contrary to the respect, obedience and subjection due to Kings, the Faculty
Assembled extraordinarily on 16. March 1626. and deputed MM. Rumet, Daultruy,
Dupuis and Chappellas to examine the said Book and make report thereof at the
ordinary Assembly of the first of April following.

On which day they reported that in the 30, and 31. Chapters they found these
Propositions, That the Pope may punish Kings and Princes with penalties
temporal, and dispense with the obedience which their Subjects owe unto them.
That this custom has always been in the Church, even for other causes than
heresy, as for faults committed by them, in case it were expedient, in case
Princes were negligent, in cases of their incapacity, and in case of
unusefulness of their Persons; with some other of the like strain to these; all
which were censured both by the Deputies and the other Doctors of the Faculty
assembled on the 1. of April, as containing a Doctrine false, erroneous,
contrary to the word of God, giving ground of hatred of the Papal dignity,
opening a way to Schism, derogating upon the Sovereign authority of Kings
dependant only from God, and apt to hinder the conversion of infidel and
heretical Princes, to disturb the public tranquillity, to avert Subjects from
the obedience and subjection due to their Princes, and excite Rebellions,
Seditions and Parricides.

This Censure was confirmed on the day of S. Ambrose, April 4. in an
extraordinary Assembly, and published forthwith, to the great satisfaction of
King Lewis the Just of glorious memory, and with the applause of all France.
But within a short time after, arose diverse Persons even of the body of the
Faculty, who endeavored to get the said Censure revoked or at least mitigated.
The solicitations and canvasings which agitated the Faculty upon that design,
and which at length proved ineffectual, continued almost a year. But that which
makes to my purpose, is, that there was no hopes of such revocation but by the
aid of the Mendicant Doctors which were caused to come for that end to Paris
from the most remote Provinces by commands sent to them from the places where
their Generals make their residence.

Hereupon thirty ancient Doctors of the Faculty, (amongst which was M.
Hardivillier, afterward Archbishop of Bourges, M. Hollandre Cure of S.
Savior, M. Faiet Cure of S. Paul, and M. Fonnellier Cure of S. Eustache last
deceased) seeing this extraordinary concourse of Mendicant Doctors, resolved,
consequently to a Conclusion of the Faculty on 15. June 1626. to have recourse
to the Court of Parliament for the execution of the 15. and 16. Articles of the
Statutes, to become formally Plaintiffs, and have a pleading in their own
names, if need were, to obtain the Court to cause its Arrest of the year 1552.
to be put in execution; which Arrest appoints the Religious Mendicant Doctors
to retire into the houses of their Order as soon as they had taken the Cap; and
to know of the said Court whether it did not intend that the said Monastic
Doctors sojourning at Paris in regard of any Offices they might have there in
their Covents, or because their Professions had been made there, or otherwise,
should be restrained to a certain number, as to two at most, to have a Vote in
Assemblies; and this to the end the Faculty might be at peace, and retain its
rights in all freedom for the accompleshment of the service of God, of the
King, and of all France. These ate the words of the Writing signed upon this
matter by those thirty ancient Doctors on the 16th. of July, 1626.

The arrest of the year 1552. which they mention, was issued upon occasion of a
Brief obtained by the Cordeliers of Pope Julius the 3d. for the adding of two
more to the number of Batchellors which might be admitted to Licenses, and upon
the Kings Letters Patents for the verification of the said Brief; Both which,
the Brief and Letters were entered into the Register, but with a charge that
(conformably to the Item jurabitis quod sine fraud aut dilatione vos
recipietis in Conventum in quo professionem fecistis.
Oath taken always and at this day by all the Mendicant Doctors so soon as
they have received the Cap, to retire into the Covents of their Profession
without fraud or delay) they should not fail to retire thither as soon as they
had commenced, and so be incapable of being present in the Assemblies of the
Faculty.

Consentaneously to the said Statute, to the custom observed in all times in
the Faculty since the admission of the Religious Mendicants thereto, to the
said Arrest of the year 1552. and to the purport of the abovementioned Writing
of the 6th. of July, an Arrest was issued by the Parliament on the 24th. of the
same Month, which was explained and confirmed by another of the first of August
following, by which the number of Religious Mendicants capable of entrance and
a deliberative voice in the Assemblies of the Faculty was restrained to two of
each Order at the most.

To the invalidating of those Arrests one was passed in the Council Nov. 2.
1626. whereby the cognizance of the matter was interdicted to the Parliament,
and it was ordained, That notwithstanding those Arrests of Parliament, all
Mendicant Doctors might be present at our Assemblies in what number they
pleased.

There is come to my hands the Copy of a Letter written by Fillessac Dean of
the Faculty to Cardinal Richlieu touching the said Order of the Council, which
may inform the Reader in what manner and by what instigations the same was
passed. I shall insert it entire here, to that purpose.

A Letter of M. Fillessac to Cardinal Richlieu.
My Lord,
It Is not only your Place of Superintendent of the Sorbonne, whereof I am the
least, but your natural Goodness, which every one acknowledges, and of which
all good Servants of the Kings and true Frenchmen are daily sensible of, that
gives me boldness to represent to you our just complaints and real apprehension
of the persecution intended against us. The Arrest of Council given in favor
of the Religious Mendicants some days since, wherewith all Paris rings,
furnishes us with most certain proof, and undoubted ground of belief of the
mischief which is projected against us. Your incomparable gentleness and
benignity will give me full liberty to represent to you freely and without
dissembling any thing, that which most of all grieves us. Inimici nostri sunt
Judices; M. the Keeper of the Seals is our Judge and Adversary too. This is
verified by sundry reasons. First, it is known how that above twenty years ago
he contracted a strict amity and familiarity with Doctor du Val. The same has
been cemented and diligently continued by the common administration wherewith
they are entrusted by the Carmelites; the one for temporal, the other for
spiritual concernments. I omit what other correspondences they have usually
together; every one knows that the said Doctor du Val is our principal
Adversary, and has raised all his tempests in favor of the Religious for the
accomplishment of his designs. The first President has informed some of our
Doctors that the said M. du Val came to him to recommend the Religious
Mendicants. On the other side, every one knows that Cardinal Spada persues this
affair with all eagerness, and has so perfect a correspondence with the Keeper
of the Seals, that when his Majesty placed him in that Office, the Cardinal
being informed thereof, said in the presence of some Bishops, Io non temo piu,
perch Marillaco a i Sigilli Reali, I am out of fear now since Marillac has
the Royal Seals. Moreover we see in the Sorbonne the daily commerce of the said
du Val with the said Cardinal, who according to the instruction he received at
his coming into France could not do otherwise. For, as I understand by Letters
from Rome, one of the Nuntio's Instructions was, that he should lodge as near
as might be to the Sorbonne, and have perpetual correspondence with Doctor du
Val whom he might make use of as a Spy upon the Sorbonne. Lastly it has
constantly been observed that the Keeper of the Seals is one of the most
resolute Defenders and Protectors of the Jesuits: and that, whenever the said
Fathers have had need of his assistance. Now that these Fathers are not
professed Adversaries of the Sorbonne, no Person can deny; all Paris having
seen the experience thereof in their Sermons, Pasquils and defaming Libels, I
shall add that they have Doctor du Val amongst us who served them as a
powerful instrument in our Assemblies when the question has been about
securing us amongst them; and he being admonished that he acted against his
Oath and against his Mother the Faculty, answered that he could not act against
the said Fathers, quia, said he, commiserunt mihi secretum suum. Furthermore,
we are not ignorant how the Keeper of the Seals is extremely confirmed in his
aversion toward us by Father B. who has great influence over him, either by
occasion of the common employment they have had from the Carmelites, or for
other reasons. Now this Father cannot patiently bear the particular Decree made
in the College of Sorbonne for execlusion of such Doctors from the said
College as have entered or shall hereafter enter into the Congregation of the
said Father; which is also the grievance of the said Doctor du Val, who, as
intimate Friend of the aforesaid Father B. has perverted and solicited seven
Doctors of the College of Sorbonne; to found and establish the said
Congregation by becoming the first associates of the same, to the great scandal
of the College. You see, my Lord, our just fear of ruin, which is pursued by
our enemies with so great violence and eagerness. You see our adversaries
openly professed, without comprehending those who out of interest dare not
declare themselves; in the number of which I shall reckon a Cardinal, who
speaking of your most generous design for the building of your Sorbonne, said,
he esteemed it highly for it self, but was sorry it should be intended for
Schismatics. However, my Lord, if that pretended Arrest must be signified to
us, We most humbly beseech you, that it be not done publicly in our Assembly
on the next day after the Holy Days, which will be Wednesday. To conclude,
what ever victory our Adversaries may gain over us, this glory will remain ours
to posterity, that we thirty who were depressed for being faithful to our
King, and true Frenchmen, signed this common cause in behalf of the King and
France.

This Remonstrance of M. Fillessac to Cardinal Richelieu did not hinder the
Arrest from having its course; after which, the solicitations and canvasings
to get the abovementioned Censure revoked, were renewed more then ever. But the
Parliament checked the torrent of those canvasings and solicitations, by
several Arrests issued forth to maintain it, and by an order given to the
President le Jay, and four Counselors of this Grand Chamber to repair to the
Sorbonne (as accordingly they did) to hinder all innovation touching this
affair in the Assembly of the month of February 1627. in which it was to be
feared one might happen, unless the Parliament interposed its authority to
prevent it.

Matters stood in this posture till the year 1631, when the University of Paris
having maturely weighed the prejudice it received as well from the said Arrest
of the Council of 2 November. 1626, as from another of the same Council of 18
July preceding, concerning the same matter; and having gravely considered what
necessity there was both for its own interest and that of the King and State to
provide against the said Arrests, they repaired to the late King at St.
German's to present to him a Petition, in which they complained of those two
Arrests, as having been passed by surprise, contrary to all right, and upon
false suppositions; for which reasons they beseech'd his Majesty the same might
be vacated. M. the Rector went to wait upon the King with this Petition, and
spoke to his Majesty concerning the importance of this affair three quarters of
an hour. The King heard him with attention and pleasure. He received himself
the Petition which the Rector held in his hand, and caused it to be reported in
his Council in his own presence; Whereupon on 8 July 1631, an Arrest was
passed, whereby the aforesaid two of 18 July and 2 Nov. 1626, and all others
prejudicial to the Statutes and Privileges of the University were annulled; and
hereof Letters Patents were expedited for the University.

M. Cornet could not be ignorant of all this; for I revived the memory thereof
to all the world in the Assembly of 1 October. 1648. when it was needful to
mention the same in answer to those two Arrests of the Council of 8 July, and 2
Nov. 1626. which had been signified to me anew that day by the Order and at the
desire of the Mendicant Doctors. Nevertheless he forbore not in the Assembly
of 4 Nov. to oppose those very two Arrests to the injunctions which M. Broussel
and Viole used to him to see to the execution of those of the Parliament,
according to the duty of his place.

But it seems there is no great reason to wonder that M. Cornet so little
valued those Letters Patents of 8 July 1631. sixteen years after they had been
granted to the University; seeing that so soon as they were granted he set
himself with all his might to hinder the effect they might have, causing
himself by a party wholly of Mendicant Doctors to be installed before the end
of three Months in the Office of Syndic; in which he would not want means to
requite the good turns which he should receive from them, and to continue the
fidelity and correspondence he had sworn with them. I shall mention nothing
that passed in that election besides what I have learned from another Letter of
M. Fillessac to Cardinal Richelieu dated Nov. 5. 1631. the Copy of which is
come to my hands, together with the Cardinal's answer. And here they follow.

Another Letter of M. Fillessac, Dean of the Faculty, to Cardinal Richelieu.
My Lord,
ACcording to the command you were pleased to lay upon me, to give you an
account of the election of our Syndic, I shall tell you in the first place,
that God having visited me with his merciful justice by afflicting One of his
Domestics had the Pestilence.
one of my Domestics, I was constrained to leave Paris; and in my absence on
the first of October, according to our Statute, the election of a Syndic was
taken into consideration, the term of the former being expired. In this
Assembly fifty Doctors were present. But when I returned to Paris, I was
desirous to know how the business passed. Diverse Doctors of our Fraternity
coming to see me, represented to me two considerable defects; one, in the
person; the other, in the form of the election.

As to the first, they represented him to me as a young Doctor of about five
years standing, unacquainted with our Statutes, Customs and Forms; besides
which, he has always been trained up and instructed by the Jesuits, having
once purposed to enter into that Society, and to that end put himself into
their Novitiate, where he was indoctrinated for some time; and had it not been
for a sickness that befell him, he would perhaps be now of their Society, to
which nevertheless he remains allied by affection. And every one knows how
little reason we have to be well pleased with Them, considering the scandalous
Libels they have written against us heretofore, and those they published lately
against our Censure pronounced against two Books composed by two English
Jesuits; Now it may here be presumed, that when ever there comes forth such
like Papers from the said Society, this new Syndic will not fail to cross the
business, and generally all others relating to that Society, (as it has
happened too often) which will be a perpetual cause of trouble and division
amongst us. Our said Confreres make it appear, that the Syndic of our Faculty
is nothing else but a Censor; and what Censure can he pass being ignorant of
our Laws and Customs? And besides, how will one more ancient then himself take
in good part any reproof or check from him, who has no credit and authority,
being a young Doctor. -- As for the second defect; of the fifty Doctors present
at the election the first of October, four and twenty voted it fit to stay till
the return of the Dean, the other twenty six chose this new Syndic; and in this
number there were eighteen Religious Mendicants suborned by the Nuntio, and of
them two were interdicted by the Faculty. You may consider, my Lord, if you
please, that it was never known that his Holiness's Nuntio had any thing to do
with our affairs, or to attempt to give us Syndics, to the prejudice of the
Rights of the King, the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, and the Maxims of
France. Now if this proceeding be allowed, and this power of the Nuntio
confirmed, I think in conscience I ought to discharge my self of the Deanship,
before I see with my eyes the evident ruin of our Faculty by the loss of its
liberty. It had been better to have retained the former Syndic, an ancient
Doctor, very well versed in our affairs, and who knew how to maintain our
discipline. These things I have remonstrated to the Nuntio, who is obstinate
for retaining the new Syndic. I conceive it to as little purpose to send M. de
Nantes, seeing the Abbot of St. Mark your Almoner having come to our Assembly
has declared it your intention that the said Syndic be retained in his office,
and perform the duties thereof; which nevertheless seems not to agree with the
words of your Letter, which speak only of Superseding the business, till you
be more punctually informed of the state of it. Giving power to the Syndic to
execute the place, is a confirming of him, and thwarting the tenor of the
Letter. Wherefore it should seem there is no more room left for Remonstrances,
but much for complaints, which I shall continue in my retirement, where I shall
not cease to the last breath of my life to pray God for your prosperity and
health, as being

Your most humble and obedient Servant, J. FILLESSAC.
Paris 5 Nov. 1631.
The answer of Cardinal Richelieu to the foregoing Letter.
SIR,
I Have seen the Letter you writ to me, in which there are very considerable
reasons. When we come to Paris, I shall be glad that you take the pains to see
me, that I may advise with you about what will be necessary to be done in this
matter. In the mean time, I can assure you, there is no person that desires
more to maintain your College in its liberty, and procure its advantage upon
all occasions then my self, who am in particular, Sir,

Your most affectionate to serve you, The Cardinal de Richelieu.
Chasteau-Thierry, 15 Nov. 1631.
And is it to be wondered, after this Letter written with so great resentment
by so eminent a Dean of the Faculty, whose remonstrances were received and
esteemed by the prime Minister of State, whose worth was so highly acknowledged
by the Commissioners of Parliament when they came into Sorbonne, Feb. 2. 1627.
that in the draught of their Process verbal they profess to be sorry in behalf
of the interest of France that his years were so far advanced; Is it to be
wondered, I say, since this Letter and Remonstrances became ineffectual, that
M. Cornet has always had so great an adherence both with the Jesuits and
Mendicant Doctors, who raised and maintained him in the office of Syndic; and
that he has so successfully labored the ruin of the Faculties liberty in
doctrine and discipline, notwithstanding any obstacles the most sagacious and
faithful Doctors have endeavored to oppose to his dangerous practices. But
when it pleases God, for the executing of his secret judgments, (many times
inscrutable, but always just) to humble the most great and illustrious
Societies; he knows how to ^ave them under the administration of such as are
capable to destroy them; nor is it in the power of any mortal to hinder the
revolution and downfall thereof.

CHAP. VI.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the 1 of July 1649. in which
M. Cornet propounded the Five Propositions, to get the same censured.

WHen Public tranquillity was restored to the Kingdom, by the Peace concluded
at Ruel, in the beginning of April 1649. we desired nothing so much, as to see
this Blessing accompanied with the particular benefit of establishment of good
order in our Faculty, by the execution of its Statutes, and of the A^rests of
Parliament, which I have spoken of. For which end it was requisite for a survey
to be made of all that had passed in our Assemblies, to the infringement
thereof, and of the Petitions which M. de Roux and I had presented, for
obtaining reparation of injuries, done us by M. Cornet in the Conclusions of
the Faculty, which he penned and drew up according to his own pleasure. But the
remembrance of the particular divisions and animosities which had been raised
amongst the Doctors, by occasion of the prosecution used by us for the
execution of the said Arrests, and establishment of our Statutes and
discipline, causing us to fear if we began the same prosecutions again, they
would awaken our division, and raise a new combustion, (wherewith we were
threatened by the Mendicant Doctors, who dared to tell M. Brousel and M. Talon
Advocate general to their faces, that they would dye martyrs rather then
consent to withdraw from our Assemblies, and that ere they would be brought to
it, there should be made new barricadoes, which perhaps would prove more
dangerous then those made the foregoing year) we thought our selves obliged to
defer our prosecutions, till we saw the minds of men more calmed from the storm
which was but begun to cease.

We continued living with this restraint and circumspection, and preferred the
sweetness of the tranquillity in which the faculty seemed to breath, before its
greatest interests and our own; when M. Cornet wholly disturbed this peace by
the Propositions, which he produced in the Assembly of 1 July 1649. and
required the Faculty to debate upon.

Though this design had been framed above a year before, as I observed by the
Clause put at the end of the Conclusion, made the same day of the foregoing
year, concerning the affair of F. Veron; yet it was not taken notice of till
this day, when the concourse of Doctors both regular and secular, whom M.
Cornet had drawn from all parts (themselves not knowing for what cause) began
to cause suspicion that they were not thus resorted in so great a number, but
for some considerable matter to be done. M. Cornet himself seemed more musing
and pensive then ordinary; and although he had as much leisure as needed to
make that extraordinary resolution familiar to himself, yet he hesitated and
seemed at a loss when he was upon the point of putting it in execution; as if
God thereby gave him some presage of the dreadful mischief he was about to
cause to the Church by the said proposal. When he was beginning to break the
matter as soon as the usual supplicates and relations were finished, after he
had half opened his mouth twice or thrice, he stopped and cast his eyes upon the
ground, then lifting them up again, he turned toward the door of the Assembly
from which he was very distant (for this Assembly was held in the great Hall of
the Sorbonne) and seeing the door a very little open, he commanded him that kept
it to shut it close.

At length, after he had remained a good while in suspense, and held the
Assembly a sufficiently long time in expectation of what he had to propound, he
began and said, That he had for the time past used his utmost endeavor to
maintain quiet and unity in the Faculty, and that his affection to preserve the
same perpetually, had made him condescend to sign several Theses, in which it
was well known some went about to introduce new opinions; but he had connived
thereat, and complied as much as he could, in hope to remedy the same by
gentleness; having, to a void dissatisfyng any, contented himself only with
adding to such Theses what he judged necessary to keep the truth from being
injured, and the decrees of the Faculty from being violated. That at present he
saw all his fair carriage and patience were unprofitable; that the same were
abused against his intention; that his own silence, and that also of the
Faculty, was taken for a tacit approbation of the said opinions. Wherefore he
conceived he could not in conscience connive longer at such disorders without
advertising the Faculty thereof, and beseeching them to apply thereto such
remedies as were necessary: That the mischief was proceeded so far, that in
June last, after he had corrected a Thesis of a Bachelor, the said Bachelor did
not, in his Act, defend it as it was corrected and printed, but as himseif had
framed it at first; and that the President of the Act did not dispute against
him upon the said Thesis as it was corrected and printed, but according to the
declaration made viva voce by the Bachelor of his sense in maintaining the
same. That there happened in the same Act, a thing not wont to be done in the
Faculty, namely, for a Doctor to speak from the Hearers seats when there is a
President of the Act, and that M. de Saint Beuve had not forborne to do it in
this. That the liberty taken by the Bachelor had gone yet further, in as much
as the said Bachelor had caused a Thesis to be printed otherwise then it had
been corrected for him. That unless the Faculty remedied this unheard of
boldness, neither order nor submission was longer to be hoped for among the
Bachelors. That he hoped they might be all reduced to the terms of their duty,
if the Faculty would please to declare their judgment concerning some
Propositions which occasioned all the disorders, and excited all those heats
and contentions. That the propositions of that kind were few, and he conceived
might all be reduced to six or seven principal ones; which he also rehearsed.
The five, which have since made so great a noise, were the first. There was
also this, Omnia Infidelium opera sunt peccata; and another touching
Repentance. At the end of his discourse, he required the Faculty to deliberate
upon what he had propounded, and entreated that for Commissioners to be
nominated they would principally choose the Professors.

M. de Saint Beuve being present at this Assembly, and finding himself accused
by M. Cornet of having spoken from the Hearers seats in the said Act, thought
himself obliged to inform the Faculty in what manner he had done so.

M. Mulot presided as Dean at that time, and as soon as M. de Saint Beuve made
show of going to speak, he interrupted him in anger, and told him he should do
better to teach (as he ought) the received Doctrines, then to give scandal to
the world by his writing and make a combustion, as he did.

When M. Mulot had ended, M. de Saint Beuve resumed his speech, and said, that
it happening in that Act that a Bachelor disputing (who is since known to have
been set on purposely to raise that quarrel) had diverse times called the
Respondent Perfidious and Perjured, because as said the Disputant, the
Respondent's Thesis was full of doctrines condemned by the Faculty; he thought
himself obliged (being the most ancient Doctor present in the Auditory, and the
others entreating him) to tell the Disputant, that the Faculty took it ill that
he gave the Respondent ill language, and condemned Propositions contained in a
Thesis signed by the Syndic and the President of the Act. That which M. de
Saint Beuve did, happens not every day, but has been often practiced, when
occasions made it necessary and convenient; as when silence was sundry times
imposed by the Auditory to F. Arnould the King's Confessor, whom the deceased
Prince of Conde would cause to dispute in a Tentative Question.

M. de Saint Beuve having thus justified what he had done, M. Mulot replied
some choleric words against him, and then betook himself to put M. Cornet's
proposals under deliberation.

M. Messier advised that the Propositions mentioned by M. Cornet should be
examined, and to that end nominated for Deputies or Commissioners out of the
College of Sorbon, M. Hennequin, M. Morel, and M. Grandin; out of that of
Navarre, M. Pereyret, and M. Capellas, and moreover M. Bail, M. Pignay, and F.
Nicholai a Jacobine. M. Messier in nominating these Deputies, hesitated like a
man that sought them in his memory, and to whom they had been suggested before,
and indeed he forgot one of them. M. Henriot who spoke second, redressed the
inconvenience; for having been desired at his going out of the Chapel, to go
up to M. Mulot's Chamber, and there told that it was material, in relation to
an affair which M. Cornet had to propound, to nominate such and such Deputies;
for fear lest his memory should fail him, he desired their names in writing,
which were given him in a Note written by M. le Moine's hand, as the Doctors
behind him perceived, (and amongst others M. Hodencq) in which Note (which he
drew out of his pocket when he was to speak) besides those named by M. Messier,
was also written the name of M. Gauquelin of Navarre, whom M. Messier had
forgotten. Him M. Henriot named with the other, and upon this sole nomination,
he was, by the Conclusion, taken into the number of Deputies, though he was at
that time in the Country, and almost all the other Doctors that nominated
Deputies for this business, not observing the difference between the votes of
M. Messier and M. Henriot, had in theirs barely followed M. Messier. M.
Pereyret who voted the third, took better notice of the difference; for in his
vote he named those that were named both by M. Messier, and by M. Henriot; but
so it was, that the Doctors his adherents did not observe it. For had they
marked it, they would not have failed to have said the same. M. Pereyret added
besides, that he doubted not but amongst the Propositions mentioned by the
Syndic, there were some manifestly Heretical, and which needed no examination
in order to their being condemned.

M. Coppin said, that if these matters were to be examined, it behooved that it
should be by all the Doctors in general; that it was not an affair for
Deputies; that it was fit every particular Doctor should have a copy of the
Propositions given him, to examine the same at leisure, and come prepared to
deliver their Judgments thereof.

Some there were so zealous in seconding M. Cornet, that they gave advice for
an extraordinary Assembly on the 15. day of the month, wherein to receive the
report concerning the Propositions, and determine the whole controversy. On
the other side, M. Chappellas and F. Nicholai seemed very reserved, and said,
Nothing was to be done with precipitancy. M. Bourgeois said, he conceived that
the affair whereof the Syndic made proposal, was perhaps the greatest and most
important the Faculty ever had; that M. Cornet had set afoot Propositions upon
which General Councils and the Holy See had abstained from pronouncing a
definitive judgment, though the same matters had been ventilated before them;
that there needed very much study, reading, meditation, leisure, and prayers to
understand the same perfectly, and far more to pass any judgment upon them;
that therefore his advice was, that every one would employ himself seriously in
studying them, before they spoke of making any determination upon them, or of
nominating Deputies to make report thereof to the Faculty.

M. de Hodencq testified some indignation at the precipitancy and partiality
with which they went about to handle this affair; and because he saw a design
in the choice, which was made of persons all addicted to one side, he aimed to
make them sensible of the injustice by a quite contrary nomination; and
therefore said, that if the Propositions must be examined, he should depute to
that employment M. Chastellain, M. Coppin, M. Bachelier, M. Bourgeois, and M.
Retart.

M. de Launoy also nominated Deputies wholly different from both sides; he
chose persons whose names I will not relate, because they were all so little
capable of such matters, that one of them, otherwise a very honest and
intelligent man, hearing himself named for this business, became offended at
it, and prayed M. de Launoy not to mock him.

M. de Saint Beuve said, the motion of M. Cornet to bring the Propositions he
spoke of under examination, was made without any necessity; since, having no
other foundation but the carriage of the Batchelors he complained of, it was
certain that if at any time they put any thing ill into their Thesis, the
Syndic had full power to expunge it before they caused the same to be printed;
and if afterward they let any thing fall in their Disputations contrary to the
correction of their Thesis, it was the duty of the Syndic to complain thereof,
and of the Faculty to punish them; That as for the matter of the Propositions
produced by M. Cornet, it was not lawful for us to pronounce judgment
thereof, but that we ought to leave liberty to Divines, according to the
determination of Paul V. consequently to the Congregation de auxiliis, this
very matter being then under consideration, though it was endeavored to be
disguised. Nevertheless if the resolution of the Facul^y tended to take them
in hand, he desired that some Propositions which himself should propound,
should likewise be examined; and accordingly he forthwith mentioned diverse. M.
Cornet instantly accepted the offer, and sundry others by his example signified
their assent thereunto. After which M. de Saint Beuve spoke against the
artifice wherewith M. Cornet had made his motion, and said, that it was not
necessary to pronounce concerning the possibility of keeping Gods Commandments
by the righteous, it being concluded de fide by the Council of Trent, that they
are possible; that all Catholics were agreed herein, because, Possibile est
quod per gratiam possibile est. Now, said he, none but a Heretic denies that
by grace they are possible. That the Question was, Whether all the righteous
have always all grace necessary to keep them, and without the which it cannot
be done. That in this point the School was divided, Molina holding the
Affirmative, and the Disciples of S. Augustine and S. Thomas (who acknowledge
grace effectual by it self, necessary to every action) holding the Negative.
That the case was the same concerning that other Proposition, about resisting
Internal Grace. In respect of Infidels, he said it was de fide, that Infidels
can dispose themselves for the Grace of Baptism; but that the Question was,
Whether without grace they can do any thing morally good, or any virtuous
action; non solum quantum ad officium, sed etiam quantum ad rectum finem. As
for the point, Of Satisfaction, that there was no Divine but acknowledged it an
error to say it ought of necessity to precede Absolution; that Sextus IV. had
condemned it; but that the Question was, Whether it be not convenient in many
cases not to give Absolution immediately after Confession. To conclude, M. de
Saint Beuve so clearly and in so Orthodox a sense explained the Propositions,
that the Dominicans, who spoke after him, especially F. Bernard Guyart, being
convinced that he had reduced them all to the Capital point of Grace effectual
by it self, necessary by it self to every pious action, and consequently that
it was that Grace which was struck at, named him to be one of the Deputies.

M. Retart in his advice, recalled the memory of F. Veron's affair, spoken of
above: He said, that when the several maxims and scandalous injuries vented by
that Father in his Libel, were questioned, M. Pereyret and most of those in
this Assembly that named Deputies for the examination of M. Cornet's
Propositions, were of opinion that the said Book could not be meddled with,
because the censure of it could not be made without holding the Faculty
employed above ten years, by reason of the connection of F. Veron's Propositions
with the matters of Grace and Repentance, upon which nothing could be
pronounced without first examining S. Augustine, Jansenius, Petrus Aurelius, M.
Arnauld, the Gospel; and that he wondered how this was become in a years time
so easy to decide. This argument very much pressed M. Pereyret and the rest of
his party. M. Pereyret went to wave it off, by interrupting M. Retart about the
word Gospel, denying that he comprised it amongst the things he then said were
requisite to be examined. M. Retart on the contrary maintained that he did
comprise it; whereupon M. Pereyret held his peace, and M. Retart concluded that
the same reasons which at that time induced the Faculty to lay aside the
examination of F. Veron's Libel, still holding and being much more valid and
evident in the case of the Propositions produced by M. Cornet, in which S.
Augustine's doctrine is concerned, it was his advice that the examination
thereof be deferred.

M. Guillebert said, that to perform the examination aright, required a man of
great leisure, great labor, and great reading; that M. Coqueret, who
complained that M. Launoy named him for the employment, and so excused himself
from it, had acted with very great prudence, in regard of his great businesses;
and that his modesty deserved to be commended, and to serve for an example to
others.

M. Marcan pressed again very vigorously the argument from the Conclusion made
the foregoing year, upon F. Veron's Libel, which M. Retart had used against M.
Pereyret. He represented, as also diverse others had done, the importance this
affair was of, it concerning the doctrine of S. Augustine, so often authorized
by Popes and Councils, and so generally followed in all ages by all Catholic
Divines, which it was just before all things to put out of danger of all
impeachment. He said, (as also some Doctors had done before him) that it was
not the custom of the Faculty to examine Propositions without noting the
places from whence they were taken, and mentioning the Authors which delivered
them, to the end every one might understand in the places themselves the
meaning of the Authors. That M. Cornet did not declare whence he took those he
produced, which he desired him to declare; and that till he had done so, he
could neither consent to their examination, nor take any more express
resolution upon his motion. He added, That it was nevertheless well enough
discerned, that under pretext of those Propositions Jansenius was aimed at, and
that the design was to cause the censure to fall one day upon that Author. But
M. Cornet (who desired to divert and stiflle this thought in the Faculty as
much as he could) being surprised to hear M. Marcan speak in that manner, and
making use of some sway of authority which he had formerly had, and thought he
had still over him, conceived he might hinder him from speaking further of it,
by intimating to him in one word, that he was not pleased therewith. Wherefore
as soon as M. Marcan had named Jansenius, M. Cornet was moved to tell him
hastily, though civilly too, That the Question was not about him, and
consequently that he ought not to speak of him; Non agitur, (said he to him) de
Jansenio, Domine mi. But M. Marcan notwithstanding his very modest and
respectfull temper, had no regard to what M. Cornet said to him; he did
violence to himself by proceeding, in behalf of the truth which he knew, beyond
the respects which engaged and subjected him to M. Cornet, and continued firm
in his opinion, which he reiterated in answering to what M. Cornet said to him,
which thing as much astonished M. Cornet, as any other that passed in this
Assembly.

To what was spoken by all the rest he held his peace: They might represent
what they would, he continued silent, letting the Suffrages pass along; and
being well assured that such as were come to this Assembly to promote his
design, considered not what others might say, but only what themselves came to
do, and what the intentions were of those that sent them.

When I delivered my sentence, I said that M. Cornet's care would have been
much better employed in seeing to the publication of the censure of Father
Bauny's Book, (which was passed so long ago, as was so necessary in this age
to stop the enormity of Usuries which that Author teaches so confidently) then
to require a new one upon the matters he proposed. But if it were necessary to
make any examination hereof, I should not gainsay it, provided all things were
done according to our Statutes, Customs, and the Arrests of Parliament;
because should those be violated in any thing (I used that passage, Nisi omnia
fiant in pondere, numero and mensura, which I repeat here, because M. Cornet
who cited it in the Conclusion he drew up, left out the word numero; which
related to the excessive number of Religious Mendicants that were there) I
should think my self bound to make opposition thereunto upon every occasion;
and that I saw at that present sundry things that gave me cause to do so; I
accordingly opposed the same as far as was needful.

M. Mulot the Dean, however, concluded, according to the plurality of
Suffrages, that the Propositions should be examined, and that the persons
nominated by M. Messier and M. Henriot were deputed to that purpose. It was
further added, that a copy of them should be given to every Doctor to debate
thereupon at the next Assembly of the first of August; that in the mean time
the Deputies should confer together about them, and should summon before them
the Bachelor of whom the Syndic complained for having printed in his Thesis the
Propositions which he had corrected for him.

CHAP. VII.
Of what passed during the rest of the month of July, consequently to the
deputation of the Doctors nominated by the Faculty for examining the
Propositions.

I Have not hitherto set down the six or seven Propositions, to which M. Cornet
said all the controversies might be reduced, because I judged it better to
reserve them for this place, and represent them as they were printed in the
Chartels distributed to the Doctors five or six days after at a Doctor's Act,
which occasion was made use for the more commodious distribution. But I took
notice of that concerning the works of Unbelievers, which he mentioned and
required the examination of, Omnia infidelium opera sunt peccata; because its
not being found in these distributed Chartels, is a certain evidence of the
liberty M. Cornet took to add or diminish in the Faculties Conclusions. The
like dealing he used in reference to the Propositions which M. de Saint Beuve
demanded to be examined also, in case the Faculty would examine the former; for
he put but one of them into the Ticket, which is the last, and concerns
Attrition; but M. de Saint Beuve was so far from restraining himself to that
alone, that on the contraty, he proposed sundry more upon the place; and yet
all were but a sample, and as it were a spark of such as he thought more
necessary to be examined, then those of M. Cornet. Wherefore after M. Cornet
himself, and almost the whole Faculty with him, had consented to the
examination of M. de Saint Beuve's Propositions, it behooved according to order
and justice, to have desired a copy of them from him, and added the same to
that of M. Cornet.

However see here the form in which they were all printed and distributed in
the Tickets I spoke of, there being no intimation of a pretense that they were
taught and delivered by any Author, M. Cornet not only not naming any in the
Assembly, but also declaring that he did not meddle with Jansenius.

1. Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis Gratia, qua
possibilia fiant. 2. Interiori Gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam
resistitur. 3. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non
requiritur in homine libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
4. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant Haeretici, quod
vellent eam Gratiam talem esse cui posset humand voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare. 5. Semipelagianorum error est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino
hominibus mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse. 6. Sensit olim Ecclesia privatam
Sacramentalem poenitentiam pro occultis peccatis non sufficere. 7. Naturalis
Attritio sufficit ad Sacramentum poenitentiae.
The accusations made by M. Cornet against the Bachelors he spoke of, were
nothing but vain pretexts, upon which he endeavored to ground his design of
getting these Propositions condemned, which he sought to color by some seeming
occasion. For indeed the Bachelor he complained of, had maintained nothing at
all in his answers but what M. Cornet had approved in express terms by his
signature or subscription; and so far was it from being true, that he had
caused any other thing to be printed in his Thesis but what M. Cornet had
signed for him, that on the contrary M. Cornet having, long after he had signed
for him a Proposition of very great importance, bethought himself to bid him
expunge it; the said Bachelor obeyed him without any repugnance, though a great
part of his Thesis were already printed. Whence the said Deputies, though so
chosen as I have declared, and sifting very narrowly in their private
Assemblies the business about the Bachelors, found nothing reflecting upon
them to make report of to the Faculty.

They were less favorable to the Propositions. For in some private meetings
which they had during the said month to advise amongst themselves about them,
almost all concluded upon their condemnation. But it is material to consider,
in what manner they proceeded to their examination. My knowledge of which I
gathered partly out of two Letters still in my hands, partly out of an Article
touching the Abusive Courses joined to a Petition mentioned hereafter, which we
presented against the said Deputation; and partly out of what M. Hennequin, the
Dean, spoke about that subject upon a remarkable occasion in the face of the
Parliament, as I shall report in due place.

The first of those Letters was written by a Doctor who was in a Coach with M.
Chappellas one day as they returned from S. Denis, where they had been present
at a Service which the Masters and Boursers of the College of Navarre are
accustomed to celebrate every year in that Church for the repose of the souls
of the King and Queen who founded their College. M. Brousse, M. Taignier, and
M. Tallendier were there, and it is one of these three that writ it. See what it
says. -- It was signified of M. Chappellas, of what consequence the Judgment
was, which all the Deputies named with him for examining the Propositions, were
about to make. It was told him, that it was a shameful thing to go about
determining an affair of that consequence in so little space, and exposing S.
Augustine to the Censure at a time when Heretics would not fail to heighten all
faults committed by Catholic Doctors. Hereunto M. Chappellas answered, That he
very well understood the consequence of such a Judgment; that himself had made
a display thereof to all the Examiners in an Assembly held at M. Bouvot's
house, in declaring to them, that the Propositions not being taken out of any
Book that appeared, and having much affinity with opinions not condemned but
still received in the Church, it would be very difficult to pass any judgment
upon them, unless they were compared with those opinions, and the books
explicating the said opinions were examined; that for his part, he conceived it
necessary for this reason that the examination of the Propositions should
proceed in that manner. He answered further, that he very well understood the
connection of these Propositions with the doctrine of S. Augustine, and of the
first amongst the rest (it being that, whereof they had already debated) that
he had represented the same to the Examiners, and shown, that in the doctrine
of the said Saint it behooved to acknowledge a Differencing Grace which comes
from God, and consentaneous to the truth of that sacred Oracle, Quis te
discernit? Quid habes, etc. That this Grace is not given to all the Just, but
only to such as fulfill the Commandments, by which Grace they are made to
differ from those that do not fulfill them, that it behooveth also to
acknowledge that this Grace is absolutely necessary to perform the command of
God; seeing that without the same, he that performs it cannot be made to differ
from him that performs it not, saving by the strength of his own will; which is
a manifest error: and consequently that it was necessary to use very great
circumspection in this Proposition. -- He told us further, that here he was
interrupted, and told that he was not to trouble himself, whether the
Propositions were S. Augustines, or had any affinity with his doctrine, or with
that of any other Catholic Doctors; that it sufficed to consider the same
according to the determinations of the Council of Trent, and the Holy
Scripture, and to find what affinity they have with the Doctrine of such
Heretics as have been condemned by that Sacred Council; that this was the sole
rule which it behooved them to follow in their judgment upon those Five
Propositions; that to stand upon S. Augustin's or any other Catholic Doctor's
doctrine, were to engage in such inexplicable difficulties, as would hinder
them from making any judgment at all thereof: That to this, he remonstrated
that the judgments of the Church were not made otherwise then by considering
what the Holy Scriptures, and the Councils, and the Holy Fathers had said
concerning the matters to be judged of, that the Church always thought her
self obliged to follow the doctrine of the Holy Fathers as constituting a part
of Tradition; that the Faculty was not higher then the Church, and therefore it
behoov'd it to conform to the rules of its mother, and to consider the Holy
Fathers as well as she does; and because this first Proposition's affinity with
the Doctrine of S. Augustine, he persisted in his first sentiment, that it
behoov'd to consider S. Augustines doctrine, together with the Holy Scriptures
and the Council of Trent. Upon this Remonstrance some of the Examiners seeming
willing to proceed, as if what he said were nothing but his single opinion, he
assured us that he insisted upon the maintaining what he had delivered, and
hindered them from passing further. Whereupon the Examiners, seeing him
resolute to have S. Augustin's doctrine considered as a rule (in part) of the
Censure they designed to pass upon the Propositions, broke up this Assembly.

I shall add one thing very considerable, namely, that he told us one of the
Examiners brought into this meeting the determination of the First Proposition,
and the condemnation he intended to make thereof. And upon my telling him that
I believed it was M. Pereyret, he replied nothing to me; So that it is easy to
judge that the said determination of the Five Propositions was beforehand
framed by them who maliciously composed them. I entreat you to make use of this
testimony, and aver it before whom you shall think meet; I assure you it is
very sincere, and I will make it good in presence of any person whatsoever.

The second Letter speaks of another Occurrence in the auditory of the
Sorbonne, between M. Launoy and F. Nicolai, at which M. Grandin was present
also. Take it as it follows. -- I think my self obliged to give you some
intelligence which may be useful in the cause you defend. I have amongst my
Notes one remark which lately I made, namely that the Deputies who were to
censure the Five Propositions within a months time, triumphed in the Auditory
of the Sorbonne, as being assured of the carrying of their cause, for that they
had made themselves the Judges thereof. Father Nicolai a Dominican, and one of
those Deputies, discoursing with M. Launoy a very eminent Doctor of our
Faculty, said, That the intention of the Deputies was not to consider whether
the Five Propositions had affinity with the doctrine of St. Augustine or no, but
only what affinity they have with the doctrine of the Heretics that have been
condemned by the Council of Trent; that there is no obligation to receive S.
Augustines doctrine or propose it to themselves for a Rule in the judgment of
the Faculty; and therefore it is not to be stood upon. Upon M. de Launoy's
answering him, that S. Augustin's doctrine was never condemned, and that it was
twelve hundred years old, and that therefore it was not fit that Doctors who
were not seventy five should undertake to condemn it; That Father replied, that
what ever was contrary to the Council of Trent, and the Holy Scriptures, was
likely to be condemned; and that there would be no speech of any particular
persons doctrine, but only the Five Propositions. M. de Launoy gave him an
account how S. Augustine's doctrine stands in reference to the first
Proposition; and told him after his pleasant way, That S. Augustine was too old
to be placed upon the seats of the Doctors in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris,
F. Nicolai answered, that this doctrine taken in the sense of Heretics
deserves to be condemned; but that the business in hand is only about
censuring or judging of Five Propositions.

M. Grandin said that there was no obligation to follow S. Augustine; and
mentioned some opinions of S. Augustine which ought not to be followed now.
Which is a shameful evasion, and unworthy of a Christian man. Thus you have
what is in my memory; make use of it as of a thing very certain, and testified
to you by him who is, etc.

As for the Abusive Courses upon which we grounded our Petition, of which I
shall speak below; amongst ten comprised in a Memorial annexed to that
Petition, the third ran thus. The Faculty has not given power to the said
Deputies for any of them to act in the absence of the rest, and nevertheless
they never are together, and have not forborne to proceed. M. Pignay after the
first Assembly retired dissatisfied, and repaired thither no more. M.
Chappellas withdrew himself after the second conference, because he having
gainsay'd him that gave his opinion before him, and branded the First
Proposition of Heresy, (the said M. Chappellas maintaining the same to be
Catholic and S. Augustines) nevertheless the plurality concluded that it was
heretical. M. Gauquelin arrived at the meeting in the middle of the
examination, and having seen the proceeding held therein, would be present at
it no more. M. Hennequin assisted not at the last Assembly where the Deputies
signed the Result in the presence of M. the Dean, who was present there to
conclude, though he had not been at the other Assemblies. For there is a Law
which begins, Si duo ex tribus, etc. which forbids some Commissioners to
proceed in the absence of the rest, unless their commission expressly allow it.
Duo ex tribus Judicibus, uno absente, judicare non possunt; quippe omnes
judicare jussi sunt. D. de re judicata, L. 39.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Writings which were published during the same month of July by the
Disciples of S. Augustine touching the Propositions.

BEfore this month expired, books were published concerning the subject of the
Propositions which M. Cornet had presented to the Faculty. One was intitul'd,
Molinae Collatorumque adversus S. Augustini doctrinam apparatus. Another began
with these words, In nomine Domini. And a third had this title, Considerations
upon the enterprise made by Master Nicholas Cornet. In each of those three
Works complaint was made of the maliciousness wherewith these Propositions
were framed, and rendered capable of diverse senses very opposite, of which some
were certainly Catholic, and the other evidently Heretical; to the end that
being exposed to examination, they might be condemned under pretext of the
heretical senses which they might include; and that when under the said pretext
the authors of the said design should have obtained a censure thereof, they
might apply the same as should seem good to themselves, and cause it to fall
upon the Catholic sense, which they also admitted; and which M. Cornet and his
Accomplices principally aimed at, though they durst not declare themselves
against the same.

Of these books, especially The Considerations, some were given to the
Examiners before they had ended their private meetings; they were likewise
given to all the Doctors they could be delivered to, before the first of
August. And I cannot sufficiently wonder, how, (considering the clearness
wherewith the disguise and artifice of those deceitful propositions and the
deplorable sequels of the whole attempt is therein laid open) nevertheless the
beginners of it could be more obstinate in it, then at first; and how such as
they had perverted could be as inclined as themselves to conclude in the
assembly of the first of August, upon a condemnation not less ambiguous then
the Propositions themselves, had there been nothing else to hinder them from
doing so, but these Books.

Those Works might deserve to be inserted here entire, for the importance of
the things contained in them, and especially for the undeceiving of such as
have been kept in a belief, that we have sometimes absolutely maintained the
said Propositions. For they might see in every page of them, that we spoke at
first of the Propositions as we have done since, namely, as equivocal,
fallacious, ambiguous, framed with cunning, to render them capable of diverse
senses very opposite, whereof some are most certainly Catholic, and the other
most evidently heretical. But I will content my self with reciting some lines
out of that of the Considerations, which shall clearly manifest what I say,
even to persons most obstinate and prejudiced. The 22. and 23. article of those
Considerations run in these terms.

XXII.
Moreover, it is clear that they have gone about to encounter. S. Augustine like
Foxes, not like Lions; and that to cover the shame of making themselves Masters
and Censors of the greatest Master of the whole Church next S. Paul in these
matters, and together with him of the Popes, Councils, and of all antiquity,
they have expressed the Propositions in ambiguous and confused words; that so
being true in one sense and false in another, they might excuse themselves to
intelligent men, by saying, that they intended only to condemn the evil that
was in them without purposing to wound S. Augustine, and at the same time decry
them before the simple and ignorant (which are the greatest number) for
absolutely condemned as well in the sense of S. Augustine, which is that which
they chiefly design to ruin, as according to the other.

XXIII.
This is seen clearly in the first Proposition, Aliqua Dei praecepta, etc.
which according to S. Augustine and the Bishop of Ipre (who has handled and
excellently explicated it by a multitude of clear and indubitable passages)
has no other meaning but this, that the Righteous are not always in one and
the same disposition, nor in the same internal vigor, but that they are
sometimes so weak that they cannot prevail with themselves to do those things
which are their duty, although they know God commands the same, and they have a
desire to do them, as it is manifest by S. Paul, who cries out, that he cannot
do the good which he would, according to the explication of the Fathers. In
this sense, so true and so conformable not only to S. Augustine and the
Scripture, but also to the ordinary Prayers of the Church, and the continual
experience of the greatest Saints, and of all such as endeavor to serve God
faithfully, this Proposition cannot receive any impeachment from envy it self.
But being taken after another sort, and according to the Letter, it may
signify another thing, namely that there are Commandments of God which the
righteous can never keep by the strength which is given them in this present
life, what grace soever God communicates to them, and whatsoever will they may
have to perform the same, which is an Error and a Heresy advanced by Calvin,
in as much as it makes the Commandments of God absolutely impossible in this
world: In the mean time, this is one of the senses intended to be put upon this
Proposition to render it odious, and to make the people and ignorants believe,
that it is what S. Augustine and his Disciples teach. For it was proposed in
the same terms under the names of Luther and Calvin, in the Theses
Claromontanae An. 1644. Jan. 4. Concl. 18. Sacri^ega est and impia Calvini
Lutherique sententia (Calv. in Antid. in cap. 12. Sess. 6. Luth. in Latom.) qua
statuunt, esse in lege gratiae quaedam hom ni praecepta, illi secundum statum
is vires in quibus constitutus est, impossibilia; and eam impotentiam etiam in
fidelibus reperiri; nec tantum quando nolunt praecepta implere, sed etiam
quando volunt? Calvinus in Antid. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 12. Mihi sufficit
nominem extit^sse unquam qui legi Dei satisf cerit, nec ullum posse inveniri.
Ibid. Apostolus proculdubio significat impares fuisse ab initio universos
mortales legis observationi, hodieque esse.
infamous Theses of the College of Clermont, which the Nuntio caused the
Jesuits to retract. And it is clear, that Calvin in the same place which is
cited in those Theses maintains only the error and heresy before observed;
namely, That it is impossible, not only for the generality of believers, but
even for the greatest Saints, the Prophets and Patriarks to keep the Law of
God, however strong a will they have to perform it, and whatever aid they
receive from the spirit of God, Vtcunque Dei spiritu adjuventur; and that there
never was a person who did or was able to do that which God commanded him, nor
ever shall be any such. So that of a Proposition which is particular in all its
points, is made a Proposition universal in all the same points; and instead of
saying that some Righteous are sometimes under a disability of performing some
Commandment, which themselves have done, and perhaps will do soon after; and
that such disability proceeds from their willing but weakly, and God's not
strengthening them with his grace, (as he has done and will do hereafter, as it
is always to be hoped) S. Augustine and the Bishop of Jpre are made to say with
Calvin, that all the Righteous are always under a disability toward God's
commandments, and that no grace ever delivers them from it, how great soever
such grace be, and what ever desire they have to accomplish the same. And this
is one of the branches of conformity which those good Judges find between the
doctrine of S. Augustine and that of Calvin.

And in the continuation of this Article beginning to speak of the other
Propositions, the mentioned Work says of the second, that it is as captious as
the preceding; of the third, that it is yet more openly fallacious; of the
fourth, that it is as full of obscurity and darkness as the rest; of the fifth,
that it contains an artifice and subtlety so visibly borrowed from the
Semipelagians, that it is strange they have not been ashamed to make use of it
publicly in so important an occasion. After which it explicates particularly
the diversity of senses whereof they are contrived capable. It declares in such
express terms both those which it maintains to be Catholic, and those which
it acknowledges to be false and heretical, that it is hard for one to speak
more clearly upon any subject. It shows next that those ambiguities and
obscurities wherewith the Propositions are covered and intricated, have been
affected, to surprise the Faculty and engage it in a Censure, in which the
Doctrine of S. Augustine would be involved. It lays open the exorbitancy of
this Attempt which strikes not only at S. Augustine, but at the Popes, the Holy
Fathers, the Councils, and the whole Church in general, of which that Saint was
the voice and instrument against the Heretics he incounter'd. It explicates
the dismal consequences which are likely to happen from a condemnation of this
nature, if it be made. It offers to verefy all that it delivers, in order
thereunto to enter into a fair conference viva voce or by writing, before all
sorts of persons not only learned, but barely rational and intelligent. And
lastly it consents to hold for refuted and condemned the whole book of
Jansenius, if they will only examine the Chapter from whence it taxes them to
have taken the first Proposition by making notable alterations thereof; if they
will undertake an exact confutation of that single Chapter; if they can show
any difference between that which Jansenius mantaines there, and the Doctrine
of S. Augustine, out of which he there recites a great number of passages upon
which that Author grounds all that he says; and if they can answer any thing
to those passages which is not ridiculous and impertinent in the judgment of
learned men. But this Work and two other were to as little purpose as if they
had not been written; they were not considered at all; they were answered only
with silence; and all the strength there was in them served only to render the
Authors and partisans of this enterprise more inexcusable before God and men.

CHAP. IX.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the first of August following
and the rest of that month, touching a Petition which we presented to the
Parliament against the enterprise of M. Cornet.

When I perceived that such bright and illustrous evidences produced no
change, that the Deputies continued acting after the same manner in their
private meetings, that they were prepared to make their Report on the first of
August, and that many other Doctors impatiently waited for that Report and day,
that they might see the Propositions condemned without any distinction or
explication of sense; I believed my self obliged to prevent it by turning the
opposition I had made against that Design on the first of July, and wherein I
continued all that month, into an Appeal against Abuses. I made the same
accordingly on the last of the said month by an Act which I took thereof
before Notaries, the Draught whereof remained with M. Hervi, one of those
before whom it was passed.

On the Monday following, being the second of August, I caused the said Act of
Appeal to be signified to the Assembly which was held in the Sorbonne by M.
Tassin Junior Bedle of the Faculty, who gave notice thereof to all the Doctors
then present. Of whom, sixty, all seculars, and one Monastic Augustine, judged
this Appeal so just and important, that they not only approved it, but
themselves joined therein by another Act passed likewise before Notaries. But
this was not it chiefly which hindered the Deputies from making their Report,
and the Doctors perverted by M. Cornet from concluding the Censure with them
that day. The obstruction was, that M. Loysal Cure of S. Jean en Greave and
Chancellor of Nostre Dame pretending a right to be President in our Assemblies
when any Censure is in hand, was present at this, and took the first place
before the Dean was come, who finding it at his coming possessed, demanded it
as appertaining to himself: and in the contest which arose between them about
this matter all the time of this Assembly was spent, without possibility of
speaking concerning any other thing, notwithstanding all the endeavors M.
Cornet and his adherents used to bring the Propositions under debate, in order
to their condemnation.

Some days passed after, which were employed only in drawing up the Petition
which we judged necessary to present to the Parliament, in order to stop the
resolution in which M. Cornet and his Adherents persisted of condemning the
Propositions, without making any distinction of the different senses whereof
they were capable. It was drawn up and put into the hands of M. Broussel to
present the same, as it here follows.

To our Lords of Parliament.
HVmbly supplicate, Anthony de Heu first Archpriest of Paris and Cure of S.
Severin, Francis Ytier Chastellain Canon of the Church of Paris, Provost of
Normandy in the Church of Chartres and Principal of the College of Fortet;
Claudius Emerets Canon of the Royal Church of S. Quintin, Peter Copin Cure of
Vaugirard lez Paris, Elias du Fresne de Mince Cure of S. Peter de Gonesse, John
Rousse Cure of S. Roch, Jerome Bachelier Counselor and Preacher to the King,
Archdeacon and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Soissons, and Counselor in the
Court of the Ecclesiastical Chamber at Paris, Peter le Gendre Cure of Aumale,
James Brousse Canon of S. Honor, Anthony de Breda Cure of S. Andrew des Arcs,
Charles Meusnier Dean and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Orleans, Nicolas
Drujon Canon of the Collegiate Church of S. Bennet at Paris, Alexander de
Hodencq Canon of S. Firmin at Amiens, John Bourgeois Precentor and Canon of the
Cathedral Church of Verdun, and Prior of S. Catherine de Loseliere, Henry de
Creil Canon of the Cathedral Church of Beauvais, James Tirement Canon of the
same Church, Francis Heron Prior Commendatary of our Lady of Champ Arien,
Francis Blondel Cure of S. Hippolite in the Suburb of S. Marcel at Paris, Lewis
le Noire Cure of S. Hilary at Paris, Henry Holden, James de Sainte-Beuve Kings
Professor of Divinity in Sorbonne, James de Paris, Peter Sarrazin Canon
Theologal in the Cathedral Church of Chartres, Robert Constantin Canon and
Archdeacon of the Cathedral Church of Angiers, Elias Foujeu Descures Archdeacon
of Dreux, and Canon in the Cathedral Church of Chartres, Francis Castle Cure of
Compan, Claudius Vacquette Cure and Prior of Clermont, James Maleude Cure of
Groslay lez Paris, Nicolas Gosset Canon and Cure of S. Opportune, James Esmard,
John Guillebert, Michel le Blanc; Renatus de Robbeville Canon Theologal; and
Chanter of the Cathedral Church of Amiens, Claudius Grenet Cure of S. Bennet,
John Callaghan, Henry du Hamel Cure of S. Mederic, George de Nuilly Canon of
the Cathedral Church of Beauvais, Friar Alipius Roussel a Religious Augustine,
Professor of Divinity in the Covent of the lesser Augustins, in the Suburb of
S. Germain with the license of his Provincial, Nicolas D'aignauln Canon of S.
Cloud, Claudius Taignier, Noel de Lalane Abbot of Valcroissant, John Bapt. de
Chassebras Archpriest and Cure of La Magdelaine at Paris, John Banneret Canon
of the Cathedral Church of Reimes, Francis Retart Cure of Magny-Lessart lez
Paris, Michel Taillandier, John James Dorat, Matthew Feydeau, John L'Abbe, John
Bapt. Gaultier, Mathurin Queras, Thomas Fortin, Lewis de Saint-Amour, Michel
Dobbaires, John Perou, Claudius le Cappellain, Philip Marcan, Gabriel Dabes,
Peter Renier, Michel Moreau Canon of the Cathedral Church of Noyon, Philip de
Longeran, Peter Barbereau, John Martin, all Doctors in the sacred Faculty of
Divinity at Paris, to the number of above sixty; SHOWING, That on Thursday the
first day of July in the ordinary Assembly of the said Faculty of Divinity of
Paris, held in the Great Hall of the College of Sorbonne, the said Lewis de
Saint-Amour one of the Petitioners opposed a Proposal made by M. Nicolas Cornet
Doctor and Syndic of the said Faculty to debate and condemn the Propositions
hereunto annexed, the said Cornet having to that end caused to come into the
said Assembly many Doctors, Religious and Secular, which he the Syndic and his
adherents had summoned on purpose from their respective houses, intending by
their number to represent the said Faculty. That notwithstanding the opposition
of the said Saint-Amour, the said Cornet and his adherents passed on to the
said debate, deputed some amongst them to prepare the determination and
condemnation of the said Propositions, and by the said Deputation made and drew
up an Act which they endeavor to make pass under the name of a Conclusion of
the said Faculty; and in pursuance thereof have had sundry private Meetings,
the issue whereof cannot be other then a division very destructive to the said
Faculty: That of the said Opposition an Act has been made before Notaries by
the procurement of the said Saint-Amour on the 31. of July last, and by him
persisting in the said Opposition, an Appeal also against Abuses has been made
against all that has been done and passed, as well in the said Assembly of the
first of July, as in other private ones; and therein charging the same upon
both the said M. Nicholas Cornet who propounded and required the debating of
the said Propositions, and M. John Mulot Doctor and Dean of the said Faculty,
who put the affair into deliberation; with protestation on the part of the said
Saint-Amour to have recourse to the Parliament, to whom alone appertains the
cognizance and jurisdiction of the said Appeal against Abuses, which Act of
Appeal has also been signified to the said M. Mulot, and Cornet, and to M.
Maugin Tassin Junior Bedle, performing the office of Scribe, by Casault Usher
of the Parliament on the second day of this present month of August; and
nevertheless the said M. John Mulot Dean, and M. Nicholas Cornet Syndic, with
their Adherents, have not forborne to use their utmost endeavors to cause the
said Propositions to be debated and condemned in the ordinary Assembly of the
second of August aforesaid, which would have been of very dangerous
consequence, and put all the said Faculty into great trouble, if the greatest
part of the Doctors thereof had not for preservation of the peace and honor of
their Body, hindered the said debate by a better management. And forasmuch as
the said M. John Mulot, Nicholas Cornet, and their Adherents, may still
continue in the same attempts, and by that means put the said Faculty of
Divinity into Division, notwithstanding the said Appeal against Abuses, unless
provision be made against their so doing; the said Petitioners (whom the said
Tassin performing the office of Scribe did in the said Assembly of the second
day of the present month of August advertise of the notice given to him of the
said Act of Appeal) have entered into communication thereupon, and to prevent
the disorders threatened by such attempts, have thought fit to join with the
said Saint-Amour, and jointly with him becoming Appellants to this Court, to
set forth (as they will do in time and place) the causes and grounds of the
said Appeals against Abuses, to the end they thereby be relieved upon the
whole, according to its accustomed prudence. Which being considered, most
honored Lords, and withal that it may appear to you by the Propositions
hereunto annexed and printed by the procurement of M. Cornet, of what
consequence they are; as also that in prejudice to the said Opposition there
could not and ought not to have been further proceeding to the said Deputation
and private Assemblies; and that all that has been done is Abusive, as being
contrary to the Holy Decrees, and Canonical Constitutions, and to the Statutes
of the said Faculty, and Arrests of this Court confirming the same; That
moreover the Petitioners aim at nothing but the preservation of the honor and
peace of the said Faculty, which the said Mulot, Cornet, and their Adherents go
about to violate: May it please you to admit the Petitioners as Appellants
against the abuse of the said pretended Conclusion of the first of July last
past, and of what followed thereupon, to allow the said Appeal for valid, to
permit the Petitioners to cause the said Cornet and Mulot to be cited and su'd
in this Court by their proper and ordinary names, together with all others
concerned, to the end to proceed upon the said Opposition and Appeal against
Abuses, and to ordain that the Parties shall come and plead thereunto on what
day it shall please the Court; and in the mean time to prohibit further
proceeding or reading again and registring the said pretended Conclusion of the
first of July, or any other Act made by the pretended Deputies and their
Adherents, or passing on in any other manner, till this Court shall have
determined concerning the matter: And you shall do well, etc.

This Petition was answered on the 12. of August, and transmitted to the
Attorney General, who put thereunto his own conclusions conformable to those
which we had taken.

M. Broussel undertook to make report thereof to the Court a few days after:
M. Mole, at present Keeper of the Seals, then first President, (and who is
always meant when I barely mention the first President in this Relation) was
prepossessed by our Adversaries. Our Petition soon made a great noise in Paris,
before M. Broussel spoke of it in the Grand Chamber. For on one side, the
Considerations I mentioned having been seen by many inquisitive persons of all
qualities; and on the other, the great number of Doctors that opposed the
design, amongst whom diverse were Curees of Paris, made this affair very
notorious. Hereupon, as soon as M. Broussel opened his mouth to make his report
of our Petition, the first President was prepared to stop it; and without
giving him time to set forth the grounds of our Appeal, and the aims of our
Petition, he cut him off, and said, It was an affair to be examined more at
leisure, before any thing were ordained in it; that we were people that said
Jesus Christ did not dye for the whole world; that God's Commandments are
impossible to justified persons; all which required narrowly to be looked into.
Thus the first President by the great Authority he had in the Court, caused
them to pass instantly to another affair, without giving M. Broussel time to
reply to him, as he desired, which he could not do, though he endeavored it
once or twice, M. the first President falling to speak as soon as M. Broussel
uttered two words in answer to him. Of this my self was witness, the door of
the Grand Chamber on the side of the Clerk's Table being for some time half
open, and I happening to come thither at the same moment.

A day or two after, to wit, on the 20. of August, M. Chastellain writ to me at
eight a clock at night, that he understood the first President had sent for him
to come to him at six a clock; but the appointed hour being passed that day, he
resolved to wait upon him the next immediately after dinner, and being it was a
time when many might be there, he thought fit that I and some other Doctors
whom he mentioned, should accompany him thither. But we were of opinion that M.
Chastellain having been sent for alone, should go alone, inasmuch as we were
not certain that it was about our affairs that the first President had sent
for him.

Accordingly M. Chastellain went thither alone the next day, being the twenty
first. The first President caressed him, and with a smiling countenance, yet
accompanied with his accustomed gravity, asked him, Whether there was any means
of accommoding this affair? adding, That the division in our Body was much
disrelish'd, and made a great noise in Paris; That great inconveniences might
arise therefrom; That he had said as much to our Adversaries, and found them
inclined to peace, and ready either wholly to desist from their enterprise, or
at least to respite it for three or four months, without doing more then what
was already done; That during that space the distemper of minds might be
assuaged, and the means of a solid agreement sought out; for which good end the
said term might be prolonged after the expiration of those three or four
months, in case they should not be sufficient. M. Chastellain testified to the
first President, That we were as much inclined to peace as our Adversaries;
That it was not on our part that the disturbance arose, but on theirs; That for
the quieting all, it was necessary that they renounce the cause of it; That
their pretended Deputation be no longer accounted valid; and in a word, That
all things be restored to the posture they were in before the first of July;
and that in order thereunto at the new reading on 1 September following the
Conclusion which was not read again in the Assembly of the second of August,
the same be done without making mention of any thing but the ordinary
Supplicates; That he could give his word for nothing, before he made us
acquainted with all this; but that he doubted not that upon those conditions we
would be very glad to live peaceably in the exercise of our usual employments.
These things M. Chastellain came and acquainted us with; We agreed thereunto:
He returned, to give the first President his word in our behalf, who also gave
him his own in behalf of our Adversaries.

Indeed, we something wondered at the three or four months Truce which was
offered us, and suspected the design of it to be only to relaxe our
prosecutions, and make use of our silence and desisting against our selves; but
we did not as yet comprehend the mystery of it, as we found afterward, and I
shall relate in due place. It shall suffice to observe here, that we were given
to understand, that it was meant only to let the memory of this attempt fairly
bury it self, and become wholly lost by time, without obliging our Adversaries
to renounce the same on a sudden, whilst they were still in their first heat.
But time likewise taught us, that indeed it was to get means in the interval of
prosecuting with the Pope the censure of the Propositions, after its
miscarriage in the Faculty. They were not ignorant that at Rome they are very
jealous of maintaining the Authority of the Decrees which issue from thence,
and that this Consideration obliges the makers of them to look very well to the
facility and compliance that may be expected in their execution, before they
pass any at all. They intended to offer to the Pope a Censure made by the
Deputies of the Faculty, as owned and authorized by the whole Body, that so
they might obtain the like from his Holiness. They feared that if our
Opposition should become more conspicuous, and the Parliament having regard
thereunto should forbid them to proceed, some noise of it would get to Rome,
and make the design abortive. Hereupon they were willing to hold us in quiet
and silence during those ^hree or four months, which time they judged needful
to obtain what they aimed at at Rome; or in case they should not accomplish the
same in that space, they purposed to prolong the term of our silence and quiet
further, namely, so long till they should have accomplished their design.

But, as I said, we did not yet perceive the bottom of the artifice, wherefore
we closed very readily with this Expedient, being well pleased to see, as we
thought, their Counsels if not wholly quashed, at least checked and half
broken. Yet how great need soever they had of the said Truce, they were not
able to preserve it, but within a few days they failed in the conditions which
they had promised, and upon which we had surceas'd.

CHAP. X.
Of what passed in the Assembly of the Faculty on the first of September 1649.

THese conditions required that no footstep of what had been done in this
business in the Assembly of the first of July, and that of August, should
remain in our Registers; wherefore the Conclusions of those two months were
read again by the Gressier, or Clerk, in the Assembly of the first of September
following, without making any mention of what concerned M. Cornet's
Propositions.

But they who managed this Accommodation, that they might obtain the Censure
which they hoped from Rome against the said Propositions, were not yet so
certain thereof, but that they endeavored to reserve one means to themselves
(in case that failed) of renewing their prosecutions in the Faculty upon a more
favorable opportunity: Wherefore being loath to see their pretended Deputation
vanquish in smoke, they sought to keep it in being, to the end that when we
least distrusted it, they might one day make the Report of the said Deputation,
and dispatch in some morning the business of the Censure, when there should be
no person in the Assembly to gainsay it.

For which purpose, as soon as the Conclusions of the said two months were read
again, M. Amiot stood up and told the Assembly, that no person ought to wonder
that there was no mention made of the Deputies which had been nominated on the
first of July for examining the Propositions; that the same was omitted, at the
desire of the first President, to see if within three or four months there
would be a means to reconcile the business.

The aforementioned Accommodement was not unknown to any in the Faculty, so
that it was visible that M. Amiot spoke not this word of Advertisement to give
information thereof to any one, but only to cause it to be inserted in the
Registers the month following, when the things that passed this day were to be
read again. Whereupon M. Chastellain, who understood the subtilty, presently
fell to blame M. Amiot for violating the word passed to the first President,
and the conditions of agreement that were made. He told him, that had there
been any report to be made of what passed at the first President's house, it
did not belong to him (M. Amiot) who was the youngest, to make the same; but
were he the antientest, he ought not to have made it before they had agreed
together thereupon. M. Amiot replied to this, that indeed they had promised the
first President that they would do nothing till after four months, but that
they had not promised that they would say nothing. This juggling and equivocal
answer was hissed at, as wholly unworthy of the place and the business treated
of, and in this posture matters rested that day.

CHAP. XI.
Of a false Censure against the Propositions, published during the month of
September; And of a second Petition which we presented to the Parliament.

Toward the middle of this month, it appeared by most strong and considerable
evidences, that the Peace we had made, was not at all in the heart of those
with whom we had made it. In Paris there was seen running through the hands of
abundance of people, a draught of a Censure against the Propositions; and we
likewise received Copies thereof, all agreeing together, which sundry of our
Friends sent us from diverse places of the Kingdom, as well to advertise us
thereof, as to be informed by us concerning the truth of the piece. It was
conceived in the same words, and drawn up in the same form which I am going
here to insert and represent.

Propositiones Baccalaureorum. Censura Doctorum. 1. Aliqua Dei praecepta
hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas habent
vires, sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis Gratia, qua possibilia fiant.

1. Haec Doctrina est Haeretica.

2. Interiori Gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

2. Haec Propositio est contraria Sacris Scripturis.

3. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

3. Haec Doctrina destruit rationem meriti and demeriti, and est Haeretica.

4. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant Haeretici, quod
vellent eam Gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare.

4. Hujus Propositionis prima pars est falsa and temeraria; secunda vero, quae
asserit Haereticum esse admittere Gratiam cui possit humana voluntas resistere,
est Haeretica.

5. Semipelagianorum Error est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse.

5. Haec Propositio est falsa and scandalosa, insimulans Erroris veritatem
Sacris Scripturis contentam, and in Concilio Tridentino declaratam.

6. Sensit olim Ecclesia privatam Sacramentalem poenitentiam pro peccatis
occultis non sufficere.

6. Haec Propositio vel spectat ad quaestionem juris; and sensus est, [Sensit
etiam privatam Sacramentalem poenitentiam reipsa and absolute pro occultis
peccatis non sufficere;] and est Haeretica, Errorem infallibili Ecclesiae
affingens. Vel spectat ad quaestionem facti, and sensus est, [Sensit olim
Ecclesia, ex illius temporis disciplina, non sufficere privatam poenitentiam
Sacramentalem pro peccatis;] and falsa est and temeraria.

7. Naturalis Attritio sufficit ad Sacramentum poenitentiae.

7. Haec Propositio intellecta de Attritione mere naturali ut sufficient ad
Sacramentum poenitentiae cum effectu Gratiae Justificationis recipiendu, est
Haeretica.



Ita visum est Doctoribus Magistris, Jacobo Hennequin Decano Professorum in
Theologia. Jacobo Pereyret Summo Moderatori Regii Collegii Navarrae and
Professori in Theologia. Claudio Morel Doctori Sorbonico and Librorum Censori.
Nicholao Cornet Syndico Facultatis Parisiensis. Marguarito Gauquelin Doctori
Navarrico. Ludovico Bail Propoenitentiario Parisiensi. Fr. Joanni Nicholai
Primario Regenti in Theologia apud Fratres Praedicatores. Martino Grandin
Professori Theologiae Moralis in Sorbona.
Deputatis in Sacra Facultate in Comitiis generalibus prima mensis Julii 1649.
ad examen praedictarum Propositionum.

Having well considered this piece, and the flying Paper which M. Pereyret
formerly delivered to the Nuntio, and which was sufficient to draw after it the
Decree and Censure of the Inquisition abovementioned, we certainly believed
that they did not contrive this Censure only to make it run about France, where
the Form of the Facultie's Censure is sufficiently known, but that they
intended to make use of it at Rome for the purpose I noted. Yet we knew nothing
certain thereof, and this was but our naked conjecture. However we thought that
it was not to be neglected, but that it was necessary for us to have recourse
to the Parliament, as well for provision against the dispersing and authors of
this pretended Censure, as against the main of M. Cornet's Enterprise, against
which we had already presented a Petition.

Toward the end of this month we presented a Second, which we put into the
hands of M. Broussel, who received the former, and annexed a Copy of the
Censure thereunto; wherein, after representation of what had passed between the
Framers of the Propositions and our selves since the first, we complained that
they had not only published this Censure in France, but perhaps also sent it out
of the Kingdom; and we concluded with desires for right to be done us upon our
first Petition, and that the said M. Nicolas Cornet Syndic, M. James Pereyret,
Morel, and the rest under whose names the pretended Censure run, might be
summonod before the Court, to acknowledge, own or disown the said pretended
Censure, to the end that upon their declaration further resolutions might be
taken by us.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Arrest which intervened upon those two Petitions; and Of what passed in
the Parliament touching that matter.

THere happened a very Considerable Incident on the first of October in the
election of M. Hallier to the office of Syndic: but because it had many
sequels, that I may not interrupt what concerns this Censure and the Petitions
upon which the Arrest intervened the fifth day of the same month; I shall
forbear speaking of the affair of M. Hallier, till I have spoken of the said
Arrest, and what preceded it and has connection with the things I last treated
of.

I cannot pass over in silence the desire and care which MM. Tristan, Julien,
Guerin, le Fevre, le Blond of Sorbonne, de Saint Helvine, and Mesnidre, had
the first and fourth days of this month to partake in the procurement of
these Arrests. For they took an Act, on those days, before Notaries, that the
appeals against Abuses, interposed both by me and the other Doctors named in
the Petition, being communicated to them, they adhered thereunto, became
appellants (as well as we) against all that had been done and passed in the
assembly of the first of July, and against all that followed upon the same;
they made M. Cornet and Mulot defendants as we had done, and purposed to have
all the prosecutions requisite and necessary to this affair transacted in their
names as well as ours.

M. Broussel having on the 4 of October 1649. spoken in the Chamber of
Vacations concerning our two Petitions and the project of the Censure above
inserted (a Copy whereof was annexed to our second Petition) it was ordained
that he should cause notice to be given to MM. Cornet and Pereyret and such
other as he thought fit of those whose names were subscribed to that Censure,
with some also of them who complained thereof, that either side might appear
the next day at the Palais at seven a clock of the morning in the said Chamber,
to be heard there.

I went to see M. Broussel at his coming forth of the Palais. He told me this,
and that he thought it convenient to summon with MM. Cornet and Pereyret, M.
Hennequin, who was the antientest of those that had subscribed. I made some
scruple thereof at first, and represented to him, that we had not made M.
Hennequin a Defendant, nor did he meddle in this enterprise, but that the
authors of it caused him to be named, in regard of some dislikes which they
knew he had against the truths they struck at; and were willing on the one side
to cover (what they could) their Conspiracy and Cabal with the good repute of
that ancient Doctor's name, who was not to be suspected thereof; and on the
other to have him favorable to their designs by the inclination of his
sentiments: That his candor made me concerned for him, and I feared it would
trouble him to think himself persecuted by us, in case he should be sent for to
the Parliament.

This Consideration caused M. Broussel to consent to summon only MM. Pereyret
and Cornet. Afterward, having bethought my self, that the Court could not be
better and more truly informed of the things that had passed then by the mouth
of one who would speak thereof with plainness and ingenuity, (as I knew M.
Hennequin would do) and that I might acquaint him privately that it was for no
other end that he was sent for; I returned to M. Broussel to tell him this: He
approved of it, and followed his first purpose: and I assured him that on our
part M. de Mince and my self would not fail to appear.

MM. Pereyret and Cornet were the next day more diligent then we. As Soon as
they were come, an Usher advertised the Court thereof, and they were presently
introduced; upon a conceit, as I imagine, that both sides were there. They had
the advantage of speaking alone to the Court about a quarter of an hour, and a
possibility of prepossessing it without our being there to observe what they
said; and I did not otherwse come to know the things that passed during that
quarter of an hour but by M. the President Coigneux, who was in office that
week, and told us the same as soon as M. de Mince and I were introduced.

He spoke to us very near in these words. The Court, before it pronounce any
thing upon the Petitions presented by you, has thought fit to hear both the
one side and the other, to the end to bring you to agreement, and to oblige you
to live peaceably. You complain of a certain Manuscript Censure which runs
through the world under the name of some Doctors that style themselves Deputies
of the Faculty for examining certain Propositions. Your Adversaries here, say
they have not given order to any person to publish the same; That it is against
their mind that it is published; That they gave it not to any, nor spoke to any
to give Copies of it; That they disown all such as have done it: Desire you any
thing more, in order to being satisfied and living with good understanding
together?

M. de Mince began to speak after this discourse, and answered almost in these
words. Messieures; About four or five years ago, when the heat began on either
side about opinions of Doctrine which concern the Propositions in question, the
Faculty, by an universal consent of all the Doctors, for avoiding contentions
and divisions which might arise amongst them thereby, ordained that no Speech
should be had thereof on one side or other. From that time, they remained in
silence and peace till the first of July last, when M. Cornet the Syndic (as I
since understood, (said M. de Mince) for I was not at that Assembly) by a
manifest enterprise against that Conclusion of the Faculty, set afoot and
required to be debated certain Propositions relating to that doctrine: In which
he not only violated the resolution which the Faculty had taken not to speak
thereof, but also acted contrary to the order received and practiced from all
time in the said Faculty, which is wont not to debate upon any Propositions,
unless the books and places of the books from whence such Propositions are
taken, be noted and examined; because the understanding and true sense of them
depends very often upon what goes before, and what follows after. Now the
Propositions which M. Cornet has made and set afoot in that Assembly of the
first of July, are loose and of uncertain sense, neither the places nor authors
from whence they might be drawn being signified by him. Since that Assembly of
the first of July, nothing more has been said concerning those Propositions;
for that of August was spent in a contest arising touching a pretension of the
Chancellor of the University. In this of the first of September, the Faculty
has likewise spoken nothing more thereof. But for all this there is published
this month a Censure under the name of pretended Deputies, who have no power
so to do; it not appertaining to any but to the Faculty in a formal and legal
assembly. Wherefore, may it please you, we desire that that pretended Censure
be declared of no value and authority, as indeed it is not.

M. de Mince having ended, and the President turned his head to M. Cornet, who
said, That whereas they disown the Censure, they mean that they disown it
indeed as to the publication, but not as to the doctrine. And as to what M. de
Mince had said, namely, that it is not the custom of the Faculty to censure
Propositions without first examining the places of Authors whence they are
taken, (he said) it was much otherwise: That the Registers of the Faculty were
full of Censures which had been so made, upon bare Propositions, without noting
the Authors whose they were. Particularly, that this was practiced during the
space of twenty years, from the year 1540. to the year 1560. which was the time
when Luther and Calvin began to appear and publish their errors: That even the
last year, the censuring of a book being spoken of in the Faculty, they had
forborne to touch the Author to this hour, but ordered, that Particular persons
who pleased to propound Propositions after two months time, should have
liberty so to do.

Hereunto it was replied by M. de Mince, that that which was said by M. Cornet
was not true; that the example of the foregoing year which he brought made
against him; the case thereof being thus; A Libel had been published the year
before under the name of F. Veron, in which many things were judged by the
whole Faculty evidently mischievous; besides many invectives and injuries
against the memory and reputation of M. the Abbot of Cyran, and the two MM.
Arnauls: hereupon some persons intimating in the Faculty that there were things
in that Libel which had relation to, and connection with the matters concerned
in the Propositions in question, the Faculty ordained that the Censure of the
said Book should be deferred, for fear men's minds should become heated and
divided upon occasion of the said matters which were touched upon transiently
and by reflection in that Libel. All which shows with how little reason M.
Cornet has brought that example, and what wrong he has done by causlesly
violating so prudent and necessary a resolution as the Faculty had made for
four or five years, not to determine or decide any thing touching those matters
on one side or other.

At this time M. Hennequin came and was introduced into the Chamber, and as he
advanced toward the side of the Table where MM. Pereyret and Cornet were, Mr.
Cornet went a step or two to meet him, as if he meant to tell him something in
his ear, before he came to the place of speaking. Which M. Hennequin
perceiving, put his hand before his breast and face to stop him, and signify
to the Judges, that he meant not to speak any thing that M. Cornet purposed to
suggest to him. The President said to him, We have caused you to come hither,
that we may be informed by you concerning a Censure of certain Propositions,
which runs under your name; and here are some of your brethren (pointing at M.
de Mince and me) who have complained to the Court thereof.

M. Hennequin answered, That he would speak the truth sincerely, as he had
always made profession and was bound in conscience to do. He said, that indeed
having been put amongst the Deputies nominated in the Assembly of the first of
July for examining those Propositions, he accordingly had diverse times met
together with them in the house of the Scribe of the Faculty; and that they had
noted the places of Scripture and of the Fathers which to them seemed contrary
to the said Propositions, with purpose to make report, and leave the judgment
of the same to the Faculty, as to whom it appertains, and not to themselves;
but as to the having determined the Propositions, or signed or decreed any
Censure, that this they had not done. That in the mean time he had been
astonished, when being at Troies, whither he lately took a journey, he saw
diverse Copies of a Censure brought from several parts; That likewise on the
other side he had seen books written in defense of the said Propositions; That
all this was not well, and that it must be acknowledged that there was on
either side a little too much heat.

The President said, that it behooved all of us to labor to moderate the same,
and that the Court would on their part contribute their utmost thereunto; and
thus he seemed to put an end to this hearing, and to dismiss us. Which I
seeing, and conceiving that the things which might be spoken for the obtaining
of the Arrest we aimed at, had not been sufficiently unfolded, I began to
speak, and told the Court that M. de Mince had been often absent from Paris
during all that passed in this affair, and so could not represent to the Court
many important circumstances thereof which came not to his knowledge; but that
with their permission, I should resume the matter from the beginning, and lay
open to the Court the whole Series thereof, if they would vouchsafe me one
quarter of an hours audience. The Court with great gentleness granted it, and
I made an exact relation of all that had passed from the first of July till
that time. I added to the things which I have spoken above thereof, that the
number of Religious Mendicants which came to that Assembly, beyond what is
appointed by the Arrests of Parliament, rendered their Deputation invalid; and
hereof I took M. Hennequin to witness, who acknowledged the same. I also made
the Court acquainted how the first President had interposed to reconcile us,
and how his interposition proved ineffectual for preserving us in peace with
our Adversaries, because they violated the word which they hah passed to him,
and he had given to us in their behalf. I reported the answer which M. Amiot
made in the Assembly of the first of September, when he was blamed for that the
Supplicate made then by him was contrary to the word which they had given to
the first President, not to do any thing more concerning this affair; Namely,
how he said, That it was true they had promised the first President to do
nothing, but that they had not promised to to speak nothing: and I asked the
Court hereupon, whether the actions that pass amongst us can consist in any
thing else but words, and what inducement there could be to rely upon those of
people who thus interpreted their own! I concluded, that, to bring us to peace
and quiet, it was necessary that the Court would please to bind us thereunto by
an Arrest; and that with less then this, what ever promises these Gentlemen
might make, after the experiences we had had of their carriage all full of
disguises and artifices, we could never be secure thereof, but should always
be in continual inquietudes and agitations.

The President said to me, How? If these Gentlemen promise you faithfully in
presence of this Court, that they will think no more of what is past, and that
they will do nothing more for the future; Do you fear that they will fail
therein?

I answered, May it please you; Should M. Hennequin pass such a promise to
you, and did the performance thereof depend upon him, we should hold our selves
secure, because he is a man of integrity and sincere; But we have not the same
conceit of these Gentlemen, we cannot confide in them.

The President addressing himself to M. Cornet, as'kd him, Whether he would
endeavor to content us, and promise the Court faithfully to remain in quiet
touching this affair?

M. Cornet answered in these very words, Sir, We Promise to make good all that
we Promised the First President.

M. le Coigneux replied to him also in these very words, Ha, Gentlemen, speak
plain French, those loose words and General Promises are not Discourses to be
held in this Company: The Sorbonne has not the Repute of using Equivocations.

The involved and ambiguous answer of these Doctors, who clearly convinced the
Court of the necessity of the Arrest which I moved for, gave me the boldness
to resume and continue my Discourse, by beseeching the Court to remember the
Arrest which it was moved to issue against a Decree that came from the
Inquisition of Rome, concerning a Book which proved the equality of authority
in S. Peter and S. Paul. I showed that that Decree was obtained in this manner.
The Nuntio sent to the Faculty a Roman Gazette, which related that there were
Doctors of it there who maintained, That there might be more Heads in the
Church; desiring the Faculty to tell him, whether this were true. Upon this
proposal M. Pereyret was deputed to go to the Nuntio, and tell him that it was
not. The Nuntio demanded of M. Pereyret his answer in writing, who gave him
such a one as himself pleased, without consulting the Faculty about it. This
writing of M. Pereyret was at Rome made to pass for a Disavowing of the
Faculty against the Book concerning the authority of S. Peter and St. Paul; and
this pretended Disavowing drew after it that Decree of the Inquisition, which
they durst not have made at Rome before, and against which the Court became
obliged to issue the Arrest which intervened. Now, I said, it was not to be
doubted, but that they would make the same use of this pretended Censure, which
they disowned not but only as to the publication, and not as to the doctrine,
because they could have wished that it had been secret, to the end it might have
been taken for valid at Rome as an authentic act, and by which they might have
extorted again a Decree, which would serve only to trouble and torment us, and
which would again oblige the Court to provide against it, as it did in that
other occasion.

M. Pereyret cried out hereupon in these very words; That all which I said was
as false as the Devil,

I replied to M. Pereyret, and protested to the Court, That I said nothing but
what was most true; That if the Court pleased to assign two of the Gentlemen on
the bench to inquire thereof, in case any falsitie were found in what I had
uttered, I would submit to all the penalties which Calumniators deserve: But
that M. Pereyret ventured so boldly to say it was false, for that he feared the
Arrest for which I made suit to the Court, by reason it would be an authentic
piece, and destroy the effect which they promised themselves from their
pretended Censure, and show the nullity thereof.

The President here interposed, and said that it would be much better that we
agreed amongst our selves of our own accord, without the granting of that
Arrest, or issuing out any thing in writing: That war was kindled both without
and within the Realm; that we had suffered famine; that there were still other
scourges which threatened us; that it was a thing of ill relish to see Division
amongst the Doctors; that the Court treated us with honor, acting with us, in
this manner, inviting us to be reconciled together charitably, and being
willing to be contented with our Words; that after this, we ought to agree and
live in peace.

I replied to the President, That we much acknowledged the honor and charity
which the Court was pleased to show us, and that if on our part we could not
accept it, it was long of the temper of the adversaries we had to do with,
which allowed us not to account our selves in security from them without the
Arrest, which we most humbly beseeched the Court to grant us.

The President answered nothing more, but that the Court would do us justice.
As we were departing from the bar to withdraw, M. Pereyret looking fixedly
upon me, asked me with a very choleric and high tone, Will you bind the Popes
hands? Whereupon I approached back again toward the barrre, to desire the
Court to take notice how by this word which proceeded from the abundance of his
heart, he verified that which I had blamed him for, and which he had said was
so false; but some of the Gentlemen signified to me with the hand, that I had
spoken enough thereof. So I added no more with my tongue, but pointed at the
place where M. Pereyret, who was now gone from it, asked me that question; and
all the Gentlemen had, as I imagine, without my so doing, sufficiently taken
notice of the same. As we were withdrawing, I went close to M. Pereyret, and
answered him very softly between him and me to the question which he had put to
me, and told him, My design was not to bind the Pope's hands, but to hinder
them, if I could, from surprising him.

When we were withdrawn, the Court consulted upon our Petitions, and upon what
they had heard in this private audience; I call it private, because there was
none there besides themselves and us. Take here the Arrest which intervened

An Extract from the Registers of PARLIAMENT.
WHereas by the Chamber of Vacations has been seen the Petition presented to
the Court on the twelfth of August last by Anthony de Heu first Archpriest of
Paris and Cure of S. Severin, Francis Ithier Chastellain Canon of the Church of
Paris, Provost of Normandy in the Church of Chartres and Principal of the
College of Fortet; Claudius Emerets Canon of the Royal Church of S. Quintin,
Peter Copin Cure of Vaugirard lez Paris, Elias du Fresne de Mince Cure of S.
Peter de Gonesse, John Rousse Cure of S. Roch, Jerome Bachelier Counselor and
Preacher to the King, Archdeacon and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Soissons,
and Counselor in the Court of the Ecclesiastical Chamber at Paris, Peter le
Gendre Cure of Aumale, James Brousse Canon of S. Honor, Anthony de Breda Cure
of S. Andrew des Arcs, Charles Meusnier Dean and Canon of the Cathedral Church
of Orleans, Grand Vicar and Official of the Bishop of Orleans, Nicolas Drujon
Canon of the Collegiate Church of S. Bennet at Paris, Alexander de Hodencq
Canon of S. Firmin at Amiens, John Bourgeois Precentor and Canon of the
Cathedral Church of Verdun, and Prior of S. Catherine de Loseliere, Henry de
Creil Canon of the Cathedral Church of Beauvais, James Thirement Canon of the
said Church, Francis Heron Prior Commendatary of Nostre Dame du Champ Arien,
John Blondel Cure of S. Hippolite in the Suburb S. Marcel at Paris, Lewis le
Noire Cure of S. Hilary. Henry Holden, James de Saint Beufve Kings Professor
of Divinity in Sorbonne, James de Paris, Peter Sarrazin Canon Theologal of the
Cathedral Church of Chartres; Robert Constantin Canon and Archdeacon of the
Cathedral Church of Angiers, Elias Foujeu Descures Archdeacon of Dreux, and
Canon in the Cathedral Church of Chartres, Francis Castle Cure of Compan,
Claudius Vacquette Cure and Prior of Clermont, James Maleude Cure of Groslay
lez Paris, Nicolas Gosset Canon and Cure of S. Opportune, James Esmard, John
Guillebert, Michel le Blanc, Renatus de Robbeville Canon Theologal, and Chanter
of the Cathedral Church of Amiens, Claudius Grenet Cure of S. Bennet, John
Callaghan, Henry du Hamel Cure of S. Mederic, George de Nuilly Canon of the
Cathedral Church of Beauvais, Friar Alipius a Religious Augustine, Professor of
Divinity in the Covent of the lesser Augustins, in the Suburb of S. Germain
with the license of his Provincial, Nicolas D'aignaulx Canon of S. Cloud,
Nicholas Taignier, Noel de Lalane Abbot of Valcroissant, John Bapt. de
Chassebras Archpriest and Cure of La Magdelaine at Paris, John Banneret Canon
of the Cathedral Church of Reimes, Francis Retart Cure of Magny-Lessart lez
Paris, Michel Taillandier, John James Dorat, Matthew Feydeau, John L'Abbe, John
Bapt. Gaultier, Mathurin Queras, Thomas Fortin, Lewis de Saint-Amour, Michel
Dobbaires, John Peron, Claudius le Cappellain, Philip Marcan, Gabriel Dabes,
Peter Renier, Michel Moreau Canon of the Cathedral Church of Noyon, Philip de
Lonergan, Peter Barbereau, and John Martin, all Doctors in the sacred Faculty
of Divinity of Paris, to the number of sixty or more; Containing, That on
Thursday the first day of July last in the ordinary Assembly of the said
Faculty held in the Great Hall of the House and College of Sorbonne, the said
Lewis de Saint-Amour one of the Petitioners opposed a Proposal made by M.
Nicolas Cornet Doctor and Syndic of the said Faculty, to debate and condemn the
Propositions, the said Cornet having to that end caused many Doctors, Religious
and Secular, to come into the said Assembly, whom the said Syndic and his
adherents had purposely convok'd from several houses, intending by their number
to represent the said Faculty. And that notwithstanding the opposition of the
said Saint-Amour, the said Cornet and his adherents passed on to the said
debate, and likewise deputed some amongst them to prepare the determination and
condemnation of the said Propositions, and by the said Deputation made and drew
up an Act which they attempt to make pass for a Conclusion of the said
Faculty; That of such Opposition the said Saint-Amour took an Act before
Notaries on the XXXI. day of July last, and persisting in the said Opposition,
made an Appeal against the Abusivenesse of all that has been done and passed,
as well in the said Assembly of the first of July; as in other private ones;
and also he made Defendants in their own ordinary names as well the said M.
Nicholas Cornet, who proposed and required to be debated the said Propositions,
as M. John Mulot Doctor and Dean of the said Faculty, who put the same under
debate; with protestation of the said Saint-Amour to seek redress in the said
Court, to which alone appertains the cognizance and jurisdiction of the said
Appeal against Abuses: which Act of Appeal was signified to the said Mulot and
Cornet, and to M. Maugin Tassin Junior Bedle, performing the office of Scribe,
by Casault Usher of this Court, on the second day of August: and that
nevertheless the said MM. John Mulot Dean, and Nicholas Cornet Syndic, with
their Adherents, have not forborne to use all their power to cause the said
Propositions to be debated and condemned in the ordinary Assembly of the said
second day of August; which would have been of very dangerous consequence, and
have brought all the said Faculty into great trouble, if the greatest part of
the Doctors thereof had not for preservation of the peace and honor of their
Body, by a better conduct hindered the said debate: And for that the said MM.
John Mulot, Nicholas Cornet, and their Adherents, may yet hereafter continue in
the same attempts, and by that means bring the Faculty of Divinity into
division, notwithstanding the said Appeal against Abuses, if the same be not
provided against; the said Petitioners, to whom the said Tassin performing the
office of Scribe did in the said Assembly declare the notice given to himself
of the said Act of Appeal, having had communication together thereon,
determined for the redressing such disorders as these attempts might cause, to
join with the said Saint-Amour, and becoming jointly with him Appellants to
this Court, to set forth in time and place the causes and grounds of the said
Appeal against Abuses, to the end to be redressed of all by the said Court. For
these reasons they desired to be admitted Opposers with the said Saint-Amour,
and Appellants against the abusivenesse of the said pretended Proposal and
Conclusion of the first of July last, and of all that followed thereupon; to
have the said Appeal allowed for good, and to be permitted to cause the said
Cornet and Mulot to be cited and summoned into the Court by their proper and
ordinary names, and all others whom it should concern; to the end proceedings
might be had upon the said Opposition and Appeal against Abuses, and that the
Court would order parties to come and plead by such a day as it should please
the said Court to assign; prohibitions in the mean time to be made of reading
again and registring the said pretended Conclusion of the first of July, or any
other Act made by the said pretended Deputies and their adherents, as also of
proceeding further, till the said Court should determine therein. Moreover,
whereas another Petition has been presented by the said Petitioners for the
further urging of the former; and that the said MM. Cornet and Pereyret, under
whose names a pretended Censure was sent abroad, might be constrained to
acknowledge, own or disown the said pretended Censure. Also the Acts and Papers
annexed to the said Petitions, and the conclusions of the Kings Attorney
General having been seen and weighed; And for that the said Cornet and
Pereyret, de Mince and Saint-Amour, and M. James Hennequin an ancient Doctor of
Sorbonne have been summoned and heard, and the said Pereyret and Cornet have
declared that they did not publish that writing or draught of a Censure made by
some particular Doctors commissioned for examining the Propositions therein
contained, neither give charge to the Scribe of the said Faculty or any other
to deliver out any act or copy thereof, but expressly forbid him to communicate,
publish or divulge the same, disowning the publication thereof, if any has
been made; and also have professed that the said Writing was not signed by any
of them three, nor by the other Doctors appointed for examining the said
Propositions; and that in the said draught delivered to the said Scribe, the
said Propositions were not so determined as they are in the Copy annexed to the
Petition, but only the passages of Scripture and Fathers, which the said
appointed Doctors esteemed contrary to the said Propositions, were cited by
them; all with an intention to make report thereof to the said Faculty
assembled; Also whereas they have consented, that all things remain as they
are, and give their word to do nothing in this matter directly or indirectly
till the Court shall have given order therein: All this being considered, the
said Chamber has admitted and does admit the said Petitioners Opposers and
Appellants, has held and does hold the said Appeal valid, Ordains upon the
whole, that the Parties shall have a hearing the first day after the Feast of
S. Martin. In the mean time, besides the aforesaid Declaration, It has made
and does make prohibitions and injunctions to the said Parties respectively
both on the one side and the other, as well to publish the said writing and
draught of Censure, as to agitate and bring into question the Propositions
contained therein, also write or publish anything concerning them directly or
indirectly in any sort or manner whatsoever, till it shall be by the Court
otherwise determined therein.

Given in the Chamber of Vacations on the fifth of October, one thousand six
hundred forty nine.
CHAP. XIII.
Of what passed during the months of October and November touching the
Election of M. Hallier to the Office of Syndic.

MOns. Hallier had been of sentiments and interests so different from those of
M. Cornet in several things, that it is no small wonder that M. Cornet should
think of going out of the office of Syndic, in the pursuit of the enterprise
which he had contrived and hitherto little advanced; and that at his going out
he should think of having M. Hallier for his successor in that place. Before
that time they had never to my knowledge had any thing common, besides
adherence and dependence on some persons of the Court of Rome; but in all other
things a sufficiently great Antipathy. Nevertheless M. Hallier was advanced to
the Office of Syndic by the whole Faction of M. Cornet; and indeed the person
of the Syndic was of very great consequence for the success of the Enterprise,
whether in regard of the correspondence necessary to be had with Rome for such
things as depended thereof, or in regard of undertaking and carrying out those
which should be acted in the Faculty.

On one side, M. Hallier's just and disinteress'd management I had observed in
some Academical Affairs wherein we acted jointly together, kept me from
thinking he could possibly resolve to favor M. Cornet's enterprise; but on the
other it was perfectly visible that M. Cornet having in his dispose the
suffrages necessary for obtaining the Syndicate, would not have determined to
give the same to M. Hallier, unless he had first drawn from him all possible
assurance to second his Designs. But to omit what may have been the tie
between these two so opposite persons, I considered but one thing which I looked
upon as that which ought to serve me for a rule in that Election after it was
come to my knowledge; although I was very loath to make use of it, for that M.
Hallier and I had ever been very good friends till that present; and for that
when I had the honor to be Rector of the University, I had found him very
active against the projects of the Jesuits to ruin it by getting to be
incorporated into its body and made partakers of its privileges.

But knowing that he had approved the doctrine of Sanctarel by setting his
Approbation to the book of Corn. a Lapide a Jesuit upon the Canonical Epistles
the same year that the Faculty condemned it, and all the Univesities of the
Kingdom received and confirmed the Censure thereof; I conceived that to suffer
him to enter into the sole Magistracy which is in the Faculty of Divinity,
would be to trespass against my duty toward the King and the public,
especially there being none but my self amongst all the Doctors, as I thought,
that knew of his having given the said Approbation. Wherefore when M. Hallier
was nominated for Syndic in the Assembly of the first of October 1649. and the
suffrage was come to my turn, and no objection made by any of his unfitness for
that place by reason of the aforesaid Approbation, I thought my self obliged to
object the same, and upon that ground to oppose his election.

I shall not stand here to recite the passages in that Assembly upon this
matter, because they are contained in the Process Verbal which was drawn up
thereupon and soon after Printed. It shall suffice to signify that M. de Heu
Cure of S. Severin, M. Chastellain, M. Copin, M. de Mince, M. Rousse, M.
Bachelier and M. Brousse joined with me in the opposition which I made against
the said election.

M. Hallier employed diverse of his friends to the end we might enter into some
accommodement with him, and we on our part were as desirous thereof as himself,
so far as the nature and circumstances of the matter permitted, and provided we
might have sufficient assurance that such accommodement tended to the honor
and public peace of the Faculty as well as to the satisfaction of the parties
concerned.

The first time he gave me occasion to speak thereof was the 12. of October by
a Doctor much his friend and mine, who came to me as we were going from a
Doctor's Act that day, and told me M. Hallier was prodigiously incensed against
me, for that he understood I intended to prosecute in Parliament the opposition
I had made against his election to the office of Syndic. That M. Hallier had
enjoined him to assure me that he was absolutely disposed to live in peace with
me, and to do his utmost for that of the Faculty: That he desired nothing more
then to stifle the divisions arisen upon M. Cornet's enterprise, to reconcile
the different opinions touching the prepositions made the first of July, and to
reduce the most exasperated minds to a just temper and mutual concord. That he
promised in the word of an honest man to use his authority to these ends, and
to deport himself toward us in his Syndical so well, that we should have cause
to be glad of him, if we would but leave him in quiet and liberty to perform
the duties of his place. That should he be brought before the Parliament upon
the accusation framed by me against him, we ought to expect from him (I,
particularly) all such treatments as are to be feared from a man justly
provoked and offended in his honor, which was dear to him, and which he
resolved to maintain with the hazard of all other things: That we knew well
what correspondence and credit he had at Rome to obtain or stop a Bull there
against us. That he would interest the Pope and the Nuncio in his business;
That he would stir up the Clergy of France whose Agent he had been in the
last Assembly of the year 1645. That all this put together against the
Parliament, might be able to balance its authority and make good his attempts.
That as for me, he would destroy me, and that informations were promised him
already against me.

I could hardly believe all these things, did I not take them out of a letter
which I writ the next day while they were yet fresh in my memory, to one of our
common friends, whom I thought fit to advertise thereof. And here take the very
words of my answer to the menaces of M. Hallier.

I answered in sum, that I desired peace as much as he, and had always
desired it; that whatever should happen, I would always act my utmost for it:
but I wished a good one, safe and honorable. That I was not a man to betray
weakly the cause of God and the King for a counterfeit peace. That all the
powers wherewith he threatened me terrified me not, in as much as I hoped the
justice of my cause and proceeding being known to them, they would approve my
doings, and there would be no division for this cause between them and our
Lords of the Court of Parliament. That I was sorry that he engaged in this
business; but private intorests are nothing to me when the public are
concerned. That whatever he could say or do, I would omit nothing of my duty
and of what was in my power for the sevice of God and the King, and for the
defense of Truth and Justice.

Some days after came the festival of S. Vrsula; for the solemnising of which
all the Doctors of Sorbonne not absent in remote Provinces, resort thither
together. M. the Archbishop of Ambrun was to preach there this year, and the
Queen was to come thither. My chamber was chosen for the said Archbishop to
retire into before and after his preaching; and accordingly he came thither
about nine a clock in the morning.

Soon after his coming he began to speak to me of the foresaid agreement in a
manner something more gentle then that of the above mentioned message, and to
invite me thereunto by reasons not only relating to particular Doctors and all
the Faculty, but also to the whole body of the Sat. This Prelate may remember
that he found it no hard matter to convince me thereof, because I was perfectly
prepared thereunto not only for public considerations and the desire which (he
said) the Queen had for the agreement to be made, but also for that I had my
self as great a desire of it as could be imagined. Nevertheless all the
conference the Archbishop and I had about this matter was terminated in general
discourses, and we spoke not of any conditions that might be made to that end,
neither at that time nor in two or three other converses, wherein he spoke to
me of it again that day. There was likewise another person of the College much
devoted to M. Hallier, called M. Segures, who spoke to me about it in the same
manner too without specifying any conditions thereof, and who knew also how
desirous I was of it; but I did not find that an accommodation was any thing
advanced by the discourse of either of them, whilst they remained within those
terms.

Wherefore the time urging either to conclude it, if M. Hallier were disposed
to do such things as were necessary in order to it, or to pursue my opposition
before the Parliament in the few days that remained thereof, to the end to get
a Rule of Court therein before our ensuing Assembly of the 4. of November, if
the public interests could not consist with the particular aims of M.
Hallier; I resolved to go the next day to M. Segures, to tell him as much and
desire him to advertise M. Hallier thereof, and withal to propound to him what
I desired of him, to the end I might have ground to desist from the prosecution
I should otherwise be obliged to use agninst him; and to know after he had
spoken with him, whether he liked the conditions proposed to him, or not.

M. Segure made several visits to M. Hallier within two or three days, (during
which all prosecutions against him were suspended) about the expedients and
conditions which were to be taken in order to concluding the said agreement. I
shall not mention the same here, because they are to be set down in a List,
whereof I shall insert a Copy in due place. It shall suffice to say that M.
Hallier made no difficulty to close with them, and to give all the verbal
assurances thereof that could be desired before persons of honor and authority
who were able to constrain him to the performance of what he promised: but he
refused to subscribe what he promised, think^ng either it would be a dishonor
to him, or that we distrusted his word, or that it might be said that he
contracted for the place by his signature.

We promised him that we would keep it very secret, that none but the Coadjutor
of Paris, now Cardinal of Retz (to whom M. Hallier had addressed to entreat him
to interpose in this accommodement) should be the Depositary of it; and that ^t
should serve only to have recourse unto and regulate things by, in case that
during his Syndicship complaint were made of his having failed in any one of
the promised matters: That his office being expired, he should have his
signature redeliver'd to him, to burn it. Moreover to remove this scruple, we
offered him to sign on our part that which we should promise to him. In fine,
we yielded so far, as that we were contented with his writing down the things
which should be promised on both sides without signing them, to the end the
same might remain a certain rule of Conditions of agreement, whereunto
recourse might be had in case of need. But what ever could be said to him, he
would never be brought to consent to sign any thing or leave any thing in
writing concerning the said Conditions.

Wherefore seeing there remained not above two or three days of the Parliament,
and that we could do no good upon M. Hallier, we thought fit to signify to him
by M. Segure, that, after his refusal of the accommodation offerr'd to him, he
ought not to take it ill if we continued to procure a Report of the Petition
which we had presented against him.

Accordingly we solicited a Report thereof, which did not hinder but that M.
Segure came again the last day to make us new tender of accommodement, of which
the Bishop of S. Malio had spoken to him; namely, that the matters promised by
M. Hallier should be written down and remain in the hands of the Coadiutor, not
as if M. Hallier were obliged thereto by us, but as if the Coadjutor caused
them to be written for his own remembrance, and reciprocally desired the same
of M. Hallier and of us.

I willingly accepted this tender; but not till I should have imparted the same
to the Doctors interessed in the business with me, without whose advice I would
not conclude any thing therein. But as I was upon the point to impart it to
them we understood that the very morning of that day, which was the 27. the
Parliament had issued an Arrest upon our Petition, by which the Court received
us as Appellants against the election of M. Hallier to the Syndicship, and
ordained that upon the Appeal the Parties should have a hearing on the morrow
after the feast of S. Martin; in the mean time prohibition was made to the said
M. Hallier to meddle or interpose in the said office of Syndic, or execute any
part thereof; and injunction to M. Cornet to discharge the duties thereof as he
did before M. Hallier was chosen, till the Court should ordain otherwise
therein. That moreover the Arrests issued against the Religious Mendicants,
(who also had contributed with their Suffrages to the said election to the
number of above two, though till this occasion there had been an Antipathy and
continual feud between them and M. Hallier) should be put in execution.

We looked upon this Arrest as a new obstacle to our agreement, because we were
not so much Masters of the affair as before; and the discharging of the
Syndicship being forbidden to M. Hallier by this Arrest, there would need
another to re-establish him in it.

Nevertheless there was no forbearance of seeking means of reconcilement,
especially during the two last Festivals of All Saints; and M. Des-Chasteaux,
then Rector of the University, took very great care therein. But in fine, the
Doctors with whom I was joined in the business, would not hear of ought but of
M. Hallier's signing what he promised, and of the writing's remaining in the
hands of the Coadjutor, for the end and reasons abovementioned.

The draught of Conditions which we required M. Hallier to sign, contained, 1.
That whilst he was Syndic he should promise for the restoring such peace as
was in the Faculty before the month of July, and preserving the same, to keep
an equality between both parties, by letting them enjoy the freedom of their
sentiments, as well to utter the same viva voce, as to write them in their
Theses. Moreover, not to carry on in any manner whatsoever the enterprise of M.
Cornet, set on foot in the month of July, concerning the examination and
censuring of certain Propositions, and nomination of Deputies for those
purposes. As also not to reject either in Theses or any other way, the Doct^in
and Authority of S. Augustine, as it is contained in his Books, and as it has
been taught in the Schools till then, for example, by M. de Saint Beufoe. 2.
That in case he (whilst Syndic) were obliged to go from Paris, he should
promise to acquaint MM. N. and N. before he speak thereof to the Faculty, for
prevention of such inconveniences as may arise upon the substitution of
another, who may design to foment division in the Faculty. 3. That he should
bind himself, being Syndic, and promise not to hinder, as such, or otherwise,
the execution of the Arrests issued for the regulation of the Suffrages of
Doctors Mendicants, in Assemblies and Consultations of the Faculty. 4. That
provided he denied publicly, and persisted to deny his having given
approbation to the Book of Cornelius a Lapide upon the Canonical Epistles, and
consented to all sorts of condemnations su'd and prosecuted against the
Propositions contained in that Author, of which complaint had been made to the
Faculty: the Doctors who opposed his election, promised also to desist from
their opposition, and to suffer him peaceably to exerc^se the duties of his
place.

It was eleven a clock at night on the third of November 1649. when M. Hallier
resolved to write with his own hand the Conditions of this agreement, to put
the same the next morning, before the Assembly, into those of the Coadjutor,
and to promise to him performance thereof, accordingly as they are here
expressed. I had notice of it on the fourth, which was the day of the Assembly,
between six and seven in the morning, to the end I might repair to the
Coadjutor, as accordingly I did with M. Taignier, and found M. Hallier there
before us.

After some slight contests which touched not the bottom of the business, M.
the Coadjutor taking him aside and giving him the Conditions to read which he
had promised to write, to the end they might remain in his the said Coadjutor's
hands, M. Hallier having read them, spoke some words very low to him. After
which we being drawn near, the Coadjutor told us, that M. Hallier not only
refused to write, but likewise was not resolved to promise by word the Articles
contained in that Paper. He expressed to us great regret to see this business
out of probability of accommodation. For (said he) were there nothing between
them but the mode and circumstances of things, some expedient might be sought
to facilitate the same; but there is not so much as an agreement about the
substance. We testified to the Coadjutor how troubled we were at the
averseness of M. Hallier, and beseecht him to remember, that we were no wise
the cause of the miscarriage of the intended reconcilement.

So we returned to the Sorbonne, to the end the Arrest, as yet not s gnifi'd to
M. Hallier, M. the Dean, and M. Bouvot the Register, might be signified unto
them before the Assembly. I will not here report any thing particularly that
was done therein, all being contained at large in the Process Verbal, which
was soon after printed thereupon, and signed by the Usher of the Parliament,
who came to the Assembly to signify the same there. I shall only say in this
place, that notwithstanding the said Arrest which expressly interdicted M.
Hallier all the functions of Syndic, he did not forbear to execute them all in
this Assembly; and this, with a strange contempt of the Parliaments Author ty,
by himself and all the Doctors who elected him to that place.

The day of this Assembly being passed, it behoov'd to wait the resitting of
the Parliament, to represent to them the infringements that had been made of
their Arrests. We presented a new Petition to them, by which we besought them
to take order therein, and cause the same to be executed. We annexed to this
Petition the Process Verbal of the Usher, and a Summons made to M. Bouvot on
the 18. of November, to declare who had till that day discharged the office of
Syndic since the Assembly of the 4th. of November, to which M. Bouvot had
answered that it was M. Hallier.

In the mean time M. Hallier ceased not to renew his solicitations for an
accord with us, notwithstanding all that was passed. He had recourse for that
effect to the Bishop of Amiens and the Coadjutor, and again assured them, and
entreated them to assure us, that he would deal equally with both sides in the
matters of Grace, Predestination, and Free Will, and would not in Theses reject
the sentiments of S. Augustine.

After what was past we saw no great likelihood of any reconciliation, and
little considered what might be propounded to us from M. Hallier; nor did we
trouble our selves with deliberating what to do in reference to his late offer
to the said two Prelates: For before they had acquainted us with it, he went to
the Coadjutor and desired him to release him of his word, and excuse him if he
could promise nothing.

Friday 26 November, M. Broussel reported our new Petition, to which report the
first President spoke thus: See (said he) here is a very considerable business,
to reproach an honest man for an Approbation given by him ever since the year
1626. Who are the Petitioners? M. Broussel answered, the Petition must be read,
and then, Sir, you will see who the Petitioners are, and find that this is not
an affair of so small consequence as you apprehend. The Petition was read. When
I was named, the first President said, There, There Is the man that makes all
this ado. However the Petition was signed with Soit montre, Let it be
admitted. The President de Mesmes seconded the motions of the first President
to pacify matters. But when the Doctors Mendicants came to be spoken of, the
President de Mesmes said, We cannot always live in this manner, some course
must be taken for redress.

After ten a clock the first President sent to seek M. Cazaut, and asked him
whether he had made the Process Verbal, concerning what had passed in
Sorbonne. M. Cazaut answered, Yes, and that that Process Verbal would astonish
him; That never was seen such a Rebellion against the Arrests of the Court. The
first President caused the first draught of it to be brought to him, the copy
being not yet finished.

We went the same day to M. Bignon, and told him, that we would cause our
Adversaries to be Summoned to appear the next morning at the Bar of the
Parliament, to argue the business, and he answered us that we should be heard
there.

The arguing of other Causes being dispatched, MMr. the King's Learned Council
caused all the people to withdraw saving us. As M. Langlois, the Advocate
retained on our side, was beginning to open the matter, and we stood toward
the window, there appeared on the other side an Attorney or Procurator, who
said, Messieurs, The Cause intended to be opened to you I am charged with, my
Clients have had no notice of this hearing till yesterday in the Evening, and
they have no Advocate provided. M. Talon thereupon asked him, Where his Clients
were? He answered, In the Hall: M. Talon said; Call them hither, there needs
but one word in this business, we will hear them by their own mouths. The
Attorney said, They are not instructed in their own affairs; and so he
withdrew. We continued our pleading, and besides the opening of our Case by the
Advocate, MM. de Mince and Brousse displayed it from the bottom. Amongst other
things which were spoken there, we complained of the Coriolanus reprinted by M.
Bail, containing the same Doctrine with Corn. a Lapide. The King's Learned
Council told us, that when such evil books were published, there needed no more
in order to have justice upon them, but straitway to bring them to the Bar.
Their conclusions were; that on the King's part nothing hindered but we might
have audience the first day, and they told us that we must repair to the first
President, who would sign us a Placet for appearance on Monday morning.

M. the first President aiming to prevent us of an Arrest, and to reduce us to
a Treaty with our Adversaries, made many scruples to award us the said Placet;
but we were so urgent upon the rules of Court, notwithstanding the difficulties
and refusals he made us, that at length he took his pen and began to
superscribe our Placet. Yet as he was writing, a resolution took him, to deny
us the same absolutely; he returned the pen which we had presented to him, and
instead of appearing with our Advocates, as we ought to do according to the
usual order, he sent us back to our Reporter, by whom (he said) we should be
heard on Monday concerning our Petition. Nevertheless when our Reporter was
according to this Rule going to speak thereof on Monday, the first President
stopped him by a new diversion to other business, and only sent to tell us at
ten a clock, that we must come and wait upon him after dinner. We did so; and
there met with our Adversaries; in which interview, and many others in the same
place, we had diverse conferences with them in his presence. It is not material
to give account of them; only I will touch two circumstances, which are too
considerable to be omitted. One is, that M. Hallier having in one of those
visits told the first President, that he could not obtain peace with us,
because he had refused to sign the Propositions of Jansenius: We answered him
immediately, that he had never been spoken to about them. M. Hallier replied,
that we caused the same be demanded of him by the Coadjutor: We answered, that
it was nothing so. But returning again the next morning, M. de Lalane, who in
the mean time went to the Coadjutor for the same purpose, said to the first
President, Sir, I am commanded by the Coadjutor to tell you from him, that he
never from us demanded of M. Hallier to sign the Propositions of Jansenius, as
M. Hallier told you yesterday. To which the first President having answered,
that that was not the matter in question; M. de Lalane replied, Sir, it is not
just that M. Hallier should impose upon the Coadjutor and us, and that we say
nothing thereof. -- The second is, that whatever instance we could use to bring
him to allow that our contests should be decided according to the ordinary
ways by the judgment of the Court, he would not consent thereunto, but told
us that we must labor to end the same our selves by agreement; adding, that
this was the mind of the Court, which he testified, that he had received order
to acquaint us with.

CHAP. XIV.
Of what was done in the Assembly of the first of December 1649. in order to
the Agreement desired by the first President.

THe first day of December being arrived, M. Charton told the Assembly of the
Faculty, that the first President had sent for either side, and signified to
us, that the Court of Parliament desired we would seek amongst our selves some
terms of agreement.

M. de Mince spoke next, and testified that the first President's meaning was
not to remit businesses to the judgment of the Faculty, but only to invite
both parties to seek ways of Accommodation amongst our selves.

M. Hallier spoke something which caused a contest to arise between M. de Mince
and him, and which was the occasion that M. de Mince having told him that he
ought not to thrust himself into the Administrations of the Syndicship, M.
Hallier declared, that he did not pretend to discharge any of them in this
Assembly.

M. Mulot put to the Vote that which was propounded by M. Charton. M. Messier
Subdean, delivering his opinion the first, said, that for the Propositions it
would be fit to nominate two Doctors on each side, to the end they might confer
together of what was to be done. But being advertised that the Propositions
were not under consideration, he altered his suffrage, and said, that he judged
the way of agreement was, to execute the Arrests of the Court.

After which no person spoke more concerning the Propositions, till M.
Pereyret, whose advices are usually infallible Prognostics, and certain rules
of the sentiments of all those of that party. He said, that in order to a solid
peace, it behoved to discuss the principal cause of the division, to look to
that which chiefly had incensed us, and that was Doctrine. That as for the
Syndicship and the other things, they were not the principal, but only
accessaries. That it behooved to apply the remedy to the root of the Evil. That
it was this that was chiefly to be examined, and from which we might most
expect peace. That all which had been done proceeded from that source.
Wherefore it was requisite to give satisfaction therein, and for that end to
take time to deliberate again thereupon, and in the mean while to invite all
people to examine them. That they who were deputed should do the same. That in
the interim it was fit to live in friendship and good intelligence one with
another; and for this purpose, to forbear writing or speaking any thing about
the said Propositions, and putting the same into Theses. That if in the mean
space any Bachelors or Doctors attempt any thing contrary to this rule, either
in Theses or Books, it behooved the Faculty to punish them sharply and severely
by its Censures. That not only the first President, but also all the other
Presidents and Counselors whom they had conferred with, had advised to proceed
in this manner; and thus it was that they designed to act in this Accommodation.

M. Coppin perceiving that this advice tended to renew the enterprise of the
first of July, said as well in his own name as in that of a great number of
Doctors, (whose mind never was to eschew the examination of those Propositions
or others, but who on the contrary always desired that it should be set afoot,
provided it were done with conditions necessary for the manifestation of truth,
and the establishment of a firm peace amongst the Doctors) He said (as I
intimated) as well in his own name as in that of the Doctors, that if the
resolution were taken to set upon such examination, he demanded that certain
conditions should be observed therein, such as all equitable persons would
esteem just and necessary for the right performance of the same, and which he
was going to propound to the Faculty: To do which, he took in his hand a paper,
wherein he had written the same; but upon this there was raised a great noise,
caused partly by such as liked not the mention of Conditions, and partly by
others who disliked that we should propose them, because that in this Assembly
the question was not about such examination.

We answered, that indeed the Dean did not put the same to the Vote, yet M.
Pereyret did not forbear to debate upon it, and by his discourse give cause to
believe that it was intended to turn the deliberations of the Faculty that way.
M. Pereyret went about to put it off, but he could not handsomely. M. Amiot
maintained that M. Pereyret had reason to say that such examination was the
thing to be considered, for that it was required to seek ways of accord, and
the difference being about Doctrine, it was fit to speak thereof. As M. Coppin
continued offering to read his paper, (because there would be no time to read
it after the examination were concluded upon, and the noise continuing, he
could not have a moment of audience) on the one side M. Mulot out of a
caprichio by force snatched away his paper, and M. Pereyret on the other to
appease the noise which increased more and more, altered his former sentence,
or at least explained it; and concluded no more to examine the Propositions, or
to forbid the maintaining of them. M. Mulot also rendered M. Coppin his paper,
who gave it into the hands of M. Bouvot, to the end it might be registered, to
be made use of, and had recourse to, as often as it should please those
Gentlemen to attempt the examination of the matters in contest.

M. Charton delivering his opinion, did not forbear to conclude again upon the
examination of the Propositions, without speaking ought, or having any regard
to the Conditions presented by M. Coppin. M. Morel advised the same with M.
Charton, and said that the examination was already made by the Deputies, that
there remained no more but for them to make their report thereof; that it was
requisite to defer it still, and in the mean time to forbid the Bachelors to
maintain those Propositions; but that it was not fit to name other Deputies to
discuss the same; and as for M. Hallier, that things ought to be so ordered as
that he abide in the office of Syndic.

M. Hallier stood up, and said he would willingly relinquish it, if need were;
yet he should advise, that eight or ten Doctors conferred together about what
was to be done therein; but that it behooved not to speak of condemning the one
or the other.

M. Amiot said, that the time agreed upon to forbear speaking of the
Propositions, and of the other transactions of the first of July, was expired;
that it behooved now to speak thereof, and to make valid what was till then only
suspended.

When I perceived that this advice to take the Propositions in hand again was
proposed by many Doctors, and that it was to be feared lest it should prevail,
I caused notice to be given to an Usher of the Court of Parliament, whom I kept
ready to signify, in case of need, the Arrest issued on the fifth of October,
and spoken of before, by which they were forbidden to proceed further upon the
business of the Propositions. M. Tassin who received the charge of signifying
the said Arrest, brought it to the Faculty to the Table: They knew not what it
was, but had wholly forgotten this Arrest, for the publishing of it had been
deferred whilst it seemed not necessary; wherefore it was easily resolved that
it should be read, to know what it was. Whilst it was reading, MM. Pereyret
and Cornet denied their having spoken that which the Arrest expressly related to
have been spoken by them, in presence of the Court, when they were heard there.
M. de Saint Roch replied to them, that then they needed only to enter a
challenge of falsity against the Arrest, and M. Brousse required a Memorandum
of the Lie which they gave the whole Court.

After that this Arrest was read, the Suffrages continued on. M. Cornet said
the signification of this Arrest disturbed the peace, and hindered them from
deliberating of ways of accord, for that it bound their hands. He was
answered, that ways of accord were sought for upon M. Hallier's business;
that this Arrest concerned only the examination of the Propositions, in which
it forbad them further to proceed, and therefore did not hinder but that they
might endeavor to find means of agreement. M. Cornet continuing his speech,
said, that then himself was of M. Chappellas's opinion, and that these contests
ought to be taken up according to the desire of the first President, who made
the overture of suspending the business of the Propositions during three or
four months; and that himself should advise that the said term be prolonged;
and nevertheless because the affair of the Syndic required expedition, that
three Doctors of each side be nominated, and three in the name of the Faculty,
who should all agree about means to accommode the contests.

M. Amiot did not forbear, after this advice, to require a Memorandum of the
publishing of this Arrest, as if it had been a misdeed committed against the
intentions of the Parliament, by them who caused it to be published. And M.
Brousse required one likewise of the time in which it was published, namely,
after diverse had given their Suffrages for continuing the examination of the
Propositions. He also laid open in general what was contained in the paper of
Conditions presented by M. Coppin, and required again that M. Bouvot should not
fail to register it.

After the reading of the said Arrest; there was no more speech of proceeding
to examine the Propositions, but only of nominating Commissioners for the
business of M. Hallier; and at length after diverse Expedients mentioned, the
plurality of Suffrages concluded that M. Hallier should name three on his own
part, M. de Mince three others, and that as many should be nominated in behalf
of the Faculty, as persons indifferent, namely M. Chappellas, M. Gauquelin, and
M. du Val, which nine were to meet and consult amongst themselves of means of
accord, and make report to the Faculty the seventh of the same month, of what
they offered in order to an Accommodation.

The proceeding of the Doctors with whom we had to do, was sufficiently strange
throughout the whole deliberation. For they debated in the same manner as they
would have done if they had been Supreme Arbiters of the Accommodation, and as
if the Court had remitted the whole business unto them to ordain thereupon.
And although we were all divided into two parties, of which some were more
heated and others less, yet they pretended that there was a third body between
them and us, which they called The Faculty, (which yet consisted only of
themselves) because with the help of the Religious Mendicants their number was
unquestionably greater then ours. We did not omit to intimate to them very
distinctly upon two or three occasions in this Assembly, that there was not in
the Company a third party which composed the Faculty; that neither the Court
nor the first President had remitted us to be judged by themselves, but only to
seek between them and us the means of reconciling us, and with charge, that if
we did it not, we should have recourse to the Court of Parliament, to be judged
there. Notwithstanding, though we endeavored to make this as clear as possible,
they could scarce be brought to understand our language, nor to forbear acting
as if they had been absolute masters of our differences, and as if the Faculty
had been some kind of thing distinct from themselves and us.

Moreover M. Brousse opposed this Result as well in his own name as in ours. He
said Commissioners could not be nominated on behalf of the Faculty, which was
no party by it self in this affair, but was wholly divided into two parties. He
said, that if it were requisite to nominate Doctors for mediators between such
as should be nominated on either side, it would belong to these Doctors to
choose them, and to agree about them, in case themselves could not agree
together. He said, that particularly the persons named as indifferent, were not
so; having declared themselves too openly in this assembly for M. Hallier: and
he warned the said M. Hallier and the Dean to execute the Arrests published;
telling them; that in default thereof he made against them all Protestations
requisite in such cases, and persisted in all Oppositions, Appeals and
Protestations heretofore made. Nevertheless the Dean forbore not to warn M. de
de Mince to nominate three Doctors on the part of the Opposers for carrying on
the Accord. M. de Mince answered, that without prejudice to the Declarations
and Protestations made by M. Brousse, he would nominate them that day, and
deliver them in writing to M. Bouvot the Register. M. Hallier was likewise
warned by the Dean, and he immediately nominated for himself MM. Pereyret,
Morel, and Le Moine. And thus this Assembly ended.

The Conditions for examining the doctrine of Grace which M. Coppin presented
in our behalf to the Faculty, were not entered in our Registers, what ever
importunity we could use to have it done, because M. Cornet ever since that
time was Master of our Registers, and put nothing therein but what himself
would. Yet they were printed almost as soon as they were presented, and have
been so again; however I shall not omit to give a Copy of them in the
Collection of pieces I intend to place after this Journal. I shall only observe
here, that it is said there in express terms, that the Propositions presented
by M. Cornet to the Faculty for Censure, are equivocal and ambiguous, and are
not maintained by any one in the sense which they seem to have of themselves.
Postquam omnibus innotuit quam periculose M. Nicolaus Cornet Propositiones
quasdam de Gratia ambiguas and aequivocas, A NULLO AUTORE IN SENSU QUEM PRAE SE
FAR VIDENTUR ASSERTAS, vocaverit in medium, and examinandas Facultati
exhibuerit, etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of what passed after this Assembly till the seventh of December, in reference
to the Agreement debated of.

THough we were not bound to follow the Result of the Assembly held in the
forenoon, but only so far as we judged it convenient to conform thereunto;
neverthesse, not to reject this way of accommodation, in case it might have any
good success, and having considered that in particular conferences about this
affair we should always have liberty to accept or reject, as we thought good;
M. de Mince in the afternoon delivered a Note to M. Bouvot, in which he
nominated M. Chastellain, M. Bachelier, and me, to confer with the Doctors
nominated by M. Hallier, for accommoding the Process commenced against his
pretended Election to the Syndicship, or rather for finding means to bring him
fairly out of it; because he (the said de Mince) always thought that M.
Hallier ought not to have been elected to it; for which purpose he made this
nomination of Commissioners or Deputies, without prejudice to our Opposition.

M. Chastellain, the antientest of these nine Deputies, assembled us according
to the custom of the College of Sorbonne to the lodgings of M. Bouvot on the
fourth of December, between nine and ten in the morning. When we were all come
thither, he propounded to us the matter about which we were assembled, and put
it under deliberation amongst us, as it uses to be in the Faculty, to the end
every one might give his advice thereupon.

M. Pereyret, who was the first to speak to the proposal made by M.
Chastellain, delivered his advice as it shall be reported hereafter. In the
mean time it is worth observing, that by all that passed in the several
conferences we had with the first President touching our affairs, we found in
him so great an averseness to suffer them to be managed by the usual ways of
justice, and so great a resolution to have us labor to terminate them our
selves, that we were constrained before that Assembly of the first of December.
to resolve thereupon, and bethink our selves of such conditions as were fit to
be offered for the reconciliation which we might be obliged to make, to the end
that by concluding the same, we might live in the Faculty with some kind of
peace and freedom.

Those Conditions, besides them which concerned the Syndicship of M. Hallier,
hereafter related, were, 1. That the two years of his Syndicship being expired,
M. de S. Andre, who had had in the assembly of his election the plurality of
legitimate Suffrages, be Syndic, and exercise the functions thereof during the
two following years. 2. That during the time in which M. Hallier should have
occasion to be absent from Paris, whether for the necessities of his
Archdeaconry of S. Malo or othewise, M. de S. Andre exercise the functions
thereof. 3. That M. Hallier come to the Sorbonne thrice a week, upon days
appointed, to satisfy the Doctors and Bachelors that have any thing to do with
him. 4. That M. Hallier have no power to reject out of Theses the Propositions
of the ancient Doctrine of the Faculty, and of France, touching the Church, the
Councils, the Pope, the Supremacy of the King, and the Liberties of the
Gallicane Church, for the maintaining of which, the Bachelors who have their
Theses signed by their chief Masters and Presidents, be left by him in perfect
liberty. That likewise he have no power to reject out of them the doctrine of S.
Augustine touching Grace, Predestination and Freewill; nor to keep the said
Theses, nor to alter in any thing the order and discipline of the Faculty. 5.
That the Conclusions complained of a year or eighteen months ago, be reviewed
and entered into the Registers conformably to the truth of the things which
passed, and in such words as may not injure any one, but may be admitted by
such as are concerned therein. 6. That the two Conscriptors nominated contrary
to form in the absence of the opposers of M. Hallier's election, being persons
altogether partial, be either both, or at least one of them changed, and two
others duly agreed upon put in their places; or that one of them quit his
office, and such Doctor put in his room as the Opposers should choose, to take
care as well of the Conclusions hereafter to be made, as of the Doctors to be
nominated for examining the Bachelors, to the end to hinder, that when it is
known that any of them are taken to be of opinions not agreeable to one of the
parties, there be not examiners assigned them of wholly differing judgments,
and inclinable to use them ill in their examinations. 7. That the Advocates
General be informed of all these Conditions of our Agreements, to the end they
may add what we may possibly have omitted conducive to the public interest,
the King's service, and the duty of their offices.

M. Bachelier, who was to speak next after M. Pereyret in this private
assembly, proposed some of these conditions; and before the others declared
their sentiments, M. Pereyret said, that provided they were agreed upon the
Capital matter of these contests, all that M. Bachelier required would admit no
scruple, but be very easy to perform. He added further, that these things
needed not to have been demanded, being implied sufficiently without being
spoken of; as also that the expenses made on either side in these contests, be
reembours'd out of the public moneys of the Faculty.

All the other Gentlemen who spoke after M. Bachelier, till it came to me, were
of M. Pereyret's opinion, both as to the substance and as to the circumstances
of what M. Bachelier added thereunto, saving that some alleged that it was not
in our power to make Conscriptors, but that they were to be nominated by the
Faculty: all agreed that it was just to make them according to these
conditions, and that the Faculty would be inclined to nominate such as with
submission to it we should agree upon.

I was obliged to follow the order which all those Gentlemen kept, and I spoke
last. I testified how great joy I found in their inclinations to our peace; but
that the better to judge and speak thereof with more certainty, it would be fit
to write down and view the conditions with which it was made, that so they
might be performed before the peace be judged perfectly concluded and agreed
upon; That I would for my own part contribute my utmost thereunto; That I had
great hopes all these conditions would be performed, both for that I accounted
them just, and because I perceived they were acceptable to them: But yet that
in these kinds of transactions it behoov'd not to defer those things till
after-Agreements, which ought to precede, or at least accompany them. Every one
advised me to fear nothing, and told me, that content should be given me; and
so way was given to M. Pereyret to dictate to M. Bouvot the Register who was
present, the things which he had spoken in his Advice. The Copy thereof here
follows, being all filled with his own matter, and having, no doubt been
complotted before with M. Cornet.

4 December. 1649.
MM. -- deputed by the Faculty have agreed, That whereas provision has been
sufficiently made in reference to the Propositions in question by the
Ecclesiastical Determinations and ancient Decrees of the Faculty; It is not
necessary to proceed to an Examination or Censure, but it suffices to enjoin
the Syndic to see to the execution of the Decrees heretofore made both for
doctrine and discipline: And in case any scruples arise touching the aforesaid
Propositions, or others relating to the matter of Grace, and de Auxiliis, That
then the said Syndic shall take the advice of all the Doctors that were his
Predecessors in that Charge.

And for what concerns the Syndicship, That after M. Hallier shall have
reiterated the declaration which he made in the Faculty on the fourth of
November, that he did not approve the book of Cornelius a Lapide, but disallows
the doctrine contained therein concerning the power of Temporal Princes; and
that he adheres wholly to the doctrine of the Faculty in this point, and to the
Censures which it has made thereupon, and amongst others on the 1. and 4. of
April 1626. And after that for justifying his innocence in this particular, he
shall have presented a Petition to the Court of Parliament that Prohibitions be
made to all Printers to print the said Book of Cornelius a Lapide with the said
supposed Approbation, with penalties against the Offenders: Then with a common
consent his Election shall be allowed.

Signed, Chastellain, Pereyret, Chappellas, Bachelier, Gauquelin, Le Moine,
Morell, Du Val.

After the Gentlemen above-named had signed, M. De Saint-Amour being moved to
sign also, demanded time to consider, and a Copy of the present Result.

Signed, Ph. Bouvot.



I was very attentive to that which M. Bouvot writ, whilst M. Pereyret dictated
to him, and I very easily perceived the equivocal terms wherein this Accord was
drawn in reference to the Propositions. I looked upon it as a new seminary of
divisions upon all occasions, wherein every one might have ground to interpret
it to his own advantage. That our Adversaries being more numerous then we,
would overruled its interpretation when ever they pleased. And lastly, that the
Referring to the ancient Syndics such scruples as might arise about Theses, was
the establishing of a petty Tribunal, and kind of Inquisition in the Faculty,
by attributing to them a Jurisdiction appertaining to all the Doctors in a
body, which might hereafter put fetters and constraint upon their sentiments,
which ought to be preserved in the liberty hitherto so advantageous to them.
This I accounted so much the more dangerous, for that amongst the Six Doctors
formerly Syndics, MM. Pereyret and Cornet being of the number, and M. Hallier
the present Syndic, I did not find so many of them equitable to us, as there
were prejudiced against us. Wherefore upon the motion of signing this Writing
as soon as it was finished, before any one had signed it, I took M. Chastellain
and M. Bachelier aside, and beseecht them that they would take one days time
to review and examine it beforehand, as well for the reasons abovesaid which I
partly noted to them, as for that there was no mention therein of any of the
conditions which we had demanded in order to this agreement, and I thought not
expedient to sign any before they were all performed; That we had to do with
people that would never seek reconcilement with us as they do, were it not that
they found themselves forced to it by the justice of the prosecutions we intend
against them, and who would afterward laugh at us and all that they have
promised us, if we should give over those so just and necessary prosecutions
without making the benefits thereof which we may for establishing the order,
discipline and ancient doctrine of the Faculty; That we had reduced them to
reason about the business of the Propositions by the Arrest of the fifth of
October. That this of the Syndicship would have as good an issue; that it
should never be carried without occasioning an information of the infringements
made of the Arrests of Parliament touching Religious Mendicants, (especially at
the time when M. Broussel and M. Viole came to the Faculty) and without doing
al things necessary for repairing the disobediences committed against the
authority of the Court, and for procuring the execution of those Arrests which
they knew to be so important to the good of the Faculty. I entreated them that
for the honor of God they would have one afternoons patience for examining all
that was to be considered about this business. But with all the
representations I could use, they were not to be brought to any delay. M.
Chastellain was much troubled with the Gout, and had caused himself to be
brought with very great pain from his own Lodging to that of M. Bouvot, and
therefore could not be prevailed with to come again, nor M. Bachelier to do
any thing but what he saw M. Chastellain do. So all eight signed the Writing,
as it is set down before; and at the signing of it, the rest assured M.
Chastellain and M. Bachelier, that they would not fail in the conditions which
we had required of them.

I was much surpised to find my self the only person left to sign them, of
nine who were much more ancient, experienced and judicious then my self; I saw
that I could not avoid being blamed as obstinate, the sole cause of the
divisions of the Faculty, and willing to keep up the disorder, of which some
reproaches had been already made me with less appearance then there was in this
occasion: but on the other side I could not resolve to avoid this vain reproach
by signing a thing which seemed to me so evidently mischievous.

However, they pressed me to sign it by threatening me to make complaints of me
everywhere, and to impute to me all the evil that might arise from our
disunion; but I could not be moved to do it; and all the expedient I could
devise in this difficult conjuncture, was, to require time to consider what I
was to do, and a Copy of the Result which they would have me sign as it is
noted by our Register at the foot thereof, and is above declared.

When I conferred hereupon with diverse of our Brethren, I found none but was
very glad of the resistance which I made thereto; many of them betook
themselves to represent the consequences thereof to M. Chastellain and M.
Bachelier; who at length became persuaded that I had reason on my side,
particularly in reference to the petty Tribunal which was going to be erected
amongst us, (consisting of the other Syndics) who were to become the only rules
and masters of doctrine; and M. Chastellain resolved to summon us together
again, to review and put into Latin that which was signed, to the end it might
be fit to be reported to the Faculty; and for that by reason of his
indisposition he was unable to come again to the house of the Faculty, he
entreated us to meet at his own.

It was on S. Nicolas's day in the afternoon. When I arrived there, the new
Result was already prepared in Latin, and signed by all the Deputies except M.
Chappellas and le Moyne, who were not yet come. It was presented to me ready
drawn and signed as I am going to insert it here, to the end I might sign it
also.

ANNO Dom. 1649. die 4. mensis Decembris, Honorandi Magistri nostri,
Chastellain, Pereyret, Chappellas, Bachelier, Morel Sorbonicus, Gauquelin, le
Moyne, Du Val, and de Saint-Amour, respective a Facultate deputati in publicis
Comitiis ejusdem mensis concluserunt and convenerunt inter se, ad Facultatem
referendum esse, Satis provisum fuisse tam circa Propositiones de quibus est
controversia, quam circa eas quae tangunt materiam de Gratia and de Auxiliis
divinis per Definitiones Ecclesiasticas and Antiqua Decreta ipsius Facultatis,
atque ideo non esse necesse procedere ad examen vel judicium earundem, sed
sufficere, si D. Syndico injungatur ut curet executioni mandanti Decreta antea
facta tam pro doctrina quam pro disciplina: quod si aliqua difficultas occurrat
circa praedictas Propositiones aut alias circa materiam de Gratia aut de
Auxiliis divinis, idem D. Syndicus consultet Facultatem: Si vero res ita urgeat
ut non possit commode convocari, consilium assumet omnium Sapientissimorum
Magistrorum qui eum in officio and munere Syndicatus praecesserunt.

Quod vero spectat ad Syndicatum, postquam honorandus M. N. Hallier
declarationem a se factam die quarta superioris mensis Novembris in publicis
Comitiis reiteravit, videlicet se nunquam approbasse librum Cornelii a Lapide
in Epistolas Canonicas, atque improbare se doctrinam in eo contentam quae
tangit potestatem Principum temporalium, seque penitus adhaerere doctrinae
Facultatis circa illud punctum, atque etiam Censuris ab eadem de eo factis, and
inter alias decreto facto contra Santarellum; utque suam circa illud momentum
innocentiam testificetur, libellum supplicem supremae Curiae Parlamenti
offeret, eo fine ut omnibus Typographis and Librariis interdicatur sub poenis
eidem Curiae reservatis in deficientes aut contravenientes, ne imprimant aut
vendant dictum librum Cornelii a Lapide cum dicta supposita approbatione. Et in
praedictorum consequentiam unanimi omnium consensu ejus electio ad Syndicatum
probabitur.

Signed; Chastellain, Bachelier, Gauquelin, Pereyret, Morel, R. du Val.


In reading this result thus new modeled in Latin, I found a new difficulty in
it besides those which I had found the first time. For to remedy that which I
made of having recourse to the ancient Syndics, it was put, that in case there
arrived any difficulty about the Propositions, the Syndic shall consult the
Faculty thereupon: and that if the case be so urgent that the Faculty cannot
conveniently assemble, then he shall take counsel of all the ancient Syndics.
It seemed to me that on one side this Liberty given the Syndic to consult the
Faculty about the said Propositions, was an Impeachment to the Arrest of the
fifth of October, and gave room for the reviving of M. Cornet's enterprise at
pleasure; and that on the other, the liberty given him and the obligation laid
upon him withal to recurre to all the ancient Syndics, when the affair
permitted not the Faculty to be assembled, was for ever to erect such a
Tribunal in the Faculty, by allowing him to recurre thereunto when he pleased;
and moreover to impose a yoke and inconvenience upon him which our Syndic was
not accustomed to bear; Wherefore I excused my self again, with more confidence
(though with much more grief) from subscribing this new Writing.

The next day ( Dec. 7.) the Faculty assembled extraordinarily to hear the
report of what we had done in the business. M. Chastellain said that the
Result touching the Propositions and the Syndicship was in the hands of M.
Bouvot, who should read it; and that none of the other Conditions agreed upon
were put into it, (as namely about the new choice of Conscriptors, and review
of the Conclusions) because for these it was relied upon the word of the
Deputies which they had passed, and upon the confidence that the Assembly would
approve the same. -- So M. Bouvot read the Result in the very terms wherein it
is transcribed above. -- After it was read, I acquainted the Assembly what a
trouble it was to me that I could not sign it, and laid forth the reasons
thereof with all possible respect to the rest of the Deputies. Which yet did
not hinder but that M. Chastellain and M. Chappellas expressed some displeasure
against me for it; and touching ambiguity of words complained of by me. M.
Chappellas said, that there was no subtlety intended therein, nor any design to
prejudice any party; but whereas there was to be no more speech of the said
Examination, it behooved to find some reason for it; and this in the Preamble
was alleged to that purpose, so that it might be said on both sides, Causa
quam putatis victricem causa cecidit; he concluded, that in stead of the word
Definitiones the word Sanctiones was fit to be put into the Agreement; M.
Hennequin having intimated the same in his Sentence.

Most of the Doctors also who spoke before me, pronounced it fit to retrench
out of the said agreement that which I judged ill therein; (namely, that in
case of difficulties arising, the Syndic should consult the Faculty, or have
recourse to the ancient Syndics) which was accordingly retrenched. This being
done, and on the other side many of my friends pressing me to acquiesce in the
Accord, although I was not yet satisfied, yet because it behooved to consider
all things, and to accept of the best that was offered, when all that was
desired could not be obtained; when it came to my turn to give my sentence, I
consented thereunto, and said I was ready to sign it, with regard had to the
things abovementioned, and provided security were given for the punctual
performance of the conditions about the Conscriptors, and the Review of the
Conclusions whereof M. Chastellain had spoken. After which all nine of us were
appointed to go and render thanks to the first President, the Kings Counsel,
and some of the Presidents of the Mortar who had interposed in our
Accommodation; and accordingly we went forthwith. It was also said that the
book of Cornelius a Lapide and the Coriolanus should be delivered into the
hands of the King's Counsel for the discharge of the Faculty.

M. Hallier was not present at this Assembly, and M. de Saint Beuve delivering
his sentence touching the point the Syndicship, said, that although he
accounted what was ordained about M. Hallier in that business somewhat
uncouth, yet he should for his part tell the Faculty that he would do
whatsoever it desired. M. Cornet officiated as Syndic here, and as soon as we
were gone to make our visits, began to infringe the conditions which had been
promised only by word of mouth. For whereas it was agreed to review the
Conclusions registered within a year or eighteen months past, that the false
and offensive words might be expunged; at the end of this Assembly, after the
ordinary supplicates were done, he caused the Conclusions of the preceding
Assemblies which had not yet been twice read, to be read again. M. the Abbot of
Valcroissant who by chance staid till the end of the Assembly, observing
something in these conclusions to the prejudice of the Opposers, said, he
conceived that since peace was made, it was reasonable, according to what had
been propounded, that the same Deputies should review the said conclusions, to
see what might be amended therein. Most of them which remained signified that
they esteemed this just. M. Cornet would have put it off, and said there was
not company enough to deliberate thereupon, the Assemby being broken up. M.
Marcan replied that if there was enough for the reading of them again, there
was also enough for the deliberating upon them. This pressed M. Cornet home,
and constrained him to say, that they should be reviewed before they were
entered in the Registers of the Faculty; which all that were present declared
to be just.

But how unsafe is it in Agreements to defer the performance of conditions
wherewith they are made, when the business is with people of little ingenuity
and good meaning! For the removing of the obstructions of this, we yielded in
several things beyond measure; and yet in the very next Assembly after this on
Jan. 1. 1650. it was requisite to make many complaints of nonperformance of
the conditions which had been promised. There arose new contests in the Faculty
about the Conscriptors whom they would not have changed, and about the
Conclusions which they would not have read again but as MM. Moral and Cornet
had framed them. It was requisite to make new protestations before the Faculty;
it was requisite to present again to it the conditions proposed on the first of
December by M. Copin; it was requisite to enter a complaint before Notaries of
their dishonesty and breach of promise with whom this decetfull peace was
concluded, and to declare there that if it were no farther kept, then MM.
Hallier, Cornet and their adherents were pleased to keep it, there would be
nothing effected by it but only our renouncing of our Oppositions and
prosecutions which were so just and so necessary. In brief, it was requisite to
enter diverse Memorials in the Faculty, and to declare formally that we
persisted in all the Oppositions, Appeals and Protestations hereaftermade; to
protest anew that we Appealed against all that had been done before and should
be done afterward to the prejudice thereof, and of the statutes, and Arrests
rendered by the Court of Parliament; that we would there, as soon as possible,
prosecute for judgment of all the causes depending between the Doctor, and
demand reparation of all that had been anew attempted in the mean time in
prejudice of the said Instances, Protestations, and Arrests.

There were diverse Doctors who entered a Memorial hereof before Notaries the
same day, being they could not obtain the same in the Assembly. And if it had
been any thing likely that the Avenues of Justice were not stopped, no doubt we
should have presented our selves again there to obtain it. But the difficulties
laid in our way lately by the first President, when we prosecuted it, together
with all other inseparable from suites, even when the countenances of the
Judges are most favorable, obliged us to remain quiet. It behooved us to leave
the Faculty in the hands of those who were made masters of it by stopping the
course of our prosecutions when we hoped greatest success for its
reestablishment: and we were forced to be content with sighing before God for
its ruin, and leaving before men such monuments as might tell posterity it
happened not by our fault.

THE SECOND PART,
Containing a Relation of sundry things which passed, or which I was informed
of, at Rome, during the four or five Months of my residing there, from the end
of November 1650. till June 1651. when I returned thither about the affair of
the five Propositions.

CHAP. I.
Of my journey from Paris to Rome in the year 1650. and of what I was informed
of being at Venice touching the prosecutions against M. Hersent.

BUT although this Peace was one rather in name then in deed, being accompanied
with all the commotions and partialities of a real Division; yet it was
requisite to comply with the time and to endeavor to abstain from all
occasions of making a stir, by letting them pass away gently, by dissembling
all our displeasures and complaints we had so great ground for, and (in brief)
by living with our Adversaries as if there had been a perfectly good
understanding among^ us. For the first president had shown himself averse and
opposite to the justice of our prosecutions that we could not well hope any
would be done us so long as he had such authority in the Parliament, nor could
we seek it elsewhere.

Thus the Faculty lived in outward tranquillity, and the Assembly of the second
of May 1650. was past without any appearance of division, when I departed from
Paris in the afternoon to overtake a Gentleman of quality whose worth and
family I pecularly honored, and to accompany him in his intended journey to
Italy. He was a young Gentleman of very illustrious birth, for whom I had a
very great esteem; and that which amongst other things wooed me to promise to
accompany him in this journey, was, my observing in some converses with him
that he did not undertake it as most of his age do, namely to see pictures and
statues, but get acquaintance in all places with persons of learning and
condition, not only for the having correspondences in stranger Countries, but
also for the learning by their conversation after the most advantageous sort,
the variety of humor, genius and manner in several nations. For which end he
took with him at his departure from Paris a great number of letters of
recommendation to all the Towns through which he was to pass.

I could not be so ready to depart so soon as he, partly because I was willing
first to see how that Assembly of the 2. of May would pass. So that I did not
overtake him till I came to Geneva on Saturday the seventh of the same Month.
I found him in the company of M. Godefroy then one of the two Syndics of that
City, to whom he had been directed, and who took care to show him the same.
When M. Godefroy saw me, he remembered, and made me call to mind, how that he
being heretofore sent to the King in behalf of his Republic, whilst I had the
honor to be Rector of the University, and finding me at the Louvre where he
entreated me to do him a small office, for which he came to see me at the
Sorbonne, I had performed it for him the most civilly that I possibly could:
and he told me that he was still beholding to me for it, and that if there were
any thing in which I needed his service in that place, he should be glad to
testify his acknowledgement. All this ended in mutual civilities, and was the
occasion that when we departed the next day being Sunday, the 8. of the same
Month, he giving this Gentleman a letter for Zuric directed to M. Vlric chief
Minister of that City, recommended me also unto him with words most obliging
and full of more esteem then I had given him cause for.

We arrived at Zuric, and during a days time (wherein passengers usually tarry
there as they go from Lions to Venice, to refresh themselves and their horses a
little) M. Vlric showed us all the civilities he could. Wine was sent to us
from the Signiory, and according to the custom of the Country some persons
chosen for that purpose dined with us, and after dinner led us to see the
Arsenal and the Library; M. Vlric being with us, and particulary expressing to
me tokens of the esteem which M. Godfroy's letter had given him for me; He gave
us also some new acquaintance amongst the Grisons, and letters for Padua and
Venice.

We spent the rest of this Summer at Venice, and in the Continent under the
dominion of that famous Republic. A violent Tertian took me at Verona in
September, which confined me to my bed for three weeks; of which as soon as I
was recovered, we returned to Venice, to take our leaves there, and prepare our
selves to depart for Rome the soonest we could.

Presently after we were returned to Venic^ we understood news of a Sermon made
by M. H^nt this year at Rome, upon the day of S. Lewis, in the Church of that
name. We saw one of the printed Copies which he had caused to be made of it,
and were told of the design some had to Arrest him for it by the Pope's order.
It was related that M. Albizzi, Assessor of the H. Office, went in a Coach
toward the Palace Borghese, (which is not far from that of the Ambassador of
Malta, where he had notice that M. Hersent was) and gave order to the Sergeants
to watch him at his coming forth, and bring him to that Coach, to the end to
carry him thence to the Palace of the H. Office, where the Prisons of the
Inquisition are. It was also told us, that at Rome it was looked upon as so high
a matter, that they had order to go and seize upon M. Hersent even in the
Palace of the said Ambassador, in case he delayed to come forth: but that M.
Hersent fearing it, found no other way of safety but to cast himself instantly
into a Coach of the Ambassador of France, which by good hap passed in the
interim before the gate of him of Malta, and so with speed got to the French
Ambassador's Palace, where he found an inviolable Sanctuary and sure protection.

This news was brought to Venice not by Letters only; Persons, who were at Rome
when the thing was done, arrived suddenly after at Venice, and published the
citcumstances of it, and the consequences which they foresaw thereupon; amongst
others a famous Capuchine (I believe it was F. George) gave an ample account of
it to M. Matharel, then the King's Resident with this Republic, which place he
discharged with great sufficiency and reputation. M. Matharel did me the favor
to come and see me after his receiving the said account, and represented to me
how ill an odor at Rome this unhappy accident would bring upon all such as
should pass there for Jansenists. He told me, that the particular affection
which we had contracted together during my stay at Venice, and the general care
he was bound to take to his power, that no Frenchman became involved in
troublesome and odious affairs in those parts, (because it always turned to
the dishonor of the Nation) obliged him to testify to me what fears he had
least in case I should go to Rome, so soon after this late disgust which M.
Hersent had drawn upon himself, they would become jealous of me there as soon
as they saw me, lest I should be looked upon as one substituted in his place for
the interests of the same cause; and lest they should resolve there, by putting
me in a place of restraint, to prevent all kind of contrivances, and other
displeasing things which they might fear I was likely to act, unless care were
taken to hinder me. He told me, he was never more surprised then at the hearing
of the disgrace which was befallen M. Hersent for that Sermon, after the
applause wherewith every one received him when he preached it, in presence of
all the curious persons at Rome that understood French, and amongst others not
only of the Ambassador, but also of the Cardinals Barberini, Vrsini, and d'
Este, two of which are of the Congregation of the H. Office; and that this
ought to increase my fears as well as his; because this so sudden a change,
was a sign that they were extraordinarily nice about these matters at Rome, and
that the least suspicion was enough there to render a man criminal. That I had
acted diverse things in France against the Mendicants, and against M. Cornet and
M. Hallier, which would not be very well gusted at Rome; wherefore, he could
not conceal from me, that his opinion was, that I should do very well if I
could resolve not to go thither. The Gentleman with whom I departed from
France, was very desirous I should continue with him the intended Journey to
Italy, and knew I had no other business there, nor any concernment with that
of M. Hersent; yet he was moved with these reasons to condescend to my return
into France, in case my self inclined so to do. But he was very glad when he
saw me oppose to all M. Matharel's reasons, the testimony of my Conscience,
which did not reproach me with any thing that might be justly objected against
me; and to see that as it left me no regret for all that I had done in time
past, so it gave me no fear for the future; but that on the contrary, I was
resolved to maintain and justify at Rome and everywhere else, upon all
occasions that might happen, all whatsoever I had done in France.

Wherefore after thanks to M. Matharel for his affection and good counsel, and
for the civilities which we had received from him during our abode at Venice,
we took leave of our other friends and departed thence toward Rome, the 30th.
of October, but arrived not there till the 20th. of November, partly because we
took our way by Loretta, and partly because the relics of my sickness
occasioned some days slownesse in our Journey.

CHAP. II.
Of the Letter of M. de Vabres; The design of the Jesuits against the Hours
translated into French; How odious at Rome they were whom they call Jansenists.

BEing arrived at Rome toward the end of November 1650. I found Letters
directed to me there, the oldest of which were written at Paris on the 7th. of
October. They gave me notice of the first discovery made of one penned by the
Bishop of Vabres, to move the Pope to condemn the Propositions which M. Cornet
had the year before endeavored to get censured by the Faculty, excepting the
two last. It was signified to me, that M. de Vabres had canvas'd as much as he
could in the Assembly of the Clergy, to get them to subscribe the said Letter;
but perceiving at last that if it were brought to the Vote there, it would
undoubtedly miscarry by the opposition which would be made by the most
judicious and zealous Prelates of the Assembly, who very well understood the
iniquity and injustice whereof all people of honor had condemned M. Cornet's
enterprise, still fresh in memory; he resolved not to propose it but to
particular Bishops, with whom he thought he might prevail, and whose
subscriptions he hoped to make good use of. A Copy of the said Letter was sent
me, taken from a printed one which a Doctor visiting M. Hallier found by chance
upon his Table: Which shows (said my corespondent) that he must needs bear a
part in this business, because he is acquainted with the secret of it:
Wherefore I was entreated to observe at Rome the most carefully I could, during
my residence there, whether this Letter had been sent thither, and how it was
received, because there were many Prelates, very eminent for Learning and
Piety, who foreseeing many sad consequences from the same, would not fail to
advertise the Pope to take heed thereto, as soon as they were assured that he
had received it. The Copy sent was a Manuscript, and in Latin, as follows.

Beatissime Pater,
MAjores causas ad sedem Apostolicam refer solemnis Ecclesiae mos est, quem
fides Petri nunquam deficiens perpetuo retineri pro jure suo postulat.
Aequissimae huic legi obsequentes de gravissimo circa Religionem negotio
Sanctitati tuae scribendum esse censuimus. Decennium est ^x quo vehementissimis
turbis Gallia magno nostro moerore commovetur ob librum posthumum and doctrinam
Reverend. Cornelii Jansenii Iprensis Episcopi. Tales quidem motus sedari
oportebat tum Concilii Tridentini auctoritate, tum Bullae illius quam Urbanus
VIII. foelicis memoriae adversus Jansenii dogmata pronunciavit, and decreta Pii
V. and Gregorii XIII. in Baium edita confirmarunt. Atque hujus quidem Bullae
veritatem ac Robur novo diplomate vindicasti; sed quia nulli sigillatim
Propositioni certa Censurae nota inusta fuit, locus etiamnum aliquis quorundam
cavillis and effugio relictus est. Intercludendum autem penitus speramus, si,
ut precamur, Sanctitas tuae quid in hac re sentiendum sit clare distincteque
definiat. Obtestamur ergo ut has praesertim Propositiones de quibus disceptatio
periculosior ac contentio ardentior est, Sanctitas tua expendat ac perspicuam
and certam de unaquaque sententiam ferat.

I. Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia; deest quoque iis Gratia qua
possibilia fiant. II. Interiori Gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam
resistitur. III. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non
requiritur in homine libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
IV. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant Haeretici, quod
vellent eam Gratiam talem esse cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare. V. Semipelagianum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse.
Experta est nuper Beatitudo tua quantum Apostolicae sedis in Gemini Ecclesiae
Capitis errore profligando valuerit auctoritas; continuo sedata est tempestas,
atque ad Christi vocem and imperium venti and mare obedierunt. Quamobrem
flagitamus, Beatissime Pater, ut clara firmaque de Propositionum istarum sensu
prolata sententia, cui etiam Reverend. ipse Jansenius morti proximus Opus suum
subjecit, caliginem omnem discutias, animos fluctuantes componas, dissidia
prohibeas, Ecclesiae tranquillitatem splendoremque restituas. Dum haec spes
mentibus nostris affulget, Sanctitati tuae multos and prosperos annos,
saeculorumque beatissimam aeternitatem Rex saeculorum immortalis adjiciat
optamus ac vovemus.

Besides this business, word was sent me that F. Annat the Jesuit, then the
French Assistant with the General at Rome, had written to F. l' Abbe one of his
Brethren, that undoubtedly he should obtain a Condemnation of the Excellent
Prayers, with the translation of the Hymns in verse, newly collected and
presented to the King by M. du Mont; and that the Calendar afforded him a great
argument to get them censured: Wherefore I was desired to enquire how the case
stood, and to do what lay in me to secure the said Book from a blow so unworthy
and unjust, and which might give so great advantages to the enemies of truth,
and even to them of the H. See.

I answered these Letters as one that sufficiently understood the importance of
the affairs recommended to me, and who was as zealous for the same as was
necessary, and withal as submissive and respectfull to those from whom these
orders were transmitted to me: Yet I could not but signify the little
probability I saw of well acquitting my self thereof, being newly arrived in a
place where I had little correspondence, where I was likely to be something
suspected, where my steps might be watched, where I had other engagements
hindering me from being master of my self, and where the affairs for which I
was desired to concern my self were very odious. However I promised to do my
best therein, and to neglect no opportunities. And accordingly I set my self to
it, as much as all those circumstances and a weak unrepaired health permitted:
but for all my diligence till the end of this year, I could discover nothing
concerning the Hours; and as for the Letter, I only learnt that it had been
sent already; and that the F. Richeome the Jesuit, one of the French
Penitentiaries at S. Peter's, boasted that it was subscribed by fifty Bishops.

He that told me this, was well seen in those affairs, and in the whole
managery of the persons upon whom the same depended; amongst the things he told
me upon this subject, I observed these two principal. One, that he believed
this Letter could not produce any thing new against Jansenius, because these
persons now mentioned knew well that too much had been done already: but as for
any thing that came from those who were looked upon as his followers, they would
find no mercy, being ill gusted in this Court; insomuch that when nothing could
be discovered ill in any writing of theirs, that may of it self deserve to be
condemned, yet it is enough for its condemnation that it proceeds from
suspected persons. This Maxim made me cease to wonder at the condemnation
pronounced against the Catechism of Grace, concerning which one had also
written particularly to me, complaining that in that condemnation the little
Book was accused of containing the Propositions condemned by the Bulls of Pius
V. and Gregory XIII. though indeed there was none such in it; whereas it but
slightly prohibited the Catechism published by the Jesuits against the former,
under the name of a Doctor of Doway, only for that it treated of the matter of
Grace, though indeed it contained sundry direct Heresies. This prejudice of the
Court of Rome against such as were there accounted Jansenists, much abated my
desire of representing to some that might impart it to the Masters of the
Censures, how unreasonably they suffered themselves to be guided by the byas of
the Jesuits, being desired so to do by one of my friends, to the end this might
make them more reserved for the future, and bring about the revocation of the
said Decree, if it were possible. But this person gave me to understand, that
it was not to be hoped for, (and this was the second thing I observed in his
discourse) because the Tribunal from whence that Condemnation issued, knew not
what it was to retract or look backwards, being fixed and immutable in its
resolutions, and that when once it has passed any thing, it is never to be
brought by any motive in the world to alter it.

As for M. Hersent, he was escaped from Rome before my arrival there. I was
told that when it was known abroad, the stir and speech about him ceased, as if
no more had been aimed at but to constrain him to fly; because otherwise there
was both a necessity and a resolution to clap him in prison. And M. the Bailly
of Valencai, then the King's Ambassador at Rome, a person of great gentleness
and civility, speaking to me one day thereof, said that M. Hersent had several
times professed while he was in his house, that were it not for that fear, he
would willingly have appeared before the Judges of the Inquisition, to defend
every thing in the Sermon he had printed, and for which he was in trouble. That
himself had at M. Hersent's request, several times desired of the Pope liberty
and security of h^s person for that purpose, which the Pope would never admit
of, giving no other answer to his importunities but Vedremo, Vedremo, We will
see, We will see. That he conceived the reason was, for that the Pope was very
close in these matters, and would not have any speech thereof at all. That
himself had often pressed him from the Queen, for an answer to some Questions
which he propounded to him by his Majesty's order, but could never bring his
Holiness to declare himself, nor draw one word concerning the same from him,
whatever urgent solicitation he had used to him. That the Pope acted in all
cases with the same reservednesse, and had treated the Capuchines in the same
manner, (amongst others F. Joseph de Morlaie) who being at Rome, desired for
quiet of their consciences to propose to him two difficulties before their
departure, of which they could never procure any answer or satisfaction. That
therefore he did not wonder at the Pope's refusing to grant M. Hersent the
liberty he desired to speak of such matters. But others told me, that this was
not the thing which most exasperated the Pope's mind against him, but his
seeming in his Epistle to blame his Holiness of negligence, touching the
doctrine of Grace, his vaunting of his particular fidelity, which he said was
so well known to the Pope, and his praising Jansenius; but above all, the
answer he made, when instead of delivering of the printed Copies of his Epistle
and Sermon, he told those that demanded them, that he had already sent them
into France.

This boasting his fidelity toward the H. See, was undoubtedly founded upon
the Book of Optatus Gallus de cavendo Schismate, which he had written by
contrivance with the Nuntio, to show that the late Cardinal Richelieu tended to
make a Schism in France; by which he put himself in danger of being infallibly
ruined, in case he had been discovered: so that it is strange, a person that had
hazarded himself so far for the interests of the Court of Rome, should be so
ill dealt with, and for so little cause. But usually nothing is more hateful
to Grandees, then to be upbraided with the services done them, and they had
rather ruin a man then confess th^mselves beholding to him for any thing,
especially if himself go about to bring them to such acknowledgement.

There was a Dominican that suffered a backblow by the disgust taken at the
printing of the said Book, namely he upon whose report the Master of the Palace
gave permission for it; for he was confined in the Covent of Minerva till he
should give account how deep he had been in the business, and there he
remained a long time, though it seemed wholly laid asleep.

From Spain I heard, that the Jesuits who always governed the new Queen, had
prevailed with her to desire for her first request to the King her Husband,
that the Bull against Jansenius might be commanded to be received throughout
all his Estates; but the King being astonished at this request, answered very
wisely, That it concerned things of Doctrine, which he understood not, that the
Doctors were to be consulted about it, and if they judged that what the Queen
desired might be done, he would do it willingly.

CHAP. III.
The complaint of the Venetians. Ill usage of the King's Ambassador. His
Majesty's Letter to the Cardinals in complaint thereof. Discourse with Cardinal
Barberini about the Hours, and the Letter of M. de Vabres.

ABout this time I was told that the Republic of Venice finding it self much
exhausted by extraordinary expenses so many years together in defending alone
the Island of Candie against the Turk, without receiving any assistance even
from the Pope, caused him to be advertised by her Ambassador in his Audience of
the 9. of December, that she should at length be constrained to abandon that
place, unless the Christian Princes inclined otherwise to succor her against
the common and so powerful enemy; that the Ambassador had made to his
Holiness great Protestations thereof, and (as it was added) some reproaches.

But about a fortnight before there happened a very great quarrel between the
Ambassador of France and his Holiness. For the Ambassador having sheltred in
his Palace and under his protection certain Neapolitans who had fled thither
for refuge, in the nights of the 21. and 22. of November, there were three of
them assassinated by some of themselves, and one of the Ambassador's servants
going out to see what was the matter was slain. The Authors of these murders
did not commit the same so secretly as they could have wished for their own
safety. The Ambassador whose Maxim it always was (as I understood from
himself) not to shelter any in his lodging but such as were guilty by
misfortune and not of enormous crimes, nor to maintain any committed by a man
before fled into his house, complied with the Pope's Justice to deliver to the
Sergeants on a day appointed the authors of the murders, and also to cause the
Sergeants to be assisted by all his own people. On Thursday evening notice was
given him that the Corses, Sergeants, etc. all the Horse and Foot of the Pope's
Guard began to prepare themselves for the taking of the Criminals; He answered
that he complied to cause them to be delivered to the Sergeant, but he would
not do it, if they came thither with so great an Array. Observe that this was
to be on Friday, and that the hour of the usual audience which he has every
fortnight of the Pope was appointed to be Friday morning; and that very
morning, without further notice, all these military men came in arms to seize
all the avenues of his Palace, searched all the neighboring houses, entered even
into his Court and kept all his gates seized. The Ambassador seeing this from
his windows, sent to bid the Barisel or Provost that led them, to come and
speak with him. The Barisel scrupled it at first apprehending some ill
treatment, but two Knight, of Malta assuring him no hurt should be done him, he
yielded to go up stairs. At the bottom of which he was disarmed, and coming
into the Ambassador's presence without arms and bare-headed, the Ambassador
asked him what made him so bold as to enter into his house? bidding him take
heed what he did, and telling him that he was in the house of the King, and
might one day repent his entering into it. The Barisel answered that he had
received such order from his Master. The Ambassador replied, that if he passed
on further, he knew how he would use him, and how his Master would use his. The
Barisel witdhrew, and caused his company to make a halt, sent this intelligence
to a place from whence order came for all these soldiers to return to their
quarters. Nevertheless they made prisoners of some poor men and women dwelling
near the place where the murders were committed, who should depose what they
knew thereof, and that they might not return without doing something. The
Ambassador sent a dispatch forthwith to the Court to give notice of all that
had passed; which the King understanding thought fit to write a circular letter
to all the Cardinals then at Rome, the tenor whereof was as follows.

To my Cousin the Cardinal N.
COusin, Having been well informed of the truth of what has been done by the
Popes Officers, who have violated all respect by forcing the Palace of my
Ambassador; I have commanded him to depart presently out of Rome, whilst I
examine what course will be fit for me to take for the redressing of so great
an injury. Hereof I thought good to advertise you, not doubting but you will
interesse your self in so just a cause, which ought to be looked upon as a
common one, for that herein the Law of Nations and the Interest of all Princes
is violated, as my Ambassador will more particularly declare to you; to whom
referring my self, I shall pray God to have you, Cousin; in his holy keeping.

Written at Paris 19. December 1650. signed, Louis, and below, De Lomenie.

As Soon as this Letter was come to Rome, the Ambassador went to visit all the
sacred College to deliver to every Cardinal that which was for him, and to
take leave of their Eminences before his departing from Rome, and retiring (as
he did afew days after) to Tivoli.

This action of the Barisel happened three days after our arrival at Rome, and
the disgust which the Ambassador signified to me about it, making me fear he
would not like that any French should go see the Pope at a time wherein he was
so little pleased with his treatment, I thought fit to represent to him what
obligations I conceived lay upon me to visit his Holiness, having the honor to
be a Doctor of Sorbonne, and having formerly been well received by him, yet
with a purpose to defer my visit till this misunderstanding were over, if I
found the Ambassador judged it fit to forbear. Accordingly by what he said to
me I understood that this was his mind; and I conformed thereunto, though my
desire of saluting his Holiness was increased every day by the Letters which
were writ to me from Paris, and by the things which I was informed of at Rome:
not that I intended (being unqualify'd for so doing) to speak to him on set
purpose of several things, whereof I saw it so necessary that he were informed
and which I presumed were not come to his knowledge; but because I remembered
that in an audience I had formerly of him, he had spoken to me of his own
accord about diverse affairs of this nature which concerned my profession, and
therefore I believed that the Audience I should now have of him would not pass
without his putting me upon such matters, and so giving me occasion himself to
tell him what I desired thereof, nor without his discovering to me something
about those, for which my friends were so solicitous in France, and of which I
could by no otherways understand any certainty at Rome.

I was in this perplexity (between the desire of having audience of his
Holiness, and the consideration which deprived me of the confidence to request
it) till the beginning of the year 1651. when having in a visit made to the
Ambassador, understood that he was satisfied with having acquainted the Court
with the proceedings he disgusted, that he expected an answer thereof, and that
till then he would not inflame matters nor drive them to a rupture; I thought
fit not to let pass this interval without indeavoring to obtain an audience.
For which purpose I went two several times to the Presence Chamber of his
Holiness, but I could not obtain it though my Lord Torreiani Archbishop of
Ravenna who was the introducer of strangers, conducted me thither once
purposely, and did what he could to procure it me: and from that time no
occasion being offered to request it, till the arrival of the King's letter
abovementioned, and the Ambassador's consequently retiring to Tivoli, I did not
any more think of presenting my self but with the Gentleman whom I accompanied
in his journey, a few days before we should leave Rome to return into France,
as I shall relate in due place.

In the mean time I neglected no other means, which I could devise, to find
some remedy to the inconveniences which were feared. Cardinal Barberini offered
me a very advantageous one; for his Eminence (whose esteem and Authority are so
great in Rome that seldom any business can miscarry if he favor it)
remembering an ancient correspondence which I had had the late honor to
contract with him by letters when I writ to the late Pope Urban VIII. against
the design of the Jesuits to invade the privileges of the University of Paris
whilst I was Rector of it, had now the goodness to desire to renew the same,
and sent for me to dyne with him on the 10. of January. He invited at the same
time M. the Abbot Antenore, a very accomplished Roman Gentleman, who had studied
at Paris in the College of Clermont, and spoke French so naturally that it was
not easy to distinguish his Country, as also Lucas Holstenius whose worth is
well known by all that have seen the translations he has published, and the
Works he is Author of.

Our discourse before and in the time of dinner, was about Books, of which his
Eminence has a very vast and general knowledge, and about the diverse contests
which were arisen between Learned men. M. Pereyret's trip was not forgotten,
who took the Count Boniface to whom S. Augustine writ so many Epistles, for Pope
Boniface; which occasioned the said Doctor to say, that Pope Boniface gave S.
Augustine charge to write for the Church against the Pelagians, because they had
been friends whilst the Pope was a soldier. That I might draw the discourse to
the Letter of M. de Vabres (of which I was desirous to learn some tidings) I
bethought my self to mention the raillerie lately made upon that Bishop, for
boasting in one of his Works, That he had written more Ecclesiastical History
then his Adversaries had read; because indeed it was granted that he had
written some which no body ever read.

But this moved not Cardinal Barberini to speak any thing of that Letter,
whether it were that he knew nothing of it yet, or that he was pleased to be
silent of it. The rest of the day also would have passed without my making any
advantage of it, had I not resolved to speak to him a little more plainly about
the new Hours in his Library whither he lead us after dinner, and where there
is so great convenience to employ one's self with as much satisfaction as
profit amongst so great a number of good books, and placed in so good order,
that after that of the Vatican, which has no equal, there is none in Rome to
be compared therewith.

Card. Barberini told me concerning the Hours, that they were very much spoken
of and found fault with for two things; The one, by reason of the Calendar
which is put into it; the other, because this Epithete Redemptor omnium is not
expressed in the translation of the Hymns, where it is in the Latin.

I could not but answer him in reference to the Calendar, that having read it
throughout, I found not any thing to be blamed therein. He replied, that there
might be several Impressions of the Hours, and that perhaps there was that in
the other Editions which was not in mine. I answered, that I knew not whether
there were more Impressions of them, that I had taken the Copy I had as soon as
they were put to sale, a few days before my departure, that I might read it
during my journey, without knowing any thing of them at that time otherwise
then by the great esteem which I heard was made of them by diverse persons of
worth whilst they were printing. The Cardinal asked me, whether I had the book
still, and told me himself had it not, and should be glad to see it. I promised
to bring it to him; and in the mean time as for the Epithete Redemptor omnium,
I told him he should see that it had been omitted without design in the
translation of the Verses which answer to the Latin in which it is, but only
through the necessity which arises in Verses; for which the Author also makes
some excuse in the Preface: for in the first hymn where it was omitted in the
first couplet, it is expressed in equivalent words in the second and fourth;
besides, that it is expressed in several other places of this Translation, and
even in those which have it not in the Latin; I added, that he might find that
the Title of Creator of all things was not expressed in more general terms then
this of Redeemer of all; and that this of Redeemer of Believers, whereby that
of Redeemer of all might have been restrained had there been any thing of
design, was also expressed in such a manner, as abundantly evidenced there had
been no thought of taking advantage by this Translation in reference to the
matters in contest.

We spent the rest of the afternoon in other discourses. The Sunday following I
went to carry the Cardinal my Copy of the Hours, and offered it his Eminence
to put into his Library. He accepted it, on condition that I would send for it
as often as I had occasion, and for any other of his books, which offer he made
me before, but with so much goodness and civility that nothing can be imagined
more obliging. With the book I delivered him a little Note wherein I had set
down the pages where he might see all that I had spoken in its justification:
after some other discourses we descended from his Chamber, and he took me into
his Coach to go with him to take the air. I had now time and opportunity to
tell him all that had been signified to me concerning the Letter of M. de
Vabres. I also told him of the Observations which I understood would be made
upon that Letter, and that I was promised to have them sent me as soon as they
were printed; That as soon as I received them I should bring them to his
Eminence. This was intended to move him to stop any resolution that might be
taken at Rome upon that Letter till it were seen what might be said against it;
as also to give him occasion of telling me what he knew of it; but he did not
open himself at all, and only told me that he was well pleased with what I
said, and that I should do him a pleasure in showing him what I promised.

CHAP. IV.
A false Censure of the Propositions sent to Rome to be confirmed there. A
Letter written from Paris concerning it; with others received from Paris.

IN the interval of time which passed between my first and second visit to this
Cardinal, I visited another of great note for his sincere solid piety and high
knowledge. He had scarce heard the first complement which I made him, but
understanding me to be a Doctor of Paris, he cast reproaches upon me for the
Censure which (he supposed) the Faculty had made against the Propositions set
afoot by M. Cornet. This treatment amazed me, and I justified my self by
telling him, that I was so far from contributing to the Censure for which he
reproacht me, that on the contrary I had been the first in opposing that
dangerous enterprise, in regard of the sad consequences it might have; that
above sixty Doctors joined with me in the Opposition, and that the Faculty had
not only not passed the said Censure, but that even they who designed it had
been hindered by the prohibitions laid upon them by the Parliament at our suit.
My answer as much amazed this Cardinal as his reproach did me: yet he concealed
his astonishment as much as he could; but judging (as I conceive) that it was
ingenuous and true, and thence concluding that (as I understood afterward)
this false Censure of them was dispersed to oblige the Pope to declare himself
by confirming it, he only told me that he had believed it was so, for that one
had appeared at Rome some time ago; and so he passed to other matters.

This was enough to rouse my curiosity about this Cheat, of which we had
suspected M. Cornet and his adherents above a year before, and charged them
with the design in the face of the Parliament, before whom also they disowned
it. For which reason also I sought ways to be informed thereof more
particularly by a person of my acquaintance who knew the business, and to whom
I had intimated in a visit, that I understood it sufficiently, that so I might
oblige him to tell me what he knew of it. The said person accordingly certify'd
me, that the Censure carried to Rome, and taken there as made by the Faculty,
was the very same Draught which was dispersed through the Provinces in August
and September 1649. under the names of the Deputies nominated upon M. Cornet's
Motion, whereof we complained by our second Petition presented to the
Parliament, and which MM. Cornet and Pereyret disowned in full Parliament on
the fifth of October the same year, as I have related above. He assured me that
that Draught of forged Censure had not only been carried to Rome as a true
Censure of the Faculty, but that it had been brought before the Pope in the
Assembly of the H. Office, to be the subject of debate for his Holiness and
all that Tribunal; That there had been four Consultors nominated to examine it
particularly, and to give their sense thereof in writing; That three of those
Consultors proceeded roundly to the confirmation of the said Censure, and that
the fourth, who was F. Abbot Hilarion a Bernardin, had spoken and written with
some restriction, by reason of the several senses which the Propositions may
admit; That however the deliberation amongst the Cardinals tended in general to
an absolute confirmation of the Censure, excepting him who spoke to me thereof,
and who taking the Propositions absolutely in the sense of Effectual Grace, and
according to the affinity they have therewith, opposed the stream, and
vigorously maintained, that the Propositions were not heretical, but the
Censures made of them were so, because they might impeach that Grace; that the
firmness of this Cardinal had astonished and stopped the Pope, and that had it
not been for this resistance, the Chimerical Censure had without difficulty
been confirmed by his Holiness.

I knew all this when I made my visit to Cardinal Barberini on the 15th of
January, (to which I now return) but I had no desire to let him see that I had
penetrated so far into those mysteries, for fear of giving him occasion to
inquire the particular way of my intelligence. I proposed to my self but two
things in my discourse to him; First, to make him a sincere narration of all
that had passed in France about this business, to the end he might know the
foul play we were abused with, and the H. See more then we; and how the actions
of that party were most gross delusions and manifest cheats. Secondly, to
understand with what reservednesse or opennesse the said Cardinal would carry
himself toward me, when I gave him occasion to speak of things which I knew
were so well known to him, and passed in his presence. Accordingly I related to
him all the History; as a thing that might be new to him, at least as to the
circumstances which I told him, and he had not been informed of before. I told
him of our Petitions, of our Protestations, of what passed in the Parliament
between our adversaries and us, of their disowning of this Censure, and of the
Arrest which was issued thereupon. I promised to show him every of those pieces
accordingly as I saw him attentive or pleased with the things I related. He
heard and received all with very great Civility; he testified that he should be
very glad to see all that I promised him; but he still kept himself as close as
before, when I mentioned M. de Vabres's Letter; which was a certain token to me
that his silence did not imply him ignorant of that Letter.

After these visits I certify'd two things to them who writ to me from Paris
about M. de Vabres's Letter; One, that there was no certainty of its not having
been sent to the Pope, though it was not spoken of at Rome, because they who
desired to make use of it to obtain that of the Pope which moved them to
procure it, had the gift of secrecy and conduct, as well as they to whom his
Holiness might have imparted it; that the business of the false Censure had
been a long time under consideration, and had broke forth as much as a thing
could do amongst those that are employed in affairs of that nature; and that
nevertheless that intelligence which I sent them thereof, and I have related
above, came to my knowledge but by particular good hap, without which the whole
intrigue had remained under the veils of obscurity, which hid it till then;
that whatsoever inquiry I could make about the Letter, perhaps I should not be
so fortunate in its discovery, as I had been in that of the Censure; and that I
conceived there was no reason to doubt of its having been sent, because it was
not likely that after so strange a boldness in promoting so far a false
Censure framed in the name of eight or ten particular Doctors, notwithstanding
such public complaints as had been made thereof, they would leave behind a
true Letter signed, as was reported, by fifty Bishops, against which no person
appeared to complain. In the second place I advertised them that they saw how
many disguisements, delusions and calumnies it might be presumed our
Adversaries had set on work at Rome to obtain what they had obtained hitherto,
if one might judge by enormities of their proceeding in this last action, in
which they had laid aside all kind of modesty and decorum; trampled upon all
laws not only of Christian conscience, but even of purely civil honesty, and
violated the faith of the H. See (for which they profess themselves so
zealous) the most essential Duties whereunto Infidels are bound toward the
meanest of men, namely of not surprising them by what they say to them, of not
lying to them, of not disguising things to them, but representing the same to
them such as they are. And that they might hence conclude how much it would be
for the interest of the H. See and of the service of God who founded it, as
also for that of the Church whereof it is the center, that all those cheats,
calumnies and impostures were discovered to it; how much the same would then be
abhorred at Rome, as well as all those who were found culpable thereof; and
what advantages were to be hoped thereby to the holy truths which these people
every day covered more and more with such thick darkness, and struck at with
such outrage and violence.

The Letters writ to me from Paris about the same time of my writing these at
Rome, were not very remote from the sentiments to which mine might lead those
Bishops which were solicitous about this affair, and earnestly waited for those
discoveries which they were told might arrive from me. For it was signified to
me, that a person well seen in the designs of the Jesuits and much devoted to
truth, had assured them that the Jesuits hoped for a wonderful effect of the
letter of M. de Vabres; that the Pope or some of his principal ministers had
told their Fathers at Rome, that if they could get a letter signed only by a
dozen Bishops, his Holiness would particularly censure the Five Propositions;
that five and twenty Bishops had signed it already; that the Nuntio had further
confirmed to the Jesuits, that it would not be long, before there were an
express Censure upon that letter: Nevertheless those Bishops which were
anxious about the effect which the said letter might produce, could scarce be
persuaded that Rome would suffer it self to be so easily cajoled in the most
important affair of the Church and of the Christian Faith; and that they had
some thoughts of writing to the Pope about it, or sending some person thither
on purpose to represent to his Holiness the dangers of this business, and the
precautions with which it was necessary that his Holiness proceeded therein, to
conclude it advantageously for truth and the edification of the Church.

Notice was given me by letters at the same time touching the Decree made
against the Catechism of Grace, that the said decree had been put by the
Nuntio into the hands of one of the Agents of the Clergy to propound the same
to the Assembly, and to bring it about that they might ordain the publishing of
it through the Provinces; that this Proposal had been made there; but the
Assembly was not disposed to condescend to this recommendation of the Nuntio.
That on the contrary they resolved not to meddle with it, and likewise ordained
that nothing should be registered about the Proposal which their Agent made to
them. Moreover that this Decree had not only been thus refused, but also that
excellent Reflections had been made upon it; and that the Court of Parliament
had issued a notable Arrest against it upon the remonstrances made to them
thereupon by the Kings learned Counsel, after they had received at their bar
the complaints of the Rector of the University, who presented himself there for
that purpose.

CHAP. V.
Diverse visits in which the Five Propositions were discoursed of, and of a
remarkable circumstance touching the same. How few at Rome well understood
these matters, and whence it came to be so.

BUT before I received those letters, and mine were arrived at Paris, I
continued to take all possible opportunities at Rome with the least noise to
inquire further into the posture of affairs: Amongst others I visited the
General of the Augustines, whose great zeal for S. Augustine we had understood
at Paris, by the Letter he writ to F. Alipius of the same Order, presently
after M. Cornet's attempt. I discoursed with him chiefly concerning the two
ways wherewith S. Augustine was struck at; one by openly rejecting the
Authority of his Doctrine, as M. Pereyret and many others did; the other, by
making show of owning his Authority, and yet teaching and maintaining a
Doctrine in effect contrary to his, and driving at a condemnation thereof, as
theirs who really defended it. I intimated to him as much as I could, the
necessity there was of his courage and prudence, being equally armed against
both these sorts of Enemies which S. Augustine had in this age. He very well
received my discourse, and professed himself ready to do so according to his
power upon all occasions. I told him of the Condemnation made at Vallidolid of
two and twenty Propositions extracted out of the Jesuits Books against S.
Augustine; but he was informed of it before, having received notice of it from
Spain.

I made a second visit to the Cardinal, whose resistance hindered the Pope from
confirming the Facultie's pretended Censure of the Propositions, as otherwise
he would have done: In this second visit we discoursed of the grounds of
Doctrine which they concerned. I spoke thereof in the same manner as we had
always done in France, from their first publishing by M. Cornet, namely as
Propositions equivocal, ambiguous, capable of different senses, both Heretical
and Catholic. But the Cardinal conceived that this was to speak too little
advantageously for their defense. Particularly concerning the first, he said,
that, considering it well, the words whereof it consists, which are found in
the Book of Jansenius, restrained it clearly enough to the Catholic sense.
That the righteous men, to whom it is there said some of God's Commandments
are impossible, are supposed to have already fullfill'd many of them, being
arrived to such Holiness as denominates them just, that these Commandments
are not absolutely impossible to them, but only in respect of the state wherein
they are, having yet but weak and imperfect Grace, which they are supposed to
have [volentibus and conantibus] and which gives them no other power for
performance of the same, but imperfect desires and weak endeavors; which is
yet more clearly expressed by the remainder of the Proposition, from which the
beginning ought not to be considered as separate, but as referring thereunto,
[Deest quoque illis gratia qua possibilia fiant.] And that the Grace (namely,
Effectual, such as is necessary to the Commandments in question) which renders
them possible, is not yet given to these just persons in the state of
weakness, wherein the Proposition supposes them in the time and circumstances
of those first Graces with which they only will and endeavor weakly; that this
is the whole Doctrine of Effectual Grace, according to the mind of S. Thomas,
and S. Augustine his Master. That the four other Propositions cannot be
considered but with relation to the first, together with which they are
presented for examination; and that if there be any obscurity in the other
four, it ought to be cleared and judged of according to the first, and the
interpretation put upon it. The solid reasons which led this learned and pious
Cardinal to speak and judge so favorably of the Propositions, by taking them,
as he did, in the sense of Effectual Grace, I cannot so well repeat as himself
deduced them to me; for I remember he did it with a strength of reason
perfectly great; but I express his conceptions the best and the most
faithfully I can, as well as those of all others which I mention; and I know he
attributed the speaking of these Propositions after another manner then his
own, only to the little understanding there was of these matters either at Rome
or Paris. Indeed he spoke of them with so great energie and affection, that I
ceased to wonder at what was told me of his having defended them so stoutly
before the Pope; and if I could have doubted of the intelligence or sincerity
of him who informed me how that story passed before the Pope, the vigor
wherewith this Cardinal himself discoursed with me, would have perfectly
confirmed me therein.

Wherefore, having this full persuasion of the truth of the business, I went
again to him that first acquainted me with it, and he told me a circumstance
which he had omitted in his first narration, believing perhaps that I was not
then fitting to hear it. He told me that the Pope (who although he highly
esteemed this Cardinal, had nevertheless a little secret jealousy against
him) seeing him speak of the Propositions with so much heat and vivacity on
this occasion, and considering himself backed by all the rest that were present,
being of contrary sentiments, his Holiness in a manner ranged himself on their
side, by saying, Guardate il Cardinal N. chi dice che nostri Consultori sono
Eretici: Take notice of Cardinal N. who says that our Consultors are
Heretics. To which the Cardinal, without being moved, made answer; Vostra
Santita mi scusi, Beatissimo Padre, non dico questo. Non dico che questi
Signori Consultori siano Haeretici, ma che le loro Censure sono Haeretiche. Ma
e ben vero che loro lo sarebbono, se vi fossero pertinaci: I beseech your
Holiness to excuse me, most Blessed Father, I do not say that. I do not say
that my LL. the Consultors are Heretics, but that their Censures are
Heretical. But withal it is true that they also would be Heretics, should they
continue obstinately therein. Which according to his sense was most true, for
being he took all the Propositions to be meant of Effectual Grace, he had
reason to accuse those Censures of Heresy which should condemn the said
Propositions in this sense. This particular not having been told me at the
first time of our discourse about the debate before the Pope, is wanting in the
account given above of what stopped his Holiness in the quandary they had put
him in, for the confirmation of the false Censure so often mentioned.

About this time other news was written to me from Venice, namely that the
Pope's Nuntio there had caused the Decree against the Catechism of Grace to be
printed there in great numbers, and sent the Copies into all the Monasteries
not only of Venice, but of the whole Venetian state. I was surpised at this
news, both for that the Jesuits do not reign in that place, and because neither
of the Books condemned by that Decree having appeared there at all, I did not
see what ground there was for publishing this Decree there with so great
diligence: and by the reading of it, I could not find any instruction or
edification afforded thereby unto the faithful. But I let this intelligence
pass as well as many others, without being more scandalized thereat, and
continued my inquiry into affairs at Rome, as far as my condition gave me
liberty so to do.

In the Covent de la Minerve I occasionally saw a very devout, upright and
judicious Monk named F. Barelier, who was assistant for France to his General.
We discoursed together of our concernments with such caution as is used by
persons that do not yet well know one another; and he spoke with as great
prudence and equity as was possible for a man that till then had had no light
of all the things that were passed. Afterward as I was professing to one
better informed, my wonder how it was possible that F. Barelier, a man of great
parts, of an Order so much engaged as the Dominicans for the opinions about
Grace, and of so considerable an employment in that Order, should be so much a
stranger to all the contests in the Church touching the same: He told me, that
I had much more reason to wonder that I found any that were not so in the place
where I was. That F. Barelier (for example) was indeed in a considerable
employment in that Order, but that this employment so wholly took him up in
receiving all the Letters concerning the businesses and contests of Monasteries
and particular persons of the Order dispersed through France, that being scarce
sufficient thereunto, he could not give much heed to other things not allied to
his own affairs: That others, besides their occupations which required their
care and personal attendance, had designs of advancing every one himself to the
several degrees whither they aimed, which taking up likewise a good part of
their time, left them not much to mind other matters. Moreover, that since the
last Congregations de Auxiliis, which after so long and diligent examination
concluded only upon imposition of silence to the parties; there was great care
used to keep such matters hushed and in oblivion, lest the like feuds might
arise which make much stir and bring no profit. That the minds of the greatest
part were bent only upon the several Courts of the Pope, the Cardinals,
Ambassadors, Princes, and Princesses, whereof there was a great number at Rome.
That they there studied nothing but the different interests and designs of this
or of that, yet few did no more but study them, but the general practice was to
mingle their own therewith, and seek means and occasions of advancing the same;
to which the taking part in these contests, or seeming to understand them, was
so far from conducing, that on the contrary it was an obstacle. That besides,
should every one apply themselves to these matters as much as they avoided
them, it would be hard to find many otherwise informed thereof then according
to the intelligence given them by the Jesuits, these Fathers having gained the
Passes, made sure of those whom they saw might be employed in these affairs,
biased them, and formed them to such conceptions of us also as they pleased,
presented their own Books to them, and took care to have the Booksellers
provided therewith; so that if I should go for example to M. Blaise the French
Bookseller at Rome, and ask for F. Petau's Book Of Public Penance, I should
not fail to have it shown me presently; but if I should ask for M. Arnauld's Of
Frequent Communion, against which that of F. Petau was written, I could have no
account of it. And therefore no body having hitherto spoken in our behalf, nor
taken care for the dispersing of our Books there, as the Jesuits have to keep
them from being seen, I ought not to wonder that F. Barelier, and infinite
others less capable and laborious then he, have either had no knowledge at all
of our affairs, or if they have been never so little informed thereof, it has
been to our disadvantage.

Cardinal Ludovisio, then Grand Penitentiary at Rome, a little time after this
visit, confirmed to me the truth of what was told me concerning the scarcity of
our Books there. For hearing, after my coming to Rome, that there was a Doctor
of Sorbonne in the City, he sent one to me to tell me he desired to see the
Book Of Frequent Communion, which he understood was to be translated into
Latin, and to ask me whether it were so. I told the Messenger, that it was
translated above three years ago, and that I was sorry that I had lost in my
Journey two Copies which I took of it in that Language at my coming from Paris;
because it would have been a contentment to me to have been able to gratify
the Cardinal's desire of seeing it. In the mean time this shows the scarcity
there is in that Country of the most Excellent Pieces, which suit not with the
gust of the Jesuits.

Besides this difficulty which concerned all the world, there was another on
the part of the Cardinals who might be employed about these matters. For the
Pope could not likely make any resolution upon this business, without first
having debated the same with my Lords the Cardinals; nor could there ascend
much light to the Throne of his Holiness to illuminate the same in this
particular, but what must be transmitted to it by their means. Now it was
certain that they were not much better instructed about these matters then the
rest of the Romans, but rather something less inclined to admit any
information thereof. The continual diversions which they are obliged to suffer
by so many audiences as they must give to such as have business with their
Eminences, by so many Congregations as they must be present at, by so many
active and passive visits from which they cannot free themselves, and by so
many public Administrations and other external occupations to which they are
subject, leave them far less time and leisure for it. Very much care had
been taken to prepossesse them to our disadvantage, and against the truths we
might have to defend; they were very little inclined to undertake the pains
which is necessary to search the bottom of them, not having been brought up in
this kind of study: and they were much more jealous for the authority of
Decrees issued from their Tribunals, the preservation or destruction of whch
they were told was concerned in all such things as had the least relation to
these matters.

CHAP. VI.
Letters written to Paris containing the reasons of believing that it would be
advantageous to send to Rome, with those of fearing that it would be
unprofitable or prejudicial; concluding nevertheless that it seemed best to
send thither.

THE sum of all my reflections upon this posture of affairs, was that if on
one side the intelligence I had given by former letters, might move my Lords
the Bishops to write and send some Ecclesiastics to represent the importance
of our business and the circumspection and diligence wherewith it required to
be handled; on the other, I considered that the abovementioned reasons might
increase the necessity of a delegation for that purpose; but withal that they
must needs cause it to be feared, that such delegation would be unprofitable,
unless it were powerful enough to overcome all those perplexing conjunctures,
and to supply all those needs above mentioned. I writ therefore once again
about this mattet with more care then I had done before, and laid down as
exactly as I could all the reasons I conceived possible to persuade or dissuade
such a delegation; to the end that all of them being weighed, those might be
followed which should be found best and most urgent.

I added to those above which make against a delegation, that perhaps it would
not have any good effect, because that the Pope liked not at all to handle such
matters; that he would not hear any speech of them, and perhaps would employ in
their examination persons not very intelligent therein: That the Jesuits had a
great influence upon most of the Officers of the Inquisition, Cardinals and
others, and bore a greater sway amongst them then was imaginable; That all
these conjunctures being so contrary, and the Pope much advanced in age, it was
perhaps expedient to let his Pontificate pass over with the most silence and
least stir possible, in expectation of another more favorable, during which
time this affair might come to more maturity. Lastly that this reason was of
great moment with me in regard of the fear we ought to have of injuring the
affairs of God, by handling them which affections and precipitations a little
too humane, and not what that humble respect and Christian patience which ought
to be had for his holy Providence.

On the other side I alleged that the mischief was great and urgent; that the
Decrees obtained every day at Rome (as that lately against the Catechism)
administered matter of triumph to the vain glory and ignorance of the Jesuits,
and brought the disciples of S. Augustine and his doctrine into some state of
oppression; and always more and more engaged the Court of Rome. That it was
further to be feared M. de Vabres's letter might extort some ill-digested
condemnation, ignominious to the H. Seee, and prejudicial to truth and the
Church. That it was likewise matter of jealousy, that the mischief might
afterward pass further, and turn into a custom of condemning the best books
when they do not please the Jesuits. That the sooner the Evil could be
remedied, the better; and that the more speed there was used to remedy it, the
more ground there would be to expect a prosperous event of the remedy which
should be applied thereunto. That although perhaps a perfect satisfaction and
vigorous protection of S. Augustin's doctrine could not as yet be hoped for;
nevertheless, those persons on whom the same may be said principally to
depend, might be obliged in the present state of things, at least to be hence
forward more circumspect and cautious in their proceeding, and to have a
greater distrust of the Jesuits accusations and practices. That besides, the
success is not in our power; that indeed we may foresee what men are able to
do, but we know not what it may please God to bring to pass; that we ought
always to do our endevor to plead aloud and with respect for truth; that it
belongs to God to afford this pains and zeal what blessing it pleases him;
but withal in undertaking it, it behooved less to consult with the wisdom of
the flesh and the world, then with that of the spirit and the Gospel. That
amongst the Cardinals as well as all other Orders of the Church, Prelates,
Priests, and Monks, there are at Rome as well as elsewhere, though in small
number, some who love and know truth, and who sigh as well as we for the ill
usage she receives every day; that we should find these persons favorable to
our attempts; that being unable to do any good by themselves, they would be
extremely glad of the comfort of being able to second us in ours by all ways
they can. That of others there were three sorts; the first, absolutely
contrary, prejudiced, and unlikely to admit any reason repugnant to their
preconceptions; the second, prejudiced too, but yet equitable and capable of
hearing what may be represented to them; and the third indifferent, not very
solicitous about these things, but like tabulae rasae, not having yet received
any impressions concerning them. That these last would be awakened when they
hear the voices of such as undertake to inlighten them; that the second would
also consider the remonstrances and arguments we shall use, and perhaps God
will show mercy to both in opening their understandings and making the same
prevalent upon them: and as for the first, who are our most obstinate
adversaries, it would be meet not to neglect them, because perhaps God might
draw some of them out of their darkness, and they which resolve to persevere
therein in spite of all the light offered them, may receive that for their
confusion which they would not admit of for their edification.

I had formerly said my first Mass at Loretto, and thence taking the way for
France came to lie the next day at Senegallia, of which Card. Factrinetti was
Bishop, by whom being entertained that night, we had converse enough to make me
retain an acquaintance of so civil and excellently endowed a Prelate. He
arrived at Rome whilst I was in these confusions, and I going to salute him
some days after his arrival, he unwillingly both dispelled and augmented them,
but with an honest intention and perfect candor. For our discourse being
fallen upon the subject of our affairs, he told me that in some of the visits
which he had already made to diverse Cardinals, some of them told him that they
had represented to his Holiness that it was most necessary to set upon their
determination, to the end to restore peace to the world, and take away all
ground of division amongst Christians. I desire no other thing but that this be
done as it ought to be; but I fear those Cardinals of whom this spoke, were not
moved to such thoughts by any concernment they had for S. Augustin's doctrine;
and I scarce doubt but that the same were infused into them by the Jesuits to
procure the effect of M. de Vebres's Letter, it seeming to me that no person
could have spoken thereof to their Eminences, but by the instigation of those
Fathers.

There was in Rome another person, admirably intelligent in these matters,
extremly prudent, and zealous to the higest degree, into whose acquaintance I
fell very happily, and without whose advice I conceived not meet to do or write
any thing in this business. I had already spoken with him twice about it. We
had discussed together pro and con the reasons abovementioned; and had never
been of the mind for the Delegation, nor could he believe that the
difficulties, Of the Jesuits great credit; Of the prepossession of minds, Of
the small knowledge of many, (amongst others, of the Pope himself) could be
overcome but by time and patience; wherefore he judged it meet to wait for a
more favorable Pontificate, and a Pope better informed and more versed in these
matters then he that sat at present in S. Peter's chair. I visited this
excellent man a third time, to see whether he persisted still in the same Mind;
and besides the reasons above specified, which I impugn'd, I represented to him
afresh the insolence wherewith the Jesuits triumphed over the H. See, the
Church, the Truth, the Doctrine of S. Augustine, and the innocence of his
disciples; the prevailing influence they had at Rome, for that no person
contradicted their accusations, nor discovered the mischievousnesse of their
conduct, and the enormities of their pernicious Maxims. I asked him whether he
did not at length believe, that if some one backed with the authority of a
considerable delegation should in a fit manner speak against those
exorbitances, it would not hinder many from following their passions with a
servitude so blind as this, wherewith they embraced the protection of their
interests; and that if such a delegation had not all the success it deserved,
it would not at least hinder them from proceeding further whilst they were
grapled with, and serve to clear many things in order to a through regulation
one day when it should please God to afford his Church so great a mercy. He
acquiesc'd at length, approved it, and moreover desired to see it set on foot;
and besides those foregoing reasons that which most prevailed with him, was,
that, at the worst, the Pope (who was conscious enough to himself of his little
knowledge in these matters) seeing himself pressed by two contrary parties
would remain undetermined and grant nothing to one side in prejudice to the
other; that in this conflict every one would be stirred up to inquire in the
subject of the contest, and so the truths which the Jesuits endevor to destroy
might by this be means be maintained against their assaults, and rescued from
the extreme oppression under which those Fathers reduce them.

It was but in the end of January 1651. that I signified all these things to my
Friends at Paris, thereby to contribute all light I could possible to the
consultation which was to be had thereupon. I have related the same here very
exactly, having extracted them almost word for word (but sometimes abridging
many things) out of the Letters which I writ then, and which were redeliver'd
to my hands for that purpose after my return. I gave notice also that I should
stay at Rome but till Easter, intending, as soon as that solemnity was over, to
return for France; that so my LL. the Bishops might hasten to send those
thither whom they designed, in case their Lordships desired, that they should
find me there before my departure, to receive from me by word of mouth many
little instructions, and such acquaintances as are always needful to persons
newly arriving in a strange Country.

CHAP. VII.
News from Paris of a Check which M. Hallier received in the Assembly of the
Faculty on the first of February 1651. Discourse with Cardinal Lugo.
Propositions out of M. Hersent's Sermon accused and justified. Strange secrecy
concerning what passes in the Inquisition.

IN the progress of time which passed till Easter I ceased not to play the
spy, observe all that I could at Rome, and give intelligence of it at Paris;
as also I was reciprocally advertised of all that passed there worthy of remark
touching the contests which were on foot.

In the Assembly of the Faculty on the first of February 1651. M, de Mince
complained of M. Hallier who was Syndic; for having signed a Thesis (defended
in January preceding) in which there were Propositions contrary to the doctrine
of the Faculty; one whereof was, That it is not lawful to appeal from the Pope
to any other; and another, That it is obstinacy, disobedience and rebellion to
oppose his Decrees. It was signified me that M. Hallier defended himself so
weakly and upon principles so suitable to his sentiments for the interests of
the Court of Rome, that he exposed himself open to, and gave all possible
grounds for, his own condemnation. That nevertheless many of the Doctors who
less considered what was just then what might gratify those they call
Jansenists, thought it enough to reprove M. Hallier in the Assembly, and to
injoyne him to sign no more Theses in which such kind of Propositions were; but
yet they hindered any thing concerning this Crime from being written in the
Registers. That M. Brousse made notable opposition to such proceeding. That he
required the inserting of the Propositions into the Registers, with an express
prohibition to the Syndic of s^gning the like again; to the end the King and
the Parliament might know how far the Faculty was from approveing those new
doctrines so contrary to its ancient Maxims. That hereupon he protested, and
required a Memorial of his Declaration and Demand; but was denied: which
obliged him to insist and profess, that if all were not written in the
Conclusion when it was to be read again in the Assembly of the first of March,
he would oppose the same, and complain thereof to the King's learned Counsel.
The Doctor that writ me this news, joined with M. Brousse, and sent me word
that they were resolved to drive this business to the utmost, yet with all
possible moderation. He certifi'd me also, that amongst the Doctors who gave
this Check to M. Hallier, there was a Carmelite who so well acquitted himself
therein that this touch alone ought to give him very much mortification.

On the days when the Pope holds a Chapter, the Cardinals repair to his
Palace at the usual hour and assemble in a great Hall, where he comes to put
on his ornaments, and thence they go to Chapel in order, as in procession. All
the Cardinals march two and two after the Cross which is carried before them,
and between each rank all persons of their Court which accompany them in this
Ceremony go before every one of them. On Candlemas day I accompanied thither
Cardinal d' Este Protector of France, whose rank was to march with Cardinal
Lugo. Cardinal d' Este took occasion to cause Cardinal Lugo and me to talk
together, making me approach toward him, and telling him that I was a Doctor
of Sorbonne. Cardinal Lugo having testified to me in three words the esteem he
had for our Faculty, asked me whether I was one of those who had approved M.
Arnauld's book Of frequent Communion: I answered him, That I was not; but at
the same instant a secret apprehension came into my mind that he might
interpret my answer as a disavowing of that excellent Work: wherefore for fear
of betraying the truth in any sort upon this occasion, by not explaining my
self further, I added immediately, that I was not yet Doctor when it was
Printed; but if I had been so, I should have willingly approved it, because
having read it then and since again, I found nothing in it but what I judged
conformable to the mind of the Church and the H. Fathers. Upon so ingenuous and
free a confession, Cardinal Lugo replying to me began with these two words,
Pian, piano, i. e. Fair and soft; and told me that this was not the judgment of
all the world, that the book was not so esteemed of at Rome; and intimated
something of a Proposition in the Preface, where speaking of S. Peter and S.
Paul it says, Those two heads of the Church which make but one. I made answer
to the Cardinal, that this Proposition, whatever it was, did not concern the
matter of Doctrine in that book, which I aimed at in testifying my esteem of
it; and that, as for this very Proposition, M. Arnauld had explained how he
understood it. The Cardinal added some words touching matter of Doctrine, which
indeed he did not rightly apprehend; but he spoke conformably to those remote
objections which the Jesuits made against it. All this discourse passed upon
the way, and before I further replied to him, we were arrived at the Chapel,
and so the conference broke off.

On the fifth of the same month I made a visit, whereby I understood from a
person sometimes sufficiently informed of things which pass in the
Congregation of the H. Office, that they had there in good earnest set upon the
examination of M. Hersent's Sermon, the memory of which I believed totally
buried. He told me also the very Propositions extracted out of it by the
prosecutors of its condemnation, to obtain the same. One of them was, That
Free Will is so weak, especially since the loss it suffered of innocence and
righteousness in the First Man, that unless it be stayed and supported by
Gods Grace, it is no longer fit for any thing but to offend God; these are the
very terms contained in the 28. page of the printed Sermon. The second was,
That the Saints obey the motions of God's Grace with an obedience so much the
more voluntary as it is free, and so much the more free as it is voluntary:
This is in the 23. page of the same Book. Those who persecuted these
Propositions, opposed them at first absolutely in themselves; and he that
maintained them did it with so great strength and success, that he disarmed
his Adversaries, and convinced his Judges of the things which he undertook to
prove to them. But I was told that it was not without great reluctance; which
was such in reference to the first Proposition, that he became engaged to
maintain a third, upon which he made a particular dissertation as well as upon
the two other, though it was not extracted out of the Sermon, namely, That all
actions performed by the sole strength of nature are sins. At length the Judges
who examined the Apologies presented to them in defense of these three
Propositions considered in themselves, became perfectly satisfied and convinced
thereby, and the accusers of the Sermon were consequently forced to silence and
a retreat. But being not of the humor to acquiesce so easily against their
engagement, they devised to say, that though the Propositions might be
maintained as they were explicated by him that defended them, nevertheless
they are bad in that Sermon and Book, because it makes but one body with the
Epistle which is before it, with reference to which it is just and necessary to
consider the two Propositions in question, that considering them in this
manner, they would no doubt be found worthy of censure, for that in the said
Epistle Jansenius is spoken of with an Elogium, being an Author condemned by
the Bull of Urban VIII. and whose opinions this Preacher has borrowed and
maintained, as is evident by the Epistle.

I was told that they who contrived this project, had the greater hope of
success, because they saw him who maintained the Propositions absolutely in
themselves as they are in the Sermon, wholly out of the business; he being
that Monastical person upon whose faith the Master of the Sacred Palace gave
permission for printing it, and the Epistle not being mentioned in his License,
but only the Sermon, and he professing openly, that he saw none but the Sermon,
nor heard any thing of the Epistle, which was an addition made by M. Hersent
purely of his own head, without speaking one single word to him of it, or his
own having the least ground to suspect it. Whence they took for certain, that
the Apologies of the Licenser having been very well received, and he seeing
himself delivered from all the combustion, and honored also with the
commendations of some of his Judges for the elegancy and solidity which they
found in his writings, would not care to engage himself in a new labor, the
success of which was uncertain, and not only more dangerous then the first,
but likely to make him lose all the benefit thereof. But this Ecclesiastic
deceived them, because this new assault giving him the curiosity to search
Jansenius upon the subject of these Propositions, and finding nothing there but
the same Doctrine himself had lately defended, and the same Judges, before whom
he was to maintain it again, approved; although his interest in no wise engaged
him to the defense of the Propositions, interpreted with relation to the said
Epistle and the opinions of Jansenius; yet he thought himself obliged thereunto
by the love of truth, and by gratitude toward his Judges. And for these
reasons he became then actually employed therein. It was told me that this
Monastic was named F. du Four, and that he was a very intimate friend of M.
the Abbot de Loiac, Chamberlain of honor to the Pope, and nominated by his
Holiness to the Bishopric of Toul, with whom it was known that I had great
commerce; there was also some hope given me, that by his means I might have a
sight of his Writings, which I was certifi'd were worthy to be read, and very
compendious and determinative. I had a very great curiosity to see them, and to
get a Copy of them, in regard of the nature of the business, and the
commendations I received of them. Wherefore I had recourse immediately to the
Abbot de Loiac, who very gladly and willingly brought me to the knowledge of
the said Father. I found him of a great wit, a very agreeable and copious
conversation, very clear in Doctrine, but as prudent too in management as a man
of that quality could be after having passed almost sixty years in the world,
whereof the twenty last were spent at Rome. I was always very welcome to him
when I visited him, and received with very great civility; but I found him so
close, as often as I went to put him upon these matters, and he so constantly
diverted the discourse thereof; that I could not without great rudeness make
the least mention of his Writings; because indeed he had been utterly undone,
should his Judges have known that he communicated them, so inviolable will they
have the secrecy of all things which they handle. There was nothing but M.
Hersent that he spoke freely of, when he was put upon this subject, because the
fact was public, and he could not forbear complaining of his not having told
him so much as one word about his Epistle, having been treated with honor, as
he was, for his Sermon. I excused M. Hersent a little by the custom in France,
and likewise in our Faculty, of not showing any thing but the Theses and the
Books to the Approbators, but adding Epistles and Prefaces according to
prudence and discretion. But he liked not these excuses, because the custom was
otherwise at Rome, which ought to be understood and followed; and because (he
said) if M. Hersent had showed him his Epistle, he would have put it in a
condition (by changing and blotting out some words) for being printed, without
being liable to any exceptions or complaints more then the Sermon it self. But
to return to his Writings, I believe he would not have granted the reading of
them to M. de Loiac, though living with him in the closest friendship and
correspondence that can be between two persons of parts, honor and piety: Such
sacred things are secrecy, and the Excommunication under penalty whereof they
are obliged to keep the same in that Congregation, in that Country.

I shall in due place mention what success followed the generous resolution of
the F. du Four, to defend those two Propositions, even considering them with
reference to that Epistle, and the Doctrine of Jansenius: only this
exquisiteness of secrecy called to my mind a thing told me by the Ambassador
in one or two converses on purpose about M. Hersent's business, namely, that
secrecy was so religiously observed, that himself often endeavoring to get
some light from Cardinal d' Este, who was one of the Congregation, concerning
the posture wherein that affair stood, and whither his Eminence judged it might
tend, that so he might tell M. Hersent something of it, who was much in pain
about it; he could never draw from him the least word or sign whereby to
conjecture any thing, whatever industry he used to that purpose, whatever
importunity he made to the said Cardinal, whatever perfect intelligence there
was between them about all things else; and although the Cardinal would
otherwise have been glad to oblige M. Hersent both for his own sake and that of
his Nation. After which certainly I will never wonder that the mysteries of
things which pass in that Congregation are so hidden and impenetrable; for
there can scarce be imagined a person more industrious to penetrate into what
he desires, then this Ambassador, nor one more beneficent and civil then that
Cardinal, nor two persons more united together then they.

CHAP. VIII.
A visit of Cardinal Lugo. The falsification of the Bull of Urban VIII. The
eagerness of M. Albizzi against S. Augustine. The Censure of Vallidolid.

THE favor done me by the abovesaid Cardinal, in putting me upon a discourse
with Cardinal Lugo, caused me to conceive my self obliged after this conference
with him, to go and wait upon him in his own house, lest I might be liable
either to be charged with disrespect to them both, or suspected of secret
aversion against the said Cardinal Lugo for his being a Jesuit. So I went to
visit him five or six days after, and found him at home: He received me very
civilly, and after some discourse touching the studies of Divinity followed a^
Paris, he told me that there were some that studied too much there. I
understood him well, but I was willing to oblige him to speak more clearly, and
to put himself into the matter of his own accord. Wherefore I answered, That
excess was to be avoided in all things, and that though the profession of
Literature requires great assiduity with Books, yet it was well enough known at
Paris how to use moderation and due temper therein. At length he declared
himself, and objected to me the Book Of the Authority of S. Peter and S. Paul,
as a Rhapsodie of passages, quotations, the interpreting and applying of which
proceeded from that excess he spoke of, etc. That the Censure upon it had
followed, etc. (these etc. etc. are usual in Italy, there is great use made of
them in speaking, and that in the most polite discourses; and they are uttered
for the abridging and supplying of what might be added for a more large
explication, it being supposed also that he who is spoken to understands well
what is implied, and is able to supply it.) I answered, that as to the passages
of that Book, M. Bourgeois at his being at Rome had showed his Eminence the
strongest and clearest of them, and that he might have judged thereof. As for
the Censure, that we at Paris did not conceive it to touch that Book at all, it
condemning only the Equality between those two Apostles, sine ulla subjectione,
without any subordination; but there were Chapters in that Book, wherein
several kinds of subordination were set down. He told me, that the Book spoke
not of any besides that which concerns point of Time. I answered, that I had
often heard those that had read it make account that there were several others;
and that, as to the foundation of Equality of Power between those two Apostles,
people not at all interessed for the Book, looked upon it as a thing very
honorable and advantageous to the H. See. He continued firm in this, that
there was no other subordination mentioned in the said Book besides that of
Time, and then passed to speak of Sufficient Grace, the ground of which he drew
from Jesus Christ and S. Paul, with as much certainty as it is possible for that
which is always Victorious to be deduced from them. I told him, that the
Disciples of S. Augustine made no difficulty to admit the same as those of S.
Thomas do, namely, granting a certain posse, but never the velle, (to wit,
perfect) nor the facere; besides which Graces there needs another Effectual one
to produce the action; but as for Sufficient Grace subject to the Will, as that
was which the first man received in the state of Original Righteousness, it
could not be admitted, because it is conceived contrary to the Doctrine of the
Scripture and the Church. In fine, I told him that this was the thing in
controversy amongst Divines, for the clearing and pacifying of whose
divisions, it was to be wished that the reasons both of the one side and the
other might be heard, that every thing might be examined, etc. He much disliked
the Expedient, saying that there needed no examination of a business which was
already judged; and for proof of his assertion, he brought me the Bull of Pius
V. I told him, that I assented to the truth of that Bull, but that all the
Propositions contained therein, were not thereby condemned; and upon my
alleging the Exception, Quanquam earum aliquae possint aliquo modo sustineri
in rigore and proprio verborum sensu ab autoribus intento, he told me, that
these last words ought to be referred to that which follows; and that the sense
was, that, Quamvis aliquo modo sustineri p^ssent, tamen in proprio autorum
sensu erant Haereticae, etc. I answered, that this sense never came into my
mind when I read the Bull, notwithstanding the different pointing used in the
several impressions thereof, and that the words did not comply therewith. He
replied, that he had consulted the Original of the Bull, and found the commaes
thus placed. Hoc dato non concesso; I said, that the first words of the
Exception were not put into the Bull without cause; and that there must needs
be some sense at least in which those Propositions may be maintained in the
rigor; and that this was it that was to be considered, viz. what that sense
was. He could not gainsay it, but changed his battery, and recurr'd to the
Scripture, the H. Fathers, and the Popes, upon whose Authority he pretended
that Sufficient Grace was established. I answered him, that we judged the
Scripture, Fathers, and Popes on our side; that if the case were as he said, if
the opinions of S. Augustine were not such as were to be followed, the number of
those who maintain them as well amongst the ancient Doctors of our Faculty as
among the younger, would not increase every day as it did. Here he fell to
mention pensions, benefices, and money given (as he said) to make those
disciples; adding, that they were very well informed thereof, and had received
certain intelligence of all those practices. I replied that this was so far
from being true, that the Court being averse from those Tenants, the way for
any one to obstruct his own temporal advancement, was to maintain them; That a
greater injury could not be done the Doctors, then to accuse them of adhering
to the truth upon so low and servile conditions and interests; and that they
who know and love truth, embrace the same only for it self. He betook himself
to the infallibility of the H. See, and cited this passage, Ego dixi tibi,
Petre, non deficiet fides tua. I told him that was the same which we followed;
that without it there is no salvation; and that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it. This was the end of our Conference, which passed with
sufficient moderation on both sides and with all the respect which I owed to a
person of that eminent dignity.

I have not related any thing as of this Conference besides what was spoken by
the Cardinal and my self; but I cannot omit here a remarkable thing which I
might have added when I was speaking concerning one of the points of which we
discoursed, had I seen that it would have been beneficial and seemly. It is
concerning the different pointings which have been made in the several
impressions of the Bull of Pius V. inserted in that of Urban VIII. when it was
printed the first time at the Apostolic Printing House in the year 1643. it
was thus pointed; Quas quidem sententias stricto coram nobis examine
ponderatas, quanquam nonnullae aliquo pacto sustineri possent in rigore, and
proprio verborum sensu ab assert^ribus intento, Haereticas, erroneas,
suspectas, temerarias, scandalosas, and in pias aures offensionem immittentes
respective.............. praesentium autoritate damnamus. Which shows that the
true sense of that Bull is, that some of those Propositions attributed to Bavis
may be maintained in the rigor and the proper sense of those who advanced them.
Quanquam nonnullae aliquo pacto sustineri poss^nt in rigore, and proprio
verborum sensu ab assertoribus intento. But this Exception not pleasing the
Jesuits, they have endeavored to alter the sense by causing a Comma to be
added between the two words possent, and in rigore, thereby to join this last
and the following words to the condemnations pronounced against these
Propositions, and to frame this scheme and signification of the words of the
Bull, namely, that although the Propositions it speaks of may be some way
maintained, yet taking them in the rigor and in the proper sense of those who
advanced them, they are Heretical, scandalous, and so forth. This is a
falsification which has been committed in diverse Editions since the first
which was made, as I said above, at the Apostolic Printing House in the year
1643. of which I keep some Copies which I procured when I was at Rome, to
evidence upon occasion the falsenesse of those which do not agree therewith.
But it is further remarkable, and shows how great an influence the Jesuits
have had in that alteration, as also what credit and prevalence they have with
the Officers by whom things are swayed at Rome; namely, That the said Bull has
been printed not only in remote Provinces with the addition of the Comma
between the two words, possent and in rigore, but likewise once in the
Apostolic Printing House it self since that edition of the year 1643. The
attempt of this Falsification appeared also once more plainly; for they who
endeavored it before these Editions I spoke of, thought it not enough to add
a Comma between possent and in rigore, but also added a whole word, namely
tamen after in rigore, to make the said Bull better square with their
intentions. But for all this it ceased not to be evident, as I told Card. Lugo
and he assented to it, That the first words of the Exception not having been
put there to no purpose, there must needs be at least some sense in which the
Propositions may be maintained in the rigor, and that the thing to be looked
after is, What that sense is.

Two or three days before this Visit one of the Ambassador's Secretaries said
in a company where I was, that he speaking to M. Albizzi touching the business
of M. Hersent, that Assessor answered him, that S. Augustine was indeed a great
Doctor, but what he had delivered touching Grace was just the dreggs of his
Works, and the point wherein he was to be gainsaid. I went the next day to
advertise the General of the Augustins of this, thereby to diminish his
confidence in the said M. Albizzi, whom (as he professed to me) he looked upon
as a man well affected to St. Augustine. That which obliged me to go so
speedily to advertise him of it, was, that in one of my visits to that General
a fortnight before, when I sp^ke much of the necessity there was of opposing
without further delay the assaults and ambushes of the visible and invisible
enemies of S. Augustine, he received it with liking and approved what I said;
but yet seemed not so forward as I desired, and thought a person devoted as he
was to S. Augustine, ought to be upon the things which I represented to him;
indeed he seemed rather to become cold, and to rest upon future hopes and
satisfactions, which I judged contrived to hinder him from stirring, that so
all things might be ruined with more facility; which being once attained to,
then all the promises made him would vanish and be forgotten.

The Censure of Vallidolid against the 22. Propositions repugnant to the
authority of S. Augustins doctrine, was either in part or wholly the occasion
of these promises. A Memorial was presented to the Pope to obtain of his
Holiness the confirmation of that Censure, which was also desired of him by a
Letter from the King of Spain delivered to him together with that Memorial.
Whereupon the said Memorial was referred to a secret Congregation appointed for
examination of affairs of that nature. Herein lay all the hope of the justice
which seemed to be intended: but yet at the same time it was given out that
nothing ought to be too much hastened in that point; because it behoov'd first
to secure the authority of the H. See, which could not be done but by a full
and absolute execution of all the Orders, Briefs, and Decrees in general which
had issued from it. Wherefore this ought to be first seen to, and then the rest
should be provided for in time, and care taken to give all the satisfaction
that can be wished in a case wherein the H. See is the first concerned. Of this
we have since seen considerable effects; but before we proceed, let us hear in
brief what was done at Paris in this time.

CHAP. IX.
Of what passed at Paris in this time. The Irish dealt withal. Complaints made
by some Bishops to the Nuntio concerning the practices of the Jesuits in
getting subscriptions to the Letter of M. de Vabres. The said Bishops
deliberate of sending to Rome. A Proposal of a Conference.

ON one side there were persons who went about to all the Monasteries to get
subscriptions to the Declarations against the Five Propositions, and so to send
the same to Rome, thereby to embolden the Romans to condemn them in confidence
of the multitude of those who would approve the Censure when it should be
passed, they declaring themselves thus for it beforehand. Even poor Priests and
poor Irish students maintained by the charity of others were solicited to
subscribe thereunto. The Rector of the University who was advertised of the
novelty and irregularity of this carriage, quashed it, and reproved all the
Accomplices for it by a Solemn Decree, which was afterward the ground of great
contests and divisions in the University by the canvasings which M. Cornet and
his adherents made there, to stir up against the Rectors decree a great
number of Doctors, who impugn'd the same in every thing they could. The history
of this must be reserved for others who were witnesses of it. This intimation
may suffice in reference to my subject.

The care taken by the authors of this Attempt to prepossesse all people at
Rome as soon as they resolved to remove it thither upon its miscarriage in the
Faculty, began not to be understood at Paris till about this time; though the
design was put in execution the year before. Of which I had a fair proof by a
Letter which fell into my hands written by F. Nicholai (a Dominican, Doctor of
our Faculty, and one of the Deputies chosen by M. Cornet, on 1 July 1649.) to
his General, dated May 23. 1650. He indeavor'd therein to avert him from
undertaking the protection of Jansenius, telling him that he wondered his
brethren were so eager to defend him, Vt ita nostri fratres ad defensionem ejus
exardescant. The reasons which he alleged to this end, were founded only upon
the calumnies which that good Father being the Jesuits friend had learnt of
them, namely, that Jansenius teaches not only an Effectual, but also a
Necessitating Grace like to that of Calvin; Necessitatem in voluntate infert
qualem ipse Calvinus. The only truth in the Letter was, that F. Nicholai
confessed in the beginning that he had not had time to read Jansenius well,
neither would he so do; Censere mihi universim non licet, quia nec percurrere
totum libuit nec vacavit; and that he acknowledged that when the Five
Propositions were first propounded in Sorbonne, there was no design to
attribute the same to Jansenius, but only to judge of them in general. Nec
Jansenii tamen vel umbra tenus nomen praefixum illis fuit, sed universim tantum
propositae illae sunt, ut sine ullo praejudicio censerentur.

On the other side, the Assembly of the Clergy was held still at Paris, and
there was no speech in it concerning M. de Vabres's Letter; but the
subscriptions of such as were likely to be gained, were still secretly pursued.
The Agents and their manner of proceeding cannot better be discovered then by a
Note written by F. Dinet the King's Confessor to M. Hallier, which fell from M.
Hallier's pocket occasionally as he was in Sorbonne, and was taken up by one of
our Brethren who sent it to me at Rome. The Superscription of it was thus, For
M. Doctor Hallier, Syndic of the Faculty of Divinity at Paris at the Hostel of
Villeroy; the Contents thus; Sir, My Lord of Tarbe sent us his subscription the
other day. My Lord of Troies his brother is at present in this City, and
promised yesterday that he would do the like after he had taken advice of some
Doctors of your Faculty about it. Have you no one of your friends who may go to
visit him? This is from Sir, Your most humble and obedient E. N. S. Signed
Dinet.

All these canvasings and other like proceedings became at length displeasing
to other Prelates, who more and more saw a necessity of hindering the evil
effects which that Letter might produce, and of taking another course in case
the business should be brought to a discussion and judgment. M. the
Archbishop of Ambrun one of the Presidents of the Assembly, and the Bishops of
Valence, Again, Chalons, Cominge, and Orleans, sent to desire access of the
Nuntio on Monday Feb. 10. He attended them, and they went to wait upon him, and
told him, That it was not by order of the Clergy that M. de Vabres and the rest
had written; that this proceeding was not at all liked by them; that they
disapproved it; that the quality of Bishops empowered them to judge of
controversies arising within their own Dioceses; that this power was signally
infringed by the Letter which M. de Vabres had written; and that the business
more then any other deserved extraordinary care and circumspection. They told
him further of the danger there was in judging thereof, without having first
examined it and summoned the parties. They represented to him what a noise
might be made by such a Censure as the said Letter demanded; and above all,
what necessity there was that before any thing be done, the Propositions in
question should be discussed and scanned according to the places from whence
they were produced. Lastly, they entreated him to advertise the Pope of this
their Declaration, and inform his Holiness of the things which they had spoken
to him.

The Archbishop of Sens was to have been at this visit, but having been
hindered by some other business, he went eight days after accompanied by some
other Bishop to speak with the Nuntio about the same matter, and to inculcate
to him afresh the necessity of the Popes proceeding in this affair with mature
deliberation, and according both to the forms required by the Canons, and to
the order of Ecclesiastical Judgments.

But the Prelates were not perfectly fatisfy'd with this their diligence; for
having left nothing but words with the Nuntio, they feared lest he might forget
some of them, or lest the Letter which he was to write thereof to the Pope not
being immediately delivered to his Holiness, might first fall into the hands
of persons friends to the Jesuits, who in favor to them might either keep it
as long as they pleased, or not present it to him but when it would be likely
to be read in a perfunctory transient manner, or lastly wholly suppress it if
it might be done conveniently: Wherefore they now took up the first purpose of
writing to the Pope that Letter which shall be mentioned hereafter. But for
that the same could not be so soon got ready to be sent and subscribed by all
those by whom it was requisite so to be, M. de Valence writ in the mean time to
the Archbishop of Toulouse (last deceased) all that had been done hitherto, and
there was sent to me at Rome from him a duplicate of his Letter signed by him,
to the end I might show it to all I thought fit, thereby to stop as much as
possible the course of those practices, which were founded upon that of M. de
Vabres. The Copy of M. de Valence's Letter to the Archbishop of Toulouse here
follows.

Paris 3. March 1651. My Lord,
BY reading the Considerations which have been made upon a Letter sent to Our
Holy Father by some of Our Lords the Prelates, you may have understood all that
has passed upon that business. I knew nothing of the said Letter, nor of the
whole design, (which was kept very secret) till my coming to Paris, and I have
been extremely displeased to see how many artifices are used by the Molinists
to hinder a solemn examination of all the Questions about Grace which are in
dispute, (the only way as I conceive to procure Peace, and to clear up the
truth.) We have here amongst us inquired what means were fit to be used for
remedying the mischief which that Letter may produce contrary to the intention
of Our Lords the Prelates who subscribed it, and we thought expedient to speak
with my Lord the Nuntio, and desire him to write to his Holiness about it.
Accordingly on Monday 22 Febr. my Lords, the Archbishop of Ambrun, the Bishops
of Again, Chaalons, Orleans, Cominges, and my self went to wait upon the Nuntio.
We declared to him that it was not the Clergy of France which signed the said
Letter, but only some of our Lords the Bishops did it by themselves, and in
secret, without speaking thereof to the Assembly; although the Clergy being
assembled at Paris, it is an unheard of thing to write to his Holiness about
an affair which concerns the whole Church, and particularly this of France,
without acquainting the Assembly therewith.

My Lord Archbishop of Ambrun represented to him the importance of this
business, and the danger there was in judging of these questions without
summoning and hearing the parties; That many things were to be said concerning
the Propositions presented to his Holiness; and that for decision of the same
it was requisite to examine and understand exactly all that has passed here
about that affair, to see in what sense the Disciples of S. Augustine maintain
them; to distinguish S. Augustin's sense first of all, for fear of involving
that Holy Teacher of Grace in a Censure, which would give occasion to our
Heretics of saying, That the H. See condemns that which it has always
approved, and that the ancient Tradition of the Fathers touching the points of
Grace is deserted in the Roman Church. The Nuntio promised to let his Holiness
know of our visit, and what we represented to him; he testified to us that he
believed his Holiness would not deliver any Judgment, seeing it was not the
Body of the Clergy which writ to him, but only some Prelates by themselves: My
L. Archbishop of Sens who was to have gone with us to the Nuntio, having been
hindered then, went to him eight days after with some other Prelat, and
declared (as I have understood) that if the proceeding at Rome in this affair
were not with all the forms required by the Canons, and according to the order
of Ecclesiastical Judgments, neither himself nor many other Prelates of France
would have any regard for what should be done. We have conceived that besides
this, it would be requisite that we writ to his Holiness, to tell him our
minds our selves. To morrow will be sent to you our Letter which has been
signed by eight or nine Prelates. Were there time enough to send into the
Provinces (as the other Letter was carried about five months) we should
undoubtedly have a great number of Prelates that would subscribe it. But being
we are informed that the Business hastens at Rome, it will be requisite to
send it thither when you with some others of your Province have signed it, and
to be contented with the fewer subscriptions by reason of the little time we
have. Although I cannot believe that the H. See will be led to pronounce in
such a manner upon questions of so great importance, I conceived it would be
pleasing to you to understand all that we have done, and that having so great a
zeal for sound doctrine, justice, and the dignity of our Function, you will
approve all that we have acted only out of a spirit of peace and truth, and out
of the duty of our Ministry. This is from,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant and Brother, LEBERON Bp.
of Valence and Die.

But before my receiving at Rome either M. de Valence's Letter or two others
which informed me of what I have above recited touching the visits to the
Nuntio, I received one which had been written ever since the 27. of January, in
which several news was signified to me: first that there was talk at Paris of
a Conference before my L. the Archbishop and some other Prelates and
Magistrates. That it was demanded to have six persons there, and offered the
Molinists to come in as great number as they would: That M. de Rhodez Tutor to
the King had been solicited by F. Paulin his Majesty's Confessor to
subscribe the Letter of M. de Vabres, and that he refused it: That M. de Saint
Flour did the like, though extraordinarily pressed to it by ths Jesuits: That
M. de Viviers confessed that he had signed it, but that he meant not to cast
any blot upon Jansenius or the Propositions, but only desired a judgment for
the sake of peace; and that the Pope was not entreated in that Letter to
appoint a Conference, because it was not to be doubted but he would according
to his wisdom call together the most able Divines on either side and make a
solemn examination of the question (which cannot otherwise be well determined)
before he pronounce any thing therein: In sum, that this was certainly the mind
of most of the Bishops who subscribed the said Letter.

The same hand writ to me again on 17. February wherein speaking of the
Congregations held under the Popes, Clement VIII. and Paul V. he has these
words; It must be incessantly inculcated to those of Rome that our disputes are
wholly the same, and that the Question is solely about Effectual Grace, and
sufficient Grace subject to Free will; and that neither Jansenius nor we
further hold the said Propositions then as they are reduced to the point of
Effectual Grace.

CHAP. X.
That the Haereo fateor is that which has rendered Jansenius so odious at
Rome. Several Declarations of Cardinal Barberini that the Bull of Urban VIII.
is only provisional, and reaches not the grounds of Jansenius's Doctrine. The
Zeal of the Generals of the Dominicans and of the Augustines, in behalf of S.
Augustine mixed with fear of giving dissatisfaction thereby.

IF it be true, as the abovementioned Letters affirm together with many
learned and judicious persons who have carefully read Jansenius's book, that he
holds no other doctrine but that of Effectual Grace which is wholly S.
Augustin's, and which (as we shall see in the sequel) has always been in
general approbation and esteem at Rome; there is no little ground of wonder,
how it could come pass that his name and his opinions have become so odious
and suspected by the Romans. I observed about this time one of the capital
causes thereof, if not the only one; namely That place of his book where
objecting to himself against S. Augustin's doctrine the Bulls of Pius V. and
Gregory XIII. he answers that truly he is surprised at those Bulls, Haereo
fateor; and that on the other side he sees not what can be replied to S.
Augustin's doctrine which has been so often approved by the H. See. This doubt
and seeming combat in which he places on one side the Bulls of these two
Popes, and on the other the doctrine of S. Augustine so often approved by the H.
See, (though he really accords and reconciles together those Bulls and this
Doctrine sufficiently, and with a very particular respect toward the H. See)
has given so great advantages to the Jesuits against him and his book; that
it not only facilitates any means which they will use to make him looked upon
as a declared enemy of the H. See by persons preposses'd with the false zeal of
those Fathers, but also they have thereby rendered him suspected by others,
whom I found very intelligent, judicious, equitable, and likewise well affected
toward this Prelate in all other things; so that expressing their dislike of
this point alone they have testified their sorrow that he exposed himself to
this disadvantage; so powerful is the conceit of the Pope's infallibility
over the minds of the Romans, and so heinous a crime and mortal offense in
their eyes is every thing that grates upon it more or less. But having seen
how admirably the said Bishop is cleared from it by Aurelius Avitus in the 22.
Dissonance of his Molinomachie which was lent me by a Cardinal to whom it was
sent by the Post; I as often wished I could dispel those suspicions and dislkes
entertained at Rome, against that place of Jansenius's book as I heard it
spoken of, which was very frequently: but this was a work reserved for others.
The Prejudices hereupon were so great and strong, that should I have said all I
could in Apology for the Bishop of Ipre touching this matter, I should rather
have made my self criminal then justified him. And indeed 'twas a thing I
abstained from the more willingly and necessarily for that not being at Rome
for that purpose, nor otherwise engaged in any thing that had affinity
therewith, I contented my self with speaking of those which were recommended to
me, or fell into discourse according as the visites I happened to make permitted.

I made one to Cardinal Barberin on 27th. of January, in which he spoke among
other things something largly of the great services which S. Bernard did to the
H. See, and the ardent affection wherewith he was always animated toward it. I
acknowledged to the Cardinal the truth of those commendations, and withal
beseech'd him to observe that that affection having been the primum mobile
which set a going all his other motions and actions in behalf of the H. See, he
used a notable liberty and franknesse toward the same H. See, when he saw
himself obliged to admonish the Popes that filled it, of such things as might
give cause to complain of their government and Decrees. I added also that all
such as are zealous for the service of the H. See, ought to testify the same
chiefly in such occasions, wherein its interest lies so much, in understanding
the things in which it has been or may be surprised; That the Popes themselves
for remedying mischiefs possible to arise from surprises have ordained in the
Cannon Law C. 5. de rescriptis, that their Decrees be not yielded unto when
there is difficulty in them, but that the same be represented to themselves, to
the end they may use such order and remedy therein as is necessary. The
Cardinal professed to like this discourse, and confirmed it by a decision or
Maxim which he said is followed in the Rota. Yet he added that the books of S.
Bernard De Consideratione are not those of his works which are most in esteem
at Rome, having sometimes been in danger of being, if not condemned, at least
suppressed or retrenched; which possibly might have been done, had it not been
for the consideration of his eminent Sanctity.

I gave him another visit on the 17. of February, and left with him the
Observations made upon M. de Vabres's Letter which he sent me back after two
days sealed, having read and made his extract out of the same. Ten days after
I gave him another, he then professed to me that he approved those
observations, but made more account of the Reflections upon the Censure of the
Catechism. He said also that himself was made to speak well therein (that is
to say, that he was well pleased whith what was there related of him) but that
the Letter of M. Albizzi which is produced there, and the other things spoken
of that Assessor troubled him; and his Eminence gave me to understand that they
were mutually concerned for one another, and reputed the offense done to one of
their Officers as done to their proper persons. To which I answered that no
doubt it was with unwillingness that M. Albizzi was reflected upon; and that it
had not been done if he had not given ground for it, and the writer conceived
himself constrained so to do.

Happing to be in the company of the same Cardinal in the beginning of March,
he told me plainly enough that when themselves or their officers are not
treated with the respect which they think their due, they are apt to become
rigid and suspicious, and to find fault with many things of which otherwise
they should take no great notice, etc. That it behooved so to order the matter
in the present case as not directly to thwart Decisions, and amongst others the
Bull of Urban VIII. of happy memory; but to show that what the Adversaries
pretend to be contained therein, is not there indeed; and that the same is to
be understood with this or that restriction, etc. That it is fit to allow
something to Popes great encumbrances which hinder them from being so exact in
every point, etc. To which I answered two things. First that sometimes there is
no way to deny the words which are express therein, nor to admit the same but
by alleging a surprise. Secondly, That S. Augustin's disciples are full of
great love and sincere respect toward the H. See and the Popes. That I doubted
not but that they are always ready to interpret their meanings and words in
the most benign sense that is possible. That if his eminence would think
thereon, and give me light of a fit expedient how to put a favorable exposition
upon that Bull at Rome, I doubted not but it would be accepted most willingly
by all the disciples of S. Augustine, provided it be not prejudicial to truth,
which with them is absolutely inviolable.

Our discourse of this business passed so far, and the Cardinal professed
himself so satisfied therewith, that I believed he would think in good earnest
of procuring a clear declaration from the H. See of the motives and extent of
the Bull of Urban VIII. which he had explicated to me before on several
occasions; and also (of making use of my mediation to bring it about that they
who found difficulties therein (with whom he conceived I had some commerce)
might acquiesce in the extent, and with the Glosses and passable conditions
with which he told me the said Bull was made, and which might be expressed in
such Declaration. Which was certainly a thought worthy so great and renowned a
Cardinal, as well for the honor of the memory of Urban VIII. his Uncle and the
execution of his intentions, as for avoiding provocation to wrath (according to
the Scripture expression) by the continuance of an obscurity and a studied
silence, of the most humble children of the Catholic Church most zealous for
her and the Holy See, and very capable of serving both against their common
enemies.

I remember I accounted it a thing resolved upon by the Cardinal, and so fully
conceived that he having undertaken it, the accomplishment must needs follow,
and they who professed some repugnance to the said Bull being (as I was
confident) very ready to embrace all overtures of peace compatible with the
preservation of truth; that at my return from a small journey taken with the
abovementioned Gentleman to Civita Vecchia, the Alum mines, and Caprarola,
finding a Citation fixed up against M. Hersent, in which I observed such words
as might exasperate minds affected to S. Augustine, I went speedily to the said
Cardinal to make my complaint thereof to him, and testify my grief in seeing
this new obstacle to the design which he had professed of bringing matters to a
safe and permanent reconciliation by giving a favorable interpretation to the
said Bull. Now this Citation was decreed in the names of the Cardinals, Roma,
la Cueva, Spada, Ginetti, S. Clement, Panzirolo, Lugo, Colonna, d' Este, and
likewise in the name of Cardinal Barberin; and it mentioned the Doctrine of
Jansenius, and of that whereof M. Hersent desired the Pope's protection (which
is no other then that of S. Augustine) as a doctrine purely and simply
condemned; although as for that of S. Augustine all the world acknowledged it at
Rome, as a doctrine confirmed and approved by the general consent of the Church
in all Ages; and although, as for that of Jansenius, Cardinal Barberin had
often told me, that such as it was, it remained still in its integrity, and had
received no blow from the Bull of his Uncle. But this Citation which was likely
to be carried everywhere to the remotest Provinces, and which gave a
sufficiently plausible ground to all the enemies of S. Augustine and Jansenius
to speak otherwise of the said Bull, gave also occasion to such as were
concerned for either or both, to become alienated and exasperated; and brought
into dispute the honor of the H. See from whence it was looked upon as
proceeding, bearing the names and seals of their Eminences, the most
considerable members officers and supports thereof.

The Cardinal seemed astonished at what I said to him, and answered me that he
would consider the matter and advertise the aforesaid persons thereof; That he
remembered that he signed some thing, but it was without having had any hand in
the business: That he had been in the Country the week before, and indisposed
this; that all these things were transacted by the Office of the Rota which
inserts in these kind of Instruments what seemed good to them, and always
interprets things to the worst. After which he proceeded to speak again of the
Bull of Urban VIII. and told me that we ought to handle the same tenderly and
not thwart it so directly; because that this and others the like were set
forth, and are to be understood, supposing that the books in question contain
really the Propositions of which they are accused; which being matter of fact,
the Popes may be surprised and deceived therein: And that in case such Books do
not contain the Propositions imputed to them, condemnations (or rather,
prohibitions) as he told me do not touch them nor lay any blot or prejudice
upon them. And as for that of Jansenius in particular, he added that the Bull
of Urban VIII. does not condemn but only forbid it upon the report made thereof
to his Holiness. I testified that I was very glad to learn from his Eminence
the interpretation and extent which ought to be given to those Decrees and
Bulls; but I told him that the Jesuits and their Adherents did not understand
the same in this manner, nor confine them within these bounds. The Cardinal
replied that herein we ought to be firm and hold them to it. I answered that
that course was taken and is still endeavored to the utmost; but his Eminence
might extinguish many contests of no fruit nor edefication, if in stead of
leaving Divines to wrangle among themselves about such punctilio's he would
procure some Decree or Bull from the H. See, wherein were made such an open and
sincere declaration and explication of those hitherto set forth, as his
Eminence did now make to me. But I could not urge this matter further; and the
Cardinal having caused me to return to what I have above related of the visit
given to the Nuntio by the Archbishop of Ambrun and the other Prelates, and to
what had passed in the University touchching the Irish, he told me that it were
good that the Pope had always about him two or three persons of France, and as
many of Spain, to inform his Holiness of the things which passed in those
remote countries touching doctrine. I answered him that it would be very good;
but that besides the difficulties which occur herein, their manner of
handling affairs in secret and covertly much discouraged those that desired to
send or come thither. He replied that it was the order which was exactly
observed amongst them, not to reveal any thing of the affairs which they
handle daily; but that in those which then divided men's minds, and whereof we
had so often discoursed, nothing could be done publicly without reciprocal
communication, and a Congregation established on purpose for that cause.

I had the honor to see Cardinal Barberin the Saturday before this conference,
and to accompany him to the Celestines to a Thesis of Divinity dedicated to him
on Saturday 19. March 1651. The Thesis amongst others was upon the matter of
Grace and Predestination to Glory, which was defended there as done
gratuitously and effectually before the Prevision of Merits: of which point
that of effectual Grace and all the other Christian Truths maintained by us in
the Five Propositions, being clear and infallible consequences, I this day took
this occasion to make to his Eminence a short reduction thereof to grace
effectual by it self, the sole thing for whose defense and establishment we
were engaged, in exclusion of sufficient Grace subject to Free Will. The
Cardinal professed himself satisfied with the reduction and declaration, and
told me that he conceived that this was the way to bring affairs to a speedy
issue.

I remembered that at my departure from him when I showed his Eminence the
Letter of M. de Valence, I went to see Lucas Holstenius, and showed the same
also to him. He esteemed it so good and so judicious and withal so suitable to
the inclinations which he had observed in the Pope in a familiar conference
which he had with his Holiness for a whole hour about these matters, that he
desired me to translate it into Italian, and give him a Copy of it to show the
Pope, thereby to confirm him in the resolution which he had professed to have,
of hastening and hazarding nothing in their contests. The subjects of these
discourse was this; the Pope opening himself to him concerning the trouble he
received by continual solicitations from France to make some decision of these
matters which he understood not, and to the study of which he had never applied
himself, M. Holstenius answered that his Holiness would do well not to begin
at that age to put himself to the trouble of understanding, and much less of
deciding them; because that they were of themselves very difficult to
comprehend, that they had not only moved great disputes in all Ages of the
Church amongst the faithful since the birth of Jesus Christ, but also had
divided all the greatest Philosophers of old in the difficulty they found of
conciliating the Freedom of Man with the most clear and infallible knowledge
which God has of future things, and with the most immutable resolution of his
eternal Decrees; some of them sticking to these opinions, and others to other,
as men do also now adays and will do as long as there be men in the world.
Wherefore being no Decision can be made of these points which is likely to
satisfy them, his Holiness should do better not to think of making any, nor
trouble himself about it, but let things slide along as they do till they
become calm of themselves, as no doubt they would do, when either side or both
become weary of disputing and of indevouring to persuade their Adversaries to
their opinions. This was so well liked by the Pope, that he congratulated with
M. Holstenius for the intimation which he gave him thereof, and told him that
he would beware of proceeding after any other manner then according to this
advice of his.

About the same time a person of honor came to visit me, and told me he had
been two days before with the Master of the sacred Palace; and that this pious
Ecclesiastic had spoken to him with great resentment for the principles of S.
Augustine explicated by the Bishop of Ipre, and with a holy abhorrence of the
persecution which they suffered, promising on his part to retard and obstruct
to his power the evil designs which he found were in agitation against those
Holy Maxims, and such as defended them; but that he was troubled that we acted
so little on our patt for the information of people at Rome, and that whilst we
wholly deserted the Field of Battle to our Adversaries, it was no wonder if
they prevailed as much as they pleased.

I thought fit also to go and advertise the General of the Augustines of the
Citation fixed up against M. Hersent, and of the danger there was lest the
Jesuits should make use of it in the remote Provinces, as a new Proof that S.
Augustin's doctrine was looked upon and dealt with at Rome as a condemned
doctrine: I intimated to him that the more he dissembled the outrages daily
offered to the doctrine and authority of that great Saint, the less easy it
would be to remedy the same. He assented to what I said, but propounded to me
to make the complaints which I suggested to him: of which I making such excuses
as he liked, and he acknowledging that himself might intermeddle therein with
more reason, security, and success then I, he lift up his eyes and his
shoulders, and striking his hands upon the arms of his chair, expressed his
grief and his thoughts with these words, which he uttered twice, Non si puo
parlar, non si puo parlar; There is no speaking, there is no liberty to speak.
To which I answering, That it was time now to do it, or never would be; (to the
end he might consider what course were best to take) I left him a Copy of M.
Hersent's Citation, Epistle and Sermon. He accepted the same willingly, but
withal asked me what he should answer in case it were demanded from whom he had
them. I answered, that it was not fit to name me; which he promised me not to
do. This I observe, to show what restraint they are under at Rome in reference
to these matters; since a man of his quality feared being asked and obliged to
declare from whom he had received such public pieces, which might have been
found in every body's hands. Moreover he signified to me what just fear he had
to make remonstrances so necessary and well-becomming him, by the example of a
Cardinal who (he said) offering to make the like a little while ago about these
matters, had fallen into great disgust and mortification for so doing.

CHAP. XI.
Notice of my being in danger to be put into the Inquisition. Of the
Molinomachy of Aurelius Avitus. The Explication of Haereo Fateor. Such as were
thought inclinable to defend Jansenius, removed from the Assemblies of the
Inquisition. An Audience of the Pope.

I WAS advertised about the same time that I was in danger of falling into the
like my self, for that (as he affirmed who gave the notice thereof to the
Gentleman my companion) in the visits which I had made to the Cardinals I had
spoken too freely of those sentiments which pass at Rome for Heretical; that
in reference to these matters there needed no more then a single Hearsay to
cause a man to be apprehended and put in a safe place, that is to say, in the
Inquisition; that when any one is once there, it is not easy for him to get
out; and therefore I had great reason to take heed to my self. He who came to
give this notice was a Jesuit, and at this time performed the office of
Secretary for France to his General, and with whom I being frequently in
company together with that Gentleman who had been recommended to him by some
Letters of his Confreres in France I had contracted some acquaintance and
friendship; Which nevertheless I did not believe so great, as to be more
prevalent with him then the interests of his Society, and I scarce doubted but
that he came to give me this intelligence by contrivance of his Confreres,
either to frighten me, or for some other reasons. However, this Father was
thanked for the kindness which he professed to do me; but withal he was given
to know, that finding my self culpable of nothing, I feared nothing; which yet
did not hinder but that, there remaining not above three weeks to the time set
down by us for our departure, I was more wary of my self then formerly, for
fear of occasioning the crossing of our designs, by giving any hold against my
self. We began to take our leaves, and to buy such little curiosities as we
minded to carry from Rome into France: amongst diverse fine Prints which I had
from a Graver there, I bought also five sheets of Paper, upon which there were
above a hundred pourtraicts of several Jesuits who were Canonis'd thus, as
having shed their blood for the Christian Religion, amongst whom this was in
its order, Pater Henricus Garnetus Anglus Londini pro fide Catholica suspensus
and sectus, 3 Maii 1606. None in the world is ignorant that he suffered there
the punishment of death for the Powder Plot, of which he was accused,
convicted, and acknowledged himself guilty before he died; insomuch that out of
his resentment of his fault, upon some reproaches made to him as having
pretended in committing it to attain to the glory of Martyrdom, He answered,
That it was a thing unheard of for Traitors and Parricides to be ranked amongst
Martyrs, Nunquam auditum fuit parricidam esse Martyrem; as it is related in
these words, if I remember aright, by a well known Author who writ the History.
These Prints, which are always sold at the Sign of the Eagle near the Church
of S. Marcellus, with permission of the Superiors, I took with me to make use
of, one day, against those who have thought fit that the Hours should be
condemned, because in one of the Editions M. de Berule is found in the Calendar
with this Letter B. which signifies Blessed, a title which the Censors of that
excellent Work affirm is not lawful to be given to any person but by the
authority and approbation of the Pope, whilst at the same time they suffer the
title of Martyr to be given publicly and without contradiction for these forty
years to persons dead in the greatest infamy, and for the most enormous crimes.

Cardinal Barberin did us the honor to visit us on the 25. day of March;
amongst other things we talked of the Molinomachie of Aurelius Avitus. The
Cardinal asked me what was the subject of that Work. I answered him, that it
was written concerning the Jesuits pretense that the Propositions condemned by
the Bull of Pius V. agreed with the Doctrine of Jansenius; that it showed with
wonderful solidity, and invincible clearness, that such pretended agreement
was indeed none at all but impertinent, and maliciously and falsely alleged by
the Jesuits; that their artifices and horrible calumnies in all that business
were laid open by the Author of the said Book. Amongst others I told him of the
22. pretended Agreement, in which the Jesuits recite this Proposition out of
Pius V's Bull; Deus non potuisset ab initio talem creare hominem qualis nunc
nascitur. I told him, that I had found true what the Molinomachie said thereof;
namely, that Jansenius having mentioned it in his Book as an Objection to be
cleared, and accordingly cleared it very solidly, they have taken it out of
that place, as if Jansenius had written and affirmed it as of himself, without
setting down the words foregoing, which show that he mentions it as an
Objection, but suppressing all that the Bishop alleges to show that it has
been condemned in the sense wherein it is taken by Pius V. but that this sense
makes nothing to that of S. Augustine, which he recites and explicates. The
Cardinal professed himself surpised at what I said, and could not imagine
(though upon my affirming it, and engaging my self to show it him, he believed
it) that 'twas possible for men to resolve upon such black falsities. But for
the better understanding of the business, he put to me the usual difficulty
abovementioned, which the Jesuits make use of to discredit Jansenius upon all
occasions; namely, that objecting the said Propositions to himself, he says,
Haereo, fateor, sed quid ad Doctrinam S. Augustini? as if Jansenius opposed the
Authority of S. Augustine to Pius V. and Gregory XIII. And indeed he proposed
it, as thinking to press me with this instance; but I told him, that this was
also one of the cheats of that Bishops enemies, and was likewise laid open in
the Molinomachie; that Jansenius did not thus close up his discourse; that it
was an intolerable wickedness to suppress the remainder, by which he
explicates this Proposition, and reconciles the H. See with it self, and that
with very great care, esteem, and veneration; that the entire place ran thus,
sed quid ad Doctrinam S. Augustini clarissimam invectissimamque, quam toties
probavit and sequitur, sequendamque monuit Apostolica seeds? that he did not
rest there, but a little after added and put to himself this question, as out
of all likelihood, namely, Whether the H. See can be contrary and opposite to
it self? to which he answers, that this absurdity cannot be affirmed; and
then shows that the H. See really agrees with it self, and that the Doctrine of
S. Augustine, approved by the Popes, has nothing of affinity with the
Propositions condemned by Pius V. and Gregory XIII. This reply cleared and
satisfied Cardinal Barberin, who rejoined nothing further.

The minds of many in constant employment at Rome about matters of Doctrine,
were so possessed with aversion against the Bishop of Ipre, that they would not
admit of any thing that might contribute to the clearing of his intentions, or
to his justification. M. Albizzi (as I have since understood) effected some
time ago, that F. Lucas Vadingo, Superior, and in a manner Founder of the house
of S. Isidore, in which are the Monks of S. Francis all Irish, one of the
Consultors of the H. Office, a man of singular piety and very great parts, was
fain to absent himself from the Assemblies of that Congregation, only for
saying; That it was requisite to examine Jansenius's Book, and to let it pass
current after having retrencht out of it what was reprovable, if there were any
thing which deserved such correction. And the F. Abbot Hilarion, of the Order
of the Bernardins, some time after his composing the Book I mentioned above, in
which he noted the different senses in which the Propositions might be taken,
received an order from Cardinal Spada to repair no more to the Congregations
where those matters were handled. The manner of it was thus: The Cardinal told
him, That it was not necessary that he should be present any more at the
Congregations held about this affair. F. Hilarion answered, That he was obliged
to obey his Eminence. The Cardinal replied, That he did not say that, but only
entreated him that he would think good to repair thither no more. When F.
Hilarion gave me this relation, he told me, that the Cardinal spoke this to him
because it had been his advice that the sense of Jansenius upon the
Propositions might be examined and explicated. And as for F. Lucas Vadingo,
that he received an express prohibition for it, by the intrigues and
solicitations of M. Albizzi.

F. Campana, Procurator General of the Dominicans, preached this Lent at Rome
in the Church of S. Peter, and it was the third or fourth Lent that he preached
there, it being usual to be retained Preacher of a Church not for one year
only, but for many, till some occasion obliges him to desist from that
employment. I went to hear him as often as I could: He was an excellent man,
and I was much edified by him. I was there on Tuesday in the Passion week, and
he gave notice of a Sermon about Predestination for the Wednesday following.
But what? (said he) many will say it is a nice subject, and not meet to be
preached of to the people. O, answered he, S. Augustine is not of that mind,
who says, That Praedestinatio Sanctorum populo Christiano praedicanda est ut
qui gloriantur in Domino glorientur. I returned thither on Wednesday, and he
made a very good and solid Sermon upon that subject.

The Gentleman with whom I was, and my self, had resolved to depart immediately
after the celebration and ceremonies of the Feast of Easter; and that we might
not be delayed by an audience which we wished to have of the Pope before our
departure, we solicited for one at the end of Lent; which on H. Monday we
obtained, and the Pope treated us with very much gentleness, courtesy and
familiarity, for half an hour. I twice turned the discourse as much as I could
to things bordering upon the contests of the times, to give his Holiness
occasion to enter upon them, but he handsomely kept off them, and we spoke not
one word thereof far nor near.

I much wondered at this time at the Pope's closeness upon the two occasions
which I gave him of speaking of things which belonged to my profession, seeing
in the audience I had had of him five years before, in the company of the Abbot
Bassompiere now Bishop of Xaintes, the Marquis of Marevil Brother-in-Law to M.
de Angoulesme, M. Sanguin the Son, first Master of the King's Household, and the
Abbot Bontemps, now first Vallet of his Majesty's Chamber, the Pope left none
of the contests risen amongst Catholics without speaking something to me of
them, and giving me occasion himself to tell his Holiness my thoughts thereof,
though the company was then much more numerous, and he had less cause and time
to fix his discourse with me then he had in this occasion, being only with that
Gentleman. So that I could not attribute his reservednesse and silence in these
matters to any thing but to the resolution which it was told me he had so often
made of not hearing any speech thereof at all, for that they did only trouble
him without any benefit; and perhaps this consideration had some place at this
time. But after I understood, as I am going to relate, that I had been accused
to him for one of the most zealous of those whom they call Jansenists, and that
there had been found one who defended me from that reproach: I conceived the
principal reason of his silence was, to know who had spoken true, my accusers
or my defenders; and that he would let me go on alone without replying any
thing on his part which might give me occasion of speaking, to see how far my
zeal (of which complaints had been made to him, which I knew not of) would lead
me. Since my understanding of which, I accounted it my great good fortune that
I kept within the bounds of the respect and circumspection which I owe to the
head of the Church, and spoke nothing to him of the affairs which concern it,
and are above my reach, without his giving me an invitation to tell him what I
knew thereof, which I should have done in this case in all Christian sincerity,
and according to the measure whereof I am capable.

CHAP. XII.
Several confirmations of the notice given me of the danger wherein I was. A
design of the Bishops to write and send to Rome. The difficulties of that so
sudden Delegation. An entire discovery of the design almost taken to stay me.
My departure from Rome.

THE first notice I received of the complaints made of me, was given me by the
kindness of the Jesuit I spoke of; and though I attributed not so much to it
as to believe or conclude any thing certain from it, yet I had not forgotten
it. It served me to understand a somewhat unusual complement which was made me
by the Cardinal of S. Clement, when I went to take leave of him, to thank him
for the favorable reception he made me in my two or three visits to him, and
to offer him the little service I was able to render him. For as soon as I had
signified the cause that brought me to him, the only answer he made, was, to
tell me that he was glad of it, and to ask me if I departed suddenly; and I
having told him that I believed it would be the next day after the Festivals of
the 13. or 14. of April, which was then began, he replied, That it would be
well done, and the sooner the better. He passed instantly, with the civility so
common to their Eminences, to another discourse, which yet he contracted
according to his wont into few words; but I was more mindful to what he said
to me at first, then to all the rest. For that which the Jesuit had told the
Gentleman my friend, came into my memory, and I began to believe that there was
something in it.

For the same purpose I went to visit Cardinal Barberin, from whom I had
received so many obliging treatments during my whole abode at Rome. Amongst
other things which he said to me, he asked me whether I knew the Cardinal of S.
Clement. I answered, that I had visited him twice or thrice, and found him of a
very vigorous old age, and that there was seen in him as great testimonies of
an eminent spirit, as there appeared tokens of modesty and peity in his
countenance. Cardinal Barberin replied, that I had not lost my time in those
visits, and that I held a good place in his mind. Mine was full of his
Complement, and the Jesuit's intelligence, and this discourse was a new item to
me in confirmation of the apprehensions I gathered from the two other, and gave
me the curiosity of searching further into it. I answered therefore to Cardinal
Barberin, that it was purely an effect of the Cardinal of S. Clement's
goodness; and that since himself (Cardinal Barberin) did me the favor to
acquaint me with that happiness which I was before ignorant of, I beseecht him
to tell me how he understood it himself. Here t^ere arose a little alteration
in Cardinal Barberin's countenance, which could not proceed but from his
conceiving that he had told me too much, or from his being at a loss what
answer to make me; so that I presently perceived, that from whencesoever that
alteration proceeded, there was more in the business then his Eminence was
willing to tell me; and after he had told me in general terms, that he had
heard the Cardinal of S. Clement speak advantageously of me, I durst not press
him further. But I well saw that something had been spoken in that way, in some
place where they had been together, which they were not often, saving in the
Congregations of the H. Office. This, with the Jesuit's intelligence, was a
certain evidence that it must needs have been in those Congregations; and that
if it was there, that the Cardinal of S. Clement had spoken of me with
advantage, it must be gathered from thence, that seeing complaints had been
made of me, there had been some who spoke not of me in the same manner.

I began also to perceive that those complaints must needs have been carried to
the Pope, because it is the order used by the Congregation of the H. Office,
for the Cardinals of whom it consists, to assemble at la Minerva the Dominicans
house every Wednesday morning: Then for the Secretary or Assessor of the said
Congregation to go to the Pope in the afternoon, to acquaint his Holiness with
what was handled in the morning by the Assembly of Cardinals, that his
Holiness may be prepared for the determination which he is to make thereof the
next day, and may have the night to reflect thereon: Then for the same
Cardinals to re-assemble on Thursday morning at the Pope's Palace, where in his
Holinesse's presence they speak anew to all the things whereof they consulted
the day foregoing, and deliver their last sentiments, which the Pope having
heard, determines himself to that which seems good unto him.

In this conjuncture Letters of the 17. of March arrived to me from Paris,
certifying me; that the Bishops who went to the Nuntio, and some others with
them, had at length resolved to write to the Pope touching the Letter of M. de
Vabres, to beseech his Holiness, that if he intended to make any decision
about those matters, he would so do it as that it might put an end to the
contests amongst Catholic Divines, establish peace amongst them, clear up and
settle the truth which both sides ought to acknowledge; all which cannot be
done but in a solemn Congregation, like that which was appointed by Clement
VIII. and Paul V. especially considering the speciosity of these matters, which
have been very much embroiled by the process of time, and the malice of men.
Moreover, that they had resolved, that seeing Letters are but dead
remonstrances, lasting sometimes no longer then they are reading, to send also
some Divines to be living solicitors for the procuring the effect of the
Letters, and obtaining the erecting of such a Congregation. It was signified
also, that the same Prelates pitched upon me for one of the Delegates; and being
I was already upon the place, they desired me to stay there expecting the
arrival of the rest, who were to come to me, and would be the bearers of their
Letters.

I was enjoined further to double my vigilance in the mean time about this
affair, because it was likely that the Letter of M. de Vabres would be brought
to effect; that all possible means would be used to bring it about; that there
was lately a Letter obtained from the Queen, in which her Majesty pressed his
Holiness to have regard to that of so many Prelates, and to the needs of her
people, and for that purpose to pass a determination upon the contested
Propositions, which were presented to him for his decision.

It was now within four or five days to the time set for our departure: We had
only some adieus to make, and were in the crowd of Ceremonies of the Festivals,
which we desired to see, and other encumbrances which always accompany the
preparation for a Journey out of a great City. I did not omit to go see that
man whom I had found so quick-sighted in the temper of the Roman Court, and all
other circumstances of this affair, and who at length consented to the
Expedient of this Delegation, in regard of the extreme needs which I had
alleged to him for it: I imparted to him all that was signified to me by the
Letters which I had received. He was surpised to see things so forward from
France: He told me, that he had yielded to the said Delegation, but not to have
it put in execution till things were in more forwardness at Rome: That it was
requisite to allow time to those who were busi'd at Rome in drawing up some
instructions touching these disputes, for the information of some Cardinals (on
whom the affair was likely to depend) concerning the true estate in which they
are: That till a fit mothod were taken to make their Eminences understand what
was intended to be represented to them, no good was to be expected therein.
This excellent man alleged some other reasons which I touched above, and
repeat not here, whereunto I opposed the extreme needs of putting some obstacle
to the powerful solicitations used by the Jesuits for compassing the evil
effect which they proposed to themselves from M. de Vabres's Letter. He told
me, that he was convinced more then I, what urgent necessity there was of
applying some remedy to this mischief, which increased every day; but that it
was not always a fit time to apply remedies though necessary; and that it
behoved to wait for circumstances fit for the procuring that redress which was
hoped for: That as for the evil effect which I feared, there was no probability
of its coming to pass so soon; and besides if it did, inasmuch as it would be
a thing against order and truth, and without hearing of parties, it could not
be valid, but there would always be room to recurre to this course. That he
remained firm in this mind, and that it behoved to beseech the Bishops of
France to suspend the execution of their good intentions till things were more
hopefully prepared at Rome. That incessant care should be used to prepare them
without noise; and that if it should please God to bless that care, I should
not fail of being timely advertised thereof, to the end the good purposes of
those Bishops might not only be accomplished as much as lay in them, but also
followed by a success worthy of their patience and zeal.

This was the substance of the answers which I made on Easter Monday, April the
10th. though more at large then they are here recited, to the Letters which I
mentioned. Namely, that considering all these reasons, and that their Letter
was not sent to me, and possibly would not be suddenly, and being willing to
accompany my friend in returning, as I had done in coming, I should without
fail depart from Rome on the ensuing Thursday for France. I added, that
nevertheless, that I might not seem to abandon a cause so important and just,
nor fail in corresponding to the hope which my LL. the Bishops had of my
submission to their Orders, nor wholly of my own motion overthrow the
resolution which they had taken; in expectation of a reply to the reasons which
I sent them, I signified what course I intended to take in my Journey, and how
I might meet their Letters at the principal Cities through which I should
pass, that so, if they pleased to give me new Orders about what I represented
to them, I might receive and obey the same.

All things were thus disposed for our departure; and I was yet ignorant of
what had particularly passed touching the complaints made of me. There remained
but two days more, and one of them was to be employed in going to Tivoli, to
take leave of M. the Ambassador, who was still retired there since his going
out of Rome; which was accordingly done: The other was so taken up with other
visits active and passive, that there remained one yet to make in the morning
of our departure to the Cardinal d' Este, to take leave of his Highness, which
we did likewise. But after I left him, I had the good fortune to light upon a
person who was very well informed of that which troubled me, and who told me
thereof with sufficient freedom. For having professed his joy for seeing me
depart in the good posture wherein I stood, and told me transiently, that the
Jesuit often mentioned had reason for what he said, and that I had escaped
fair: To put him upon a fuller discovery of what concerned my departure, I
answered, That I had not been ignorant of the clamor made to the Pope about
me, though without cause given by me; but yet if I had been well assaulted, I
was also well defended. My friend by this believed that I understood the whole
secret, so that no longer scrupling to speak plainly of it, he was much pleased
to tell me all the circumstances he knew thereof, and I to hear them. He told
me that the business was come to an even lay; and had not a Cardinal pleaded
hard for me, I was in danger of making a troublesome residence at Rome. That
the reason hereof was, for that in the discourses I had had with some of the
Cardinals, I had testified some affection for Jansenius; (yet I said nothing of
him besides what is related above) That upon the least discovery of the
inclinations of ones heart, especially in matters so odious as these, the rest
would be presumed; consequently it was gathered, that I had more of such
affection then I had made show of: in a word, that I was a Janseniste, and that
it was requisite to arrest me, and put me in the prison of the Inquisition.
That upon this the Cardinal who spoke in my defense, declared that I had also
visited him two or three times, and had indeed testified to him some zeal for
S. Augustins Doctrine, but said not so much as one word to him of Jansenius.
That he demanded what proof there was of the accusation brought against me?
Where were the books, or the Writings by which I might be convicted of that
whereof I was accused? That he said, Such haste must not be used towatds a
person belonging to so famous a Body as the Faculty of Paris, which might
resent the injury done to one of its Doctors for words spoken into the air, for
single hearsay, without proof under hand, without conviction. That were I
guilty of what I was charged with, yet it would be necessary to have something
before them, whereof to inform the public, and justify the proceedings held
against me. That should such a thing be done, it would be disapproved by all
the world, for that I was come to Rome only upon occasion of the H. year or
Jubilee; and so little in order to treating any affair there, that all I waited
for to return into France, was only till the solemnity of the Festivals of the
approaching Easter were past; that therefore he did not see just ground enough
to resolve upon arresting me. That in fine the Pope amidst this variety of
opinions finding himself amused by these reasons, inclined to my side, and
pronounced his sentence upon my affair in these two words; Lasciatelo andare,
Let him go.

I accounted my self much beholding to the providence of God, the protection of
that Cardinal, and the goodness of the Pope, for the rendering of this sentence
in my favor; very happy in knowing of it, and most obliged to this friend for
having so clearly unfolded this mystery which I discerned but very obscurely
before. Yet I took notice to him of but half my obligation; however being
otherwise much my friend, congratulating my self with him for Gods deliverance
of me from the aforesaid danger; I embraced him, and took my leave. After which
it remained only to dine, and so to horse, which we did about noon 13 April
1651. intending to lie at Monterose.

CHAP. XIII.
A Letter written from Florence to excuse my self absolutely from returning to
Rome, notwithstanding my promise. My most considerable Observations at Milan.

When I saw my self out of Rome, I had time upon the way to consider more
attentively the danger I had incurred, and was more astonished at the project
against me, then I had been when the several notices were first given me
thereof. I scarce believed what I saw, and admired how I had escaped the
danger, having been so near falling into it. I resolved positively not to put
my self into the like again, for that it would seem a tempting of God to hazard
my self anew to so evident peril. And whereas the reason which brought me off,
was the Popes considering that I was ready to depart from Rome to return into
France, I resoiv'd to write by the first Post, to make my most humble excuses
to my LL. the Bishops, from the promise made in my last of returning to Rome if
they appointed me; that so if they persisted in the design of sending some one
thither, they might think, without delay, of some other then me.

As Soon as we arrived in Florence, I did so, and signified by those Letters of
the 20 of April, not only that I should not return to Rome as I had promised to
do, in case I should by the way receive order for it of my LL. the Bishops, and
the Letters to the Pope; but that I should write to a Father of the Oratory, a
judicious, zealous and pious person, named F, Petit. (whom I had entreated to
open in my absence such Pacquets as were sent to me, and to perform such things
in my behalf as required haste, but could not see him after my receiving of
that last intelligence) not to meddle with any thing, (...) do ought of what I
had instructed him, because considering the state of things not fit to be told
at this time, it would not be safe either for the cause or his person, for him
(any more then for me) to do any thing whatever about this affair, without
express order and authentic power.

I signified by the said Letters expressly, that this resolution was not to be
altered; of which such as I should acquaint by word of mouth at Paris
concerning the grounds thereof, would be convinced; that however I hoped the
Pope would not hasten to determine any thing for all the solicitations made to
him; and I intimated among other reasons I had for it, that dining with the
Ambassador the day before our departure, and in the Converse after Dinner
having read the Bishop of Valence's Letter to the Archbishop of Toulouse, he
heard it silenty till the place where M. de Valence expresses his fear, lest
the affair were hastened at Rome, and the Pope determined it before it were well
examined; at which place the Ambassador who had abundant experience of the
Popes resolved silence touching these matters, said these words, True indeed,
it is well said; ha! he cares not; I have spoken to him about it a hundred
times, and could never draw one word from him.

I observed too both in these and my last letters from Rome, that if any
Delegates came, it was absolutely necessary, that they wholly abstain from the
name of Jansenius, how well persuaded soever they were of the truth of his
opinions and fidelity in explicating those of St. Augustine, and how ardent
soever they were for the interests of the particular cause of that Prelate;
because if they should, there would not only be nothing gotten by it to his
advantage, but they would also ruin the grand affair for which they were sent
to Rome; That for certain, things were in such a posture there, since the
haereo fateor, etc. that as soon as the name of Jansenius were heard out of
their mouths, they would be in an inevitable danger of rendering the rest of
their most just and necessary Remonstrances altogether unprofitable.

We were at Florence, and the parts adjacent near three weeks; partly in
expectation of a passeport for Milan, which was there solicited for us by M.
Rinuccini Resident in that City for the great Duke of Tuscany. Thence we went
to Bononia, Modena, Parma, Mantua, and after staying so long in those places as
was requisite to see them and salute the several Dukes of them, we came down to
Venice, arriving thereon Ascension day, whereon that famous Ceremony of
renewing the Republics alliance with the Sea, is celebrated. We departed
thence for Genua through the Duchy of Milan; all which State we saw, together
with that great and goodly City which gives name to it. We were led round the
great covered Galleries on the top of the ancient square Fortress in the
middle, which commands all the Bastions of the new Citadel, which is so
handsome, so regular and well fortified. One afternoon we went to M. Stella,
Canon of the Cathedral, who showed us his Closet so worthy to be reckoned for a
Rarity, not only in regard of the curiosities it contains, but also for the
exquisite things made by his own hand belonging to the Mathematics, the
Optics, and Musical instruments which are in so great number, that there is
about fifty several kinds made by himself, and which he knows how to use very
skilfully. He showed us the great Hospital, and the Seminaries built by S.
Charles; and also the great Crystal Shrine, in which his body still entire
clothed with his Pontifical Ornaments, is so well preserved, notwithstanding
the injuries of time, which has begun to invade the eyebrows and the end of
the nose, that he seemed to me (by his left cheek, on which side he is seen) to
have some air of the pictures which pass about of him. But I cannot forget
the particular courteousnesse of M. Rinuccini, who brought us to the knowledge
of this Canon, and showed us many other civilities. He accompanied us with the
said Canon to the Cathedral Church; the design of which is so vast, and the
structure so magnificent, as well fot the Marble, of which it is all built
without, as for the great number of exquisite statues about it in a thousand
places. He conducted us into diverse other places of the City. He invited us to
dine with him a day or two after our Arrival, the Marquis of Caracena having
sent him a very great fish on Thursday; we were desired to be at the eating of
it the next day; but he seasoned it, amongst many other delightful things which
came into discourse, with a question he made, which is worth the setting down
here, to show many Ecclesiastics, who shall read it one day, the just
reproaches which we sometimes deserve to receive from the people of the world.
He told me, he wondered that almost all the Writers of this age employed
themselves chiefly in two things; the one, in amplifying more and more the
Popes power, and extending every day his authority much beyond the bounds which
our Lord gave him: The second, in making men go as near as is possible to
criminal actions forbidden by the Laws of God and the Church, and exciting them
to commit the same with impunity, and without any remorse of conscience, by
using all sorts of subtilties to sever from them the sinfulness which blackens
them, and inspires a horror of them. He asked me how it came to be so? And he
was not ill satisfied with my answer, which imported, That I wondered at it as
well as he, and that his asking me the reason of it, was a sign that he knew it
no more then I.

CHAP. XIV.
A Letter from Paris received at Genua, obliging me to return to Rome. It
prevailed above my resolution to the contrary. My return to Rome.

WE arrived at Genua a day or two before the day of Corpus Christi. Ever since
my departure from Rome I continued in the resolution not to return thither, at
least not unless some motives almost irresistible should arrive to alter it.
The more I reflected by the way upon the fortune I had incurred, and the reason
which dissipated the purposes of retaining me there, the more this resolution
was fortified. I was still in this mind, when I went to visit Marquis
Giustiniani Resident for the King with that Republic, to salute him, and
desire the Letters which he had received for me, to the end I might know what
my LL. the Bishops had determined upon my last from Rome of the 3. of April,
and upon those from Florence of the 20th of the same month. I hoped all the
answers I should receive, at least those to my Letters from Florence, would be
so many releases of my former promise of returning to Rome in case it were
judged necessary; and I believe had it been thoroughly understood in France how
narrowly I escaped the nets which were laid for me, I had undoubtedly been
dispensed with. But looking upon affairs near hand, and discovering them afar
off, are two several things; and so are speaking of things in general, and
considering them particularly. By all the Letters which I received, both those
of the 28th of April in answer to mine of the 3d. and those of the 5. and 12th
of May to mine from Florence, it was signified to me, that I must by all means
return to Rome what reason soever I had to the contrary. That there were
Letters sent both to the Pope and to some of the Cardinals (of which I shall
speak afterward) which were ordered to be delivered to none but to my self;
that I should deliver them according to their directions, and beware of
rendering them uneffectual by my negligence in an affair of so great importance
as this in agitation, unless I would be responsible for all the evil sequels
it might have, in case the Letters were not delivered through my fault or
absence. None could write more expressly (speaking but in general) then I had
done from Florence to evince that I ought not to return to Rome, at least not
all alone; nor could more strong and urging terms be used then those which
obliged me to return without admitting of my deliberation thereon.

All which notwithstanding was no conviction to me that I ought to return to
Rome. For how strong soever I had said my reasons were for not returning, yet I
had not discovered the main particular. I knew it could not be divined, and was
persuaded that had it been known, I had been dealt with in another manner.

As I was alone upon the Port of Genua, ruminating upon these designs, that
which was intended to be taken with me at Rome, and which kept me from
returning thither more then any other consideration, brought a thought into my
mind which suddenly changed my inclination and made me slight all other
obstacles which might hinder me from so doing. I considered that God had
perhaps preserved my liberty against their attempts and artifices who designed
to deprive me of it, only that I might employ it for his service for that of
the H. See, for that of Truth, and for that of the whole Church in reference to
this Affair; after which I concluded that I should be guilty before him of
ingratitude and infidelity if I demurred longer. That seeing he had once
protected me against those attempts, he could do the same against the like or
greater; and if it pleased his Providence that I should miscarry in the next
adventure, I ought cheerfully to consecrate to him my liberty and life, which I
could not do in a better occasion, having herein ground to hope from his mercy
that I should lose nothing in the sequel but what he would one day restore a
hundred fold. Thus I resolved to return to Rome, for those purposes which I
shall set down when I come to speak of my actions immediately upon it; but I
resolved to do it with such conditions and cautions as required to be heeded in
such ticklish circumstances as I stood in, and expected all things to be at
Rome.

The principal one was, not to appear at Rome when I arrived there, but to
return directly back without delivering the Prelates Letters, if upon my
imparting them and laying forth my commission to that excellent and judicious
personage above mentioned (who did not approve the so soon beginning to stir
in this business) he should advise me to retire without appearing or doing any
thing. As on the contrary, in case he consented to my performing what I was
charged with, I conceived I ought to do it with the greatest publicknesse and
assurance that I could; that so they who contrived the former bad designs
against my liberty during my stay there, might no more have the boldness to
renew the same.

I cast my business accordingly, and projected to arrive at Rome a day or two
after Thursday or on Thursday it self; that so before another Thursday (which
is the day for ordinary consultations about things and persons relating to
matters of doctrine) I might either be upon my way back if it were requisite,
or make known my quality of Envoy from the Bishops of France, which would
secure me from all kind of enterprises and violences, and render my person
sacred and inviolable by the Maxims of the Law of Nations. For I considered
that if on the contrary I should arrive at Rome only a day or too before
Thursday, and my return should by mishap come to be discovered before I could
publish it with the solemnities requisite, I might fear least those who had
before spoken to the Pope against me, would not let pass the following
Assembly withour advertising his Holiness thereof, without convincing him that
their accusations were well grounded, and that my departure from Rome had been
only a mere trick; without confounding the Cardinal whose goodness had
defended me, by showing him that he was mistaken in his judgment of me; and
without causing him to look upon me from thence forward as a wilely and
suspected person, and to consent with themselves to my restraint; and that
whereas his former pleading had induced the Pope to say Let him go, his
Holiness after this seeing me returned might say to M. Albizzi, Cause him to
be apprehended. Which he would have been very glad to execute immediately, and
to which for certain there would have been no want of his diligence.

And although the Letters found with me ought in good justice to procure my
release the next day, yet it was to be feared lest they might be suppressed or
kept (at least) til another time, the Officers employed to arrest me being
persuaded that it was for the interest of the H. see, that M. de Vabres's
letter have its entire success; and that three or four Bishops (as M. Albizzi
slightingly said to me even after he had seen their Letters) by whom I was
sent, ought no otherwise to be considered then enemies to the H. See as well as
my self.

But, supposing all the justice I could desire were done me after such my
Apprehending, and I were restored the next day to a full liberty of acting
according to the commissions I had received, could I do it with any honor?
could I have confidence enough to appear in Rome after having been disparaged
by such an ignominy? and would not the cause entrusted to me (already but too
much decry'd) receive prejudice thereby? would it be fit to commit the same to
others? who would undertake it after its being thus discredited?

These were the considerations which obliged me to retard my departure from
Genua two or three days, that so I might take post with the Ordinary Courrier
of France, and arrive together with him at Rome about the end of the week
according to his custom. But a Gally being to go almost empty from Genua to
Civita Vecchia to fetch home a Resident of this Republic with the Pope after
his accomplishing his time, who waited only for the said Gally to carry him
back, and it being ready to set sail in the afternoon of the Saturday
following; and experien'd people assuring me that it was morally impossible
according to the quality of the time and season for it to be more then two or
three days in reaching to Civita Vecchia; I took it as an opportunity offered
me by divine Providence for the seconding of my resolution and voyage:
intending, in case it arrived at Civita Vecchia some days before Thursday, to
stay there till its going from thence; and in case the fair weather continued
not according to expectation, then to land and take horse at the shore where it
staid, that so what ever happned I might arrive at Rome at the end of the week.

Saturday afternoon being come, I took leave of the Gentleman for whose sake I
undertook this journey, and of some others whom we were acquainted with at Rome
and found at Genua as the little Rendes-vows appointed for the meeting of all
our company, to pass together into France. There was also a Canon of Noion
called M. Wiar a very accomplished and prudent man; with whom we had been ever
since our departure from Rome; they had all the goodness toward me (as well as
the Gentleman my friend) to accompany me to the Gally, where was the place of
our separation.

Our voyage was, for my design, of just the length I wished. For we arrived at
Civita Vecchia on Wednesday about three in the afternoon, with one man more
then we were at Genua, who was as well pleased as my self with being at Civita
Vecchia, though upon a very different ground. He was a Neapolitane, a goodly
personage, of a sprightly aspect, and about 50. years old; we found him in the
open Sea alone in a little skiffe which he rowed along as well as he could with
two oars, and his shirt hois'd up instead of a sail. We took him and his skiffe
by the way into our Gally, he told us that the Spaniards had taken him by force
from Naples to bear arms, and carried him to the garrison of Portolongone,
from whence he escaped in that manner.

Asson as we landed at Civita Vecchia I gave order to have horses ready to
depart in the evening, intending, to travel all night, that so I might arrive
(as I did accordingly) the next morning at Rome at the same time that the
Assembly of the Inquisition was holden before the Pope, whither no person was
likely to carry them the news; and also might have a whole week free, wherein
to order my affairs, and show my self publicly before they could any wise
consult about me.

THE THIRD PART.
Containing what passed at Rome from the time of my return thither as Delegate
or Deputy from the Bishops, 15. June 1651. till the end of that year.

CHAP. I.
The Bishops Letter to the Pope. Deliberation whether it were fit to deliver
it. Resolution to do so.

BEing arrived at Rome on 15. June 1651. about one after noon, I presently sent
to inquire for such Letters as were sent to attend me there from my LL. the
Bishops; and I writ a Note to him whom I saw last there before my departure,
(from whom I learnt the particulars of what had passed about me before the
Pope) advertising him of my return, and beseeching him to come and see me the
soonest he could that afternoon.

Amongst those Letters, there were some for the Pope, others for MM. the
Cardinals d' Este, Spada, and Barberin, and others for my self. Those for me
contained the Orders laid upon me by my LL. the Bishops who writ them, to
present theirs to his Holiness and their Eminences, and to endeavor the
effect of them, to wit, the establishment of a Solemn Congregation, like those
held under Clement VIII. and Paul V. to which Catholic Divines of different
judgments about the matters of Grace might be called, and fully heard on
either side, both viva voce and by writing, according to the accustomed forms,
and with entire Ecclesiastical liberty, before the Pope pronounce any Judgment
upon the Five Equivocal Propositions which were presented to him; that so by
this means that which he shall pronounce may be more signal, more satisfactory,
more venerable to all the world, and more likely to dispel all difficulties, to
confirm the truth, and to establish a sound peace amongst all Catholic
Divines. The Letters directed to the Cardinals were sealed; it was signified to
me that they were from M. the Bishop of Angiers, who was particularly known to
them, and that he therein beseecht them to further the effect of so just a
request, and to favor me with their protection, wherein I should need it.
Those for the Pope were yet open, of which take here the translation. They were
directed, To the most Holy Father Pope Innocent X. at Rome. The contents follow.

Most Holy Father,
WE have understood that some of our Brethren Bishops of France, have written
to your Holiness touching an affair of very great importance and difficulty,
and requested you by their Letter to decide clearly and plainly certain
Propositions, which last year raised great disturbance without any benefit in
the Theologal Faculty of Paris; nor could the issue be otherwise; for being
contrived purposely in ambiguous terms, they could produce nothing of
themselves but disputes full of animosity about the various senses put upon
them, as it always happens in Equivocal Propositions. Wherefore our Brethren
must give us leave to declare, that we cannot approve their design in this
matter. For besides that the Questions about Divine Grace and Predestination
are full of difficulties, and are not ordinarily handled without violent
contests; there are other very considerable reasons which give us ground to
conceive, that this present time is not fit for the terminating of so important
a Difference, unless your Holiness will please, in order to passing a solemn
judgment upon it, (which seems not to be their intention) to proceed therein
according to the forms practiced by our Forefathers, to resume the affair from
its original, and to examine it wholly and entirely, to that end summoning and
hearing the reasons and arguments of either side, as was done not long since by
the Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. of Holy memory. For if your Holiness do
not take this course, the condemned party may with justice complain of having
become so by the calumnies and artifices of their Adversaries, without having
their own reasons heard. To which perhaps they may add, that this cause was
brought to your Holiness, before it was judged in a Council of Bishops. And to
strengthen the justness of their complaints by examples of the ancient
Discipline of the Church, they may allege the Council of Alexandria against
Arius, that of Constantinople against Eutyches, those of Carthage and Mileva
against Pelagius, those of Valence and Langres held in France, for the same
matter now in Question, and other Councils against other Heretics. And truly,
most Holy Father, were it meet to examine and decide the said Propositions, the
legal order of the Judgments of the Universal Church, together with the Custom
observed in the Gallicane Church, requires that the greatest and most difficult
Questions which arise in this Realm, be first examined by our selves. Which
being so, Equity would oblige us to consider maturely, whether the Propositions
complained of to your Holiness have been made purposely to cast an odium upon
some persons, and to excite a combustion; in what Books, by what Authors, and
in what senses they have been advanced and maintained; to hear the pleadings
and arguings of either side thereupon; to view all the Books written lately
touching the said Propositions, to distinguish the true sense of them from the
false and ambiguous; to inquire carefully into all that has passed in the
business since the beginning of the dispute; and after this, to give an
account to your Holiness of all things done and ordained by us in this affair,
which concerns matter of Faith; that so what were rightly pronounced by us
about this matter, might be confirmed by your Apostolical Authority. But how
many artifices may there be to oppress and overthrow the truth, by thus
directly addressing to your See before our examining and judging of the cause?
By what abundance of calumnies may the reputation of our Prelates and Doctors
be blemished? And by how many fallacies may your Holiness be circumvented and
surprised in this great affair, which concerns points of Faith? For on the one
side, it is visible that they in whose favor our Brethren the Bishops writ to
your Holiness, maintain firmly and obstinately that the greatest part of the
new Schoolmen is of their opinion, and that their Doctrine is most
consentaneous to the goodness of God, and the equity of natural reason. On the
other side, they who adhere to S. Augustine, declare, not in secret but
publicly, that the Questions contested about, are not now dubious and
problematical, but that it is an affair ended and terminated long ago; that
they are the received Determinations of ancient Councils and Popes; whose
Decrees are most evident in this matter; and especially those of the Council of
Trent, which they maintain consist almost wholly of the words and maxims of S.
Augustine, as well as those of the second Council of Orange do. Wherefore they
profess, that instead of fearing either our judgment or yours, they have
rather reason to desire the same, having all ground to promise themselves, that
your Holiness, being assisted by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, (who
vouchsafes to guide you when you consult him, and to hear you when you pray to
him) will not in the least thing depart from what has been determined by the
H. Fathers; that so it may not happen (which God forbid) that the reputation of
the H. Apostolical See fall under the contempt of Heretics, who narrowly
observe the least of its actions and words. But we have ground to hope that
this will never come to pass; especially, if for retrenching all contest for
the future, your Holiness will please, by treading in the footsteps of your
Predecessors, to examine this affair from the bottom, and to hear the reasons
and defenses of either side according to custom. Vouchsafe therefore, most Holy
Father, either to let this important dispute, which has lasted diverse ages
without breach of the Catholic Unity, continue still a little longer, or to
decide all the Questions by observing the legitimate forms of Ecclesiastical
Judgments. And we beseech your Holiness, that you will please to employ all
your care and zeal, that the interests of the Church entrusted to your
Government, be not any wise injured in this Cause. God accumulate many years
prosperity and happiness upon your Holiness. We are,

Most Holy Father, Your Holinesse's most humble Sons and Servants in Christ
Jesus. [Signed thus in several Copies.] In one. Lewis Henry de Gondrin
Archbishop of Sens. B. Delbene Bishop of Again. Gilbert Bishop of Comenge. Le
Beron Bishop of Valence and Die. A. Delbene Bishop of Orleans. Bernard Bishop
of S. Papoul. J. Henry de Salette Bishop of Lescar in Bearn. Felix Bishop and
C. of Chalons.
In another. Francis Bishop of Amiens.
In a third. Henry Bishop of Angiers.
In a fourth. Nicholas Bishop and C. of Beauvais.



The friend whom I entreated to come to me, accordingly repaired to the lodging
I had taken. We considered the above mentioned Letters, and having discoursed
largely of all things, I desired him to go, and confer thereupon with the other
person, (who could not so well come abroad, and who did not think meet the
delegation should be hastened) and to assure him, that if the present posture
of things at Rome would not bear the prosecution of my affair, I was for my own
part ready to return back the next morning to Civita Vecchia, and so to Genua
by the Gally in which I came, and which was to return thither within a few days.

I entrusted my Letters to this friend, who accordingly carried them to that
other person, and after having conferred together upon them, came again to me
the same day. I conceive that in case things had been still entire, and not yet
meddled with, we three should have agreed to leave them so for some time, and
wait till men's minds were better prepared then at present to receive our
Remonstrances, and consider the truths which we were to defend in the Sequel of
this affair, if the first Justice desired by us were granted, of which there
seemed not to be any doubt, being su'd for by persons so eminent among their
brethren as those Bishops of France, who subscribed the letter whereof I was
bearer. But for that it was not absolutely in our power to act so directly
against their orders and intentions, without having reasons evidently
convincing, and perfectly indubitable for so doing; and also for that, although
there were very strong ones to persuade it expedient not to hasten so much the
producing of my Letters, and beginning the prosecution enjoined me; yet there
were others too no less powerful, to evince such prosecution both beneficial
and necessary: We all three judged that it ought to be begun; we considered
that the business was in very evident danger whatsoever course were taken; and
that unless I stirred in it, the ill success would infallibly be attributed to
so irregular a managment as mine would be. That such ill success was almost
inevitable, there being already a Congregation established, which secretly
carried on the affair, and which receiving neither opposition nor information
contrary to the conceptions begotten in them by M. de Vabres's Letter
(subscribed by so many Bishops and other persons who conspired and solicited
the condemnation aimed at in writing it) would not fall to follow those
prepossessions, and conclude upon the condemnation. That by the high credit and
great authority of the persons who interested themselves in the prosecution of
the same, and in whose power it would be to make such application, and use of
it as they pleased, it would cause as much mischief, and have as evil
consequences in what manner soever it were concluded, as if it were so,
notwithstanding the letters I should deliver, and the remonstrances I could
make: Besides, those letters and remonstrances in whatsoever manner they were
received, and whatsoever regard were had of them, might always hinder some of
those ill effects and grievous consequences. For either the condemnation would
be proceeded to, notwithstanding my letters and remonstrances, and without
granting the Congregation required by me; (in which case being an irregular,
unheard of Condemnation made against all form and equity, it would destroy it
self, and at least in time to come, incur the indignation of all persons any
thing judicious or equitable:) Or the said congregation would be granted at our
request, and the affair examined according to form; in which case it could not
be but that at least a great part of those employed therein, would understand
which side Truth and Justice are of, in regard every one would be necessitated
to apply himself to the examination of writings delivered him on either side,
to the discussion of things alleged in conferences held between us in their
presence, and to the particular study of the matters which they saw in question
between us. It was not possible likewise but that there would be found in the
great City many persons who being awakened by the notoriousness of this
examination would have the curiosity and the good hap to inquire thereinto,
leaving apart their other studies and employments, which would be a good fruit
of our pains. And lastly, that it was not possible but the Pope (who though
little versed and skilful in these matters, was nevertheless very prudent and
circumspect, as he lately showed when being prevailed with by the common
consent of the Congregation of the H. Office to confirm the pretended censure
of the faculty at Paris, he changed his mind, and was staid from doing it by
the dissent of a single Cardinal) would be more powerfully wooed with the
number of those who should declare to him their being undeceived, and better
instructed of the truth whereof they were formerly ignorant; that these
reflections would move him either to abstain from pronounc^ng upon this affair
any judgment which might be unworthy of the Majesty of the H. See, or to
pronounce one worthy thereof. Whereupon we all three concluded, that these
considerations obliged me to acquit my self of my Commission, to deliver my
Letters, to begin my solicitations, and that the soonest, and with the
greatest publikness I could.

I had time left the same day to send for a Tailor to make me a Gown and a
furred Hood against the next Sunday, such as we have in Sorbonne, and also for
a Cap-maker to make me a Cap with four Corners, most of these at Rome having
but three, and being far less then what we are accustomed to wear at Paris.

CHAP. II.
A visit to Cardinal d' Este, who gives me to understand, that it is not safe
for me to tarry at Rome. My immobility at it, with diverse Visits concerning the
cause of my Return. Discourse with F. Annat.

I continued without stirring out of my Chamber till Saturday evening following
(17 June) when being assured all my Equipage would be ready by the next
morning, I went to salute Cardinal d' Este; to whom I conceived I owed that
respect in the first place, both for that there was at that time no Ambassador
at Rome, and because he was Protector of France, as also out of a design to
make him mine as much as I could. I presented to him M. d' Angers's Letter sent
to me for his Highness, and I acquainted him with the occasion of my Return: He
seemed much surprised to see me in that Country, and that partly out of his
affection for the Nation and my self, and partly out of the danger which he saw
I incurred: for he was present at the Assembly of the H. Office, in which I was
spoken of before the Pope, and knew what had passed thereupon.

After he had read M. d' Angers's letter, and, as he was reading, considered
what to say to me, he professed much affection and esteem for M. d' Angers, and
told me, he conceived, I believed, he had some for me too; of either of which
he could give no other assurance then by doing for me all that should lie in
his power: But he asked me, whether I had well cons^der'd of the resolution
which I took when I determined to come back, and that about such matters as
these: He represented to me that I had spent the four or five months that I was
at Rome with honor and success: that the affairs for which I returned thither,
were very odious and apt to render all persons suspected that meddle therewith;
but as for me in particular, for reasons he had, and could not declare to me,
he desired me to take it well that he told me, that there was no person less
fit to meddle therewith then I: That to advise me as a friend, he conceived
himself obliged to advertise me that I must not appear again, but resolve to
return back, and that with all speed.

Had I before understood the reason which moved Cardinal d' Este to speak in
this manner, I should have been more surprised therewith then I was: yet I
forbore not to testify some astonishment to his Highness, because on the one
side I was glad to find how far he would discover what had passed before the
Pope; of which I still kept my self from seeming to have any light: And on the
other, I was not at all willing to acquiesce in his counsel: For though I was
sure of the affection, sincerity and generosity of him that gave it, yet I was
also sure that he gave it me without having examined things to the bottom, and
only considering my interest and safety: wherefore I told the Cardinal that I
had so great respect and yieldance to his sentiments, as to submit mine to them
readily, were the affair occasioning my return particularly my own; but it
concerned the most illustrious Bishops of France who entrusted me with it, and
promising themselves from my submission to their Orders, that I would
punctually follow them when I had received them, relied upon me therein without
looking out any other person more capable of discharging the same, as they
would have done, had they not depended upon me, and therefore I could not fail
in answering their expectation in a business so important as they accounted
this which they had committed to me. To show him in what terms they had treated
me, I drew out of my Pocket the Letters which they writ to me: The Cardinal
thereupon answered, That those Prelates in France did not so understand the
state of things at Rome as they do who are there, and have a clearer insight
into those affairs; that he would return M. d' Angers an answer, and would
assure him, and desire him to assure all the other Bishops of my good will and
forwardness, and that I had not desisted execuing the Commission they gave me,
but upon reasons to which it was impossible not to yield: I replied to the
Cardinal, That I did not know those reasons; that he would oblige me in telling
me them, if there were any, as I doubted not; but I could not imagine there
were any prevalent enough to countenance such a desisting as his Highness spoke
of; being convinced as I was of the importance of the affair entrusted to me:
That besides I did not fear being blamed for it at Rome, when it was once
considered; being certain that the H. See is more interested therein then any,
and that in the prosecution I was to make, the service of that is more
concerned then of the Prelates who obliged me to return.

The Cardinal seeing me so firm, bid me do as I would; but he said, I had best
take heed; That for his own part, he was convinced of the necessity of the
advice he gave me; That he exhorted me again as a friend to follow it, and
before my departure to speak with the Cardinals Spada and Barberin; whom he
believed well affected toward me; and to see what their Eminencies would say
to me. I answered, that I would wait upon my LL. the Cardinals Spada and
Barberin, but not in order to change my purpose; for were I so minded, it
should be upon what his Highness had said to me: wherefore intending not to
fail to present to his Holiness the Letters which my LL. the Bishops had sent
to him, I beseecht his Highness to procure for me as soon as possible an
audience for that end.

I perceived for certain that my remaining so firm in my resolution, troubled
the Cardinal d' Este; that he looked upon me as one that was going to sacrifice
himself, that he heartily wished he could prevent the unhappiness I was ready to
fall into; and that he conceived (as he told me) that did I know what moved him
to give me such counsel, I would take it of my self without needing any reason
to persuade me of its necessity. But the Excommunication under penalty of which
he was obliged to such religious secrecy as he used to the H. Office, made him
rather consent to my unhappiness which he believed inevitable (notwithstanding
his affection to me) then to violate the same by telling me a word, though my
deliverance depended thereupon. Wherefore he promised me that in case I met
with the least difficulty or delay of the audience which I desired to have of
his Holiness, he would recommend me to some Officers in whom he had an
interest, who should accelerate the same; but he said, he did not believe the
recommendation necessary, considering the acquaintance I had lately by his
mediation with those very Officers which it was likely they had not yet
forgotten. As for the Prelates who signed the Letters which I had to present,
he asked me what number there was of them: I avoided telling him, by answering,
that their Letters were sealed, as indeed they were all at that time. And this
I did, because I had not yet received them from all that were to send them: I
hoped they would arrive before I could obtain audience of the Pope; and I was
willing their names should be all known together, that so the first
apprehension which would be had from their number, might not be disadvantageous
to the business in a Country where I knew many things are measured by the
outside and the show. At length I took my leave, more satisfied with this
visit, in regard of the affection testified to me by this Cardinal, in his
hearty endeavoring to persuade me from proceeding further in this business,
then he was with my resolution which I signified to him of driving it on to the
utmost, in regard of the danger which his Highness believed I incurred.

On the Sunday morning (June 18) I presented my self in the Pope's
Presence Chamber in my Gown, Cap and Furr'd-hood, to have audience of him; I
heard his Mass, and spent all the forenoon there; but audience there was none
for me; Cardinal Gueva who took leave that day of his Holiness to go to his
Bishopric in Spain, engrossed it all. Also all the Jesuits Assistants waited
for it, to give the Pope notice of the decease of the^r General who died the
day before. When I saw audience desperate for me that day, I resolved to return
home to my lodging; yet I thought fit before my going, to accost and salute F.
Annat. who was with all those other Assistants, and with whom I had contracted
some slight acquaintance. I conceived it fit to do so to that Father out of
good manners and civility; and withal necessary too, to take from them all the
thought of new Intrigues against me, by letting them see (yet without
affectation) that I showed my self boldly, and had no fear, being sent as I was
for a public cause, and by persons so considerable in the Church. I told F.
Annat. after my saluting him, that he did not think at my departure of seeing
me so soon, nor I him: but I had been stopped by the way, and obliged to return,
to present the Pope a Letter from some Bishops of France, who knowing of my
being in that Country, chose rather to charge me therewith, then to send some
other person thither on purpose. When he heard me speak of a Letter from
Bishops, (they are the words of the Letter which I writ the next day touching
the discourse I had with him) he apprehended that it was concerning the Five
Propositions, and I did not at all dissemble it. He answered, That it was very
well done, that both the one side and the other had recourse to the Oracle. He
told me nothing could be more civil then what was desired by those who writ on
the other side, (as I remember, he used these words, Who writ for us) namely a
plain judgment, without speaking either Pro or Con. I replied, That they by
whose Order I was returned, desired not much more; to wit, That the Divines be
first heard, for the distinguishing of the several senses of the Propositions,
that so the censure may fall only upon that which is bad, and which all the
world acknowledges such; but the Catholic sense may be safe, and exempted from
the Censure; that so both sides having been heard, each may receive his
Holines's judgment with respect, without stir, and without having cause to
complain of not having been heard, and to make new Remonstrances, which would
renew the Quarrel. He deemed all this just, and yet could not dissemble the
design they had of getting the Propositions condemned absolutely. For he added,
that notwithstanding the Propositions were capable of a Catholic sense, yet if
absolutely and in themselves, they have an Heretical sense, it is fit they be
condemned in themselves. Without seeming to take notice of his meaning, and to
avoid disputing in that place, I only said, That the Heretical sense ought to
be absolutely condemned, and the Catholic absolutely saved; after which I took
leave of him, and separated civilly.

In the afternoon I went to visit Cardinal Spada in the same habit which I wore
in the morning in the Popes-Presence-Chamber. I told him that being at Genua
upon the point to return into France, I received some Letters from my LL. the
Bishops of that kingdom, which obliged me to come back to Rome to present one
to the Pope which they had written to his Holiness concerning an affair of high
consequence; the effect of which they charged me to solicit with all the care
and diligence it deser'vd. That it was touching the Five Propositions contrived
and framed in obscure, ambiguous, and equivocal words, so as to be capable of
several very contrary senses according to the different interpretations which
may be put upon them. That some of those senses are evidently Heretical; others
most certainly Catholic, and containing the chief Truths of Faith and
Christian Religion. That the Authors of those Propositions framed them in this
manner, that so under pretext of those bad senses, they may get a downright
absolute condemnation of them, and apply the same afterward to the Catholic
Senses and Orthodox Truths which they include. That they did thus because they
are possessed with Sentiments contrary to those Truths; and seeing the same so
firmly established, that there is no likelihood of impeaching them with success,
should they openly declare against them, they had devised and framed those
Propositions to overthrow the said Truths by involving them in one and the same
condemnation with the errors contained in the said Propositions. That M. Cornet
was the man that first broacht them, proposing them to the Faculty almost two
years ago to get them censured; but a great number of Doctors presently
understanding the Artifice, and discovering the dangerous consequences thereof,
both to the public by some Books published against that Attempt, and to the
Court of Parliament by two Petitions which they were constrained to present for
stopping its coutse; It incurred the indignation of all sincere and equitable
persons that heard of it, and was repressed by an Arrest of the Court, which
prohibited M. Cornet and all others to pursue it. That having missed of their
design in the Faculty in the year 1649, M. Cornet and such as joined with him,
conceived the Assembly of the Clergy held the year after, might be a favorable
opportunity to revive it; because the Bishop of Vabres who was engaged therein
with them, and was to be of the Assembly, might use such practices as were
necessary for it with my Lords his brethren: But many of them which were also
of the Assembly, having well understood the business, the memory of which was
still fresh and abhorred; and M. de Vabres (having apprehended, that if he made
the least opening of it, there would never be wanting some or other to
represent to the Assembly, how great and fruitless a stir it caused the year
preceding, how remote it was judged from sincerity and honor, and consequently
how unworthy it would be of their company, and so his Proposal would certainly
have no effect;) he durst not attempt to make it. Wherefore the business having
failed in the Faculty, and being not thought fit to be set afoot amongst the
Clergy for fear of the same success, they resolved to venture it to the H. See,
conceiving all the particularities of its odiousness would not be represented
there, and that no person would set forth to his Holiness what a plot there was
upon him to engage the Apostolical Authority in a Censure intended to serve for
the upholding of error. That they were the more confident of drawing the H. See
to such a Determination (though it cannot but be shameful to it in the end, and
beget confusion and greater Disputes in the Church, which yet is the only
refuge they have in the miserable cause wherein they are engaged;) for that
they presume the H. See not having any suspicion or distrust of those which
solicit it, being persons who have ever professed a singular devotion to its
interests and service. But this, as I conceived, would cause in the Pope and
their Eminences, greater indignation against the Enterprise, when they should
find that its Authors made use of that outside false zeal for the H. See, to
circumvent it and bring it more easily into the Ambushes which they have
prepared against it. That they covered the same with the authority of some
Bishops which they have inveigled thereinto by sundry plausible motives and
specious considerations fitted to every one's gust, thereby engaging each of
them to subscribe a Letter addressed to the Pope for his Holiness's judgment
upon the Propositions. That the fear of those by whose order I was returned
lest this authority and recommendation of their Brethern should prevail upon
the Pope's mind, and lest the promoters of this Enterprise should abuse their
Letter against their intentions, induced them to write another to his Holiness,
by which they advertise him of the prejudicial consequences likely to ensue
upon his Decision, in case he make it before fully examining all the
circumstances of the business, and thoroughly searching the bottom of the matter
in question. Which they conceiving not to be done but in a solemn Congregation,
in which all the Divines divided about these matters may be heard both viva
voce and by writing, in presence of either side, to represent all their reasons
and answer those of their Adversaries; their just care to prevent the troubles
likely to arise in the Church, and their affection for the service and
interests of the H. See, has moved them to beseech the Pope to erect and
establish such a Congregation. That they hoped this Request would be
well-pleasing to his Holiness, because without such a Congregation it is not
possible either to settle a firm peace amongst the Catholic Divines (whose
concord is so necessary to the Edification of the whole Church) or to clear and
maintain Truth, the defending and supporting of which are the prime duties and
most essential obligations of the H. See, or to preserve the respect due to its
Decrees, the authoriry of which ought to be rendered inviolable by using all
circumspection and diligence possible in the making thereof.

I added that what I represented to his Eminence, was more largely and clearly
set forth in the Letters which I had to deliver to the Pope from my LL. the
Bishops who obliged me to return; and moreover because it was requisite to add
many things by word of mouth for the more ample deducing both to his Holiness
and their Eminences, all the particulars and considerations fit to be
represented in so great and important an affair, one man being not sufficient
to perform the same fully and perfectly; they would likewise send at Autumn
following some Doctors or other Divines, that so nothing might be omitted which
they conceived they owe to the H. See and the Church in this occasion. That
nevertheless in the mean time their fear lest this affair might be too much
hastened at Rome, before the arrival of those whom they intended to send
thither, and lest his Holiness not being advertised of the danger there is in
decreeing any thing in it before it be thoroughly examined, might grant some
Decree upon the Instances made to him for it; understanding that I was still in
those parts, and accustomed to the heats which are oftimes so prejudicial to
new-commers, they obliged me to come and give him this first advertisment
thereof.

I delivered the Cardinal a Letter written particularly to himself, by M. d'
Angers in recommendation of me to him and of the affair which I was to follow;
and I beseecht him to countenance the prosecutions I should use, with his
Authority; and to believe that next the service of God, of Truth and of the
Church, which principally induced me to return to Rome in obedience to persons
of so Eminent worth and dignity who obliged me thereto (notwithstanding my
particular desire and interest to go home into France) I became engaged to do
so by the affection which I have for the service of the H. See, which his
Eminence would at length find more concerned in this affair then any other.

I found a great difference (as indeed there was reason) between Cardinal
Spada's deportment in this visit, and in another which I made to him of
civility in the Lent preceding; for he was as reserved in this, as he was
communicative in the former; he heard all that I said to him (just as I have
since experienced to be the usual way in Italy in all audiences) with great
silence, attention and gravity. He received the Letters which I had for him;
and after signifying some testimonies of his esteem of the Bishops of France,
and particularly of him whose Letter I presented, he told me, He hoped the Pope
would not fail to take such course in this affair as was necessary for its
succeeding to the honor of God and his Church; to which end, for his own part,
should his Holiness employ him in it, he should contribute his utmost care and
endeavor.

I arose up from the chair set for me at my entrance right against that of his
Eminence, in order to depart, and himself arose also to conduct me; which he
did from the chamber wherein he received me till we came into the Dining room,
where he left me; although between it and his chamber, there were two
Anti-chambers to pass through. When he had quitted me, I was saluted by some
of his Court who accompanied me to the door. This I take notice of, not as an
extraordinary thing, but to intimate to such as know it not, in what manner
these audiences use to be given; it being very civil and convenient; for the
Visitant is received alone, and has time to deduce at length and at his
pleasure what he minds to represent.

At my departing from Cardinal Spada, I went to wait upon Cardinal Barberin,
and I was likewise so fortunate as to find him at his Palace, and to declare my
mind to him as much as I desired the same day. I shall not recite here or
elsewhere what I then said to his Eminence touching my return. For in all the
visites which I made to speak of this business, it was nothing but a continual
repetition (sometimes amplifi'd more or less according to occasion) both of I
what I said to Cardinal Spada and of what I have formerly related to have been
done ar Paris and at Rome about the Propositions. And as for what passed at
Rome, sometimes I met with people, who hearing me speak thereof, and thereby
conceiving me better informed then indeed I was, not only confirmed to me what
I knew before, but also instructed me in some particulars of which I was
ignorant; by which means I came to understand things so well as not to fear to
assure the Pope even in Papers signed with our hands, of the truth of all those
which I have above related.

But to return to Cardinal Barberin, I told him all that I had said to Cardinal
Spada, though not altogether in the same order and without interruption. For
the great familiarity wherewith Cardinal Barberin used me in all the
entertainments which I had with him during my residence at Rome the foregoing
winter, and his more exact knowledge of all the things and persons of whom I
spoke, caused him sometimes to interpose answers and interrogations to me
concerning what I said; I was obliged to continue my discourse according to the
matter and leisure which he afforded me; but I constantly resumed the series of
my affair, and omitted nothing at all in giving him account of what I had said
to Cardinal Spada.

Besides which, I spoke something concerning another business, namely about the
Hours, touching which I formerly had some discourse with him; and they were
now recommended to me by the Bishop of Angers to take care of, and maintain and
justify as much as I could against the prosecutions and accusations which he
understood were made against them. Cardinal Barberin answered that it was a
long while since he heard any speech of them; that he conceived, they were
thought of no more; that the Bishop of Angers had recommended them to him by a
Letter which he received from him some days ago; and that he hoped the answer
which he intended to return thererunto the next day would give M. d' Angers
content. I do not at present remember the particulars thereof which he was
pleased to impart to me, nor can I find what I then writ down in my Notes; but
I remember that according to what his Eminence then said, I Judged the Hours
out of danger and wholly secure from calumny.

CHAP. III.
Visites made in the end of June and beginning of the month of July, wherein I
discovered the objections made against the Hours. Notice of putting me into
the Inquisition.

I spent Monday the 17th. of June in answering the Letters I received at my
arrival, and I advertised the Prelates who writ the same to me of what had
passed since in the visites which I made about the affair wherewith they did me
the honor to charge me. I spent Tuesday the 18th. in providing me a Lodging in
the society of the French Priests which are at S. Lewis, that so I might be in
a place more suitable to my condition and employment then I could be in an
ordinary Inn; such persons as it was requisite for me to address to for the
obtaining of the said Lodging, I acquainted with the occasion of my return;
amongst others, M. du Noiset Dean of the Rota on whom it absolutely depended as
being the superior of the said Society. On Wednesday I went to Tivoly, where M.
le Bailly de Valancey the King's Ambassador to the Pope was still retired, to
salute him and inform him also (according as I was obliged) of the Commission I
had the honor to be charged with. He made me a very courteous reception, and
promised to do what he could at that distance, to facilitate and hasten my
audience of the Pope, whereunto I signified to him my great desire to be
admitted without delay in regard of the importance there was in the Pope's
being speedily advertised of the nature of the affair whereof I was to speak,
that so surprisals and circumventions might be prevented, which were otherwise
much to be feared.

Returning at night from Tivoli, I understood Cardinal Barberin had sent for me
to come to him that evening; and hearing I was gone to Tivoly, sent again to
tell me I should come to him the next day about seven a clock in France. I add
this word in France, because in Italy they begin to count the hours from the
time of sunset, and reckon twenty four till the next day at the same time.
Upon this account it is not frequent to make an appointment at seven a clock in
the morning because when the days are longer, that would be about three in the
morning; and therefore to intimate at our seven a clock, they say at eleven a
clock. But for that I write in French and for the use of Frenchmen who for the
most part would not understand the Italian reckoning; should I use it,
especially when I mentioned thirteen a clock, eighteen a clock, and one and
twenty a clock; I conceive it fitter to reduce their computation to ours as
often as I have occasion to mention it, as I have done above, without adding
the two words in France; because they are always to be understood.

On Thursday morning ( June 20.) at seven a clock I went to Cardinal Barberin
according to his order. He told me he sent for me to tell me that it was
requisite that I went to visit several persons whom he named, to acquaint them
with what I had said to him in favor of the Hours, either by answering the
accusations made against them, or informing them of what greast esteem they
were in France with persons of understanding and honor who judged thereof
impartially. The persons he named for me to visit, were my LL. the Cardinals
Roma, Spada, Ginetti and Cechini, my Lord Albizzi and the Master of the sacred
Palace.

After this I accompanied Cardinal Barberin to the Pope's Palace, whether he
repaired to the Assembly of the H. Office, which is held, (as I said above)
every Thursday in presence of his Holiness; and having passed into the
Presence chamber I there entertained as many persons as I could with the
business which occasioned my return, during the time of the Assembly; which
being ended, and M. Albizzi happening to be near enough to me for me to acquaint
him with my purpose of going to wait upon him; according to the direction of
Cardinal Barberin, I would not lose this opportunity of surmounting the
difficulty there was in breaking our business to a man openly declared in
sundry cases against what ever I could pretend, and wholly engaged in the ways
and interests of the Jesuits. Nevertheless he very civilly received what I
said to him concerning the design which brought me back, and told me I should
always be welcome to him.

In the afternoon of the same day I went to Cardinal Roma's Palace, but I could
not speak with him, because a Congregation of Cardinals was there, the very
same persons whose names Cardinal Barberin had mentioned to me in the morning,
and because I was not yet so well informed of things as to know that M. Albizzi
were there too, I went likewise to visit him; but not finding him, and being
in the quarter of Saint Onuphrio, I went to see M. Holstenius who was retired
thither a little while before to take the air and recover strength after a
sickness. We were two hours together, and I informed him amply of my
commission. He told me, I must fore-arme my self with patience; for without
doubt the Pope would not grant the Congregation which I came to demand; and
hereupon forgetting his having formerly related to me a conference which he had
with the Pope touching this matter, he rehearsed all the same again as I have
set it down in the 2. Part, Chap. 10. This obliged me to make an overture to M.
Holstenius with which he might acquaint the Pope if he thought meet, namely,
that there came into my mind a way by which his Holiness might disingage
himself very hansomely of the business, and likewise oblige the Bishops of
France according to that saying of Scripture, honor invicem praevenientes; and
that was, by remitting to themselves the decision of the Propositions whereof
his judgment was desired. And my meaning in this was not to decline the
Congregation which I came to request, but that the overture being accepted, and
the Bishops of France finding themselves obliged by such reference or remission
to search thoroughly into the marters in question, the cause might be judged by
persons better informed, and more solemnly then I conceived it could be at Rome
in the Congregation I desired, in case the Pope should grant it; or in case he
should not, (as I had cause to fear by the averseness which M. Holstenius
represented to me, his Holiness had against it) that at least in regard of
such reference the Bishops of France might not be excluded from it. But M.
Holstenius replied to my overture, that the Pope would not be willing to remit
to the Tribunal of Bishops a cause brought to that of his Holiness, which is
superior to theirs. But though I was somewhat earnest in showing that the Pope
doing this of his own accord after the submission of the Bishops to him, the
rights of his Holiness would not be prejudiced thereby, and there would be
always room to recur to him, in case any one found himself injured by the
judgment passed by the Bishops; nevertheless M. Holstenius continued firm,
that there was no ground to hope any success of such overture.

On Friday the 24th. of June I went to salute M. Gueffier ancient Resident for
the King at Rome, and after my coming from him I went to the Cardinal of S.
Clement. In the afternoon I repaired again to Cardinal Roma, with whom I spoke
also: and all that I added in these three visites to the general intimation of
the business for which I returned, was, only what I said touching the Hours
to Cardinal Roma, who professed not to have lately heard any speech of them. He
added that perhaps they would not be mentioned before them in the H. Office,
but only in the Congregation of the Index; and that the general prohibition of
translating into the vulgar tongue any thing of the H. Scripture and the
Offices of the Church was the principal cause of all the stir about them.

It is not impertinent to set down what hindered me from speaking thereof to the
Cardinal of S. Clement, who is also one of the Congregation of the H. Office,
where all matters of this nature use to be handled. The truth is he was
excluded from the consultations held about these particular matters, and they
were regulated without advising with him about them. This course was resolved
upon for that in certain cases where some thing was propounded against those
who spoke thereof according to S. Augustin's sentiments, and amongst others
where M. Jansenius was impeached, He had explicated things too much, and so
handsomely withstood those who struck at him, that what they endeavored had
neither issue nor success. Wherefore, for the acting with more liberty and
less contradiction, and for the more equitablenesse and surenesse of
resolutions, and for the easier dispatching them, it was pleaded requisite to
exclude such as might have any interest therein; and for a pretext of excluding
the Cardinal of S. Clement as a Dominican, Cardinal Lugo was also excluded as a
Jesuit; and of seven or eight Cardinals that usually assist at the common
consultations of the whole Congregation of the H. Office, the four
abovementioned, Roma, Spada, Gineti and Cechini were taken to make a particular
Congregation, before which all matters any wise relating to these Controversies
were to be proposed. For this reason without speaking to him of the Hours, I
only informed him in general of the cause of my return, and how sensible I was
of the testimonies of kindness which he had given me in my precedent visites
to him.

Saturday morning being S. John Baptist's day was spent at Chapel, whether the
Cardinals repair to celebrate that Festival in the Church of S. John of Lateran.

In the Afternoon I went to visit M. Albizzi, to whom I laid forth the most
largely and sweetly I could the matter of my commission, and the order I had to
request the Pope, that it would please his Holiness to erect a solemn
Congregation in which all the Parties concerned in the matters of the
Propositions might be heard before his Holiness decreed any thing thereupon.
M. Albizzi having heard me patiently, answered that he had not yet heard any
speech of those Propositons; and he gave me some hope that in case of
proceeding to do any thing about them or examine them, he would cause me to be
advertised of it: but otherwise, I must know that in this business no parties
were to be heard; because parties are not to be heard in matters of doctrine,
but only when the question is about persons; that in the business of the
Propositions, there was no question about any person, there not appearing any
Author that had advanced them. That which moved M. Albizzi to answer me at
first that he had heard no speech of them, was no doubt a purpose not to open
himself in any sort unto me; and nevertheless in the Sequel of his discourse,
he fell to speak of them as one that had not been ignorant till then of what
pertain'd to that Attempt. I replied, That though matters of doctrine do not
directly, and of themselves relate to persons, but may be considered apart; yet
the Christian Faith being as dear to Christians as the apple of their eyes,
there are no affairs more important to persons then these, when there are
persons who will interesse themselves therein, either to answer the calumnies
and false accusations made against the purity of their sentiments, or to accuse
other persons of pernicious Tenets against the purity of the Faith and
Christian Morality. That this held good in this case, if ever it did in any;
and that the Bishops in whose behalf I spoke, interposing to beseech the Pope
to do that Justice to the Catholic Divines at difference about these matters,
as to examine who they are that defend the truth with simplicity, and who they
are that assault it with Artifice; they well deserved that the Pope should have
regard to their Address which is so equitable, and that which his Holiness will
find in the end to have been made more for his interest then their own. M.
Albizzi answered me, That the Pope was the Master, ann would take what course
seemed good unto him; that for making Articles of faith, he needed not to stand
upon what may be represented to him, or consider what sentiments Divines are or
are not of: but it is sufficient that he make his decision as seems good to
him, and as the H. Spirit (whose assistance cannot fail him in regard of the
infallibility which God has promised him) shall dictate to him: That this
Decision being made, all Divines are obliged to conform and submit thereunto.
That nevertheless his Holiness may, before he pronounce any thing, do the
favor to those who desire it of him, and interpose in the judgment of the
Propositions, as to hear or receive in writing what they will represent to him:
that so all being considered, he may decree what he shall think fit. I took
heed as much as I could not to exasperate this person whom I knew already
prepossessed in that behalf of the Jesuits, and not to give him any hold
against me; and therefore without insisting further upon the word Party which
he would not admit, or upon what he said the Pope might or might not observe in
his Judgments, I contented my self with what he gave me in this first Visit,
and said, That all we desired, was that the Pope would receive and hear what
should be represented to him touching this affair according to the Custom and
forms always observed in the Church: He answered, That if all of them were
observed, and all that would be replied and rejoined on one side and the other
were heard, there would be never an end; and the Pope in the mean time not
condemning opinions that deserved it, might be suspected to favor them; as it
happened to Honorius who was accounted a Heretic by some that decry'd him,
because he had not speedily enough condemned the Heretics which arose in his
time. M. Albizzi mentioned this story in such a manner as made me think it
would be made use of to the Pope to induce him to condemn the Propositions, by
telling him, That unless he condemned them, he would be accused of mantaining
them. But not to infer any thing from what M. Albizzi said which was not
essential to my business, I thought it enough to tell him clearly and in
express terms, That I was not come to avert the Pope from condemning the bad
sense of which the Propositions are capable; but to beseech him to examine that
which is mantain'd to be Catholic, and to erect a Congregation in which all
the Divines opposing or defending the same may be fully heard, that so it may
be afterward declared by him who of them mantain the Truth, and by supporting
the same, a firm and lasting Peace may be established amongst them. All this
conference passed between M. Albizzi and me very gently and civilly.

After this I put him upon the Subject of the Hours, in reference to which
Cardinal Barberin advised me to visit him. He spoke of them at first as a
business forgotten and no more thought of. Afterward he fell to declaim
against them; and to let me see how worthy they were of Censure; he told me the
translation of the first Commandment, wherein Images are spoken of, was
correspondent to that of Geneva. He read out of the Hours thus; Vous ne feres
point d' idol, ny D' IMAGE TAILLEE, ny aucune figure, pour les adorer; You
shall not make any Idol or GRAVEN IMAGE, or any figure, to adore them: Then he
showed me a Geneva Bible wherein the Commandment is translated, and there
finding the words Graven Image; he pretended to have found the correspondence
of which he complained: But I told him, the words Graven Image are the sense of
the Scripture word SCVLPTILE, and I represented to him; that the ill use made
by Heretics of this Commandment, consisted not in the words Graven Image, but
in their not acknowledging that God forbids only the making graven Images for
adoration, which is noted in express terms by the Author of the Hours, and
therefore he is so far from being justly accusable of conformity with Geneva,
that on the contrary it is visible his Version is wholly different from it, and
absolutely suitable to the sentiment of Catholics. M. Albizzi very well
understood the reason of this difference; but he answered me, that it might
serve for the learned, but not for the simple people; and that these words To
adore them, added in the translation of the Hours, were so far from rendering
them more excusable, that on the contrary they were thereby the more faulty,
because the Vulgar will take and understand them as if they ought not to fall
upon their knees before Images: I answes'd him, that if his objection were good
against this translation, because of the bad sense which may be put upon those
words against the interpreters meaning, it would also be good against the very
words of the Text of Scripture; of which the same abuse and false
interpretation may be made; but as nothing can be charged against the H.
Scripture from them, so neither can any thing be concluded from the same to the
prejudice of the Translator, who had therein faithfully acquitted himself. M.
Albizzi made to me some further objections against the Hours, but because they
are the subject of a memorial which I presented to the Cardinal of the H.
Office, and is hereafter mentioned; I omit them at present, to avoid
repetition. I shall only add, that after he had proposed them to me, and I had
answered him, he fell to declaim in general against the liberty of Writing and
Printing which is taken in France; and drew out of his Pocket certain little
French Hours for the Cavaliers, and showed me a little image of St. Paul, at
the bottom of which were these words, S. Paul Cavalier Prince of the Apostles,
and made great complaints thereof. But being unwilling to meddle with that
matter, I told him, I was not concerned in those little Hours which he showed
me that I had not in charge to answer; but to the calumnies against those I
spoke of before, and to clear the malicious suspicions endeavored to be cast
upon Writers to whom the public was indebted for so excellent a work. I
entreated him again to deal with it favorably, and with Justice so far as lay
in him, and so arose up to depart.

Cross the Dining-Rome there was a Screen covered with painted silk, which
divided it in two. As we were going out of the Antichamber, Father Morel an
Augustine, Doctor of our Faculty, was entering in at the passage of the Screen:
so soon as he perceived me, he was started, drew back, and hid himself behind
the Screen: But suddenly (as I conceived) reflecting that this his fear of my
having seen him come to visit M. Albizzi might make me presume there was more
correspondence between them then he would have me believe there was, he came
forth and showed himself, and as well as he could endeavored to compose the
disorder of the sudden astonishment, into which the first appprehension of his
surprise had put him.

The days following I continued such Visits as I could make, both to publish
the principal Subject of my delegation touching the Propositions to such as
ought to be advertised of it, and to recommend to them the affair of the Hours.
To both which purposes, on Sunday morning (June 25.) I visited Cardinal
Ginetti, and in the evening the Master of the sacred Palace, having passed
almost the whole afternoon at Cardinal Panzirolo's Palace in attending an
opportunity to speak with him; which I could not obtain that day. On Thuesday
the 27. I again visited the Cardinal Spada and Barberin touching the Hours, and
in sum having employed the other days of the interval the most profitably I
could in order to that business, and having been four times at Cardinal
Panziolo's Palace without obtaining to speak with him, I was referred for that
purpose to Friday morning, July the 7.

When I was come to his Palace, I found at the entrance of his Antichamber the
Master of his Chamber, who told me he waited for me there to acquaint me that I
needed not wear my gown to speak with his Eminence. I had always worn it
hitherto in my visites, and answered him that I had addressed to my LL. the
other Cardinals in that habit, which I wore out of respect to their Eminences.
He replied that Cardinal Panzirolo had signified to him his pleasure to
dispense with me for that subjection toward himself, because perhaps being
likely to come often to him, it would be too troublesome for me always to
change my habit. I answered that his Eminence had too great goodness for me,
but nevertheless I should use the freedom which he gave me. So returning from
his Palace, within a quarter of an hour I came back thither with my Cloak, and
was presently introduced into his Chamber, where I found him sitting up, upon
bed. I had scarce begun to declare to him the business in very few words, but
he cut me short, and told me, that if it was concerning any thing contained in
the Bull of Urban VIII. the Pope would not hear any person before obedience
were performed to it. That if it was any thing new, his Holiness would
willingly hear both the one side and the other, and certainly would not
precipitate or hasten any thing. I replied that none of the Five Propositions
was contained in the Bull of Urban VIII. But without suffering me to enter
further into the matter, he bid me go visit M. Albizzi, telling me; he was the
man relied upon for the care of those affairs. He cut me off so roundly that I
had scarce added a word in assurance of our respect and affection to the H.
See, but I was constrained to retire.

On Saturday ( July 8.) I learned something very considerable touching the
Hours; but that I may give an entire account of what I have to relate
concerning them together, I shall forbear to mention it till I have set down
what passed in the audience which I had of the Pope on Monday the tenth,
touching the principal affair: before which I will nevertheless relate what
passed in a Visit which an Ecclesiastic made to me, to give me notice of the
danger wherein I was of being arrested, and what cause I had to provide for my
safety.

I doubted for some time, out of what design the Ecclesiastic, who came to
give me this notice, had so great a charity for me; for I knew him not but very
generally, and there was nothing but his being a French man and a Priest of the
Mission that could induce him to it. I conceived at first, it was to fright me,
and to see what impression the fears he suggested in me would have upon me: but
I have been assured since, that it was with a very sincere intention and
affection.

It was the first day of July that he came to me, and he was very earnest to
speak with me, though I was newly let blood for an indisposition which
permitted not the deferring of that remedy to another more fit season. He told
me, and enjoined me secrecy (which I keep still in not nameing him) that a
Doctor of our Faculty told him the day before, that I said, other Doctors were
to come to Rome with me about the business which I had in charge; but there
would come others thither too against me, and that neither I nor they which
came after me about the same business, would be very welcome. That we were
people, who besides the Propositions which were the ground of my journey, would
introduce others far more pernicious. That this Doctor said there was fourteen
extracted out of several Theses, presented to the Syndic by persons that
defended the same opinions with us, which Propositions had been published and
mantain'd in the Divinity Acts at Paris, had not the Syndic hindered it That he
had Copies of them authetically compared, and that the Originals themselves
signed by the chief Masters and Directors of the Batchelors Study would shortly
be brought to Rome. This Ecclesiastic repeated to me diverse Propositions of
those fourteen whereof the said Doctor complained to him; but I took notice
only of five. The first was, That the Pope is amongst the Bishops, what A is
amongst the letters. The second, That the Council of Trent was not a true
Council, but a Politic Assembly. The third, That he who sins after Baptism
loses the character of it. The fourth, That Priests who fall into any sin, lose
likewise the character of their Priesthood. And the fifth, That the Body of our
Lord is not in the Eucharist; but as God is in the soul of the righteous. This
Ecclesiastic told me, that I was liable to be accused as one of those who
mantain these sentiments; and that under that pretext it might come to pass
that I might be put into the Inquisition. That it was a Prison very dreadful,
that it was very hard coming out when one is once there; and that if there were
such a design against me, it would be put in execution without noise. That
people would come to S. Lewis (where I lodged) at midnight, cause the Gates to
be opened by the Popes order, carry me away without telling whither, and forbid
all that knew of it, to speak any thing of it under pain of excommunication.
That I ought not so much to rely upon the innocence of my sentiments, and the
candor of my proceeding whereof I was confident, as to consider the power and
credit of those who were not satisfied with my return. And though we are
obliged to do many things, and hazard all sort of disgraces for the service of
God, yet that when we see we cannot succeed, and it is not our fault, it
behooveth to give way to the time, and provide for our own security and
preservation.

I answered this Ecclesiastic that I believed the Law of Nations would not be
violated upon vain suspicions and extravagant calumnies of that nature; That I
was a public person, being sent by considerable Prelates who would not endure
that wrong should be done to me, or that I should disappear without taking
pains to know what were become of me: That I conceived their Eminences and his
Holiness too advised to attempt such a thing; that however, should they attempt
it upon considerations leading them thereto which could not enter into my mind,
they would be more troubled then I when they had me in their hands; for the
more they examined me, the less would they find cause for arresting me. That
for all this if contrary to my expectation it happened, that they would treat me
otherwise and exercise any violence and ctuelty against me, I did not fear
them; because the more it should please God to cause me to suffer in such
innocence, and for a cause so just and necessary as this for which I was
returned, the more I should esteem my self beholding to his divine mercy. And
therefore so long as I was in a condition to act for that cause, by God's help
I should not fail so to do. Whatever else this Ecclesiastic said in the
discourse he had with me about this subject, during two whole hours which he
held me, notwithstanding my blood-letting, he could draw no other thing from me.

CHAP. IV.
An Audience of the Pope on the 10 th. of July, at my delivering to him the
Bishops Letter, and declaring to him the subject of it.

THat which I had with the Pope on Monday the 10th. of July 1651. was very
different, and much more pleasing. After the three usual kneelings, one at the
entering into at the Pope's Chamber as soon as he is perceived, the second about
the middle of the way toward the Chair where he sits, and the third at the
appraching near him to kiss his feet according to the custom; I told him
(being upon my knees) that I was returning toward France, full of the
resentments which I ought to have of the kindness wherewith his Holiness had
treated me, and of the favors which I had received of him the foregoing
Winter; but upon the way I received Letters written to him by some of my Lords
the Bishops of France, with others for my self, by which they appointed me to
return speedily to deliver those written to his Holiness, and procure the
effect of the same from him, as being about matters very important and urgent.
The Pope scarce staid till I had done speaking; but he told me; that if I
conceived I had received any testimonies of his kindness in time past, I might
hold my self assured that I should receive no less for the future; and he
asked me what was the subject of the Letters which I had to present to him? I
answered, that they were upon occasion of other Letters which other Bishops of
France had written to him, whereby they desired of his Holiness a clear
determination of five certain Propositions framed with artifice and in
ambiguous terms, capable of very different and contrary senses. That the same
may admit an heretical sense, but there was no person that maintained them in
that sense; that besides, they may have a very Catholic sense; and that his
Holiness ought to observe that it is the Catholic sense which is struck at by
those who solicited the Letter which those other Prelates had written to him,
because this sense cannot comply with the novelty of their doctrines; and that
under pretext of the heretical sense they endeavor to obtain a Censure, that
they may afterward apply the same to the Catholic sense; which would cause
great disturbances and have very dangerous consequences. That the Bishops by
whose order I was returned, beseecht his Holiness, that in case it pleased him
to make any new determination touching those Propositions, it might not be
without having first heard the persons who were to follow me, and who would
declare and manifest to his Holiness, that there was neither Bishop, nor
Doctor, nor Priest that maintained the said Propositions in their bad sense;
and moreover, clearly show him certain and invincible proofs upon which the
Catholic sense which they defend, and whereof the Propositions are capable, is
founded. That this Request was the most just that could be made to his Holiness
by Ecclesiastical persons; and that if we are obliged in all things providere
bona non tantum coram Deo sed etiam coram hominibus, it is chiefly when the
question is to show the Church and the Vicar of Jesus Christ that the Faith is
entire and sincere in our hearts, and that we are not infected with any thought
contrary thereunto. As for his Holiness, that he could not but have great
satisfaction in finding the same, by the example of S. John, who says in one
of his Epistles, Majorem horum non habeo gratiam quam ut sciam filios meos in
veritate ambulare. [I durst not at that time speak more openly of the
Congregation whose election I was to solicit, nor use so much as the word
Congregation at first, for fear of crossing the Pope's spirit in any thing, who
I was assured, was very averse from entering into any discussion of these
matters] As Soon as I had done speaking the passage newly mentioned, the Pope
smiled at the application which I made of it; and told me the Bishops of France
needed not to be sollicitous about letting him know their devotednesse to the
H. See, and the sincerity of their sentiments; that he had abundant proofs
thereof in the voyage he made thither in the legation of Cardinal Barberin; and
he recounted to me at length all the Civilities which they received from them
in the Dioceses through which they passed, and that were showed by the Body of
the Clergy to M. the Legate, coming to bid him adieu before his departure, and
to wish him a good voyage, to the number of fifty six. As for the Propositions,
if they were contained in the Bull of Urban VIII. or rather of Pius V. that the
same was passed with too much knowledge of the cause to afford any thing that
might be gainsaid or gloss'd upon. If they were any new thing, all should be
examined with care and leisure; That he had nothing so much at his heart, as to
do things with all the prudence and circumspection that can be desired; That
this was all the answer he could make me at present, before having seen what
the Letters imported which I had delivered to him. I told the Pope, that as for
the Bull of Urban VIII. it had been received and published by the Archbishop of
Paris; and that of the Five Propositions in question, not any was contained
therein; that four of them especially had no relation to the said Bull; that
one of them indeed seemed like one of those which are in the same, but yet was
many ways different from them; that his Holiness knew well that there needs
but one word to make great alterations. The Pope told me, that a point or a
dash is enough for that. I added, that the Bishops who sent me had no design to
invalidate that Bull, but only to keep his Holiness from being possessed or
surpised in reference to the Five Propositions, and from passing (in regard of
the bad sense whereof they are capable) such a Censure as may be applied to the
Catholic sense according to which they may be understood; That the inventors
of them spoke in France of the Censure which they expected from Rome, as if
they had his Holinesses Tongue in their mouths, and his Pen in their hands.
The Pope replied hereunto, by showing me a Crucifix, which he said was his
counsel in such affairs as these; and that having heard what would be
represented to him by such as argued therein, he kneeled down before that
Crucifix to take at the feet thereof his resolution, according to the
inspiration given to him by the H. Spirit, whose assistance was promised to
him, and could not fail him.

In this address the Pope spoke to me several times to rise up; which I out of
respect being unwilling to do, he commanded me to arise, and told me, he would
thereby show me what account he made of me. It was requisite to obey his
Holiness; and toward the end of his discourse he bid me repair to M. Albizzi.
I durst not then tell the Pope how much we esteemed M. Albizzi prepossessed by
the Jesuits, and opposite to all affairs not approved by those Fathers. But I
took occasion to tell him, that I had a very humble suit to make to his
Holiness, namely, that he would not give credit to all the ill reports which
might be made against me, and all those whom some endeavored to bring into ill
esteem with him; because we had to do with people very full of artifice, and
exceeding bold in forging calumnies. Amongst other testimonies which I might
have given his Holiness of the liberty of Detraction taken by our Adversaries,
I instanced one to him which concerned my self in the time wherein I had the
honor to be Rector of the University. I told him that the Jesuits in the end
of the year 1642. attempting to invade its Privileges, I became obliged to
write thereof to Pope Urban VIII. to hinder them from obtaining of him by
surprise some Brief which might favor their designs, unless he were
preadvertis'd thereof: That the Letter which I writ to him being framed in such
respectfull terms as the person to whom, and the subject of which I was to
write, required; the Jesuits in an Apology which they caused to be printed a
little while after in behalf of their Society, took occasion therein to
complain of my Letter, as if I had injured the service of the King, and the
interests of the State by writing it; and that they might have wherewith to
triumph against me, they falsely alleged in their book such words of it, as
were not contained in any place of my said Letter, either together or asunder.
Wherefore I beseecht his Holiness to consider to what exorbitance of calumnies
they are likely to proceed in secret, since they are not ashamed, and make no
scruple to divulge publicly such high things against a person who being in a
Charge very considerable in Paris, was able to complain of the injury in all
places, and so easily to convince them before all the world of the falsenesse
of their accusation. The Pope answered that I had reason, and promised me that
he would keep himself from being prepossessed by any calumny. I beseecht him
that he would vouchsafe to let me advertise his Holiness upon occasion of all
that I should find necessary to be represented to him in this affair, which I
should always do with truth and moderation, yet with that Christian freedom
which the justice of the cause for which I pleaded, and the service of the
Church required. He answered, That he would always hear me very willingly. I
held in my hand the Letters which I was to present to him. The Pope offered to
take them, and lay them upon a low Stool near him, where he had already laid
the Memorials which he had received that day; but I placed my Letters there my
self; which as I was doing, the Pope presenting his hand to receive them, told
me, the Bishops who subscribed the first Letter, were a very great number. I
answered, that the Letters which I presented to him would, as I conceived, be
as acceptable to his Holiness, and appear to him more necessary then those
which he had received. After which falling upon my knees and receiving his
benediction, I withdrew.

It must be confessed that these audiences of the Pope are very pleasing and
agreeable. One is admitted to him alone, and so long as they continue, there is
no person but the Pope present, or that can hear what is said; so that a man
may open his heart to him, and speak to him about any business with full
liberty all that he conceives necessary to represent to him. There is no fear
of being too long or tedious to him. For it is so far from being requisite to
offer to retire and make an end, that on the contrary it would be an incivility
and a fault to do it before the Pope himself signify his pleasure to end the
audience, by the benediction which he gives when he finds there is no need, or
no time to hear more.

CHAP. V.
A Relation of all that passed concerning the Hours. An Answer to all
Objections made by the Jesuits against them. That they were put into the Index
only because of a Bull of Pius V. alleged to prohibit all Translations of the
Office of the B. Virgin into the Vulgar tongue. The Asperities of M. Albizzi.

IT was the tenth of July that I had the audience of which I have now given
account. I would have gladly spoken to the Pope touching the business of the
Hours, by reason of what I learnt about them the day foregoing. But it not
being the principal affair for which I was returned, and I not being confident
that it was needful to speak to his Holiness for remedy in it, I thought fit
to forbear.

What I learnt concerning them, was thus: viz. That there was sent about two
months before to the Secretary of the Congregation of the Index, a Catalogue
of Prohibited Books, amongst which the Hours were; That M. Albizzi had for
some time since much urged the said Secretary to expedite the publishing of it;
That it had been hindered from being so, among other impediments, by the
solicitations used by the Jesuits to get exempted a book of one of their
Fathers named Amceius, who was Author of a Work wherein sundry pernicious
Maxims, especially concerning Murder, are taught; but all they could obtain
was, that the title of Jesuit should not be mentioned in the Decree, but this
clause be added to the condemnation of his book, donec corrigatur; That the
business being made up thus, the Catalogue was at the Printing House, and
ready to be published every day, and that the Hours were in it.

Then it was that I well understood what Card. Roma meant when he told me, that
perhaps the Hours would be spoken of no more in the Congregation of the H.
Office, but only in that of the Index; but I did not so easily understand to
what purpose were the solicitations and general recommendations which Cardinal
Barberin advised me to make to their Eminences in behalf of the said Book.
Wherefore I repaired to his Palace, and not daring to tell him plainly my
knowledge of the posture in which the business was (for I came to it by a very
particular and secret way) after I had given him an account of the Visit which
I made to Card. Panzirolo, who cut me off so short that he gave me not time to
speak to him about the Hours. I asked him whether it were yet time and sitting
for me to speak thereof to Card. Cechini, when I found him so little employed
as to hear me; for his office of Datary obliged him to answer so many persons,
that is often as I went to him, I always found him surrounded with a crowd of
people. Card. Barberin answering me hereunto neither Yes nor No. I proceeded
and told him, that the Jesuits continued to boast that they were confident of
a Censure of the Hours, if not from the H. Office, at least from the
Congregation of the Index. I told him further; that I had heard say that M.
Albizzi speaking of a Catalogue of Prohibited Books which was to be published
within some time, said it should be so before the following week were past. I
also signified to him what Cardinal Roma said to me, viz. that perhaps that
affair would not pass before the Congregation of the H. Office, but before
that of the Index: that all this put together made me fear, that the Service
which he had intimated he would do the Bishop of Angers would be unprofitable,
if perchance the said Book were amongst those contained in the Catalogue to be
published a few days after; that I was informed that the business depended
absolutely upon Cardinal Spada; who was the head of that Congregation, who
could produce the said Catalogue, see whether the Book were in it, and blot it
out, if it seemed good to him. Cardinal Barberin answered me to all this, That
he was not present at all the Congregations, and that it was requisite for me
to go to Cardinal Spada, to represent to him the same that I did to himself,
and also to repeat all that could be said for defense and justification of the
Hours. I replied, that I would willingly wait upon Cardinal Spada to acquaint
him with all that he pleased; but that if he would make this business his own,
as he had testified to me, it would be better for his Eminence to speak with
Cardinal Spada then for me; and that that Cardinal would more regard the least
thing spoken to him by his Eminence then all that I could represent to him.
Nevertheless I could not obtain of Cardinal Barberin to promise me to visit
Cardinal Spada, what ever importunity I used to him, but I was fain to depart
without his giving me any assurance that he would speak to the said Cardinal;
on the contrary he told me clearly that he remitted the whole business to my
management.

This so unusual indifference which Cardinal Barberin showed for a business
which he had testified to me he would make his own, giving me cause to believe
that he would meddle with it no more, because he saw no likelihood of
succeeding in it, deprived me also of all hope, and with hope of all courage to
labor in it; which I had the more reason to give over, when I considered how
it was fully concluded, and how all the instances and solicitations which I
could use for hindering it, were henceforth unprofitable and out of time; in as
much as I certainly knew that the Printer had already carried the Secretary of
the Congregation of the Index a proof of the said Catalogue, and that the
Hours were in it, though I durst not plainly tell Card. Barberin so; the
importance, necessity, and obligation of secrecy of the way by which I
understood it, being more considerable to me then any other advantage which I
could obtain in behalf of the Hours by divulging it. But besides, I was
obliged to take heed of letting it be known that I understood how the business
stood, even for the interest of the Hours; because I feared that if the
Commissioners of the H. Office came to discover that I knew it so certainly,
they would lose all the good will and inclination which they might otherwise
have to do that excellent Work the Justice which I desired; and this in regard
of the reputation of their Tribunal, which they would account impaired, should
they suffer it to be thought subject to any vicissitudes, or capable of
changing its determinations. Wherefore I was obliged to keep my self within
these bounds with Cardinal Barberin, and to content my self with representing
to him the most effectually I could the dangers wherein the Hours might be of
receiving some doom as I presumed, for the reasons wherewith I acquainted him,
to oblige him to prevent the same, according to the affection which he had to
defend them; but seeing he referred the matter wholly to my self, I could no
longer look upon it as other then desperate and irremediable.

Hour, that I might not hereafter repent of having been able to make some
remonstrance in behalf of the Hours, and not having done it, I resolved upon
what Cardinal Barberin lately enjoined me, viz. to go again and visit Cardinal
Spada, and try my last endeavor with him. When I came to his Palace, he was
receiving a visit from a person of Quality, with whom he was about an hour, at
the end of which came a Gentleman from Cardinal Barberin to know whether
Cardinal Spada were at home. I doubted presently whether Cardinal Barberin had
not altered his resolution since my departure, and I imagined that it was about
the affair whereof I had spoken to him, that he intended to come visit Cardinal
Spada. I had some mind to withdraw without speaking to Cardinal Spada for fear
of spoiling any thing by so doing, and that I might leave the business to
Cardinal Barberin entire, to do what he should think fit for the success of
it. But the Marquis who was with Cardinal Spada coming forth almost as soon as
the news of Cardinal Barberin's coming was brought, and it coming into my mind
that Cardinal Barberin would perhaps be glad that I spoke some thing to
Cardinal Spada before himself did, according to the order which he gave me, I
spent the little interval of time which was between the Marquis's visit and
Cardinal Barberin's coming, in representing to Cardinal Spada in few words and
the greatest moderation I could, the same things which I had said to Cardinal
Barberin. I told him of the absolute power which I was informed he had in this
business, of the inconveniences and sad consequences which he might prevent by
doing what I requested of him, and of the many obligations there would be to
his Eminence for his good proceeding therein. Cardinal Spada answered me
plainly, by acknowledging the Catalogue talked of to come forth in which the
Hours were; but he spoke of it as a Prohibition little considerable, and not
likely to do the Hours much prejudice, there being thirty or forty books
comprised together in the same Prohibition; That nevertheless, if I were
minded to prevent it, I must have recourse to the H. Office to take order
therein; but as for himself he could do nothing alone.

Cardinal Barberin arrived there incognito by the little Door. Cardinal Spada
went to meet him, and I withdrew. Though it was already somewhat late, yet I
went to Cardinal Barberin's Palace to wait for him at his return, and know what
what he had done in this Visit. It lasted a long hour, and he came not home
till night. He told me when he was returned, that I must again visit all the
Cardinals whom I had visited before concerning the Hours. He took the pains to
deduce particularly what I was to represent to them; and by all that he said he
gave me very much ground to hope that they were disposed to have regard to my
Remonstrances. He advised me to draw up a Memorial to present to them; and
after it was finished, to let him see it, that he might tell me whether it were
right. Moreover, touching the Gown and Cap which I had worn hitherto in the
visits which I made to the Cardinals, he told me, that they did not like to see
me in that habit, and that he conceived they would be willing that I wore it no
longer. I rendered thanks to his Eminence for all the care which he took of
this business. And as for the habit, I answered him that I should be very glad
to be dispensed with from the subjection and trouble of wearing it, which I had
not done hitherto with some inconvenience, but only out of respect to their
Eminences; as himself had seen we use to do in France in occasions of honor
and ceremony.

This Advertisement was the cause that before I presented my self in the Pope's
presence chamber to have the Audience of him which I above mentioned, on Sunday
morning (July 9) I went to the Master of the Pope's chamber to his Apartment to
inquire of him in what habit he thought good I should present my self to have
Audience of his Holiness, and I offered him of my own accord to go with my
Cassock and my Cloak. He answered, that this would be best, because of the
novelty of the other, about which it would be requisite to speak to the Pope,
to know whether his Holiness liked my wearing of a Gown and Cap; seeing the
other Doctors which were there before, presented themselves only in their
Cassock and Cloak. Whereupon I was not unwilling to accept the offer which he
made me, to avoid deferring my Audience by the discussion of a scruple of this
nature; seeing too, the principal cause of my wearing a Gown and Cap, (namely,
to have it taken notice of at first that I was come back to Rome about a
public employment) was ceased at that time by all the visits which I had made
to show the occasion of my return.

The same Sunday ( July 9.) I went in behalf of the Hours to visit Cardinal
Ginetti in the moring, and Cardinal Roma in the afternoon; which last made me
new instances upon the scruple about the Translation of the first Commandment
touching Images. On Tuesday morning I finished the Memorial which I presented
to their Eminences about this matter; I caused copies to be made of it, and
carried them in the afternoon to the Cardinals Genetti, S. Clement, Spada and
Barberin. Which last further advised me to look a little into the Catechism of
the Council of Trent, and see how it speaks concerning Images. And because the
time for their Assembly was near, it being to meet on Wednesday morning, and
there being no order as I knew of to suspend the publishing of ^he
abovementioned Catalogue, I left my Memorial at the Palace of those Cardinals
whom I could not meet with to present the same personally. In the said Memorial
having said something about the drift of the Hours, I passed thus to the
answer of objections brought against it.

This Book having been received almost universally by all the world with so
great applause that there have been six several Editions of it within less
then a year; it has stirred the jealousy of certain persons, who not being
able to find any thing considerable in it to gainsay, have been reduced only to
blame it for three slight matters.

First, of neglecting to translate out of the Latin the word Redempteur de
tous [Redeemer of All] as if the translator omitted it out of design and set
purpose.

But the Authors of this work know too well what S. Paul says in 2 Cor. 5.
that Jesus Christ dyed for all; and what also is said in the first Epistle of
S. John, chap. 2. that he is the price and ransom for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for those of the whole World. They acknowledge too well,
That Jesus Christ our Lord is the Savior of all, to retrench maliciously the
word, Redempteur de tous, or conceal a truth which they own de fide, and for
which they are ready to shed their blood.

And indeed the said Authors having been very diligent in the Work to translate
the Hymns verse for verse (which is very difficult, considering the
confinement of the French rimes) it may have happened that it has been put in
the French verse which corresponds to the Latin wherein the said word is by
reason of the rhyme, which would not fall right in the course of Poetry; but the
said word is restored in the following verse, and has likewise been inserted
in sundry other places where the Latin wants it.

This is seen particularly in the Hymn Lustris sex qui jam peractis, in which
these six verses [Crux fidelis, inter omnes, Arbor una nobilis: Nulla sylva
talem profert, Fronde, flore germine: Dulce lignum dulces clavos, Dulce pondus
sustinet] are thus translated,

O Croix arbre d' amor, de salut and de grace,
Arbre vraiment divin, qui tout arbre surpass.
En miracles diverse;
O bois plus sacre per ce Corpse adorable,
Tu ports le doux fruit, le fruit inestimable
QUI GUERIT L' UNIVERS.
In the Hymn Ad coenam Agni providi, Et stolis albis candidi, Post transitum
maris rubri, Christo canamus Principi, The Translation runs thus

Vaincucurs, de la mer rouge eschappes de son onde,
Allons pares de blanc au festin de l' Agneau,
Publions dans nos chants du REDEMPTEUR DU MONDE
Le triomphe nouveau.
In the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, the last verse, Gloria Patri Domino,
Natoque qui a mortuis surrexit, is thus translated.

Gloire a Christ par sa mort DES MORTS LE REDEMPTEUR.
And in the Te Deum this verse, Tu ad liberandum suscepturus hominem non
horruisti virginis uterum, is also translated into these words,

Tu n'as dedaigne pour SAUVER TOUT LE MONDE
D' entrer dans l' humble sein d' une vierge feconde.
Thus in diverse places of the Hymns speaking indefinitely and generally, it is
said that our Lord Jesus Christ is the hope of the whole Universe, the price of
the world, the invaluable fruit hanging on the tree which heals the Universe,
the Redeemer of the world, the salvation of men; and that he shed his precious
blood for the infinite price of the guilty Universe; That he came to deliver
man from his misery, to heal all our evils, to save the guilty, to break thc
chains of sinners, to wash the world, to purchase the Universe: that we are
purchased by his blood; That he came to be born and to dye for us; That he died
for guilty man. And more such manners of speech there are in the French which
are not found even in several places of the Latin.

The second objection made against this Work is that the Cardinal de Berule is
put in the Calendar with the title of Bien-heureux blessed. To which it is
answered that this is not the fault of the Author who well knows that it
pertaines only to the H. See to declare the Saints and the Blessed; but a
simple devotion which he who corrected the second impression of the said Book
had for that Cardinal. And accordingly the Author taking notice of the
Corrector's fault, blotted out the tittle of Blessed from that Cardinal in the
four other Ediitons which have been made since the second.

The third Objection consists in that the Adversaries pretend that the
Translator has interpreted according to the conceptions of Heretics that
passage of the fifth chapter of Deuteronomie; Non facies tibi sculptile, neque
similitudinem omnium quae in caelo sunt desuper, etc. But those Censors are
greatly mistaken in this particular; because the Heretics aim in that
translation is to show that the Church does ill in the laudable custom which
it has of making and having the Images of Saints; for which purpose they leave
out the word Idol, and the end, which is, to adore them. But the Translator
has faithfully put both into this book, making express mention of the word
Idol and of the end, for which it is forbidden to make any, namely to adore
them. The Translation is thus, Vous ne feres point d' Idol ny d' Image taillee
ny aucune figure pour les adorer, You shall make no Idol nor graven Image, nor
any figure, to adore the same, which version is not only suitable to the text
of H. Scripture, but also necessary for France; and it is found so in all the
Catechismes printed for the instruction of children and plain people: And all
Curates, and such as teach the Catechism to Children and the vulgar, have
great care when they expound this commandment to recite it thus to them, and to
make them take notice of it, that so they may know the reason for which God
made that prohibition, and knowing it may also know that when the Church makes
Images it does nothing contrary to this commandment of God, because it makes
them not to adore them, but only to render to them the worship (cultum) which
is due unto them. And by this means the Catholic people are delivered from the
fallacies and false explications and reproaches of Heretics; whereas if they
were not thus instructed, Heretics might circumvent and seduce them.

That if these reasons be not accounted sufficient to take away all the
suspicions that may be raised against the good intentions of the Author of this
Work, but your Eminences judge it necessary to add to the Book some Preface or
Explication or other like thing for greater assurance of this Authors sincerity
and good purposes; what your Eminences shall in prudence please ta appoint
therein shall be punctually performed, the book shall be brought to you within
three months reprinted with such new declaration, and shall never be printed
otherwise hereafter.

Moreover the book is of very great profit and edification to Christians
containing nothing but the principal and most necessary Maxims of Christian
life drawn out of the H. Scripture and the H. Fathers of the Church. It would
be a sad and deplorable thing, if people should imagine that your Eminences
condemn them; as the enemies of the said book will endevor to persuade if it
receive any impeachment, though it be not possible for their malice to hinder
the great applause which it receives from all the world. Wherefore besides the
good which your Eminences will do, and the scandal which you will prevent, you
will also oblige very many pious and knowing persons who will endeavor to
acknowledge this favorable dealing by all means possible, and will pray to God
for the long and happy preservation and exaltation of your Eminences, whom God
bless, etc.

My purpose was to be on Wednesday morning ( July 12.) at la Minerve half an
hour before the time which I understood the Cardinals were to meet there for
their Congregation that so I might salute them as they came, partly to excuse
the necessity there was of my leaving the Memorial at their Houses the
foregoing Evening, having not time to return thither to present the same to
themselves, and partly to inform them of what I read the precedent night in the
Catechism of the Council of Trent. But they repaired thither much sooner this
day then ordinary, by reason that Cardinal Pamphilio, who was to take his first
sitting there that day, could not come thither later; and so they were all
entered before my coming, except Cardinal Roma to whom I presented a Copy of
the said Memorial, which I could not deliver to him in the evening.

I was afraid too lest M. Albizzi should think himself slighted, and be
incensed against us, if I did not present him one in particular; for which
reason, I inquired whether there were no means to get him out of the Assembly
for a moment, to present the same to him. I was answered No; but if I had a
mind to speak any thing to the Assembly, I might enter in; for they would
presently be called who had any thing to propose to it. I was something
scruplous of resolving upon it, fearing lest by my presenting my self there, I
might give the Congregation ground to pretend that a Frenchman and a Doctor of
Sorbonne acknowledged its jurisdiction. However I determined to enter with the
same mind and manner as I intended to address a Memorial to it, namely not as
acknowledging any jurisdiction or superiority in the said Congregation either
in respect of France, or of the book, or of the Author for whom I interceded;
but only for preventing (if possible) the scandals which might arise from the
Decrees of a Company of persons who indeed held a very considerable rank in the
Church in regard of the manner wherewith many Catholics in France look upon
those Decrees, the bad use which sundry particular persons make of them, and
the false and pernicious consequences which they draw from them.

They were seated about the Table in this order. The Cardinals Roma and
Barberin were at the upper end; on their right hand on one side of the table
were the Cardinals Ginetti, S. Clement, Lugo and Pamphilio; over against these
two last M. Albizzi and the F. Commissary of the H Office sat upon lower seats,
and before them there was a bar joining to the Table: Along the wall opposite
to the Cardinals sat seven or eight of their Consultors. I drew near to speak
at the end of the table which was empty, and I told them in Latin, That to
avoid troubling them by repetition of what I had represented to them as well by
word of mouth as by my Memorial, I should add nothing thereto but that having
the foregoing night read the Catechism provided for Curates by order of the
Council of Trent, translated into the vulgar tongue, and printed by the command
of Pius V. I observed that the Commandment touching Images was there expressed
in the same words as in the Hours, and that in a higher and more dangerous
manner, if the reasons of those who made the said Objection against the Hours
deserved to be received. For the Catechism has these express word, Non
tifarai alcuna imagine sculpita, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image, [Sculpita] which seemed most to offend the accusers of the Hours; And
whereas in the Hours it is only said that they shall not make them to adore
them, it is in the Catechism that they shall not adore them, yea (which is
more) that they shall not honor them [Non le adorerai ne le honorerai]
Wherefore if the Hours deserved to be condemned for that translation, the
Catechism deserves it much more for this; and on the contrary if the
Catechism has not been condemned in these hundred years since its printing,
the Hours deserve it far less. I added that if there were any thing else to
be objected against the Hours besides what I had already heard, I noe only
hoped that it would not be harder for me to answer solidly thereunto then it
had been to answer the objections made hitherto; but also that if their
Eminences, desired any thing else from the Authors of the Hours for a more
ample justification of their right Belief, honest management, and submission to
their Eminences I assured them that they should give them full satisfaction
within what time it pleased them to prescribe.

Cardinal Roma speaking in the name of all answered that they would consider
what I had represented to them by word of mouth and by writing, and then give
me an answer [and dabimus responsum] As I retired I left a Copy of my Memorial
to M. Albizzi, and laid upon the table before him the Catechism translated
into Italian, which I procured the day before, and looked upon as a Piece that
abundantly determined the capital difficulty brought against the Hours.

I waited for M. Albizzi at his coming out of the Assembly, partly to
understand from him as secretary of that Congregation what he might have to
tell me concerning what was resolved upon that which I represented; and partly
to make an excuse to him that I could not present the Memorial to him sooner by
bringing it to his house. He answered me nothing, but that 'twas enough that I
informed the rest.

In the afternoon I went to wait upon Cardinal Pamphilio whom I had not yet
saluted. I told him that I should come at the first opportunity to inform him
of the principal motive of my return to Rome, besides what he might have
already understood thereof by the Letters of the Bishops which I presented to
the Pope; but in the mean time I came to acquaint him with the affair of the
Hours. An account of which I aecordingly gave him, but in few words, being
obliged to be brief, in regard of the great number of persons who were at the
door of his Antichamber, and desired audience of his Eminence.

The same afternoon I visited Cardinal Barberin again; I presented a Memoral to
him; I told him of the Hours lately published by F. Adam, which he entitled
Catholic in opposition to the former, as if they were Heretical, using much
bitterness and calumny against those who had a hand in their translation. His
answer implied as if all the Cardinals were sufficiently enlightened and
satisfied as to the Objections which I removed, and as if there remained no
other scruple concerning the Hours but their being in the vulgar tongue. I
replied, That translation into the vulgar tongue was forbidden only of the
whole entire Scripture, in regard of some particular places whereby the simple
may be misled and ill edifi'd; but it was never prohibited to extract and
translate such principal places of it as may serve for the edification of the
people. That in particular the Hours of F. Adam were in the vulgar tongue as
was as the other; upon which nothing could be charged but what might also be
charged upon those of the said Father; which besides may be justly accused
amongst other things of having altered and corrupted in the Translation all the
Collects in which the power of the Effectualness of Grace is expressed in the
Latin. Then we fell to speak of the audience which I had had of the Pope the
day aforegoing, of which I related all the part^cularities to his Eminence.
Upon which occasion among other things which he said, I remember he repeated
what he had formerly often told me, namely, That he wonderd the Pope laid so
much stresse upon the Bull of Urban VIII. as if it were decisive of any thing,
whereas for certain, it was only provisional, not for the condemning of the
Doctrine of Jansenius, but barely for the forbidding or prohibiting it, till it
should be examined and approved.

Neither Cardinal Spada, nor Catdinal Panzirolo were at la Minerve on Wednesday
morning; nor could I meet with them in the afternoon. Wherefore holding my self
assured that the affair of the Hours would be spoken of before the Pope on
Thursday morning, and it having been told me that the sentiments of those two
Cardinals were in great estimation with his Holiness, I went to their Palaces
to wait upon them both before they repaired to the Assembly which was to be
held that day in the presence of his Holiness.

The first I went to was Cardinal Spada. I told him two things, whereof I had
not spoken at my visiting him, nor said any thing in my Memorial. One was what
I had represented the day before at la Minerve out of the Catechism of the
Council of Trent about Images. The other, The information which I had received
of the impression of the Hours of F. Adam. I added that word was sent me, that
they were full of falsities and detractions which he mingled with the prayers
of the Churth; that he entitled them Catholic, as if the other were Heretical;
that he had translated the Hymns into burlesque and ridiculous Verses; that
though I received this News but the last Post, yet it was signified to me that
they had been public three or four months; and that I prayed him to consider
what might be said, in case the other were comprised in a Decree, because they
were in French, and these latter exempted. The Cardinal answered me, That if I
had the Hours of F. Adam, and complained thereof to their Tribunal, as others
there accused those which I defended, they would not condemn the one, unless
they condemned the other also. I replied, That I had them not; that if he
desired to see them, I would procure them to show him, that so by comparing
them together, he might understand more clearly, and judge more certainly of
the Justice of my Remonstrances: And for this purpose I beseecht him to procure
time for it, by causing the intended Judgment upon the former to be suspended
and deferred: but as for bringing my Complaints against those of F. Adam to
their Tribunal, I saw no benefit of so doing; that if the Hours which I
defended must be impeached by a Decree wherein they were comprised, I had as
lieve they were so alone as in the company of those of F. Adam; because it was
not fit to accustom those Fathers to make a bad Book as soon as they saw a good
one which they liked not, upon hope to get both condemned, (under color of
holding the balance equal, and restoring Peace between both sides) nor to give
their Eminences occasion to proceed in such a manner.

When I was come from Cardinal Spada, I went to the apartment of Cardinal
Panzirolo which was down at Monte Cavallo where the Pope then resided. I could
not be admitted to speak to him before he came forth of his apartment to go up
to the Pope. He was encompassed with many persons of quality, Bishops,
Gentlemen and Prelates of Rome, who were with him to court him and accompany
him from his own apartment to that of the Pope. I addressed to him in the midst
of all that multitude, because I could not otherwise; and presenting my
Memorial to him, I told him, according as the place permitted, that I came to
implore his protection for a Book, whose Excellence and general approbation had
drawn some Maligners upon it, who not being able to blame any thing
considerable in it, were reduced to very weak objections, as he might find by
the memorial which I presented to him, and as I hoped, he would hear in the
Assembly which was going to be held before his Holiness. I had no sooner done
speaking, but the Cardinal instead of answering me, turned toward M. Albizzi;
(who was one of those that accompanied him) and asked him what was the business
whereof I spoke to him: M. Albizzi answered with a very high and earnest tone,
saying these words twice, Si burla il signor sant-Amor, si burla, etc. M. de
saint-Amor jests, he is in jest. These offensive and disparaging words would not
have much troubled me if M. Albizzi had spoke them in some private audience,
where I might have replied to him before those that heard them; but in a place
so public as this was, before so great a multitude, and at a time when there
was no room for much reply, (for it was in the middle of the way, and we were
already almost at the foot of the stairs which leads up to the Pope) they were
a sufficient rude taste of the haughty and imperious treatment which I was to
look for when I should be obliged to visit M. Albizzi. But notwithstanding the
just commotion which they caused in me, yet through a secret fear I had, lest
he spoke them only to incense me and force me to some more vehement answer, (as
indeed he deserved, but from which he might have taken advantage against me;) I
did not address my answer to him, but to Cardinal Panzirolo, (though so loud,
as to make it heard by most of those that took notice of the affront) telling
him that his Eminence would see whether I jested or no, when he perused the
Memorial which I presented to him. That I addressed my self to him to beseech
him to acquaint his Holiness that some of the Bishops whose Letters I had
presented to him, and who knew what the Book was, would account the treatment
it received as done to themselves; and that I did not mention the same to the
Pope when I presented him their Letters, because I did not then foresee that
it was fit to speak of it, at least so soon, to his Holiness.

Whilst I was speaking this to Cardinal Panzirolo, M. Albizzi was still behind
him a little on one side, and having taken hold of a corner of the Book, he
held it up very high, and showed it to all the company, shaking it and
threatening, saying, I had spoken of it what seemed good to me; but they were
going to see above, whether I had reason or no. Leaving Cardinal Panzirolo to
pass on, I answered M. Albizzi, That that was it which I waited for; but I
wondered in the mean time at this his usage both of the Book and of my self. M.
Albizzi angerly replied, That I thought I had done a great matter yesterday
when I had spoke of the above mentioned Catechism, but I ought to have first
looked all along the place I cited, which is clearly expounded as the Catholic
sense requires, which the Author of the Hours has not done. I answered, That
the Catechism was more large, and extends it self further in the exposition
of the said Commandment, then the Translation of the Hours does; yet in the few
words it contains, it is well enough and clearly enough explicated without
needing other comment to make it more intelligible. M. Albizzi replied, That
the generality of the world could not well understand it being so compendious.
I told him, That it was very easy for any person to understand, of how mean
capacity soever. He replied, That women did not understand it. I said, That the
meanest women understood it well; and that all such as teach the Catechism
every day to little Girls and Children, were too careful in expounding it to
leave obscurity in it; and that in France there was no Catholic ignorant of
it. He continued speaking to me in a muttering way, and as offended at the care
I took for the defense of the Hours, as if I went about thereby to do some
violence to Religion and to the H. See, and to oblige it to tolerate a thing
which might not be. I answered, That it was not my intention nor thought to
engage the H. See to any thing whatever against its inclinations and interests;
but to serve it by letting the Pope know the ambushes prepared against it by
the equivocal Propositions whose Decision is pursued, and by informing him the
most carefully I could of the true state of all the things wherewith I was
incharg'd. And as for himself, I beseecht him that he would vouchsafe to hear
what I had to say to him with some kind of equitableness, and not reject the
evident justification which I could make both of the purity of the Doctrines
contained in the Hours, and of the purity of their intentions who published
them; which is very easy to be judged, since even in the whole Book there can
hardly be found any rational ground for the least suspicion. M. Albizzi
replied, That it was too manifestly seen how bad that Authors intention was,
and that all that is reported of the evil designs of such people against the
Holy See, whereof they are enemies, is but too true. Finding by this Answer
that he was absolutely corrupted against us, and that the moderation and
patience which I used in all this discourse, did only exasperate him, and make
him break out the more against me, I fell into the just indignation which his
carriage constrained me to, and told him with confidence, That what he said
would not be found true, and that, I would never endure that any person do such
a high Injury (as he had done) to the worthy persons whose sound Piety and
sincere intentions I was acquainted with, without protesting against the
Injustice, and showing the wrong done them by so false and prejudicial a
belief, which can have no other foundation but calumnies and frauds. M. Albizzi
replied not to this discourse but mutteringly between his teeth; so that
hearing none of his words, and seeing mine very unprofitable with him, I stopped
there, which silence was more easy to me; for all that we spoke was upon the
way going up to the Popes apartment, where we arrived when we ceased speaking.

On Friday (July 14.) I was present at Mass with the Cardinals in the Chapel
of the Cordeliers in the place Colonna, upon occasion of the Feast of St.
Bonaventure, and I heard an Oration in Latin made there by a young Cordelier at
the end of Mass in praise of the aforesaid Saint. In the afternoon I went to
visit three Cardinals, to whom I spoke about the affair of the Hours. The
first was the Cardinal of S. Clement, in conference of whom I discovered two
remarkable things: First, that what I said and represened in the Congregation
of the H. Office on Wednesday was very well received there, yet that I had
better not have appeared in person in that Congregation, and that for keeping
the greater circumspection and gravity in my Conduct. And secondly, that the
grand occasion of complaints and prosecutions made against the Hours was not
any ill observed in them, but the bad opinion taken up against those people who
put them forth. The second Cardinal whom I visited was Roma, who told me that
my Memorial was not read in their Congregation on Wednesday, but it should be
in a private one held in his House for that purpose, to be reported afterward
to the General; but in the mean time I should not trouble my self; that nothing
would be done but after mature and serious deliberation. And as I took occasion
to tell him what passed on Thursday between M. Albizzi and me, whose animosity
and power to hurt me I consequently ought to fear, his Office of Secretary of
their Congregation, affording him so many occasions of speaking to the Pope and
their Eminences about affairs of that nature; the Cardinal acknowledged that he
had done amiss, yet excused him with greater kindness, bidding me not heed
it, saying that it was his humor, that he acted very often with their
Eminences so impetuously, and that I must not forbear to visit him, as if what
was past had never happened. The third was Cardinal Lugo, to whom I omitted not
to carry a Memorial, notwithstanding his alliance wi^h the Jesuits.

Saturdayes, Sundays and Mondayes, were not usual days of much solicitation
with me; because the Courrier departing on Saturdayes for all the titles of
Italy, almost all persons whom I could go see were employed about their
dispatches: and the Courrier of France going away on Monday, I many times began
the Letters in Sunday afternoon, which I was to write to give account of what
passed about the affairs wherewith I was encharged, Wherefore I could not
before Tuesday (July 11.) continue the solicitations which I had began in the
behalf of the Hours, having been obliged the foregoing days to send word
exactly to the Bishops and the other persons who recommended the same to me how
all passed hitherto about that matter.

I also drew a second Memorial touching the Hours, by which the Cardinals of
the Congregation of the H. Office were entreated to give way to the
justification of the right faith and sincere intention of those who put them
forth, and for this end to cause the whole Book to be read, and an Extract to
be given of all that could be found blameable in it; that so, if after the
objected difficulties were explicated, they thought meet to correct any thing
in the Book or add any explication to it, for taking away the slightest
suspicions, and clearing the least doubts, performance might be made of
whatever their Eminences ordain, within a set time, and that with all the
diligence which their Eminences can expect from persons perfectly full of
submission and obedience.

The desig^ of this second Memorial I communicated on Tuesday (July 18.) to
persons very intelligent of the management, which ought to be used in that
Country in those kind of affairs. It was assured to me, that according to the
Laws and Customs of the Tribunal of the Inquisition, they could not deny what
I requested by this Memorial, nor proceed further before they do right to it.
So I was counseled to deliver it; but told it would be sufficient to carry it
the next morning to Cardinal Roma for the whole Congregation, before he came
forth of his Palace to repair thither. I had also time that day to visit
Cardinal Barberin, and he permitted me to read to him the Copy of the Letter
which I told him I had writ the day before to the Bishops concerning what had
passed hitherto touching the Hours; which I could not but think very
advantageous for their defense, in that this Cardinal might consider and tell
the rest what interest was taken in this Work by Persons so Illustrous
throughout all France for their dignity and merit; and how all that was done at
Rome about this matter was punctually signified to them.

On Wednesday morning I went to carry the second Memorial to Cardinal Roma; He
told me that it was not yet time to give it to him, because my business would
not be spoken of that day; but that I should bring it to him against the next
day, that the private Congregation which he told me of before was to be holden.
I learnt that it would be the next day in the afternoon, and so did not fail to
carry the Memorial to him half an hour before the Congregation was assembled.

I waited patiently for justice to be done upon all that I had represented; but
on Friday afternoon (July 21.) as I was going to Cardinal Barberin to fortify
what I had said to him in favor of the Hours by undeniable examples of Books
which I procured at Rome, I saw fixed up at the Apostolical Printing House the
new Decree of Books prohibited by the Inquisition during the course of that
year, the publishing of which I knew was deferred only in expectation of what
should be ordained touching the Hours. At first I was very glad to see it
fixed up, in no wise imagining that they were comprised in it, but on the
contrary persuading my self that they were wholly exempted; or that at least
the publishing of this Decree was resolved upon, only for that it was foreseen
that the discussion of what concerned the Hours, would take up more time then
was fit according to their custom to delay the publication: but my reading of
the said Catalogue of prohibited Books, informed me that the Hours were
comprehended in it.

It Is in vain to speak of the extreme astonishment wherein I was at so
unexpected an Event; but how great soever it was, it did not hinder me from
presently considering the use that I ought to make of it, and the benefit which
I might draw from it in reference to the principal affair wherewith I was
encharged. And whereas it is no little advantage to understand as well as
possible the people we are to deal with, I respited my intended visit to
Cardinal Barberin, and returned back to Cardinal Roma. I spoke to him as if I
knew nothing of the publishing of the Decree, and asked him plainly whether he
had looked upon my two Memorials, and whether I might hope for justice from what
I had represented to him. The Cardinal answered me with perfect sincerity, That
the business was ordered and concluded, nor would it be any more spoken of;
and of his own accord he related to me how the matter past in the Conference
which they had about it. He told me, that there was no more mention of the
title B. given to M. de Barule in the Calender, nor of the Translation of
Redemptor omnium; but that the speech was about Images, and that seven or eight
French Catechisms were produced, amongst others that of Cardinal Richelieu, in
which the Commandment is not translated in the words that it is in the Hours;
that on the other s^de an Heretical Catechism was looked into, and there it was
translated just as in the Hours. But for all this, it was acknowledged that
the version of the Hours in this point might have a good sense, and be well
understood. He told me in the second place, that the bare Title of the Hours
styled The Office of the Church, taken in the rigor displeased, and was judged
worthy of blame, because the Office of the Church properly cannot be other then
what is ordained by the Church it self; and that a collection of Prayers,
through all the Churches made by any one whatever without the order and
allowance of the Church it self cannot be called The Office of the Church. But
yet it was seen well enough too in what sense the Authors meant it; and though
the words were in the rigor bad, yet they were not the principal ground of the
Resolution taken in their Congregation. In the third place he told me, That it
was not liked that certain Prayers and Oraisons (amongst others some to be said
before and after Confession and Communion) which use to be in other Hours,
were omitted in these; that it was inconvenient for every one to take the
liberty of making them after his own fashion, and that this diversity of
Prayers was not for edification. That he perceived well (nevertheless) that
this was not unanswerable, and that he did not tell it me as such, but only to
inform me of what was spoken, and how the matter passed, and also to let me
know that it was well examined; that if the Conclusion was to the disadvantage
of the Book; it was not without having had regard to my Remonstrances. In a
word, that which at length absolutely fixed them, and obliged them not to
suffer the Hours without condemning them, was the Bull of Pius V. which was
recited and represented to their Eminences, by which that H. Pope made express
prohibition of printing in the vulgar Tongue in what manner soever the Office
of the Virgin; that this Bull being to them an inviolable Rule which they ought
to follow, and one of the principal parts of the said Book consisting in the
translation of that Office, it was not possible for them to let it pass
without condemnation.

This reason surprised me at first, and I imagined it convincing as well as the
Cardinal; wherefore all that I could readily answer, having never had knowledge
of that Bull of Pius V. was, that I wondered how, the case being thus, so many
other Hours in which the said Office is translated into the vulgar Tongue, are
not condemned. To which the Cardinal replied, that they had no knowledge of it,
no person accusing them and prosecuting their condemnation, as was done to
these; which hindered not but that these deserved it, though the other which
are equally culpable, escape free; just as a thief (added he) is sent to the
punishment which he deserves, though others much more guilty then he are free
from it, because they have not been prosecuted before the Judges, as he was
whom they condemned; that as the Judges would likewise condemn those Thieves
whom they leave still in liberty, were they once accused before them; so none
of those Hours in which the Office of the Virgin is in French, would escape
condemning by their Tribunal, were they there accused.

This seemed to me not to agree with what M. Albizzi said to me, viz. That in
matter of Doctrine there were no parties. I found also by this, that it was
easy for the Jesuits to get what Books they would condemned, they being
always at Rome to play the part of Accusers; but on the contrary it was very
difficult for their Books to be condemned, such as might accuse them not being
at Rome. Lastly, I understood how when the Question is, Whether there be any
particular thing bad in a Book, it is requisite that some be found to advertise
the Inquisition of it: But in a thing so notorious as to know whether the
Hours be translated into French, I saw not wherefore an Accuser is necessary;
nor could I doubt but that the Inquisition of its own accord condemned an
infinite number of Books without any persons meddling therewith besides its own
Officers.

But I dissembled all these thoughts, and thought it enough to testify to
Cardinal Roma, that I was beholding to the goodness wherewith he enform'd me
how the matter was carried about the Hours, which was no more to be thought of
after its being thus determined. I took occasion to put him in mind of what I
had said to him touching that of the five Propositions, which I told him was of
other consequence then that of the Hours, and could not be composed without a
more exact and longer discussion. Wherefore I beseecht him to employ his
Authority to bring it to pass that there might be assigned time and place to
all the Catholic Divines that concerned themselves therein, and minded to make
their Remonstrances to the H. See touching the matter in question, to do it;
and particularly to those who were to come after me, and to be at Rome in
October following. Cardinal Roma bid me not trouble my self about this; telling
me that this affair would certainly be drawn out in length; that it would not
go as that of the Hours; that when a Determination is intended, there is care
taken of not hastening too much. That there needed other studies and
preparations for making a decision of Faith, then for making a Prohibition
according to an Ordinance of a Pope. That such as would represent to the H. See
what seemed good to them either by word of mouth, or writing, it should always
be welcome, heard most willingly, and their service acknowledged by the H. See,
which cannot take too much evidence in a business of such importance. That
belonged to the H. See to judge and decide matters contested amongst
Christians; but after they are decided by it, all Christians and others take
upon them to judge of its decisions; and this obliges it to use all possible
precaution to prevent being deceived. That for certain I should have more time
then I could wish; that I now feared lest any thing might be precipitated, but
the day would come that I should complain of not hastening enough: so that I
ought to be at rest in this business, and signify to the Divines that they
might come with all assurance, and that they should at their coming find
things in the same posture in which I now beheld them.

I departed from Cardinal Roma well satisfied with my Visit, especially in
reference to this Affair, and even to that of the Hours too, because of the
information he gave me, and the chief essential reason upon which he told me
their Prohibition was grounded. Some time after I had the curiosity to be
further instructed, and I confessed the Bullarie. There I found the Bull of
Pius V. which forbids the Office of the Virgin in the vulgar Tongue; but after
I had better examined it, I found not that the said Prohibitions could be
extended to the Hours which were in question. That which gave occasion to the
said Prohibition, was, that the Avarice of some Booksellers, and the malice or
brutishness of some others leagued with them in that design put them upon
publishing (out of emulation one against another) several Offices of the
Virgin, or rather little Books under that name, in which there were diverse
Prayers which they forged, and which were full of superstitions and other
follies, to circumvent the simple and promote the sale of their Books. Pius V.
taking notice of this abuse, and considerng how scandalous this exorbitant
license taken by some persons in the venting such Books was; and how
destructive it might be to the consciences and edification of the faithful, he
prohibited all those pretended Offices of the Virgin, and not only those which
were already published, but likewise all such as might be published for the
future.

Certainly this Bull of Pius V. had respect only to superstitious and
scandalous Offices, such as those of which it complains, and which gave
occasions for it; of which sort surely that is not which is contained in the
Hours for which I interceded. I should not have failed to have represented as
much very effectually and clearly to the Cardinals, if after it had been
produced to them, they would have never so little suspended their judgment;
and if before publishing the same, they had acquainted me with the said Bull as
the Rule which they intended to follow, and which the Authors of the Hours
ought not to have violated. But it made such impression upon their minds at the
very instant of its proposing, that from thence they without hesitating
concluded upon the condemnation of the Hours; and as soon as they had concluded
it, the Decree was published and fixed up diligently, that between their
judgment and its execution there was no room either for reflection or
remonstrance.

Although this business had such disadvantageous success, yet I took care not
to be moved at it, nor to seem abashed; yea I conceived my self obliged to go
thank Cardinal Barberin for the care he testified to me he would take of it.
For which purpose I went to see him on Sunday ( July 23.) in the forenoon with
an aspect sufficiently free and pleasant. This was the cause he scarce knew how
to answer to the thanks which I rendered him, nor whether or no he should tell
me that the Hours were comprehended in the said Decree; because, as he told me
afterward, he knew not whether it were published, and feared his conscience
would not permit him to tell me so, by reason of the secrecy whereunto they are
obliged under penalty of excommuncation, and to which they take a solemn Oath
at their Congregation. I testified that I was fully informed of the business,
that ever since the Friday before I knew that it was ended, nor was I ignorant
how it was carried. The Cardinal replied, (as if to comfort me for the Doom
laid upon the Hours) That those decrees are not published at Paris (he meant
such as issue out of the Inquisition, as this against the Hours did.) I
answered, That the Jesuits would not forbear to triumph upon it in all places
where they had partakers. He remained silent for some time without answering to
this; and then changing the matter, he told me suddenly that it behooved him to
think of obeying the Bull (meaning that of Urban VIII. his Uncle against
Jansenius) and that till it were obeyed, no satisfaction was to be hoped for. I
replied that the Bull had been published at Paris, and moreover the Hours had
no relation to that Bull. He told me that this was it in which I might see that
it was requisite to obey the Bull; and that a bad business did wrong to a good
one; that nothing else was to be hoped till obedience were yielded thereunto,
that it behoov'd to begin there. I answered That I was sorry the affair of the
Hours had no better success, especially after the hope conceived of the
protection which his Eminence promised in it: but yet I was very glad to be
delivered from the trouble and disturbance which the difficulties framed
against them gave me, they being on one side favorably voidable, and on the
other there being some offers to blemish them by a censure; that the success
held in pain; but the determination being concluded as it was, I was now free
from anxiety, and had no more to do but to rest and study till the business of
the Five Propositions were stirred in, and I were advertised thereof according
to the request made to his Holiness by the Bishops of France whose Letters I
presented to him. The Cardinal replied, That I must not sleep in it, that it
would be requisite for me to visit the Cardinals Roma, Spada, Ginetti and
Cechini to acquaint them with what I had to represent to them touching the
matter of the Five Propositions. He told me also, that I should do well to
visit some persons skillful in those matters, and who had order to study them;
he named to me F. Campanella a reformed Carmelite, F. Abbot Hilarion a
Bernardin, the General of the Chierici minores and a Jesuit named Alziato (as I
think) who he told me was in the balance with Cardinal Lugo to be promoted to
the Cardinalship. I answered, That I was much obliged to his Eminence for the
good advice he gave me; but I cared not to confer with any persons about the
grounds of the Doctrine concerned in the Five Propositions, to give any
information thereof, because I had neither order nor purpose to handle the
matter slightly, and without seeing how the things which I had to present,
would be considered, unless I might also be informed of those which our
Adversaries alleged, thereby to discover and make known what is true and what
false in their Writings; and unless I be assured that mine be also communicated
to them, to oblige them to answer thereto either by refuting or acquiescing in
the same. M. Cardinal Barberin replied, That if I would not communicate what I
had to say, it was to be feared there would be further proceeding; that there
is some times very quick dispatch at Rome; That the Tiber moves sometimes very
swiftly; that there was no person in particular engaged in this affair; that it
was not a Law-sute. That the Pope, if he thought good, might make a
determination without needing to hear any person. I answered, That they might
move as fast as they pleased; that I should not trouble my self for that at
all; that it was none of my business but the Popes and the Churches; that
neither my self, nor any other concerned themselves in it but out of this
respect. That I was come to give the H. See the first notice of one of the most
fraudulent designs that ever was projected to surprise and engage it against
one of the principal and most important truths of Christian Religion, till
other persons arrived more able then my self to give it greater evidence of the
Ambushes laid for it under the Five equivocal Propositions, the determination
whereof was desired of it for that end. That if they at Rome would admit the
informations and remonstrances which perhaps God had prepared to help the. H.
See in this occasion by our means and the cares of the Bishops who sent us,
they might; but it was requisite to be done in such order and manner, that we
might be persuaded that the same would be considered; otherwise we had nothing
to say. The Cardinal replied, That for this purpose it would be requisite to
erect a new Congregation de Auxiliis; and that the H. See was not at this time
disposed to decide that matter. I told him, that then it could not pronounce
any thing upon the said Propositions, because it was wholly comprehended and
involved therein. He proceeded to ask me whether it were not our intention that
nothing should be done against the prevalence and efficacy of Grace. I
answered, That provided that point were established, we desired nothing more;
and that we reduced all our thoughts and pretensions thereto, because all the
rest of our sentiments were dependant on and insepareble from it. He told me,
that perhaps the H. See was not disposed to establish any thing about it; and
he asked me, whether it were not enough that nothing were done against it, and
that too without destroying the sufficient Grace of the Jesuits. I answered,
That the H. See could not preserve or spare the sufficient grace of the
Jesuits, without doing wrong to effectual Grace: That they are two things so
opposite and contradictory, that the one or the other must needs fall to the
ground; that there is no mean between them; and that we could not consent that
the H. See admit or suffer as probable a Maxim which it has always condemned,
and which is diametrically opposite to another which it has always established
and mantain'd as de fide, and as that of the whole Church. Then we fell upon
St. Augustine, and the Cardinal spoke of him as if his sentiments were difficult
to be known, and as if some of his works were favorable to the Maxims of
Grace which we defended, and in others there were principles conformable to the
opinions of the Jesuits. To which I answered, That the Doctrine of St.
Augustine touching Grace was clear and uniform; That I was so certain of it,
that if but one of his works, where he handles the ground of this matter, could
be showed me, in which his sense could be presumed conformable to the
sufficient grace of the Jesuits, I offered to yield the cause: and on the
contrary, if the effectual Grace, in behalf of which I was to speak, was not
generally received in all his works written upon this subject, and in every one
of them particularly, I would renounce the prosecutions which I purposed to
make for the establishing of it. I know not how he fell to tell me of Paludanus
who writ in Flanders very advantageously for the Bull, though he was not of the
Jesuits opinion; and he told me, that if such a man as he should write to his
Holiness in behalf of the present affair of the Propositions, it would be of
great moment and produce a good effect. At length I told the Cardinal what
cause I had to complain of the treatment which M. Albizzi showed me, and what
little confidence I could have that any thing offered by me was likely to make
any impression upon his mind; in as much as he looking upon us (as he did) as
people of ill designs against the Church and the H. See, though we professed
none, he could not receive any thing whatever I should say to him, but on the
contrary must needs esteem it suspected, and slight it, through the belief
which he will always have that it is spoken unsincerely, and out of a bad
design. Cardinal Barberin replied, that this was considerable, and that I might
represent the same to the Pope, and to my LL. the Cardinals.

CHAP. VI.
Several Visits in the end of July, and the beginning of August, chiefly to the
Cardinals Spada, Roma, Barberini, and M. the Ambassador, who was come back to
Rome from Tivoli.

AFter this Affair was thus ended, I applied all my cares to that for which I
was sent; for which I saw but two things that I could do; One was to visit all
persons to whom I could have access, and who might upon occasion contribute to
the manifesting of the Design of the framers of the Five Propositions, after my
informing them of what had passed in France about them, and of the Contents of
the Bishops Letters which I delivered to his Holiness; The second was, to
renew from time to time my visits to such Cardinals as I perceived capable of
procuring in this business such delay as was requisite for its thorough
examination, by considering all that the Divines whom I expected, and others
that might come, had to represent by word of mouth or by writing in this
occasion.

M. le Bailly de Valencey the King's Ambassador at Rome, having spent above Six
Months at Tivoli returned thither on Monday July 17. upon the instances made
to him for that purpose from the Pope by the Venetian Ambassador who mediated
for the accommoding of his difference with his Holiness. On Tuesday morning he
went incognito to see the Pope, and I had the honor to accompany him in that
visit, at the end of which I recalled to his memory all that I had said to him
at Tivoli, where he was at my coming to Rome, and I made him a summary recital
of all that I had done since my last seeing him.

On the 25th. I visited M. Michel Angelo Ricci a very wise and studious Roman
Gentleman, in whose converse I observed this particularity; That having by him
the works of Petrus Aurelius printed by order of the Clergy of France, he lent
them to me, and told me, that as for himself, he durst not read them, because
of a Decree of the Inquisition made March 19. 1633. and published at Rome Febr.
16. 1642. by which that Tribunal forbad all books made on either side in the
contests arisen concerning the Bishop of Calcedon, and upon the business of
the books of the English Jesuits which were censured by the Divinity Faculty
of Paris, and by the Clergy of France. I thanked this Gentleman for his favor
in lending me that famous Author, though it was then useless to him, not
daring to read it; but I said nothing to him how that Decree was received and
treated in France, where the Bishops in the year 1643. having renewed their
Censures against the books of England, with the true names of the Jesuits who
were the Authors of them, did also censure a new a book written in its defense
by one of those Fathers. What further concerns this matter, I shall not here
relate, but I shall referr the principal Pieces about it to the choice ones
placed at the end of this Journal.

On the 26th. I went to acquaint a person very illustrious both for dignity and
knowledge, with what haste Cardinal Barb^rin had given me cause to fear this
affair would be terminated. This excellent Personage answered thereunto in
these words; Se fanno una definitione precipit^sa, so quel ch' ho da far: La
Chiesa sara la mia reg^; bis^gnera veder chi havra ragione, o di quest^ ^pa, o
de gli aliri. If they make a precipitated definition, I know what I have to do;
The Church shall be my rule; it will be needful to see, who has reason,
either this Pope, or they that have been before him.

On the 27th I went again to vis t Cardinal Roma, to testify to him the same
fear, by giving him assurance of the coming of the Doctors which were to
follow me, and were preparing to set forth. The Cardinal answered that they
might come with all confidence, that for certain there would be nothing done
touching this affair before their arrival; That the Pope's never hastened to
define any thing, and that the present Pope was more slow and circumspect then
any other. I intimated to him the distrust I had of M. Albizzi. He told me that
M. Albizzi was not the Master, and advised me to treat both with him and others
the most peaceably I could. The next day one of this Cardinal's friends, who
was also mine, told me, that his Eminence professed to him that he admired the
modest and judicious deportment wherewith I had behaved my self to that time;
because he expected nothing less from me, according to the bad characters
given him of me; that he knew not whether I would continue to govern my self in
that manner; but if I did, the reports made of me to him were very false and
calumnious.

During my residence at Rome the foregoing Winter, I fell into some
correspondence of particular friendship with F. le Maire a Jesuit, and
Secretary for France to his General. I conceived my self obliged to visit him
being returned, which I did on the 28th of July, and amongst other things which
we discoursed of, he asked me why we went about to hinder the condemning of the
Propositions in themselves, which we confess already heretical in one of the
senses whereof they are capable; seeing even in that which we account Catholic
they are judged bad by many Catholics, (he meant the Fathers of his Society
and their followers) and for his reason, he told me that Faith was a thing so
tender and precious, and Heresy so hurtful and pernicious, that there ought
to be no scruple of rooting it up from the bottom, or of condemning and
suppressing whatever may give the least umbrage to it. I replied upon his very
foundation, that Faith was a thing so dear, and Heresy so detestable, that
heed ought to be taken of confounding them, or using them both alike: Wherefore
for fear of injuring the Faith, by going about to destroy Heresy, all the
world ought to wish and require that a distinction be made of the different
senses whereof the Propositions are capable, that so in condemning the bad, the
good may be preserved. Nevertheless he persisted in his opinion, and to evince
it equitable, he alleged for instance the Bull of Pius V, against Bavis, in
which it cannot be doubted that amongst those condemned Propositions there are
some in terminis S. Augustin's; which hindered not but that all the world
agreed that they were not thereby condemned in S. Augustin's sense. So when the
five Propositions in question shall be condemned in terminis, it cannot be but
in their bad sense; which will not hinder but that ever afterward it will be
lawful to revindicate the Catholic sense out of them. I maintained very
steadfastly that his Expedient was not very proper for the clearing of the
truth, and procuring peace among the Catholic Divines, but on the contrary
very apt to cover the truth with obscure clouds, and to excite most dismal
divisions amongst Divines.

On the 29th. I went to visit Cardinal Barberin, to accompany him whither he
was to go that day; and in attendance of the time to set forth, he joined me
with the Archbishop of Beneventum, and amongst other things that he said,
showed me as a new thing the last chapter of the Letter of Celestin the first
to the Bishops of France, copyed out in writing upon half a sheet of paper. The
consequence that he meant to draw from it, was, That it was not necessary for
the Pope to incline to the making of the decision of the matters contested
between us and the Jesuits, founded upon these words contained in that chapter,
Profundiores vero difficilioresque parts incurrentium quaestionum quas latius
pertractarunt qui Haereticis restiterunt, sicut non audemus contemnere, ita non
necesse habemus astruere. I told the Cardinal that I was very glad to see in
his Eminences hands the extracts of a great Popes Letter which was so
advantageous to us, and which alone sufficed to decide all the differences
which we had about these matters. He answered, that I ought not to fear that
any thing would be done at Rome, contrary to the Letter of that Pope. I
replied, that it was enough, and that I desired no more. He fell presently to
speak of Sufficient Grace; to which seeing he invited me, I said that I had
already several times intimated to his Eminence, and now repeated the same
again in presence of the Archbishop of Beneventum, that we did not at all
dispute against that of the Thomists; but as for that of the Jesuits, it could
not, according to Celestin's Letter whereof he newly showed me an extract,
consist with the faith of the the Church. The time to go forth being come, the
Cardinal told me as he separated us, that it was requisite to think of obeying
the Bull, and then all would go well.

On the first of August I went to wait upon Cardinal Spada, and to beseech him
to tell me whether I might write with full assurance to the Bishops who caused
me to return, to cause the other Divines to set forth in September. whom they
determined to send in case things were at that time in their integrity; and
whether I were not mistaken in my confidence that nothing would be done till
the arrival of those Deputies. The Cardinal answered that I spoke of things to
him, of which he was not the master, and besides being secrets, he could tell
me nothing of them; but he believed I was not mistaken in my presumption. And
on this occasion, himself put a question to me^, namely, Whether there would
come also Doctors of the contrary party, presupposing that for the discussing
an affair before a Congregation, it is requisite that there be persons
contesting on either side. To this I answered, that there needed not other
Doctors to come beside us, because the Jesuits who are our principal
adversaries, are all prepared, and always present upon the place. In the
second place I told him what passed between M. Albizzi and me; and that for the
future I saw no likelihood of treating any thing with him whilst he presumed
that all our intentions tended only to the disservice and subversion of the H.
See. The Cardinal replied, that he was but a Secretary, who had no deliberative
voice in their Assemblies, and with whom we might have nothing to do or say,
unless we pleased.

On the sixth of August F. le Maire came to repay the visit which I made to
him; and I wonder (at the perusing of this Passage) that he was then so
quicksighted in things that came to pass long after. He told me two of that
kind; One that there would likewise come to Rome Doctors of the contrary
parties; and the other, that the Pope would dispatch this affair after he had
heard either side in one or two Congregations. Which inclines me the more
willingly to believe a third which he told me of a thing then past, though I
could get no more light of it since, viz. that their Letter (so he called that
of the Bishop of Vabres) arrvi'd at Rome the first time subscribed by seventy
two Bishops, and that several others had subscribed it since; so that the
number amounted to fourscore and three.

After F. le Maire had left me, I went again to Cardinal Barberin and
acquainted him with new Letters which I had received for the Pope, whereof one
was from the Archbishop of Toulouse last deceased, and the other from the
Bishop of Grass, who joined their prayers to those of the other Bishops who
desired of the Pope a solemn Congregation for the affair of the five
Propositions before decreeing any thing therein. This motion of a Congregation
seemed to this Cardinal so distant from the inclinations of the Pope and the
Court of Rome, that the very thought of it seemed to his Eminence altogether
uncouth and unseasonable. But to show him that it was not a thing so
unreasonable, I told him that I conceived the order which (as his Eminence
informed me) the Pope gave to some Divines and likewise to some of the
Cardinals to study the Propositions, was the beginning of one. The Cardinal
then advisd me to go to those Cardinals whom he had nominated before to me, and
tell them that they became insensibly engaged in the business. I answered that
there was no need for me to go to them again for that end till the arrival of
the Divines that were to follow me. But, said he, take heed lest they be not
staid for to determine it. I replied thar I had rather leave all to be done as
it was now understood then press it on to no purpose. After this he asked me
whether I had acquainted Cardinal Spada, with what passed between M. Albizzi
and me: I answered that I had, and that that Cardinal bid me not be troubled
about it, for he had no voice in judging. But yet you see, said Cardinal
Barberin, that the Hours are put into the Catalogue of prohibited books. I
replied that that was of a little importance. Here the Cardinal instantly
reflecting upon what he had said added, That he did not mean directly that M.
Albizzi was the cause of it; and though it were so, yet he was obliged to
secrecy. After this discourse he carried me abroad to take the air with him,
where we discoursed of many things; amongst others touching M. Hallier, in
whose praises he was very copious, and of whom he said, (as an excellence) that
it could not be denied that he was very pliant and obedient; when our Promenade
was done, his Eminence did me the honor to bring me back to S. Lewis where I
lodged.

On Sunday morning ( August 6.) I went to see a good French Friar of the order
of the Carmelites, who told me that he learnt the day before how M. Hallier had
written several things against us, and the good Father mentioned them to me.
But I remembered only two, whereof one was, that if the Pope did not hasten to
condemn the Jansenists (so he called us) the face of the Church would soon be
wholly changed; for proof of which falsity he alleged most of the lying rumors
spread abroad on purpose to calumniate us. The second thing was that he was
confident that if the Pope sent any decree against us into France, which
proceeded as from the person of his Holiness, and not from the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, that such decree would be received by the King, by the Bishops and
by the Parliament.

After this I went to wait upon the Ambassador, and gave him notice of the new
Letters which I had received from the Bishops of Toulouse and Grass to deliver
to the Pope, and other particular ones written to me by some other Bishops, by
which they charged me anew to urge the erection of a Congregation as the only
way which they judged convenient for the clearing of Truth and procuring peace
in the Church. The Ambassador very well received what I said to him, and with
great civility offered to get me audience of the Pope, that so I might make my
remonstrances to him as soon as the posture of his affairs permitted. In the
afternoon I visited Cardinal Spada, to whom I told in few words (besides some
other things related above in the last conference which I had with Cardinal
Barberin) that the Bishops who sent me enjoined me by their last Letters not to
fail to send them an account in what condition the affair was wherewith I was
encharg'd; but all things which concerned the same were so obscure and secret,
that all I could signify to them was that a month a go I delivered their
Letters to the Pope, and could discover nothing since of certainty to send
them. That indeed I had some conjectures which made me think that there was a
Congregation ordained, but I knew neither the the Cardinals nor the Consultors
that were appointed to be of it; that I saw nothing at all to write to them,
saving that I conceived they might send the Divines whom they intended. In the
sequel of my discourse I twice insinuated to his Eminence the extreme necessity
of hearing both parties for the clearing of the truth and settling peace among
Divines. But all that I could observe in the Cardinals answer was, that he told
me with a very low voice that he would remember what I had said to him.

On Tuesday the 8. of August I went in the afternoon to visit Cardinal Roma
upon the subject abovementioned, and amongst other things which I said to him,
I acquainted him with the extreme dispatch that a Jesuit who came to see me
(viz. F. le Maire) made account that the Determination would be passed, to wit
after giving us one or two Audiences. The Cardinal answered, that that Jesuit
must needs be a Frenchman; for they did not move so fast at Rome; That I should
not trouble my self; that our affairs should not want for time. That there was
no person but saw how just and necessary it was to hear the Divines of
different opinions as I required, before pronouncing any thing upon these
matters. But should all the world neglect so just a demand, himself would
prosecute it, and make it his own business. This he inculcated to me with so
much care and certainty, that he seemed to be somewhat troubled lest I should
not be perfectly persuaded of the truth of it. So that I was obliged to tell
his Eminence, that after the assurance which he gave me, I should for the
future rely upon his authority and his care. We entered a little into the
matter of the Propositions; and I took occasion to mention that proposition
contained in the Book of Petrus Aurelius printed several times by order of the
Assembly of the Clergy of France, viz. That God wills not the salvation of
those whom he does not save; The Cardinal answered And who can doubt of it? And
extending a little upon the proof of this truth, he cited among others those
two passages of the Gospel, Without me ye can do nothing; and No man can come
to me unless my Father draw him.

CHAP. VII.
Visites in August to the Qualificators of the H. Office. Letters of M. Hallier
full of falsities. Several discoveries of the false Censure sent to Rome in the
name of the Faculty.

CArdinal Barberin did me the favor to send me two manuscript volumes in folio
to look upon, containing what F. Lemos (that renowned Dominican who so well
defended the cause of God's grace against the Jesuits in the Congregations de
Auxiliis held under Clement VIII. and Paul V.) had written upon that subject.
On Wednesday ( August 9th.) I went to thank the obliging Cardinal. And in my
discourse with him having made reflection that in the Congregation which I
hoped his Holiness would establish for discussion of the affair of the five
Propositions, there would be many Consultors and Qualificators of the H.
Office, that such as were chosen to be of it, might not want information of the
nature of the business. I resolved to go visit them all. Which I did the more
willingly, because it was the way to make it known the more, and consequently
to draw the indignation of all good men upon the authors of the Enterprise.

The first that I visited that day was F. Hilarion, with whom I had a
sufficiently ample conference. He presently appeared to me a good man, and I
found that he had very good sentiments concerning Grace; but he conceived that
for the benefit of peace, and in regard of the weakness and extravagance of
many persons skilled in that matter, it was necessary to be silent of many
Truths belonging to it. However, he said, there were two that cannot be too
much inculcated to Christians; First, that they have in themselves a stock of
malignity capable enough to precipitate them into sin, and cause them justly to
merit the punishment due to their offenses. The other was for persons freed by
Grace from the bondage of sin, viz. That all the good which they do comes from
God who gives it to them; and that if the Grace wherewith he favors them
happen to leave them, they return incontinently to sin. I agreed with him, that
these are truths of which the faithful cannot be too much instructed; but I
told him, that all those which concern Grace depending upon the same principle,
and being linked together by an invincible connection, the same consequences may
be drawn from these two as from others: to which he assented.

I visited two more on Friday morning (August 11,) whereof one was F. Fani,
Companion of the Master of the sacred Palace, whom I found sprightly, quick and
clear-sighted in these matters, and full of very sincere and right intentions.
The second was F. Modeste, procurator of the Conventual Cordeliers, whom I
entertained largely enough, but found nothing in him besides Molinist opinions,
and little or no reading of St. Augustine.

Some days before, the Pope was fallen into a disease which most people judged
mortal, and diverse already laid their contrivances for a new Papacy. By
consequence I saw the business stopped till a future Conclave. Nevertheless I
ceased not to continue the course of my Visits, as if he had been in the best
health in the world. The same day in the afternoon I went to see M. Albizzi,
though I looked upon him as a man perfectly gained and prepossessed against us;
but the manner wherewith I purposed to deport my self toward him, made me hope
that this Visit could not be otherwise then advantageous to me, though I got no
more good by it but to see him answer to the things which I said to him.
Accordingly within half an hour that our conference lasted, he corresponded to
my expectation, and exceeded it too by much. I told him the most seriously I
could, that when I had audience of the Pope to present him the Letters which he
knew I delivered to his Holiness, he was very well pleased with the intentions
and providence of the Bishops who writ them; That he promised me he would not
make any determination upon the Propositions in question till the Divines,
which those Bishops intended to send in October following were arrived, and had
declared by word of mouth and by writing all that they had to represent in that
matter; and that he bid me in the mean time repair to M. Albizzi. That it was
in compliance with his Holines's order that I was come to him that day, and to
assure him that those Divines would not fail to be at Rome in the month of
October; and also to know of him in the mean time, whether the Pope had
appointed any particular Congregation for this matter, and whether he had given
Commissions to any of the Cardinals, or of the Consultors and Qualificators or
other Divines to study them. M. Albizzi answered me roughly and half jesting,
that he knew nothing, that he had heard speak of nothing, and had nothing to
tell me. He added that he told me from the beginning, That for the making a
determination of any point of Doctrine or Faith whatsoever, the Pope was not
obliged to hear any person. That it was good to do so in Lawsuits, where there
are parties interessed; but in these matters there were no parties. I told him,
that I did not stand upon desiring to be heard as a party; that I insisted not
upon this formality, which he made so much of; that I disputed it not; that
'twas enough that the Pope had promised me to determine nothing in the business
without hearing us; and that for this purpose till they came who were jointly
with me to represent the things which we had to say, I was come to wait upon
him in obedience to his Holiness, and to beseech him to tell me at the present
whether there were a Congregation established for this Affair. He replied, that
I must not think to draw any thing from his mouth; That I should not have any
word from him; That he had received no order to tell me any thing; That when he
had, he would not fail to let me know it. I answered, that nevertheless it
would be good that I knew the persons designed for that Congregation; because,
though I should not give them the principal arguments in reference to the
Propositions which were not to be produced till my Companions were arrived, and
the Congregation were perfectly open, yet I might inform them of some
accessories and dependances of this Affair, which they would be glad to
understand and which it was profitable for them to know at this time; as for
example, What the design was, for which the Propositions were framed, In what
manner M. Cornet moved in the Faculty to have them debated: How the Faculty
rejected the examination of them, and several other circumstances. M. Albizzi
said that he was well informed of all this; and better then my self. And to
show me as much, he added that, Truly the Faculty was willing to make a
decision of them; but the Jansenists who were in it made a tumult, and by their
combustions hindered the good designs of the Faculty. I answered that for
better information thereof, he must yield to me; since I was present in all the
Assemblies of the Faculty about this matter; That I had a sufficient hand in
all the resistance that was made to M. Cornet's designs; That I was he who
first opposed that dangerous enterprise. That moreover, he was mistaken in
saying that the hinderance was caused by the Jansenists, because there was none
in the Faculty. That that name was the odious name of a sect, with which the
adversaries of those who adhered to St. Augustin's doctrine, projected to decry
it. That indeed there was a sufficiently great number of Doctors of the Faculty
who accounted themselves happy, and gloried in following the doctrine of that
great Saint, who conceived they did service to the Church and the H. See by
opposing M. Cornet, since they thereby kept a doctrine which was hereditary to
the Church and the H. See from being condemned, and a particular Faculty from
deciding it to the prejudice of the H. See, which has reserved the cognizance
thereof to it seif. M. Albizzi told me, that I might possibly deceive my self,
if I conceived I had served the H. See by so doing. I answered that himself
might be deceived, if he conceived that I did not serve it by procuring the
execution of the Prohibitions published against deciding those matters. M.
Albizzi replied that I did not apprehend the thing right: That those
Prohibitions did not extend to this matter; that they were not intended to
hinder the making of Doctrinal Censures, but only the establishing any Tenet by
maintaining one of those two opinions as of faith. I answered, that he put a
difference between things where there was none; for that at the same time that
a Proposition is condemned, its contradictory is of necessity established. M.
Albizzi seeing himself caught, and not knowing what to answer me hereunto,
sought an evasion, and told me, that Faculties have no right to make an Article
of faith; that this pertain'd only to the H. See; that they have indeed a
coercive power to oblige those that depend on them, as the Rector lately used
it unjustly against the poor Irish, whom he declared deprived of their degrees
only for having obeyed the Pope. I let pass this incidental Discourse to
follow him elsewhere; and told him, that though Faculties cannot make Articles
of Faith by their Censures, yet such Censures many times bring great sequels
when the Faculties that make them are in esteem for knowledge and integrity, as
that of Paris is, whose sentiments have always been in singular veneration
through all France. He told me that they have always been much esteemed at Rome
too, and had it been suffered to make the Censure of the Five propositions, it
would have been well; because the same had not anywise thwarted the intentions
of the Bull issued upon occasion of the book of Jansenius. For to tell you the
Truth, added he, that Bull was not passed to determine any thing of Doctrine,
nor to hinder the decisions which they who have authority may make thereof, but
only to remedy the stir which was raised, and the devision which was broken
forth amongst Catholics upon the impression of that posthumous Book, which
perhaps would not have been printed, had not its Author been dead. That also
nothing was decided either on one side or other for Doctrine, but only silence
imposed to keep both parties from writing pro or con, for fear things might
grow to a heat, and the divisions increase more and more. I replied, That they
would grow to a heat much otherwise by a Censure pro or con, (which carries a
great stroke) then by all the Books imaginable of particular persons, who on
whatever side they be, have no considerable authority. He told me that
nevertheless the Jesuits held themselves greatly offended by that of
Jansenius. That if it were true that I had not read it, as I told him, he
counseled me not to read it; but if ever I should read it, to take heed in the
third book, which I should find was nothing but a continued detraction against
Vasquez, Suarez, Gregorius a Valentia, Card. Bellarmin, etc. I told M. Albizzi
that I wondered that Bishop should undertake against Bellarmine, who certainly
deserved respect for his quality and his learning. This conformity of
sentiments into which I entered with M. Albizzi, pleased him in some sort, and
put him into the humor to tell me more. He added, That that Bishop was full of
venom against those Fathers and the whole Society, that he broke out into
unimaginable exorbitances against them; that this greatly provoked and incensed
them against his book, and obliged them to solicit Urban VIII. for the
prohibition which he made of it. That had not he first assaulted them, perhaps
they would not have thought fit of so doing; but after he set upon and outraged
them as he did, it is no wonder that they have endeavored to be revenged on
him. That I knew, Defense is natural to every one, when he is assaulted either
in his own person, or that of his friends; and that it ought to be more so to a
great and renowned society, as that of the Jesuits, which saw it self
reproached and offended unworthily by a single person. He continued to
exaggerate to me the exorbitances of that Author, who not only fell foul upon
that Society, but even broke forth against Popes, as among other places of his
book that shows where he says, Haereo fateor, etc.

After I left M. Albizzi, I visited the Procurator Fiscal of the H. Office;
whom I found very civil; and the Commissary of the H. Office, who told me he
would maintain the truth with the hazard of his life, both as a disciple of S.
Augustine, and as a Dominican. He prayed me also that we might see one another
once a week, to confer together; that for that purpose he would come first to
my lodging, and then I should go to his; which yet could by no means be
performed.

At my coming from the H. Office, I went again to the Carmelites to see F.
Campanella, who told me that he believed that there was made above a year ago a
secret Censure of the Propositions which I mentioned to him. But before he
could assure me of it, he must see them in writing; and therefore prayed me to
bring them to him.

On Sunday the 13th. I met with a person who assured me, that a friend of his
saw and read a Letter of six pages which M. Hallier writ to M. Albizzi, the
whole design and result whereof was, That the Jansenists were people that loved
novelties, and tended only to make a schism in the Church. He added, That the
contents of the Letter were either read or reported to the Pope; and that it
was accompanied with a Letter from the Nuntio, which was nothing but a
Panegyric upon M. Hallier, and spoke of him as the most eminent and zealous
servant that the H. See had. That moreover in this conjuncture a Benefice which
he desired, about which there was some competitor or difficulty, was given him
immediately.

On Thursday (August 17.) I went to Cardinal Barberin, to accompany him to the
Pope. The Cardinal made me a Complement, and congratulated me for the Visit
which the Commissary of the H. Office told his Eminence I made to him. I gave
his Eminence Intelligence of a Latin Explication newly printed in France, and
sent to me touching the sense in which alone we mantain the Propositions. The
writing was entitled, Quinque propositionum de gratia quas Facultati
Theologicae Parisiensi M. Nicolaus Cornet subdole exhibuit prima Julii ann.
1649. vera and Catholica Expositio juxta mentem discipulorum sancti Augustini.
It began with these words, Beati Augustini doctrina adversariorum suorum
calumniis semper appetita est ac sub alienis and fictis ad libitum
assertionibus, etc. It ended with these, Sancti Augustini discipuli suam
sententiam hanc de quinque Propositionibus istis subdole concinnatis ad
fraudem, omnibus Episcopis, Archiepiscopis, Romanae sedi, universae Ecclesiae
palam faciunt, ne quid jam subsit calumniae, triumphatisque malis artibus
discat aliquando silere livor, and victricis Christi gratiae vindicem
Augustinum cum universa Ecclesia colere. It was dated Parisiis Kal. Jul. anno
salutis per gratiam reparatae MDCLI. I shall place a Copy of it at the end of
this work among other pieces, to preserve them to posterity. I showed it at
Rome to several persons, and gave many Copies of it; when I shall have occasion
to mention it hereafter, I shall call it our Latin Manifesto.

When I had summarily told Cardinal Barberin what it was, he ask' me, Why,
seeing we had really no other sentiments then the Thomists, we we became so
alienated from their ancient manner of speaking? I answered, That we do not
gainsay their sentiments of sufficient Grace as to the thing signified, but we
cannot think fit to use that equivocal and captious word which St. Augustine and
St. Thomas never used. But as for that sufficient Grace of the Jesuits subject
to free Will, we are obliged to encounter it, and cannot admit it because it is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church. That indeed we should be glad that
their sentiments were conformable thereto, that we might have nothing to
quarrel with them; but so long as they persist in them, our duty obliges us to
oppose them as much as we can. The Cardinal added that since we were not averse
from the doctrine of the Thomists, we should do well not to separate from those
ancient terms of the School. Here one intervening that diverted us, the
Cardinal told me we should meet again.

When I had accompanied him to the Pope, I staid in his Holinesses
Presence Chamber till the breaking up of the Congregation which lasted not
long; and then I went to see Cardinal Cechini, whom I could not hitherto speak
with, because as often as I went to him, he was either gone abroad or so
surrounded with a multitude which had business with him about the affairs of
the Datary, that I thought not fit to address to him in that encumbrance. At
last I found him this day in some fitness to give me audience, but yet so
taken up too, that he scarce gave me time to lay open to him the business of
my legation. After which he asked me whether the five Propositions I spoke of
were in the Bull of Urban VIII. against Jansenius. I answered that they were
not there at all, and that I was come to tell his Eminence that they were
forged at pleasure by M. Cornet to deceive the Pope, and circumvent the H. See;
and this was it that I came to advertise his Holiness and their Eminences of,
to the end no decision might be made of them before discussing the whole
matter, and hearing the Divines which interess'd themselves on either side. He
told me the Pope needed not hear any person in order to make a determination
when there is no author that advanced a doctrine; that the Pope defines as
seems good to him, and that as soon as the definition is made, it ought to be
obeyed and submitted to. I replied something to him, to let him understand what
necessity and benefit there was in a solemn Congregation before defining any
thing: but perceiving that he did not receive it well, I told him (to make
short) that the Pope promised me to do it, and that I beseecht his Eminence
most humbly, that he would please to contribute on his part to keep the Pope in
that good disposition. He told me that things must be done as his Holiness
should appoint. I answered, that himself would find of what great importance it
is to hear the parties in such a Congregation as I requested of the Pope, if he
pleased but to weigh the reasons which I had to deduce to him; but here hearing
a little noise behind me, I turned my head, and seeing the Tapestry at the door
of his Chamber lifted up by a crowd of people that were in haste to speak with
him, I rise up to take leave of him, and told him that if he pleased I would
come another time to represent the same to him. He asked me whether I was come
in behalf of the Letter which was signed by so many Bishops. I answered No, but
neither was I come against it, because undoubtedly most of the Bishops that
signed it, conceived that the Determination which they desired would not fail
to be preceded by a solemn examination, and so tacitly requested what they who
sent me sued for more expressly.

At my coming from Cardinal Cechini I went to see the Procurator General of the
order of the Servi. Who having heard patiently and attentively what I had to
unfold to him, answered that for his own part he had not yet heard speak of the
affair of the five Propositions; but perhaps it was about that subject that the
Pope had appointed a Congregation which assembled every Thursday in the
afternoon at Cardinal Roma's Palace, and at which were present with himself who
was the Dean of it, the Cardinal Spada, Genetti and Cechini. That really, for
his own part, he judged the demand which I made very equitable, very
consentaneous to the custom of the H. See, and such as could not but be well
received by the Pope and all the Cardinals. That he could not imagine their
Eminences would end any thing without taking Divines into the business; and
that if himself happened to be one of those to whom it were referred, he would do
his duty. That he conceived the Fathers, Hillarion a Bernardin, and Lucas
Vadingo a Cordelier would be interessed in it; and that I ought not to fear
lest the Jesuits with all their strength of credit, which is undoubtedly very
great at Rome, could cause any great haste in this business; hasting in such a
case as this being so perfectly contrary to the mind of the Pope and Cardinals;
but that which I ought to fear, was lest they did not cunningly and underhand
get such Divines named for the said Congregation, as were of the sentiments of
their society. Perceiving this Qualificator so correspond with mine touching
the motion which I made for a Congregation, I thought fit to mention to him the
difficulty which some made of it, alleging that the Pope is not obliged to
hear any person in order to make a Decision, when there appears no Author that
broacht a doctine or made a book, and solicited to have his defense heard and
his reasons considered; and that out of this hypothesis, there is no Party
interessed therein, or who may oblige to enter into the cognizance of the cause
for the discussion and preservation of his interests. He answered me that every
person that would interpose therein, is really and truly a Party. That so the
Jesuits defended as far as seemed good to them; the book of one of their
Fathers named Amicus who was dead, and who taught Homicide to be lawful in
point of Conscience. That they delivered writings in his behalf four fingers
thick, and that particularly four or five days before that Jesuit was
condemned, himself was obliged by a Cardinal to receive a new writing in favor
of that Jesuit, which contained forty six leaves of paper.

The same day I visited il Signor Camillo Piazza Procurator for the accused
persons; Monsignor Paolucci the most ancient of the Prelates of Rome, who had
still fresh in memory what passed under Clement VIII. and Paul V. in the
Congregation de Auxiliis, and since that time had spent a great part of his
time in reading of S. Augustine; as also the Procurator General of the
Capucines; in the visites of whom I remarke nothing worthy particular
observation, no more then in that of Cardinal Ginetti whom I visited on Friday
afternoon, though I entertained him very long and very commodiously, and spoke
about almost all the things which I have above related; excepting certain
particularities which were not proper for the conference which I had with him.

On Saturday morning I visited F. Delbene, who having heard the whole relation
which I made to him of this business, told me that I mentioned only five
Propositions, but he thought there were seven, which he said were delivered to
them to examine almost two years before, though after a new form; for that he
and his Colleagues never spoke together of them saving once, but every one in
particular delivered his sense to the Pope signed and sealed. That for his own
part, he had in his Paper distinguished the senses, and adjoin'd to each of
those senses its suitable qualification. That he never heard word of it since.
His franknesse gave me the boldness to ask him (or rather to tell him as a
certain thing of which I was otherwise informed) whether when the seven
Propositions he mentioned were delivered to them, they received not together
the Censures which the Faculty of Paris had made of them? He was sometime
without answering me, fearing no doubt, to sin against the secrecy which he had
sworn to that Tribunal, if he told me, and against the truth if he denied it.
Seeing him in this perplexity I repeated to him the same discourse so as urged
him more to answer me. At length he answered that it was so; but a color which
arose in his countenance was testimony enough to me that the thing was so, and
I had this new proof, That the first time of the Propositions being presented
to the Pope, besides the bad senses they were made capable of in themselves,
they were rendered odiours by a Censure of an Eminent Faculty, wherewith they
were supposed already blemished. But when I told F. Delbene that that pretended
Censure was never made by the Faculty; and that it was a work of the same men
that contrived the Propositions, he was extraordniarily surprised at it, and
could not forbear telling me, that they always took it for a true Censure, and
advising me to advertise all such of its falsity as I should speak with about
this affair.

I returned after this to the F. Procurator General of the Servi to carry him a
Paper which I promised to show him when I visited him. He spoke this day of the
business, as having had some light since I saw him, and told me, He was
confident no decision would be made without referring it, not only to the most
able Divines of Rome, but also to some of foreign Countries, who should be
sent to for that purpose; That for the present the Cardinals were still
consulting whether it were fit to make a decision or no; That the Assistant of
the Jesuits of France who was well acquainted with what passed in France about
this matter, proclaimed that the decision was marvellously wished for there by
all good men, and almost generally by all the world; That unless it were
speedily made, all would be in a general disorder there; because the
Propositions were maintained there in their bad sense at least by such as being
capable of resting there when they hear the same proposed by others, and
ignorant of distinguishing the senses which they may admit, accounted them true
and maintained them according to the natural senses which they include. I
answered this Qualificator, that he went a little too far, and that if F.
Armat, who was then Assistant for France at Rome, affirmed this for true, the
intelligence which he received from France touching this matter, was not so,
for that in reality there was no Catholic in France of whatever condition so
unhappy as to be of such belief. But those good Fathers and their Associates in
the Cabal about the five Propositions, published this for the more easy
obtaining of their condemnation.

On Sunday the 20th I went abroad with Cardinal Barberin to take the air,
where among other things I told him of a Cardinal one of his creatures (so they
speak at Rome) with whom I conferred about the five Propositions, and who told
me that having examined the doctrine of Jansenius touching them, he found all
his sentiments very Catholic, though in some other particular points, (as,
touching the works of Infidels, he found him differing from his own and
consequently contrary to the true; which suffis'd (said that Cardinal) to give
ground for the Bull of Urban VIII. against him. Cardinal Barberin answered me,
that though Jansenius's sentiments were true not only in these points but also
generally in all the other parts of his book, yet the Bull was well made for
that it was not in any wise for the condemnation or establishment of any
Maxim, but only a bare provisional prohibition of the book till it were
cleared, and men's minds heated by its publication were returned to such calm
as they ought to have. He added that if the Bull were taken thus, and submitted
to without scruple as it ought to be, all things might be composed, and such as
had withstood it hitherto might receive the contentment which they ought not to
hope for without so doing.

On Tuesday morning I visited Monsignor Spada Patriarch of Constantinople, who
having heard my story, asked whether Divines would come to Rome of the Party
contrary to that which I was; I answered him that I knew nothing of that, but
there were always enough upon the place (viz. at Rome) for that the Jesuits
are our true Adversaries.

This did not hinder me from visiting F. le Maire the next day; who being asked
whether he knew really that some of our Doctors would come against us, as I was
told in several places, and himself had not long since testified his belief; He
answered me, that he conceived there ought none to come; That the reasons of
such as were of this opinion, were, that as for themselves they were as in
possession, of the doctrine of the Church (to what a height arises by little
and little the presumption of people after having escaped a condemnation which
they so justly deserved!) and consequently needed not plead any thing to
maintain it; and that they needed not trouble themselves about a thing which
all the world consented to; that for any ones appearing here for defense of his
sentiments, it became only such as had suspected or condemned ones; That the
sole reason of others who were of advise for the coming of Doctors against us,
was, That no Cause is so good, but needs help: But the former said, that if the
Pope thought fit for any of their part to be heard, they might either be sent
for or taken upon the place. Moreover he mentioned a very remarkable
distinction which they made of the five Propositions, viz. that they must be
considered and examined two ways, first with respect to the people, and
secondly with respect to the Learned; and that if taken with respect to the
Learned, they have senses capable of being admitted and maintained amongst
them, and nevertheless taken with respect to the people, they be apt to excite
a stir in the Church, and cast scandal or scruple into simple souls, they
ought not to be spared but to be condemned. Because that indeed in France there
were evidently seen two opposite parties (as 'twere) perfectly framed, and two
different Religions; That there were seen different Hours; that there was made
a new Catechism concerning Grace, that the Ecclesiastical and also the secular
families were divided, etc. That it behooved to remedy these disorders and cut
off the cause; which cause he ascribed to the Propositions. In the third place,
The manner which he imagined was to be observed in the conferences which I was
come to prosecute, was very remarkable. He spoke as if the whole business was
to be reduced to certain Interrogations, which he said would be put to us about
the senses in which we understood the Propositions; and after our answers and
distinctions, if need were, new Interrogations to be put to us, till our sense
were well apprehended; after which (according to his conjecture) we were to be
remitted home, and then Judgment to be pronounced at the convenience of the
Pope, and of such whose ministry his Holiness pleases to use in this affair;
which Judgment according to the Jesuits account ought to be an inviolable rule
of our faith. For in the fourth place he spoke of the infallibility of all that
the Pope does, either in the judgments of the Inquisition, or in any others in
what matter soever, and in his bed too, where his Holiness then was very
indisposed, as of certain and indubitable things, and as if the H. Spirit and
his assistance were not more annexed to General Councils, then to these sorts
of determinations: which he extended likewise for examples sake to all that was
done and should be done in the affair of M. Hersent.

The same day I visited the General of the Dominicans, who told me of the new
order which he sent a little while since to all the Religious of his Order to
preach and teach the doctrine of S. Augustine; and he spoke of it with much
esteem and zeal, telling me that he did so, in conformity to the duty which he
owed to God and the Church in this point. At my coming from this visit I made
one to F. Bordonne, a Friar of the third Order of S Francis, in whom I found a
great sincerity and much esteem and affection for the doctrine of S. Augustine.

I visited likewise the same day the General of another Order, namely of the
Sommaschi, named F. Vbaldino. He told me, that as to the ground of doctrine,
few persons were better informed of the sentiments of the Jesuits then
himself, because he had made two or three courses in Divinity, in which he
taught the same as he had formerly learnt them himself; but at length the mercy
of God, and the reading of St. Augustine showed him his errors. That he
wondered how he came to adhere to them formerly, and how he maintained them
steadfastly for sound truths; that he blessed God for undeceiving him, and begged
the same grace of him for them who were still in love with their own darkness.
As for the Account of things which I told him were passed upon occasion of the
Propositions, he prayed me to make a little History thereof, for that he
conceived there needed no more to dissipate the whole Conspiracy,
notwithstanding the great credit of the Jesuits. And as for the Congregations
of the H. Office, of which he was a Qualificator, that 'twas a good while since
he in a manner wholly withdrew from thence, and repaired not thither since the
intelligences and practices which he found the Jesuits held there, that so he
might avoid quarrelling with them, etc.

On Thursday the 24. I showed F. Campanella the Propositions in writing, and he
acknowledged that they were the same upon which their opinions were required in
writing two years ago; but he told me that then there were two others, and
that they were the last in the false Censure that was presented to the Pope, as
made by the Faculty.

On the day of St. Lewis, the Cardinals were at the Mass which is said in the
Church of that name. When Cardinal Barberin arrived there, the Master of his
Chamber told me, that his Eminence came incognito the foregoing Wednesday to
take me abroad with him. When Mass was ended I testified to his Eminence my
regret for not being at my Lodging when he did me the honor to come thither.
He answered, that he had but one word to say to me, which he would tell me
another time: and when I replied that I would come to wait upon him for that
purpose, he told it me immediately upon the place. It was, that complaints were
made of me that I made Conventicles with the Fathers of the Oratory at Rome,
lodged in the house of S. Lewis, where also I for the present lodged till I
could take a House fit for us. The Cardinal added, that I should do better to
wait till the Doctors designed to follow me were come, and then to solicit
our Affair jointly with such as it was fit to treat with; in the mean time to
remain quiet, and not to incur distaste by my eagerness to tell it to all the
world, and draw people into my sentiments and interests. I answered the
Cardinal Barberin, that since my being at Rome, I usually saw no Father of the
Oratory but F. Petit who was their Superior, and came frequently after repasts
ended to visit me with M. Chibert, who was also the Superior of the Priests of
that House; that in the familiar conferences we had together I mentioned my
Affair the least I could, because being obliged to speak of it so much elsewhere
to the other persons whom I visited for that purpose, the discourse of it was
become tedious and troublesome to me out of those necessary occasions; that I
saw not hitherto how the Fathers of the Oratory at Rome could further the
effect of my business, and that the least thought of drawing them over to me,
never came into my mind. The Cardinal replied, that he knew I acted with
circumspection and prudence, but he gave me this notice, that I might take heed
of giving ground for complaints against me. I thankt the Cardinal for the
affection which he testified to me, and answered, that I acted with as much
clearness and simplicity as prudence, that I was come to manifest to the H.
See and all such as were concerned for its interests, one of the blackest
Enterprises that ever was framed to circumvent it; that I would endeavor to
acquit my self of my Commission, whatever was said of it; and that the
complaints that might be made against me should not much trouble me, while they
are so ill grounded as this which he mentioned touching the Fathers, which was
no better then another which I learnt by my last Letters that the Doctors, M.
Cornet's accomplices spread of me at Paris, namely, that I styled my self at
Rome, The Deputy of the Faculty, for which I appealed to his Eminence, who
presently acknowledged it a ridiculous Calumny, and without reason.

It was not only at coming forth of the Church of S. Lewis, that all these
things were spoken between Cardinal Barberin and me; but we discoursed together
in the afternoon upon the same principles on either side, in a visit which I
thought my self obliged to give him in thankfulness for his care in giving me
that notice which he had done; and after that which we spoke of it, the matter
rested so. But this did not hinder but that the Jesuits who knew the
business, took occasion thence to decry me in several places in Rome, as one
already accused to the Inquisition for infecting with my Doctrine diverse
Priests of S. Lewis, and especially the Fathers of the Oratory which were
there. It was an aspersion so much the more grievous, in that it was made with
some probability of foundation, but it behoov'd me to wear it off as well as
others without being troubled at it, and not to cease carrying on the principal
business which was the subject of my legation.

I forgot, that for rendering the ceremony of the Festival of S. Lewis more
remarkable, and the Excommunication decreed by the H. Office against M.
Hersent, (because of his nonappearance notwithstanding the citations published
against him,) more notorious, Thursday the Eve of that Feast was chosen to
publish and fix it up printed. Which choice was remarkable also, because it was
the end of the Year that he preached his Sermon in that Church, in which
nevertheless (as I said elsewhere) there could not be found any Proposition
condemnable, either absolutely or in relation of Jansenius, whatever exquisite
search was made, and whatever disadvantageous application and interpretation
was striven to be put upon it.

But when I consider that the same M. Hersent being at Rome in the Year 1645.
there distributed himself a Memorial signed with his own hand in justification
of Jansenius, whom he maintained to have taught nothing but the doctrine of S.
Augustine and S. Paul, and wherein he speaks with strange vehemence against the
Bull of Urban VIII. without any trouble then raised against him, I cannot
sufficiently wonder at the inequality of this proceeding. However, I have that
Memorial in my hands, which has this title; Super Bulla Urbani VIII. adversus
Jansenium, and libro Antonii Arnaldi, admonitiones quaedam SS. D. Pontifici
Innocentio X. pro Memoriali offerenda: It begins with these words; Magnum and
perniciosum in doctrina Theologica incendium. And ends with these; Hoc
Memoriale summo Pontifici offerendum curavit Carolus Hersent Doctor Theologus,
and Regis Christianissimi Concionator ordinarius, pro suo summo in sedem
Apostolicam and SS. Patrem Innocentium studio and amore, salva in omnibus
Apostolicae sedis and summi Pontificis reverentia. Signed, Carolus Hersent.

On Tuesday morning the 29th. I went to visit the Church of St. John beheaded,
and after I had ended my prayers there, I found under the Cloister M. Fernier
Doctor of our Faculty, who came to me. He fell to speak of the great credit of
M. Albizzi in the affairs about which I came; and of his intimate league with
the Jesuits, and of the esteem wherein he was with the Pope and Cardinals for
a knowing and intelligent personage. He was so prolixe in this kind
intelligence, that I was fain to answer him, That I dreaded neither M.
Albizzi's person nor his power when he went about to employ it to the
disadvantage of truth; because God its protector would not suffer M. Albizzi,
nor others to do mischief against it further then it pleased his unsearchable
and invincible Providence.

CHAP. VIII.
Visits in September. A writing full of falsities by an Augustine Doctor of the
Faculty which was secretly-dispers'd in Rome. Of the Bull of Urban. Of F.
Lemos, and of the zeal of Clement VIII. for the doctrine of Grace. Advice
several times not to speak of Jansenius.

ON the third of September, an Ecclesiastic of the society of the Priests of
S. Hierom de la Charity, a man pious, learned, and full of zeal, whom I visited
that day for the second or third time, having heard the Account which I gave
him of this Affair, he told me freely, That he had been hitherto informed of
those matters after another manner, and showed me a writing which he had
formerly mentioned to me, and was entitled De Controversia inter Jansenistas,
and Anti-Jansenistas, which he told me (as since too I have had certain proofs)
was made by F. Morel an Augustine Doctor of our Faculty at the request of M.
Albizzi, who desired him to draw up a Memoire for him of the state of the
Controversies.

In that writing he represents us under the name of Jansenists, as people
spirited with nothing but passion and hatred against the H. See, and who have
no other aim but to overthrow and ruin its Authority. That this Aversion is
the original of all the Disputes arisen about all the contested points of
Doctrine. That they have not ventured to write concerning Grace, frequent
Communion, and the like, but to have occasion thereby to discredit the must
zealous Defenders of the H. See, by causing them to pass with the people for
Ignorants, who have corrupted the Sentiments of the H. Fathers, and are tainted
only with Semipelagian and Pelagian errors; that so they may afterward
securely say what they please of that sacred Authority, to destroy it when its
Defenders are become without credit and esteem: That for this it was, that
there was such endeavors used to exclude them (the Religious or Friars
Mendicants) from the Assembly of the Faculty, by restraining them to the number
of two of each Order. That for the same end there were purchased with ready
money Doctors, Preachers, Batchelors, Students in all the Universities and
Cities of France; that so, not only in public occasions, but also in familiar
Conferences they might gain the multitude, and inspire into them, not only
their sentiments touching Grace and Predestination, but also the hideous
Maxims which they maintain against the Sacraments of the Altar and Penance,
and against the Authority of the Council of Trent. That we were possessed of
the hearts of severaol persons of quality, rich and potent, who liberally
furnished vast sums of money to supply the expenses necessary to be made for the
carrying on of such pernicious designs. That we have in sundry places
Seminaries and Assemblies of Sectators, who wholly apply themselves to contrive
means to bring the same to pass. That 'twas for this end that we complotted
right or wrong to maintain the Tenets of Jansenius, because they are very
proper thereto. That nevertheless, finding we did not advance so much as we
wished in this affair by the works composed touching Grace, we could no longer
retain the venom which we had concealed a great while against the H. See and
the Church, but at length vomited it forth by publishing the books of frequent
Communion and of Tradition concerning Penance, in which we accused the Church
of being corrupted, and pretended our selves to be its Physicians and
Reformers. That we always hindered by all sort of ways the Bulls of Popes from
being received into the Diocesses, or by the Faculties; and that when the
sleights used for that end succeeded not, we had recourse to other ways, so
far as to stir up seditions, when we were able to do it, and judged the same
necessary. That in fine all this being unprofitable, Rage and Fury led us to
revive and maintain by all ways all the ancient Errors and scandalous
Principles concerning Grace and the Sacraments which the Popes have heretofore
condemned. That 'twas for this reason that those of the Faculty whose hearts
were firm to maintain the authority of the H. See, and to stop the Current of
calamities and disorders, (these beginnings of which threatened the whole
Church) seeing themselves without comparison the greater number, in respect of
those who were enemies of the said Authority, chose out as the most scandalous
amongst many others Propositions which we dispersed among the people, those
which M. Cornet produced in the Faculty to get them censured in the general,
and without having regard whether they were advanced by Jansenius, by M.
Arnauld, by the Jesuits, or by any other whatsoever. That moreover, the H. See
ought extremely to take heed of giving ear to those Jansenists, because they
are mingled and united with the Richerists (that is, with the sectators of the
Doctor named Richer, who writ so much against the Ecclesiastical Monarchy) and
because their whole faction strives after, and endeavors nothing with more
ardor then to debase the Authority of the H. See. Wherefore this zealous
Intelligencer and faithful Counselor having in the same Paper, noted in
particular the names of some of those whom he supposed culpable of these
factions and designs, and the names also of some others of the principal
servants of the H. See, who withstood the same, concludes at length with his
advice which he proposes with some seeming moderation, saying, that the
readiest Expedient in this affair would be to impose silence to every one; Yet
really persisting in the good characters which he gave of us, and persuading
the Pope to treat us with all the distrust and caution that can be used with an
open enemy, and to overwhelm us every day with new Bulls and Decrees to reduce
us to obedience; but to deal with the others as with his well-beloved Children
and most faithful servants, and to provide as much as possible for their
interest and satisfaction.

But though this be extracted out of the said writing word for word, yet it is
hard to apprehend it for such as it is without reading it. And therefore though
it be something long, I have thought good to place it among the Pieces which I
shall add to this Journal, therein to show a Model of the disadvantageous
Characters of us and our intentions inculcated to the Pope and his principal
Officers, thereby to render us suspected and odious, and to incense them
against us: And by this example it may be seen. how the Popes are sometimes
very ill-inform'd of the truth of the things which are related to them. 'Twas a
good Religious Friar, Doctor of Paris, of the order of St. Augustine, of whom a
sincere account of those Disputes in France was desired. This Writing thus
penned by him was imparted about as coming from him, and as a work rare,
faithful and secret; and this raised a curiosity in every body to see it.

All that read it gave perfect belief to it; there was no body at Rome to
contradict it; and when I was arrived there, though I was named particularly in
the said Writing, yet they for whom he drew it were obliged to such secrecy as
would have kept them from telling me any thing of it, though they had otherwise
desired it. So that it had its course freely through Rome, as no doubt many
others had, of which I could never discover any thing; and this had remained
unknown to me as well as the rest of like nature, had it not been for the
cordial kindness of this good Priest who gave it to me, having by chance got
it himself.

It was confirmed to me that it came from F. Morel, by M. the
Archbishop............the Pope's Sacristan, who was chosen out of the Order of
St. Augustine, according to the custom, to be raised to that dignity and
Office. But I must render this testimony to F. Morel, that being blamed by the
said Signor Sacrista for the sharpness wherewith he spoke in that Writing
against people who not without reason made profession of inviolably adhering to
the doctrine of S. Augustine, whereof they style themselves Defenders, and being
advised by him to correct it, F. Morel thinking he did enough for satisfaction
of the said Signor Sacrista if he added something to sweeten it, therefore
added the two last Sections which are after these words, [quod omen avertat
Deus] with which he concluded at first: and besides those two Paragraphs, he
added also to what is there said of M. Loysel Cure of S. John's, and Chancellor
of the University, at the end of the Paragraph, Debet sancta seeds sum
cavere. The whole Writing is to be found at the Journal, both as it was at
first, and with the alterations.

The Prayers of Forty Hours, which are always at Rome in several Churches in
different quarters, were begun at S. Lewis, as usually on the day of the Feast,
and they retained me there till they were ended, namely till the 28th. of
August, the Feast of S. Augustine, when I left my residence at S. Lewis to go
take possession of the lodging which I had procured for my self and the other
Divines who were to come to me, it being ready some days before.

As Soon as I was settled there, the King's birth day being come which is
September 5. I took occasion that day (which ought to be dear and in veneration
to all Frenchmen) to invite to Dinner some Priests of S. Lewis, whom I had seen
most familiarly during my stay there, and F. Guerin Canon Regular of S.
Augustine, and Procurator of the Order at Rome, whose neighborhood I got by
this new lodging, which was also near to that of the Priests of the Mission in
the Gregorian street.

We had scarce done Dinner but I received a new visit from F. le Maire the
Jesuit who entertained me very copiously with the sentiments of his Society
touching Grace, which he said, never fails the Will when it is obliged to do
well, but the Will rejects or accepts it according as it likes or likes not
to make use of it. He spoke also of the Censure which was made at Vallidolid of
22 Propositions contrary to the doctrine of S. Augustine, as of a Chimera or
Romance made at pleasure; although it was very certain, and printed authentical
Copies of it were brought from Vallidolid to Rome. In fine, he spoke of the
manner how he was confident the Pope would judge this whole Controversy,
telling me as he had done formerly, that we must deliver our memoires,
withdraw, and leave the Church to do the rest.

The death of Cardinal Panzirolo happened the day aforegoing, and he was interred
this day with the ceremonies accustomed at the Funerals of their Eminences.

Cardinal Barberin carried me again to his Library on Wednesday afternoon being
the 6th. I restored to him that day some manuscript Quires of an Author named
Paludanus, which he obliged me to read. I told him, that I found therein an
Expedient sufficiently favorable to remove all scruples of receiving the Bull
of Urban VIII. namely in the place where he examines the greatest reason
brought against it, which is, because it says that there are in Jansenius's
Book Propositions condemned by the Bull of Pius V. But, says this Author,
speaking to those that make this difficulty, You are agreed, and Jansenius too;
for he and you trouble your selves to explicate the diversity of senses of your
Propositions and of those of Bavis; which needed not to be done, unless the
words were alike. Now says he, the Bull of Urban VIII. does not say that those
Propositions which are in Jansenius, contain the same sense with those of
Bavis, it is enough therefore for the validity and reception of it, that they
are correspondent in words, though the senses of them be different; and this
sufficed for a just ground to Urban VIII. to make his Bull as soon as that Book
appeared out of the apprehension he might have that they agreed also in sense,
with a Salvo to discharge it from this condemnation when upon exact examination
the truth and sincerity of his sense and the difference between the same and
those condemned in the person of Bavis, were made evident. Cardinal Barberin
was so well-pleased with this discourse that he answered pleasantly, Quando
riceverela la Bolla, laglierete le gambe alli Giesuiti, That the way to
ham-string the Jesuits was to receive the Bull. I told him that this was the
principal thing that I had read in the Papers which he gave me of that book;
and he returned me an answer which denotes his nimblenesse and great diligence
in reading books, viz. That he read it almost throughout in his Coach as he
went to the seven Churches.

During this interval of time which passed between my settlement in my new
lodging and Sunday the 10th of September, besides those two visites of which I
have now given account, I made sundry others, wherein there occurred nothing
remarkable. I visited the Bishop of Cavaillon, a Gentleman of Avignon of good
quality and parts; the Marquis Del Buffalo General of the Pope's Artillery,
with whom I had contracted in my first voyages a particular acquaintance and
friendship; M. Michel Angelo Rici, and F. Mariana his intimate friend; M. Paolo
di Rossi a great Civilian, and who heretofore knew M. Pegna Dean of the Rota;
Monsignor Sacrista; M. Ricciardo de Alcoltis Cure of S. Saviors at Rome, a
Florentine Gentleman by birth; Qualificator of the Congregation of the Index a
great Divine, well seen in the Hierarchy and Ecclesiastical Discipline, which
he learnt, (he said) in S. Cyprian and not in our flattering Doctors, who have
wholly disfigured it in their writings; but eminent above all things for his
knowledge and hatred of the whole politic menagery of the Jesuits, and of
their pernicious maxims in Morality and Religion; M. Dorigny superior of the
Priests of the Mission at Rome; F. Barelier French Assistant to the General of
the Dominicans; the F. Commissary of the H. Office: such of these Personages as
I had not before saluted, I acquainted with the ground of my Return and
Negotiation at Rome; and as for such as knew it before, to them I lent or gave
of our Latin Manifestoes, and the Antitheses or Differences between the
Doctrines of Calvin and St. Augustine, which is ours, they being newly sent me
from France. This I did after long debating in my self, but always with
reluctance, because the name of Jansenius was inserted in the first of those
Writings, which name alone was enough to make them suspected or despised. But I
considered the necessity there was to make known our sentiments at Rome the
soonest, and to the greatest number of persons, that I could; as also that if
any one blamed me for this fault, I might render it in some measure excusable
by pleading that what concerned the above mentioned Author, is but very lightly
touched therein, and promising to do my utmost, that there be no more meddling
therewith.

Moreover I aimed by giving them about to prevent that blame, according as I
saw fit, having regard to such as I presented them to; and if perchance there
was any one whom I feared, lest receiving them from my hand, he should take
them as an information which I had to deliver touching the Propositions, I
roundly explained my self before giving them, by saying expressly that I did not
give them for that cause; and that which I gave, was not that which we had to
say before the Congregation which I desired, when it should be established, but
only a slight draught of our sentiments published in France to disabuse the
world of the Calumnies spread abroad against us; and I desired precisly that it
might not be received from me, but upon this condition. The F. Commissary of
the H. Office receiving from me the Latin Manifesto, and having heard what I
proposed, to signify to me in two words that he understood my meaning, told
me, that I gave it him, and he received it amice, non juridice.

I had already contracted so much friendship and good correspondence with the
whole order, of which this Father was, and they accounted all that I propounded
to them touching this affair so judicious and just, that upon a naked overture
which I made to them of what importance it was for the preservation of the
Doctrine of St. Augustine and St. Thomas in our Faculty to choose in October
following a Syndic well affected to this Doctrine, the General writ expressly
thereupon to the Religious of his order who were Doctors of our Faculty. He
sent the Letter to me as soon as it was written on the ninth of September, for
me to dispose of, and cause to be delivered to the hands of such of his Friars
as I should think fit when the time of the Election came.

I went to thank him for it the same day, and by the same means I saw one of
his most eminent and commendable Friars; in whose Conference I learned, that a
Gentleman (who came heretofore frequently to visit F. Lemos, and one day
brought him a Breviary which Clement VIII. presented to him as a small pledge
of his good Will, and the value he had of his Ability and Vigor to defend
against the Jesuits the sentiments of S. Augustine, S. Thomas and the Church
touching Grace) testified after the death of that Pope, which happened in March,
that his design and resolution was to publish on the Eve of Pentecost following
at the end of Vespers his Bull against Molina, and then to create F. Lemos
Cardinal in presence of the Jesuits and the Dominicans. That the Cardinal
Monopoli to whom Clement VIII. opened his mind also about this particular, in
like manner declared the same after the Popes death. That during the time that
he labored and caused others to labor in the examination of these matters,
besides the care he took to be informed thereof by solid study and the reading
of St. Augustins works as well the Writings presented to him both in behalf of
the Jesuits, and of the Dominicans, which he weighed with singular diligence;
he was sometimes found early in the morning goeing a foot without followers
clothed in Penitents saccloth from Monte Cavallo to S. Maria Maggiore; and that
many times too he spent two or three hours in the night at Prayers upon his
knees ad limina Apostolorum. These particularities this learned and zealous
Dominican had told Cardinal Roma before he told them to me; and the Cardinal
was much affected and edifi'd therewith, and presently out of the satisfaction
which he had with the same, cried out with his ordinary plainness in these
words, O Santi sensi and digni d' un Papa! sarebbe stato questo un Santo, se
non havesse lasciato tanti bien^ a' sui parenti; O holy thoughts worthy of a
Pope! this man might have been a Saint, if he had not left so much wealth to
his kindred.

On Sunday morning (Sept. 10.) I went to Cardinal Barberin to show him a Letter
written to me from Paris August 25. and brought to Rome by an extraordinary
Courier who came thither upon a vacancy. This Letter was written to me from the
Prelates, by whose order I was returned, and contained amongst others a thing
which I conceived would be well pleasing to this Cardinal. It was, that those
Prelates were resolved to admit the Bull of Urban VIII. but never to consider
it as other then provisional, and as an act of policy by which the Pope upon
the first complaints made to him of that Book, without having examined or
judged of it, but having regard to those complaints, and to prevent the ill
Consequences which they caused to be feared from that book, stopped the course of
it, and forbad the reading of it till after mature examination of it, it were
otherwise ordained, which is in effect the same thing that Cardinal Barberin
had said to me twenty times. And indeed he was very glad of this good News; and
as I added, that it was requisite also if it were possible, to oblige the
Jesuits to keep themselves within these bounds, and to cease from pretending
(as they had done hitherto) that that Bull prohibited the said Book, not only
upon a political account, but condemned the Doctrine of it as evil and
pernicious; the Cardinal answered, that we ought not to trouble our selves
about what the Jesuits say, but rest upon and hold to what the Bull says,
Lasciateli dire, voi stiate a quello che dice la Bolla. Let them talk, etc.
That we ought to be satisfied, since we knew that it was made only of that
extent and for such effect, that no person knew better then himself what
intentions his Uncle had in making, and his Eminence likewise in procuring it:
that indeed it might be a little more clear then it is; but all things are not
always done with so great circumspection, and in the perfection that they ought
to be. Cardinal Barberin's Library Keeper, to whom his Eminence gave order to
send me the Books which he desired I should see, occasionally confirmed to me
what the Cardinal had told me so often, and so many others besides him, That
the Bull of Urban VIII. in the bottom of it and really does not prejudice the
Doctrine of any Author in particular, but that it was alike decreed against all
those as well on one side as the other, who had written of the matter de
Auxiliis, without permission of the H. See. For this Library Keeper named
Signor Carlo Moroni, a man of parts, and very civil, sending me by his Masters
order the Book of Ripalda, he did it with the same precaution, as if he had
sent me Jansenius's works, advising me not to read it, unless I had permission
to do it, because it was comprised in the general prohibitions made at Rome
touching that subject: it is probable he did not give me this advertisement
without receiving some little order for it from Cardinal Barberin, as well as
for sending me the Book. I know not precisely at what time it was, for there is
no date to the Letter which he writ to me when he sent it; but I am sure that
it was much about this time that I am now upon: See the tenor of it;

Molto illustre e reverendissimo Signore mio osservandissimo,
L'Eminentissimo Signor Cardinale Barberino in ha commendato che io mandi a V.
S. questo tomo del Ripalda. Ma perch l' Eminentissimo si ritrova impegnato di
doverlo prestare fra tree o quattro giorni ad un personaggio, la supplico a
volerlo rimandare in tempo. Quando questo libro s' intend compreso nella
prohibitione, credo che V. S, ne havera la licenza. Ne altro in occorre se non
di rassegnarmi a V. S. molto illustre e reverendissima,

Humillimo Servitore, Carlo Moroni.

Right Worshipful and Reverend,
THe most Eminent Lord Cardinal Barberino has commanded me to send you this
volume of Ripalda: Which, for that his Eminence is engaged to lend it elsewhere
within three or four days, I desire you to return in time. Whereas the book
is comprised within a Decree of Prohibition, I presume you have leave to peruse
it. I have nothing else but to subscribe my self, etc.

In the afternoon I went to see the General of the Augustins, but I could do
nothing with him by reason of the distrust he had of F. Morel, whom he looked
upon as M. Albizzi's spy about him; from whom he knew the said Father had
received some good offices and particular favors in recompense for the Writing
which he made, and of which I have above given account.

On Tuesday ( September 12.) in the morning I went to see M. the Abbot de la
Paix, who in regard to his profession of being a disciple and Monastic of S.
Augustine, told me he would willingly employ himself to help me in the cause
wherein by the Account by me given him, he saw the Doctrine of that great
Doctor of the Church was so unworthily and maliciously impeached.

In the afternoon I went to see Cardinal Vrsin, who as concerned for the
satisfaction of the Kingdom and Church of France could have wished with me that
these contests were composed and terminated as I came to request; but he
intimated several Political and Theological reasons which in his judgment
rendered the discussion and decision of them in a manner impossible. And as he
was Protector of Poland, he told me, that he understood that these Disputes
were ready to arise into heat there too; and he mentioned also (though with
some obscurity) a certain Letter from the King of Poland to the Pope touching
the Queen's Confessor, who was said to be an Arnaudiste, and engaged in the
opinions which divide the Church at this day. I told this Cardinal that I knew
him to be a very able and honest man, Doctor of our society of Sorbon, and who
would always defend himself very well from the vain accusations that may be
made against him. This Cardinal Vrsin received with his accustomed civility,
and told me, I should do him a pleasure in showing him some Writings which
might inform him more particularly of the state of our Controversies.

At my coming from him I went again to F. Campanella, to whom I lent our Latin
Manifesto till Sunday following; he held himself obliged, and received it with
contentment, but on condition that when he restored it I should dispense with
him for telling me his sentiments of it.

On Wednesday ( September. 13.) in the afternoon I met M. Fernier, who was with
another Canon of Auxerre. I went with them to Cardinal Barberin's Library, and
from thence to walk abroad. M. Fernier informed me, that a certain Cordelier
named F. Mulard (of whom I shall give account hereafter) was arrived at Rome
the day aforegoing, and that himself was much scandalized at the unworthy
speeches which he heard that Cordelier utter since his arrival, in contempt of
the Bishops whose Letters I brought to the Pope; for example of M. d' Amiens,
that he was a good Beer-drinker; and of the rest the like vile and shameful
injuries.

On Thursday (September. 14.) I went to give notice of this Cordelier's arrival
to that good Friar who informed me of M. Hallier's long Letter, of which I have
spoken above; and also that others were coming, of which this Cordelier was the
bearer. This Friar confirmed to me, that what he had told me of M. Hallier's
Letter was true; that he had since been better informed of it; that it was
written to M. Albizzi, but was also showed to the Pope: that it consisted of
six Pages, in which he had put many petty trifles, all which tended but to
represent to his Holiness that Jansenism was embraced in a manner by all the
Preachers, that it was also followed by the Confessors, that all the world was
engaging in it, that the whole Church of France was endeavored to be drawn to
it, and that if the Pope took not heed, ere ten years hence the mischief would
be past remedy.

I understood that the four Cardinals whom Cardinal Barberin named and enjoined
me to visit, Roma, Spada, Ginetti and Cechini continued to assemble together
every Thursday afternoon with some Divines at Cardinal Roma's Palace; but being
uncertain whether or no they had begun to take the Propositions in hand, I
wished to be resolved; and that they also knew that the Assemblies which they
made would be accounted in France as Beginnings of the Congregation which I
came to desire, that so on one side they might think themselves more engaged to
establish it, and withal conceive themselves less free to regulate any thing
in this matter, before hearing the parties on either side by word of mouth and
writing, as I solicited openly and publicly. For this reason I determined
that afternoon to go see the Cardinal Roma, to take him at the breaking up of
that Congregation, and to be in his Palace at the time that they who composed
it went away. I did so, and after they were gone, and I was introduced all
alone to Cardinal Roma (as it is the custom) I told him, That I came to
congratulate with him for those first dispositions toward the erection of the
Congregation which I came to request of the Pope; that I conceived my self
obliged to send word to the Bishops of France in whose name I was at Rome, what
I knew thereof, and the hope I conceived from thence for the perfect
accomplishment of their desires; and the request which they made to the Pope by
their Letters; which certainly they would rejoice very much to understand, by
reason of the grand importance of which they knew the Affair to be in reference
to the whole Church. The Cardinal answered me as one a little wearied with the
Congregation from which he came, yet still full of affection and zeal for the
perfect clearing up of these Disputes. He told me, that he would never spare
any thing that lay in his power for the service of the Church, that it was
requisite to endeavor to bring this business to an end, but it would be
long-winded and of difficult discussion. I replied, that indeed some study and
pains would be necessary in it, but it might be so managed as to save very
much, if the right course were taken. That it was not necessary to begin this
Judgment with examining the Propositions; because, that besides their not
relating to us at all, and having no Author that taught them, but being framed
at pleasure and out of malice by those who designed to get them condemned,
should it be resolved to pronounce before searching into the bottom of things,
a thousand difficulties and perplexities would arise of great intricacy, and
not possible to be removed: whereas if the chief and essential matter were
first discussed and regulated, it would be afterward very easy to decide
these Propositions, and that in a clear and indubitable way, by reducing them
to the Chief Matter, which was already settled. Wherefore our design would no
doubt be to enter strait into that matter, as soon as the Congregation were
erected, and the Jesuits, who corrupted the faith of the grace of Jesus Christ
in the Church (as we hoped to accuse and convict them) appeared there before
us. Cardinal Roma answered that I had reason; and moreover he told me, that no
doubt it behoov'd to condemn the sufficient Grace held by those Fathers, if the
Effectual which we maintained was declared and acknowledged for the Catholic
and Orthodox faith; because indeed one doctrine cannot be true, but its
contradictory must be false. I took the confidence to tell him too, that
certainly the opinion of those Fathers ought not to be spared, as it had been
formerly, in case it were found wholly opposite to the Christian faith, as we
pretended, because their boldness was at present raised to such a point, that
they presumed to make it pass for the faith of the Church, having so long
escaped condemnation since it was accused; whereas all that they pretended in
the beginning was but to render it tolerable. Which seeing they could not
obtain from the Inquisition of Spain, where Molina's Book was first accused,
as soon as published, they had the cunning to evade the condemnation which was
ready to be pronounced upon it there, by getting the business removed to the
Inquisition of Rome, where also the very same condemnation was decreed, but
restrained in darkness by reason of the death of Clement VIII. which happened
when he was fully prepared and resolved to publish it. Cardinal Roma replied,
that this and every thing else should be taken notice of in the progress of
the business, and so I gave him the Goodnight.

The same day also I had time to visit Cardinal Ginetti, to whom I spoke very
near to the same purpose that I did to Cardinal Roma. Cardinal Ginetti answered
me by asking me who were those Deputies? I told him, that in the first place
his Eminence was one. But the others, (said he;) I named them to him, he
assented; and perceiving that I was informed thereof, he opened himself with
freedom, and by his words gave me as many testimonies as he could of the
particular care and extraordinary diligence, that for his own part he would
contribute to the full and perfect discussion of this Affair.

I was willing also to try that evening to meet with the Procurator General of
the Augustines, to which purpose coming back from my lodging I went to their
Covent. As I arrived there, F. Delbene was coming forth. I had been twice that
day to find him, to understand something from him which Cardinal Barberin told
me this Father had to say to me. He would have put it off to another day
because it was late; but my desire to leave it without delay, caused me to
desire him to come into the Coach where I was, in which I offered to carry him
home, and by the way he might tell me what he had to acquaint me with. He
accepted my offer, and told me, Cardinal Barberin charged him to recommend two
things to me. First, that I should not stir so much, to avoid giving occasion
of hold against me; And secondly, that when I spoke of this Affair to such as
were to be advertised of it, I should speak of nothing but of the Propositions,
without troubling my self at all about Jansenius. I answered F. Delbene, that
he knew whether in any of the Conferences which I had with him, I spoke so much
as one word of that Bishop's Book, far or near. He replied; that he had given
this testimony of me to Cardinal Barberin when his Eminence spoke to him of it.
As for the first point of his Advertisement, I replied, that in my judgment
that Counsel was given me by the Artifice of the Jesuits, who sought occasion
to procure me some mischief, or at least to give out, that my person and
sentiments were suspected at Rome; but all this should not hinder me from
performing of my duty to the utmost of my power. That I was come to Rome to
advertise the Pope, and with him all such as ought to take care of the
interests of the H. See, of the most pernicious enterprise that ever was made
to circumvent it, and that tended to cause it to do an Act which would impair
its esteem in the eyes of all judicious persons living at this day, and be
shamful to it in all Ages to come. Wherefore instead of abating the ardour
wherewith I had hitherto spoken of the evil designs which the Authors of the
five Propositions have, I thought my self on the contrary obliged to make them
the more notorious, that they might be more heedfully taken notice of, and more
narrowly observed. That I knew no person to whom I might in reason address my
self to discover them, but I should forthwith visit him. That if heretofore
there was a Son, who wanting the use of speech from his birth, acquired it when
he saw his Father going to be killed; I conceived my self obliged to lift up
mine more and more, while I see the Head of the Church and prime Father of all
the faithful so unworthily invaded; and to practice toward our Adversaries
(who under the false appearance of zeal for the H. See, assault it in that
place where it is quickest of sense) that precept of Scripture, Quod in aure
auditis, praedicate super lecta. That I hoped God would give me the grace to
take no other course, and that he (Father Delbene) would do me a pleasure to
assure Cardinal Barberin of this. I entertained the Father in this manner till
we came to his lodging, where I left him, and returned to my own in that
resolution.

On Friday ( September. 15.) I accompanied the Ambassador to his usual audience
at the Pope's Palace; and afterward I went to a Chapel which was held by the
Cardinals, where they caused Te Deum to be sung for a signal Victory won by the
Poles. I returned thence to the Ambassador's lodging, where I was retained to
dine. The Discourse of the Table fell immediately upon the business which
brought me back to Rome; and I took occasion to tell the Ambassador, that the
Doctors who were to come after me to join with me in my solicitations, set
forth from Paris the next day after the Nativity of the Virgin. The Ambassador
answered, that he imagined the Pope would not give us audience, nor erect the
Congregation which I had requested of him. That he discoursed with him that
very day half an hour about our affairs; and that he spoke of imposing silence
to both sides. I replied, that my Condeputies were set forth upon the hope they
had of such a Congregation, and in order to pursue the perfect erection of it
jointly with me; but they knew that there was a little beginning of it at Rome
already; the Pope having given order to four Cardinals, viz. Roma, Spada,
Ginetti; and Cechini, to apply themselves particularly to these matters; who
assemble together every Thursday afternoon with some Divines at Cardinal Roma's
Palace; and that I saw them the last night coming away from their Assembly. The
Ambassador told me, that were it the King's business, his Majesty would end
these differences without standing upon such a Congregation. That he would
roundly declare, that he would have but two Religions in his Kingdom, the
Roman and the Calvinists; and that he would employ his Authority and the means
which God has put into his hands to reduce all his subjects to one or the
other of those two Religions. I replied that it was very fit to be so; but we
conceived that we maintained the faith of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman
Church touching the grace of Jesus Christ; that we have no other designs but
to reduce thereunto all such as are separated from it; that in the pursuit we
used, we sought means to find who defended the same really; Our selves, or
They whom we accused of corrupting it. The Ambassador told me, that he did not
speak what he had spoken as meaning to reproach me for any thing, but only out
of the sentiments which the King might have, and had indeed, namely to restore
peace in his Kingdom, and to oblige the Pope to restore it in the Spiritual,
whilst his Majesty labored to restore it in the Temporal state: That he spoke
to me in one manner, and to others in another. But yet that which really caused
some fear that the divisions which were at present amongst the Ecclesiastics
of the Realm might produce worse effects, not easily to be remedied, at length,
was, that in former times Calvin begun just as we did, and talked of reforming,
public penance, and so of the rest. That all the Curates of Paris since these
Disputes were become very nice and scrupulous, when they are about giving
absolution. That Calvin made not so great progress in so short a time, as the
new doctrine which is attributed to (...) that nevertheless, because the
innovations of that Heresiarch were not at first opposed, so great a multitude
became suddenly infected with his poison, that it was not possible to find any
Antidote or Remedy thereunto* What necessity was there of our adhering so
vehemently to those innovations? and wherefore do we not give heed to what was
approved by our good old Doctors, those white-beards, such as M. Hallier (I
believe the Ambassador did not yet know him) who writ a little while since an
excellent Letter touching the present Occurrences to Cardinal Panzirolo,
whereof he (the Ambassador) had had a sight? I answered that if he had it
still, he would do me a very great pleasure in letting me see it; but as for
answering and satisfying all that he had spoken, this would be very difficult
for me to do, unless he would take the pains to examine the bottom of things,
and not rest upon flying rumors without proof, which Calumny spread in all
places against very innocent and Catholic persons; that if, for example, I had
but that Letter of M. Hallier which he mentioned, I doubted not to find
wherewith to convince him (if he would examine it) that we were treated with
all sort of injustice. The Ambassador promised me that he would endeavor to
recover M. Hallier's Letter and give it me (which yet he never did, though I
desired it of him many times) and in the mean time, asked me what Office M.
Hallier had in the Faculty, and whether it were for life? I answered, that M.
Hallier exercised the Office of Syndic there; but I could not assent that he
was truly so, because the Parliament had forbidden him to take upon himself the
title or administer the functions of it, for that he had approved a doctrine
contrary to that of France, touching the Pope's power over Kings in temporals:
That besides, this Office was but for two years; that those of M. Hallier's
intrusion were ready to expire, that he must go out of it at the Feast of S.
Remigius following, unless he be then continued; but if I were at Paris I
would endeavor to hinder his continuation in regard of the scandal it was for
a man not purged from the accusations charged upon him for that doctrine, to be
suffered in an Office, which so many other Doctors besides were able to
discharge worthily. After Dinner the Ambassador continued to hold me in
discourse for the most part bordering upon the former, and all favoring of the
false conceptions of us infused into him by the Jesuits; but for that he
mingled therewith many Maxims and reflections very well grounded, I was forced
to tell him that I could not answer to all that he said to me, because his
discourse being of good length, and without interruption, and he speaking many
things which were true, and also many others which were not so, it was
necessary for me to make a separation if I would answer to them; but as soon as
I began to reply to any particular which he had uttered, he presently resumed
his speech and fell to others. The Ambassador answered me pleasantly, that
indeed it was his design to hinder me from speaking, and that he had but one
thing to recommend to me, which was Peace, and a hearty endeavor to put a
speedy end to all these Contests. I replied, that we endeavored to take the
way to it, b^ ^eseeching his Holiness (as we did) that he would please to
clear them; and I entreated the Ambassador to tell me whether he had observed
any thing in our deportment which tended not to that Peace which he
recommended. He answered that he had not, but it would be a question worth
knowing, whether after the Determination which I came to desire of the Pope
were pronounced, we would hold to it; I answered, that Charity must needs
presume that we would; but I was not sorry to have this occasion to declare to
him, that 'twas on condition that the same were made in the Order, and
according to the Rules of the Church; whereas on the contrary, if 'twere
intended to be made against the forms by M. Albizzi or some other people so
ill-affected, ignorant, and dependant on the Jesuits, as he was, there would
be no submission to such determination nor regard had of it. That I had order
from the Prelates by whom I was sent to speak in this manner. That if it
pleased him to see all the Letters which I received from them within a month
touching this business, he would find that they enjoined me nothing else. The
Ambassador told me that it must be some other day at some little meeting which
we must agree upon, when there might be two or three hours time for him to
spend about it.

In the afternoon I went to see Cardinal Spada. In his Antichamber I met F.
Delbene and the Procurator General of the Capucines; and having entertained
them together concerning the Propositions, they both agreed before me, that
they were obliged to deliver in writing their sentiments touching the five
Propositions, without having ever conferred together about them; which they
acknowledged was not wont to be practiced, and deprived them of a great means
to find out the truth by enlightening one another and correcting (as it often
happens) their own conceptions by those of others. I was called in to Cardinal
Spada, and after having made him the same complement, and spoke almost the same
things as to the Cardinals Roma and Ginetti in my visites to them the day
before, he answered me that all would depend upon the whole Congregation, the
Cardinals, Consultors, and Qualificators; that for his own part, if he could do
any thing toward the good discipline and carrying on of the Congregation, he
should make it his care that matters might go well. I told him that the Divines
who I had acquainted him were to come after me, set forth the next day after
the Virgins Nativity; he asked me their names, and I told him them.

At my coming away from him I went to see the Procurator General of the
Augustines whom I entertained largely and conveniently with all that was passed
in France and at Rome about the five Propositions, as I have above related. I
found him a person very capable of hearing reason and very equitable. When in
the course of the Narration I told him that in the Consultation which was held
thereof before the Pope, there was found a Man that said that the Propositions
were not Heretical but the Censures made of them, he answered smiling, Quello
era un Frate, The man was a Friar; I replied si, ma vestito di rosso, Yes but
clothed in red. He added presently si, ma per la barretta, True, but his Cap
was so. Whereby I perceived that he was well informed of that notorious fraud
which was committed before the Pope in this business; and his knowledge of it
was to me a new confirmation of its truth.

Since my receiving Letters for the Pope from the Archbishop of Toulouse last
deceased and M. Godeau (then Bishop of Grass and Vence, now only of Vence) I
could not till now think of delivering them to his Holiness. On Sunday morning
( Sep. 17.) I went to his presence chamber to demand audience for presenting
them; but I was not called in.

On Tuesday afternoon ( September 19.) I went to see F. Luca Vadingo at S.
Isidore's. He told me that F. Mulard came to see him in the morning about the
same business that I had given him account of: that he was come as from the
Faculty of Paris, and that he left with him one of it is Conclusions for the
execution of which he came, and that there were coming after him two secular
Doctors of the same Faculty who were upon the way, and by this time, he said,
very near Rome. He told him also that F. Annat, Assistant for France to the
General of the Jesuits, carried him to M. Albizzi, and presented him to him in
that Quality. As I largely informed F. Luca Vadingo of all that had passed
about this business both at Rome and at Paris, he found much difference between
my Narration and that of F. Mulard; and for that he desired something of me in
writing whereby he might be more fully informed of the truth of things, and of
our pretensions. I could at that time show him nothing but our Latin Manifesto:
and in exchange he lent me the Conclusion of the Faculty which F. Mulard left
with him.

On Wednesday ( September 20.) I met with nothing considerable but F. Mulard,
who told me (1) that he came from the Ambassador's house where the F. Assistant
(meaning F. Annat) had been with him. 2. I asking him whether he knew any
news, he answered that I could not be ignorant that the Pope had appointed a
Congregation of Cardinals whom he named to me, viz. Roma, Spada, etc. that M.
Albizzi had told him that it was time to deliver his memoires and instructions.
3. That neither Cardinal S. Clement nor Cardinal Lugo were of the Congregation,
to avoid the contests and siding which might happen between them. [The true
cause which caused the exclusion of both under this seeming pretxt, was indeed,
for that Cardinal S. Clement had on many occasions so strongly evidicenc'd the
matters which were to be debated, and spoken so home and so vehemently against
the intentions of those which tended only to condemn what pleased the Jesuits
and their partakers to have condemned, that those good people could not answer
him, but were put to silence, and forced to expect other Congregations (wherein
he was not) for obtaining the condemnations which they aimed at; so that it may
be said truly of him; Nemo poterat resistere spiritui and sapientiae qua
loquebatur.] But in the fourth place he told me that I was a good friend of F.
Luca Vadingo's, though I had not seen him but upon the occasion alone which I
newly mentioned.

M. Fernier came to see me on Thursday afternoon ( September 21) with another
Canon of Auxerre; and F. Malgoires a Bernardine Procurator of that Order, and
Dr. of our Faculty, intervened during the Visit. F. Mulard was there spoken
of; and M. Fernier said, That 'twas a shame that he durst term himself, as he
did, Deputy of the Faculty; that 'twas a thing which he could not suffer; that
if the Faculty were to send any from it self, it would not send a Friar; but if
it did, it would never send such a one as this.

Cardinal Barberin (whom I was to see the same day after the abovementioned
Gentlemen left me) told me also concerning this Cordelier, That it was not
credible that he came to Rome by the Faculties's order about this affair; but
'twas possible he had some intimacies and intelligences with the contrary
party; that he was really no other then a Post, that he came to Rome the last
winter, thence made a journey into Catalonia, etc. From this discourse we fell
to speak again of the Bull of Urban VIII. upon which I reiterated the
declaration which I had made to his Eminence how the Bishops who sent me,
henceforward considered it as purely provisional; To which the Cardinal gave me
no positive answer this day, but told me, That we had nothing to do at all to
meddle with Jansenius, nor to entangle our business with him; and that he
conceived, That it ought to suffice us, that we obtained the point of Grace
Effectual by it self, and all the indisoluble consequences depending upon it. I
very willingly agreed with Cardinal Barberin to all this; but he added a thing
whereunto I could not agree: namely that we must take special heed of speaking
of a Congregation de Auxiliis, because the Pope, (said he) will certainly not
grant it at this time. I answered Him, that Grace effectual by it self, of
which we newly spoke, was no other but the same thing: To which the Cardinal,
Replied that we must not confound things; and that it behoved not to speak of
the matter de Auxiliis, because the Pope would not decide the question which
has been left undecided: So this point too was fain to be left undecided
between the Cardinal and me, and I was to answer a question which he put to me,
viz. Wherher F. Luca Vadingo were a friend of mine. I gave his Eminence account
what knowledge I had of him; but I perceived that it was F. Mulard's
intelligence to him, though he gave me not the least intimation who incited him
to ask me that question.

On Friday ( September 22.) I understood that F. Cavalli a Cordelier, a very
honest, learned and humble man, penitentiary of S. John de Lateran for the
French, came several times to see me; This obliged me to visit him in the
afternoon, to know what he desired of me; where after having given him such a
narration as I could of the business which detained me at Rome, I asked him
whether he knew F. Mulard. He told me, No; but promised to inquire who he was,
and endeavor to discover what brought him to Rome.

On Saturday F. Mulard came to see me; I put him to speak touching the
Congregation which he told me of before. He would not tell me the names of
those that were of it; but yet said M. Albizzi, signified to him that it would
assemble the first time the week ensuing; that he had spoke to the Pope to
hasten it; and that his Holiness gave him order for it.

Sunday morning ( September 24.) I spent in the Popes Presence Chamber, to get
audience of him, and present him the Letters which I brought thither eight
days before for that purpose; but I was no more fortunate then I had been
eight days before.

The same day I went again to see F. Luca Vadingo, to know whether he had made
inquiry of F. Mulard concerning his deputation from the Faculty, and caused him
to lay open the particularities of it, as I had desired him. F. Luca Vadingo
told me that he had not seen F. Mulard since; but F. Annat came to see him
about the same business, and that he told this Jesuit as he had told me, that
he saw that we were agreed on both sides to desire a Congregation of our H.
Father; but unless there came a powerful commendation and solicitation from
the Court of France, the Bishops and the Sorbonne, we should scarce obtain it.
That as to the foundation of things, we were also agreed therein too; namely,
that grace has its efficacy of it self, and determines the will to the good
actions which it performs, but an physice an moraliter, this was the point of
our contests. I replied to F. Luca Vadingo that this was not the knot of the
affair; that it was no wise the belief of the Jesuits and our Adversares their
Followers, That Grace determines the will to good actions; that if they agreed
to this sincerely, we should have no disputes together at all about the manner,
an physice an moraliter. F. Luca Vadingo answered me that F. Annat told him
that he assented to this truth, That the Determination of the Will to Good,
comes from the Efficacy of Grace, and added that if they gave us a good
declaration thereof in writing, this ought to suffice us. I replied to F. Luca
Vadingo, that they meant never to do it, because though it may be the
particular sentiment of F. Annat (which I knew not) yet certainly it is not the
common one of their Society, which maintains that Grace is so subject to the
determination of the Will, that it may be either followed or rejected actually
by the Will, according to its choice and disposition. O, not at all, replied F.
Luca Vadingo; they cannot say this; if they should, they were Heretics
(Sarebbono Haeretici.) I agreed with the Father as to his consequence; and
assured him that he should find in the sequel of the affair, that the Principle
from whence he inferred it, was true; and that the sole thing which incensed us
herein, was that we had people to contend with, who so subject Grace to the
Will, that they make the Will absolutely Mistress, and affirm Grace to have
or miss its effect according as it pleases the Will to follow it or not: which
is to be understood in the opinion of these Fathers of the Direct and special
effect for the production and position of which God gives the same.

As I returned in the afternoon from some other Visites wherein nothing passed
worthy of remark, I met a French Ecclesiastic in the Spanish Piazza, who
assured me, that F. Mulard openly voic'd himself deputed by the Syndic of the
Faculty of Paris, to procure the condemnation of Jansenius at Rome. He told me
also, that the said Cordelier showed him the Letters of M. Hallier to the Pope
and Cardinal Panzirolo. I told him, that he would oblige me very much, if he
could get a Copy of them. He answered me, that he believed he could not obtain
it, but he had seem them, and they were subscribed, Tuus observantissimus atque
obsequentissimus, Franciscus Hallier sacrae Facultatis Syndicus; and that 'twas
certainly a great ignomine to the Faculty to send in its name such a fellow as
this.

But to avoid touching in several places upon this Deputation, it will be
expedient to sever it for one into a particular chapter, and to show how it
came ^to be devolved upon this famous Deputy.

CHAP. IX.
A History of the Collusion which M. Hallier made use of, to send a vagabond
Cordolier named F. Mulard, as the Facultie's Deputy. With what boldness this
Cordelier (who was sometimes a Capucine, an Apostate, and married) took upon
himself the said title in his address to the Pope.

FOR a full and orderly account, it is necessary to look back into the history
of the Irish, whose subscriptions against the five Propositions M. Vincent
superior of the Mission solicited the foregoing winter, which I only touched
upon transiently before.

Now the Rector having notice that those Irish frequently assembled at the
College des Bons Enfans near S. Victor's gate under the direction of one of
the Priests of the Mission which are there; and one day ( February 13. 1651.)
being informed that they were assembled at that time for the same purpose at
the College of Lizieux at the chamber of M. Poerus of that nation Bachelor of
Divinity, he sent a Bedle of the University to them to forbid them from making
such kind of conventicles and giving any Judgment in matter of doctrine. Which
was no sooner signified to them by the Officer, but they retired every one to
his own quarters and durst meet again no more. But within a few days after,
certain persons went to their respective lodgings and used so many
solicitations and promises to them, that at length they obtained that the
declaration drawn for them against the five Propositions was subscribed by
twenty six of their company, amongst whom there was but one Doctor, two
Bachelors, two masters of Arts, and all the rest ordinary Scholars who were
beginning to study Philosophy and Grammar.

The Rector of the University understanding this, caused such of these Irish as
had degrees in the University, to be cited to the first usual Assembly of Deans
of Faculties and Procurators of Nations held on Saturday the fourth of the same
month 1651. there to be heard touching their Declaration, and obliged to
produce all the Copies which they had subscribed. The day of the Assembly being
come, the Rector proposed the business to the Deans and Procurators; he
represented to them the dangerous consequences which were to be feared, if such
kind of Conventicles as these were permitted in the Colleges of the
University, or people without authority or skill, to decide matters of
Doctrine; he showed them chiefly, that in the declaration of these Irish, there
were things highly prejudicial to the authority of the University of Paris, and
to the Rights and Privileges of the Realm, and of the Gallicane Church. After
this laying open the matter, the Irish who had been cited, were called in:
Their Declaration was represented to them: They acknowledged that they signed
it every one apart without having first conferred together about it, and that
they signed three or four Copies, but there was none left with them; the one
was put into the hands of M. Vincent, but they knew not what became of the
rest; and that they were all ready to revoke their subscriptions, if the
University so pleased: which Answer they likewise subscribed. After which they
withdrew, and the Rector told the Deputies, that he was encharg'd with a
Petition of some other Irish graduates in Divinity in the same University by
which they supplicated, that that might not be attributed to their whole
Nation, which was but the fault of some few particular persons; some of whom
were circumvented by reason of their ignorance, others corrupted and seduced by
the enemies of the University; but that this disorder committed by a small
number of their Countrymen might be charitably redressed. After this Petition
was read, several of those Irish who presented it were called in to be heard by
word of mouth; and some of them declared, That there was two Jesuits who made
solemn promise to the Irish, to give them a house if they would subscribe that
Declaration; yea, they had hopes given them, that a certain person of quality
would make a foundation for them; and that M. Vincent also promised to procure
benefices for those that subscribed it. It was ordained upon all thus by the
Rector and Deputies unanimously, that the Declaration was a highly temerarious
and unjustifiable Attempt; that the University judged it contrary to its
authority, and to the Rights and Customs of the Realm and Gallicane Church;
that it vacated and annulled the same; and that all the Copies which were
signed of it, wherever they were, should be brought to the Rector to be torn.
It was enjoined all such as had signed it, to come and revoke their
subscription within eight days in Writing to be left with the Register of the
University, upon penalty that the said time being passed, such as have degrees
in the University, to be deprived thereof, and of all Right and Privilege
annexed to those degrees; and such as have not, to be debarred for ever from
obtaining the same. Which time being passed, no act of Grace shall be done to
such as have not revoked their Declaration. Likewise Prohibition was made to all
other Members of the University never to attempt the like under penalty of
being deprived of all Academical Degrees, Rights and Privileges.

It is not impertinent to observe here by the way that which gave occasion to
the University to judge that Declaration contrary and prejudicial to the
Customs and Rights of the kingdom, and Church of France, was a clause by which
these Irish promised in two places of their Declaration, Always to adhere to
ALL the Decrees and Censures of the Pope, Nos semper adhaesuros omnibus
Decretis ac Censuris summorum Pontificum: And never to teach any Propositions
suspected of Error or Heresy, or condemned by any Pope in any manner
whatsoever; Nunquam nos docturos ullas Propositiones de Errore aut Haeresi
suspectas, aut QUOMODOLIBET A QUOVIS SUMMO PONTIFICE damnatas, praesertimque
sequentes: Prima Propositio, Aliqua Dei praecepta, etc. They who understand
these matters well, apprehend the consequence of these Maxims. For my part I
relate not the words, but because of the connection which they will be found
hereafter to have with the foundation upon which the lately mentioned
Deputation was set afoot.

They who moved these Irish to make their Declaration against the Five
Propositions, to draw the advantages from it which they aimed at, by building
upon it their designs of getting them condemned by the Pope, fearing le^t on
the contrary, the decree of the University which they had by this means drawn
against themselves, might at Rome produce an effect different from what they
propounded to themselves from the Declaration; they conceived it their interest
to lay some clog upon the Decree, in stead of leaving the Irish to submit to
and comply with it as they promised. Wherefore as at first they solicited them
to this irregular enterprise, so now they inspired them with the spirit of
Revolt against the University: they caused them to take an act before Notaries
on the 22. of the same March, which tended only to elude the Decree of the
University: and on the 24. they caused them to obtain of the Parliament an
Arrest upon their Petition, which was signified to the Rector on the 29th;
whereby Prohibitions were made to the University to put its Decree in
execution, till further order were taken therein.

They constrained the abovesaid Poerus (who had himself with the rest declared
in the Assembly of the University, That he was ready to revoke his Declaration,
if the University so pleased) to make complaint to the ordinary Assembly of the
Faculty in April following against the Rectors Decree, to set forth there how
they had recourse to the Parliament against the said Decree, and to beseech the
faculty to interpose in their behalf in this cause against the University. It
was a proceeding very extraordinary and strange; but a very great number of
Doctors esteeming the University and its Rector unworthily treated by the
impudence of these Forreiners, opposed all that M. Cornet, M. Hallier and their
Adherents could cause to be concluded in their favout in this Assembly; and
declared, that they joined with the Rector and the University in all that they
had done in this business as very legal and well grounded. But the party of M.
Cornet and his Adherents was too strong, and they were Masters of the
conclusion of the Faculty* by which they ordained that the Faculty should
intervene in this cause to the Parliament in behalf of the Irish, and they
deputed MM. Amiot and Guyard with the Dean and Syndic to prosecute the
business; wheresoever, and in what manner soever, in all places, and by all
means. Appellationi Hybernorum sese adjunxit Facultas; Qui autem litem
promoveant VBICVNQVE ET QVOMODOCVNQVE, nominavit Hon. MM. NN. Edmundum Amyot,
and Dionysium Guyard cum DD. Decano and Syndico. It was as M. Pereyret gave his
sentence, and many without making any reflection upon those words, saying
according to their wont, Sequor sententiam D. Pereyret, which Doctor caused the
conclusion to be drawn up in that manner.

These unusual and very extraordinary Terms, Vbicunque and Quomodolibet
inserted in a conclusion of the Faculty, in reference to an affair depending in
the Parliament, of which there was no doubt of interceding, and making the
necessary and accustomed prosecutions, in no wise suited to the gravity of the
Faculty. Without question they were unworthy and wholly remote from it; nor
could they be looked upon but as inserted out of a childish Bravado, to insult
over the Rector and Deputies of the University by the same words which the
University had judged of all that were in the Declaration of the Irish, most
contrary to the Rights of the Realm and Gallicane Church. But the design and
aim of the Doctors who caused this conclusion to be thus drawn up, were of
further extent. Because the Declaration of the Irish was made against the Five
Propositions; they looked upon every thing done against those Propositions, as
part of the Process in which the Faculty concluded to intervene. They took upon
themselves by those words ubicunque and quomodocunque to prosecute as far as
Rome, and everywhere else a Process which really was laid only in the
Parliament. Nor did they confine themselves up to a manner of prosecution, but
undertook to prosecute after what manner, and in what way soever seemed to them
advantageous to their ends; without excepting the resolution which they took
afterward, and very likely had then in their minds, to send F. Mulard to the
Pope as Deputy from the Faculty. Thus it was that they plotted and prepared
afar off the foundation of that so unworthy Deputation, which they might indeed
have made as justly and reasonably without this Project as with it; but they
meant to reserve it as a last Refuge, to ward off in some sort the just
reproaches which such irregular and shuffling dealing would deserve, should it
come one day to be discovered. Have Truth and Justice need of these Legerdemain
tricks and juggles? Is it the Spirit of Truth and Justice which inspires the
same to those who are not afraid to become guilty thereof before God and men?

But I must add some things that followed upon this affair, before I give
account how I came certainly to know how F. Mulard was commissioned by the
abovesaid four Doctors for this Deputation.

The day of the ordinary Assembly of May following being come, the conclusion
made in the name of the Faculty on the first of April was to be read again.
There was very great contest about the reading of it again, because most
Doctors complained, that the truth of things then passed was altered in it; but
at length it was read and passed: And indeed it passed without any obstruction
in regard of the words ubicunque and quomodolibet, because every one saw that
they were foisted at pleasure; but none had the least suspicion of the Use
which would be made of them by those that were the Authors of their Insertion.

During the month of May MM. Hallier and Amiot consulted to cause it to be
printed with the Kings Privilege, and to fix it up the Eve before Pentecost at
all the Turnings of the University and the City, and that with an injurious
title. This obliged the Rector to assemble extraordinarily the next day after
the Festivals which was the last of May, the ordinary Deputies of the
University; who having debated upon this new attempt, declared amongst other
things, That the Chancellor was surprised when he granted a privilege for the
Printing of that Libel; That the Title put to it, was very false and very
injurious to the whole University. That it behooved to enquire after those that
were the Authors of this deceit and insolence, and to proceed against them with
all rigor of Law. That M. Hallier obtruded a notorious falsity upon the
Faculty in some thing which he spoke there very untruly touching this affair:
That the Irish were proceeded against orderly, and according to the forms of
Justice; That the Rector and the Deputies had not gone beyond their power in
what they ordained against the Irish, who by their Declaration transgressed
against the Discipline of the University; and heinously violated the Rights and
Safety of the King and Kingdom: That nevertheless they appealed from this
Decree to the Parliament, which received them as Appellants, and retained the
cause before the Court; that consequently the Irish could not, nor ought not to
have complained of the said Decree to the Faculty of Divinity, nor the Faculty
have ordained any thing thereupon without doing wrong to the Authority of the
University, and especially to that of the Parliament. And that the Faculty
might not pretend ignorance of all the Contents of this new Decree, it was
ordered to be the next day, (June 1.) signified by the Bedels of the University
to the Faculty assembled, and fixed up at the gates of all the Colleges.

All which was executed the next day, and for all the endeavors used in the
Assembly of the Faculty by all the Doctors M. Cornet's Adherents, who in the
name of the Faculty, determined the said intervention in behalf of the Irish,
they could not invalidate this new Decree, nor give any impeachment to an
Attestation which M. o Lonergan an Irish Doctor also gave to the Book
concerning Prevailing or Victorious Grace; though M. Amiot made complaint of
the said Attestation in the Assembly, for that it seemed to accuse of Ignorance
his Irish Confreres who subscribed the abovementioned declaration, which M.
Amiot said, was an Injury that redounded upon the Faculty, because it had
undertaken the protection of these Irish by intervening in their behalf. For
'twas by such oblique and indirect ways as those that most of this kind of
affairs were then transacted in the Faculty.

They set themselves again to try what they could do against this second decree
of the Rector in the Assembly of the first of July following, but without any
success; and they were at length constrained to yield to both the one and the
other of those decrees, and the Irish to conform thereunto in every point; and
their conclusion of the first of April was reformed by an accommodation, to
which they were glad to submit in a conference held for that purpose in the
College of Navarre July 28. between them and the Doctors who in the Facultie's
Assemblies had mantain'd the Justice and Authority of those decrees. But they
have since no more performed what they promised by this agreement then they
performed that which I mentioned in December 1649. and this business has
insensibly rested till the present time without being regulated one way or
other.

F. Mulard in the mean time set forth from Paris toward Rome with his
Commission and his instructions; and whether they had time and convenience to
advertise him to retrench this particular before showing his Power at Rome, and
would not the stone being already cast, and no other course or pretext more
convenient coming into their heads make him pass there for the Deputy of the
Faculty, which they judged too important to the success of their enterprise not
to make use of; or whether they sent him Orders for it which were not soon
enough brought to him; so it was, that he did not arrive at Rome till Tuesday
Sept. 12. and there appeared immediately in the quality of the Faculties
Deputy; and to testify that he was truly so, he presented that conclusion of
the first of April, which showed that the Faculty referred to, and charged upon
the Dean the Syndic, M. Amiot, M. Guyard the prosecution of that affair in all
places, and by all ways which they judged fit; to which he added, that those
four eminent Doctors chose him for this employment, as it was clear by the
Letters whereof they made him the Bearer, there seemed nothing wanting for his
just title to that quality.

I found this out at first, (as I said above in the visit which I made to F.
Luca Vadingo Sep. 19.) by things which he ingenuously told me of F. Mulard's
visit, and by that conclusion of the first of April which F. Mulard left with
that good Father, being printed, though he had not left with him the Letters
which were not so. But F. Mulard made an express Declaration of it to my self
on Monday Sep. 25. in the Hall of Consistory which was held that day, where we
fell into discourse together, and he told me the same in formal terms as I have
related, and that before two unsuspected witnesses who by chance were also in
the Consistory, and heard all that F. Mulard and I spoke, and deposed it on the
seventh of October following before a Notary upon my request.

He gave me occasion of entering into this matter by some word which he said
concerning St. Augustine's Doctrine, whereupon I entreated him to dispense with
me for answering him, because the air wherewith he demeaned himself, made me
judge that he did not understand it. Yet he took occasion to enter further into
it as he grew in heat, and cited some passages to me, which probably had been
suggested to him by those who employed him in this affair, and he had learnt by
heart. After which alas (said he to me) is this being ignorant in St. Augustine!
The good conceit of himself which those two or three passages which he recited
put him into, obliged me to check it by asking him, Whether he could tell me
what St. Augustine treated of in any of his works which he composed upon this
matter? He treats in all, answered he, of Effectual Grace. That is not the
thing, Father, said I, which I inquire. Ask you to tell me the particular
Subject which lead him to write any one of his Books. He answered me, That
'twas Pelagius's too much advancing Free Will above Grace: and St. Augustine to
thwart Pelagius, has too much advanced Grace above Free Will, insomuch, said
he, That in many places He falls into excess as well as St. Paul* Hold, Father,
said I, You fall unwarily into Blasphemies and impieties against the H.
Scripture, which the Inquisition would not suffer, were it advertised thereof.
But letting that alone, I told him that what he said to me concerning St.
Augustine and Pelagius were yet but general things: That I asked him something
of particular; that I would have him tell me, for example, what occasion
induced St. Augustine to make the Book De Praedestinatione Sanctorum? He
answered me, That we were not living in those times, to know. God forbid, said
I! there needs no more to know, but to have read a douzen lines. And to make
him comprehend this, I alleged to him, for example, M. Halliers Letter, which
he (F Mulard) had presented to the Pope, and I told him, That they who should
see that Letter two or three hundred years hence, would not have been in these
times, and yet when they read it, they would well enough know why M. Hallier
writ it, namely, as he told me, De Jansenistarum examinando dogmate. He knew
not what to answer me, but was offended that I treated him as an ignorant, and
he would have me know he was not so. Alas! said he, Do you think I was sent
hither without good instruction? Did not M. Hallier give me his Notes or
Memoires? Besides which, Have I not my own? Would the Faculty have charged me
to speak in its name, had it not judged me capable to set forth its sentiments
to defned the same? (he as little knew those of the Faculty, as those of St.
Augustine) but he added, That in fine, he would have me know, that in the
Letters which he brought after a summary account of matters, these words were
subjoined, Quid plura? we send you the Bearer, in quo summam fidem, curam,
experientiam, scientiam, and some other words he added which I did not
remember, for he had his Letter almost by heart, and repeated it very
currently: That the conclusion was thus, Igitur audies illum plura nostro
nomine loquentem: nostro nomine, repeated he, that is to say, totius facultatis
nomine loquentem. And truly, said he, The Faculty would not speak thus of me,
and the four Doctors upon whom it reposed the Trust of this affair, would not
have given me Commission about it in the Faculties behalf, if they had not
conceivd I had understanding enough to serve it. In sum, I should see, whether
he would speak otherwise then becommingly to the Pope, when he should have
audience of him, which he said the Ambassador promised to procure him as soon as
possible.

This so ingenuous confession of F. Mulard to my self of his pretended
Deputation might seem a feigned story, if the Act or Memorandum which I took of
it on the 7th, of October following, did not expressly contain all that I have
related of it; and if F. Mulard had not made himself known for a great Talker
in many other occasions, and upon this very subject too, as M. Bouvot Register
of our Faculty testified to me, by a Letter which he writ to me about the same
Affair July 14. wherein he speaks thereof in these terms, We have learnt that
our Master Hallier our Syndic has conjointly with F. Paulin the King's
Confessor, written to Rome by a Cordelier dispatched away on purpose, who is
named F. Mulard, so very secret a person, that he has published his Commission
to contain an earnest solicitation to some Cardinals to beseech the H. Father,
to take some order with the doctrine of these times; otherwise the Jansenists
will bebome Masters of the University.

M. Gueffier Resident for the King at Rome many years was witness of another
Conference between F. Mulard and me upon the same matter two days after the
Rencounter in the Consistory, viz. Wednesday September, 27. That day I went to
see the said M. Gueffier about two a clock afternoon, and I found F. Mulard
with him, who it seems had dined there. After some indifferent discourses which
I continued the most I could, F. Mulard told me, that he was returning shortly
into France. I asked him whether he made so little account of the society by
whom he was deputed, as to abandon the affairs so wherewith he was incharged
in its behalf? F. Mulard answered me, that he was not maintained here by
Bishops nor by other persons as I was, and so could not subsist long; that he
had only been put in charge by the four Doctors upon whom the Faculty relied in
this matter, to deliver at Rome as occasion served some Memoires and
Instructions which he had received from them; that he should acquit himself of
his trust while he stayed; that after he had said all, and made all known, as
he would do exactly, openly, and without dissembling any thing, then he would
return; and that he believed no other persons would appear here for this Cause
after his departure. That there would remain only the Jesuits; that others
linked with them in this Cause would not appear here for fear of putting to
arbitration a thing already decided. But if it were needful for any to come, M.
Hallier and M. Amiot might be the persons, provided nevertheless that M.
Hallier were not hindered, from coming by the Office of Syndic (which F. Mulard
conceived perpetual, so well he understood the most common things of the
Faculty) for if that change required his presence at Paris, in such case he
would be loath to desert the Faculty. That he had been decry'd at Paris indeed;
but if he was ill represented to the Parliament for having protected poor
strangers, who barely declared that they submitted to the Bulls of Popes, he
should be revenged at Rome for the wrong done him at Paris. That for witness
of this, the Pope had lately given him two Benefices without his asking of
them; and that within a little time, it should be seen whether the injuries
which had been done him at Paris, would be put up at Rome. That he (F. Mulard)
had brought to Rome the Apologetical Memoires of the University; that he could
bring but two Copies of them; that M. Albizzi had one, and the other was in the
hands of the Jesuits; that he had promised the Ambassador to show him one of
those Copies as soon as it was returned; that he had spoke to him that very
morning about it; that he was promised to have audience of the Pope on
Wednesday following; that he would speak to him as was fitting, and to all
others whom he could address to before his departing. That to stay longer at
Rome was good for Procurators; but for his part, he had no more to do there;
that the Queen was of the party; that she had written to the Ambassador, that
the Pope should only Decide, and not trouble himself for the execution. This
fine Deputy after this endeavored to engage me unvoluntarily upon the
contested matters; but I told him plainly that I would never enter thereinto
with him. Whilst these things were a doing, one came to advertise M. Gueffier,
that the Ambassador was going abroad, which notice hastened him to go see him,
and so very fitly broke off my Conference with F. Mulard.

In the mean time it is a thing very remarkable, that amongst the principal
crimes wherewith we were to be blackened at Rome by the diligence of this
Cordelier, he was charged with the Apologetical Memoires of the University
against the enterprise of the Irish, to attribute the same to the disciples of
St. Augustine, because there is some vehement speaking in those Memoires against
such as would promote the pretensions of Rome over the temporal power of Kings:
for our Adversaries who no doubt made use of them for that purpose after their
bringing to Rome, as well as their Deputy, were in this particular doubly
culpable. First, in that they attributed to us particularly that which is
common to all good Frenchmen, and has been so often resolved by the Sorbon and
the whole Clergy of France: one of the first Articles of the Liberties of the
Gallicane Church, being to maintain That the King depends only upon God as to
temporals. And in the second place, in that they betrayed the interest of the
King and of France, to render us odious at Rome, for things which in no wise
pertained to the Disputes agitated between themselves and us. For this reason I
shall place those Apologetical Memoires amongst the Pieces which I shall
subjoin to this Journal, to let Posterity see the infamous Artifices wherewith
they endeavored to draw upon us the hatred of the Court of Rome, that so the
ill will conceived against our persons might engage the minds of the Superiors
to treat us ill in the cause which we maintained.

The fifth of October going toward evening to the Church of Ara c^li, to make
my prayer there to S. Francis, whose Festival was there celebrated the Eve
before with great magnificence, I was so curious as to enquire whether F.
Mulard passed in that Covent for Deputy of the Faculty of Divinity, as I had
great ground to presume he did. I entreated the Friar who was the Porter to
help me to the speech of a French Father who was sent to Rome from the Faculty
of Divinity at Paris. The Friar answered that he saw Friars come in and go out,
to and fro, but he took no heed who they were, nor knew their names, but I
might enter farther into the house, and address my self to some French
Fathers, and they would inform me. Accordingly I passed on even to th Cloister,
and found at the entrance a great number of Cordeliers; I asked them if there
was any amongst them that was a Frenchman? there was none; but they showed me
two sitting and talking together under an Arch of the Cloister. I went to them,
and told them that I was desirous to speak with one of their Fathers who was
sent to Rome from the Faculty of Divinity at Paris. He of the two that spoke,
answered me, With F. Mulard, Sir? I replied, Yes. He told me that he was not
yet returned to the Covent, that he knew not whether he would return that day
or no, because he had desired leave to lie in the City. So, after civilities I
left him and went toward the Church; and as soon as I had quitted him,
considering that I had the answer which I expected, but withal, that it was
good that I knew the Father's name who gave it me; before I re-enter'd into the
Church, I sent my man to ask it of him, to the end I might tell F. Mulard whom
I had spoken to when I went to see him. On his part he asked mine of my man, who
told it him; and as if he had be thought himself that he had not showed me
civilities enough according to his mind, he came unto me in the Church where I
was at my devotions. When I was risen up, he told me himself that his name was
Friar Archangel, and that he was of the Province of Aquitaine. We returned
under the Cloister, and discoursed of several things of the Covent. He told me
that they were very well as for Diet, but very inconveniently in respect of
Lodging: that there was but nine little very strait Chambers for strangers, who
were then about twelve or thirteen. I asked him also the name of him that was
with him when I spoke to him; he told me that his name was Friar Francis
Gr^sset of the Province of Marseille; that he was come to Rome to get an
Obedience to go study elsewhere, and that he intended to go to Bourdeaux; that
his business was done. As for himself, he told me, that he had been but a
month at Rome, and had a Quotidian Ague ever since his arrival; that he had
been always in the Infirmerie or Sick-Quarter, where the accommodation was
good, but he was ready to come from thence. Because he seemed a very ingenuous
and civil person, and likely to need some little Refreshments, I cordially
offered him the assistances and services which he might judge me capable to
render him, and told him, that if he would accept my offers, F. Mulard could
infotm him of my lodging. As I was coming back, I met F. Mulard upon the way,
and told him that I was come from repaying him the visit which he had made me.
He answered, that since by this civility I gave him the liberty of coming again
to see me, he would do it; and I replied that he should be very welcome.

Within a little time after, he was better then his word, for he gave me two,
with the account of which I shall end this Chapter, to pursue the sequel of the
other things which I have to relate.

The former of those two Visits was on Wednesday. October. 11th. in the company
of Friar Archangel above mentioned. This Friar was to go a few days after to
take the air out of Rome, and did not speak much in this Conference, but was a
witness of all that passed between F. Mulard and me. This Father put me upon
the bu^nesse, by asking me the names of those Deputies whom I expected. I
excused my self, that I was not fully certain who they would be, till their
arrival. Whereupon he answered that I was very secret, that I would never tell
any thing, but that he always told me all; and then he named M. the Abbot of
Valcroissan, and another Doctor who was none of them; but he said he knew not
the two others, and that word was sent him that there were four; that in the
Letter written to F. Annat they were mounted to five. In the sequel he told me,
that he should always love the persons in whose behalf I was there, till there
were a Decision of the pope against them. I said that there needed not so much
haste, and showed him how far Charity toward our neighbor ought to extend:
and as for the respect and submission wh ch wear obliged to have for the
decisions of the H. See, to which he began falsely to judge that we would be
refractory; I told him, he ought to assure himself that we would not in the
least be defective in that respect and submission, and I wished the same
disposition of humbly and sincerely submitting were equal in all those of the
contrary party. Hereupon, as if I had told him some new thing, And how think
you, said he, can that be doubted of? How do you speak of so many Bishops which
have written to the Pope against those Propositions? Do you think there can be
any doubt of their submission to the H. See? I answered him, that he much
deceived himself, if he accounted all those Bishops of the contrary party;
which for my part I did not. That I was not come from those that sent me, to
put an obstacle to what the others had desired, viz. a Judgment of the H. See
upon the Propositions; but on the contrary to desire the same as well as they,
yet with using such a precaution as no doubt the most of them presupposed, but
had not expressly demanded, and that is, that before pronouncing such Judgment,
the Pope would please to ordain a solemn Congregation, in which the Divines of
different opinions might be heard antecedently on either side, both by word of
mouth and by writing, as they had formerly been in like case and upon the same
matter under Clement VIII. and Paul V. F. Mulard replied* that those Bishops of
whom I spoke, were of the contrary party, since they had declared in the Letter
which they had signed, that they held the Propositions for Heretical, and that
many amongst them had already condemned them in their Diocesses. I answered him
what was fit to be said to such Discourse. And as he exposed to my view in his
left sleeve a Paper and a little book covered with Marble Paper, without my
asking him what they were, he drew them forth, and showed me. One was the Bull
of Urban VIII. which he alleged also as a proof of Jansenius's condemnation. I
told him plainly that I would always refer my self to Cardinal Barberin for
the extent that was to be allowed that Bull, and how it ought to be understood;
and because he seemed to wonder at this Declaration which I made to him, I
though fit to reiterate the same to him twice or thrice. He showed me likewise
the Book. When I had seen the title of it, I prayed him to let me go up but to
my Chamber and take a note of it. He would not condescend to it, saying, that
he was afraid I made that pretense to keep his Book; and that he had business
to do with it, as also with another Copy which he had lent to Friar Archangel,
and that he came abroad on purpose to show the same to such persons as he was
obliged to impart them to. That it was a Fundamental Piece, which served him as
an Arsenal, from whence he could draw the chief Arms which he needed to make
use of for the discharge of his Commission. For as for the Bull of Urban VIII.
he made sport with that, (it was his word) but he meant no more by it, then
that he did not pretend to draw so great advantages from it as from the little
Book; having had it in my hands during that short Conference, I retained the
title in my memory which he would not let me take in writing, and it contained
very near these words, Jansenius de sancto Augustino ac de Ecclesia Catholica,
de sancto Thoma ac de Theologia scholastica pessime meritus.
Apud............Meturas, etc. He mentioned again his preparation to return into
France. I told him, I could scarce believe that he would go so suddenly. He
answered me; that he must obey his General. I replied, True, if his General
would have it so, but he (F. Mulard) might represent to his General the
importance of the affair for which he was at Rome, entrusted with the orders
and interests with such an eminent Faculty as that of Paris had therein. He
told me that on the contrary, That some affair induced his General to oblige
him to return, because, as he said, it was to be feared that the solicitations
made by him in it, might render his Order odious to another considerable Order
in the Church with which he desired to live in good intelligence; and also to
very many eminent persons in France who concerned themselves for the affairs
for which he came. These were almost the last words wherewith we ended this
Visit.

That which he made to me a few days after, was on Sunday October 22. in the
morning. He came all alone; but met there at the same time two persons worthy
of credit, who the next day deposed an Act or Memorandum before Notaries as I
desired them, of all that they heard spoken on either side. He came to me full
of trouble and resentment for an Order to return into Franee, which his General
had given him the foregoing evening. He said, that he beseecht his General to
permit him to stay yet some days at Rome, to take leave of some of the
Cardinals to whom he had brought Letters, and that his General had granted him
that permission, but besides, he could not depart, till he had first received
the answer of M. Hallier Syndic of the Faculty of Divinity who sent him
thither, and till some Doctor or other person were come in his place to take
care of the affairs wherewith he was entrusted. That he could not do otherwise
notwithstanding his General's Order, since he was at Rome on the behalf of the
said M. Hallier Syndic of the Faculty, as the said Syndic had testified in the
Letters which he writ to the Pope and to some of the Cardinals, but especially
in that which he writ to Monsignor Albizzi, wherein he says formally speaking
of the said F. Mulard, Audies illum nostro, id est, totius Facultatis nomine
loquentem; which words, totius Facultatis were not in the other letters as they
were in these. This F. Mulard expressly repeated several times, being moved
thereto by the little difficulties which I made to him about it, to give him
occasion to confirm it, and to such as were present to observe it well. After
which I told him that I shared in his regret, notwithstanding a slight
suspicion which he had, that I had contributed to his dismission by a visit
which I made the day before to his General; and I assured him that it was a
thing indifferent to me, whether he were at Rome or no; that though he termed
himself Deputy from the Faculty, yet I had no ill will to him for his own part,
considering that he acted under the good faith of the persons who gave him that
Commission, and that he conceived they would not have given him the same
unless they had had authority. But as for M. Hallier who gave it him, and writ
those Letters without having any power so to do, I could not excuse his
proceeding. F. Mulard replied to this, Ipse viderit; as for my part, I do not
trouble my self; he knows well enough how to maintain what he has done. One of
the two persons that were present, having said to F. Mulard, that he thought,
he had told him that 'twas not only M. Hallier that charged him with his
Commission, but also the Dean and the Subdean, and that the whole power of the
Faculty was in the hands of those three persons; the Father answered that he
did not say so; but indeed beside the said M. Hallier, there was also another
Doctor named M. Amiot, who were two of the four which the Faculty deputed for
this affair, and who as well in behalf of themselves as of the others gave him
charge and instruction concerning all that he had to do; but besides, said he,
addressing to me, were there none but M. Hallier, I should have as good a title
as you, because M. Hallier is more esteemed there then a Bp. and looked upon as
the most learned man in Europe. I replied to F. Mulard, that granting all which
he said in M. Hallier's commendation were true, yet it did not give him power
to have a Deputy at Rome in the name of the Faculty; and that the Office of
Syndic gave him no more power to meddle with those affairs in the name of the
Faculty, unless the Faculty gave him express order so to do, then the youngest
of all the Doctors has. F. Mulard quitted M. Hallier, and betook himself to
ask me by what authority I was at Rome. I answered him that I was there in
behalf and by order of some of my LL. the Bps. of France. namely of those whose
Letters I had presented to the Pope. F. Mulard insisted, and asked me to what
end, and whether it was against the Bull of Urban VIII. or for Jansenius's
book? I answered him that it was for neither; that there was nothing either in
that Bull, or in those of Pius V. and Gregory XIII. which was contrary to what
I pretended; and as for the book he mentioned, that it was wholly unconcerned
in my Commission, because the same was barely upon occasion of the five
Propositions which had been presented to the Pope, and which being all
contrived in ambiguous terms, might have, according to the explication of
those terms, senses very different, and so opposite, that one was most
evidently heretical, and the other most certainly Catholic; That my being at
Rome was to advertise the Pope thereof, and to beseech him that before
Determining any thing, his Holiness would please to give audience to both
parties in a solemn Congregation. F. Mulard not knowing what to reply hereunto,
and wlling to bring M. Hallier off the stage* drew out of his sleeve a Letter
sealed, and directed to his General, which he said was written by M. Albizzi to
desire that General in two lines that he would not oblige F. Mulard to depart
from Rome, because his presence was requisite there in reference to things
which were treating in the H. Office. That he (F. Mulard) had had that Letter
before his General went away that morning, as he did, to go toward France; but
he would not deliver it to him before his departure, that so he might put the
same into the hands of the person who was to represent him, and perform his
charge in his absence, by which means the Letter would have its full effect
without any reply or difficulty. You see, said the Father, I shall be no longer
here by authority from M. Hallier, but by that of the H. Office. Do you go now
and tell M. Albizzi and the two Cardinals that advised me to address to him
for this purpose, that they are to blame to retain me here. To which I
answered, that it was all one to me whether F. Mulard was at Rome by the order
of the H. Office, or of his Patron, or of any other whatsoever, provided the
name of the faculty, whereof* I had the honor to be a Doctor, were not falsely
used therein.

These are the words of all that was deposed by the witnesses who subscribed
the Act of Memorandum which I caused to be taken of this Confefence; but there
were also some other things spoken which were forgotten or purposely omitted.
M. Fernier was also witness of all, though he would not be one of those that
subscribed the said Act. I shall mention only three of the most remarkable. The
first was, that F. Annat was the Author of the Book De Ecclesia praesentis
temporis. The second was, that speaking of the Letter which M. Albizzi gave him
to his General, the said Signor Albizzi was every day with the Pope, that it
was he that did all, that the Pope relied wholly upon him, and that one might
say that what he did and what he would, the Pope did and would. The third was,
in reference to the effect of the Letter which M. Albizzi gave him, that it was
fit that they (the Religious, or Friars) might have recourse to some Powers,
(against the commands of their Generals which were too burdensome to them)
because otherwise, a Monk (meaning his General) might wrongfully and crossely
torment an honest man (as himself F. Mulard) with a tyrannical power. And the
fourth was, that having had recourse to Cardinal Spada to prevent the command
to return into France, which he feared to receive from his General* he offered
the Cardinal to return thither, if his Eminence judged fit; and that the
Cardinal answered him in these two words, Non Expedit. Which when I consider I
am apt to think that the said Cardinal was instrumental to the abovesaid
Letter; because on September 21. F. Epiphanius a Friar dela Premonstre, a very
able honest man, then at Rome about an affair of his Order, told me upon
another occasion, that F. Novet a Minime, lately informed him that F. Mulard
would have made use of him a few days before to present a Memorial to that
Cardinal, to beseech his Eminence to cause him to stay at Rome, considering
that he was deputed thither not only by M. Hallier, but also by the whole
Faculty, non solum a Syndico, as his Memorial ran, sed etiam a Facultate
delegatus.

Moreover I know not whether F. Mulard's suspicion that I had contributed to
his return into France enjoined him by his General, was not in some sort well
grounded, though if I did, it was without having any such design. But see what
befell me that same day, October 21. I learnt in the morning of F. Mariana that
that General was suddenly to go into France, that he was an able and upright
man, and of good understanding too in the business wherewith I was encharged;
That he had the greatest hand in the condemnation made at Vallid^lid of the 22.
Propositions prejudicial to the honor of S. Augustine, and to the authority of
his doctrine; and this good Priest invited me to visit him before his departure,
that I might know him, and also advertise him of the book which F. Mulard
distributed about at Rome, intitl'd Jansenius de Sancto Augustino pessime
meritus, in the first six lines of which it was said that the Censures of those
22. Propositions were impostures. I went then that evening to Ara Coeli; The
General was not there. His Secretary named Michel Angelo de Napoli, staid with
me to entertain me in expectation of him. When he understood all that I told
him as well concerning our affair of the Propositions, as that of F. Mulard whom
he knew, he prayed me not to go away before I spoke with the General also, who
was, as he said, to depart very early the next day. I waited for the General,
though he came not home till it was late. I informed him in the fewest words I
could of both those affairs; and by the little discourse we had together he
seemed to me well versed in the reading of the Fathers, and well affected to
the good and sound doctrine, and I took leave of him without speaking so much
as one word about the Dismission which he gave that very night to F. Mulard,
against which he defended himself the next morning by the Letter
abovementioned. It was with that Letter that he and I ended our principal
discourses touching his Legation to Rome: but because he passed there for a man
as rare in his person as his call to this emplyment was extraordinary, and that
so many things were daily told me of his irregular deportment, that they did
not seem credible, I was willing to inquire from the place of his birth, (which
was also the Country of his Cousin M. Hallier) whether the the principal of
them were true or no. The person who made inquiry thereof at my entreaty,
received the following Letter, by which we may judge of the advisednesse and
candor of those who put an affair of the Faculty into such hands, and blushed
not to add to the others qualities of this Cordelier that of Deputy from that
renowned and famous society. See the Copy of the Letter which I mentioned.

SIR,
THese few words may serve to certify you that I have gotten exact information
touching F. Mulard the Cordelier. The said Mulard is a native of this City, of
the Parish of S. Hilary next the Monastery; About thirty two or thirty three
years ago he was a Physician Some time after, he became a Capucine. After he
had worn the habit a long time, he cast his Cowle into a Ditch, and went to
Montpellier, in which place he took a wife amongst the Hugonots. There he
passed for a good considerable Physician. At length he was discovered by a
Father Capucine passing through Montpellier, to whom the said Mulard, going to
visit him as a Physician, was constrained to confess that he had been of his
Order. There was a maidservant in the house where the sick Capucine was, who
heard the passages between him and F. Mulard, and failed not to tell the same
to the Master of the House. The matter being divulged, the said Mulard fled,
and went to Rome, to get a dispensation from his Vow. He has had the
permission of the Pope to wear a Cordelier's habit. He belongs to no Covent.
He passed through this City a month ago; it is not known in what place he is
at present. He calls himself Almoner to the Count of Harcourt. This is all that
I have been able to learn of the life of the said Mulard; He is brother to our
she-Cousin Le Feure, etc. I am ever with all my heart,

From Chartres Feb. 4. 1652. SIR, Your most humble and affectionate brother to
serve you, Edeline.

I shall add to this letter by the way, that it was not without cause that
this Cordelier termed himself Almoner of the Army; he had so much more in all
his manners and deportment of the Soldier, and Goodfellow, then of the modesty
and restraint of a Religious, or Friar. I speak this word upon my own account
with confidence, not doubting but such as know him and read this, will in
regard of what he is really say that I have spoken very sparingly of him. And
not to mention others, F. Morel himself before the third of October said, with
laughter, that he would write to M. Hallier to thank him for having made so
worthy a choice, by sending to Rome in behalf of the Faculty such an ancient
Doctor and an able man as F. Mulard.

CHAP. X.
Visites made in the end of September and the beginning of October. A story
concerning Clement VIII. Manuscripts of the Congregations de Auxiliis in the
Library of the Augustines. Of that whereof I took a Copy there. The Jesuits in
vain endeavor to draw the Dominicans to their side.

When I quitted F. Mulard on Wednesday September 27. at my coming fron M.
Gueffier's house, who went to wait upon the Ambassador, I returned to my
lodging to fetch the Preface of the book Of victorious or Prevailing Grace
(which had been sent me in sheets) and carry it presently to the Ambassador,
according to what he had desired me to do, in order to give him knowledge of
the state of our Contest by the perusal of that Preface when he returned from
his visits, and to give him time to be in some measure informed thereof before
the day of his ordinary audience which was to be on the Friday following. I
found at my lodging F. Petit, who waited there for me, to tell me that F.
Mulard dining the day before with M. the Abbot Testu, said there that M.
Albizzi had assured him that within a little time the Censure of the five
Propositions would be passed.

I went to the Ambassador's house, and accompanied him to S. Cosme and S.
Damien whether he went. He caused his Coach to turn on the side of S. John de
Lateran, out of the walls of Rome; and having alighted to walk, and to speak to
me in particular about our matters, he put many difficulties to me, which
consisted in the Consequences ordinarily drawn from them by such as oppose them
with humane wit; and he did it after a manner very pressing, and nevertheless
obliging. Whereupon having given him the answers which the Fathers make
thereto, I invited him to read all those arguments in the Epistle of S. Prosper
to S. Augustine, and also to view the Answers which S. Augustine makes to the
same in the book De Praedestinatione Sanctorum; of which I had been but a bad
Echo in what I had said to him. The second part of our discourse was touching
the submission which we were likely to show to the Decision which the Pope
might make of these matters; and I assured him that if he made one after
hearing the paties in the ordinary forms of a Lawful Examination, such as I
supplicated for in the names of the Prelates whose Letters I had delivered to
him, we would show an absolute submission to such a Decision; but if he made
any otherwise, and without having discussed the contested matters in a due
manner, we should have as much submission for it as it deserved, and yet the
greatest we could. And to satsify him of the necessity and justice there was in
granting that solemn Examination to the Prelates who demanded it, and in whose
names I solicited for it, I related to him with how much instance The Council
of Trent offered the same to Heretics. The Ambassador replied, that as for
that particular, they did not yield to the Decisions of that Council. I
answered that they did not; but that was it which took from them all ground of
blaming it in that point; whereas if they had demanded such Examination, and it
had been denied to them, they would have had very just reason to complain
thereof. At length I delivered to him the Preface of the book Of Victorious
Grace, and advertised him of what was contained in the fifth page thereof in
favor of Jansenius, of whom they would not hear any speech at all at Rome. I
told him I could have wished that that passage had been left out, because it
alone was enough to incense the minds of the Romans and make the whole book
suspected. But I desired the Ambassador also to take notice of the time in
which the book was written, because there was then no thought of any person's
coming to Rome in pursuit of such Examination; but on the contrary there was
daily expectation of some precipitated Censure according to the Menaces of the
Jesuits in all places; That at the present we hoped things would be done upon
Cognizance of the Cause and with justice, and therefore declined speaking of
Jansenius, partly to avoid clashing with the people with whom we had to do, and
partly because indeed the interests of that Prelat's book had not affinity with
the prosecution wherewith I was encharged; though in the sequel the same might
be advantageous to it, namely if the doctrine contained therein be conformable
to what shall be decided. Concerning the Jesuits, the Ambassador told me, that
they prosecuted with all possible eagerness a judgment uponthe Propositions
(without speaking of such examination) that he received letters every week to
do such offices as lay in his power for the promoting thereof, which he did as
much as he could, but without injuring any person, and with endeavors to bring
both the one side and the other to peace.

On Thursday Sept. 28. I learnt two excellent stories from a learned Dominican
whom I visited that morning; I shall relate but one of them, as the most
appertaining to the matter whereof I am writing. He told me, that Clement VIII.
was at first very ill bent against the Doctrine of Grace, by reason of many
complaints made to him by the Jesuits against the Dominicans, because these
Monks, said the Jesuits, ceased not to give them continual vexation, upon the
account of School disputes. That at length the Pope, importuned by their
continual solicitations, and fearing the arising of greater divisions, one day
as he was in this impatience and apprehension, he sent to the General of the
Dominicans, who was gone out of the City upon a Visit, to return to Rome
without delay; That the said General being returned, and appearing at his
Holinesses feet, who had him in great esteem in regard of his great capacity
and exemplary life, the Pope said to him; Come, good Father, you must give me
satisfaction in one thing, you must employ all your authority in it, and if it
suffice not, I will join all mine. You see how the Coat of Jesus Christ is
rent, England, Germany, so many Hugonots in France, so many divisions and
schisms on all sides. Is it so, that what is left in the Church cannot live in
peace? Take some order speedily and absolutely, and see that the Religious of
your Order do not molest the Jesuits: Extinguish these Scholastic Quarrels,
for fear lest they prove one day the cause of greater mischief. The General was
astonished at this discourse, but he answered to it with as much vigor as
respect, saying, H. Father, if your Holiness has had hitherto any confidence
in me, you are not mistaken, and I would sooner lose my life, then tell your
Holiness a thing that were not true. But I assure you with as great
protestation as I am able that it is not an interest of the School that is in
question. It Is the Cause of Faith that is concerned. If the opinion which the
Jesuits introduce into the Church be suffered in it, it is a depriving God of
his Crown; it is no longer he that gives us Paradise; he is no longer master of
his benefits and his graces; etc. This discourse, and the rest which the
General added to it, so affected Clement VIII. that he was desirous to hear the
General another time, to learn more particularities about this matter then he
could tell him at this audience; and from that time forward Clement VIII. was
earnest to see this General many times in a week, and received from him little
Memoires, which served him to inform himself therein. At length, when this
General had given Clement VIII. the first tinctures of this matter; the Pope
liked well a request which he made to his Holiness, namely, that he might
present to him some other Divines of his own Order, with whom he might conferr
as agreeably and as profitably as with him, and that himself in the mean time
might better discharge the numerous affairs attending his Generalship.

I shall not fear to tell who was the Dominican from whom I learnt these
particularities, adding here, that a few days before he told me this, Pope
Innocent X. who sits at this day upon the throne of S. Peter, sending for him
about a certain affair, and acquainting him with some of his regrets, said to
him, That if it were well known what the Papacy is, there would not be so much
seeking for it as there is; That he had so many encumbrances to satisfy all
the world, so many things to set right with Crowns, etc. That he was now
threescore and eighteen years old; That he was not master of one hours time in
the day, to take a little rest; and many other such things. And also speaking
to him of M. Hersent's Sermon, he told him, that indeed there was nothing atall
in it that deserved any Censure. This Dominican was the same, upon whose
relation and approbation the Master of the Sacred Palace gave the Imprimatur to
that Sermon; in one word, it was F. du Four.

On Sunday morning October. 1. I visited a Religious Minime, whom upon occasion I
acquainted with our readiness to yield submission to the Decision which should
be pass d upon these matters, as I had done to the Ambassador. To which the
Father Minime, named F. du Plantet, having told me that the Pope needed not for
the making of such Decision to stand upon all these formalities which I
demanded: I prayed him to tell me the reasons that might hinder the Pope from
erecting such a Congregation and legal Examen, because I saw a thousand why he
should do it, and none why he should not. He told me three very pitiful ones.
The first was, That to hear parties, would very much protract matters in
length. The second, that it might exasperate both things and persons. And the
third, that the subtilty of such as should argue against the truth, might be so
great as to dazzle the minds of the Judges, and circumvent them.

In the afternoon I visited the Ambassador, and went abroad with him to take
the air. After several discourses, and amongst the rest, about what I learnt
concerning Clement VIII. which I have newly related, he told me that he had
conferred with the Pope about our affair, and that to all that he said to him,
the Pope answered, That there were Bulls enough already; (he was in the right)
That he (the Ambassador) replied, that indeed there were already very many; but
every one drew them to his own side; that one was desired from him plain,
express, decisive, that might clear the contests, and bring the Divines and
all the Faithful to peace. (The Ambassador was in the right too.)

On Wednesday October. 4. afternoon I went to deliver Card. Spada a Letter from
M. d' Angers. He read it through by himself; and all the answer that he made to
it then, was to tell me, that he was full of esteem for M. d' Angers, and
should always make great account of his Letters. After which I told Cardinal
Spada that F. Mulard styled himself Deputy from the Faculty; that I knew M.
Hallier the Syndic of it had encharged him with some Letters, but could not
make him such; and that if the Faculty were advertised of it, they would not be
well pleased, nor suffer this enterprise of M. Hallier's; That I was informed
that the Nuntio had sent to M. Albizzi some new Piece printed against the Five
Propositions, which was pretended to be a Censure made by the Faculty; but I
assured his Eminence, the Faculty never made any; That I knew many impostures
and falsities were set on foot by clandestine suggestion; but no notice was
given to me thereof; and that this was not the way to be satisfied therein and
to know the truth; That if they were unwilling to do it, I did not desire to
have the persons declared to me that sowed those falsities and calumnies; for
fear of engaging such persons too far, but that at least the particulars whereof
we are accused and blamed, might be told us, because perhaps we might bring
such evidence as would evince our innocence, and justify the Candor of our
sentiments, and of our sincere respect and affection for the things and the
persons to whom endeavors were used to render us suspected. And for that I
considered him as one of the most knowing and prudent of the Cardinals, I
beseecht him for this favor, hoping that in the mean time that what I said to
him would cause him to suspend his belief, and that of others also, as to any
thing that might be secretly and craftily suggested to our disparagement. The
Cardinal let me speak all that I would upon this matter, and when I had done,
he arose up, telling me He would remember what I had said to him.

Monsignor Sacrista about this time brought me to the knowledge of a Father who
was keeper of the Library belonging to the Augustines; and recommended me very
much to him, to the end that if in their Library (which is public for all that
will, to repair to in the forenoon, and make use of what books they needed)
there were any book or manuscript that I needed for assisting me in the cause I
was to manage, which he saw wholly in behalf of S. Augustin's doctrine and
authority; he would do me the favor to accommodate me with it. The said Father
promised me very willingly, and that I might more conveniently see all that he
had to show me, he desired me to take the afternoons to come in, because then
there would be no person there but our selves. Accordingly I went thither on
Tuesday October. 10. He showed me some manuscripts remaining in that Library, of
the Congregations which were held under Clement VIII. and Paul V. For Fr.
Gregorius Nunnius Coronel who was one of the two Secretaries of those
Congregations, and of the Order of Augustines, had privately kept them till his
death, after which they were taken into this Library and placed amongst the
rest; That afternoon I copied out one my self, which at first view I conceived
worthy of that labor, because I saw at the foot of each page, the
subscriptions of the Divines of whom those Congregations consisted. In every of
those Pages was seen the resolutions of those Divines against the errors of
Molina, and that resolution was subscribed with the original signatures of
those Divines who set thereto their Ita sentio, and subscribed it with their
own names. They were but nine at first, and toward the end but eight; and
their names were; Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Archiepiscopus
Fr. Jo. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. [he subscribed always thus, beginning with
Archiepisc. Fr. which is very unusual] Fr. Julius Sanctueius Episcopus S.
Agathae Gothorum. Laelius Laudus Episcopus Neritonensis. Fr. Hieronymus
Pallantus Episcopus Bizontinus. D. Anastasius a Brixia Abbas Farfensis, [who as
it appears by the twelfe of these subscriptions was also one of the
secretaries.] Fr. Joannes de Plumbino Ordinis Eremitarum S. Augustini
Procurator Generalis. Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel Secretarius [so he always
subscribes himself.] Fr. Jacobus le Bossa Religiosus S, Benedict in Francia,
and Doctor in Facultate Theologiae Parisiensi


The title of this last calls to my mind, that there was also a Doctor of the
Faculty named M. de Creit, who was of those Congregations, as I have seen in
some other Manuscripts and Memoires of that time; but what ever cause, sickness
or other, hindered him from being of the number of those that subscribed the
Resolutions of this Manuscript, I found them subscribed only by those whose
names I have mentioned. A present Copy of the said Manuscript shall be annexed
to the end of this Journal, that the learned may see what it was, and I doubt
not but it is still. I shall only say here before hand, that the Effectualness
of Grace by it self, and its necessity to all the good motions of Christian
piety, its dominions and infallible power over the Will of man, which
nevertheless consists with the perfect liberty thereof; The gratuitous Election
and Predestination which God makes of men to eternal salvation depending on
his pure liberality and mercy, and not on the praevision of their merits, and
the good use which they will make of his Grace; The certainty of the eternal
Prescience which he has of all those which shall be saved in all times,
founded solely upon that Election, and upon the Power and Virtue of his Grace,
and the effectual motion which he gives it to subdue and subject to itself the
most rebellious Wills of those on whom he pleases to bestow that Grace, (which
is all that we pretend and have ever pretended to defend against the Authors of
the Five Propositions, who never invented them but as an Artifice to ruin and
stifle those holy Truths) are very fully and evidently established in that
Manuscript against the errors of Molina.

I received that day too a Complement from the Abbot of St. Peter in vinculis,
who a little time after was made Archbishop of Manfredonio in the kingdom of
Naples; he signified to me, that having understood that I had been several
times at his house to see him, he desired me to send him word when he might
come and visit me. I prayed him without Ceremony not to take the pains to come
to see me, but to do me the favor to expect me on Thursday following* which
was he 12th. of October. Accordingly I went to see him, and laid open my whole
business to him, which he took very well, and seemed a man of capacity and
study, and full of zeal for St. Augustine, and perfectly impartial.

The same day a friend came to me, and brought me the Book entitled Jansenius
de Ecclesia, etc. pessime meritus, of which I made mention above. M. Guiffier
had given it to this friend of mine, not knowing what to do with it, and told
him F. Mulard presented the same to him, which shows, that that Cordelier had a
good number of them to distribute, since he gave them to persons that had no
need, and could make no use of them. The day preceding I received another visit
from a Dominican, who told me, that being two or three days before with
Cardinal Lugo, the Cardinal said thus to him, It is necessary that we unite
together against the Jansenists, at least in the things in which they thwart
both you and us equally, as in Sufficient Grace: whereto this Dominican
answered (as another did sometimes to F. Annat, who blushed to have made so
frivolous a Motion to a very intelligent Divine) that there was much difference
between the sufficient Grace held by the Jesuits, and that which is held by
the Dominicans. That the pretended Jansenists did not oppose any but that of
the Jesuits, the good or bad use whereof depended absolutely on Free Will; but
the same Jansenists were agreed with the Dominicans, as to the main, namely,
the Effectualness of Grace, and its necessity to all good actions.

On the 13th. I found F. Malgaires at the Ambassadors house; he asked me whether
I could lend him fot two or three hours the Book of S. Fulgentius, which was
newly published by a Jesuit of Dyon. I told the Father that instead of two
hours, I would lend it him for three days. I asked him what news of F. Hilarion,
and what he said to our affairs. He told me, that F. Hilarion would not further
open his sentiments in reference to the Propositions that he had given you
sealed up to the Pope two years ago next November, and that he would speak no
more thereof; which I mention not in this place, but as a new testimony in
confirmation of what I said before of the manner how they were proposed to the
Pope, and how the Divines consulted upon them, delivered their judgments; viz.
at the same time that the false Censure of the Faculty was carried to Rome, and
the first President made a Truce between us and our Adversaries at their
instigation, for so much time as was requisite to let that false Censure have
its full effect.

Tursday October 17. I had a second audience of the Pope, in which I presented
to him a Letter which the Bishop of Grass now of Vince had written to him. But
before I relate the particularities of that audience, I think it not
impertinent to insert here some Letters which I received from Paris, and which
show with what intentions my LL. the Bishops who interposed in this affair, and
we conjontly with them, acted therein.

CHAP. XI.
Letters from Paris confirming the Resolution of the Bishops to do nothing but
in a regular Congregation, where Divines might argue on both sides.

I Received many at this time, but all breathed the same spirit with these
subjoined, which I have selected not by way of preference before the rest, but
for that they have more connection and correspondence to the matter which the
Series of my Journal puts into my hands.

The first of those Letters is dated 14. July 1651. and contains these words:
Sir, I send you by this Post the Letters which my LL. the Archbishop of
Tholouze and the Bishop of Grass have written to the Pope. You may please to
present the same to his Holiness, and use all imaginable endeavors with him to
procure the effect with them; and particularly in the point which ooncerns a
Congregation like that which was erected in the time of Clement VIII. and Paul
V. I am charged to tell you that you must represent to his Holiness, that those
Propositions have been framed by the Adversaries of St. Augustine 's disciples,
on purpose to confound them, and blemish the honor of that great Doctor of the
Church: or if you cannot have audience of his Holiness, they entreat you at
least to acquaint the Examinators that the Propositions are not in any Author;
that they were never advanced by the Disciples of St. Augustine; that to this
present the Disciples of Molina have not been able to verify it, nor ever
will, since in all their Writings which they have published to render the
Propositions (invented by themselves) cdious, they have said nothing that
verifies it. That the Pope ought not to deny the Disciples of St. Augustine the
conference which they demanded in the Assembly of December 1. 1649. since the
same is according to the Rules of the Church, and to what has been formerly
done in presence of Popes, and authorized by them. That they are ready to
depute for that conference as many Deputies as his Holiness shall please; and
that the said Deputy shall set forth by order of my LL. the Prelates, who writ
the Letters which you presented to the H. Father. They are all prepared for the
journey. My Lords have also commanded me to desire you to represent in their
names to our H. Father, or to the Commissioners who examine, that the judgment
which they render upon the Propositions before the Parties be heard, will serve
only to augment the Disputes; since the Propositions being capable of very
different senses, whereof one is Catholic, and the other is not, some will
say, that they are condemned only in the Heretical sense; others will contest,
that they are condemned absolutely, and so people will not know what to make of
them; which will cause great trouble to the Church, and undoubtedly much
diminish the respect which ought to be had for the authority of the H. See, etc.

The second is of the same date, written by one of the Deputies designed to be
joined with me, who speaks in the end of his Letter in these words; In the mean
time while you expect us, use all possible endeavors that nothing be
pronounced upon the Propositions. But you see they will do it, and there is no
way to help it; then you must endeavor to get three things done; viz. that it
be declared expressly, 1. That they mean not to lay any blemish upon the
Doctrine or Authority of St. Augustine, which the H. Father requires to be
reverenced by all the Faithful. 2. That there is no purpose at all to impeach
Effectual Grace by it self necessary to all good actions, and to all the good
motions of the Will which regard Salvation. 3. That there is also no design to
damn the Propositions according to the connection which they have with the same
Doctrine of Effectual Grace by it self necessary to all the good motions of the
Will, etc.

The third of those Letters is from the same person who writ the first to me as
from the Bishops, and in this which was written on the 25. of August, he spoke
in these terms: I received your Letter of the 31. of July on Sunday last. I
showed it to my Lords: They gave mecharge to tell you, that they are very glad
to know what Cardinals they are to whom the Pope has given Commission to view
and examine the Five Propositions; and they hope that as they are very just
persons, they will contribute all their Power, that his Holiness may grant to
the persons whom they shall send a Conference or Congregation de Auxiliis to
defend the Catholic sense of the said Propositions against all those that
mantain they are Heretical and worthy of the greatest Anathemaes. My Lords,
expect that the proceeding will not be so quick in this affair, which is the
foundation of one of the greatest Contests that ever was in the Church, etc.

The Deputies will set forth the next day after the Nativity of our Lady. Their
Commission imports, That they confer not in secret about the Propositions, but
demand a public Conference. The Latin Writing which I send you, has been
drawn according to the order which you gave me. My Lords are porswaded, that
nothing can be more plain, concise and nervous then that little Tract; They are
confident the Jesuits will never be able to say any thing against it, at least
openly, either in a public regular conference, or by Writing: Indeed in
secret, it is certain they may speak all that they please; but it cannot be
legal or valid in the Judgment of any Court whatsoever.

My Lords have given me charge to tell you, that they have no other design in
their Letters, and the Commission which they have given you, but to preserve in
the Church the Authority of the great St. Augustine, and the Veneration that is
due to his Doctrine, which the Church has made her own. They do not consider
this Doctrine, because it has been recited by the Bishop of Ipre; they say it
is considerable only upon the account of its being St. Augustines, and that M.
d' Ipre cannot pass for the Author of any opinion, because he has advanced
nothing of himself; but all that he has said, he drew out of that great source
of light. So that in this affair, they have no regard at all to Jansenius, but
solely to St. Augustine. The Bishops of Flanders may, if they think fit, send
their Deputies to beseech the Pope to cause Jansenius to be examined, thereby
to take from his Adversaries the pretexts which they daily make use of to
calumniate him by calumniating the Doctrine of his Book.

My Lords will never consider the Bull against Jansenius but as provisional,
and made only for a Political purpose. For whatever the Jesuits say, they will
never make it believed that the said Bull imports any thing else but a
Prohibition, and not a condemnation. Those Fathers do all they can to make good
what they say by the word damnat, which is used in reference to the Doctrine of
Bavis, which the Pope is there made to say, that he renews in his Book
entitled Augustinus. But there is no strength in this inference, because if the
Examiners of Jansenius 's Book had found manifestly that he renewed the
Doctrine of Bavis, undoubtedly they would not have suffered only the word
Prohibit to be put in the same place where it is, and not rather have put in
that of damnat. They would not have pronounced against it after the same manner
as against the Thesis of the Jesuits. There is no rational man but yields to
all this, and is of the same sentiment that I send you touching this Article.

My Lords much wonder that there are found persons whom God seems to have
placed in his Church for the deciding of matters of Faith, and regulating the
manners of the Faithful, who yet think it is a persecution raised against the
Jesuits, to oppose them touching Sufficient Grace. They say that such Grace is
directly opposite to the faith of the Church, that it wholly destroys the
belief of Original Sin, and evacuateth the adorable value, and victorious power
of the death and cross of Jesus Christ; that it the foundation of Libertinism
and Impiety; that it destroys Prayer and Christian Humility, and that it puts
our Salvation in our own power, etc. How is it possible that Catholics can
find what to blame in so lawful an opposition, the want of which has, through
a just judgment of God, for reasons which we know not, brought the doctrine of
the Church at present into a lamentable condition, and reduced the undaunted
defenders of this faith to be worse treated then Heretics? It is very
necessary that you press this point home. All this has no reference at all to
Jansenius.

All my Lords which are here, cannot brook the ill treatment used to the
Hours; since it apparently disparageth the Authority of the H. See, and
exposes the same to the laughter of Heretics. But that which surpriseth them
more, is, that the Jesuits whom they know very well to be the Authors of that
blow given the Church, instead of hiding their malice and temerity, and
hindering all speech of that affair, do all they can to move the Archbishop of
Paris to blast those Hours publicly. To which purpose they employed the
Nuntio too, who solicited the said Lord for the reception of that Decree, aend
has given him an extract of a Letter sent to himself from Rome, containing the
reasons for which the Hours were put in Indice Expurgatorio. I send you the
Copy of that Extract, etc.

He writ so, but the Extract was left behind upon his Table, and he sent me
word that all the prosecutions of the Jesuits and the Nuntio against the
Hours could prevail nothing at all upon the Archbishop, so that they were sold
and esteemed no less after that Decree of Rome, then before.

The fourth of these Letters, which I mention here to represent more punctually
the sentiments which people had at Paris* touching the transactions at Rome in
this matter, was dated Septem. 29. In which after earnest injunction by order
of my said Lords, to omit nothing in my power for the obtaining of the
Congregation which they esteemed so necessary for the fitting discussion of the
matter of the five Propositions, it was prescribed me from them; That in case
the said Congregation were denied, and after long patience and continual
solicitations sufficiently testifying the ardour of my zeal, nothing were
granted but a slight audience, in which the points in Dispute could not be
thoroughly examined, I should no longer deliberate, but declare that my
Commission required that the parties might be heard in the manner that Clement
VIII. and Paul V. heretofore heard the Dominicans and the Jesuits in the
solemn Congregation de Auxiliis, which not being granted, I had order to take
leave and retire.

CHAP. XII.
An Audience of the Pope, October. 17. A Letter of M. the Bishop of Grass
delivered to the Pope at that Audience.

I Told the Pope in the first place that I had sigfy'd to my Lords the Bishops
whose Letters I had presented to him, with how great gentleness toward me and
esteem for them he had received the same, and what assurance he had given me at
that time that no decision should be made upon the Five Propositions, before
such things as they intended to represent by persons sent hither for that
purpose, had been well considered. That the same Bishops were joyful to
understand the order that he had given to some of the Cardinals to apply
themselves particularly to the study of those matters, to the end they might be
of the Congregation which would be established to discuss them; and that there
were three Doctors upon the way coming to join with me, to inform his Holiness
more largely then I could do alone, of the importance of this Affair.

But I had scarce ended this speech when the Pope began to speak, and told me,
that I ought to remember that he intimated two things to me, which were not to
be thought of; one was, the resuming of the Bull of Urban VIII. and the other,
entering into an examination of the matter de auxiliis. That as for any thing
else, he had told me nothing should be done without thorough consideration. But
as for the Cardinals that I spoke of, he professed to me, that either he gave
no such order, or did not remember it; At least, he would not own to me that he
had given any such.

I replied, that I had formerly declared to him that we had no design to do any
prejudice, neither to the Bull of Urban VIII. nor those of Pius V. and Gregory
XIII. As for the matter de auxiliis, the Pope had spoken thereof to me with
such aversion, and I knew otherwise that hewas so loath to apply himself
thereunto, that I durst not tell him, that Then he must not enter into the
examination of the Propositions which had been presented to him, because each
of them was a necessary dependence thereon, and inseparable from it in the
sense wherein we affirmed them to be Catholic; for fear, lest speaking to the
Pope in that manner, I might put an invincible obstacle to all the
solicitations which I was to make for obtaining the erection of the solemn
Congregation, which seemed so necessary to the full discussion and decision of
the Controversies which were in the Church between Divines about these matters.
Wherefore without using the term de Auxiliis, I told the Pope, that since we
had been accused to his Holiness of maintaining the five Propositions,
presented to him under equivocal terms, which afforded different senses,
whereof onewas Catholic and the other Heretical, it was agreeable to justice,
and tended to the satisfaction of his Holiness, to know, that we abhorred the
Heretical, and maintained the Catholic; and that those senses being
distinguished, the condemnation which followed would be clear and distinct, and
could not be attributed to the sense which we maintained to be the doctrine and
faith of the Church, as it was the design of the Authors of those Propositions
to do, if they obtained a Censure befoe the said senfes were cleared* and
distinguished: Which since it could not be done but in a Congregation established
for the purpose, this induced the Bishops for whom I appeared, to desire the
same of his Holiness by their Letters, and to encharge me with solicitations
to procure the effect thereof.

The Pope scarce allowed me time to end this discourse, but he told me, that
after Clement VIII. had caused this matter to be debated in his presence for a
long time by the most excellent men, whom he summoned from several places,
after he had studied them himself with very great care, (so that as he
remembered, some took occasion thereby to say, that Clement VIII. began very
old to study Divinity,) yet he could not at last decide any thing therein, but
was fain to impose a perpetual silence both to the one side and the other,
Imposuit omnibus perpetuum silentium: wherefore it behoved to acquiesce in that
order and live in peace, and that every one in the mean time pray to God for
grace to serve him well.

I answered the Pope, that Clement VIII. notwithstanding all the care he took
to examine that matter, could not indeed decide it; but he had the design to do
it, and it was only death, wherewith God suffered him to be overtaken, that
hindered him from deciding it in favor of our side; and that the said decision
not having been then published, our adversaries take so great advantage thereof
at this day, that they do not dissemble that they attempt to overthrow the
doctrine of S. Augustine, which is also that of the Church.

The Pope assented to this truth, that the Doctrine of S. Augustine was that of
the Church, but he said, We understood S. Augustine one way, and our adversaries
another.

I answered, that greater wrong could not be done to S. Augustine, and all the
holy Popes who proposed his doctrine to the Faithful as their own, then to
pretend as our adversaries do, that it cannot be known to which doctrine,
theirs, or ours, that of S. Augustine is conformable.

The Pope replied that they drew him to their side, and we maintained him on
ours. That this was it that was to be judged, but the discussion of it was a
matter of much pains, it requiring much labor and time; that it was therefore
requisite to hold to what Clement VIII. had ordained therein, namely to remain
in silence.

I answered that our Adversaries did not keep it, and ceased not every day to
undermine the faith of the Church insensibly; which if they were suffered still
to do, they would utterly ruin it at length. That truly it was difficult for
me to take the boldness to speak thereof with so great instance to his
Holiness, but his setvice and that of truth obliged me thereunto. And if his
Holiness pleased but to peruse a little Italian Writing of about two Pages or
more, which I had made purposely to show him in particular, and almost at one
view, the evident coherence which those five Propositions taken in the sense
which we maintained, had with Grace Effectual by it self, he would clearly
discern the ambushes laid for him in presenting those Propositions to him, and
would remain convinced of the importance of this Affair.

The Pope replied, that he would not look upon that writing how short soever it
were; because after having seen that, he must see another, and then another,
and so he should by degrees become engaged in the matter unawares.

I told him that I had not prepared that Writing to discuss the matter, but
only to let him know in what manner our Adversaries had acted toward his
Holiness in this affair; but the Pope would by no means hearken to what I
propounded to him, because he still professed that he feared it would engage
him further, and oblige him to too great toils, as he knew the discussion of
this matter required even of such as had applied themselves to that study all
their time; but much more pains must it cost him then others; poi (said he to
me, they are his own words) non e la mia Professione; oltra che son vecchio,
non ho may studiato in Theologia. Because, (said he) it is not my Profession;
besides that I am old, I have never studied Divinity. Which I beseech those
that shall read, to take in the same sense that his Holiness spoke it, and
wherein I write it; that is, That he had not studied Divinity comparatively to
the study of the Canon Law, upon which he had bestowed all his time, laying
Divinity apart, as many do at Rome, where it seems the several employments
which are followed, and by which advancement is attained, require rather a
Canonist then a Divine.

I replied then to the Pope, that I should be very loath to cause any inquietude
to him, or engage him to any pains that were not agreeable to his Holiness;
but I was obliged to make him the instances which I now did, because Monsignor
Albizzi had told certain persons from whom I understood it, that his Holiness
would within a little time pass a Decree upon those Propositions; and that it
was of absolute and very important necessity that his Holiness were informed
of the nature of those Propositions, before he made such Decree, and that there
was no shorter way to give him a true Pourtraict thereof, then what I offered
him in my Paper.

The Pope answered me; Does he (or you) think that a Decree can be made so
quickly, and that there is no more deliberation used thereunto?

I replied, that before making, or so much as deliberating thereof, it was
always necessary to be informed of the matter that is in question. And for
that I perceived the Pope continued to show a great repugnance and aversion to
that, I told him I was very sorry that I could no better represent to him then
I did the extreme necessity there was of our being heard upon the subject of
the Propositions, as well to let him know the sincerity and verity of our
sentiments, as to establish a firm peace in the Church of France; but the
Doctors who were upon the way, coming --

The Pope interrupted me, to tell me that there were Ordinances which enjoined
Silence in this matter; That if there were persons that would be disobedient,
he could not keep or restrain them by force in their duty.

I proceeded to tell him, that those Doctors which I was mentioning, could
represent to him better then I how far that Silence might extend, andall the
other things which I had intimated to him; but in the mean time I had further a
Letter to deliver to him (it was that of my L. the Bishop of Grass, now of
Vence)* which I drew out of my pocket, and presented to his Holiness.

The Pope received it very coldly, testifying to me his reluctance thereunto;
and as he received it, he asked me what it contained?

I answered him, that it was upon the same subject and for the same end with
those that I had formerly delivered to him.

The Pope hereupon reiterated to me the imposition of Silence ordained by
Clement VIII.

I answered again, that I beseecht him to excuse me if I presumed to tell him,
that Clemen VIII. might have enjoined some temporary Silence as to these
matters, possibly for so long time as the examination lasted, with which he was
in hand, and till they were decided, but not for ever; since they were not of
such a nature as to be buried in obscurity and oblivion, any more then the
other points of the Christian Faith, which God appointed his Apostles to go and
preach through the whole world.

Forasmuch as I knew by all that I had learnt of the Popes disposition since my
being at Rome, that he was much possessed with the thought of that Silence
imposed by Clement VIII. and a purpose to make a new Decree to that end, it
seemed to me so unworthy the Majesty and honor of the H. See to extinguish the
Lamp to the Faithful in stead of lighting it, that I was prepared to encounter
that thought in the Popes mind; and I had made choice of two proper and
decisive passages upon that subject, wherein one was taken out of S. Augustine,
and the other out of S. Fulgentius, and both in reference to what S. Paul
writes to the Romans, to whom having explicated the Mystery of Predestination
and Grace, he gives this reason of so doing; Nolo autem vos, fratres, ignorare
mysterium hoc, ut non sitis. vobis ipsis sapientes. That of S. Augustine is in
his 105th Epistle, where speaking of the same Grace which S. Paul preached to
the Romans, and concerning which only the question is at this day between the
Jesuits and us, he says these words, De cujus commendatione maxim ad Romanos
Apostolica Epistola loquitur, ut inde se praedicatio ejus velus a capite orbis
toto orb diffunderet. And that of S. Fulgentius is in the 8 chapter of the 3d.
book, in these works, Beatus Apos^s noluit taceri quod voluit scribi. And
lower, Praedestinationem namque sicut tam fidenter quam veraciter praedicavit,
ita nobis praedicandam fidenter veraciterque mandavit.

I had made choice of these two passages to tell them to the Pope, and to let
him see thereby how distant the thought of Silence was from that of those H.
Fathers; but he scarce gave me time to finish what I spoke above; but he
replied that he very well knew what Clement VIII. ordained in reference to such
Silence; he (Innocent X.) being at Rome at that time in the vigor of his
youth; and that he remembered very well that the disputes raised under the
Papacy of Clement VIII. were extinguished by that Silence. Wherefore fearing
to cross the Pope too directly, by arguing further against what he said
thereof, I was contented to keep my two passages for another more fit time,
when the Pope might be better disposed to receive them: and conceiving that it
was time for me to end this audience by holding my peace and withdrawing, I did
so after I had received the Pope's benediction.

Besides the Letter of my L. of Vence, which I delivered to the Pope at this
audience, I had another from the late Archbishop of Toulouse; but having
received news of his decease before that audience, I did not think fit to
deliver it to the Pope, considering that if I afterward should conceive
fitting so to do, it might afford me occasion for a new Audience, wherein I
might further speak to the Pope what was most urgent in behalf of the affair
which I had in charge to solicit with him.

Nevertheless I did not deliver it afterward; and it served me only for a new
proof that M. Hallier was in so perfect intelligence with M. Albizzi, that
there was nothing but this Assessor communicated to him. For after our return
into France, falling into familiar discourse with him touching the number of
Bishops that writ to the Pope about the Enterprise of the Propositions, and I
reckoning the Archbishop of Toulouse amongst them, M. Hallier imagining that I
mentioned him only because he was dead, strongly denied that he was one of
them, and told me he knew who writ to the Pope as well as I, because M. Albizzi
had showed him the Letters, and there was none from the Archbishop of Toulouse.
I acknowledged that M. Hallier had reason to speak as he did, seeing the Letter
of that Prelate was not delivered to the Pope, nor found among those that M.
Albizzi showed him; but I maintained too that I had said nothing but truth when
I named him for one of those that writ to the Pope about this business, because
indeed he had done so, as I could prove by the very Original of his Letter
which remained then and is still in my hands. But I shall here set down the
translation of that of M. de Vence, which I delivered to the Pope at the
abovementioned audience. The Superscription was, To the most holy Father Pope
Innocent X. at Rome. The Contents follow.

Most Holy Father;
I Could not understand but with very much grief, that some persons have lately
written to your Holiness t uching certain Propositions, and desired your
Judgment upon the contests arisen about that matter. Not that I am troubled to
see that they have recourse to the S preme Tribunal, but because it has been
done by one alone amongst all the Bishops our most dear brethren who incited
the rest to subscribe that Letter without having conferred together, without
having gathered voices, without having convok'd any Synod, and without having
so much as propounded the business in the General Assembly of the Clergy of
France, which by a happy chance was held at that time. I wish, most H. Father,
from the bottom of my heart to see the fire extinguished which this Dispute
has kindled; but I cannot dissemble to your Holiness, that I much fear lest
some will rather cast oil upon it then water, and under pretext of seeking
peace, excite a new war more violent then the former. For to what else tends
this Project? The very same Five Propositions are presented to your Holiness,
which were tendered two years ago to the Faculty of Divinity at Paris, which
for the sake of peace declined to Judge thereof; because it found that not
being taken out of any Author, they are all composed of doubtful senses, and
contrived purposely at pleasure by the Partisans of the contrary opinion, so as
that they may easily explicate them in a bad sense. It was for this reason,
most H. Father, that the Faculty with very great prudence judged that nothing
could be decided touching such Propositions without very evident danger, for
fear of impeaching by a Censure, not the doctrine of Cornelius Jansenius (whose
name it observed was spared, upon other accounts) but, which is more
deplorable, the doctrine of S. Augustine, and also that of the whole Church,
which has constantly embraced the sentiments of that Saint in the matter of
Grace. Which, how great a mischief it would be, and how great a failure in
respect toward your Holiness, who have so high esteem of that glorious Saint,
cannot but be seen by such as are not ignorant, that it was under the conduct
of that incomparable Chief that the enemies of the Church and of the Grace of
Jesus Christ have been vanquished. Wherefore most Holy Father, that under
pretext of the ambiguity which is found in the equivocal words of those
Propositions, wrong be not done to that H. Doctor, we most humbly beseech you
Holiness to permit those of the one part and the other to explain their
sentiments, as Clement VIII. and Paul V. of most happy memory did in a like
case, to the end that in this affair, so important as none can be more, no
person may complain of having been condemned without being heard, and
consequently every one may without scruple submit to the Judgment which your
Holiness shall pronounce. This is the request, most H. Father, which we make
with profound respect to your Holiness, and beseech you to grant to us out of
that charity which renders you a Father, that Equity which renders you a Judge,
that Learning which renders you a Doctor, and lastly, out of the consideration
that nothing can prejudice S. Augustine but it must fall upon the Church, such
affinity is there between their interests, especially in this sort of
questions, wherein all the Learned agree that they are absolutely inseparable.
In the mean time, I pray God, most H. Father, by his Grace to continue your
Holiness in your good purposes, and to grant that you may incessantly watch
many years for the good of the Church, and all the Faithful in that height of
Grandeur, whereunto I rejoice with all good men to see your Holiness advanced.
I am,

Most Holy Father, Your Holinesses most humble and most obedient Son and
Servant, ANTHONY Bishop of Grass and Vence.

CHAP. XIII.
Visits made in the end of October and the whole month of November. A
Manuscript of the Bull of Paul V. against Molina in the Library of the
Augustines. Of the Secrecy used in the transacting the affair of the
Propositions. An Untruth of M. Hallier and F. Mulard. Asperities of M. Albizzi.

I Had received from France a Copy of a Bull which Paul V. caused to be
prepared for the condemnation of the sentiments of Molina, and confirmation of
those concerning Grace Effectual by it self, and gratuitous Predestination,
which we defended: the same had been drawn up in consequence of the Conferences
which continued under his Papacy about this matter, after the death of Clement
VIII. The same day of my audience, after noon, I went to seek in the Library of
the Augustines, whether there were any draught of it among the Manuscripts left
there after the said Congregations, that so I might compare the Copy sent me
from France with that which I should find there, according as I was enjoined.
And indeed I happened to find one; but when I went to compare them, by reading
but the first Paragraph I found them so different both in many words and in the
citations, that I thought better to write out the Copy I found in this Library,
then to make mine conformable to it by so numerous corrections. Wherefore I
spent this afternoon in transcribing it, F. Mariana dictating to me.

Thursday, Oct. 19. after noon I went to wait upon Cardinal Roma: He was coming
out of his chamber to reconduct a person that had visited him, and at the same
time M. Albizzi entered in, with a bagg in which there seemed to be papers. The
Cardinal came to me to speak to me, but I told him I would wait upon his
Eminence another time when he was less employed; to which he agreed. The
Master of his Chamber coming to me where the Cardinal left me, told me as he
accompanied me upon the stairs, that this affair (meaning that which was
treated of there every Thursday, and esteeming it the same with that for which
I was at Rome) must needs be of great consequence; That he had never heard of
any that had been more debated, and lasted longer then this; That every
Thursday after the Cardinals had been with the Pope, they came thither in the
afternoon. But I desiring to learn something further of him, and asking him,
whether it were about the same with that for which I was at Rome, he seemed as
if he repented that he had told me so much; for he answered me smiling, that he
knew no more of it then my self. I shall mention here by anticipation, that I
learnt on Wednesday following (which was the 25th of the same month) that a
Cardinal, very intelligent in these matters, and who admirably penetrated into
all the contrivances and consequences of either side, had made some visites and
very dextrous inquiries to find how things stood (for people were shy of him)
but all that he could discover was that while either Party pressed to be heard,
it was under debate whether it were fit to engage in the matter or no, and
which way to go about it, An and Quomodo; that Opinions were very different
herein, that the Pope would have no meddling with it at all; but Cardinal Roma
was very earnest for it, and judged it absolutely necessary for a thousand
reasons, as well as to supply the Bishoprics of Portugal, etc.

On Wednesday October 20. I went to give Cardinal Pamphilio an account of the
audience which I had had of his Holiness the Friday preceding; but I found
Card. Trivultio coming forth with him, and there was such a multitude about the
entrance that I could not come near the Master of his chamber to tell him that
I desired to speak with his Eminence. So I quitted this Post, and went to
entertain Monsignor Sacrista with the relation, and I prayed him, in case he
found opportunity to speak to the Pope about our affair, to tell him plainly
that our desires were that he would decide it, if his Holiness, could apply
himself to examine it before hand with the care and study it deserved; but if
he would not make such Examination with all due solemnities, then we desired
him not to let any new determination be made about it, as he had formerly given
me hope; one or the other; rather the former then the latter; but the latter,
if we cannot obtain the former. He promised me he would do it, if he found
opportunity; and counseled me in the maean time, not to address to the Pope
again till the Deputies whom I expected were arrived.

In the afternoon of the same day I went to see F. Vbaldino, who showed himself
very quick and vigorous for a man of his age in a good long discourse which we
had about this matter. As for the point of the Congregation which I solicited,
he told me that assuredly I must not expect to have any determination during
this Papacy, though such a Congregation were granted us. That were it granted,
it would be only for form, and outward seemlinesse; but really to weary us,
and constrain us by the length into which we should see all things drawn, to
return without any thing done. And the reasons upon which he grounded this
opinion, were, that the Pope was already very ancient, and would not be able to
undergo the pains that that Discussion required of him. That he was naturally
very slow in all things. That he was very prudent in affairs, and that he would
not care to engage in one wherein he knew himself not very well skilled. The
Father used the same words as the Pope did at my audience; viz. Il Papa non e
Theologo, non e la sua professione; e Legista. The Pope is not a Divine,
Divinity is not his Profession, but Canon Law.

On Tuesday October 24. I met with M. Fernier, with whom I went to give a
visit to F. le Maire the Jesuit. In our Discourse this Father maintained That
the good natural qualities wherewith a man is borne, may be a motive to God to
give him his grace for salvation, which he would not give to another that has
vicious ones. He maintained likewise that of three or four Jews alike
disposed in themselves, whom I should exhort to embraice the faith, and whose
conversion God equally willed, and for the effecting thereof gave them the like
graces, one might actually become a Christian, and the other actually reject
the graces given them by God for the same intent. He offered to prove this out
of S. Augustine, and carried us into their Library to show us some passages in
him; but all those which he showed us spoke nothing less then what he
pretended. When I had made to those passages such answers as I conceived
suitable, he replied, speaking of S. Augustine, Est meus and tuus; sed neque tuus
neque meus. M. Fernier plainly reproved that speech as inconsistent with the
esteem which ought to be had of that great Saint, whose sentiments are too
clear and well explicated to deserve such a censure; and F. le Maire seemed
willing to put it off, as grounding it upon all the worlds pretending him to be
on their side, and yet believing that indeed he was neither for one nor other.
He added also that his case was the same as it is with the H. Scripture, which
Heretics pretend is one their side as well as the Catholics, and which needs
to be explained, that it may be known how it is to be understood. As F. le
Maire reconducted us, we found F. Annat before his Chamber; he invited us to
come in, and there we discoursed together for some time very pleasingly and of
things wholly indifferent. At our departure they accompanied us with much
civility as far as the door of their Church toward their Cloister, and M.
Fernier and I heard Mass there.

I spent that afternoon in the Library of the Augustines, and transcribed
thence the beginning of a little compendious History de Auxiliis. The keeper of
the Library began to intimate some fear lest he should be blamed for letting me
take the Copies of those manuscripts; so that I perceived I must not hope for
any more to be showed me I perceived also that if I had not already had the
Copy of that Writing which I mentioned above signed by those ten Divines who
composed the Congregation established by Clement VIII. for examining Molina's
book, and who so fully declared themselves against his errots in behalf of
Effectual Grace and Gratuitous Predestination, this Library Keeper would not
let me have taken it; but for that I had before transcribed it, he permitted me
to compare it exactly, which I did some days after.

The rest of this month I had but one more considerable Occurrence, and that
was in a visit which I made upon the last day to Cardinal Roma. I told him the
news which I had received of some obstruction in the journey of my Colleagues
in this deputation, and I gave him an account of the audience which I had of
the Pope on the 17th day. The Cardinal answered, that there was no haste, that
they would come time enough, that nothing would be done without full cognizance
of the cause, that I ought not to doubt it; and though he did not think it
necessary for the salvation of every one to be fully informed of these matters
in contest, yet it was very good to decide them. I told him of the coming of
F. Mulard; and the manner of his pretended deputation. He answered me, that he
had not yet seen F. Mulard; but is it possible, added he, that a man so eminent
and so esteemed as M. Hallier, has sent a Deputy as from the Faculty without
having power to do it, and that a person ignorant and of a scandalous and
corrupt life as is that of this Cordelier? I assured him that M. Hallier had
done so, and acquainted him with the occasion that some had taken to calumniate
us at Rome, as if we intended to burn all the Bulls of the Popes by reason of
the just Scruples made by the University about some Bulls and Decrees of Popes
passed upon surprise and without cognizance of the cause; as also with that
which some took to say that the Faculty had subscribed the condemnation of
those Propositions, because that the plurality of voices had resolved to
intervene in the cause of the Irish before the Parliament in reference to
Discipline; though a great number of Doctors of the same Faculty had declared
contrary to the plurality, that they adhered to what the University had done
against the said Irish. The Cardinal took all very well, and assured me again
that he would take very great care that there might be no surprise here, and
that truth might be the rule of all things.

I made a visit likewise to Cardinal Spada to acquaint him with the retardment
of our Deputies; to which he only returned these four words, as he rose up,
Questi viaggi sono longhi, Those journeys are long.

The first visit which I made in November was to the Ambassador, to wait upon
him to Chapel on All Saints day. The solemnity of the day, did not hinder him
from asking me as he came forth of his Chamber, what news of our deputies. I
told him the condition of their journey; and he replied that he believed the
Pope would let all those problematical things alone so long as he lived. I
answered the Ambassador that I feared so, and that the Pope had signified very
much of such an inclination in an audience which I had of his Holiness during a
small journey which he (the Ambassador) made to Tivoli, of which I should be
glad to give him an account at his first convenience. Whereupon the Ambassador
replied that we must see one another in one of the next ensuing days.

In the afternoon after Vespers were ended, I visited F. Mulard, who read a
Letter to me which he had received from M. Hallier; the most remarkable thing
that I perceived in it, was, that though two Doctors of the contrary party (as
he called it) were set forth on their own accord to come to Rome, nevertheless
They (viz. who deputed F. Mullard) did not think fit to send others. I told F.
Mulard that M. Hallier was mistaken in saying those two Doctors were set forth
on their own accord. He answered me, that he had order to give out so upon all
occasions, and to advertise M. Albizzi thereof.

This discourse obliged me to make a visit on Friday morning to M. Albizzi; I
told him, that I had acquainted him at my first arrival at Rome that the
Bishops whose Letters I had presented to the Pope intended to send other
Doctors to solicit the effect thereof jointly with my self; and that those
Doctors would arrive in the month of October; That that month was past, and
the Doctors not yet arrived: but to assure him the had not spoken it without
being certain of what I said, I was come to advertise him that I had a letter
from Lions of the 30th of that month, by which it was signified to me that
they were set forth to continue their journey to Rome; That they had met with
some obstruction in the way; but I hoped they would nevertheless be at Rome
within a little-time. M. Albizzi answered me roughly in these words; Vengano, o
non vengano, al mese d' Octobre, di Novembre, di Gennaro, di Febraro; questo
non importa. Let them come, or not come, either in October, November, January,
or February, it matters not. We never said (continued he in Italian and with
the same air) that we gave them till the month of October or November: The H.
See is not resolved to receive any party in an affair of doctrine, as this is.
If they are minded to say any thing, it will hear them, if it think good,
tanquam aliquos e populo, (these were his words) They have no charge to come
hither, they come of their own heads. I interrupted him here, to tell him that
they did not come of their own heads, but they were sent by the Bishops. He
replied, that what I said was not true, questo non e pur vero, and that he was
as well informed thereof as my self. I answered him, that whosoever had told
him the contrary was a liar, e mendace. He maintained that he knew it full
well, and that he had good intelligence for it. I replied, that whosoever gave
it him, deceived him. He answered, What if it were the Nuntio? I replied, that
if it were the Nuntio, he had not said true; he must needs have been ill
informed. Ho, (said he) I warrant he would speak true; Do you think that the
Ministers of the H. See send false intelligence to it? And do you think (said
I) when I have in my hands a Procuration drawn in good form, and the Nuntio
says I have not, that I do not see and am certain that the Nuntio is mistaken?
But I (said M. Albizzi) will say that it is a false one. And besides, added he,
suppose they have a procuration from four Bishops, what is that against
fourscore? I answered him, that one alone was sufficient; and that it was
suitable to the order of the Church and the interest of the H. See, to hear him,
and see what he had to say for the service of the Church and the H. See. He
replied, that those Bishops and all of us, as many as we were, should do well
to obey the Bulls, and live in peace; That as often as any went about to
attempt any thing against the H. See, there was mischief followed upon it; That
in France they had offered to find fault with many things that are practiced at
Rome; that they talked there of Reformation, and that they had set up a Reformed
Religion. I asked who had done all this? He answered me Dio benedetto, 'twas
God. I replied, that he said true, because it is said in Scripture, Non est
malum in civitate quod non fecerit Dominus; but I asked him who had done it,
because I had never read nor heard anywhere that the Bishops of France had
failed in any thing of duty toward the H. See. He answered, that there was
nothing seen daily in France but enterprises against the H. See; that nothing
was heard spoken of but the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, which were so
many revolts against the Apostolical authority; Qu' un tal Marca havesse fatto
un libraccio il piu cattivo; That a certain Marca had made a kind of book, the
most wicked that had been heard of, a long time. That indeed he since sung a
palinodie palinodia, and for that reason was made a Bishop; That there came to
Rome about four or five years ago one Bourgeois, (he meant M. Bourgeois) with
another named Duchesne, as the Deputies whom I expected would come hither upon
their own private authority, to have the face to maintain heresies: But if he
(Albizzi) could have been believed that Bourgeos sarebbe stato fatto priggione,
that Bourgeois should have been arrested and put in prison, for having had the
boldness to deliver a Memorial to the Pope, in which there was Heresy: I
durst not take notice of the extreme scorn wherewith he spoke of those so
worthy persons, for fear of falling into some unnecessary contest with him,
from whence he might take advantage. But I answered him fairly, that all the
things which he spoke of belonged not to my affair, that therefore I had
nothing to say about them to him; but as for the Doctors whom I expected, I
affirmed to him that they were rightly and duly sent by many Bishops of France
of great consideration and merit; That it imported the order of the Church, and
the interest of the H. See to hear them; and as for those that had told him
that they came upon their own account, they were either malicious or ignorant
of the matter. To this M. Albizzi said, He, se non lo voglio credere, And what
if I will not believe it? I answered him, that he was master of his own will,
that he might believe or not believe all that he thought fit; but whether he
believed it or no, what I spoke was not the less true for that; Sele Padrone
della vostra Voglia and del vostro credere, ma credete lo o non, non e men
vero. M. Albizzi replied to me upon this by repeating several times the same
words, Ese non lo voglio credere, e se non lo voglio credere, in so strange a
manner and tone, that being scarce able to forbear laughing, I was obliged to
rise up to end this conference, and he reconducted me, muttering all the way,
and I smiling at his answers and deportment.

When I had quitted him, I passed by the lodging of M. Fernier, whom I found at
his gate, and he told me as a new thing, that M. Aveline had acquainted him
with all that F. Mulard had showed me in M. Hallier's Letter upon All Saints
day. And he further added, that M. Hallier had again sent to him to comport
himself at Rome as Deputy from the Faculty, to take courage, and he should not
be disowned; and that F. Mulard talked of nothing else upon the Piazza of Spain
with all the French, with whom he was often seen walking there.

In the afternoon I went to accompany the Ambassador to a Divinity-Act, which
was dedicated to him in the Covent of the Barefooted Carmelites of our Lady de
la Victoire. The most remarkable thing in that Act was this Thesis, Gracia
efficax est incompossiibilis cum discensu, (which alone summarily comprised all
our Sentiments) against which F. du Plantet a Minime Professor of Divinity, a
la Trinite du mont, next whom F. Annat sat, disputed the third and last of the
whole Act, and did it though with great zeal sat, very pitifully.

At the end of the Act I waited upon the Ambassador home. As we entered into
his Chamber, he told me that F. Mulard had said the day before, that he was a
Jansenist, and that I reported it; and that to clear himself from that
Reproach, he presently sent for the Abbot de Loiac to be a witness, that all
the Interest which he took in this affair, was to procure the Pope to grant the
Parties the Audience or Congregation which was desired of him (to the end he
might pronounce such a decision as might restore Peace in the Church of France
in reference to these matters) by representing to his Holiness the great
disposition there was in the King and all his Subjects to hear his voice and
obey it; but he had found the Pope always very averse from it. That he knew not
whether besides the principal reason that might divert the Pope from it,
because he was none of the most versed in these matters, and was too old to
apply himself to them, he had not some fear of being at some expense in causing
Learned me to come to Rome; as also lest when those persons saw themselves
assembled together, they might think of going further, and meddle with other
matters; or at lest it might prove the beginning of a Council, etc. I told the
Ambassador that none of this was to be feared; and having given him my reasons,
I proposed to him the Expedients to beseech the Pope to give Commission to a
Congregation calmly to examine things, and give him an account in one half
hour, of all that were done in it in a month, which I confirmed by the example
of Clement VIII. who was not personally present in the first Congregations held
under his Papacy, The Ambassador said, that he was of the opinion to get the
Cardinals St. Clement and Lugo to be of it. And in fine, when my Companions
were come, we should consult with him by what means to get the Pope to
condescend, that some order or other might be taken therein. In this
Entertainment I gave the Ambassador an account of what I have above related
concerning the audience which I had of the Pope October 17. The Ambassador
likewise told me, that the Pope would be more pliant when he saw more persons
appear.

On Sunday November. 5. afternoon, I went to tell Cardinal Ginetti, what I had
told Cardinal Barberin the day before, and others, concerning the Journey of
our Deputies. He answered me, That their delay would produce no hurt; that they
would come time enough, that he should receive them with joy; that he should
see them with a willing heart, and do his utmost for their satisfaction, and
that of the Prelates who sent them.

On Tuesday November. 7. I visited Cardinal Cechini for the same purpose, whom I
found that day more at leisure to hear me then formerly. I remembered him of the
audience which he had given me about the affair for which I came to Rome, and
of his scruple that we were not Parties, and the Pope might make such
Declarations as he would touching the Doctrine of Faith without hearing any
persons. After which I told him, that that might be true, speaking generally,
but in this cause we were truly Parties. That we found that the Doctrine which
we held concerning Grace, and which we pretended to be that of the Church too,
was involved in certain ambiguous Propositions, capable also of another sense
which is heretical. That we perceived that under Pretext of that Heretical
Sense, they who themselves fraim'd the Propositions, endeavored to obtain a
Censure of them, that they might apply the same afterward not to the Heretical
Sense which we held not, but to the Catholic which we hold, and to which these
Contrivers well know they may be extended: so that though they impute not those
Propositions to us, yet we saw well that they aimed at us, and that we had as
much ground to interess our selves therein, as a man accused of a Crime, not by
being named, but being described by the color of his Liveries, would have to
defend himself from such crime, though his name were not openly mentioned.
Cardinal Cechini answet'd, That as for himself, it was not necessary to speak
to him di questa robba of those things, but I must advertise M. Albizzi of
them, whose office it was to take care thereof. I replied, That I had informed
M. Albizzi of the same, but I was oblig,d also to inform his Eminence thereof,
as I had likewise done the Pope himself. As I was proceeding further, the
Cardinal made show of going to rise up from his seat, and therefore I was
obliged to rise from mine; which when I had done, I told him that the
Congregation whose Erection I came to solicit conjointly with other Doctors
that were shortly to arrive at Rome, was very just and very important for
Truth, the Peace of the Church of France, the Honor of the Holy See, and the
preservation of its authority. The Cardinal answered, that I must not doubt,
but the Pope would have all imaginable care of an affair of that quality.

In the afternoon I lighted upon a book at a Booksellers Shop, entitled Gemma
sententiarum S. P. Augustini de Auxiliis, selectarum ex omnibus tomis and
libris ipsius Patris Augustini a fratre Nicolao de Gracchis Romano, Ordinis
Eremitarum S. Augustine. Mag. and Doct. in S. T. and J. V. Professor. Ad
sanctiss. Dominum nostrum Vrbanum VIII. P. M. Romae apud Andream Pheum.
MDCXXVI. superiorum permissu. I bought several of those Books, though it was
not of the most commendable for it self, but because in the few sentences
therein extracted in very few words out of S. Augustine, there were a good
number which suited with the Catholic sense of which the Propositions were
capable, and having been dedicated to Urban VIII, and printed with permission
of superiors in the year 1626. and ever since publicly exposed to sale in
Rome till the year 1651. without any complaint having been made thereof, there
was great appearance, that neither Clement VIII, nor Paul V, had imposed
perpetual silence upon the matter de auxiliis, as the Pope and many besides him
endeavored to persuade me.

On Thursday morning I went to visit Cardinal Vrsin. I showed him our Latin
Manifesto, and gave him an account how our inducement to procure the impression
of it, was to let the whole Church now the Catholic senses which we maintained
in the matter of the five Propositions, and which obliged us to endeavor to
hinder their condemnation, for fear those senses might be involved in the same,
and it might be extended and applied thereunto by the very Contrivers of the
said Philosophical Discourse which we had to this purpose, the Cardinal
acknowledged that the Jesuits had strangly corrupted Divinity, and amongst
other examples that he alleged thereof, he mentioned two Jesuit Authors,
named Pelissarius and Amicus, who taught, That one might kill a man that was
ready to slander him, though he were a Religious, or Monk, perhaps not by
giving him a wound with a Sword or Pistol, but by a way that seemed to them
more gentle and moderate, namely by starving him per subtractionem ciborum. He
told me also, that the Jesuits offered to undertake the defense of those
Authors of their Society before the Congregation of the Index, whereof he was a
member, but that they were condemned there. At the end of this Conference, he
prayed me, when I should have any other Books Latin or Italian, touching the
matters which were the subject of our Contestations with those Fathers, to lend
the same to him to read.

On Sunday November. 12. I was at a Divinity Act held at the Augustines, who
invited me thither. There I saw answer and dispute well amongst others F.
Alvarez a Friar of the Order of the Dominicans, and Professor in Divinity at la
Minerve; The names of others I do not remember.

On Tuesday November 14. I went to the Ambassadors whilst he was hearing Mass.
I had heard it before. Cardinal Barberin arrived at the same time, and I went
with him into the Ambassadors Chamber, expecting till Mass were ended, but it
was then but beginning. The Discourse I had with the Cardinal in the interim,
was only concerning the Book of Frequent Communion, and the purity wherewith it
behooves to approach that holy Table. When the Ambassador came to us, he
saluted him very pleasantly, threatening to tell F. Mulard, that he had found
him with me: which signified, that there needed no more to make his Eminence
pass for a Jansenist in the opinion of that Cordelier.

I dined that day with the Ambassador, who after many several discourses of
Moral and Christian matters as well during Dinner as after, told me, that he
lately saw in F. Mulards hands a Letter signed by M. Pereyret, and many other
Doctors touching the matters in contest. This gave me occasion to reiterate to
him the request which I had formerly made to him for a sight of M. Halliers,
whereof he had given me hope; and also to beseech him to let me see this new
one if he could; assuring him that on my part I had nothing that I would keep
secret, but contrarily should be always* ready to produce all to the public
light, and particularly to such as might find themselves interested therein.
But I could never get a Copy, or so much as a sight of those Letters either by
this means or otherwise.

On Wednesday Novem. 15. afternoon I went to Cardinal Barberin. I found F.
Mulard coming out thence with a Letter, and a written paper which he held in
his hand. I prayed him to let me see that Paper; he refused to do it, but yet
condescended so far as to open it. It was very fairly written, and contained
four pages. I cast my eye upon the Title, and there read these words, An sit^
sopienda quae jam fervet Jansenistarum controversia, imposito utrique parti
silentio, which was a sufficient Item to me, having gotten a Copy of it
afterward, that this man was made use of to distribute and impart here and
there such kind of Writings which were works of darkness, wholly filled with
calumnies and falsities, as well as that of F. Morel. F. Mulard told me, that
he was going to carry that which he had in his hand to Cardinal Spada, with
intent, after he had read it, to bring it again to Cardinal Barberin.

I recovered that Writing afterward, as I shall relate in its due place; but I
shall here set down what I found it to contain.

The design of those who caused it to be dispersed, was to show, that it
behoved not to impose silence to the two parties, but to condemn Jansenius.
They proved it; 1. because said they, Jansenius was already condemned by the
Bull of Urban, which declares, that he renews the Doctrine of Bavis. It has
been seen in several places of this Journal even by the acknowledgement of
Cardinal Barberin, that there is nothing more false then this pretension; the
said Bull being but provisional.

2. Because if Silence were imposed, it would be no longer lawful to say that
the Commandments are possible, and that the H. Spirit may be resisted. But
this is ridiculous too, it being always lawful to utter such truths as are
certain, and not contested by any person.

3. Because the Church was already. engaged to find errors in Jansenius. Quia
jam Ecclesia oppignorata est, cum definierit multas ex Jansenianis
Propositionibus esse damnatas and damnabiles; and proinde hujus controversiae
materia non est amplius indifferens. It appears hence, that the principal
artifice of the Jesuits has always been to engage the Pope and the Bishops to
make ambiguous Decrees, and afterward to drive them further then they desired
at first, by supposing that it is a thing decided. They obtained at first a
little Decree against Jansenius; then they engaged Pope Urban VIII. to make a
provisional Bull, into which they procured ambiguous words to be slipped. By
favor of the ambiguity of which provisional Bull, themselves have made a
Doctrinal Bull of it; and at length have begun to seek for errors in Jansenius,
because as they pretend, the H. See has affirmed there were some in his book.

4. Because those Propositions were maintained in France; which is very false;
the Propositions having been framed by themselves, and no person there having
ever maintain'n them, saving so far as they may be reduced to the sense of
Effectual Grace; which is not to maintain them; but to maintain Effectual Grace.

5. Because it was meet not to let pass the occasions of confirming to the H.
See the possession of defining controversies touching Faith. Expedit non
praetermitti opportunas occasiones hujus possessionis confirmandae. And that
this occasion was the more favorable, for that the King was ready to cause
obedience to be given to the Pope, and the Principal persons of the Parliament
had likewise declared that his Decision should be obeyed. It is not improbable
but this reason has been considered as much or more then the rest.

Lastly, to take away all scruples, they maintained that there was nothing in
this controversy that had reference to the controversy de Auxiliis. Hanc esse
causam Thomistarum and Jesuitarum, qui dicunt, errant toto coelo. Nihil
proponitur Summo Pontifici, de quo fuerit contentio inter illos duos Ordines,
nihil quod non sit inter ambas familias summo consensu constitutum. We shall
see in its due place how far the Dominicans were from this thought.

When I had quitted F. Mulard, I went up to Cardinal Barberin; but because he
had many audiences to give, and I had not much to say to him, I continued with
him but a moment. After which I went to visit F. Delbene, who told me he
believed there would be erected a full and solemn Congregation, and that when
he gave me the advertisement which he did from Cardinal Barberin, it was out of
the affection which his Eminence had for me; and that he had also rendered his
Eminence very advantageous testimonies of my deportment and discourse with him
in all the conferences that we had had together.

Yet it is certain that those charitable advertisements gave occasion to the
Jesuits to spread the rumor in many parts of Rome, that I was already become
suspected by the Inquisition: which rumor seemed to me so unreasonable and
importune, that I was sometimes in the mind to make a free and authentic
complaint thereof to those Officers; but persons more intelligent then my self
in the genius of the Country, whom I acquainted with that thought, counseled
me not to do any thing about it, but to lift my self above such false reports.

On Thursday after noon I returned to Cardinal Barberin; and finding that he
was gone abroad, I went up to the chamber of M. Holstenius. I found him with a
book in his hands which the Pope had given him a few days before at an
audience which he had of him, wherein he told me, his Holiness spoke very
advantagiously of me, and that he was well pleased therewith. As for the Five
Propositions, he prayed me not to take it ill, if he freely told me his
thoughts of them; which were; that he wondered that we would maintain the same
absolutely because of the Catholic sense which they might admit,
notwithstanding the Heretical inherent in them; and he spoke as if our
intention were not draw out of each of those Propositions a clear and plain
Proposition; expressing in evident and unsuspected terms the sentiments we had
upon each. I answered him, that he had reason to say that it ought to be so
done, and assured him that it was our intention. I told him, that it behooved
to unravell and put into the fire those Propositions, and of each to make two,
whereof one to contain explicitly the Catholic sense which we held, the other
the Heretical, which was worthy to be condemned; and then to apply to each of
those Propositions so expressed and exempted from all ambiguity and obscurity
the judgment which it deserved. I told him that if he would take the pains to
read the book of Victorious Grace, and our Latin Manifesto, he should find that
we had no other aim then what I had declared to him. He answered me, that he
would willingly see them, and upon occasion he fell to speak of the book
intitul'd De Ecclesia praesentis temporis, which he accounted highly of. I
agreed with him as to the goodness of the book so far as it pretended to
prove the unity and perpetuity of the Church, and as to the style and manner of
expression: but as for the false suppositions which it made in attributing to
us such opinions as we owned not, thereby to take occasion to impugn them, I
told him that Author was a falsifier and a wicked person. M. Holstenius replied
as if we were much too blame then, that we did not discover those falsities,
and complain of those calumnies; and as if that silence had been an effect of
the difficulty we had to manifest our sentiments. I answered him, that we
desired nothing more cordially then that they were known by all the world for
such as they are; that we wished they were written with letters as visible as
the Sunbeams; that in occasions that seemed worth it, we complained of the
impostures and accusations invented to blacken us; but we had not so many
hands, nor so much authority and friends as the Jesuits, to divulge our books
throughout Rome, where those Fathers dispersed theirs. We ended this conference
with a new assurance that he gave me, more positive and indubitable then
formerly, that the Pope would not make any new determination; telling me that
we ought to comply with that inclination of his Holiness, and ought not to
press the H. See further to take part in those contests, and become engaged in
the toiles and cares that the discussion of the same required.

The next day November. 17. I went to carry our Latin Manifesto to M. Holstenius,
and not the book of Victorious Grace, because I had it not; but I directed him
for it to Cardinal Barberin's Library, where I believed it was. After which I
went to see the Father Commissary of the H. Office, but findding only his
Companion, who entreated me to show him our Latin Manifesto, I discoursed with
him at the present very copiously, and painted out to him the black malice of
those who framed those miserable Propositions.

On the 20th I went to deliver the Ambassador a Letter which I had received for
him. He told me, that he had lately seen another from M. Hallier to a person of
eminent rank, in which he said that he was not so averse from our sentiments;
but that which animated him against us was our manner of obtruding them, which,
as this Doctor suggested, implied that we held the Church had been in an error,
which was a shameful calumny.

On Tuesday 21. I carried to M. Holstenius the Latin explication of the
Propositions made in July 1649. so soon as M. Cornet first set them afoot, to
expose them to the Censure of the Faculty.

Wednesday 22. I happened to meet with one of the most intelligent Divines of
Rome, as well for his skill in doctrine, as in the practices of those that
superintend in it; he told me that he would not advise us to seek to get a
conference with the Jesuits, in regard of their great credit, and because it
was a thing that had been formerly done unsuccessefully. I answered, that Truth
was more powerful then they, and if it were once manifested, (as I hoped it
would be if we could obtain a regular conference with them) it might overthrow
them. He replied, that it were good to stay till one came that understood it
well, and knew how to direct the blow and strike home, before it were possible
for them to see it, and provide to ward it off. I also met with the Father
Procurator of S. Marcel, who told me that there was talk of forming a
Congregation about our affair, and that he hoped to be a member of it. In the
afternoon I mer at S. Cecilia F. Malgoires and F. Loyseau an Augustine and
Doctor of our Faculty, who overtook me both together. F. Malgoires told me,
that the Abbot of Comblon informed him, that being on Sunday last in the
presence chamber of the Pope, he heard F. Mulard say to the Master of his
Holinesses chamchamber, these very words, Piaccia a vostra Signoria
illustrissima farmi havere udienza. Son qua diputato dalla Facolta della
Sorbona per quell' affare contra Jansenio. I entreat your most illustrious
Lordship to help me to have audience. I am delegated hither by the Faculty of
Sorbon, about the affair against Jansenius. F. Malgoires professed himself very
much offended at it, and propounded an expedient to me to hinder it; and that
was, for all of us that were Doctors at Rome to go together and complain of it
to the Ambassador. M. Fernier intervening, professed that he was more
displeased at it then I. But they did not agree that we should go to the
Ambassador about it. When I had quitted them, within two or three steps I met
with F. Mulard, and told him I came newly from some people that were very much
incensed against him. He asked me who? I did not name the persons, but told him
it was because he termed himself Deputy from the Faculty, though he was not. He
answered, They are sots and fools who offer to gainsay it; the Pope shall be
the Judge; his Holiness owns me for such; the Cardinals hear me in that
quality; I care little for those that are not pleased with it. When he parted
from me, he lighted upon F. Loyseau, who came and told me afterward, that F.
Mulard quarreled with him, and charged him with having told me what I have
above mentioned.

I had received a new Letter which obliged me to go to Cardinal. Barberin, and
signify to him that my LL. the Bishops, by whose order I was at Rome, were
very joyful to understand that his Eminence did not approve the bad use which
the Jesuits made of the Bull of Urban 8. his Uncle, by extending it, as they
did, to the absolute and decisive condemnation of the sentiments which those
Fathers impugned. I visited him on Thursday the 13. in the afternoon for that
purpose; and he told me, that he could not approve the proceeding of those
Fathers in this respect, and never had approved it. Upon my reading a
congratulation to his Eminence, that those Prelates were resolved not to
consider that Bull but as provisional, for this reason, that should they take
it otherwise, they should have very great ground to complain of it,
particularly, for that the terms of the Bull taken in the rigor, seemed to
forbid them to speak of the matter of Grace even incidently, though it be not
only a right inseparable from their profession, but also an essential
obligation, from which neither themselves nor others can dispense with them, to
instruct the people committed to their charge, solidly thereof; The Cardinal
replied, that indeed the said Bull was not to be extended so far. Then I
complained to his Eminence of the Quality that F. Mulard took upon him at Rome;
of M. Hallier's unheard of audacity in giving it him; that the same Doctor writ
injuriously and calumniously against us to several persons, and particularly to
M. Albizzi; of the secret way that these things were received, and of the
difficulty for us to defend and justify our selves from them, whilst they
remained in that secrecy. But the Cardinal seemed this day more disposed to
excuse the things whereof I complained, then to receive the complaints which I
made to him. At length we fell upon the Congregation which I su'd for, and he
told me the H. See was not very inclinable to grant it. I answered, that yet it
was a thing highly necessary, contests being come to such a pitch, that it
behooved for the sake of Peace and Truth to examine who were in the wrong, both
being concerned in it; that if the sentiments which we defended were not true,
I wished we were convinced the next day by a good condemnation; but on the
contrary, if those of the Jesuits deserved it, they ought to wish it too as
well as we; that for a little mortification which the condemned party would
receive at first, for having been too eager in holding sentiments contrary to
the truth, there would in the sequel arrive both to the one side and the other
infinite advantages, considerable and important, to countervail the same; which
being well weighed and examined by the H. See, it would assuredly find that it
is obliged in justice to take such pains as are necessary to procure so eminent
a Benefit to its Children, and consequently to establish the Congregation which
is esteemed so necessary for that effect. The Cardinal desired me at the end of
this audience to return again to him on Saturday following in the afternoon,
with M. de Balagni a French Gentleman of great worth, whom I had mentioned to
him, that we might go abroad to take the air, or repair to his Library,
according as to the time should permit.

On Saturday the 25th. as I was going accordingly with the said M. de Balagni
to wait upon the Cardinal Barberin, I received very sad news, but, thanks be
to God, it proved untrue. It was, that the Deputies whom I waited for, were
taken at Sea by the Pirates. M. de Valeran Master of the French Couriers to
Rome came purposely to tell it me, with all the circumspection and condolence
accustomed in such cases, as having received the same from Florence, and
esteeming it true, though not altogether certain. I was not dismayed at it, and
it did not hinder me from going to Cardinal Barberin, and spending the rest of
the day with him and M. de Balagni in entertainments upon indifferent matters.

I was blamed the next day for having been so cold and negligent after the
receipt of the abovementioned news; and for not going the same day, which was
that on which Letters are dispatched from all Italy, to advertise the Ambassador
of it, and beseech him to write by that Post to Constantinople for the
procuring of my Colleagues their liberty, or at least some comfort in their
captivity. But I cleared my self, by alleging that I did not judge M. de
Valeran's intelligence very true; and that I conceived it was fitting to be
sure of the truth, before I took the allarm and communicated it to the
Ambassador. And accordingly I found that I had taken the best course; for I
received Letters from them on Sunday the 26th. in the afternoon, by which I
understood not only that M. de Valeran's news could not be true, but also that
they would probably be at Rome within a very few days; and so they were, as I
shall relate in the following Chapter: but I shall first observe here two or
three things which come into my mind, and whereof I have made no mention in my
Notes of this time.

The first is, that happening occasionally since my return to Rome to be in the
Professed House of the Jesuits under the Cloister or Gallery which is at the
entrance, there passed by one of those Fathers whose hand was very white; and
when he was gone, my friend that was with me, a Roman Citizen, told me it was
F. Santarel. This put me in mind of his book, and made me desirous to buy it if
it were to be sold. At my coming away from the Jesuits, I went purposely
toward the Quarter of Pasquin where are the most Booksellers, and the first
of whom I inquired for it, sold it me at a very ordinary price. I admired that
that book was so commonly to be had at Rome after having been censured by all
the Universities of France with so unanimous and universal consent; and it
containing such pernicious doctrine, that the Author wanting more solid
foundations for it, was forced to corrupt the H. Scripture so openly, that he
retrencht a Negative particle out of the sacred Text, to make it speak quite
the contrary to what it speaks of it self. It Is in that passage where S. Paul
speaking of the Spiritual power which Jesus Christ gave to his Apostles for the
Edification of the Faithful, he says they received it ad aedificationem, and
non in destructionem; For their edification and instruction, and not for their
destruction and ruin. But this Jesuit on the contrary applying the said
passage to the pretended Temporal power of the Pope over Monarchies, to make it
believed that God has given it to him as well to ruin and overturn them, as
to edify them; he takes the Non out of the place; and cites it thus; Ad
aedificationem and in destructionem. Notwithstanding all which, I found that
the book was st^l in great applause and free sale at Rome.

The second thing; which I remember, but did not set down, was, that in my
visites to Cardinal Spada, I used one argument which I conceived would have
been most prevalent at Rome. I told him, that one way to fix in the minds of
the world a great opinion of the Equity of the H. See, would be to grant us the
equitable things which we requested, and to make a Decision favorable to our
cause, in case they found that that we defended the truth. Because by that
means, pronouncing in favor of persons which had been represented very
suspected and odious to them, and had no support in the world but their
learning and virtue. against others that had a very great credit, and were
recommended by all the Princes of Europe, and openly profes'd an absolute
dependence on the Pope, every body would be obliged to acknowledge that the H.
See had no other rule in its Decision but Truth it self. I added further that
should it consider only the interests it self has to keep within their duty
those persons that were the most dependant on it, and boasted themselves the
most devoted to it, it ought in this occasion to humble the Authors of those
Propositions and of that whole Design; because indeed they had forgotten the
respect and fidelity which they ought to preserve toward it, forasmuch as they
had framed the same Propositions so capable of equivocatious, and full of
ambiguities, only to circumvent the H. See and engage it in the scandalous
protection of their pernicious doctrine and their vain reputation which they
saw they could no longer uphold but by sacrificing that of the H. See for that
end. I told him also, that they would find the truth and sincerity of the
submission and respect which the said persons pretended for the H. See, when it
was not favorable to them. The Cardinal heard this discourse (which I renewed
and urged to him several times) as he heard all the rest which I said to him,
without answering any thing in particular. I represented the same also upon
occasion to others, but more or less largely according as it was expedient.

The third and last thing which I have to add here, of all that were
observable during the six months that I spent alone at Rome in giving the Pope
and his Ministers the first adviso's of this great affair, concerns another
which has almost no affinity with it, but yet is very considerable in it self.
It is touching the violent persecutions which the Jesuits have practiced for
this long time against a learned and pious Bishop of America, who made a
representation of them to the Pope in a letter written to his Holiness in the
beginning of the year 1649. M. Cosimo Ricciardi gave me a Copy of it a little
after my returning to Rome, and in many of the visites which I made to him
frequently and familiarly, he always mentioned it with just indgnation. He got
the Copy of it from that Bishops Agent who brought it to Rome and delivered it
to the Pope. He had a great desire to have it printed, that all the world might
be partakers of it, and he signified seeveral times that he had given it upon
that design to other persons besides me. But not knowing what those other
persons may have done* I shall venture to put it among the first pieces of the
Collection annexed to this Journal, to the end it may come to the knowledge of
the public, and admonish all the world what is to be feared from the violences
of the Jesuits and their strange obstinacy in invading the sacred rights of
the Episcopal Office, and upholding themselves by all sort of practices in
their sacrilegious usurpations.

The ensuing title was not upon the said Letter when the Agent gave it to
Signor Cosimo, but himself out of the satisfaction which he had after he had
read it, thus endors'd it: Natalibus, doctrina, virtute vere Christiana
Clarissimi and Illustrissimi Viri Domini Joannis de Palafox and Mendoza
Hispani, and in America Episcopi Angelorum populi, ac Consiliis Indiarum
Decani, Epistola sanctissima, gravissima, Ad summum Pontificem Innocentium X.
de Jesuitarum societate extinguenda vel stricte reformanda ob venerabilis
Ecclesiae bonum.

CHAP. XIV.
The Arrival of our Deputies on December. 5. The visites which we made together
till the end of the same month.

THE day so advantageous and comfortable to me by the arrival of my Colleagues
was December 5. about two a clock afternoon. They were three, namely M. Brousse
Canon of S. Honor, M. de Lalane Abbot of Valcroissant, Doctors of Paris; and
M. Angran Licentiate. I went to Ponte-molle to meet them with some friends who
pleased to accompany me thither. The rest of the day after dinner, was spent in
receiving some visits of other friends who came to congratulate their safe
arrival, with the more joy, in regard of the rumor of their detention.

On Wednesday the 6. we went in the morning ad Limina Apostolica to S. Peter,
to give thanks to God for his benedection vouchsafed to their journey; and we
returned by the Church of S. Augustine, there to redouble our thanksgiving. In
the afternoon we went to see the Ambassador, who received us with great
expressions of esteem and courtesy, and seeing these Gentleman still in their
riding habits, he offered us his coaches and all other assistances wherewith he
could supply us. Then we went to see M. Gueffier, and some other friends, and
as we were in the course of our visits we turned in at the Church of S. Lewis,
to put up our prayers there.

On Thursday the 7. I went to accompany Cardinal Barberin to Monte Cavallo. The
Archbishop of Beneventum, the Abbot della pace, and two other persons were in
his Coach with me. I advertised his Eminence of the arrival of our Deputies,
and entertained him upon the way with the Sermons which M. Brousse was obliged
to make at Die, of which I shall speak hereafter. In the afternoon my Colleagues
and I went to visit other friends.

On Sunday the 10. after I had waited upon the Ambassador to Chapel, I met the
Cordelier who made the sermon at S. Lewis that year. He told me, F. Mulard had
taken his companion by the throat in the Cloister, and by his menaces
constrained another Cordelier named F. Pacifique, to retire to the
Ambassador's, as to a place of refuge; that he was confederated against them
with the Spanish Cordeliers; and in brief, caused a great deal of stir and
trouble in the Covent. In the afternoon I met one of the Ambassador's
Secretaires, who being asked concerning the Cordelier that was reported to have
taken Sanctuary there, he told me There dined one there that day, but he did
not know whether he were absolutely retreated thither.

On Tuesday the 12. we went to visit the Ambassador and entertain him more at
leisure then we could do at the arrival of my Colleagues. He was coming forth as
we were entering in, and desired us to excuse him for that time; referring us
to Thursday.

On Wednesday the 13. we accompanied him to the ceremony of S. Lucia, which is
performed every year in the Church of S. John de Lateran, in memory of Henry
IV. of glorious memory benefactor to that Church, and in the afternoon we went
to see the Vatican Library. As I returned I visited a person well seen in the
affairs of the H. Office, who told me that Cardinal Lugo complained there one
day, that he had received Intelligence that the Bull of Paul V. against the
Jesuits was going to be printed in France; and that it was resolved thereupon
that the Nuntio should be desired to take care that the said Impression were
not made. He accqainted me also with a very secret and important Adviso; namely
that the Emperor, the King of France, and the King of Spain had lately upon
the Jesuits importunity written to the Pope, to demand the formal condemnation
of the five Propositions, because they occasioned disturbance in their
Dominions. That presently after the arrival of our Doctors the Pope was
advertised of it. That it was debated on Wednesday at la Minerve, and on
Thursday before the Pope what was to be done upon our request for the erection
of a Congregation, and it was resolved to do nothing at all, but to hold us in
expectation, to treat us with civility, to defer and put off from time to time
all resolutions upon our suit, and in fine to weary us, and oblige us to
resolve of our own accord to return without doing any thing. He advertised me
also that there would be spies upon all our actions, and that we must always
remember to speak in the name of the Bishops that sent us: Which indeed was
otherwise our intention.

This intelligence being given me upon condition of secrecy, I could not
acquaint my Colleagues, nor indeed was it otherwise fitting, being such as might
have cast them into despair of any good issue, should they have known that
there was a resolution taken to grant them nothing of what they requested, but
to pay them with formal civilities. But for my own part, God gave me the grace
not to be discouraged at all these difficulties, but to maintain my self still
with hope, that we might so effectually represent the necessity of establishing
such a Congregation as we required that at length we might obtain it by our
perseverance.

On Thursday we repaired to the Ambassador, and found him yet in bed; After we
had largely laid open to him the purposes and order we had to move the Pope for
the said Congregation; as also the maliciousness wherewith those five
Propositions had been contri^'d for the calumniating and disparaging of the
true disciples and defenders of S. Augustin's doctrine; his conclusion was,
that he counseled us to act with as much mildness and modesty, as he knew we
understood to be requsite; and for any thing in his power, he would contribute
it to obtain the Examen, and Congregation which we su'd for; but he found the
Pope very far from the inclination to grant the same.

We went on Friday to see the master of the Pope's Chamber and know of him when
we might be admitted to the audience of his Holiness. He desired one of us to
take the pains to repair to him within a few days, and then he would satisfy
our question.

We intended to visit all the sacred College after we had saluted the Pope;
but in the mean time we thought fit to visit the Cardinals of the French
Faction, as we had done the Ambassador. Wherefore we visited the Cardinals
Barberin and Vrsin. The latter first gave us audience on Friday December. 15.
As Soon as he saw us, he showed us the book of Jansenius de S. Augustino etc.
pessime meritus. We spoke of it to him as of an i^famous Libel, and nothing but
a heap of falsities and impostures; which would have been easy for us to prove,
because in realty it was such. One amongst the rest I shall take notice of here
by the way to show how the boldest lies, and most artifical impostures
sometimes destroy one another. For at the same time that they imputed to the
Bishop of Ipre the second Proposition, which is, That in the state of corrupted
nature a man never resists internal grace; they attribute to him in that
libel with no less falsity, an Error wholly contrary, viz. That sinners resist
divine Grace, through an impossibility not to resist it. This is the second of
the Propositions which they there charge upon Jansenius, Peccatores omnes qui
divinae gratiae resistunt, illi resistere ex impossibilitate assentiendi, quam
habet similiter adjunctam status in quo tunc reperiuntur quando resistunt. But
in stead of noting to Cardinal Vrsin particularly any of the Calumnies of that
book, we contented our selves to tell him in general; that we had no more
design to complain of that then of many others the same nature which were daily
printed; because all the commission which we had received from the Bishops who
sent us, was only to advertise the Pope of the Dis-ingenuity wherewith the
Equivocal Propositions presented to him were framed, to represent to him what
danger there was lest the holy truths included in those Propositions might
receive some wrong, if the said Propositions were absolutely censured because
of the Heretical senses whereof they were also capable, without having first
separated and distinguished the different senses which they may admit, and to
beseech him not to suffer the H. See to be circumvented, nor Truth to be
oppressed in this cause, but to provide both for the one and the other by
establishing a solemn Congregation in which the whole affair might be discussed
with care, and the parties heard viva voce and by writing touching the matter
of the Propositions, before his Holiness made any decision thereof. The
Cardinal apprehended all this very equitable, and asked whether there were not a
Congregation established already. I answered him that we had understood so, and
that we knew at least four Cardinals that were designed to be of it. He asked
who they were; I named them to him viz: Roma, Spada, Ginetti, and Cechini. He
said he believed there would be Divines joined with them. I answered that I had
heard some named. Hereupon he named to me the Father Procurator of S. Marcel
and F. Aversa, as it were to ask me whether they were not the persons whom I
had named. I told him, they were. It being late, and we disposing our selves to
take leave of his Eminence, he told us that for his own part he wished the
affair were terminated in the manner we desired, and if he could do any thing
in it, he offered us his service and his recommendation.

That little book of Jansenius pessime meritus, was in great vogue at Rome, and
it had been distributed to abundance of people. For going that morning to la
Minerve, one of their Eminent Fathers spoke to me about it, and told me, we
must have a care of it, for it would produce very evil effects. But I answered
him, that that was not our business at all; that if Jansenius had vented the
Propositions which that book imputed to him, they might condemn him if they
would, we were not concerned; that we were at Rome only to obtain of the Pope
a solemn Congregation for examining the affair of the five Propositions before
the Pope made any decision upon them: Which this Dominican was well pleased
with, and that we declared our selves openly in this manner and took no part in
the defense of Jansenius.

On Saturday the 16. I was in the Pope's Presence Chamber, and spoke with his
Maistre de Chamber something more particularly touching the subject of my
Commission. He told me that there came a Cordelier thither (F. Mulard) to
present certain Propositions in a printed book to the Pope, and that before he
introduced him he desired to know what it was. That Cardinal Cecheni told him,
there was no danger in offering it to the sight of his Holiness. He said also
that the Cordelier told him that he was one of the Sorbon. I answered him to
this, that most certainly he was not; and so took occasion to give him an
account of the whole Fraud. He admonisht me also to take heed of giving the
Pope alcuni travagli, any cause of disturbance and pains. I told him, that we
would be as careful in that respect as possible; and that this consideration
had already been the cause that I had represented to my Colleagues that between
that day and the Festivals there was only the Tuesday following in which we
could hope to have audience; that the Pope would be much encumbered that day,
and that if we would stay till after the festivals we should with more ease and
convenience be admitted. The Maistre de Chamber was well pleased with this
moderatenesse, and proms'd me to procure audience for us as soon after the
Festivals as he could.

Sunday the 17. we went to the Pope's Chapel, and Monsignor Sacrista placed on
one side of the Altar, just upon the passage where the Pope was to come in and
go out; so that his Holinsse casting his eye upon us, considered us very wistly
both at his coming in and going out.

M. Cosimo Ricciardi de Alcoltis Cure of San Salvato della Copella, and
Qualificator of the Congregation of the Index sent to me to come to him in the
afternoon, which I did. He gave me notice that F. Annat was about to print a
Book against the five Propositions, and that the book was committed by the H.
Office to some persons to examine it, and see whether it were fit to give it
approbation and permission to be printed; which might prove of very great
prejudice in this affair, as I shall relate hereafter when I come to mention
what we did to hinder it.

On Tuesday the 19. we went to wait upon Cardinal Barberin, who fell into high
commendations of the Faculty; which were seconded by our applauses; but least
the same might be construed as if we took upon us to be at Rome in its name, I
told his Eminence that the degree of Doctor being inseparable from the persons
that have the honor to be of it, I conceived, he considered the same in us,
though we were not employed by the Faculty but by some of my LL. the Bishops of
France, for the purposes I had formerly had the honor to signify to his
Eminence. Our conference continued not long, Cardinal Rapaccioli coming to call
his Eminence to go abroad; and so it concluded in complements.

We went on Wednesday the 20. to visit the seven Churches. Going to S. Peter's
in the morning I met F. Mulard in the street of the Hat-Sellers, who was buying
some to return into France; he told me would not go now the season was so far
spent, were it not that he was constrained by people that had power to command
him; but he hoped he should come back shortly to Rome with M. Hallier. That the
Pope would for certain pass a Judgment in the case; That it was reported that
he would be contented with imposing silence as to our matters; but his mind was
now otherwise. I desired him to remember me to M. Hallier, and assure him, that
himself could not be more desirous to be at Rome, then I was to see him there.
When we were returned from the seven Churches, F. Mariana came to put me in
remembrance of some visits which he thought expedient for us to make. He told
me when I asked him the question, that people seemed very joyful for the
arrival of our Colleagues; and spoke very well of it. But he said he heard from
a certain person, that there had escaped from one of us some word against the
Council of Trent; but he had answered that it was a slander and a falsity, as
indeed he had reason, there not having been the least pretext or ground for
that accusation.

On Friday the 22. M. Brousse and my self went to see the General of the
Augustines. Amongst other things, he told us that F. Mulard came to visit him
as Envoy from the Faculty of Divinity at Paris; and wondered when we assured
him that he was neither a Deputy nor a Doctor of it. He advised us very
earnestly to forbear speaking of Jansenius, and promised to contribute with us
what he could do for the interest of S. Augustin's doctrine.

In a Visit I made in the afternoon to F. Barelier, he told me his General
could not be spoken with till after two days, because of a hundred or sixscore
letters which he was to prepare against the next day for Italy; but he had
already mentioned our business to him, and said that we could not but be very
welcome, provided we spoke of none but S. Augustine, and S. Thomas.

All the Festivals were spent in Devotions, Ceremonies and Visits active and
passive of our particular friends. I saw one thing at Vespers at the Church of
S. Lewis, (where we were on Christmasse day) which deserves in my judgment to
be set down here. The prayers of 40. hours had been there, and ended that day.
At the end of Vespers a Procession was to be made, and the H. Sacrament was to
be carried about in order to being shut up after the procession and accustomed
ceremonies. We had the honor to carry the Canopy. As we were coming out of
the Church, Card. Giori was passing by: He caused his Coach to stop, the boot
to be taken down, and fell upon his knees while the Procession was passing.
When the Sacrament appeared, he alighted, accompanied it, and entered with us
into the Quire, and there stayed upon his knees till all the prayers and
ceremonies were ended.

When the Festivals were over, I went to the Popes Maistre de chamber, who, for
that the Venetian Ambassador newly arrived was to have his first audience that
morning, and Cardinal Raggi was afterward to present to the Pope the
Conservators of the people of Rome newly elected, referred us for our audience
to the Tuesday ensuing.

Having quitted him, I went to the high Mass in the little Church of S. Thomas
of Canterbury; at the end of which approaching to Cardinal Barberin in the
Sacristie, we fell to speak of the Abbot of Bourzeis his not enduring that any
thing should be spoken in the printed books about our contests against the Bull
of Urban VIII. whereupon Cardinal Barberin rejoicing, O, said he to me, M. de
Bourzeis e mio grand amico.

On Saturday the 30th. going in the afternoon for recreation to see the more
considerable places of Rome, as we passed by Ara coeli, we met Friar Archangel,
who told us that F. Mulard was gone, and that he was gone encharg'd with
Procurations and letters of recommendation from Card. Barberin, to negotiate in
France about the affair of the Five Propositions, to return speedily, and bring
M. Hallier with him. I asked him concerning M. Hallier's letter which F. Mulard
refused to show me; he told us, it was a thing not hard to be seen, for he had
given Copies of it to several Cardinals, and he named Roma and Ginetti; that he
(Fr. Archangel) transcribed them to present to their Eminences; but had kept no
Copy for himself, they being too long, and in a very small hand, and requiring
five or six hours to transcribe one. And by all that he told me, I found that
what had been signified to me thereof by others not so clearly informed as Fr.
Archangel, was nevertheless very true.

CHAP. XV.
An Account of some Sermons which M. Brousse made upon the way of Die against
the Calvinists of that City, touching the possibility of God's Commandments.

AMongst the particularities which my Colleagues related to me of their journey,
they told me of the stay which the Abbot of Valcroissant made at his Abbey,
during which M. Brousse had occasion to hear preach at Die a considerable
Minister of that City which is almost wholly Calvinistical, and to refute what
he had said in his Sermon. That which I heard mention of in familiar discourse,
seemed to me so considerable, that I desired the Abbot of Valcroissant to set
it down in writing, for preserving the remembrance of it. He did so; and the
account he gave of it, deserves, as I conceive, to have a place in this Journal.

In our journey from Lions to Marseilles in order to take Sea, we passed
through the City of Die in Dauphine, where the Calvinists have a College, one
of the most considerable that they have in France. We stayed there some days,
by reason my Abbey is a league distant from that City. During which time M.
Brousse, seeking occasion to evince the truths of the Catholic faith against
the Hugonots, went to the Church on Sunday the 22. of October. to hear the Sermon
of the Minister named Dise, who took for the Theme of his Discourse the 6.
verse of the 8. chap. of the Epistle to the Romans; Nam prudentia carnis mors
est, prudentia autem Spiritus vita and pax. From which words he adventured to
draw sundry heretical consequences against the Possibility of the
Commandments, against the Merit of Good works, and against the difference and
distinction of Sins into mortal and venial. This was the matter that he handled
during a long hour which his discourse lasted.

When all was done, M. Brousse offered to the Principals of the Consistory to
refute immediately all that the Minister had said, and to go for that purpose
into what place they pleased, either into the Bishops Hall, or into the middle
of that place, or into the College, provided the Minister would hear him, as
himself had heard him. But those Heretics refusing the challenge, he resolved
to confute the said Sermon in the Cathedral Church, to which the Vicar General
of the Bishop of Valence and Die, and all the Members of the Chapter assented.
Many of those of the Religion were present there, though the Ministers did not
like it. He made two Sermons upon the same Verse, and confuted all the
Heretical consequences which the Minister pretended to draw from it. In the
former, he proved the Possibility of the Commandments, and in the second, he
established the Merit of good works, and evinced the difference of mortal Sins
from venial, and showed, that though no person lives in the world without small
sins, yet all our works are not sins; contrary to what that Minister had
maintained in his discourse.

Touching the Possibility of the Commandments, he established the verity of the
Catholic faith, making the same apparent between the two erroneous Extremes of
the Pelagians on one side, who would have the Commandments possible by the
sole strength of nature, without the aid of the true grace of Jesus Christ; and
of the Lutherans and Calvinists on the other, who hold that they are not
possible to Nature even assisted with the grace of Jesus Christ. And he showed
clearly how both the one and the other are overthrown at one blow by the
Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Can. 18. Si quis dixerit homini justificato
praecepta Dei esse impossibilia, anathema sit. And cap. 11. Nemo temeraria illa
and a Patribus sub anathemate prohibita voce uti debet, Praecepta homini
justificato ad observandum esse impossibilia. Which he confirmed by abundance
of passages of H. Scripture, and by the authorities of S. Hierome, S.
Augustine, and the Councils of Mileve and Orange, out of which the Council of
Trent has taken its Definitions.

And because the Minister, to elude the Scripture; by making semblance of
answering to it and explicating it, had said, That the Commandments may in
some sort be said to be possible in two manners; first, inasmuch as they may be
performed in Heaven, as also they might have been before Adam had sinned.
Secondly, that they may be said possible, because we have a Will which of its
own essence is a remote Power, and is not found in other creatures. M. Brousse
showed that the Commandments are not only possible in those two manners.

In refutation of the former, he showed, that the H. Scripture speaks of the
fulfilling of the Commandments, which is done in this life; which he confirmed
by the example of many righteous persons who lived under the Law and the
Gospel, of whom it is said in the Old and New Testament, That they kept the Law
of God, That they walked in the way of his Commandments, That they observed
righteousness, That they were righteous before God, and they lived without
blame, and without fault, etc. whence he concluded, that the H. Scripture
speaks of the possibility of the Commandments in reference to this life; but
because many that living after the lusts of the flesh do not observe them, or
do not observe them by the Spirit of Grace and of the Gospel, and in the order
to Salvation, but only by the spirit of the flesh, and according to the Letter
and bark of the Law, in this sense the Apostle says, Prudentia carnis mors
est; Prudentia autem Spiritus Vita and Pax.

He showed in the second place, that the Commandments are not possible to men
only because they have a Will, which according to its Essence is a remote power
accomplishing them;

1. Because then Jesus Christ should have merited nothing for men by his death,
in reference to the fulfilling of the Commandments; since without him they were
equally possible with that remote power, which consists in the Essence of the
Will, which Jesus Christ did not purchase by his death.

2. Because the Christians would have no advantage above Turks and Pagans, in
respect of being able to observe the Law of God; since that Power which
consists in the Essence of the Will, is common to Turks and Pagans as well as
to Christians. This he confirmed by the consequence of several other
absurdities, which the Heretics cannot avoid.

All the Auditors expressed great satisfaction with this Sermon, and agreed that
M. Brousse had very solidly refuted that of the Minister. The Jesuits of Die
which were there, were also very much edifi'd with it, and without doubt they
will attest the same. Many of those of the Religion who had heard the Minister
before, confessed, that Mr. Brousse had confuted his Sermon word for word, and
all commended his moderation, for having proceeded only upon the Authority and
Reason founded upon the H. Scripture, and the H. Fathers, without flying into
any contumely against the Minister. But that which most astonished the
Heretics, was the hearing of the Catholic Doctrine in the point of the
possibility of the Commandments explained, and their belief confuted without
having recourse to Sufficient Grace subject to Free Will, as the Jesuits
explicate it. This made them acknowledge, that those who are called Jansenists,
though they hold Principles contrary to those of the Jesuits, yet for all that
do not favor the Doctrine of Calvin, and have this advantage in oppugning them
this way that they (Calvinists) could not upbraid these Doctors us they did the
Jesuits, of falling into the Error of the Pelagians, by going about to oppose
the Tenets of Calvin. Moreover the Catholics were heard to ask one another as
they went from the Sermon, How can these Doctors be accused of agreeing with
the Calvenists, touching the possibility of the Commandments, seeing we never
heard the Doctrine of the Calvinists so well confuted, nor that of the Council
of Trent so well established? as this Doctor has done, who they say is a
Jansenist, etc. M. Brousse offered the Ministers again to hold a conference,
but they would not accept it. He was desired to preach to the Urselines, who
are the only Nuns in that place, where seeing many of the pretended reformed
Religion were come to hear him, he fully evinced against them, with the
edification of all his Hearers, the Sanctity of Vows, by which Virgins
particularly consecrate themselves to God in the retirement of Monasteries.

An Addition to the foregoing Narrative.
DUring the four months of M. Brousse 's residence at Rome, I never thought of
showing him the foregoing Narrative; but since my Return, sending it to him to
peruse, and see whether all were punctually related, and whether he would add
any thing to it, after he had read it, he sent it to me back with the following
Addition.

In the said Narrative there is almost nothing of the second Sermon which I
preached at Die, wherein I handled the matter of Good Works, and the
distinction of sins into mortal and venial, with as great and more strength as
I did the day before that of Grace, and the possibility of the Commandments;
and wherein there was this Rrmarkable, That the Minister having mentioned the
Opinion of the Jesuit Gretser, and brought a passage of his as a Doctrine of
the Roman Church, I said in confuting him, That he was either extremely
ignorant for a Professor in Divinity, or extremely malicious: Ignorant, if he
knew not that the sentiment of that Jesuit was not owned by the Roman Church,
since so many learned men had opposed it: Malicious, if knowing so much, (as it
was not likely he could be so ignorant of what was so common among the learned)
he had nevetheless the boldness to allege it to his Auditors as the belief of
the Church of Rome, and so impose upon them the falsity. I added, that the
opinion of the Jesuit Gretser was so far from being the belief of the Roman
Church, that for my part I accounted the same directly contrary unto it. I
added this, because I saw two Jesuits my Auditors, who after Sermon came to
see me at my Lodging, and expressed to me the satisfaction they had in hearing
with what perspicuity and strength I handled that matter.

You may add, That the chief of the Heretics were so satisfied with me, that
they prayed me to pass that way at my Return from Rome: I promised them, that
if I came back by the same Road, I would do it with all my heart, and bestow a
whole month amongst them, and every day confute their errors in the public
place with the same clearness and solidity that I confuted the points which
their Minister taught in his Sermon, and which I confuted in two, of which I
made themselves Judges, if they would lay their hands upon their consciences.

CHAP. XVI
Passages at Paris toward the end of the year 1651. An Accusation made against
me by M. Grandin the Syndic at the instance of the Nuntio, as if I termed my
self Deputy from the Faculty. The Jesuits boast how they were confident the
Propositions would be condemned at Rome. A scandalous Libel of F. Brisacier the
Jesuit against the Nuns of Port Royal, censured by the Archbishop of Paris.

BEfore I enter upon the Narration of what passed at Rome during the first six
months of the year 1652. there are three or four things worth mentioning here
which passed at Paris in the end of the year 1651. That which has most
affinity with the former Story, is an Enterprise and Slander extremely
ridiculous, which they contrived against me in the Assembly of the Faculty
Novem. 4. no doubt out of a design to cloud and render uncertain the boldness
of F. Mulard, who termed himself a Deputy from the Faculty, by accusing* me
formally and solemnly in that Assembly of having committed my self the same
Imposture, to which they had induced and trained that Cordelier.

When they dispatched him from France to come and execute all their
prescriptions in virtue of that Chimerical Deputation which they had given him
by their own private Authority, and by which they hoped to authorize all things
which they instructed him to say at Rome, they knew full well that I was set
forth for France as I have above mentioned. They did not all expect my
returning to Rome, or that there would be other persons there besides me who
would be displeased and concerned for F. Mulards stiling himself Deputy from so
famous a Society, and the knowldge they might have of his Life and Behavior in
the world, which gave him license to speak any thing without any ones being
offended or taking notice of it, undoubtedly made them presume, that this would
be observed less in his person then in another; so that they looked he should
act absolutely and without contradiction under that name in all the parts of
his Instructions, and that neither he nor themselves would be liable to
reproach for so foul a juggle: wherefore when they saw afterward that their
plot was contrary to their hope discovered by my means, whether they were only
led with indignation against me for having searched so far into their
contrivance, and therefore aimed to be revenged by falsely imposing that Crime
upon me, of which themselves were truly guilty; or whether they only designed
to keep off from themselves that Infamy, and render it obscure and dubious in
reference to themselves, by imputing the same to one who was likely to complain
of it, and accusing him first, though they knew him to be very innocent; so it
was, that they took a Resolution to accuse me of it in public. Now that the
accusation might seem the more plausible and better grounded, they would not be
the Instruments of it themselves, but thought fit to make it more authentic by
the considerableness of the Nuntio's person, which they made use of therein.

M. Grandin who had been chosen Syndic in M. Hallier's room in the last
October, and was according to custom to give his Thanks in the Assembly of the
fourth of November, took this complaint for the whole Subject of his Oration.
He said. [as the Letter written by a Doctor, my friend, some days after that
Assembly informs me) that the Nuntio sent for him and the Sub-Dean the day
before, to advertise them that M. de Saint Amand (he meant Saint Amor; for
having consulted his paper, he said no more Saint Amand but Saint Amor; which
consultation of his paper was from his Charity, which told him it might be M.
de Saint Amor) acted at Rome in quality of Deputy from the Faculty of
Divinity, in behalf of the cause of some, whom with a lower tone he named
Jansenists. That the Nuntio desired to know the Facultie's mind upon this
Advice which he gave them, and whether it were true that it had named the said
M. de Saint Amor for its Deputy. To which M. Grandin added that it was very
important that the Faculty took into consideration what he propounded to it.

Several Doctors who presently apprehended the maliciousness of this first
proposal of the new Syndic* and were persuaded I was not capable of so shameful
a falsitie, nor had any ground or need to commit it, hissed his Proposal, and
declaimed against the Deputation of F. Mulard, of which they had been
advertised, saying, That that was it of which there was very great great reason
to complain. When the murmur was appeased, M. Des-chasteaux Doctor and
Procurator of Sorbonne (to whom I had written since my Return to Rome in regard
of the remembrance I had of a like charge with as little ground against MM.
Bourgeois and Duchesne, and desired him if the same were renewed against me, to
declare in my name, that in case it were with the least truth, I consented to
pass for the most infamous of men) advertised the Faculty of the Letter which I
had written to him, and produced it at the same time in the Assembly. After the
reading of my Letter, he and many other Doctors who were convinced of my
innocence, said, that it was not requisite that the Faculty declared, not
barely whether it had deputed me or not, but generally whether it had encharg'd
any other with such Commission to act in its name at Rome about the matters
then agitated concerning Grace. Great contest there was in the Assembly upon
this Subject, some saying, that the Question was not concerning F. Mulard or
his Deputation, but to give an answer to the Nuntio; others on the contrary,
that it was not necessary to answer the Nuntio, because his demand was grounded
upon an Imposture, which was wholly visible by my Letter; That nevertheless it
being true that I had in no wise usurped that quality, they would not hinder
but the Truth might be known to all the earth; but being on the other side
certain that F. Mulard had usurped it, it was necessary that upon the complaint
made by Doctors who had proofs thereof at hand, the Faculty should declare the
reality of the business.

The design of the Doctors who complotted this Accusation, was to get the
Faculty to declare, that it had not deputed me; which would have been an
ignominious Note upon me, and given the public and Posterity occasion to
conceive that the Faculty had believed upon the Nuntio's Deposition that I had
been capable of that Falsity. But at length after long debate which lasted
almost till noon, it was concluded, that MM. Messier and Grandin should repair
to the Nuntio, and tell him that hitherto the Faculty had deputed no person to
Rome, and that it was manifest that I had not taken upon me that Quality, by a
Letter written to M. Des-Chasteaux who produced the same in the Assembly, which
Letter the Faculty ordered should be shown to the Nuntio. MM. Messier and
Grandin when the Assembly was ended, went to deliver this answer to the Nuntio,
and carried him my Letter. The Nuntio desired them to leave it, which they did.
But M. Des-chasteaux being loath to loose such a proof of my Innocence, prayed
M. Messier to go next day to the Nuntio, and beseech him to return my Letter:
He did so, and the Nuntio delivered it without any difficulty.

It Is remarkable, that though the words of the Faculty were general, and
consequently ought in reason to touch such as had taken that Quality upon them,
and brand them ignominiously, yet M. Grandin and the other Doctors that drew up
the Conclusion, inserted in the draught only my name, and spared F. Mulards,
leaving it to be presumed hereafter, that only I had given occasion for it. But
as soon as I had received the Extract of it, which was sent me after it had been
read again and confirmed in the Assembly of the first of December, I perceived
how I could make use of it, to reflect it back upon the face of them who alone
deserved to bear the affront; As I shall show when I give an account of the
audience which my Colleagues and I had of the Pope the 21. of January following.

The University also found it self interessed in the Conduct of the above said
Cordelier, in regard of the falsities and injuries which they were advertised
he spread against them in Rome; and they made a Decree in the ordinary Assembly
of the Deputies, held in the College of Navarre, December 2. by which it was
resolved to write to me, and desire me to inform them the most punctually I
could of all those falsities and calumnies. The Rector sent me that Decree, and
joined with it Letters of his own, wheredy he advised me to make complaint in
the Universities name to some Judge, by putting in an information of the Lies
and Calumnies of F. Mulard, and then to produce my witnesses. But consulting
with two Romans, men of great insight and practice in those matters; one told
me that the business must be brought before the Judges Criminal, that it was no
very ordinary case; that by reason of sundry disorders lately arisen in those
Courts, he feared they would be shy of meddling with it. The second told me,
That the most proper Court was the Auditor of the Chamber, where he conceived,
permission would be easily granted to inform; but for sending the informations
elsewhere, he believed it would not be allowed. That this was a matter of
consequence, in which nothing could be done without asking the Pope whether he
pleased to grant this particular Grace: Which difficulties considered, together
with F. Mulards being returned from Rome, and the Rector desiring no more
informations then what he had since seen the day of that Decree (which I sent
him) and I esteeming it more requisite to apply our selves totally to the
prosecution of the grand Affair, in which all those Injures and Calumnies might
be better quasht and dispel'd, then to this incidental Contest, which would
withdraw so much attention from the principal; all the difficulties I say, and
considerations hindered me from fully performing (as I desired) all that the
University recommended unto me.

The Canons regular of the Order of St. Augustine having notice of the Examen
intended at Rome about these matters in a solemn Congregation, assembled
together to consult whether they should send thither one or two of their
Fathers, in the name of the Society, in behalf of the interest which they took
in the preservation of St. Augustins Doctrine; and they had already cast their
eyes upon F. Fronto for the Journey. The General writ to Rome about it to their
Procurator General, who showed me the Letter, and ask my opinion. I
congratulated him and the whole Order for so holy and Christian a care: I told
him it might be very useful, and of a great example in due time; but I did not
see all things yet in readiness enough for the putting of that good and pious
design in execution.

My Correspondent in behalf of my LL. the Bishops writ a Letter to me dated,
December 22. 1651. in which he seemed to foretell in some sort, how the
proceeding would be in this affair; as shall be seen hereafter. Blessed be God
(says says) that there are persons in the College of Cardinals who
understand the Truth in these Matters, though they be very few; but I am still
afraid of the Roman Policy. Our Molinist Doctors (who have intelligence every
week from Rome) are very pleasant, when they say the Censure of the
Propositions will speedily come forth, and that the Jansenists are made believe
that the Pope condescends to the Letters of the Bishops who writ to his
Holiness against that of M. de Vabres, and will not pass Judgment of them at
all. They add that the first Proposition is censured already, and declared
Heretical* and that the others are under examination. That when the Censure is
finished, before it be declared to you, you shall be called for, to be heard in
private, and after that, the Censure shall be published. Accordingly they are
more brisk then usual. Be pleased to inquire into the grounds of this news,
which comes not from one alone, but from many hands.

In the end of this year a Censure was past by the Archbishop of Paris upon a
book of F. Brisacier a Jesuit, intitl'd le Jansenisme confonda, etc.
Jansenisme confounded. The Cause was for that the Author therein charge the
Monastery of Religious Women or Nuns at Port Royal with abundance of
calumnies and scandals, so far as to accuse them of heresy in doctrine, and
heinous disorders in manners: That according to the Rules prescribed to the
Virgins of the H. Sacrament, there will be a new Religion made; that they shall
be called Impenitents, Asacramentaries, Incommunicants, etc. For which the
Archbishop condemned the said book as injurious, calumnious, and containing
many lyts and impostures. He delar'd the said Nuns pure and innocent from the
Crimes wherewith that Jesuit went about to soil the candor of their good
manners, and traduce their integrity and Religion, of which the said Archbishop
declared that he was assured with full certainty. This Censure he ordered to be
published in all the Parishes of Paris, and caused the same to be printed and
fixed upon the gates of all other Churc es. Which was performed with the
applause of all good men, and a strange madness of the Jesuits, who had
fruitlesly employed all their credit to hinder the said Censure, which made
them pass everywhere for public calumniators.

THE FOURTH PART.
January 1652. Containing what passed during the first six Months of the Year
1652.

CHAP. I.
Of what passed at Paris and at Rome during the first three weeks of January.

THE first thing which we did this year, was to go on Tuesday January 2. to the
Pope's Presence Chamber, in order to being introduced to audience; which we
could not obtain that day, because the Prince of Luneburg who had the first,
and Cardinal Vrsin who had the second, took up all the time. We repaired
thither every day afterward that we could hope for it, till at length we
obtained it on the 21. of the same months, as I shall relate in its due place.

In the mean while we employed our time as the necessity and advantage of our
affair or the rules of Decorum required: That Tuesday afternoon I went with M.
Brousse to M. le Cavalier Pozzo a person of note in Rome and of great worth; He
told us in his entertainment a pleasant Conceit of a Jesuit, whom he formerly
knew, and who was the present Pope's Confessor; This Jesuit maintained and
would needs print his Opinion That the Pope might choose his successor before
his death, and establish him as a Coadjutor in that highest Ecclesiastical
dignity.

The same day at Paris a person named Sanguiniere who had been a Jesuit, but
thrust himself into the Faculty of Divinity, so far as to maintain a Thesis in
a Tentative Question, having demanded in the Assembly Letters concerning his
time of study, was denied, though he was backd by the favorers of the Jesuits,
and more then any by M. Hallier.

The same Doctors appeared also very displeased with the News which they
received at that time of the arrival of my Colleagues at Rome: but yet they
comforted themselves for all that, by publishing abroad that that whould not
hinder but the Pope would speedily pronounce a Judgment against the
Propositions, and that if he gave us a hearing before he pronounced, it would
be but as I had been heard in the business of the Hours. Which coming to the
ears of the Bishops who deligated us, they enjoined us again by a Letter which
they caused to be written to us on the fifth of that month, to beware of
engaging in a secret or private Conference; but to coniinue suing for a solemn
one, like those which had been held under Clement VIII. and Paul V. before
which, we should not be contented with answering for the Catholic sense which
the Propositions imputed to us might admit, in which alone they were to be
maintained as Orthodox, but also should accuse the erroneous sentiments of
Molina, and demand the condemnation thereof against the Jesuits.

On Monday the 8. we accompanied Cardinal Barberin to the Consistory, and he
did us the honor to desire us to dine with him the next day. Accordingly
having treated us with very great magnificence he carried us to spend the
afternoon in his Library, and afterward himself conducted us home.

On the 11. M. Brousse and I went to see the Ambassador, and accompanied him to
the Palace of S. Mark to the Ambassador of Venice, and from thence to the
professed House of the Jesuits called le Giesu, which is not far from his
Palace. The Ambassador, as he told us, went thither to speak with one of those
Fathers with whom the King was not well pleased; which he did, after he had
heard Mass. I observed that as soon at F. Annat received notice of the
Ambassador's coming, he went away without staying for him, to get audience of
the Pope.

On Friday the 12th. we began to visit the Cardinals who we knew were designed
for our Congregation. That day we visited Cardinal Spada, who received and
entertained us very well. But this was considerable in the audience he gave us,
that there was not spoken so much as one word concerning our affair on one side
or other. After which I going alone to see the Cure of S. Savior, he gave me a
very remarkable Item, which we always endeavored to Practice, viz. That the
half of an Affair, especially at Rome, consists in the manner of well
managing it, La Meta d' un negotio consiste nel modo di ben portarlo.

This good Cure was great friend and countryman to Monsignor Ghiggi, who was
lately returned from his Nuntiature at Munster. He gave me an account of him as
a man of great piety and learning, much in favor with the Pope, and one of his
Secretaries of state, who would not fail to be Cardinal at the next promotion,
and perhaps one day Pope, when there was passed another Papacy after the
present. For these reasons he advised me to visit him asson as I could, to
inform him of the state of our affairs. Upon his motion I went for that
purpose on Saturday the 13th of January; but finding that he gave no audience,
I went tot S. Maria Maggiore.

There I saw the Dominican Confessor of the French Nation, who told me that the
next day there was to be, a Chapel of Cardinals, to celebrate there a Mass of
the Trinity for Pius V. That this Pope died in such opinion of Sanctity, that
on the first of May his tomb was strewn over with abundance of flowers, and
his Chapel was all full of ex voto. But since the Bull of Urban VIII. for the
Canonization of Saints, those ex voto were taken away and shut up in the
Sacristy or Vestry, and the custom of strewing flowers upon his tomb was
abolished: I went afterward to S. John de Lateran to see F. Cavalli and return
him his little tract of Observations upon the Conection of the Hymns which was
made by a Jesuit in the name of Urban VIII. which Jesuit was much incensed
against F. Cavalli because of the faults, both as to Grammar and sense, which
he found in that Conection. F. Cavalli submitted his Reflections very humbly,
to as many as would look upon them. The Cardinals cared not to examine whether
he had reason or no; though some said it was a thing that deserved to be taken
heed to. But that which is remarkable herein, is, that though those new Hymns
were introduced everywhere, as an order given by the Pope; yet the Canons of S.
Peter withstood all the instances made to them to make use thereof, upon the
sole account of the newness of those verses; wherewith their Chanters, being
habituated and accustomed to the old, were inconvenienc'd. And indeed their
resistance and their custom caused that they were left to the possession and
use of the old, notwithstanding the earnest desire of the Authors of those new
Corrections that those Canons should confirm by their example the care that was
taken to introduce them into all Christendom.

On Monday the 15th. we visited the Covent of Barefooted Carmelites of our Lady
de la Victory, where we were informed by one of those Friars that the Pope
having been lately conferred with about our affair by a Considerable person who
solicited him to put an end to this great controversy de auxiliis, which
troubled the Church for so many years; the Pope signified that his mind and
resolution was to follow the example, of his Predecessors who were contented
with imposing silence in the matter to both parties; that enough had been done
in condemning or rather prohibiting in general the book of Jansenius; and that
he would do nothing more. Wherewith the said Person not contented, replied to
the Pope that this was not the thing which the most considerable persons in the
Church expected, but on the contrary they conceived that his Holiness was
obliged to terminate the contests in the present case; and to persuade him to
it, he showed him the Writing above mentioned, whereof F. Mulard was the
dispersor, intitl'd Vtrum sit sopienda, etc. Which he read to the Pope from the
beginning to the end; and after the Pope had heard it, he made no other answer
to this person to free himself from his instances, but told he might show the
said Writing to such of the Cardinals as he thought fit.

On Wednessday the 17th. I went again to Monsignor Ghiggi, to make him the
visit which the Cure of S. Savior had given him notice that I intended. He
received me with much civility and gravity. After I had told him in few words
the substance of our affair, and the importance it was of, I began to give him
a particular account of all that had passed in it; but before I had done
representing to him the reasons which were opposed to M. Cornet in the Assembly
of the first if July, to hinder proceeding to any examination of the
Propositions, Monsignor Ghiggi told me that he was expected by the Pope, and
therefore prayed me to dispatch and tell him the matter of fact without
standing upon the reasons. So I was obliged to pass succinctly over the chief
and essential points of this affair, as the False Censure presented to the Pope
for confirmation; the design of M. de Vabres, seeing that way failed to get the
Assembly of the Clergy to sign a Letter wherein to desire the condemnation of
the Propositions, upon assurance given him by the Jesuits that they would
obtain it if the Clergy desired it; his resolution (when he could do nothing
with the Clergy) to inveigle several particular Bishops to subscribe the said
Letter; the care of those which sent me, to advertise the Pope of the ambiguity
of the Propositions presented to him by that Letter, the surprise which was to
be feared in it, the interest of the H. See to avoid that surprise, the
importance it was of in refence to his Authority, the truth, and the peace of
the Faithful; in fine, that I must come another time when his Lordship was
more at leisure, to give him more ample and particular informations upon the
whole, and that my Colleagues would not fail to wait upon him, and pay their
duty to him as soon as they had seen the Pope. Monsignor Ghiggi told me, it
would be better that I came alone to acquaint him with the Case, then that many
came to do it; because oftentimes in occasions of this nature, number did more
hurt then good. He said the Pope had not yet spoken to him about this affair,
and till the Pope did so, he would not meddle with it; Ne videretur mittere
manum in alienam messem: but probably the Pope would communicate it to him
as soon as we had delivered him our Letters. I answered, that I had delivered
them almost Six months ago. He replied, that then it would be requisite to
leave a Memorial with the Pope when we were admitted to him, to refresh his
Holinesses memory; and that when that Memorial came to his hands, it would be
sufficient, that before it did, it was not needful for us to make a visit to
him, because Secretaries of State receive none, but always keep their doors
shut, excepting for affairs. I told him, that we would do as he appointed, and
I renewed to him the declaration which I had made to the Pope, that we had no
pretension against the Bull of Urban VIII; and that of the Propositions upon
which his Censure was solicited, there was not any in that of Pius V.

On Thursday the 18th. we visited Cardinal Ginetti, who again gave us great
testimonies of good will and earnestness to apply himself seriously to this
affair. He asked us also if our Adversaries were come. I answered, that none
appeared openly; but the Jesuits were those with whom we had to do, and whom
we would attaque as our principal adversaries, who had set a work all these
projects against the doctrine of the Church, to uphold that of Molina; that
their whole Society was assembled ad Rome; that they might choose the ablest of
their Fathers to defend themselves against the accusations and complaints which
we had to charge them with; and so we should not want Parties. He approved what
I said; but our conference was not long, and we ended it sooner then we should
have done, out of decency, because we saw there was a Table prepared for a
Congregation which his Eminence expected there.

That day I was told by one of the H. Office, that he to whom F. Annat's book
de Incoacta liberate, then under the Press, was committed to read, had made
his Report of it eight days ago; that M. Albizzi moved there might be given to
it not only a License for printing, but also a kind of Approbation; that there
was nothing in it contrary to the Faith; but the Members of the H. Office
considering it was not their Custom, M. Albizzi could not bring them to his
intended innovation, and so the book was only remitted to the Master of the
Sacred Palace.

I went to visit him on Saturday the 19. and represented the Prejudice which
the Cause of Grace Effectual by it self would receive by the Approbation which
F. Annat endeavored to get from the Congregation of the H. Office for the Book
he was printing, and the advantage which the Jesuits would make of it, for the
upholding of their Molinistical Grace subject to Free Will, which could not be
established but upon the ruins of many Christian Truths. The Master of the
Sacred Palace presently agreed with me as to the prejudice which those truths
receive from that Molinistical opinion, and particularly mentioned many truths
that are subverted thereby. But he told me, that he did not believe F. Annat's
book was writ in defense of that opinion; That were it so, it could not afford
any consequence as to the matter of the Doctrine, which would not fail to be
maintained, when they came to the Decision; but till it were come to that, the
Pope had prohibited writing of these matters without permission of the
Congregation of the H. Office; That the said Congregation had given F. Annat
such permission, and him (the Master, etc.) permission to peruse the book, and
give his consent to the impression; That he had done so, and could not have
done otherwise; That those people were Almighty, Ognipotenti; That he was in an
office in which it was necessary to obey. By which I saw, that we must be
contented either to behold that book published, with whatever advantageous Notes
of Approbation it could be authorized, or else stop its course by our complaint
to the Pope against it, if we could get audience of him before it came forth.

CHAP. II.
Of the first Audience which we had together of the Pope, Jan. 21. 1652. at the
end of which we delivered to him our first Memorial.

AT length we obtained that so much desired Audience, on Sunday, Jan. 21. After
we had made the usual kneelings at entrance into the Chamber where the Pope
was, and kissed his feet, we placed our selves all four before him in a
Semicircle, and being upon our knees, M. Brousse our Senior, spoke in Latin to
his Holiness what follows in the Translation.

Most Holy Father,
THE Joy we resent this day is so great, that no words are capable to express
it. For what could happen more desirable and more happy to Sons of the Church,
to Priests and Doctors, then to see our selves prostrate before the Common
Father of Christians, the Visible Head of the Church, the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, and the Successor of S. Peter, to kiss his feet, and receive a
benediction from his hand and mouth? So that we doubt not but the sequel of
this Year will be favorable to us, and the success of our Commission
fortunate, since we begin both the one and the other with your Holinesse's
benediction.

Behold us, most H. F. at the feet of your Holiness, sent from many most
illustrious Bishops of France, who excited with an ardent Zeal for the
Mysteries and Articles of Faith, and animated by their respect to the Holy See,
and particularly toward your Holiness, have delegated us hither, to beseech
you in their Name (according to the laudable custom of the Church in the like
occasions) to please to ordain a Congregation for the Examination and
Discussion of five Equivocal Propositions, fraudulently and subtly contrived,
and whereof the Authors themselves solicit a Censure with all kind of
artifices; to the end that after the Parties shall have been heard in presence
one of the other, their proofs and reasons reciprocally produced, subscribed
and communicated, the whole being weighed and examined as the importance of the
matter requires, your Holiness may pronounce and declare by the supreme
authority which you have in the Church, what ought to be followed, and what
avoided; which is the true sense of those Propositions which we are obliged to
hold, and which the false which we ought to abhor; as we understand by public
and authentic Acts to have been practiced under Clement VIII. and Paul V. of
h^ppy memory, with so great glory to those two great Popes, so much luster of
the truth, and so great advantage to the H. See.

Our Confrere here present has formerly propounded the same more largely to
your Holiness, when he had the Honor to present to you the Letters of our LL.
the Bishops; and therefore I shall not repeat it, for fear of being tedious to
your Holiness, reserving my self to speak further thereof when your Holiness
shall please to command me. For your Holiness may easily judge, by that
strength of mind which it has pleased God to give you, of what importance this
Suite of ours is for the preservation of truth, for unity, for peace, and for
the authority of the Church, Forasmuch as the said Propositions being capable
of diverse senses, true and false, Catholic and Heretical, and having been
cunningly framed by those who are the Authors of them, with design, if once
they be condemned in general and according to the rigor of the words, to
attribute to themselves the judgment of such Equivocal Censure, and under
pretext of defending it, to take the Liberty of applying it as they please to
all the kinds of senses; and so by mingling the true with the false, and error
with the Catholic faith, to excite envy and hatred against many both Bishops
and Doctors of very great piety and excellent learning, to accuse them to your
Holiness as guilty of spiritual Treason, and to traduce them by their injuries
and calumnies in the minds of the ignorant common people; as they have not been
ashamed to do already, to the great scandal of all good men.

In which regard, most H. F. there is none but sees how necessary the clearing
of those Propositions is for Union, for peace, and for the good of the Church,
to the end that the parties having been heard on either side, all the
equivocations and ambiguities of words being unfolded, and all the odious
cavills dispelled and rejected, falsitie may become severed from truth, error
from the faith, and bran from the flower, (to use S. Gregorie's Words.)

I pass over in silence, most H. F. (that so I may not abuse the grace which
your Holiness does me in hearing me) that all this dispute concerns the
dignity, authority and doctrine of S. Augustine, whom the supreme Pontifs and
the whole Church have always held in so great veneration; of that glorious
Doctor I say, the scourge of Heretics, by whose mouth and pen during twenty
years of his life the Church triumphed over its enemies, and still triumphs
after his death: so that while the saving and victorious grace of Jesus Christ
is in question, the cause is not only S. Augustin's, but that of the Church.

Now, most H. F. whereas the sum of the difficulties which arise in this
cause, is principally to know what is the sense of S. Augustine, undoubtedly
nothing is so necessary in the Church as the discussion and judgment of that
true sense; since if your Holiness should suffer people to continue to expound
it in several manners, the authority and doctrine of that great Father, so
often approved and commended by the Church, and by the supreme Pontifs,
Innocent, Zozimus, Boniface, Celestin, Sixtus, Leo, Gelasius, Hormisdas, Felix,
John, Gregory, Clement, Paul and others, would receive a mortal wound, be
shattered, and made to jarre with it self, and become exposed hy means of
fallacious Propositions, to the Censure of those who have seen hitherto that it
was an attempt equally rash and unprofitable to impugn the same under the name
of S. Augustine; which your Holiness easily judges would be the most
prejudicial thing in the world, the most injurious to the supreme Pontifs, the
most offensive in reference to the Holy Doctor of Grace, and the most
destructive to holy and sacred Tradition.

Your prudence and your goodness therefore, most H. F. will be pleased to
grant in behalf of the grace of Jesus Christ, that favor to the Bishops which
they request, that quiet to the Faithful which they wish, and that comfort to
good men which they desire, and to our most humble supplications the
accomplishment of our hope; that by this means the Faith may be cleared, Truth
established, Christian Unity strengthened, sacred Tradition preserved, the honor
of the Church maintained in the maintaining of the authority of S. Augustine,
and that all may conspire to the upholding of the Majesty and Sovereignty of
the H. See and the Roman Church, from whence as from a plenteous fountain flow
the streams which water other Churches, as that Pope sometimes said who first
bore the name which your Holiness does. And lastly, that by these so important
reasons the Church may have the comfort to see your Holiness happily
accomplish what that H. Pope begun; and that what God did in Innocent I. by his
grace and for his grace, he may do the same in Innocent X. and that it may be a
part of the glory which by committing to you the guard of his divine flock, he
has reserved to your Holiness, to whom, we in the quality of true sons of
the Church, Priests, Doctors, and Deputies of our LL. the Bishops, of France,
wish at this beginning of the year, an accomplished felicity, and for whose
health and prosperity we daily offer our Sacrifices to his Divine Majesty.

M. Brousse pronounced this discourse very deliberately and pathetically,
according to his usual way, and quickened it with as much vigor as the modesty
and the submission befitting one that speaks to the Pope, and the place so
little distant from him, and so private, wherein we were, could permit. The
Pope heard him with great gravity and attention, and when he had ended, the
Pope answered in Italian, and made a discourse of about the same length with
this of M. Brousse. The substance which we could recollect of the Popes answer,
was not much different from what he had said to me in the two other audiences
which he gave me alone. He told us, that he would not have us speak of
Jansenius at all; Non voglio che sia fatta mentione di Jansenio in nissuna
maniera. Those were his words. That when his book first came forth, what in it
concerned this affair, was diligently examined; That after such examination it
was thought meet to make the Bull of Urban VIII, which was published upon this
occasion, and by which the reading of Jansenius's book and the Theses of the
Jesuits which treated of this matter, was prohibited; that as to the
publication and execution of that Bull sundry difficulties were made, but they
were never sound of moment enough to hinder the execution of the same; Thar the
prohibitions made formerly by the Popes to write and dispute of those matters
de Auxiliis, were not made without great necessity and cognizance of the cause.
That Clement VIII. and Paul V. his Predecessors, after they had taken very much
pains, and spent much time and study upon this subject, and after they had
assembled the most able Divines, who likewise labored very much in it, at
length all they could do was to impose a perpetual silence in these matters
upon the Divines of both sides; That the best course was to keep to that, and
not renew at this day those old disputes which could not be terminated in those
times; and consequently not to speak of establishing a new Congregation de
Auxiliis. That as for the doctrine of S. Augustine, there was no scruple but it
ought to be followed and embraced in the Church, as it had been in all times in
singular esteem and veneration; but the question was, who were they that truly
embraced it; That when the Deputies of the Faculty of Lovain came to Rome, to
defend the book of Jansenius, they said the same things that we do of the
doctrine of S. Augustine, and the authority it ought to have in the Church; That
it was to that alone which they adhered, and that Jansenius adhered to the
same; but after his book had been examined and compared with the doctrine of S.
Augustine, they who were employed therein at that time found that Jansenius
held Propositions very different from the sentiments of S. Augustine; That all
the world pleaded that authority and doctrine, and every one drew it to his own
side; but it could not favor all; That every one construed it as he was
inclined, and understood it after his own way; but it behooved not to stick so
close to things and words, but to consider with what exaggeration and Hyperbole
S. Augustine and other Holy Fathers of the Church may have spoken in some cases;
as also not to rely and build upon what they may have sometimes said in the
heat and vehemence of discourse, as upon the words of Scripture.

The Pope in speaking all this, extended it more to other Fathers then to S.
Augustine, and took his rise from what had been done by others, to tell us that
the same might also have been done by S. Augustine: but indeed he spoke it with
much hesitancy, and rather to make the answers and objections to us which
possibly had been suggested to him by M. Albizzi, or others imbued with the
Jesuits principles, then as being himself persuaded thereof.

Wherefore his discourse leaving sufficient room for a reply, M. Brousse told
the Pope in Italian (as the Letter relates which he writ the next day to M.
Puilon Doctor in Physic of the Faculty of Paris, his Countryman and friend)
That we had nothing to do with Jansenius; That he was an Author in whom we were
not concerned, no more then the Bishops who deputed us; that we barely
requested the examen and discussion of the Propositions in question, in regard
of the diversity of senses whereof they are capable, to hinder that the Censure
which was to be made of them (as we acknowledged they deserved it in one sense)
might not be reflected upon the doctrine of S. Augustine, as the enemies of that
Saint professed to desire, having purposely framed them equivocal, and with
different senses: As for the Congregation de Auxiliis, that we would abstain
from the word Auxilium, saving so far as it would be necessary for the
understanding of the Propositions (we knew the Pope was so firmly resolved not
to renew the examination of that matter, that lest we should at the first
address receive from his Holiness a precise and absolute refusal of the
Congregation for which we supplicated, we were forced not to unfold to him so
openly how it was contained in each of the Propositions well understood.
Wherefore to render our Motion the more passable, M. Brousse was obliged to
tell him in general, as his letter rehearses, that we should abstain from the
term Auxiliis, saving so far as would be necessary for the understanding of the
Propositions.) And because his Holiness sp^ke of what passed under Clement
VIII. as if after his time nothing had been done in this affair, and that the
thing remained undecided, he prayed his Holiness to permit him to revive in
his memory that point of history; and he told him, that after the death of
Clement VIII, when the choice of his Successor was in agitation, it was
determined in the Conclave before proceeding to Election, that he who should be
chosen should finish what Clement had begun touching the matter de Auxiliis;
That therefore Paul V. (who succeeded Leo XI, whose Papacy lasted but a few
days) immediately after his promotion to S. Peter's Chair reassembled those
Congregations; that the matters having been examined anew at the instance of
the Jesuits for defense of their Molina, who they said was ill understood, and
ill d^fended to the Congregations under Clement, the matter was at length so
terminated after many Congregations, that fifty Propositions of Molina were
condemned; that the Bull was prepared and ready to thunder forth; but that
which hindered it, was the quarrel of Venice, from whence the Jesuits being
driven, prayed his Holiness not to publish that Bull, which would quite
overwhelm them, promising him (what they have not kept) to renounce Molina, and
no longer teach those evil Maxims. M. Brousse added, that this being a matter
of fact and history which passed at Rome, we should not only be imprudent, but
also deserve punishment for averring it at his Holinesses feet if it were not
true; but we were certain that the Acts of those Congregations, with the
Original of the Bull of Paul V. were in Castello ( in the Castle S. Angelo) and
that if it pleased his Holiness to cause the same to be published, there would
be no longer need of a Congregation for the terminating of all these contests.
The Pope signified his satisfaction in this point of history, and answered that
he would think on it. M. Brousse had the liberty to say many other things to
him, among others concerning S. Augustins doctrine, that we adhered to that
alone, not as the Pope might fear we misconstru'd it, but as it would be found
to be really his; That when it came to be examined, it would be found clear and
uniform, and that it must needs be so, since the Fathers and whole Councils
have embraced it and commended it to the whole Church, as that which ought to
be followed, and with which the Church had already triumphed over so many
Heretics.

We having there concluded it meet for me to speak to his Holiness, if I could
have time, I took occasion in this place to say, That it would be one of the
principal things in which his Holiness would by God's help one day have the
satisfaction to find who were mistaken, our adversaries or we, when he had
examined it and caused it to be examined in the solemn Congregation for which
we came to supplicate; That he should see by the sequel of that examination,
whether our adversaries or we, had the true understanding of St. Augustin's
sentiments; That we now declared to him, that we would only adhere to what was
acknowledged without contradiction and with perfect evidence, to have been
taught by that great Doctor as the pure doctrine of the Church, and approved
for such by Popes; and that it was for this purpose chiefly that we beseecht
his Holiness to establish the Congregation desired by the Bishops upon
occasion of those Five Propositions, whereof every one understood in the
Catholic sense of Effectual Grace, contained an abridgement of his whole
Doctrine; so connex'd together were these matters, and dependant all upon one
and the same principle.

After this I took occasion from the Silence which the Pope so much insisted
on, to complain to him of F. Annats book which was printing. I represented to
him, that that silence was so far from having been enjoined to Divines for
ever, that at the same moment we were speaking to him, that book was printing
in Rome; That M. Albizzi not content to have obtained permission from the
Congregation of the H. Office for that Jesuit to break this silence, by
publishing his book, used his endeavors to have it come forth with the
Approbation of that Congregation, and the authority of his Holinesses name,
thereby to engage the H. See unawares in the interests and sentiments of that
Society; because upon the determination of one single point on one side or
other, depended all that was to be held pro or con in the whole matter de
Auxiliis.

The Pope answered me, that it was a great mistake, to think that all that was
printed at Rome was the sentiments of the H. See; but the approbation or
Imprimatur requisite for the impression of books was not granted nor required,
but to hinder least any might be printed that were contrary to the Law of God
and to Religion, or against good manners.

Omitting what might have been replied to the Pope, (as, that the sentiments of
the Jesuits touching Grace were wholly contrary to Religion, and to the good
manners of true Christians) I answered, that F. Annat had designed not only to
get the usual and general Imprimatur to his book, but to have it examined by
the Congregatiom of the H. Office, to the end they might authorize the doctrine
of it, and so the H. See become insensibly engaged in the unhappy cause of
their Molina; that it wat only this consideration, and fear of the engagement
of the H. See that made us anxious about the impression of thar book; that
otherwise, were there nothing more then the ordinary impression, we should be
so far from hindering it, that we should rather further it; because S. Augustins
and our adversaries printed nothing but what proved extremely advantageous to
the truth and to our cause, they filled their books so with falsities,
ignorances and lies, and though all this might serve for some time to uphold
their reputation by blinding the less attentive, yet when their books came
once to be sifted in a Congregation of judicious and equitable Judges, the
exorbitances would be scarce credible to which these good Fathers and their
adherents suffer themselves to be transported against truth and honesty; that
therefore the more they printed, the more they advantaged us; but all our
trouble was, that they did it in the sight and knowledge of the H. See, and by
that means engaged the same in broyls from which it would be hard to clear it
self, and which would increase the difficulties of our making known to it the
justice of our cause, and of its declaring in our favor.

The Pope was apprehensive of what I said to him about this subject, and
signified that he had not heard of that book before, but he would consider of
it, and take some order about it. I proceeded to tell him, how for the better
accomplishing their design, they attempted to avoid passing through the hands
of the Master of the Sacred Palace, who was forced to supplicate the Cardinals
of the H. Office, that the rights of his place might not be prejudiced in this
case; and all that he obtained, was, that the said Book might pass through his
hands and he might read it; but withal he received order to pass it, to give
it his Imprimatur; and that it was actually printing. The Pope smiled a little,
to render this first audience more agreeable, speaking a word of raillery
touching the continual contest that there was between the Dominicans and the
Jesuits.

I proceeded to the second thing whereof we agreed that I should complain to
the Pope, and that was M. Albizzi's extreme passion for the interests of the
Jesuits; and having told his Holiness that that Man was wholly possessed with
their sentiments, and blindly favored all their designs, I instanced visible
tokens thereof that I had observed in particular cases: I told the Pope how he
treated me when I was addressing to Cardinal Panzirolo touching the Hours,
crying out, Si burla il Signor de Sant' Amor, si burla. That I presently
remonstrating to him calmly, that he ought to treat me after another sort, if
not for my own sake, yet in respect to the Bishops of France who sent me, and
to the affair in which the H. See was the principal concerned, etc. The Pope
here interrupted me, and told me I knew how himself had treated me, with how
much esteem he had received what I represented to him in the name of those
illustrious Bishops, and in what account he expressed to hold me particulary. I
renewed my thanks to him; and he proceeded to tell me that Men are sometimes
subject to choler, and suffer themselves to be transported with it; but it
behooved to have a little patience in those cases, and excuse them. I replied,
that M. Albizzi's proceeding testified more then choler, that he acted out of
palpable Aversion: whereof I gave his Holiness this proof, that having
continued to justify to M. Albizzi the reason for my acting as I did, he
persisted to treat me ill and exasperate me, saying, that I was come to Rome to
offer violence and force to the H. See; that we were full of evil intentions,
and sought nothing but to cross its intersts, etc. The Pope, to show the
injustice of that Reproach, interposed, that if it were so, we would not have
recourse thither, as we had. I acknowledged the weight of the Pope's reason,
and added, that it showed how injurious M. Albizzi was to speak otherwise; and
that when I remonstrated to the said Signor Albizzi how little just it was in
him, and very grievous for us, that he imputed to us evil intentions against
the H. See, without having full proof thereof, he answered me more bitterly,
That it was but too true that we had such evil intentions. Non e che troppo
vero; etc. The Pope here again mentioned M. Albizzi's choler in his excuse.

After this discourse, M. Brousse made some general complaints to the Pope
touching the calumnies that were spread without control against us by the
Jesuits, and at their instigation. To which the Pope answered, that it was not
possible to hinder those disorders; That himself could not prevent all the
calumnies that were made against him, and particularly, that it was not
possible for him to stop the mouths of those which charged him as if he had no
affection to France, but had intentions prejudicial to the service of that
Crown, notwithstanding his care in all cases to give proofs of his affection
for that first Kingdom of Christendom, in which for his own particular he had
received so much honor, and so many obliging treatments.

But to give the Pope an instance of the boundless liberty taken by our
Adversaries to dare any thing against us, that their blind passion suggested, I
was willing to have himself a witness thereof, in presence of my Colleagues. I
said to him, H. Father, Your Holiness remembers that you lately saw here a
certain Cordelier named F. Mulard, who addressed to your Holiness as being
deputed from the Faculty of Divinity at Paris about the same affairs. The Pope
answered, that it was true. I proceeded; H. Father, Your Holiness may also
remember, whether in the Audiences you did me the favor to give me, you heard
me so much as name the Faculty out of my mouth, to call my self their Deputy;
and whether I ever said that I was sent from any other then the Prelates whose
Letters I delivered to you. The Pope acknowledged the truth of both. I
continued, Nevertheless H. Father, I have been accused to the Assembly of the
Faculty, for terming my self their Deputy: and they, who instigated the said
Cordelier to take upon him that Quality here, aimed by that artifice to cause
the Faculty to declare that they had not deputed me, thereby to blemish my
reputation, and possibly to take some pretext of inferring, that the Faculty
indirectly authorized the Chimerical deputation of that Cordelier, (who termed
himself so for three or four months) in that they did not complain thereof;
But some Doctors understanding this Fraud, and laying it open in the Assembly,
it gave occasion to the Faculty to declare that they had not hitherto deputed
any person hither; and by that means that which had been prepared to calumniate
me, has served to convince before your Holiness the Authors of that imposture
of the Cordelier. In proof of all which I presented the Copy of the Facultie's
Conclusion to the Pope, desiring him to keep it, and if he thought good, to
send it into France, to verify whether it were the writing of M. Bouvot the
Faculties Register, or not; and to make me undergo such punishment as he
pleased, if he found that I imposed upon his Holiness. The Pope told me that
he believed it sufficiently upon what I said to him, that he did not take me
for a person likely to impose upon him; and he bid me read the said Conclusion,
which I held in my hands before him. In obedience to his Holiness I read the
same throughout in Latin, as it here follows.

ANNO Domini Millesimo Sexcentisimo Quinquagesimo primo, Die quarta Mensis
Novembris, Sacra Theologiae Facultas Parisiensis, post Missam de Spiritu Sancto
sua ordinaria habuit Comitia in aula Collegii Sorbonae; in quibus honorandus
Magister noster Martinus Grandin Syndicus exposuit se ante paucos dies cum
honorando Domino Messier Prodecano vocatos fuisse per Illustrissimum D. Nuncium
Apostolicum, ipsumque ab iis quaesivisse an Facultas Romam legasset D. Abbatem
de S. Amando, seu de S. Amore, seque respondisse Neminem Romam a Facultate
deputatum esse. Quo audito honorandus M. N. Petrus Deschasteaux Sorbonicus
asseruit coram Facultate, Dominum de S. Amor, Romae non se gerere neque
gessisse pro Deputato Facultatis; and suam Assertionem literis sibi ab ipso
Domino de St. Amor dudum transmissis, quas exhibuit, comprobavit. Iis
expositis, Censuit Facultas referendum esse ad Illustrissimum D. Nuntium per
eosdem Magistros nostros Messier and Grandin, neminem hactenus ex part
Facultatis fuisse Romam deputatum, Dominumque de St. Amor significasse se non
agere ut deputatum ejusdem, ut literis Domino Deschastea^x ab eo scriptis in
Congregatione exhibitis CONSTAT, quas eidem Illustrissimo Nuncio communicandas
decrevit.

In quorum fidem subscripsi die prima Mensis Decembris, Anno Domini quo supra.
De Mandato DD. Decani and Magistrorum praefatae Facultatis Sacrae Theologiae
Parisiensis. Signed, Ph. Bouvot, Major Apparitor.

When I had done reading this Conclusion, the Pope asked me how the Nuntio came
to have a hand in this business, He, come e intervenuto in quesio Monsignor
Nuncio? I told the Pope, that I was unwilling to have mentioned that
circumstance, though it may serve to make their insolence and detraction the
more public and notorious, because I feared his Holiness would not be well
pleased to hear what hand the Nuntio had had in it; but having been obliged by
his command to read the Conclusion, I could not add to or diminish from it.
That indeed I wondered, together with his Holiness, how the Nuntio came to
interpose in the matter; but his Holiness saw that it was so; and all that I
could conjecture was, that he must needs have been surprised, and made to
believe things otherwise then they were; that however, his Holiness might find
thereby that the Nuntio was liable to be surprised too in other things, and
consequently that his Holiness ought not to give credit to all that he might
signify against us, since others have deluded him by making him believe such
things in France as he might have sent to his Holiness, how false and
calumnious soever. In the discourse about the Authors of that unworthy
accusation, mention was made of M. Hallier Syndic of the Faculty and Cousin to
F. Mulard, who possibly had been the principal promotor of it. The Pope told us
that he did not know him, but had heard him spoken of as a very commendable
person. Whereupon I told the Pope, that whatsoever esteem was had of him, his
Holiness might judge whether he deserved it, and know what temper and conduct
he was of, by comparing the Letters which he had written and were at Rome, with
the Conclusion of the Faculty which I had read unto him.

The Pope remained astonished at this Intrigue. Yet he told us that without this
conviction, the thing spoke sufficiently of it self; that indeed he had given
audience to that Cordelier, and heard him as the Deputy of the Faculty of
Paris, yet he could never think that he was so indeed, and that so eminent a
society as that was, and as he had found it whilst he was in France,
consisting of many learned and worthy persons, would send to him for Deputy un
tal Fratre, such a pitiful Friar as F. Mulard was. I beseecht the Pope to
remember all this history, so contrary to sincerity and to the respect which is
due to the H. See; and to consider how little credit those people deserved in
their private accusations and secret libels (of which themselves were so
ashamed as not to bring them out of obscurity) who had the forhead to venture
to commit publicly actions liable to so many reproaches, so odious and so easy
to be refell'd.

The Pope answered that we ought not to fear that he would suffer himself to be
possessed by calumnies; and that as to the maine of our affair, he would take
time to consider it more maturely; that it was of such a nature as admitted not
much speed. I answered him that we should attend upon it; and yet we hoped his
Holiness would not have so much trouble in it as might be imagined. I added
that in the like case Clement VIII. employed the whole year 1597. in assembling
the Consultors whom he chose for his Congregation. That the first time they
were seen together, was the second day of the year 1598. That that year and the
four following, all passed without the Pope's being present in those
Congregations; That the first time their Congregation was held in his presence,
was March 20. 1603. That to know how things went during those five years, he
caused what passed amongst the Consultors to be reported to himself from time
to time, by persons sure and faithful. The Pope was here pleased to object
against what I said, telling me that in the year 1598. Clement VIII. went to
Ferrara, for the recovering of that Duchy. I answered that I knew Clement
VIII. made that journey in that year, but his Consultors tarried at Rome and
ceased not to labor there during his absence. The Pope expressed himself
something pleased with this discourse, and we all began to put our selves in a
readiness to withdraw, after having been about an hour in this audience: but
before we arose up, I told the Pope again that we should attend his resolution
and orders upon what we had represented; but in the mean time the thing that
was urgent and admitted little delay, was, F. Annat's book, in which care was
to be taken that the publishing of it might not be with any mark of the H.
See's approbation; which the Pope testified he would see to. He gave us a
plenary Indulgence in forma jubilei, upon visiting the four Churches, in favor
of my Colleagues who were not at Rome during the H. year. As we withdrew from
the Pope's presence, we presented to him the Memorial here subjoyned; The form
of those Memorials is thus, The sheets of Paper in which they are written, are
usually so folded, as to be about four fingers broad and half a foot long. On
the outside there is an Inscription at the top containing the Person's name to
whom they are presented, and another at the bottom of the substance of the
affair concerned; Ours was thus inscribed, Beatissimo Patri Jnnocentio Papae X.
pro pluribus Galliae Episcopis, Doctores Parisienses illorum Oratores. The
Contents follow.

BEATISSIME PATER,
IVxta literas a pluribus Illustrissimis Ecclesiae Gallicanae Antistitibus ad
Beatitudinem vestram missas, illorum nomine Doctores Parisienses infrascripti
sanctitati vestrae humillime supplicant, ut distingui and sigillatim examinari
jubeat varios sensus quinque Propositionum aequivocarum and ad fraudem
fictarum, quae vestrae Beatitudini exhibitae sunt; atque ut de praedictis
sensibus, prout exiget illorum veritas, ac aliorum falsitas, sententiam far
velit, partibus prius in Congregatione tum voce tum scripto coram auditis, and
omnibus illarum scriptis mutuo communicatis, sicut postulant negotii magnitudo,
in similibus occasionibus Ecclesiae consuetudo, ipsiusque Sanctae sedis
Apostolicae usus non ita pridem a felicis memoriae Clemente VIII. and Paul V.
vestrae Sactitatis praecssoribus observata. Confidunt iidem Oratores hoc se
beneficium consolationemque istam accepturos a Summa benignitate, sapientia and
aequitate Sanctitatis vestrae, quam Dominus gratiae suae praecipuo munere Ex
Ep. S. Aug. and caeterorum Episcoporum Council. Milev. ad Innocentium I.
in sede Apostolica collocatam praestet per annos plurimos incolumem ac felicem.

Signed, Ego Jacobus Brousse Doctor Theologus Parisiensis Praedicator and
Consiliarius Regis Christianissimi, and in Ecclesia Sancti Honorati Parisiensis
Canonicus, supplico ut supra. Ego Natalis de la Lana Doctor Theologus
Parisiensis and Abbas B. Mariae de Valleerescente, supplico ut supra. Ego
Ludovicus de Saint-Amour Doctor Theologus Parisiensis and socius Sorbonicus,
supplico ut supra. Ego Ludovicus Angran Licentiatus Theologus Parisiensis, and
insignis Ecclesiae Trecensis Canonicus, supplico ut supra.


The said Memorial imports these words being translated,

To the most holy Father Pope Innocent X. in the name of sundry Bishops of
France, the Doctors of Paris their Deputies.
MOST HOLY FATHER,
THE Doctors of Paris underwritten most humbly beseech your Holiness in the
name of diverse Bishops of the Church of France, according to the letters
written by them to you, that it will please you to cause distinction to be made
of the different senses of the five Propositions, framed equivocally and
fraudulently to deceive and surprise the Church which have been presented to
your Holiness, and to cause each of those senses to be particularly examined,
to the end your Holiness may pronounce judgment thereupon, according as the
truth of the one and the falsehood of the other shall require, after you shall
have heard in a Congregation both parties in presence one of the other, both by
word of mouth, and by writings, and all the writings of either side shall have
been mutually communicated, as the importance of this affair, the accustom of
the Church in like occasions, and likewise the practice of the H. Apostolical
See, observed not long since by your Holines's predecessors Clement VIII. and
Paul V. of happy memory, require. The said supplicants hope they shall receive
this favor and comfort from the goodness; wisdom and equity of your
Holiness, whom God preserve may years in the H. Apostolical see, where he has
established you by a singular gift of his grace.

Signed, James Brousse Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, etc. Noel de
la Lane Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, etc. Lewis de Saint-Amour
Doctor in Divinity of the house and society of Sorbon, etc. Lewis Angran
Licentiate in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, etc.


In the afternon of the same day the Pope sent for M. Albizzi, who repaired to
his Holiness; some friends of ours that saw him when he came away from the
Pope, told me that his countenance intimated no great satisfaction with his
audience. After which it is likely he was with the Jesuits, who that day had
chosen F. Godifridi a Neapolitan for their General. They were to have gone
forthwith to salute the Pope, or at least the next day after that Election. But
one of their Fathers the next day raised a very ridiculous and false Report,
for the reason of their delay; namely, that notice was given them to forbear
that Visit a while, because the Pope parted with us extraordinarily ill
pleased, and they should have no contentment to address to him whilst he was in
that bad disposition. For the Truth is, he gave us none but expressions of Joy,
Benignity, Esteem and good Will.

We could not conveniently wait upon Cardinal Pamphilio, to give account of
this audience, according to the custom which is observed at Rome, till Friday
the 26. of this month. Nor was he then disposed conveniently to hear us. For he
was so busy, and it was so late, that we were forced to tell him, that it was
expedient that we had a little more time to acquaint him with the business of
our coming and deputation to his Holiness, then he could then afford us. He
told us that he should be willing to hear us at any time. His Eminence would
not set the day, as we moved him, but told us, that it should be as often as we
pleased. We durst not press him further to assign one in which he might please
to be at leisure, though it would have been very convenient both for himself
and for us, and most advantageous for the affair whereof we were to speak. But
he had so many other, and so different from ours in the station wherein he was,
that its likely he had rather not hear of it at all, then suffer himself to be
informed thereof.

CHAP. III.
The Verification of the Original of the Memoires of M. Pegna Dean of the Rota
touching the Congregations de Auxiliis. Sundry things which we did during the
rest of January and the beginning of February.

THe Dominicans had lent me the last Summer with much goodness and confidence,
the Original of the Writings of M. Pegna, sometimes Dean of the Rota under the
Papacy of Clement VIII. who had had the curiosity to observe daily what passed
in the Congregation de Auxiliis. I intended faithfully to restore what was so
courteously lent me, but I was willing to keep a Copy or two compared with the
Original, to have Recourse thereunto in case of need, and derive such Light and
advantages from the same as it afforded for the cause of Truth, the Honor of
the H. See, and that of the Consultors who had been employed in that
Congregation. Wherefore before I transcribed my Copies, that I might be
assured, the Original was the hand of M. Pegna, I had often desired M. Noiset his
Successor in that Office, to whom I had very free access, to show me some of
the Records of their Tribunal of the handwriting of M, Pegna. At length on
Sunday the 28. of Jan. M. du Noiset sent to Brousse and I when we repaired
thither, an ancient Notary of their Tribunal named Peter Cottuen, giving him
order to do all necessary things for us that we desired. When this Notary had
showed us several Papers written with the hand of M. Pegna, and we found that
they were all like that of the Book which I had, we prayed him to get us two
persons expert or sworn for the verification of Writings. He fetched two, who
were name Andreas Albercius, and Franciscus Pignocatus; and they acknowledged
that the Book which I had was of M. Pegna's hand: whereupon they drew an Act or
Memorandum which was de^ver'd to us the same day.

On Tuesday the 30. of January we went to the Ambassador to acquaint him with
all that passed in the Audience which we had had of the Pope. The Ambassador
gave us very fair opportunity, for he lead us out to walk with him to the
Church of St. Martin, where we heard Mass, and afterward he carried us back to
dine with him.

In the afternoon we visited Cardinal Roma, who confirmed to us what he had
always promised, that we should not fail to be heard in this affair as amply as
we could wish, and declared to us that he promised the same again.

On Wednesday morning the last of this month, we waited upon Cardinal Barberin
de la Minerve. Whilst he was there, we visited F. Barelier. When the Cardinal
came forth, he carried us to S. Jacques des Incurables, where he said Mass, and
served the poor at Dinner whom he treated that day, and we assisted his
Eminence to serve them. That afternoon we visited the Marquis del Buffalo, then
F. Vbaldino, (who amongst other things speaking of the Pope and of Divinity,
reiterated plainly what I have above reported, that is was not his Profession,
Non e la sua Professione;) and afterward the General of the Dominicans, whom
we entertained amply and calmly concerning the matter of our Affairs, and he
very well received what we said. One thing remarkable he told us, viz. That
Cardinal Lugo whilst he was a Jesuit, endeavored to engage him in a Ligue
against the Book of Jansenius.

The first observable thing that occurred in February, was, that on Monday the
fifth day of that month one came and told me from a good hand, that F. Fani a
Dominican and Companion of the Master of the sacred Palace, having read F.
Annat's Book, found two Calvinistical Propositions in it, notwithstanding which
he forbore not to give it his Imprimatur, on condition that they should be
expunged. That this condition very much displeased the Author, who went
forthwith to complain thereof to M. Albizzi: That M. Albizzi to content him,
and revenge the Injury done to such an ancient Jesuit as F. Annat by so young a
Dominican, presently writ to the Printer, that without taking heed to the
Restriction of the Imprimatur, he should not fail to print all that the
Jesuits appointed him. That F. Fani going to the Printer to see whether F
Annat had taken care to expunge those two Calvanistical Propositions out of
this Book, and how the places were corrected; he there found M. Albizzi's
Letter contrary to the correction which he had enjoined. That he took and
compared a Copy thereof before a Notary, and carried the same to the Master of
the sacred Palace, who being informed of the whole matter on the foregoing
Wednesday, acquainted the Congregation of the H. Office therewith, who gave a
check to M. Albizzi for so doing, and enjoined him to meddle no more with
things that belonged not to the functions of his place.

On Wednesday morning, Feb. 6. we went to Monte Cavallo to thank the Popes
Maistre de Chambri, for the audience which he had procured us, and to tell him
that in that Audience we had spoken to his Holiness of a particular affair
which was urgent, and abont which we conceived our selves obliged to present
him a new Memorial; which Memorial we desired him to deliver without delay. We
told him also that the Affair of which we were to inform the Pope, being of the
nature of those which are held at Rome the most secret, we had made two Copies,
whereof one was sealed, the other open in the ordinary form; and that we would
leave with him which he pleased. He referred it to our own choice. We perceiving
that he was willing to have that which was open, conceived that civility
obliged us to repose that confidence in him (in which nevertheless we did ill;
for had we given him the sealed Copy, he would no doubt have delivered it the
same day to the Pope, without troubling himself about what was contained in it;
whereas giving him that which was unsealed, he had the curiosity to look into
it, and the quality of the matter made him backward to deliver it; this and
other delays which superven'd, almost made that Memorial of no use, as I shall
relate hereafter) But so it was, that we left the unsealed Copy of the Memorial
with the Popes Maistre de Chamber, who promised to deliver it to his Holiness
the same day.

We went afterward to visit F. Delbene, who repaid our Visit in the
afternoon: in both which Entertainments nothing passed but after the general
way in which we treated this affair, as I have above in imated.

On Thursday Feb. 8. we visited Padre Bordone, whom we found very inclinable to
be informed fully of the bottom of our Controversies, and very ready to receive
such Impressions thereof as S. Prosper and S. Augustine might give him: in the
reading which he promised us he would not fail to undertake them with care and
diligence.

On the ninth M. Brousse and I went to the Popes Presence Chamber to know of
his Maistre de Chamber what he had done with our Memorial. He told us that that
Memorial was about an affair of too great consequence, and fit only to be
treated by an Ambassador. That to confess the Truth, he conceived that by our
giving it open to him, we were willing that he should read it; that he did so,
and afterward could not resolve to present it to the Pope. That the Pope had a
Nephew who did not stand for nothing. That if we thought good, we might address
to him to present to it his Holiness; or if we liked better, we might come the
Sunday following for an Audience, and present it our selves, We accepted this
last condition, and took back our Memorial, being unable by all our Reasons to
persuade this Maistre de Chamber to do us that Office, or satisfy his fears.

On Saturday the 10. M. Brousse and I were at Laurence Church in Damazo to hear
a Sermon of F. Mariana; Cardinal Barberin happened to be then in a little Chapel
right against the Pulpit; and understanding that we were in the Church, he
caused us to be called, and Seats placed for us near his Eminence. The Preacher
spoke very much in his Sermon of Effectual Grace, and of its necessity to all
Christian actions; and he ended with a Prayer to God to beg his assistance and
protection for the defense of that Grace, against those who impugn'd, and used
all their endeavors to ruin the same.

On Sunday the 11th. we went to the Pope's Presence Chamber to be introduced to
Audience, and to present him our Memorial. But lest the Pope should think we
came to have his Answer upon our principal Affair, and therefore suspect us of
Impatience, I brought it sealed, and entreated the Maistre de Chamber to take
it in his hand, and when he acquainted the Pope that we desired Audience, to
tell his Holiness that we (desired it to present that Memorial to him; upon the
outside of which, the Subject it contained, was written according to the
Custom. I added, that if the Pope pleased to hear us a little touching that
matter, he might cause us to enter; otherwise, if he took our Memorial, it was
sufficient. But the Maistre de Chamber would by no means meddle with it. We
waited therefore to have Audience, till all that the Pope admitted were ended,
but we could have none. Of which speaking to a friend that understood those
Affairs, and of the necessity that our Memorial were speedily delivered, lest
if it were long delayed, F. Annat's Book against the Publication of which it
was designed, might be finished and published, my friend advised us to wait upon
Monsignor Ghiggi, and entreat him to deliver it to the Pope without delay.

Accordingly in the Afternoon we repaired to M. Ghiggi, but not finding him at
home, we returned thither again the next day, and were told that he gave no
audience that day, in regard of the Dispatches that he was preparing for
France. But the prejudice which this Affair might suffer by delay, made us
resolve to tell his Maistre de Chamber that we had sought eight days to deliver
that sealed Paper to the Pope, and for that it was about a very urgent matter,
and that was the day of the Curriers departure, we were desirous to send word
that we had put it into a sure hand that would not fail to deliver it to the
Pope. The Gentleman willingly undertook it, and assured us very civilly, that
he would not fail to acquit himself of his Commission.

As we had been in the Chapel on Candlemas day at the Ceremony and
Distribution of the H. Tapers, and had each received one from the Popes hand,
so we were there also upon Aswednesday at that Ceremony, and there received
Ashes likewise from the hand of his Holiness. In the Afternoon we began our
Visits, and after many fruitless ones to Monsignor Ghiggi, to the Procurator
general of S. Marcello, to F. Hllarion, etc. we made one with success to M.
Noiset, to thank him for an other which he made to us the first of this month,
and other civilities received from him, particularly the verification of the
Original which I had of the history or rather the memories of M. Pegna.

My impatience to learn whether our Memorial were delivered to the Pope, caused
me to go alone toward evening to Monsignor Ghiggi. He who had it in charge,
told me that Monsignor Ghiggi said, that being a Memorial it ought to go
directly to the Pope's Maistre de chamber; yet for this time, and not to draw
it into consequence, he would do us that office to his Holiness. I could not
obtain to speak with him, but was referred to another time. However, I
understood that his order and place was to unseal all the letters which he
received for the Pope and Cardinal Pamphilio; and so our Memorial being sealed
in form of a Letter, he had no doubt opened, and probably spoken of it to his
Holiness.

On Thursday the 15. we visited Cardinal Palotta, who at our coming was ready
to say Mass, which we heard. After which we were scarce sat down to lay open
to him the subject of our visit, but the time being come for him to go to the
Sermon at S. Laurence in Lucina, we were obliged to remit part to another day:
which he prayed us to do and to leave with him if we could some Instruction in
writing concerning what we had to say to him; then we visited the F. companion
of the Comissary of the H. Office, Cardinal Lanti who was sick, Cardinal
Franciotti who assented that the authority of S. Augustine was sacred and
inviolable, Cardinal Carpegna who heard us very calmely and gravely; and after
them the Procurator General of the Capucines.

On Friday the 16th. going to learn news of our Memorial from a particular
friend, he could not tell me any, but informed me that two or three days ago
two Cardinals being in a Coach together, and meeting us, one said to the other,
There go the Jansenists, (or some equivalent word) and the other who knew our
sentiments, undertook our defense, and gave his companion an account of our
negotiation with the Pope. He told me also that Cardinal Rapaccioli was a great
intimate of Cardinal Barberin, and therefore we should do well to visit him,
and when we did so, to give him to understand that our affair had no affinity
with that of Jansenius. This friend told me one thing which seemed strange,
namely that the Jesuits presented a Memorial in the Spanish tongue to Clement
VIII. in February 1602. which was neither the common language of the Western
Church, nor the natural one of the Country where the Pope resided. He added
that the Jesuits who presented, were of the same Country with Molina, for
whose defense they were newly arrived from Spain, that Clement VIII. well
understood that language; but besides thar memorial they delivered others also
in Latin.

Returning from this visit (it being unseasonable to make any to the
Cardinals, because it was the time of Sermon at the Pope's Chapel, whether
they repair every Friday in Lent) we went to see F. Abbot Hilarion who lived in
the House de Saint Croix de Jerusalem. After reciprocal civilities, the first
thing he put us upon was the Bull of Urban VIII. which he complan'd much that
the Jesu tes abused against Jansenius, to whom it did no prejudice as to the
ground of any thing in his book: Because the book was barely prohibited for
having transgressed the prohibitions of printing concerning those matters
without permission. That it was clearer then the day, that those Prohibitions
were violated by its publication; and that indeed all others which treated of
the same matters were equally against those prohibitions, because it was
equally forbidden to write either for, or against; That in the second place,
for the Bull's saying that there is in Jansenius's book, Ptopositions condemned
by Jansenius, that is to be understood, as they were condemned by the Pope, and
not otherwise: but amongst those which he there condemns, there are some
excepted, and it was not said that those which were excepted, were not the same
that Jansenius taught. So that the difference not having been made by the H.
See, there was reason to forbid the book and the reading of it by provision,
till it were made. But yet all that was in it, might be true to the least line,
and yet the said Bull have its full and entire execution. Thus this learned
Monastic engaged us to speak much of Jansenius; but before we parted, we told
him, let the affairs of that Bishop go as they would, it was nothing to us,
who had nothing to propound either for his defense, or against the Bull; and
that we stuck only to the affair of the five Propositions in question. Of
which we gave him the reasons, namely the Catholic sense concerning Effectual
Grace included in them, which we explicated to him. He was well pleased
therewith, and acknowledged every one for Catholic which we mentioned, telling
us he believed they could be in no danger as to that sense. And at last he
invited us to come the fourth sunday of Lent to see those rare and precious
Relics which are in that House whereof he is Superior.

The same day, Friday the 16th. we went to visit Cardinal Rapaccioli according
as we were advised: He professd much desire to be instructed concerning our
affair, whereof we informed him punctually enough, and when we told him we were
not come for the defense of Jansenius's book, but only for the clearing of the
different senses which might be given those Propositions, he answered that we
did prudently, because Jansenius male audiebat Romae. That in this affair he
should be set aside, and the Propositions examined without taking notice of
him. To which we replied as we had done in former visites, That when the senses
of those Propositions were distingush'd and cleared, and the Pope had passed a
particular judgment of them, it would be easy to find whether the doctrine of
Jansenius upon this subject were Catholic or Heretical, only by comparing
those senses so cleared and judged with what is contained in the book of that
Bishop.

We also visited Cardinal Ludovisio, who heard our account of this affair with
great civility. Besides the general things which we represented every where
else, we testified to him that notwithstanding the necessity of it, yet we were
very backward to bring this new encumbrance upon the Pope besides those which
molested him already. To which he answered that the Pope was not a temporal
Prince but by accident, that God had not established him such; but as for
matters of Faith and Truth, they ought to be his first care. We beseecht him to
remember the justice of our suit for a Congregation for the discussion of this
affair, and to favor this suit with his approbation and recommendation in such
occasions as he might have to do it. He told us that by what we had said, he
sufficiently understood the importance of it; but the same would be more
apparent when the Pope had appointed Judges to examine it; and if he were of
the number, he would do all in his power in behalf of truth and justice.

The Procurator General of the Augustines received the next visit from us; we
instructed him soundly and amply of our intentions, and confirmed to him
altogether, what I had formerly acquainted him with alone. The same day I
endeavored to speak with Monsignor Ghiggi, but was told some other hour in the
day would be more proper then the Evening; yet I could not obtain to have one
expressly assigned me, because Monsignor, they said, was not at his own
dispose.

I durst not go thither again on Saturday, in regard of the Dispatches for
Italy, but I designed that day for some particular visites, amongst which one
was to F. Dinel the Jesuit; we talked much more of the ancient acquaintance
which he and I had at Court while he was the late King's Confessor, and of the
singular good will which he acknowledged his Majesty had for me, then of the
affairs of the time; saving that we spoke something about my return and my
Commission to Rome, of which he acknowledged with me the fruit could not be but
advantageous to all the world.

On Sunday the 18th. after we had been to accompany the Ambassador to Chapel,
I went to Monsignor Ghiggi's house, but not finding him I returned thither in
the afternoon, and stayed to speak with him till six a clock at night. I told
him we were constrained to have recourse to him for our Memorial, by reason of
the difficulty and delay of audience from the Pope, and the fear lest the book
should come forth in the mean time. He said it was a matter that did not belong
to him, yet he had spoken of it to the Pope, who told him he had given order
that the book should not come forth without having been first well perused,
etc. I did not think fit to give Monsignor Ghiggi such an answer as would have
been more material then that which I made him. I ought to have told him, that
it was difficult to weigh the consequences of the impression of that book
without having first examined things to the bottom, as we desired they might
be, and the parties heard. But having thanked him for his good office, I only
said, That with what ever care it might be perused, we had to do with people
that had many wiles and subterfuges, that explicated their writings on way to
the Examiners before printing, and afterward understood them another, and made
what use of them they pleased. That, for instance, they took this course to
draw the Dominicans into the same complotment with themselves, persuading them
that they both defended the same kind of Grace which they call sufficient;
though they knew very well, that that which the Dominicans hold (besides which
learned Divines maintain that there is requisite Effectual Grace, to determine
the Will to a good action) is wholly different from their own, which they so
subject to the Will, as to make the good or bad use of it wholly to depend upon
that Faculty. Monsignor Ghiggi fell upon the Political reason that there was,
not to permit either side to print such sort of books, and that it was
requisite to forbid all the world equally so to do. I answered, that it would
be good in the interim; but at length it was requisite to manifest which side
had reason, which defended the Truth and the Faith, and so come to a solemn
decision, which would bring all parties to accord. He made great difficulties
as to this, in regard he saw that while the H. See remembered and considered
that Clement VIII. and Paul V. had labored so much in these matters without
determining any thing, it would be loath to reassemble new Divines to labor
therein. I acknowledged that certainly it would be very difficult; but I told
him that it was the more necessary, in regard those two Popes forbore to define
any thing or to publish their definitions, only to spare the Jesuits, upon
hope that they would by degrees return to the good and holy doctrine of the
Church which they had forsaken; but instead of doing so, they were become more
and more remote from it, and therefore it was time to reduce them: Tempus
faci^ndi, Domine; dissipaverunt legem tuam. Monsignor Ghiggi would not believe
what I said; but I added that it would be very easy to verify it by most
clear reasons and indubitable proofs; that we knew how all things passed under
those two Popes, that we had the Memoires thereof, either the Originals, or
such as were compared therewith, and that amongst others we had at Paris many
Pieces concerning these matters signed by Clement VIII. his own hand. Monsignor
Ghiggi was astonished at this, but I assured him of the truth it. Then we fell
to speak of our Memorial; and he confirmed to me again that the Pope told him
he would take order in it, and that he believed the impression of the book was
stopped, till his Holiness further signified his pleasure about it. He said we
might nevertheless continue our diligences in the ordinary manner, and that
for his part, he could do no more in it then what he had done. He spoke also of
prohibiting either side to print any thing touching these matters. I answered,
that we could not consent to prohibitions that were common to us with them;
that the same would be ineffectual with them, and prejudicial to the cause
which we maintained; that they would not obey the same on their part, but make
use of them for a pretext to oppose and persecute us. I added, that the
shortest course, most honorable for the H. See, most edifying for the Church,
most expedient against the reproaches of its enemies, and most advantageous for
our adversaries and our selves, was to examine and declare which of us was in
the right; That we did not endeavor absolutely to hinder the impression of the
said book; that we should be glad it were published; because, to judge by the
other outrages which that party has divulged, it might be presumed that this
would give us new advantages against them as well as their former Libels: but
all we proposed to our selves in our prosecution against it, was only to hinder
it from coming forth as authorized and approved by the H. See: Provided this
particular were secured, we were not further sollicitous. This Conference
ended, as it began, with very great reciprocal civilities, with telling the
news of the time, as he was doing me the honor to reconduct me to the stairs.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning our transactions till the end of February. A Promotion of
Cardinals, amongst whom was Monsignor Ghiggi. Of a Memorial which we presented
to the Pope against a book of F. Annat under the Press; and of the Visits
which we began to make to all the Sacred College.

THE next day after the abovementioned Visit, Monday the 19th of February,
Monsignor Ghiggi was created Cardinal, with nine other persons, whose merit was
publicly and unanimously acknowledged in Rome by all people. It was not
remembered that there had been seen a promotion of such commendable Churchmen,
not only in reference to those whom the Pope made of his own choice, but also
to them who were nominated to him by the two Crowns. It is not credible how
all people strived to give the Pope applauses and benedictions for having so
worthily filled the vacant places of the Sacred College. Besides Monsignor
Ghiggi, their names were, my LL. the Cardd. Homodei, Santa Croce, Corrado,
Ottobone, Lomelino, Aldobrandino, who were at Rome; and the Cardinal of Hassia,
Cardinal Pimentelli, and Cardinal de Rets, who were not there.

When I received the news of this promotion, I was with one of my Friends, who
came to me to advertise me, that Cardinal Spada had received many Letters from
Paris, which were very sharp against those that are called Jansenists; that it
was urged vehemently in these Letters, that unless the Jansenists were
suppressed, all was lost; and that the Letters being in French, the Cardinal
caused him to translate them into Italian, in order to present them so
translated to the Pope. What could we now do against all these Cabals and
calumnies, besides what we had done already, and continued to do? It behooved
us to receive that intelligence from the hand of God, as well as the news of
the Promotion, blessing him both for the one and the other, and partaking in
the public joy.

I had cautioned with the Master of the Sacred Palace for a permission for us
to have and read all books made pro or con about the matters of Grace. In the
afternoon I went to remind him of it, and to congratulate with him and F. Fani
his Companion for the promotion of Cardinal Pimentelli, who was of their Order.

Returning, I found F. Hilarion at our lodging. In his discourse he confirmed
again to us that the Bull of Urban VIII. against Jansenius might hold in the
whole extent which the makers of it intended, and could equitably be allowed to
it, and yet nothing at all be in the book of that Bishop but what was most true
and most Orthodox; That the Jesuits had not so great credit at Rome as was
imagined; That the Propositions, as we understood them, could not run any
hazard; That he had looked upon the book of F. Annat; That F. Modeste Procurator
General of the Conventual Cordeliers was he that read it, and made report that
it might be printed, and if it were judged otherwise he would answer it; and
many other things of this nature, which that learned Monastic told us with
great gentleness and sincerity.

On Tuesday the 20. one brought me very early as many sheets of F. Annat's book
as were printed, and after we had perused some of them, M. Brousse and I went
to the Pope's presence chamber to endeavor to get audience, and present him
our Memorial against that book. But we were frustrated because the Pope that
day expected the Ambassadors of Princes who were to come and thank him for the
Cardinals newly made at the recommendation of their Masters. Wherefore we went
to wait upon the Kings Ambassador to accompany him to the ceremony, and also to
beseech him to move the Pope either to give us audience, or appoint his Maistre
de chamber to take our Memorial, in order to show it to his Holiness. The
Ambassador told us he should not speak of any business in this visit, but on
Friday following, which was the day of his usual audience, he would not sail to
do what we desired.

On Wednesday the 21. I went to F. Fani to tell him how many things there were
contrary to Effectual Grace in the sheets which I had seen of F. Annats book.
He bid me represent the same boldly; and said he had scarce had time to peruse
it, and it was not in his power to read it exactly.

Afterward M. Brousse and I went to the Ambassador, who told us that in the
end of his audience, asking the Pope, How his Holiness liked our Doctors? The
Pope expressed himself well satisfied with us. That then he signified to him,
that we desired to have an audience touching a book that was printing, whereof
we complained. But the Pope seemed surprised at our soliciting for audience;
and looked upon our complaint as a thrusting of our selves to intermeddle with
the order and discipline of Impressions which are made at Rome, and to reform
the same. That the said the book had been seen by the Master of the Sacred
Palace, that all the ordinary Ceremonies had been observed about it; and if
there were any thing that ought to hinder the Impression, the Dominicans were
adversaries sufficiently to the Jesuits, not to let it pass without
complaining of it. As M. Brousse was going to reply, the Ambassador of Malta
arrived and interrupted the conference. We retired into another chamber, where
after the Ambassador had done with him of Malta, he came to rejoyn us. We told
him, that we should condemn our selves, had we the thought as the Pope
imagined, to cause the least change in the Regulation accustomed to be kept at
Rome for the printing of books; but that whose impression we opposed being
directly upon the subject of the difficulties to be debated amongst the
Divines, upon which we came to supplicate the Pope to hear them in a solemn
Congregation before any Decision of them, and consequently to prevent the H.
See from being engaged on one side or other before hearing them; it was our
duty to represent to the Pope what prejudice the Impression of that book
authorized (as we were informed) by the H. See or some of its principal
members, might bring to our cause, and to the H. See it self. We told him he
might see the same more clearly set forth in our Memorial, if he pleased to
take the pains to read it. He accepted our offer to leave the same with him,
and he promised that he would not sleep before he read it. He stayed us to dine
with him, and at the table F. Mulard's deputation was spoken of, and the real
accusation that had been made against me; which the Ambassador acknowledged to
be so groundless, that he told me himself would be my witness wherever I
pleased that I had never given the least cause for it.

On Thursday the 22th. the Ceremony of giving the Hat to the new Cardinals was
solemnis'd, and we were present at it.

On Friday the 23d. M. Brousse and I went to the Ambassador to wait upon him to
the Pope, and to remember him of our Memorial. He showed us his Note of the
things of which he was to speak to the Pope, amongst which our affair was
written, and he drew our Memorial half out of his pocket, to show us that he
had not forgotten us. While the Ambassador was at audience, we waited in the
Presence Chamber, to be ready in case we should be called. He stayed till noon,
and when he came forth, we reconducted him home in his own Coach. Where in few
words he told us, that he had represented our affair very zealously and
punctually to the Pope, but found him not disposed to conclude any thing upon
it. That he told the Pope that it was urgent, and required a speedy Order to
stop the Impression; That his Holiness knew well that be had never spoken to
him in favor of us, but on the contrary had made many recommendations to him
in behalf of the Jesuits; yet he looked upon this affair as likely to have
troublesome consequences, and capable, unless his Holiness prevented it, to
raise some combustion in France, which would not be pleasing to him; That the
printing and authorizing of a book of that nature, whilst we were soliciting
for the examination of things to the bottom, could not be well resented; That
he had hitherto advised the Pope to delude us, if he thought good, and do all
that he pleased against us, but yet to content us at least in appearance, by
granting the Congregation which we su'd for, and holding such things as these
which were not decisive, in aequilibrio in the mean time; but all his discourse
could noc prevail upon the Pope, whose mind he found biased and prepossessed
in this affair against us; That nevertheless he left our Memorial with him;
that very probably he would read it; that he had commended it to him, and said
that his Holiness no doubt would be well pleased with it, excepting perhaps
for some few positive words wherewith we spoke of our opinion, as constant and
indubitable; That he could not procure audience for us that day in regard other
Ambassadors were to be admitted; nor could we have any the next day, because it
was the day for the Card. of the H. Office; that Sunday would be taken up at
Chapel, Monday and Tuesday with the Signature of Grace: that this was great
delay, but he hoped the Pope would in the mean time relent and become
favorable to our request, when he had read our Memorial and ruminated upon it;
That for all this hope which he gave us, we should not account our business
done, but continue what other diligences we could use in it; That for his part
he had forgot nothing that he could allege to the Pope in this cause; but the
Pope instead of concluding any thing, still did what he could to wave the
subject, and come to an end of the audience. We returned our most humble thanks
to the Ambassador for the good office he had done us, and left him to prepare
for his departure to Tivoli in the afternoon.

I should here insert the Memorial which I have so often mentioned, and shall
speak of in the sequel of this Narrative, but for that it contained only the
same reasons more at large which we had represented to the Pope in few words at
the audience we had of him, Jan. 21. it would be tedious to recite it here. I
shall only note that among other things we declared in it, 1. That we impugned
only the Sufficient Grace subjected to Free Will, which the Molinists hold. 2.
That we maintained only Effectual Grace, as to the Five Propositions. 3. That
we did not undertake the defense of the book of Jansenius.

The same day we made a second Visit to Cardinal Spada, in which we represented
our affair to him, giving him an account of what had passed in the audience
which the Pope had given us, Jan. 21. After M. Brousse had ended his discourse,
the Cardinal answered us in these words, Ho caro d'haver sentito quel c'ha
detto suo Santita; quando veno qualche cosa ordinata da essa lo faro, etc. M.
Brousse was about to add something to the Narrative which he had made, but one
came to advertise Cardinal Spada that the new Cardinals were coming to salute
him; and so we were fain to end what we had to say.

From thence we went to Cardinal Rapaccioli, to whom we represented our affair
fully and at leisure. He thanked us for our information, and told us he was
very well pleased to hear of these matters which exercised the Church at this
time, that they were sufficiently intricate, that he had not thoroughly studied
them, but it behooved a Cardinal to be acquainted with them; That he had much
contentment to hear that from our mouths which we had spoken to him concerning
them, and that he would willingly apply himself to them as far as the
employments of a Bishop would permit him. As for the express declaration we
had made, of having no commission nor purpose to interesse our selves in any
thing that regarded Jansenius's book, he told us we needed not trouble our
selves about it, for that when any opinion or Proposition is to be examined, it
is not to be considered whether Jansenius delivers it or not, but only whether
it be good or bad.

On Saturday the 24. we went to visit Cardina Cesi, who afforded us leisure
enough to set forth our affair; but he spoke more to us then we did to him. He
told us there was nothing more easy to resolve. That the Pope might refer it
to the Congregation of the Council, or that of the Holy Office, or select out
of each diverse Cardinals and other persons to compose a third. After we left
him, we visited the Procurator General of St. Marcello, with whom there passed
nothing memorable, saving that he assured my Colleagues, and offered to testify
anywhere else, that before him I never took upon me the quality of the
Faculties Deputy; and that when he had heard others speak of me, it was no
otherwise then as of one sent by some Bishops of France.

The same day I went to the Printer who had F. Annat's Book in hand, to know
how it stood, and what remained to be printed. He told me that he had at least
enough for three weeks before it would be finished.

On Sunday the 24. I went to a person, without whose Counsel I acted little, to
acquaint him with the state of that impression, what had passed about our
Memorial, and our fear to engage in that further solicitations against that
book, both for the little likelihood of succeeding, and for that it was not a
matter that directly belonged to our Commission; in which regard we had not
subscribed that Memorial, but spoke of our selves in it in the third person, as
also of Jesuits and others mentioned in it. But we found that the same reasons
though remote from our Commission, which had induced us to speak thereof to the
Pope, and to get that Memorial presented to him, obliged us to pursue a
favorable issue of it to the last, always keeping the same Circumspections
that we had observed therein. For either our further diligences which we should
further use, would obtain that favorable issue, or at least we should receive
no more dissatisfaction and disadvantage after, having done all we could, then
if we made only a plain recommendation; it being always to be presumed, that
after we had concerned our selves therein, we would do or ought to do our
utmost to sueceed: Therefore we concluded it fit, if my Colleagues consented, to
endeavor to get an Audience of the Pope, to go and speak with Monsignot
Ghiggi, to carry a Copy of our Memorial to Cardinal Roma, and to defet for
eight or nine days our Visits to the Cardinal St. Clement, Lugo and Colonna,
who being of the H. Office, might have a part in the Resolution that would be
made thereupon; to the end that if it were fitting to speak to them of it, we
might do so in the Visits which we were to make to them about our principal
affair.

I learnt from the same person, that one day of that week there was to be a
little Enterview of Consultors and Qualificators who were to confer together
upon the first Proposition, and that probably this was done in consequence of
the first Memorial which we presented to the Pope. Whereupon telling that
person, that it was not those secret and particular Assemblies, before which
the Divines of either side appeared not, that we demanded; he told me that
those Consultors did not assemble to determine any thing, but rather to
exercise themselves, and see what might be done with me in the business.

On Monday the 26. M. Brousse and I repaired to the Popes Presence Chamber to
have Audience touching our Memorial against F. Annats Book; but we found so
many Advocates waiting there, whose day it was in regard of the Signature of
Grace that was to be made the next day, (in order to which they were come the
day before to give his Holiness the first informations of the Affairs wherewith
each of them was encharged) that we durst not demand it, but retired almost as
soon as we came.

Tuesday the 27. we visited Cardinal Savelli, who gave us a very favorable
Audience, though himself and we were standing all the while. He received our
Representations very well and made no difficulty to tell us that he saw nothing
in our Request to the Pope for a Congregation, but what was altogether just and
fitting to be granted.

In the Afternoon we visited Cardinal Raggi, who also took well what we said to
him during the short time that we intertain'd him, which nevertheless was
sufficient to give him a general Idea of our Affair. Quittting him, we went to
Cardinal Rondanini with whom we spent the better part of the rest of that
afternoon. The cause of our long Visit was his making sundry Questions to us
about the things represented by us to him, which he did not sufficiently
understand, and we were obliged to explicate further for his satisfaction. He
was pleased during this Audience to read the Letter of M. de Vabres to the
Pope, and that of the other Bishops which I delivered to his Holiness, of which
I showed him a Copy which I had purposely about me to show both of them to such
persons as I found upon occasion had the Curiosity to see them. Having read the
Propositions in the letter of M. de Vabes, he told us they seemed rude
according to the words. Whereunto we answered, that they were framed so
purposely, and we explicated to him the sense according to which we held the
first and second, which he professed not to gainsay. At length we left him
well informed and well satisfied with us, as himself testified, and the Abbot
Rondanini his brother (with whom we contracted a great acquaintance, and who is
certainly of excellent parts, and applies himself prosperously to good Learning
and good things) confirmed to us since. This was a remarkable particularity in
this Visit, that M. Brousse at first making a Complement to this Cardinal as to
all the rest in Italian, his Eminence answered in Latin, which thereby became
the language used in all the rest of the entertainment.

We ended this day with a Visit to the Abbot Charrier, to congratulate with him
for the happy success of his Vigilance in negotiating for the Cardinals Hat for
my L. the Coadjutor of Paris, notwithstanding all the Artifices and obstacles
employed by diverse persons to cross it, and to testify to him the joy and
hopes arising to us from that promotion in reference to the good of the Affairs
of the Church of France.

On Wednesday we learnt that the Jesuits were advertised and alarmed at what
we had done to hinder the publication of F. Annat's Book. We made a Visit to
Cardinal Corrado, who received our Complements upon his promotion with great
Christian humility, and very exemplary sentiments of Piety. He well understood
our Affair, and told us with great modesty, that in this and in all others, he
should always endeavor to do what the service of the H. See required of him.
He said also, that if what we reported of the Exorbitances of the Jesuits, and
others against St. Augustine, were true, it was necessary that his Holiness took
some course therein, and that it was not possible to suffer the Authority of
that holy Doctor to be shaken, but the Faith and the H. See must receive
prejudice thereby.

Monsignor Sacrista showed us in the Afternoon the rich Ornaments and precious
Relics of the Popes private Sacristy or Vestry. As we returned we went to see
F. Campanella at the Carmelites de la Transpontine. And at night I went to see
one of my particular friends, who informed me that the General of the
Augustines was added by the Pope to the number of Qualificators who were to be
employed afterward in the examination of the Five Proportions.

The next day I left my Colleagues with F. Lezzana an ancient Monastic and
Professor in Divinity, Author of some works in print, and went to the Company
of the Commissary of the H. Office, who told me that the Jesuits made a great
clamor about a Book newly printed by a Minister of Holland named Desmares at
Groaning. That they took occasion from thence to redouble their instances for
the condemnation of the Propositions, which they demanded even without hearing
the Parties, and as a thing very urgent and necessary, not only for retaining
us for that lash and humiliation in the submission and obedience which we owed
to the H. See, but also for the reuniting to the Church several Provinces
withdrawn from it, and continuing in their rebellion and separation by our
example. That there was much talk in Rome about this Matter, and that those
Fathers omitted not to allarm the Pope and the Cardinals with it. I had not yet
seen that Book, but I understood by Letters from Paris of the 26. of January
what it was, and that there was an Answer intended to be made to it. I had
already answered to those Letters, as not being much surprised at that work by
the fear of what advantages might be made of it against us for some time; since
after this Agitation we might make greater of it against the Jesuits and the
Heretics themselves that produced it. I told this good Father the substance of
all those Letters, with which he was satisfied; so that he plainly acknowledged
that he needed but a little time to dispell all the Umbrages and Suspicions
that might be given or taken by the said Book. He informed me also of another
remarkable thing, namely, that in the year 1612. the H. Office made a
Declaration, by which it was judged that the Books printed before the
Prohibition of Paul V. were not comprehended in that Prohibition, and might be
reprinted without obtaining a new permission. I returned to F. Lezzana to call
my Companions, from whom I learnt that that Father had a great desire to be
informed of all, that he carefully read all the Writings he could on this
Subject, that he was at work about the Propositions, that he professed to
follow the Doctrine of St. Augustine, and held the necessity of Effectual Grace
ad singulos actus; that the reading of S. Augustine had caused him to embrace
those sentiments, and that it infused piety.

In the afternoon we visited Cardinal Capponi, who testified to us a very high
veneration for St. Augustine, and an equal astonishment at the detractions and
calumnies which we told him were spread against that H. Doctor and against us.
As for the Congregation which we required, he said his opinion was, it ought
rather to be established sooner then later, that so the matters in question
might be managed with all fitting leisure and exactness. Stabilirla quanto
prima, e poi ben maturarla.

CHAP. V.
Of the Visites which we made during the first days of March, as well to the
sacred College, as to the Consultors and Qualificators who are usually
employed at Rome in matters of Doctrine.

I Learnt on the first day of March a very remarkable thing, namely that before
the Bull of Urban VIII. Cardinal Barberin himself took the pains to make
sundry accusations against the book of Jansenius in the Assembly of the H.
Office, and that his Eminence caused it to be brought thither on diverse
occasions to show that assembly the erroneous opinions whereof he accused it:
That one time amongst the rest he accused him for having written that Original
sin was the sole cause of the damnation of the reprobate, as if it were the
only cause, and actual sins contributed nothing at all thereunto. But that it
always happened that it was evinced to his Eminence by examination of the places
which he cited, that the Memoires delivered to him against that book were not
well grounded, and that in this point particularly they were without any
appearance; since, as Cardinal S. Clement, who was then but Master of the
sacred Palace, showed in a full assembly, that Bishop expressly says that
actual sin is the radical cause thereof, causa radicalis damnationis; which is
very true. Whereupon during some time, that book was no more spoken of in the
said Congregation; but a little after, when it was least thought of, the Bull
of Urban VIII. decreed against the same book was published.

In the afternoon we visited Cardinal Giori, to whom we had scarce begun to
speak, but one came to advertise him that the Pope was going to S. Peter's
Church, whither he was obliged to repair to receive his Holiness; and so we
were constrained to take leave of him without further communication. My
companions and I went to visit F. Modeste, who made as if he were ignorant of
our affair and of the Five Propositions, though I had formerly acquainted him
therewith whilst I was at Rome alone. He gave us but general and popular
answers, concerning the diversity of Heretics with whom S. Augustine had to
deal, and said that the vehemence wherewith he opposed them making him
sometimes speak with Exaggeration, all his sayings were not to be looked upon as
if they were Scriptures. He said also that the Pope was not obliged to hear the
Parties, in order to making of a Decision. To which we answered, that at least
it suited with his prudence and his justice when it was requested as it was by
us in the name of persons whose worth and quality gave them right and authority
so to do. Having continued with him till one a clock in the night we departed.

On Saturday we visited Cardinal Ghiggi, who received us standing, and excused
himself that the day being then Post-day made him in have. He spoke of his
Promotion with great sentiments of piety and modesty. He told us that he did
not deserve that dignity, nor had he sought it; that he followed the Maxim of
the Bishop of Geneva, To ask nothing, To refuse nothing, and To complain of
nothing. On which occasion he told us that he always wore upon his breast a
Meddal, on the one side of which was the Pourtrait of that great Bishop, and on
the other that of S. Augustine. Touching our affair, he said that it was best to
deliver Propositions very clear and exact; and that sometimes great stir and
opposition about a business occasions the establishing of what we would
overthrow; for which he cited the same verses of Horace, Ventus ut amittit
vires, etc. which he had done formerly in a letter to M. Daquin Doctor of
Physic at Paris, who sent him the book Of Frequent Communion during his
Nuntiature i^ Germany, upon occasion of the complaints and Writings which the
Adversaries of that Excellent book published against it, as M. Brousse remembered
him when he uttered them in this audience. I shall repete them here with four
or five of the preceding lines of that Letter. Ego sane non video quid contra
librum de Frequenti Communione scribere sit opus, cum in eo adeo attemperata
videantur ea dogmata quae affert, ut nihil in eis peccatum dicas. Tota namque
moles difficultatis ad praxim devolvitur, in qua quidem non tam facile est
praescribere leges, cum unica auricularis secreta confessio examen sit quo ad
actum deducitur tota instructio, and in ea confessione servatur maximum omnium
arcanorum. Spreta obsolescunt, si irascaris, agnita videntur, dicebat ille; dum
alias, Ventus ut amittit vires, nisi robore densae
Occurrunt Sylvae, spatio diffusus inani;
Vtque perit magnus nullis obstantibus ignis,
Sic hosts mihi deesse nocet --
Leaving Cardinal Ghiggi we went to visit Cardinal Cechini, who caused seats to
be set for us round the Table where he was, and after he had heard M. Brousse's
discourse, he answered us, that if he received any commands from his Holiness
as to this matter, he would acquit himself thereof punctually.

On Sunday the third, the Abbot of Valcroissant and I visited Cardinal Vrsin*
before his going to Chapel, whither we accompanied him. After Chapel we went
all together to see Cardinal Cornaro, who was standing and uncovered all the
while we were speaking to him, which we did largely enough. Mention was made of
one of the causes which caused Paul V. to suspend his Bull against Molina,
namely the banishment of the Jesuits by the Commonwealth of Venice, which
happening upon occasion of his Interdict, when he was upon the point to publish
his Bull, he was willing to spare them that second mortification, in hope that
without it they might of themselves return to Orthodox sentiments, from which
all that had passed in those matters, ought to have convinced them that they
were gone far astray.

In the afternoon we visited Cardinal Ginetti, to whom we gave an account of
our audience with the Pope, particularly of the falsities and calumnies of
which we complained, and of F. Annat's book which was printing. Touching the
former, He acknowledged that I had never spoken to himself but in the name of
the Bishops, and that F. Mulard had addressed to him as the Faculties Deputy,
and touching the book, that we should do well to speak about it to the other
Cardinals of the Holy Office. We replied, that we intended it, though we were
no further concerned, then that the name of his Holiness or their Eminences
might not be engaged in it; that we had spoken first to him, partly because of
the singular benevolence which he had testified to us, and partly in regard of
a particular authority which we knew he had as to the printing of books.

We visited Cardinal Lomellino next, whom we entertained very familiarly; He
answered us, that his various employments had much diverted him from the study
of those matters; and thought he had been always obliged to apply himself
thereunto, yet conceiving himself more obliged by his new dignity of Cardinal,
he should willingly do it. Whereunto we excited him by the satisfaction which
we told him he would receive in it.

After which I went alone to carry Card. Roma a copy of our Memorial against F.
Annat's book. The Cardinal told me it was not the intention of their
Congregation to give F. Annat permission to write of the matter de Auxiliis. I
answered, that nevertheless his book was upon that subject; but we were not
much troubled at that; and if he pleased to cause the Printer to give us a Copy
of what was already printed, we would deliver his Eminence such observations
thereupon as should show that it was not our own interest that induced us to
obstruct the publishing of it, but the sole consideration of the H. See, which
the Jesuits would proclaim to have authorized the pernicious sentiments of
that Libel.

I learnt the same day that the Consultors and Qualificators which were to have
met last week, did not assemble; the cause of which was the subtilty of one of
the principal and best meaning men, who alleged that he could not yet meet
anywhere to consult of these matters till he had employed more time in studying
them. And he said this, to the end the rest might follow his example, and not
be ashamed to say and do the same.

The same friend that gave me this intelligence, counseled me to take some
care to inform one of the Consultors whom he named, and who deserved it, both
because he needed it, and because he was a well-meaning and treatable man. But
I answered, I could not do it, because we had no Order to inform any person in
private and secretly, and all that was done in this manner was suspected by us
and little troubled us: That we must first see the Congregation which we
desired of the Pope, well open and well settled, before we resolved upon
informing any one. This done, we would take all possible care and necessary
pains to inform every one both in private and in public; but till the were
done, we could proceed no otherwise then (...) had done hitherto, namely to
make known to all such as were concerned for the interests of the H. See,
Consultors and others, with what malicious subtilty they who framed those
Propositions endeavored to circumvent it. That yet I did not refuse to give in
a friendly way, but not as to a Judge, such light as an honest man could desire
in the things which I knew, and he was willing to understand; which office,
provided it were thus received, I should not decline to do, though it were to a
Consultor; (although less willingly to such then to another) but withal in
such a way, that all I said to him should in no wise pass for an Instruction
upon the grounds of the Propositions, which required greater study and
attention, and much other solemnity. My friend approved this course, and
acknowledged that we had great reason not to recede from it.

We visited Cardinal Ottobone on Tuesday morning the 5. of March. He received
our Complements and made many to us; but our affair was little spoken of.

Parting from him, we went to Cardinal Lugo; He asked me whether I had continued
at Rome ever since our last speaking together. Whereupon I gave him an account
of the occasion of my return, and what we four were to solicit with his
Holiness. He replied that he had not yet heard speak of those Propositions. I
proceeded to tell him what necessity there was of examining them thoroughly in a
Congregation, in regard of the diversity of their senses. He answered that it
was reasonable that we should be heard, and our writings seen. That what he
could say to us, was, that it was an affair not handled in the H. Office, but
reserved by the Pope to himself. I replied that we waited till the Pope pleased
to erect a special Congregation for the purpose. He put us upon the business of
S. Peter and S. Paul, telling us that the same course was taken for its
examination, and that the Pope assembled together the ablest Divines in Rome,
as well of the H Office as others, and that himself persuaded his Holiness so
to do. I told him we knew nothing of all that, nor had we heard any talk of it;
indeed we knew of the Decree passed upon the book, but were ignorant of the
circumstances which he related. He replied in such a manner as tended to lead
us to that subject again, but we diverted the discourse of it by bringing him
to that of the solemn Congregation whose establishment we pursued. He told us
again that he thought it fit and just that our writings were examined and
communicated to the Qualificators and Consultors: but for our going to houses
to see them, he durst not add that he judged it bad, but he gave us to
understand that it did not please him. M. Brousse replied and said that
Commission was not confined within such strait bounds, but it enjoined us to
desire a solemn Congregation of the Pope in which both parties might be heard
both by word of mouth and by writing in presence one of the other* and all
their writings reciprocally communicated. The Cardinal said that it seemed we
intended to have a kind of little Council. M. Brousse answered that that was
necessary, as well for other reasons, as in regard of the falsities and
calumnies that were found to have slipped into secret writings. I took this
occasion and told him what accusation the Nuntio had made against me in the
Faculty, what we had said to the Pope of it, and what the Pope had answered us.
The Cardinal said he believed all those difficulties would come to fall upon
the point of sufficient Grace: and to persuade us that that was it which was to
be defended and would be judged the best, he made use of this comparison. He
said, it was once indispute, which was the best way of counting the hours,
either by four and twenty beginning from the time of one Sunset to another, as
the Italians do; or from twelve to twelve, beginning from Midnight to noon, and
from Noon to midnight, as the French and Spaniards do: and that this last way
had been judged the better, since Nations otherwise so opposite agreed in it.
That so, sufficient Grace would undoubtedly, be judged the better, since the
Dominicans and the Jesuits consented in it. I replied, that there were two
sorts of Grace, which were called sufficient; that the Jesuits and the
Dominicans agreed in the Word, but not in the Thing, and that other Divines,
such as our selves, did not impugn all kind of sufficient Grace, but only
that which was made subject to Free Will; and that the Dominicans opposed the
same as well as we. That therefore when the question is of sufficient Grace, we
should not speak of it without distinction, and without knowing of what nature
it is, and what it is capable to produce in our hearts by the power which God
gives it -- Cardinal Lugo suffered me not to finish this discourse which
assuredly was none of the most pleasing to his Eminence; but he interrupted it,
saying that it behoved to defend the same which S. Augustine defended against
Pelagius. The Abbot of Valcroissant replied that that which S. Augustine
defended against Pelagius, was the Effectual by it self, necessary to every
pious action; whereunto the Cardinal answering nothing, I continued my relation
of what passed in the audiences which we had of his Holiness, and told him
that the Pope in one audience asked me whether any of the Five Propositions was
in the Bull of Pius V. and I answered negatively. The Cardinal replied that the
third was in it. (This agreed ill with what he told us at first, viz. that he
had not yet heard speak of those Propositions) I proceeded, that I had told his
Holiness, that indeed the third had some resemblance with two or three of
those that are in the Bull of Pius V. but yet they were different from it, and
that upon my saying to the Pope that there needed but one word to change a
Proposition, His Holiness answered me that there needed but a Comma. That I
further told the Pope that this third was not condemned in the sense that we
held it, nor like any of the others condemned in the sense that we held it, nor
like any of the others condemned by that Bull. That we did not oppose it in any
thing; nor had any thing to say against that of Urban VIII. published against
Jansenius. Neither had we ought to plead in defense of his book. That all those
things were wholly different, and separate from our affair. That the same was
only to beseech the Pope to cause the different senses of the Propositions to
be distinguished before passing of judgment upon them, to admit us to declare
which we do not hold; and as for those that we do hold, to examine the reasons
which we have so to do; to communicate the writings which we should present to
him upon this subject to our adversaries, and theirs to us; and to hear us upon
the whole viva voce in presence one of the other; to the end that after having
well cleard, heard and considered all, the Pope might pass judgment thereof,
and his decision might be received peaceably with the satisfaction of both
parties, and with the respect that shall be due thereunto. We rose up, and
Cardinal Lugo told us as he accompanied us, that he was glad for his not being
concerned in this affair nor employed in it; and we told him on the other side,
that we wished his Eminence were employed in it.

Ending this visit we went to Cardinal S. Clement, who, as soon as M. Brousse
had begun to lay open the subject of our coming, told us he understood the
business well enough, but he would acquaint us with some particularities that
had passed at Rome. He said the Nuntio had sent thither a certain Censure made
by the Sorbonne, in which those Propositions were condemned. That the Pope
appointed four Divines to write their sentiments upon those Censures; that
three of the four plainly and fully confirmed those Censures, but the fourth
spoke a little more uncertainly. That himself being upon occasion obliged to
speak what he thought of them, he had said freely, That the Censures were
Heretical and not the Propositions. (For he construed them all to the sense of
Effectual Grace.) That the Pope hearing his opinion, said, See, Cardinal S.
Clement says our Divines are Heretics; and that he replied to the Pope, that
he did not say that his Divines were Heretics, but the Censures; and yet if
they persisted obstinate in avowing the confirmation which they made thereof,
they would be Heretical too as well as the Censures. He spoke something about
the earnest study of these matters which was requisite for the right
understanding of them, whereby he gave us to know that he understood the same
well. He began to enter upon the discussion of the first of the Propositions,
when one came to advertise him that the Prince of Lunebourg was coming to take
leave of him, being to return into Germany; which broke off our conference. The
Cardinal made an excuse to us, and testif'd his regret for this interruption.
We told him we could come again to see him; he answered that it was not
needful, and that he was sufficiently informed of all that had passed and was
daily acted, as to this affair.

We went in the afternoon to accompany the Ambassador to the Cardinals Homodei,
Santa Croce, and Corrado. At his return he asked us whether any thing was done
touching our Memorial. We told him, we had heard no tidings of it: He replied,
that nevertheless he conceived the Pope had taken order in it, and as he was
told, had charged the General of the Jesuits to hinder those of his Order from
Writing upon these matters during these contests, and this posture of things,
without the Books be first seen and examined at Rome. We answered, That it was
contrary to what we wished, because the Jesuits made no books, but wha^
furnished us with new Arms; and so the more they writ, the more they fortif'd
(...); but our sole intent in this ma^ter was, that their books might not be
reviewed at Rome, for^ar the H. See should suffer it self to be engaged in
their sentiments, and surprised by their Artifices.

M. Gu^ff^r did us the honor to invite us to dinner on Wednesday the sixth, and
in the afternoon we accompanied the Ambassador in the Visits which he continued
to the new Cardinals, Ottobone and Lomelino.

On Thursday the seventh the Cardinals held a Chapel at la Minerve for the
solemnity of the fea^ of S. Thomas, where they were all present except those of
the H. Office; who on another day then Thurday would have been there rather
then the rest, but now preferred their usual Assembly held before the Pope
before that Ceremony. We were invited in the afternoon to the Covent of the
Barefooted Carmeliets where an Oration and a Dispute were to be made for the
celebration of the same Festival. The Abbot of Valcroissant and M. Angran were
there, and M. Brousse and I continued to accompany the Ambassador in the rest
of the Visits which he was to make to the new Cardinals Aldobrandino and Ghiggi.

Friday the eight being the ordinary day that Ambassadors have audience of the
Pope regularly every fo^tnight, we presented a little Memorial in French to our
Ambassador as he was going to the Pope, partly to remind him of that which at
our instance he had left with his Holiness at his former audience, and partly
to inform him more expressly of the reasons which induced us to present it,
which tended in no wise to hinder the Jesuits from writing and publishing
Books, but only from doing it with the owning and approbation of the H. See.
And to show him that it was no vanity that we said, that we could have
advantages against the Jesuits out of their own Books, and particularly out of
that whose publishing we endeavored to obstruct, we showed him a printed sheet
of it, in which F. Annat, either by a gross error or obstinate malice (which
could not but turn to his own confusion) cited Pelagius's confession of Faith
as a work of S. Augustine, containing his Doctrine. The Ambassador took our
little Memorial, and the sheet we left with him to show the Pope, if he found
it meet. He told us he was mindful of us, and that we were already in the Note
of what he had to say to his Holiness.

At his Return we entered into his Chamber, and he told us the Pope said, It
was a strange thing we should oppose the Impression of that book, that it had
past through the ordinary forms; if it contained any thing to be disliked after
it was printed, it should be censured, and they who did not do their duty,
should be reproved. That the same course should be taken as was about M.
Hersents book; after the impression and publication of which, a French
Dominican who licensed it, was confined six or eight months in la Minerve, and
the Master of the sacred Palace in danger of being cashiered, till both of them
cleared and justified themselves of what they had done. But besides, if the
Pope must take care of the printing of Books, he would be overwhelmed with
infinite new encumbrances thereby. That he had fifty thousand other Affairs
without that, and therefore we must have patience, if he could not meddle with
it. The Ambassador told us, that he replied to the Pope, that it was more
expedient to hinder a misch^ef before it were done, then to stay till it were
done, to remedy it; and that it was easier to quench a taper that was ready to
set fire on a Woodpile, then to extinguish the fire when the Woodpile was
flaming. This, he said, he represented to the Pope, not as interessing himself
in the business, but by way of advice which he received from us. He added that
notwithstanding these considerations did not alter his mind, but he continued
still in that which he had declared to us, that he took not the part of that
book; and if we found any ill in it after it was printed, it would be easy for
us and all others to complain, and the remedy would not be difficult. We
answered the Ambassador that since it was so, and after this declaration of the
Pope, it would be more advantageous for us that the book were published then
suppressed. The Ambassador replied that yet he doubted whether in would come
forth, because though the Pope was averse and made semblance of not much
regarding it, yet he perceived that the Pope mused upon it, and made some
reflection upon our instances; and that he believed it would be no ill way for
us to continue the same by the mediation of some of the Cardinals. That for his
part he could not speak in it any otherwise then by way of advertisement and
representing to the Pope of what consequence we said it was, but not with that
zeal and importunity which he should have done, if he had received order from
the King to meddle in it. We gave the Ambassador our humble thanks, and
acknowledged that he had done all we could hope from a very obliging and
equitable person. That according to his advice we would endeavor to speak to
some of the Cardinals as we had done already to Roma and Ginetti, but rather
for form then otherwise; because the Pope having declared that he took no part
in it, we were satisfied, and secure as to the rest.

In the afternoon we went to see Cardinal Barberin. He was ready to go to S.
Peter's Church when we came there: however he caused us to enter into his
Chamber, and asked us whether we would accompany him thither. In the mean time,
before any thing was spoken concerning our business, he asked us whether we had
instructed the persons whom it was requisite. I answered that we endeavored it
as much as possible; and M. Brousse added that we had had audience of the Pope,
and were well satisfied with the reception which he gave us. But without
staying to hear any of the particulars, he asked us what was the first
Proposition. I told it him, He asked whether we had writ nothing upon that
subject. I answered that something was written at Paris which he had seen; but
for our parts we had composed nothing about it but a Memorial which we left
with the Pope at the end of our audience, wherein we moved his Holiness for a
Congregation in which the Divines of different opinions might be solemnly heard
in defense of their opinions. The Cardinal further put us upon speaking of the
different senses of the first Proposition: but to prevent it, I told him we
would give the explications thereof when the Congregation was assembled; the
Cardinal replied that the Italians were molto tristi, that is, very untoward,
and e grande la nostra tristitia (added he) that at Paris they say for
accomplishing affairs it is requisite to solicit them well, but at Rome it
required more pains to make those on whom they depended only to remember
them. I replied to his Eminence that we had no order to act otherwise then we
did, nor should we, what ever resolution were taken at Rome in this affair.
That provided we acquitted our selves of that commission, it was sufficient for
us. That it belonged to the Pope or their Eminences to see to the rest. M.
Brousse confirmed the same, and spoke of F. Annat's book, and our Memorial to
hinder its coming forth. Which he said, we resolved upon chiefly, because of
the affront that seemed to be done to the Bishops who sent us, by letting a
book of that nature come forth owned and approved, in which the present contest
was determined in favor of one of the parties, at the same time that we were
suing in the name of those Bishops, for a solemn Congrregation to examine it in
pretense of the parties, and to decide it after they had been heard. M. Brousse
urged this very well, when one came to advertise the Cardinal that it was time
to go to S. Peter's: Upon the way we mentioned the Bishop of Geneva's book,
termed an Introduction to a devout life; I told him that I understood by the
Bishop of Belley in what outrageous manner many Mendicant Friars, and the
Capucines especially, opposed it at its first apearance, that their zeal became
so vehement against that book, that some carried it into their pulpits, and
after they had declared against it, threw it down in the pulpit, and trampled
upon it with great demonstrations of indignation; others carried it into the
pulpit loosestitcht, and after the like declamations broke the thread that held
the leaves together and scattered them among their auditors; and lastly that
others burnt it after the same tragical manner. I told the Cardinal that M.
Hallier and M. Hermant were present when M. du Belley told us these passages at
a Visit which we made to him together, at the beginning of and concerning the
opposition that was made against the book Of Frequent Communion. That therefore
it was not to be wondered that good books were sometimes disparaged and
persecuted by ignorant Friars; but that the event will be sooner or later like
that which the same Bishop told us befell the Introduction to a Devout Life,
which having by that means been much more read then otherwise it would have
been, at length merited so general an approbation, that its Persecutors finding
that the laughers were not on their side, became obliged to betake themselves
to that of the laughers, and to be at last themselves the approvers of it with
all the rest of the world; which the prodigious multitude of its several
Impressions testified. We ended our journey to S. Peter's as we were speaking
of the book of the Minister of Groaning, of the advantages which the Jesuits
might pretend to derive from it, and of those which on the other side we
conceived more reasonably might accrue to us, when the answer to it preparing
by one of our friends was published. Wherewith Cardinal Barberin testified to us
sufficient satisfaction.

We left him at S. Peter's, and repaired to Cardinal Lanti, who received us
courteously, heard us and answered us prudently and vigorously.

On Saturday the 9th. I made a private visit in which I learnt two considerable
things: One, that the Congregation of Consultors and Qualificators designed to
confer together upon the first Proposition, was appointed to meet again on
Thursday following, and that this was the cause that persons well instructed
and qualified were employed to visit those Consultors and give them some light
upon the Propositions. The other that the Preacher of the Jesuits Professed
House, having a few days before taken occasion to speak in his Sermon of the
immaculate conception of the Virgin (which he did besides his purpose too) he
went about to prove it by certain Plates of Copper that spoke of it, which had
been found in a Cave in Spain during the Papacy of Urban VIII. who being
advertised in what veneration they began to be in Spain, caused them to be
brought to Rome, where being examined, he soon after declared them Apocryphal,
and forbad having them in any consideration, under the usual penalties
contained in the Bulls and Decrees of Popes. That a Dominican who was present
at that sermon, observing that the Preacher cited those Plates, informed the
Congregation of the H. Office, whereupon by order of the said Congregation, the
Jesuits Papers, were seized on, and verified the accusation. That Report being
made thereof to the Pope, his Holiness said it was a shame that those people
durst in view of the H. See contemn the Constitutions of Popes, especially at a
time when we who complained of them were at Rome. That the Pope sent for the
General of the Jesuits, and told him a little angerly that he was too blame
for suffering that Predicator in the functions of the Pulpit a fortnight after
he had committed such an exorbitance, for letting him celebrate Mass since
that time and incur irregularity; that perhaps he would have let him continue
in that manner till the end of Lent, if his Holiness had not looked after it;
That Generals of Orders ought to be acquainted with the Bulls of Popes, that
they may cause them to be obeyed by their Societies. In fine, that his
Holiness interdicted the said Predicator.

Accordingly he remained interdicted till the fifteenth day of March, when he
made satisfaction for his fault in the Pulpit where he had committed it,
reading the Recantation prescribed him by the Congregation of the H. Office;
two Notaries of the said Congregation holding a Copy of it at the foot of the
Pulpit, whilst F. Carlo Salviati da less della Compagnia di Giesa (so was he
called) read the same publicly. It was in these words:

Havendo io inconsideramente nella predica che feci ligiomi passati sopra la
Concettione della beata Virgin; preservata dal peccato originale allegato l'
autorita di san Tesifone conservata nelle lamine di granata contro it decreto
della santa memoria di Vrbano Ottavo fatto acinque di Maggio mill seicento
trenta nove, e publicato a di tredici Maggio mill seicento quarenta uno. E per
cio essendo io caduto nelle Censure e pene fulminate nel detto decreto
solamente per haver citato l' autorita di debt lamine di granata, mi fu fatto
intendere da part della santita di nostro signare e della sacra Congregatione
del sanct Officio che dovessi io astenermi dal predicare e dal celebrare come
reo di debt pene; ho pienamente obedito; Riconscendo il mio errore sono
recorso alla clemenza della sua sanctita e della medisima Congregatione, da'
quali sono stato begignamente aggratiato di debt pene, e reintegrato all'
asercitio del predicare, ho voluto accennare a questa udienza tutto cio, per
remediare allo scandalo che io havessi dato per essermi servito della sudetta
autorita contravenendo al fudelto decreto.

Whereas I have inconsiderately in my late Sermon upon the Conception of the B.
Virgin as preserved from original sin alleged the authority of San. Tesifone
in the copper Plates of Granata, contrary to the decree of Urban VIII. published
1641. And being therefore fallen under the Censures and penalties thundered
forth in the said Decree, I have been commanded by his Holiness and the
Congregation of the H. Office to abstain from preaching and celebrating Mass,
as guilty of the said penalties; I have fully obeyed. And acknowledging my
error, I have had recourse to the clemency of his Holiness and the said
Congregation, by whom I have been graciously released from the said penalties,
and restored to the exercise of preaching. All which I signify to this
Auditory, by way of amends for the scandal which I may have given by making use
of the said Authority contrary to the said Decree.

Coming from this Visit I went to hear Mass at a little Church of S. Frances,
where there was also a Chapel of Cardinals, and from thence to F. Hilarion, to
appoint an hour for seeing his Relics the next day. I told him all that had
passed in reference to F. Annats Book, and how the Impression proceeded
notwithstanding our Remonstrances. Whereupon he alleged very considerable
reasons to persuade us to go to M. Albizzi, saying, that he was a man that
loved justice, and was upright in affairs in which he was not prepossessed;
and exhorting us to speak to him heartily and with demonstration of confidence.
I told him, we would endeavor to acquit our selves the best we could. He
further represented to me how prejudicial it was to us, that we looked upon the
Tribunals of Rome as half contrary to us, and half Partisans of the Jesuits,
who were they alone whom we ought to take for our Adversaries. I thankt him for
his advice and assented to it: but I alleged the necessity of our judging so,
by all the Decrees that were seen to come forth so easily and so frequently
against the best books that were published on our side, and I instanced in the
Decrees issued against the Catechism and the Hours. He answered me, that all
those Decrees were to be considered with reference to the Bull of Urban VIII.
in consequence of which they were made, and that the H. See had no intention,
either by that Bull or those decrees to innovate any thing or to pronounce upon
doctrine one way or other, but only to cause its prohibitions of writing upon
this subject without permission to be observed. That those prohibitions which
were made to either side equally were so evident a conviction, that the
doctrine of Jansenius received no attainder by that Bull, that the meerest
Peasant might be satisfied thereof. In fine, that the other Decrees were to be
interpreted and considered in the same manner.

Amongst the Relics which he showed us the next day, the most remarkable was
the Title which was upon our Lords Cross, of which there remains in that place
but about one half. It is of very worm-eaten wood, about seven or eight inches
broad, and ten or eleven long, upon which Jesus Nazarenus is written in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin; and these two last Languages written as the Hebrew from the
right hand to the left. The Characters are framed very negligently, such as are
commonly seen in the names which ordinary people write here and there upon
walls, and such as the Soldiers or Executioners might frame at that time for a
Criminal, as they esteemed our Lord. The Hebrew Characters are almost wholly
defaced and eaten by the worms and time with the wood, so that they are scarce
perceivable. The Latin is very legible, and in the midst of the two other
Languages; and the Greek which is the lowest of the three is still easy to be
read: but as I said, there is but about half of that piece of wood, and not
that. It is that which was in the middle; it being likely that the two ends
have been broken off; since neither the word Jesus, nor Rex Judaeorum are found
there, but only Nazarenus, which takes up almost the length of the wood.

The same day being Sunday March the 10th. all of us visited M. Albizzi
together: He conducted us into his Chamber, where having taken our places, we
prevailed with our selves to make him the most cordial Declaration we could, in
hope to have him favorable to our designs, when he found how conformable they
were to Truth and Justice, which we knew he loved. He answered us also on his
part very civilly, and told us the service of the H. See should be always his
inviolable Rule, that he should always be a professed enemy to all those that
should offend it: but he had much confidence, that we would always have it in
great veneration, and he would do for our service what was possible for him: He
interposed some very unpleasing things in his Discourse, which we dissembled or
mollify'd the best we could: only one thing M. Brousse took up as it deserved,
namely, that if the Pope heard us before passing his Decision, he would hear us
if he pleased tanquam aliquos de populo, as he would do any ordinary people. He
told us, that should the Pope hear and consider all that we intended to
represent, as he conceived his Holiness would do, yet he believed that he would
not grant us the Congregation which we demanded. We answered, that then we had
nothing to represent, because we could not deliver any instruction by writing
or word of mouth but before such a Congregation; that without that, our hands
were bound, and we could not go beyond our Commission. He told us the Pope had
put into his hands the first Memorial which we left with his Holiness, wherein
we supplicated for the Congregation; he spoke also of the second, touching F.
Annat's book, in reference to which he said, the Pope did no more but remove
the Prohibitions formerly made of writing concerning those matters; that if any
thing were found in the book not right, it should be censured as well as any
other. We answered that the case being so, we desired nothing more then that it
came forth; because it furnished us with advantageous hold against its Author.
M. Albizzi added, that himself was the Compiler of the Bull against Jansenius;
that it was made upon a belief that it would appease the troubles and Disputes
arisen about those matters, and reduce things to silence and the former peace;
That if what has followed since had been foreseen, instead of making a simple
prohibition of that book, the doctrine perhaps would have been examined and
possibly condemned too; but that moderate course was thought sufficient, the
rather to spare a Bishop who was dead in the Catholic Communion; That it was
himself (M. Albizzi) that suggested that Counsel. After this he spoke of the
Minister of Groning's book, which he said was sent him from Brussels and from
Paris, and having in anger fetched the Book, he read to us out of the Preface,
that the Author says, they were of S. Augustins opinion touching Grace, as
Jansenius is too. M. Brousse answered, that there was no need of being angry,
that we knew nothing of that Book; that Heretics are not always to be
believed when they say an Author is for themselves; otherwise the Bible must be
burnt, which they all say is on their side; that F. Annat in his Book de
scientia media, cites four or five Heretics, who say that St. Thomas is for
them; ought they therefore to be believed, and S. Thomas to be burnt? Besides
that, it behooves not to be angry if it be true that they are of S. Augustin's
mind touching Grace, as they allege; on the contrary we ought to thank God,
because they are Catholics in this point, and they need only to be instructed
in the rest wherein they err. For, do not you believe (said he) that one is a
Heretic because he is not a Molinist; on the contrary, I account that to be a
Molinist, is to be an Heretic. But to satisfy him further upon this subject,
I showed him Letters written to me on the second and 9th. of February, which
promised an answer to the said Book: of which M. Albizzi professed himself
glad, and told us that that was done as it should be. He spoke
disadvantageously enough of St. Augustine, taxing him of excesses or flyings
out in his encountering Heretics. He added, that these matters were not
necessary to salvation; That they caused despair, etc. To all which we returned
such answers as it deserved. He complained very much that the Bishops of
Machlin and Gaunt, could not be prevailed with to receive the Bull. He spoke
also of M. Bourgeois. We told him all those businesses were different from
ours, which was only to obtain a solemn Congregation of the Pope, in which
these matters might be examined in the Ecclesiastical forms; that besides, we
were sorry that the Bull was so ill received, but the abuse which the Jesuits
made of it was the cause of that mischief. Other things were spoken of in this
Visit (among the rest, the place of Haereo fateor, in Jansenius, which M.
Albizzi objected to us twice, as a certain conviction of that Prelate's bad
sentiments; to which we said nothing) but these are the principal; and at last
our Conference ended very calmly and civilly, both on his part and ours.

After we left him, we visited the Commissary of the H. Office, who was not
there when we arrived there, but his Companion received us, and while he was
entertaining us the Commissary returned to his lodging. We discoursed with
either of them only about Theological matters in reference to the first
Proposition, till night broke off the Conversation.

CHAP. VI.
The continuation of our Visites, and what passed till the end of March. M.
Brousse constrained to return into France, in regard of his health. Two Copies
of the Memoires of M. Pegna, which we caused to be compared very exactly with
the Original. What success our Memorial had against F. Annat's Book.

ON Monday the eleventh of March we visited F. Luca Vadingo; our chief
Discourse with whom was (he already understanding our Affair enough) touching
the Assembly of Consultors and Qualificators appointed on Thursday following.
For though, as we told him, we doubted not of their capacity, understanding and
good intention; and that almost all those whom we visited appeared favorable
to the sentiments of S. Augustine, for which we had reason to be satisfied and
to praise God; yet, as we told him too, a matter becomes more clear and is more
thoroughly discovered after hearing the Contesting Parties upon it, then when it
is barely examined by it self, especially when it is intricate, as that in
question was; and when, besides the difficulties which are inseparable from it,
it is industriously embroiled and obscured, as the Authors of those
Propositions had entangled and clouded this. Moreover, That a man is more in
his own power, and more fit to pass an equitable and dis-interested judgment,
when he has had time to meditate upon a matter, and make all necessary
reflections upon it beforehand, then when he has already chosen a side by
framing a false Idea to himself of it, and is become engaged by declaring
himself too soon in maintaining the first Impressions he has had of it, and
the first sentiments which he has discovered to witnesses, before whom he is
very loath to retract and acknowledge his being deceived, So that to keep those
persons free and equitable without engagement and prepossession, before they
came to pass Judgment, we conceived that it would be good that before all
things else they heard the Divines of either side, who were to oppose or defend
the Propositions; and that their own interest as well as ours, obliged them to
declare to such as importuned their assembling for delivering their sense of
the first Proposition, that this was the right way to begin. And the rather,
because the Propositions to be considered were subject to more ambiguities then
we had represented, and those expressly affected by their Authors. That
therefore for an orderly and due proceeding, the first thing to be done was to
distinguish the different senses whereof they are capable; and in order to do
that well, to make of each Proposition as many several clear and plain
Propositions, as it included different senses; that so we might declare first
of all which those are that we will not maintain, and for such as we will hold,
expect who will oppose them; to hear both the one side and the other according
to the usual and necessary forms; and after this was done, then it would be a
fit time to ask of them their Sentiment. But to require it of them beforehand,
seemed a little precipitous, and contrary, not only to all order of justice,
but also to the Request which we had made to the Pope in the name of the
Bishops, upon which his Holiness had caused us to hope he would give us
satisfaction. F. Luca Vadingo approved these reasons; but told us these things
were to be represented and desired of the Pope; because for their part, they
could only desire them of God, and when they were summoned to deliver their
judgment upon any Propositions, they could do nothing else but deliver it.

In the afternoon I accompanied M. Brousse to Cardinal Ginetti, who had
promised him the Relics. He asked us what tidings of our Affair; and we told
him we waited for the Pope's resolution upon the Letters and Memorial which we
had delivered to him.

On Tuesday the 12th. I went to see F. Vbaldino, who wondered we had such
correspondence at Rome, as to be advertised of that Assembly of Consultors. He
approved the reasons which I alleged for deferring it till after both parties
were heard, as formerly to F. Vadingo. But he said too, that he could do
nothing, at least openly to get them considered; underhand he would do his
utmost.

I went also to represent the same to F. Delbene, who knew not how to satisfy
me but by telling me that we should be heard undoubtedly, and it would not be
prejudicial to us though they gave their opinion beforehand, because they
reviewed it several times, and might correct in it what they pleased, or change
it wholly. I told him, it would do better if they gave it not till after they
had so well examined things, as to have no occasion to change any thing. I
moved him also, that he would demand to hear us before giving his own, and also
to incline the rest in their Assembly, if thete were occasion to make the same
demand. But I obtained nothing of him as to this point, no more then I had done
of the FF. Vadingo and Vbaldino.

Rejoyning my Colleagues, we went to see Cardinal Colonna. By the way we met the
Ambassador, who seeing our Coach stopped, caused his own to stop too, and had the
goodness to speak to us so long, that he gave us time to testify to him our
sorrow for his late loss of one of his Nephews, who died at Angers: Whereunto
he made a very generous and Christian answer, Il n'importe combien il en meure,
pourveu que ce soit pour le service du Roy, and que Dieu leur face misericorde.
It matters not how many of them dye, so it be for the Kings service, and God be
merciful to them. We arrived at the Palace of Cardinal Colonna, in which there
are most magnificent apartments. He received us with very great civility. We
laid forth our Affair to him at large, and he heard it with attention and
satisfaction. Our Conference with him was ended by the arrival of the
Ambassador of Bologne who came to see him, and with a Complement that I made to
him as he reconducted us, upon hope that our cause should find in him a
Protector amongst the living, as it had amongst the dead in Aegidius Romanus,
who was his near Kinsman, and whose memory was still very fresh with him.

In the afternoon we went to Cardinal Costagusti, and finding him busy for
some time, we went to Signor Camillo Piazza Procurator of the Accused, to whom
we declared our Affair, suitably to what I had formerly said to him. He
received our Visit for a great honor, and told us what we demanded was so
just that it could not be refused to any person. After which we returned to
Cardinal Costagusti, who was ready to go abroad. So after some short Discourse,
which to avoid being inconvenient to him, we broke off, he professed his regret
for his being otherwise engaged, and the satisfaction he should have if we
pleased to see him another time. Thence I went to Cardinal Roma, where I stayed
till night to see him, and after the Litanies were done, at which I was
present, and which were said daily there during Lent, his Maistre de Chamber
informed me, that the Domestics of the Cardinals who were with their Masters,
obtained the same indulgences as if they were present at them. The first thing
Cardinal Roma spoke of, was, our Memorial against F. Annat's Book, which he
offered to give me. I prayed him to keep it, that he might have it ready to
show the next day to the Cardinals at la Minerve, if they happened to speak of
it; because though the Pope told the Ambassador, that his Holiness had no
Interest in the book, and that when it was printed it should be censured if it
deserved it, yet I knew the Pope had given the Memorial to M. Albizzi, and
perhaps it was to communicate the same to their Congregation, to which it was
likely M. Albizzi had no great stomach. The Cardinal replied that he would
carry it thither, to have recourse to in case of need. Falling then to speak of
oaths matters of the times, I told him of the Minister of Groning's book, and
of the answer preparing to it; as also of the malice and ignorance of those who
would make use of S. Augustine against us, objecting to us passages out of
Pelagius's Confession of Faith, as if it were S. Augustin's; and this with such
obstinacy, that after having been fully convinced thereof by books published in
answer to them, yet they produced the same thing again in a late book, as if
they had never heard of our clearing it in former Writings. The Cardinal could
not think it possible for people to be transported to such enormities, and
testified great indignation at it. At length I mentioned the principal cause of
my coming to his Eminence, which was the approaching Assembly of the Consultors
on Thursday following, the danger we feared from it, and how advantageous it
would be both for them, and those that defended the truth, if they heard the
parties before declaring their opinions. The Cardinal answered, that that ought
not to dismay me, because the Pope would not hasten to conclude any thing, and
his Holiness well knew, that not only his own Reputation, but also that of the
H. See was concerned in this Affair. That all that the Qualificators could do,
was of no consequence. That it was not seen: and that the reason of their
meeting before hearing us, was that they might ventilate and open the matter a
little, and become more capable to hear it and deal with it when we came before
them. But otherwise I might be certain, that nothing would be decided till the
Parties were first heard as much as they could desire: that all this pains of
the Consultors, was only to give the Pope and their Eminences some preliminary
knowledge, for their better enlightening and disposing to hear what we had to
say to them. I signified to the Cardinal that I was much heartned by his
Discourse; but still I insisted, that it would be better, if before that labor
the Consultors heard what might be said by the Parties on either side. The good
Cardinal showed a reluctance (no doubt elsewhere infused into him) to grant the
Parties such an audience and public Congregation, as I maintained was most
expedient and profitable for truth; and the pretext (suggested to him) was that
it would make more noise, and retard and entangle the affair instead of
facilitating and advancing it, as he sincerely desired; which desire induced
him to ask us whether we were ready, whether we had our Memoires all prepared
to deliver to them when required, adding that it was very expedient that we
were ready to present our selves to the Congregation when we should be
Advertised of it. I answered, that the Bishops, by whose order we sue'd for a
Congregation, purposed to send some other persons with us when the Congregation
was resolved upon, and the matter came to be handled in earnest. The Cardinal
replied, though gently and mildly, that it was something unpleasing that we
were not ready: (so he interpreted it, and nevertheless he looked upon the
slownesse, to which I seemed to incline* as a thing not to be debated on, but
necessary to be granted.) But I told him that that should cause no delay: and
when the Congregation was ready, we would forthwith begin to deliver some
informations upon the Affair, to employ the Divines of whom it consisted
sufficiently, till others came to assist us to treat it solemnly and
thoroughly. But without that too the Consultors might in the mean while be too
much busied if they would seriously apply themselves to what was most
necessary, in order to the getting of a clear and certain understanding of
those difficulties: namely, to read well in the first place the principal works
which S. Augustine has written expressly upon these matters. The Cardinal
assented hereunto, and added that it was very fitting, since S. Augustine should
be the rule of those Disputes, and of the decisions to be made upon them. I
replied that it was our hope; and when we came to speak and write before that
Congregation, we would employ no other weapons but those which that H. Doctor
made use of against the Heretics whom he overcame; but till it were
established, and its establishment d^clar'd to us, our whole Commission was only
to solicit for it. That from some slight passages we presumed it was
preparing, but we had not yet received any authentical advertisement of it; and
till we were so advertised, all that should be done, and nothing, were the same
in reference to us.

On Wednesday the 13. we visited the Cardinals di Santa Croce and Homodei, to
neither of whom we spoke much, because our visits were interrupted. We visited
also at la Minerve F. F. Alvarez and Nolano, very zealous and able Dominicans.

In the Afternoon we visited the Abbot of S. Peter in vinculis, who received us
very cordially and civilly. The remembrance he had of what I had formerly
signified to him touching our Affair, hindered us from entertaining him further
with it. We spoke of the Exorbitances of the Jesuits against S. Augustine, both
in their Books and Sermons, at which he was filled with horror and
indignation. He told us a considerable Cardinal lately visited him, and finding
that he was so well informed of things, and so sincere for the defense of S.
Augustin's Doctrine, embraced him with great affection. He spoke to us of the
Nomination made by the Pope of the Cardinals Roma, Spada, Ginetti, and Cechini,
as a certain and known thing; and said, he had received no intelligence of the
Assembly of Qualifitators, which we were advertised was to be the next day. By
which we gathered that he was not chosen to be one of them, though he was one
of the Qualificators of the H. Office, and of the most intelligent in
Theological matters. He asked us what danger there was in censuring the
Propositions in general, seeing, according to our selves, they might admit a
bad sense? We showed him the danger by explicating the first; for that the
Adversaries desired the condemnation of them, only to reflect it upon the
Necessity of Effectual Grace, which we maintained in that Proposition; which
account satisfied him. At length, after a long and agreeable entertainment, he
showed us the chiefest Rarities of his House and his Church; and amongst the
rest, the sacred Chains which are in so great veneration in that place, for
having been sometimes the Instruments of S. Peter's captivity.

Leaving him we went to visit F. Aversa at S. Laurence in Lucina. We
explicated our Affair to him, which he took very well; and touching the
Congregation, he asked us whether we had had any answer about it, and whether it
would be erected? We answered, that we had learnt by the common rumor the
names of some of those that were to be of it; but for that nothing had been
signified to us from the Pope, we did not hold our selves assured, nor make any
great account of what we had learnt; because de iis quae non erant, and qua non
apparebant, erat idem apud nos judicium.

On Thursday the 14th. I went in to see F. Luca Vadingo, and to carry him in
the way of a friend two little Latin Discourses upon the Propositions. He told
that Cardinal Roma, with whom he had been upon Friday, was well satisfied with
me, and assured him again, that this Affair would not be ended without our
being heard as we desired and voce and scripto as much as we would. I thankt
the Father for his new assurance of Cardinal Roma's good dispositions; and I
told him, that both Justice and Prudence required that regard be had to Time
and all the other circumstances which accompany affairs. That in the Church
circumstances and conjunctures sometime obliged to condemn and reject at one
time a Proposition, which would be well received and approved at another. That
if we had been in Calvin's days when his Heresy was at the highest, I should
not have advised to let pass the first Proposition without condemnation, if it
had been advanced in the same words, and nakedly as it was expressed: because
it might seem to countenance his opinion of the impossibility of God's
Commandments. But the same Proposition having been deceitfully pulled out of a
place, in which what goes before and what follows, reduce it to a very Orthodox
sense and a very Catholic truth; and having been thus exposed under ambiguous
and defective terms, only to destroy that Catholic truth by the Censure, which
they who propose it, endeavor to obtain upon it under pretext of the bad sense
of those terms: that the case being thus, I conceived it requisite to hinder it
from being condemned, without first distinguishing the different senses, and
securing the Catholic, for fear of administering advantage against the same, by
an absolute and unlimited condemnation. F. Luca Vadingo consented with me, as
to the justice and necessity there was of using that distriction and caution.

When I quitted him I returned to my lodging to take my Colleagues, and went
together to the Palace of Cardinal Trivultio. Some of his Gentlemen came and
received us at the door of his first Antichamber, and conducted us through
three or four before we met the Cardinal, and there were two or three more to
pass through before we came to his own whether he led us, and at each door
that was to be passed, he made us a civility before he entered at it. When we
had taken our places in his Chamber, M. Brousse amply and at leisure gave him
an account of our affair. He answered us that as for the Theological part, he
was but little versed in it; but for the Political, he would assist us what he
could to obtain satisfaction in so just a demand. He said, the Pope wanted not
prudence, and he believed his Holiness would have regard to what he desired of
him. He told us also, the Jesuits were violent upon this business, and that
ever since he acted as the King of Spain's Ambassador he had heard speak of it,
and interposed in it in reference to the Archbishop of Malines, and the Bishop
of Gaunt. We answered that ours was not the affair of Jansenius, but only
about Five Propositions, upon which it was important that the Pope pronounced a
signal Judgment correspondent to his place and the esteem which people are to
have of his decision. And the rather for that the boldness of those who
inveigled the Bishops to present such equivocal and fallacious Propositions to
him, was incredible, especially they persisting so obstinate in it, after
having been convinced by so many writings of the unworthiness of the action
which he who was the first author of them committed in presenting them to our
Faculty. The Cardinal much approved our sentiments, and told us he should
willingly receive and hear us as often as we had any thing to say to him. He
accompanied us into the fourth chamber from that in which he received us, and
twelve or fifteen persons of his Court continued marching before us to
accompany us to the stairs. Which ceremonies I mention here partly in
acknowledgment to him, who though of the Spanish Faction, and then encharg'd
with the affairs of that Monarchy during the absence of an Ambassador, yet
treated Frenchmen with so many demonstrations of esteem and courtesy, and
partly not to omit any thing that was most singular and remarkable in any
visit that we made about this affair.

At our coming away from him we went to see the General of the Augustines. He
expressed a very deep resentment of this affair, and told us he would apply
himself wholly to it; that for the right concluding it, one of the first things
he should advise the Pope to do, was, to write to all the Catholic
Universities to study S. Augustine, and in the mean time to appoint the Divines
here to do the same, that so it might afterward be more easy to judge what
conformity the Propositions in question have with his doctrine. We much
approved this advice, and told him it would be extremely useful to ruin two
objections which were made with as much boldness as injustice against that H.
Father. First, that he has spoken with so great obscurity, that it is a hard
matter to discover of what opinion he was. And secondly that in the heat of his
discourses he has suffered himself to be carried into the excesses opposite to
the Heretics which he incounter'd. We mentioned likewise other calumnies
dispersed against that Saint and our selves as well by secret accusations as
printed books. And our discourse falling upon that entitled Jansenius pessime
meritus, etc. which F. Mulard distributed at Rome, in the first lines of which
it is impudently affirmed that the two and twenty Propositions censured at
Vallidolid are so many impostures; the truth whereof this General might judge,
having had a Censure of the very impression at Vallidolid sent him; he drew the
said Libel out of his Pocket, and could not sufficiently admire the
shamelessness of it. One entertainment held about an hour, and ended with the
reflection which we made how important and beneficial it would be, if the
Qualificators deferred giving their opinions upon these Propositions till they
had througly read the works of that Father, and heard what we had to say to
them in the presence of our adversaries.

In the afternoon we repaired to the Ambassador who was to receive a visit
from Cardinal Corrado. When it was ended, we went to see Monsignor Borromeo,
whom I had often attempted to write unto while I was at Rome alone, but could
not. We gave him a full and punctual account of our affair: Which he heard, and
thankt us for our information. I sent one of our people to Cardinal Roma's
Palace to know who were to be present in the Assembly of the Consultors which
we heard was to be held there: he brought word that there had been no
Congregation at all there. Of which, the Cure of S. Saviors coming to see me,
told me the reason was, because the Cardinals Spada and Ginetti had got cold.
Which was true as to the ordinary Congregation held there every Thursday by
those four Cardinals. But there was another reason more considerable that
hindered the meeting of the Consultors, which I was informed of the next day,
and shall relate in its order. The same Cure further told me that the Pope had
increased the number of the Cardinals of the Congregation of the H. Office by
adding Cardinal Ghiggi who entered into it that day for the first time. And
lastly he told me that according to my request he had spoken to the F.
Procurator of S. Marcel, to incite him to demand to hear us before delivering
his opinion upon any of the Propositions, for the reasons above mentioned.

M. the Abbot of Valcroissant and I spent almost all Friday morning ( March
15.) in conferring amice with the Commissary of the Office upon the first
Proposition. We told him also the same reasons why we conceived it so expedient
that the Qualificators hastened not to write and deliver their opinions upon the
Propositions before they had taken such light and informations upon the matter
as they might hope from a legal Conference wherein we and our adversaries were
heard. He answered that this was not to be told to him; that he was
sufficiently persuaded of it; but it behoved to speak it to the Cardinals who
were the Masters.

As I returned to my lodging I went to see a particular friend who learnt me
three or four considerable things. First, that M. Albizzi had acquainted the
Congregation of the H. Office with the visit which we had made to him, and
spoke as if he had well humbled us, and taught us how to govern our selves for
our own safely. Secondly, that he had made complaint there against the book of
Victorious Grace, and presented the same to the Congregation to be viewed and
condemned. And thirdly that the General of the Dominicans intended that very
day to seek for audience of the Pope after the Sermon, and if he could not
obtain it, to return the Sunday following for he same purpose. And that his
busnesse was to tell the Pope that hitherto he had not spoken a word in the
cause, by reason he did not clearly see what was the thing in question, but at
length having well examined it, he found that it was the same affair that war
formerly in agitation under Clement VIII. and Paul V. between his Order and
that of the Jesuits; that he would demand of his Holiness, that they might be
heard too before any thing were determined on one side or other; that all
proceedings might be the same as they were under those two Popes, that the
Memoires of the things which were passed in that time might be perused, to see
what was expedient to be done at this. And fourthly, that the reason which
caused the deferring the Assembly of the Qualificators which was to have been
held the day preceding at Cardinal Roma's Palace, was indeed because the
Commissary of the H. Office had signified to the said Cardinal that he was
encharg'd with a multitude of processes for the visitation of Prisoners which
was to be made before Easter, and so his Papers upon the first Proposition were
not ready. Which he represented to his Eminence with a design not only that by
this means the Qualificators might have more leisure to prepare themselves to
do well, but also to give his General time to make his supplication to the Pope
which I newly mentioned.

A small indisposition of M Brousse hindered us from continuing our Visits
together in the afternoon, and therefore I went to see F. Hilarion, partly to
thank him for the favor he lately did us in showing us his Relics; partly to
acquaint him how we governed our selves in our Visit to M. Albizzi, but chiefly
to tell him what he did against us three days ago out of a bravado in the
Congregation of the H. Office, and to beseech him to use what interest he had
in M. Albizzi, to hinder him from further persecuting the book of Victorious
Grace, because it would make matters worse, and obstruct the restoration of a
good intelligence. This was a very nice point to be touched upon at this time,
as well on the part of of F. Hilarion toward M. Albizzi, as of mine toward F.
Hilarion, because it was so to be carried that M. Albizzi might not know that
F. Hilarion was so clearly inform of it, especially by me; and also that F.
Hilarion might not know that I had such assured intelligence of it, for fear
they would suspect him from whom I received it to have violated the fidelity of
secrecy. In fine, I fetched a compass, and took all possible care and caution to
avoid that inconvenience, which I would have shunned as solicitously ar death it
self. The F. did not promise me to speak to M. Albizzi about it, because he had
no other occasion to visit him, and to go on purpose was not convenient. On the
contrary, he told me, if that book were propounded in the Congregation of the
H. Office in his presence, and he were obliged to give his opinion of it, he
would sentence it to be condemned, because it treated of a prohibited subject.
But when I had laid open to him the necessity of setting it fotth, the good
effects it had had already, and might further be expected from it, he mitigated
his first rigor* and condescended that the Congregation should take no notice
of: and if M. Albizzi and he happened upon occasion to discourse of this point,
he would persuade him as much as he could to that gentleness. In reference to
the said book, I shall here by the way mention two things that came into my
memory. First, that I made these solicitations in its behalf upon my own head
without acquainting my Colleagues with M. Albizzi's accusation against it,
partly not to disquiet them unnecessarily, and partly in consideration of
secrecy which I was to perform to my Intelligencer. Secondly, that
understanding from France the last Summer that it was intended to be translated
and printed in Latin, in order to be sent and seen at Rome; I dissuaded the
design, in regard of what was spoken in the Preface to the advantage of
Jansenius: because I feared that place alone considering the state of things,
would do more hurt to our cause then the rest of the book would do good.) But
to return to F. Hilarion, I told him of the difficulty that I war certifi'd
there was to answer the Minister of Groaning aright, by reason of the decree
made against the Catechism of Grace. The Father answered me, that it behooved
us to observe a general and very sure Rule in those matters, namely, that the
Popes would not hitherto pass any judgment upon the Doctrine. That therefore
it was no wonder if it were suffered in the Anticatechism of Errors and
Heresy, without any thing said to it. That as for what was noted, that the
Catechism revived the Propositions condemned by Pius V. it was ground enough
for saying so, that there was one found to be such at the first inspection of
the book. But it was not expressd in that Decree, whether those condemned
Propositions which were in the Catechism, were any of those which Pius V. had
condemned as Heretical; or temerarious, or as offending Christian ears: which
might be so in the time of Pius V. and not so now: but however those
Propositions having been once condemned, and that condemnation neither reversed
nor interpreted, nor the prohibition of teaching and maintaining them removed,
he was too blame that advanced and published them, and there was reason to
complain as well of his writing of these matters contrary to the Prohibition',
as of his reviving those condemned Propositions. F. Hilarion and I were three
full hours in this conference, and it was far in the night before we broke it
off.

On Saturday morning the 19th. we did nothing but went to the Ambassador who
expected a visit from one of the new Cardinals. And in the afternoon I learnt
nothing but that a new Tome of Suarez was lately printed at Lions touching the
matter de Auxiliis, notwithstanding it had been formerly denied permission at
Rome, and that the Jesuits caused it to be sold there. This intelligence was
given us that we might complain of it; but we were loath to take new affairs and
employments upon our selves without necessity, being scarce able to manage all
those in which we were engaged already.

On Sunday (the 17th.) in the morning we went to accompany the Ambassador to
the Pope's Chapel. From thence we went to Giesu to see the ceremonies which
the Jesuits made after the election of their General, which we found plain and
modest. We spent almost the whole afternoon at the Ambassador's house in
reference to the visit which Cardinal Aldobrandino was to make to him.

On Tuesday we went to see that Cardinal with whom we found Cardinal Trivultio.
We waited till this latter was gone, and then were admitted to Cardinal
Aldobrandino. We found him sufficiently informed of many circumstances of our
affair, which we laid open to him at leisure. We spoke much of the famous
Congregation held under Clement VIII. of whose family this Cardinal was, and
who dying (as he intimated in our discourse) as he was upon the point to
publish his Bull of condemnation against the Jesuits, his death was by those
Fathers imputed to a Miracle.

In the afternoon we visited Cardinal Sachetti, who apprehended our intentions
and demands very just, and answered us very handsomely and ingenuously. He
said, among other things, that the wiles and jugglings which we showed him had
been recurr'd to in this affair, were no good arms for defending a just cause:
and that they who made use of them gave ground to believe that they were
diffident of their good right. The same Afternoon we went to Cardinal
Maidalcini who was the youngest of the Cardinals, and thence to Monsignor
Paolucci who was the ancientest Prelate in Rome. M. Brousse declared the affair
in Italian to Cardinal Maidalcini, and the Abbot of Valcroissant to M.
Paolucci, who answered us as one that still well remembered all that he had seen
formerly transacted under Clement VIII. between the Dominicans and the
Jesuits, and who had since that time spent part of his own in the reading of
S. Augustine.

There remained none of all the sacred College to be visited but Cardinal
Cherubin. We went to him on Wednesday ( March 20.) and acquainted him, as we
had done the rest, what had passed, and what we pretended to in this affair. We
learnt the same day that a Memorial was presented in the morning to the
Congregation of the H. Office against the book of Suarez and those who
dispersed it.

Monsignor Spada Patriarch of Constantinople was the last we visited of the
Consultors and Qualificators of the H. Office; for he had that Title which
depressed him infinitely below the lowest Cardinal: which seemed very strange
to us in the person of a Patriarch of the second See of the Church, and who
since the second Ecumenical Council always held the first place after the
Pope. We went to him on Thursday the 21. and after he had heard what we said to
him, he wondered that we seemed to doubt whether the Congregation and audience
of Parties would be granted, in which we placed the certain carrying of the
Cause, and the indubitable triumph of truth against our common adversaries. He
intimated, with a clear inclination to our good designs, that things were in
suspense, that order would be taken about them, and that preparations were
making for them. In fine he answered us very judiciously, gravely and
courteously. And he acknowledged (as all other persons who we visited together,
and whom I had visited before when I was alone at Rome, acknowledged in our
common visites, though I have not menion'd it in every occasion, to avoid too
frequent repetitions) that I had never addres'd to him but as one sent by some
of my LL. the Bps. of France.

Our visites being ended, and we finding by experience during the whole winter,
that the air of Rome was very unsuitable with M. Brousse's health, and
conceiving that the heat of the approaching Summer might be more prejudicial to
it then the winter, during which he had a continual head-ake, and defluxion in
his breast, which constrained him to be blooded largely five times, and to
drink nothing but Ptisane: He prayed us to give way that he prepared himself to
return to his native air after Easter, as soon as he was able to travel to the
place of his ordinary residence. Whereunto we consented according to the
condiscension of the Bishops who deputed us, to whom in the end of January
last, we had signified the case of his indisposition which seized upon him
as soon as he came to Rome, and continued to molest him ever since. Wherefore he
and I went the same evening to advertise the Ambassador of it, and to beseech
him to acquainr the Pope therewith the next day at his usual audience; to the
end M. Brousse might salute his Holiness and receive his benediction before his
departure, which was to be as soon as the Festivals and Ceremonies of Easter
were over. The Ambassador promised to do him this office the next day if he
could, or some day of the H. Week.

The next day (Friday the 22th.) we attended the Ambassador to his ordinary
audience. He caused M. Brousse to be called in, who being introduced, and the
Ambassador going to speak some thing of him to the Pope by way of
recommendation, His Holiness interrupted him with these familiar and obliging
words, Lo conesco, e mio grand amico, I know him, he is my great friend. M.
Brousse made ^his complement to him in few words, and signified how his health
necessitated his return. The Pope wished him a good journey, and gave him his
benediction and indulgences. Besides the Ambassador, the Corrector of the
French Minimes was present, having been introduced at the same time about
another business.

In the afternoon I accompanied M. Brousse to Cardinal Barberin to take his
leave; as accordingly he did after a long discourse of sundry things not
necessary to be related in this place.

Sunday the 24th. we were at the ceremony of Palms, and received some from his
Holines's hand.

Monday the 25. the Abbot of S. Peter in vinclis made an Oration upon the
sanctity of that season in an assembly of an eminent Academy composed of many
Ingenious and Learned persons, whereof the Gall^cane Prince was one of the
principal members, if not the chief. The Abbot did us the honor to invite us
to his Oration. We repaired thither, and before it began, Cardinal Rondanini's
brother, and one of Cardinal S. Clement's nephews came to us to entertain
themselves with us, and promote our acquiantance formely contracted, which we
mutually promised to augment when the Festivals were past.

On Tuesday morning I accompain'd M. Brousse in his visitation of the four
Churches. In the morning we went to those of S. Marie Maggiore, S. John de
Lateran and S. Paul; When he went in the afternoon to that of S. Peter, he left
me at la Minerve; where I entertained at length F. Capisucci, a Monk of that
Order and Professor in Divinity, with what had passed in the affair for which
we were at Rome. F. du Plantet a Minime, very zealous against the sentiments of
S. Augustine which he did not understand, and much devoted to F. Annat and the
Court of Cardinal Spada who was protector of the Minimes, had given this
Dominican for a full instruction in this affair a Copy of M. de Vabres's
letter, at the bottom of which were these words;

Subscripserunt aut suo nomine subscribi voluerunt hi qui sequuntur. Leonorius
Destampes Archiepiscopus and Dux Remensis aliquot mensibus ante obitum. De
Grignan Archepiscopus Arelatensis. Henricus de Bethune Archiepiscopus
Burdigalensis. Annas de Vanladour Archiepiscopus Pisuricensis. Henricus a
Sabaudia nominatus Archiepiscopus Remensis. Sunt alii numero 64. Episcopi.
I met in the City M. Michel Angelo Recci, who told me that F. Pascaligio an
able Divine of the same house of S. Andrew de la Val, whereof F. Delbene was,
desired to come and see us; but seeing that good Father much troubled with the
Gout, he took the liberty to tell him that he would advertise us of it, and we
should prevent him.

I omitted mention that we spent all Saturday the 23. with Signor Pien Cottuen
Notary of the Rota, and Andreas Albercius, and Franciscus Pignocatus, expert
Jurates for comparing and verifying writings, in a most exquisite comparing two
Copies which we had caused to be made of M. Pegna's history. And we were so
exact therein that each of those Copies was as useful and Authentic as the
Original it self.

Our Memorial against F. Annat's book, which we no longer thought of after it
was declared to us, that neither the Pope nor the H. Office took part in it,
had its effect the same day that we composed the papers of F. Pegna. M. Albizzi
sent to the Printer by the Pope's Order, to command him to bring to the Palace
of the H. Office (where M. Albizzi lodged, where also are the Prisons called
the Inquisition) all the copies of sheets that he had printed of that work,
with prohibition to distribute any to any person. The Letter was in these
words. Signor Ignatio de' Lazaris Stampatore in Roma; In virtu della present
dovera V. S. recare al S. Offitio e consignare a me infrascritto tutti gli
essempi dell' Opera che con licenza della sacra Congregatione del santo Offitio
ha fatto Stampatore il Padre Anato della compagnia di Giesu, senza darne ad
altri alcun essemplare sotto pena arbitraria alla medesima Congregatione.
Perch cosi ha ordinato e commandato la sanctita di nostro signore per ordine
dato mi a bocca. Dato nel Palazzo del S. Offitio questo di 28. di Marzo 1652.
Signed Fran. dalli Albizzi.

The Pr^er let pass H. Friday without obeying this Order; but on Saturday he
carried M. Albizzi all that he had printed of that book, and took his Receipt.
The same day five Jews and one Turk were baptized at S. John de Lateran. The
Marquis of Breaute was Godfather to one of those Jews, and I to another, to
whom I gave the n^me of Paul.

M. Hostier Bishop of Bethleem arrived on H. Tuesday at Rome, whether he was
sent from the Assembly of the Clergy of France, to obtain of the Pope that he
would fill the vacant Sees of the Church of Portugal, with those persons which
the King of Portug^l had nominated.

CHAP. VII.
Of a little Volume of the principal Works of S. Augustine against the Pelagians
and Semipelagians which we put to printing after Easter, and of the
Obstructions raised against the Impression.

SHortly after we gave that poor Printer a better business then that of which
we had been the cause that he was deprived. There remained but a few more
sheets to print for the finishing of F. Annat's book, and we hired him to print
for us the principal works of S. Augustine against the Pelagians and
Semipelagians. It was a thing that we had designed some time a go, because we
found nothing so proper, not only for justifying our pretensions to all Rome,
and making known the truth of the doctrine which we defended, as well to the
principal judges with whom we had to do, as to a great number of persons whom
we found little enough intelligent therein, but very desirous to be instructed;
but also to confirm to our interests (which were no other then those of truth)
many other persons whom we had also found informed enough to consider them as
their own. We had purposed to make several small volumes one after another,
according as occasion should permit in the sequel of time; but we had already
chosen wherewith to make up one first as the most necessary urgent, with the
greatest diligence we could. The Pieces which we intended to put into it, were
the book De Gratia Jesu Christi, that De perfectione Justitiae, the 107.
Epistle ad Vitalem, the 105. Epistle ad Sixtum, the book De Gratia and Libero
arbitrio, the 46. and 47. Epistles ad Valentinum, the book De Emendatione and
Gratia, the Epistle of S. Prosper, and that of Hilarie to S. Augustine, the
books De Praedestinatione Sanctorum and De dono Perseverantiae, the Epistle of
Pope S. Celestin I. to some Bishops of France, the Synodical Epistle of the
African Bishops which were banished into the Island of Sardinia, the second
Council of Orange, and the Letter of Pope Boniface II. for confirmation of that
Council.

On Easter Tuesday the second of April, I asked permission of the Vicegerent of
Rome to print them, and after him of the Master of the sacred Palace: who both
granted it immediately.

The Printer began to work upon them on Monday following April 8. and before
Thursday night there was one sheet printed, one corrected and ready for the
Press, and a third composed and ready also the first proof to be made of it.
But I was astonished that evening when the Printer came to tell me that M.
Albizzi had sent for him, taken away the Permission to print which we had
obtained (and which is necessary to be delivered to the Printer that he may
begin to work) and given him an order in writing whereby he was forbidden to
proceed further in the Impression of S. Augustin's works, if they were not
first reviewed by the Congregation of the H. Office, particularly the
Apostilles (or Notes in the Margent) The order was in these words.

A voi sig. Ignatio di Lazaris s' ordina da part della Santita di nostro sig.
(and then two words which neither the Printer nor I could read) audar avanti
alla stampa dell' Opere di Sant' Agostino contra Pelagio, se non sono rivedule
particolarmente le Postille dalla sacra Congregatione del Sant' Offitio, sotto
pene arbitrarie alla Santita di nostro signore.

Dato nel Palazzo del Saint' Offitio li undeci di Aprile 1652. Signed, Fran.
delli Albizzi.

The Printer told me he had answered M. Albizzi very resolutely and contested
much with him, that he might not part with his Permission to print, which was
good and valid. That he had represented to him what cost he had been at, in
buying new characters on purpose for this work, and in brief told him that what
he was printing, was no new thing of a private author, but the Works of an
ancient Father of the Church.

On Friday morning April 12. the same Printer came and told me that he had been
with the Master of the sacred Palace to advertise him of this Obstruction; and
that the Master of the Sacred Palace bid him do no Apostille of handwriting,
but only such as were printed formerly. This obliged me to go to the Master of
the sacred Palace, and show him that there was not any other printed, but such.
The Master of the sacred Palace and I, after long discourse upon this
surprising occurrence, agreed that the Printer should go to M. Albizzi to
assure him thereof, show him the Impression which he followed, and that the
Apostills might be no obstacle, offer him, if he pleased, to print the Text of
S. Augustine alone without any Apostills.

He went accordingly, and returned to tell me that he could not prevail with
M. Albizzi; that he would hear nothing, not so much as of printing S.
Augustin's text alone. That M. Albizzi only said to him, that he did not tell
him that he should not continue to print, but he would have him wait for an
order for it first. I bid the Printer go and acquaint the Master of the sacred
Palace herewith.

On Saturday April 13. I went to the Printer to know what the Master of the
sacred Palace had said to him. He told me that he bid him have a little
patience in attending M. Albizzis resolution, and that he was to repair to him
again the next day which was Sunday. He added that when he spoke to him on
Friday about the Apostilles, that M. Albizzi taking them and looking upon them,
said, It was there that the Heresies were, CHE era in questo che si trovavano
le heresy.

On Sunday the Printer came from M. Albizzi, and told me he was still in the
same mind, what ever he could allege to him.

I had let those three days pass, without advertising my Colleagues of the
Obstruction of our Impression, that I might not needlessly divert them from the
things about which they were employed in their chambers, and in hope that this
storm, which had but a very ill grounded pretext, would be calmed by my little
diligences, as speedily and as easily as it was raised. But M. Albizzi's
obstinatenesse not to heed what ever reasonable and submissive applications the
Printer made to him, caused me to fear that he purposed to hinder this
Impression altogether if he could, or at least to retard it as much as
possible, thereby to deprive us of all the benefit which we hoped to gather
from it, and hold us busied in these trifles in prejudice to our more important
actions, obliged me to advertise my Colleagues of all that had passed about it.

Whereupon we presently resolved to complain of this proceeding to the
Cardinals of the H. Office and give them a Memorial to signify our intentions
in this matter. It was thus directed, To the most Eminent and Reverend Lords,
the Lords Cardinals Inquisitors general in the sacred Congregation of the H.
Office: and at the bottom, For the Printing of S. Augustine. The Memorial
follows.

Most Eminent and Reverend Lords,
Besides the general benefits accruing to the Church from printing at sundry
times the works of S. Augustine against the Pelagians and Semipelagians, in
which so many Popes have declared, that the doctrine of the same touching Grace
is contained; The Doctors of Paris underwritten, have also had sundry
considerations which have induced them to cause the same to be reprinted anew
in the present posture of Controversies, which are between Catholics about
that matter. Whereupon they desired and obtained of the Master of the sacred
Palace permission to print the principal and most considerable Treatises
thereof in one small Volume; which may be printed within two or three months,
and by means whereof great light may be had of the justice of the pretensions
of the Parties till time and convenience shall serve for the printing of the
rest. But as soon as the Impression of the said first little Volume was begun,
M. Albizzi caused it to cease, upon a pretext of the Apostilles, which he
says, ought to be reviewed by the sacred Congregation of the H. Office before
the said Impression be continued.

And forasmuch as it may be suggested, that we the Persons underwritten might
make some new observations, reflections, or interpretations whereby to force,
wrest or corrupt the sense of S. Augustine; we have conceived our selves obliged
to advertise your Eminences that we have no such design. We add not the least
word of our own thereunto. We follow the last Impression made at Lorain in the
year 1647. as the most correct and conformable to that of Plantin, which is the
best of all the Editions that have been hitherto made of that Father. There is
not on the one side but the bare citations of places of Holy Scripture, upon
which S. Augustine establishes all that he says against his Adversaries; and
on the other there is nothing but a few words, exactly consentaneous to the
text, serving to note to the Readers in the whole sequel the Point which is
treated of in every place by that H. Doctor. So that on one side or other, it
seems that there is not any difficulty or occasion to hinder or retard the
said Impression.

Nevertheless, if to take away all pretext of gainsaying this affair, your
Eminences think meet to give order to the Master of the sacred Palace or any
other, if so you please, to review those Apostilles before the book be
published, or whilst it is printting, we are contented therewith, and willingly
yield to the taking away of any Apostille whatsoever, not only if there be
found any falsity (which we hope shall not be) or any forced interpretation put
upon S. Augustin's words, but where there shall be found any shadow of
difficulty, or the least foundation of scruple (which we believe also will not
occur) and this without contest, and as soon as the least desire shall be
signified to us so to do.

This is, most Eminent and Reverend Lords, in brief what we have to say in a
case of this nature; and we esteem it more then sufficient to represent the
sincerity of our intentions, and the justice of our design to your Eminences,
quas Deus, etc.

Signed, James Brousse Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, etc. Noel de
la Lane Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, etc. Lewis de Saint-Amour
Doctor of the Sacred Faculty of Paris, etc. Lewis Angran Licentiate in Faculty
and Canon of the Church of Trois.


Having spent Tuesday morning in preparing this Memorial, we employed the
afternoon till five a clock in getting Copies made, to carry to the Cardinal of
the H. Office, and leave at the Palaces of such as we should not meet with. M.
Brousse being still at Rome, signed it with us, but did not accompany us to the
Cardinals, because he had lately visited diverse of them to take leave of their
Eminences before his departure, which was to be at furthest on the Friday
following, as accordingly it was. He had been but three days before with the
Cardinals, Barberin, Spada and Roma, and with the Ambassador; so that it was
not seemly for him to present himself to them again about these new
solicitations. By this Visit to the Ambassador, we found manifestly that M.
Albizzi had stopped the course of our Impression, and given us all this trouble
of his own head, without first acquainting the Pope at all therewith. For the
Ambassador told us, that in his last ordinary audience, which was on the Friday
foregoing, that the Pope occasionally had spoken to him of us, and yet made no
mention of the Impression which we were in hand with, and which was stopped on
Thursday evening, which without question he would have, if that obstruction had
been by his order:

Leaving M. Brousse at our lodging, the Abbot of Valcroissant, M. Angran, and I
my self went out about five a clock on Tuesday April 16. to deliver our
Memorial. We went first to wait upon the Cardinals Pamphilio, Ghiggi; Lugo,
Ginetti, Barberin and Spada, but found none of them. I had ever since Sunday
foreseen that this business would come to need a Memorial, and in a Visit
that day to Cardinal Roma, I acquainted him with it by anticipation, and
desired him not to fail to be at la Minerve the Wednesday following; which he
promised me. So that it was sufficient that I went alone to carry him our
Memorial to put him in mind of it: which I did accordingly; He needed no
importunity in our affair; for he was as sensible of it as our selves.
Returning to my Colleagues, we went together to Cardinal Spada and S. Clement,
spoke with them, and so left our Memorial: As also a Copy with the Secretary of
Cardinal Ginetti, and another with the Maistre de chamber of Cardinal
Pamphilio. We could not find a fit Person to leave it with at Cardinal
Ghiggi's Palace, nor make more Visites that day.

On Wednesday April 17. we went very early to la Minerve to deliver it to such
as we could not speak with, nor leave it at their Palaces the day foregoing.
But the fruit of our diligence was only to present one Copy to the Commissary
of the H. Office, and another to M. Albizzi with our excuses for that we had
not time to carry it to him the day before. For there came but four Cardinals
to la Minerve, namely Spada, Ginetti, S. Clement, and Pamphilio; nor was our
affair at all spoken of. Cardinal Roma could not be there, because the Gout had
seized upon his foot in the night, where he had not formerly had that Disease.

After the Assembly, we asked the Commissary of the H. Office what news there
was touching our affair? He durst not answer us but between his Teeth, and bid
us go to Cardinal Spada, Barberin, Roma, or some other; adding that our Affair
was remitted to a Congregation to be held on Friday or some other day; and in
one word, that he could tell us nothing of it, because those matters were
secret. We would not be seen by the abovementioned Cardinals as they came
forth, having saluted them at their entrance; nor could we get to speak to M.
Albizzi as we desired: wherefore we determined to wait upon him purposely in
the afternoon, partly to understand by what he should say to us what was
fitting for us to do, and partly that we might not fail in any civility or
respect towatds him, that might conduce to mollify the fierceness and
asperity of his spirit against us. At noon I was advertised by a Note, that he
had cunningly caused the mentioning of our affair to he deferred till the next
day before the Pope, that he might inform his Holiness his own way when he
should go to him in the evening of that day according to his custom. As also
that it was expedient for us to endeavor to gain Cardinal Ghiggi, to oppose
himself in our favor to the ill Offices which M. Albizzi might do us with the
Pope.

The Note was short, and consisted of these lines: Bisogna fare ogni Forzo di
captivare il sig. Cardinale Ghiggi per la stampa, perch e Albizzi ha
studiosamente differito il trattarne domani avanti al Papa, and hoggi infermera
a suo modo.

We persisted in our purpose nevertheless to go to M. Albizzi before we did
any thing else: and accordingly M. Angran and my self went to him. As we came
into his Antichamber, we heard him speaking very loud, and as it were in choler
to two Religious Cordeliers that were with him, and whom we saw come forth
presently after. The loud tone of his Voice kept us from going further in his
Antichamber then the two first Chaires which were at the entrance. Yet we heard
some things which he said to them. He was speaking to them concerning the
affairs of Flanders, sharply and imperiously. The terms he used for the people
of that Country were forfanti and forfanteria, rogues and roguery. Speaking of
the Archduke Leopold, he called him The poor Arch Duke; What? said he, must it
come into compromise for arbitration, whether the orders of Temporal Superiors
are rather to be obeyed then those which come from Rome? Mi dispiace che i
nostri soldati; (for said he, i Frati sono nostri soldati) siano quelli chi
commettono questi disordini; I am sorry, our soldiers are they that commit
these disorders. I say our Soldiers (said he) for the Frati (by which word in
Italy they denote the Mendicant Friars) are our Soldiers. He said, the
Archbishop of Machlin deserved to be burnt in the Piazza of S. Peter. He fell
to speak of the Catechism of Grace, and named me, saying Non si vergognera
questo sig. di Sant-Amor e glialtri suos compagni, etc. Is not this M. de Saint
Amor and the others his companions ashamed, etc. He asked himself the question
whether we were not ashamed to say that it were requisite to teach the people
those matters, as those concerning the Trinity, though they be, added he, above
the reach of human capacity. He said also that the Gospel would not be Gospel
if the Pope had not approved it. They showed him the Letters of a certain
religious Person or Friar; which after he had read, he counseled them not to
present, because, said he, they will be more apt to do him hurt than good. At
length those two Cordeliers came forth, and he reconducted them. When he was
come back, I made our excuses to him for that we could not bring him our
Memorial the day before. I told him we wondered our affair was not dispatched
that morning, considering it was urgent, and we had by that Memorial satisfied
all difficulties that could be made in reference to it. He answered us plainly,
that it was not mentioned at all: which was not true. For it was propounded,
but he diverted it, and caused it to be remitted to the next day before the
Pope. He told us also that it should be taken into consideration in another
Congregation which should be held the next day at the Palace either of Cardinal
Roma or Spada. Yet at the same time he purposed that it should be spoken of
before the Pope, as I learnt afterward, and shall relate in its order. In the
sequel of his discourse, he told us, there might be some difficulty made as to
the choice and order of the books which we intended to get printed, and that
there might be met with in some of those books qualche crudita, some crudities,
which had been better explicated and more digested in other later books:
however, he conceived, this would not be much stood upon; but as for the
Apostolles or Marginal notes which were there, and the Table of Contents which
we might insert, therein would be the matter of trouble. We replied we had not
the least thought of adjoining a Table; and as for the Apostilles, we offered
in our Memorial what was fully satisfactory, namely, to take away without
contest all such as could cause the least exception. He answered that he
conceived we had good reason, mi pare che parlano assai been. So we took leave,
assuring him, he should always find our actions correspondent to our words.

We returned home to acquaint the Abbot of Valcroissant and M. Brousse with the
passages of this visit, and for that we saw matters still in suspense, we
determined to go to speak with such Cardinals of the H. Office as we could meet
with, and the Abbot of Valcroissant, M. Angran and my self went abroad again
for that purpose. We could be admitted but to two of those Cardinals, namely,
Ginetti and Ghiggi. The former we only acquainted briefly with our wonder that
our affair was not dispatched that morning without difficulty, and what danger
of extraordinary scandal there would be in the world if the Jesuits on one
side and the Heretics on the other, each for their own interests, could boast
that S. Augustine was not allowed to be printed at Rome. He told us, we had
reason, and he hoped we should have contentment.

Cardinal Ghiggi was ready to go from his own apartment to that of the Pope,
yet he was pleased to give us audience, though standing. He said, that as for
the impression of S. Augustine, it could admit no difficulty, in reference to
the substance of the thing; but the advantage and ostentation wherewith one
party might do it, to insult over the other might cause it to be hindered,
considering the gentleness and tranquillity wherewith his Holiness desired
things might be carried. That himself (Cardinal Ghiggi) was as full of esteem
and veneration for S. Augustine, as could be imagined. That he had worn his
pourtraicture from his childhood, and had the same still about him. That
therefore we ought not to doubt but he should interest himself in any thing
that concerned that holy Doctor. That if the Impression we had undertaken were
spoken of the next day, he would do his utmost for preserving the honor due to
those excellent works, for our satisfaction and for the common good of both
parties. But in the mean time he exhorted us to do nothing that might cause any
stir, to give no Person (not even our Adversaries) any ground to complain of
us; to do nothing extraordinary or unusual, that might be taken notice of. That
he could not approve the general blaming any whole Society what soever, as for
example, all the Jesuits, etc. We answered to this last particular, that when
we spoke of the Jesuits, we spoke of them in general, because it was the main
body of their Society that was culpable of the things which we had to lay to
their charge. As for tranquillity and gentleness, we desired it more than any,
and were more resolved to comport our selves in that mind than he could require
of us. That no stir or noise had been about our Impression, if M. Albizzi had
not interrupted it, but carried himself with a little more equality between
both parties. The Cardinal replied that perhaps M. Albizzi was excusable, and
had reason to do what lie had done, according to the diligence where unto his
Office obliged him, which is termed in Italian Fiscaleggiare. I answered that
M. Albizzi might have been as diligent to Fiscaleggiare as he would, by taking
heed underhand to what we were doing about that Impression; but before he
proceeded to stop it, he should have observed us gently and peaceably, and see
whether we did any thing contrary to order, and then complained of it; he
might, if he pleased, have caused the Printer to bring him everyday a Copy of
the sheets which he dispatched, and have perused them himself, or by others whom
he thought fit, that so nothing might be done worthy of blame; but to begin
presently with this way of stopping the progress of the work, to tie the
Printers hands, and constrain us to run to himself, and have recourse to their
Eminences, without the least foundation of so doing, this proceeding seemed
something rude and violent. He replied that possibly M. Albizzi did it thus to
hinder the mischief in the beginning; that there was nothing like stopping an
evil in its fountain, Principiis obsta; and that if some one had done the same
Office for Janseniu's book, when his executors caused it to be printed, he
should have done both him and them a good office: but they had been the
Murderers of his work, and done him great wrong; that himself (Cardinal Ghiggi)
had read the whole book; that besides about half a page which they might have
left out or explained, there was nothing in it to be excepted against; because
we had in mandatis to speak nothing that might relate to Jansenius, and had
made it a chief point to abstain as much as possible even from pronouncing his
name; we answered nothing to this discourse of Cardinal Ghiggi concerning him.
But the Abbot of Valcroissant returning to what concerned our Impression, gave
his Eminence an account of the number and order of the books which we purposed
to get printed; and upon his mentioning the Epistle of Celestine, the Council
of Orange, and the Epistle of Sardinia, the Cardinal stumbled a little at it,
and asked us why we did not put those other works into a little book apart, But
when the Abbot of Valcroissant had answered that those works had been formerly
printed together with those of S. Augustine, as pertaining thereunto and
treating of the same matter, he was satisfied.

At length I beseecht his Eminence to believe, that in procuring this
Impression we had not had the least thought of any bravado or ostentation, but
only designed to clear the things in question, by the most solid, short and
innocent way that we could choose. But I added further, that though we had been
too blame in beginning it, (as we conceived there could not be the least
pretext) yet things being to come to this pass, it seemed expedient not to
stop it or interrupt it longer, in regard of the occasions which thereby might
be taken to say, That S. Augustine began to be no longer in esteem and
approbation at Rome as formerly; but to avoid the scandalous sequels which such
discourse might produce, The Cardinal replied that he looked upon this argument
as something, yet not as unanswerable: for then it would follow said he, that a
man might engage thus upon what he please, and plead afterward such
inexpediency to hinder him. I answered that I judged such proceeding in the
general as unreasonable as himself did; but in this case and in the affair
under question, this argument appeared to me very strong and convincing,
because the thing undertaken was profitable, just and holy, and from whence we
could not reasonably presume the least probability of any inconvemence. That we
had used all circumspection and observed all the forms and rules that could be
wish^ before we began; and that the Obstruction of the work would be of no
profit, but draw prejudicial sequels after it. His Eminence was in haste, and
so it behooved us to break off, and we accompanied him, discoursing of other
indifferent things, as far as the apartment of Cardinal Cherubini.

On Thursday morning, April 18. the Abbot of Valcroissant and M. Angran went to
wait upon Cardinal Barberin, who had been in the Country the two preceding
days, and so could not be informed before touching this Impression. But I went
alone to Cardinal Spada, and as soon as his Eminence was in condition to be
seen, I told him that when we presented our Memorial to him, we acquainted him
only with reasons alleged for obstruction of our work. That we accounted our
affair so clear and so just that we doubted not but we should have had, after
the foregoing days congregation, the liberty to continue it: but having had no
answer in the morning, we went in the afternoon to M. Albizzi who raised new
scruples, to which I was come to acquaint him in two words what we had to
answer. That M. Albizzi, told us in the first place, that he had crossed us,
out of the fear he had of a Table which he intended to adjoyn to the book; and
secondly that in the works of S. Augustine selected by us there were Crudities
which had been digested and refined in his latter works. That as to the first
difficulty, I was to tell his Eminence that we had not so much as the least
thought of annexing a Table to the intended Volumn; And as to the second, 1.
that the word Crudities could not be applied to S. Augustin's works without
failing in the respect which is due to him and to the Popes who have approved
them. 2. That there was really neither crudities nor obscurities, nor excesses
nor perplexities in his works. And thirdly, that in case there were such
crudities, obscurities and perplexities in others of his works, yet not in
these which we have chosen to print, that are resolved and cleard, as being the
last which he composed upon this matter; and when the greatest difficulties and
strongest objections which his adversaries had to allege against the doctrine
of the Scriptures and the Church which he maintained, h^d been propounded to
him, and he had destroyed and confounded the most perplexing subtilties, I gave
the Cardinal an account of the order and substance of those Books as well as
the shortness of the time permitted. He heard with gravity and decency all that
I represented to him. After which he accompanied me only to his Chamber door;
but answered me not so much as one single word,

In the afternoon we went to M Albizzi no know what was resolved upon in the
Congregation before the Pope that morning. But upon the way I was informed
there had been no mention of our business. That M. Albizzi before the Popes
coming to the Assembly, talked much with Cardinal Pamphilio and Cardinal
Barberin apart, and that it was determined at length amongst them to defer
propouning it to a particular Congregation at the Palace of Spada, M. Albizzi
ending the conference with their Eminences with these words, Non daremo
fastidio al Papa questa matina, ne parlaremo nella Congregatione particolare
alla Casa di Spada. However we proceeded to M. Albizzi, to see what he would
say to us. He had not leisure enough the day before to hear what we had to tell
him concerning the order and subject of the books whereof we had made choice.
The Abbot of Valcroissant gave him account thereof, during which M. Albizzi
held in his hand the little Volumes of S. Augustine printed by M. Vitre, and
read the titles of them; and after what M. de Valcroissant had said to him, he
seemed to make no great difficulty about out affair, telling us he believed it
would be terminated at the House of Cardinal Spada, where a Congregation was to
be held that day; that the Pope should afterward be acquainted with it; in a
word, That perhaps Cardinal Spada would send for us to tell us that we might
continue our Impression; that he was not certain of it, but he told us this by
way of advice. He asked us whether M. Brousse were gone, and said he would do
well to stay. I know not why M. Albizzi said so, but I answered him, that M.
Brousse was not yet gone, but intended it the next day without fail, his health
not permitting his longer residence at Rome. When he departed from M. Albizzi,
I sent a Laquay to Cardinal Spada's Palace to see who came to that
Congregation. He brought me word at night that only Cardinal Ginetti and M.
Albizzi were there; that he heard, the Cardinals Pamphilio and Ghiggi wete to
be there, but they came not, being obliged to accompany the Pope abroad to take
the air that afternoon.

On Saturday the 20th. I went to restore a book to Cardinal Barberin. Our
conference was very long, and we spoke sufficiently at large concerning our
Impression. He told me the business lay in the hands of the Cardinals Spada and
Ghiggi, and that for his part, he saw no difficulty in it.

On Monday the 23d. I went to the Antichamber of Cardinal Pamphilio, where I
found M. Albizzi. I took occasion to tell, that since the last visit we made to
him, I had heard nothing either from himself or Cardinal Spada, and that in the
mean time our Imperssion stayed without going forward. He answered me that he
would take care of it the next day, la sollicitarino domani. I told him the
Answer to the Minister of Groaning was going forward at Paris, that the first
letter of that answer was already printed, that the Minister was well refuted
in it, etc. M. Albizzi answered me, that it was well done, faranno been.

In the afternoon I went again to Cardinal Ghiggi, and showed him several small
Impressions formerly made of those little works of St. Augustine, and
represented to him with what gentleness and moderation we had governed our
selves in this matter, that so long as we could, we set the Printer to
solicit M. Albizzi, that so our selves might not appear in it without
necessity; and that we had not resolved upon presenting our Memorial to their
Eminences, till we perceived M. Albizzi was inexorable to all the Printers
instances, and till we feared he might give the Pope and their Eminences
unhandsome suspicions and diffidences against St. Augustine and our selves. The
Cardinal received very pleasingly and courteously what I said to him. Turning
over these little Volumns of S. Augustine, he lighted upon some places which he
read with pleasure; amongst others upon that of the 14th. Chapter of the Book
de Gratia, where it is said, Si ergo sicut veritas loquitur, OMNIS QVI DIDICIT
VENIT; quisquis non venit, profecto nec didicit. He spoke of that Holy Doctor
with very great esteem, and gave me hope that we should have liberty to
continue our Impression. I went also to visit Cardinal Roma, but the Gout had
confined him to his bed.

On Wednesday the 24th. I learnt that the Jesuits had procured new instances
to be made as from the King of Spain, to obtain a Decree from the Pope in
favor of the immaculate conception of the Virgin; that Cardinal Trivultio had
earnestly solicited all the Cardinals of the H. Office, that it would be
propounded the next day before the Pope, and that his Holiness would have this
matter handled in a very secret manner. The Abbot of Valcroissant and my self
went again to Cardinal Pamphilio, to beseech him to get the affair of our
Impression dispatched. He answered us very civilly, but remitted us to Cardinal
Spada for a determination.

The Ambassador came back from Tivolo on Thursday the 25. and civilities to him
took up all the morning of the next day. The Bishop of Bethlehem whom we had
visited, excused himself to us by the suspicion of Jansenism, that he had not
yet repaid our visit. Monsignor Sacrista told me that the Congregation of the
day before, which without doubt was touching the business of the Conception,
lasted three hours, and that Cardinal Lugo went away from it with a high color
and discontent in his face. The Printer came to tell me that M. Albizzi had
signified to him the day before that the Cardinals of the H. Office gave way to
the finishing of our Impression, but he must review the Apostills.

On Saturday the 27. we consulted with some intelligent persons what course to
take in this matter, and concluded, for avoidance of new difficulties, to treat
with Mr. Albizzi about the renewing of those Apostilles. Accordingly on Sunday
the 28. in the afternoon we went to him for that purpose, with the Tome of S.
Augustine printed at Paris anno 1635. out of which we intended to take the
Treatise de Perfectione Justitiae, having as yet only the first Tome of the
Impression of Lovain of the year 1647. in which the Treatise is not; which
first Tome we carried too, intending to take out of it the book de Gratia
Christi, and the 105 and 107. Epistles; and we left both the books in his hands.

After which we were present at an Act dedicated to Cardinal Ghiggi at the
Covent of our Lady de la Victoire, whereunto we were invited. But the Cardinal
sent to desire that it might be deferred to another day, because the Pope went
abroad to take the air, and took him with him. In the Garden of that Covent we
met with the Bishop of Bethlem, who told me that the Superior of the Jesuits
of Nevers visiting him upon occasion of some affair relating to his Bishopric
which is near that City, had in his discourse about the matters in contest
drawn from under his Cassoke a Copy of M. de Vabres's Letter to cause him to
subscribe it; which he refusing, they had proclaimed him a Jansenist.

On the 30. of April being the day of S. Peter the Martyr, the Cardinals and
Consultors of the H. Office were at a Mass which was said at la Minerve for the
solemnity of that Festival. And because it happened to be this year on a Tuesday
and Wednesday would be taken up by that of S. James and S. Philip, they held
their Congregation at the end of Mass: during which, the Printer told me* that
he had spoken to M. Albizzi, who said he had not yet done our business, but he
would dispatch it, and give us contentment: Vaglio dar gusto a questi signori.

Wherefore to see whether he would give us the satisfaction he pretended, and
to win him as much as possible by respects and submissions, I went to visit him
on the first of May, and carried him a printed Copy of the first Letter against
the Minister of Groaning. I showed him one of the principal places which spoke
of the Pope, the Council of Trent, and the Errors of Heretics touching the
matter of Grace. The two books of S. Augustine which we carried to him the
Saturday following, lay by his Chair; he told me he had not yet dispatched them,
but he would do it the next day. I told him it might be done in a moment. He
assented, and further acknowledged, that it was a great inconvenience that the
Printers work had been hindered for three weeks already; therefore he promised
me satisfaction and expedition.

The Congregation held before the Pope on Thursday morning ( May 2.) was very
long, not ending till an hour and half after noon: and another was held the
same evening at the Palace of Cardinal Roma, at which were present the
Cardinals Spada, Ginetti, and Lugo, and M. Albizzi; in all probability it was
about the conception. All that day I could hear nothing touching our
Impression; but having by chance visited Cardinal Vrsin, I learnt from his
Eminence that M. Hallier was a coming with some companions, and that their
arrival might cause the hastening of the Congregation which we requested; but
nevertheless he believed nothing would be done.

Nor could I have any News from M. Albizzi on Friday and Saturday the fourth
and fifth of May, neither by our selves, nor by the intervention of the
Printer. But on Sunday morning as I was ready to go abroad, the Printer came to
tell me he had been with him the night before, and received from him our two
Volumns of St. Augustine, with a list of such Apostilles as he would have
charged in the four Treatises which we designed to take out of them.

Having considered that list which contained six Articles, M. de Valcroissant
and my self went to Mr. Albizzi forthwith, and signified to him that we would
add to the Apostilles such of the alterations which he had set down, as we
found agreeing to the Text: but for others not agreeing thereunto, or likely to
alter the sense, we could not add them; yet were contented, according as we
offered in our Memorial, to leave them all out. Mr. Albizzi heard what we said
to him, made a mark upon his paper, and almost consented; but he did not
resolve immediately, only told us he would signify our Answers a questi
signori. He would have us understand, that it was to the Cardinals that he
intended to signify our Answers, as meaning their Eminences by questi signori;
but it was in reality to the Jesuits, and very probably to the Penitentiaries
of St. Peter, who were his near Neighbors. For when we represented to him the
incovenience which the poor Printer suffered by doing nothing for a month
together, his Letters being still engaged in the two sheets which he had got
ready of our Book in daily expectance of liberty to proceed; and therefore
desired him that the Printer might fall to work again the next day, he told us,
it should be so, and appointed the Printer to come to him that evening. Now it
was morally impossible that he could or would go that afternoon (which was
growing very hot) to the Cardinals who lived remote from him, or that their
Eminences would be ready to apply themselves so suddenly to the examinat on of
those Apostilles, as the Jesuits might be, who were more instructed therein;
who perhaps were the Authors of them, and who lived sufficiently near him.

However of those six observations there were two most remarkable, touching
which we could agree to nothing but leaving them out, in regard of the bad
senses which they might have. One was upon the 14th. Chapter of the Book de
Gratia Christi, where the power and operative virtue of Grace being explicated,
there was put in the margent Gratia efficit; which he would have thus, Gratia
efficax efficit, to intimate that there is another sort of Grace named
sufficient which acts not, and which he said in his note that St. Augustine
teaches and supposes frequently in his other books. C. 14. had this note,
Augustinus describit tantum gratiam efficacem, and non excludit sufficientem,
quam alibi saepe supponit. Ergo ne cui detur occasio errandi in Apostilla
prima, ubi dicitur (Gratia efficit) ponendum esset, Gratia efficax. The second
was upon the 32. Chap. of the same book, where St. Augustine relates and cites
Pelagius's Confession of Faith; for denoting and distinguishing whereof to less
skilful Readers, there was an Apostille. And because Mr. Morel had had the
inadvertency to cite that confession of Pelagius's Faith as a work of St.
Augustine, for which he was reprehended by the Abbot de Bourzeis, therefore the
interests of that Doctors were so dear to M. Albizzi or the Jesuits, that they
would not have any Apostilles set there at all: and though we condescended to
put only these words, Libellus Fidei Pelagii, which are expressly in the Text,
yet we were constrained to leave them out; nor did we make much resistance when
we knew they would have it so. Cap. 32. had this Remarque from M. Albizzi;
Apostilla nihil facit ad textum, and tangit controversiam peculiarem inter D.
Morel doctorem Sorbonicum, and alium doctorem Jansenistam, a qua videtur
abstinendum. Extraordinary care in behalf of a man that took Pelagius for S.
Augustine, and an injurious word against him that defended S. Augustine from that
Reproach. But it behooved to suffer it with patience, as well as all the other
rigours which we daily experienced for our most sincere intentions and lawful
demands.

In the evening the Printer repaired to speak with M. Albizzi, but could not.
But the next day he brought us a second Writing in reference to Answers which
we made to M. Albizzi. And being now free either to add in the Apostilles what
was not contrary to the Text and mind of S. Augustine, or to put none at all,
our Printer, to whom M. Albizzi returned the license for Printing which he had
from the Master of the sacred Palace, prepared his forms which were ready
almost a month before to print the next day, and proceed to finish these four
Treatises, whereof M. Albizzi had reviewed the Apostilles.

We could not supply him with Books to review the Apostilles of the rest which
we intended to print; but as soon as we designed this Impression, having writ
into Flanders for the three small Tomes, that we might receive them by such
time as we should need them, the second was brought to us Thursday the ninth of
May.

On Sunday the 12. we carried it to M. Albizzi, for him to review the
Apostilles of the other eight Treatises of S. Augustine contained in our license
for printing. And that he might dispatch all together, and the sooner, we
carried him at the same time the little Tome in which the Epistle of Celestine
1. is of the Impression of M. Vitre, anno 1644. As for the second Council of
Orange, the letter of Boniface 11. who confirmed it, and that of the Bishops
banished into Sardinia, we presented him other books, which he presently
delivered us again, because they had no Apostilles.

On Thursday the 16. I found him in the Popes Presence Chamber, and asked him
whether he had viewed those Apostilles. He told me, No; but he would dispach
them the next day or the day after. The same day I received the third small
Tome of S. Augustine by the Courier of Flanders.

On Sunday the 19. being the day of Pentecost, M. de Valcroissant and my self
went to M. Albizzi to desire the expediting of those Apostilles, and I carried
with me the sheet of the above mentioned small Volum wherein was the Epistle of
S. Celestine, intending to take back that of M. Vitre, in case he had not yet
dispatht it; that so he might have nothing in his hands but of the same
Impression of Flanders. As Soon as he saw us, he told us he had not had time to
peruse what we came for, but he would do it before the Festivals were past.
That in the interim he advertised that Questi signori had found very much to
dislike in an Apostille of Celestine's Epistle, which was in these words,
Defensores liberi arbitrii nocentissimi sunt. (It is at the third Chapter of
that Epistle, and the 803. page of M. Vitre's Impression) That the Defenders of
Free Will are very culpable. This Apostille surprised us a little, because
indeed we had not observed it before, having designed nothing else in this
Impression of S. Augustine, but the Impression it self simply and sincerely. Yet
we answered M. Albizzi, That though the Propositions contained in that
Apostille might have a bad sense, nevertheless it was clear, that it was to be
understood with reference to the Text, which speaks only of those Defenders of
Free Will, who think they cannot defend the same but by advancing it above and
ruining Grace, who indeed are very culpable. M. Albizzi replied two things:
First, that it was distastful, and that these Apostilles gave grand fastidio a
questi signori, great disgust to those Signori; and that it was requisite to
reform them; he meant after his own way, and according to the shifts and
distinctions which the Jesuits liked to give them. And secondly, that it was
still judged more expedient not to print this book, di non stampare il libro.
Yet he said he would make observations upon those Apostilles, and deliver them
to us on Wednesday or Thursday following. Whereupon we departed, and when we
were come away, I remembered that we had not left with him the sheet of the
Flanders Impression wherein that Epistle was. I drew it out of my pocket, and
looking upon it, we found that the Apostille whereof he complained, was not in
this Edition: so I returned to give it him, and show him that we meant no
subtilty, but proceeded fairly herein; and if we had been suffered to finish
our Impression without disturbing us, that Apostille had not been heard of,
because we purposed to follow that of Flanders as the best, in which the said
Apostille was not found.

I cannot omit here the remark which he made upon this Apostille in the paper
which he delivered to us afterward signed with his own hand; Apostilla quae
habetur page 803. (Defensores liberi arbitrii nocentissimi sunt) videtur esse
scripta propria ipsius Lutheri vel Calvini manu, continetque manifestissimam
sensus Caelestini corruptionem, and sufficeret sola ad damnandam hanc editionem
selectorum S. Augustini opusculorum. It is evident, as I said before, that this
Apostille speaks only of those who so defend Free will as that they destroy
Grace, whom S. Celestin calls in this place Nocentissimos liberi arbitrii
defensores. And yet because it pleased M. Assessor of the Inquisition, or those
who set him on, to take this Note in a wrong sense, he said it was alone
sufficient for the condemnation of this Edition of S. Augustines select Works;
which shows by the way what account is to be made of the Condemnations of books
at Rome, since according to the express testimony of this Assessor, there
sometimes needs no more for condemning the best, but such a misconception.

We were so afraid of his delays, that lest the four other little Treatises
would be printed before he had regulated the Apostilles of those which were
still in his hands, and lest he should injure our Printer, and retard our work,
we resolved to solicit him incessantly, till he delivered the same to us.
Wherefore on Thursday the 23d. M. de Valcroissant and M, Angran repaired to
him, and he put them off again for three or four days.

On Sunday the 26. to lose no time, we went to him again. He delivered us a
Memoire containing four pages of alterations to be made in the Apostilles of
these works; and told us it was that which was appointed by those Cardinals,
questi signori Cardinali.

When we were come home, and considered this Memoire, we found there were
Additions of new Apostilles, not before printed in any Editions; as this which
was to be set at the eight Chapter of Celestin's Epistle, though there was
nothing like it in the Text, Romanus Episcopus omnibus aliis totius orbis
Episcopis praescribit quid sit sentiendum in materia fidei: some there are that
evidenced the design of the Jesuits to diminish St. Augustine's authority as
much as they could; as this, which he set to the second Chapter of Celestin's
Epistle, ad cap. 2. Necessarium videtur notare ad marginem quod est in sensu,
Augustinus inter Magistros optimos habitus a sede Apostolica, ut constet
judicio Caelestini non unicum esse optimum, sed unum ex optimis. Some there
were wholly corrupted and altered; as when instead of that which is at the end
of the second Chapter of Celestine's Letter (where this Pope tells the Bishops,
that they ought to restrain, and chastise the temerity of ignorant and
presumptuous Ecclesiastics, who exalt themselves against the Faith, and cause
dissentions to arise amongst the Faithful) whereof the words are, Cuhibendae
dissentiones ex Ecelesiis per Episcopos, he would have us put this new
Apostille, Indisciplinatae questiones Presbyterorum per Episcopos exhibendae
sunt, to take away from the Bishops their authority and jurisdiction over their
Ecclesiastics, by reducing them to carry their complaints to some other
superior Tribunal, which could be no other, according to his pretension, then
that of the Court of Rome. And upon the fifth chapter of the same Letter of S.
Celestin, instead of this Apostille which was there, Bonitas nostra Deo
debetur, which answers to these words of the Text, nam quid nos de eorum post
hac mentibus rectum aestimemus, qui sibi se putant debere quod boni sunt, nec
illum considerant cujus quotidie gratiam consequuntur? this Assessor would have
us put this, Damnandi qui sibi putant deberi quod boni sunt, non considerantes
Dei gratiam, insinuating thereby, that provided a man acknowledge the
Molinistical kind of Grace, he is not blameable in thinking that he is
beholding to himself for his goodness. Moreover he would have us put this at
the end of Cap. 5. De Praedestinatione Sanctorum, Credere vel non credere in
arbitrio voluntatis humanae est, supposita scilicet divina gratia, meaning
thereby to establish the Molinistical Grace of the Jesuits, which is such, that
being given to a man, he believes or not believes according as it pleases his
free will: whereas S. Augustine speaks the quite contrary in that place,
ascribing faith to a singular Grace which severs him that believes from him
that does not believe, being given to the one, and not to the other. For this
see the entire passage of S. Augustine, Natura, in qua nobis data est
possibilitas habendi fidem, non discernit hominem ab homine; ipsa vero fides
discernit fidelem ab infideli. Ac per hoc ubi dicitur, Qui te discernit? Quid
autem habes quod non accepisti? quisquis audet dicere, Habeo ex meipso fidem,
non ergo accepi, profecto contradicit huic apertissimae veritati: non quia
credere vel non credere non est in arbitrio humanae voluntatis, sed in Electis
praeparatur voluntas a Domino. And in the Chapter ensuing; Multi audiunt verbum
veritatis, sed alii credunt, alii contradicunt. Volunt ergo isti credere,
nolunt autem illi. Quis hoc ignoret? quis hoc neget? sed cum aliis praeparetur,
aliis non praeparetur voluntas a Domino, discernendum est utique quid veniat de
misericordia ejus, quid de judicio. There were several other Apostilles of the
new invention of M. Albizzi or the Jesuits in the Memoire which he gave us,
and which I have still subscribed by him: but I have insisted a little upon
these, that the Reader may judge of their design, since they could hinder the
Impression of S. Augustin's works, at least to corrupt the doctrine thereof as
much as they could by their false Apostilles.

Considering therefore that to debate with M. Albizzi concerning all the
Apostilles contained in his Memoire, and to enter into examination of the
reasons he had to oblige us to print them after this manner which he
prescribed, and of ours to refuse it, was the way to engage our selves in
troublesome questions, in reference to which we could have no justice, and
which might perhaps give occasion for some complaint against us; as also that
either the absolute stopping, or at least long retardment of our Impression
would follow thereupon (which perhaps was the thing they aimed at by the
perplexities and wranglings about these Apostilles) we resolved to accept one
of the two Conditions, though rude and displeasing, which he had written at the
bottom of his Memoire, namely, either to print all these Apostilles precisely
as they were prescribed, or to print no more through the remainder of the work:
vel delendae sunt omnes Apostillae, vel imprimendae ut jacent in supradictis
Annotationibus. Signed, Fr. d' Albizzi. So that having printed the four first
treatises with the ordinary Apostilles, we were constrained, for avoiding
worse, to take the former part of the offer, and print no more throughout the
rest of the book, that so we might secure the Impression from further
disturbance. And thus it came to pass that it appeared in public so imperfect
and maimed, as it is, in this respect. You see what obstacles were to be
struggled with in this age at Rome through the ligitiousnesse of this Assessor,
for the printing those few works of S. Augustine, after his doctrine has been
canonis'd there in all preceding Ages by all the Popes that have lived since
that great Saint, and have had occasion to speak thereof, and though it be
still at this day in singular veneration with all the Divines of Rome,
excepting a small number of those that are devoted to the interests of the
Jesuits.

CHAP. VIII.
An incidental History of the exemplary Punishment of the Sub-Datary
Mascamb^un, convicted of several forgeries, which happened about this time, and
whereof I learnt very considerable particularities by a most sure way.

IT was necessary to lay aside for a while these few remarkable things which
passed during the time that the business of our Impression was in agitation,
that the Narration thereof might not be interrupted by the intermixture of
other things according to the course of my Journal; which, that being
dispatched, it is now seasonable to resume.

There passed one about this time so considerable in it self, that though it
have no reference to our affair but very indirectly, as having only been the
cause that one of the four Cardinals designed for the cognizance of it, was
almost wholly laid aside; nevertheless I shall not forbear to report here what
I came to know of it by a very certain way, as well for the now mentioned
reason, as that it may serve for a memorable example of the just punishments
they sometimes receive who have abused the confidence their masters had in
their fidelity and counsels, when their frauds and miscariages come to be
discovered.

There was a certain person named Francesco de Canonicis, a native of Marca
Anconitana, who having commendably dispatched the course of his studies in
Humanity and the Laws, was entered with an Eminent Advocate named Masca^brun,
to help him in his studies and copy out the Law-writing which he made for his
Clients. This F. de Canonicis, who was of low extraction and poor, having found
this occasion of geting money, employed his whole industry to grow wealthy.
Besides the Advocates fee, which is ordinarily eight Testons A Teston is worth
18d. sterling.
for every piece of writings, his Ajutante di Studio (in plain English, his
Clerk) who copies the same, has for his fees a Gros for every page, (a Gros is
the twelf part of a Teston) This Francesco de Canonicis, put so few lines in a
page, and so few words in a line, that the Draughts of Mascambrun became
proverbial in Rome, to signify a thing extraordinarily drawn and stretched out
in length.

The Advocate Mascambrun finding that Francesco de Canonicis was a dextrous
youth, and fit for the trade of Law, had much esteem and affection for him, and
at his death bequeathed to him his name, his arms, his writings and his
Library. All this gave a great reputation to Francesco de Canonicis, being so
dignified by a man that had so much in his time; and making his advantage of
it, he put himself forward as much as he could into the Intrigue of the Bar
and sell into great practice.

The rise of his great fortune was from the access which he had to the Pope
whilst he was yet but Cardinal Pamphilio. This Cardinal had married the eldest
of his Nieces to the Marquis Justinian, who had a Suit of great consequence in
the Rota which this Cardinal tended and solicited as his own business. This
Process had been laid after an ill sort, and two judgments had already past
against the Marquis Justinian. Cardinal Pamphilio was much troubled for the
interest of his House, and because he was engaged in a solicitation which
proved unsuccessefull. Now it happened that this Cardinal's Auditor spoke thereof
to Mascambrun, as of a business that much afflicted his Master. Mascambrun was
this Auditors great friend, and therefore he desired him to show him such
papers as might give him full intelligence of the nature of the Suit. Which
done, Mascambrun studied them with great diligence, and found that the
business had been undertaken by a wrong course; and if it were so continued,
it would be infallibly lost: but if it were laid another way, as he conceived
it might be if he undertook it, it might come to a good issue. So he returned
the Auditor his papers, told him his Opinion, prayed him to mention him to the
Cardinal as one fit to be consulted with in this affair after the esteem
wherein the deceased Mascambrun had testified he held him by leaving him his
name, his arms, his Library and his Writings; but above all he desired him not
to take notice to the Cardinal that he had shown him any papers belonging to
this Suit. The Auditor easily condescended to this desire of Mascrambrun, and
mentioned him effectually to the Cardinal, who amidst his inquietudes and
discontents sent for Mascambrun, set forth the whole affair to him, and deduced
it from the beginning to the two judgments which the Rota had passed against
it. Mascambrun who had studied the business to the bottom, resumed it from
the beginning, and passed over it with such facility before the Cardinal, to
show him the errors that had beeen committed in the management, and what way
there was to get those contrary judgments reversed, that the Cardinal was
almost ravished, and judged Mascambrun the ablest man in Rome, hearing him
speak so roundly to a business which he thought was so new to him, and show
the way to accomplish an affair which was so important to him, and which he
looked upon as absolutely lost. Whereupon he caused all his Papers to be put
into his hands, and resolved to follow his counsel, in whatsoever was to be
done. Mascambrun undertook it so successefully that he procured the two
Judgments to be revoked and carried the Suit. The winning whereof so won the
mind of Cardinal Pamphilio to him, that becoming Pope he made him Sub-Datary,
and besides entrusted to him the care of all the businesses and encumbrances
belonging to the house of Pamphilio.

The Sub-Datary, to speak properly, is but the Substitute or Lieutenant of the
Datary. The Pope makes him Chamberlain of honor, and gives him a pension for
his table of bread and wine, and money for the rest. His business is to view
all Petitions presented to the Pope; excepting such as are for Benefices vacant
by death, which go to another Officer who is under the Datary and called the
Per obitum.

It belongs therefore to the Sub-Datary to make the division of Petitions.
Matters of course, such as are all Vacancies by the death of Curees, and the
simple Benifices of France, excepting Brittany, all simple Resignations, the
extra tempora, and Lapses, which are all ordinary matters, are not to be signed
by the Pope, but he remits them to the Concessum, who is an Officer Prelate of
the Court, having 1500. Crowns pension, and signs all the Petitions sent to
him by the Sub-Datary, whose mark he must see at the foot of the Petition,
which is in two words ad Ordum. that is, ad Ordinarium. This Officer signs the
Petitions in this form,

Concessum ut petitur in praesentia S. D. N. Papae. Fr. CAETANUS. There are
other Petitions, whereof the matters are to be examined by the Congregations of
the Regulars, or of the Council, or of the H. Office, or others. It belongs to
the Sub-Datary to send them whether they ought to go.

As for Petitions for Favors depending simply on the Pope, and needing no
greater examination, the Sub-Datary according to the ancient form is to peruse
them either by himself or by a trusty and intelligent Substitute, and write at
the foot of every Petition the sum of what it contains. Which sum is an
abridgement in very few words of the Grace su'd for in the body of the
Petition, and ought to be correspondent to the same; because the Pope, that he
may know what he signs, reads only the Summary which represents to him what
the Favor is which is desired of him.

The Datary fails not to go every day to the Pope, to carry him the businesses
of this nature which he is to sign. But first he calls the Sub-Datary and the
Per obitum, to know what affairs ought to be presented to the Pope to sign.
They examine those together which have any difficulty, to the end they may
inform his Holiness thereof. Then they make a paquet or bundle of a number of
Petitions to carry them to the Pope. The Sub-Datary goes with the Datary; but
the Per obitum does not, unless the Sub-Datary be sick.

Mascambrun was accused of having committed many frauds and knaveries in this
Office of Sub-Datary. For the understanding whereof, it is requisite to know
how Petitions are made and through what Officers hands they pass to be
dispatched.

Petitions are made in half a sheet of Paper, at the top whereof is set the
Diocese wherein the Benefice lies, if it be about a Benefice; or if it be a
favor which does not concern a Benefice, then they put the Diocese of the
person which desires it; for example, Parisien. Trecen. Lugdun. Bononien. On
the right side of the Petition is set down what Favor it is that is desired,
as, Provisio, Resignatio simplex, Dispensatio in 3. and 4. consanguinitatis,
Certo modo, Per obitum, Resignatio cum Pensione, or other the like, according
as the matter is. Then the Petition begins, Beatissime Pater, etc. the name of
the Petitioner is expressed in it, the grace which he demands, and all the
circumstances necessary to be signified. After which there is left a void space
of about three fingers for the the Popes signing, and below the Petition is
concluded with these usual words, Et cum absolutione a Censuris ad effectum
duntaxat, etc. with all the decrees and restrictions wherewith graces are
ordinarily granted. At the foot of the Petition the Sub-Datary or his Clerks
set the Sum of the grace in a line or two, more or less, according as the
matter is.

The Officers through whose hands the Petitions must pass, are the Datary and
the Sub-Datary, who carry them to the Pope to be signed, and are to aquaint him
with what difficulties are in them, and the reasons for which he ought or may
grant the favor desired of him. If the Pope judge the favor exorbitant, he
rejects the Petition; if he will grant it, he writes Fiat ut petitur in the
void space left between the body of the Petition and the Decrees, and sets the
first Letter of his name, not his Papal, but his baptismal. Innocent X. is
called John Baptista, therefore he sets an J. Urban VIII. was named Mapheus and
set an M. Moreover he writes the Fiat again in the margent right over the
decrees.

The Petition being signed, the Sub-Datary sends it to the first Revisor. There
are two Revisors belonging to the Datary, to whom the Pope gives la part,
which may be worth to each two hundred and sixty crowns. Their Office is to
review the signed Petitions, to see whether the Summaries set at the foot of
Petitions, according to which the Pope intends the favor, express all that
is in the body of them. If the first Revisor finds that there are graces in the
body which are not in the Summary, he blots out of the body what is not in the
Summary, or else keeps the Petition, which goes no further. If he is minded to
do service to the Expeditionaries or to the parties, he goes to the Datary or
the Sub-Datary and confers with them about the defect of the Petition, and
oftentimes they agree that it may be dispatched, because the Supreme Officers
are accounted the Pope's instruments, and ought to know his will and
intentions, since they treat every day with him. Therefore when they bid the
first Revisor to proceed in doubtful matters, he sets his mark which is the
first letter of his name at the beginning of the Summary. The first Revisor at
this time was named Joachim, and set an J.

After the first Revisor has perused the Petition, if it ought to be
dispatched, he sends it to the Dates, where dates are taken for Benefices
whereto the Pope claims, as in all the Benifices of France (excepting
Brittany, which are not in the King's nomination.) He that has the first Date,
carries it. As Soon as they who desire it, have received news of a vacant
Benefice, they go to the lodging of this Officer, and take a Date, which is
nothing else but the name of the Postulant, the Benefice, the Diocese and the
day current. The Officer enters the same into Register, that he may add the
lesser Date to that which is entered. Now after this Officer has received the
Petition from the first Revisor: if it be for a Benefice upon which a Date has
been taken, he writes below the Summary the lesser Date conformable to what
has been entered; for example, S. M. M. Kalend. Martii Anno 8. etc. If they be
Petitions for which no Date has been taken, he sets down the date of the day
current. This Date is called the lesser, to distinguish it from the great one
which the Sub-Datary gives, as I shall show hereafter.

After the Officer of the Dates has dated the Petition, he sends it to the
second Revisor, who is the second in order, but the first in dignity. He
reviews what tne first has already seen; if the first has let pass any thing
unfitting, or has added any decree that restraines the grace too much or
renders it unprofitable, he may alter, take away or add what he thinks fit.
When he passes the Petition, he sets his mark, which is the first letter of his
name, beneath that of the first. The second Revisor at this time, set an L.
because his name was Lagnel.

When the matter of the Petition requires payment of Composition, as titularie
Priories, Abbeys, Coadjutories, and Pardons do, the Petition goes from the
second Revisor to the Officer for Compositions, to whom it pays what is
appointed. In very many cases things are not so regulated, but the sum is
arbitrarily agreed upon by the Officer of the Compositions and the Cardinal
Datary, and people must get off as good cheap as they can. When the Petition is
to pay Compounding-money, one of the Revisors sets at the bottom of the Summary
a C. or Comp. to show that it must compound before the Sub-Datary put the grand
date to it. When the Officer of Compositions is paid, he writes at the bottom
of the Petition Solvit, and the first letter of his name.

From the Compositions the Petition returns to the Sub-Datary, to have the
grant date set to it; the Dataries who did the same heretofore and thence took
the name, relying upon the Sub-Dataries herein. The Sub-Datary is then to see
whether the hands and marks of all the Officers are about the Summary, and
whether the Composition be paid, in case any be due. Whereof when he is assured
by the Solvit which he sees at the bottom, he puts to it the grand date
correspondent to the lesser which I spoke of, but at length; for example, Datum
apud Sanctam Mariam Majorem Kalendis Martii Anno Octavo, etc. When the Petition
is thus dated, it goes to an Office which is called Missis, where the Summary
is cut off from the Petition and remains in that Office; it is called Missis
because it sends Petitions to the Registers to be enrolled.

One of the four and twenty Registers enters the Petition in the Registers, and
then carries it with the Register to one of the four Masters of the Register,
to hear the Petition, that is, to compare it, and see whether the Register be
correspndent word for word with the Petition. Which done, the Master of the
Register, mkes a great R. upon the backside thereof, which signifies
Registrata; he sets his name at the foot of the R. and below the book and folio
of the Register. And then the Petition passes out of the Datary.

All this premised we come now to our intended Narrative.

Mascambrun was accused of five several Crimes. 1. Of having altered the
Summaries of Petitions. 2. Of having defrauded the Compositions. 3. Of having
given Mandates for the expediting of Bulls gratis. 4. Of having falsifi'd the
Registers of Pope Urban. 5. Of having done the same in those of Innocent X.

As for the first Article, of altering Summaries, he had offended two ways;
the first whereof was in making flying Summaries. For the understanding whereof
it is to be noted, that it happened in some cases, that the Petitions were very
large, and left but little space at the bottom of the half sheet for to write
conveniently the Summary of the favor contained in the Petition, because
perhaps it comprehended several articles, which were to be expressed to the
Pope to the end he might know what he signed; so that there needed sometime
five or six lines for a Summary. In these cases the Summary was written in a
Paper apart of about 4. or 5. fingers breadth, which was annexed to the bottom
of the Petition with a little sealing paste. And so long as the Pope had no
ground to distrust his Officers, he signed these Petitions promiscuously,
whether the Summaries were written at the bottom of the same Paper with the
rest of the Petition, or in these kind of annexed Papers, which they called
flying Summaries.

Now to deceive the Pope and cause him to sign gratis which undoubtedly he
would not have granted if they had been asked fairly and plainly, they annexed
to the Petitions which contained the extraordinary Graces which they would
obtain by circumvention, one of these flying Summaries, in which they write the
summary of an ordinary Grace. Thus the Pope confiding in his Sub-Datary that
the Summary was correspondent to the Petition, and seeing nothing extraordinary
in it, used to sign it. When the Sub-Datary had this Petition thus signed, he
took off the false Summary that was presented to the Pope, and annexed another
perfectly correspondent to the body of the Petition, and sent the same to the
first Revisor, who finding the Summary correspondent to the Petition was
obliged to pass it. For example, if they minded to get a Dispensation for a
Bastard, to enable him to possess Dignities in Cathedral Churches even to
Bishoprics, which the Pope grants to none but Princes, they annexed a Summary
in these words, Dispensatio pro illegitimo ad simplicia Beneficia; when the
Grace was signed, they took off that Summary, and adjoined another in these
terms, Dispensatio pro bastardo ad quacunque Beneficia, etiam ad dignitates in
Cathedralibus and ad Episcopatum.

One of the Revisors who took notice that such graces passed daily as all the
world knew to be contrary to the intention of the Pope, showed some of them to
Cardinal Chechini the Datary, and also the manner how the Pope was circumvented
by those flying Summaries. Whereupon the Cardinal forbad the use of the like
for the future.

They who had used this Artifice to deceive the Pope, finding they were
deprived of it, devised another, which was to make use of Paper (which they
call at Rome French Paper) being larger than that which is ordinarily used for
Petitions. And whereas before they writ their false Summaries upon flying
Papers, which they took off afterward; now they writ the same at the bottom of
the page below the Petition; and after the Pope had signed it, cut off the
false Summary, and writ another correspondent to the body of the Petition.

This was discoveted by the first Revisor, who having taken a sheet of that
large Paper, and comparing it with the Petitions for which it had been used,
found that the sheet of the Petitions was not entire, but that there was as
much cut off as might serve for a Summary; besides their shamelessness was at
such a height, that oftentimes they cut off the Summary so negligently as there
still appeared part of the Letters which had been cut off, so that a man a
little considerate, as the first Revisor was, and who knew that the Pope had
declared that he would not grant the graces which yet he daily saw signed by
his Holyness's hand, very easily perceived in what manner the Pope was abused.

The second Article of the accusation proved against Mascambrun was, for having
cheated the Compositions. I mentioned how all Petitions that are to pay
Composition-money before the Subdatary sets the grand date to them, go to the
Officers of the Compositions, where they pay according as they are taxed; and
that this Officer having received the money, writes solvit upon the fold with
the first letter of his name. The Expeditionaries who were accomplices with
Mascambrun, were the five principal, namely, Monacci, le Gracco, Brignardel, de
Goux and Bonozzi, each of them complying with him as to the affairs which they
had in their hands, and sharing amongst them the sum which was to go to the
Compositions; the greatest part whereof was for the Sub-Datary, and the rest
for these Expeditionaries. Now to frustrate the Officer of the Compositions
thereof, the Subdatary caused the Petitions to be brought to himself, as soon as
they were out of the hands of the second Revisor, and set the grand date to
them, without sending them to the Composition-Office.

The third Article of Accusation was, for giving Mandates for expediting Bulls
gratis. Those Mandates are expedited by a motu proprio. Which motu proprio
distinguishes them from other Petitions which are passed by Fiat ut petitur;
for that these latter are signed at the instance of the party, as the words ut
petitur denotes; and the former are signed with Fiat motu proprio, and the
first letter of the Popes name, as I mentioned for the others. The Pope gives
those Mandates for priviledg'd persons, such as Cardinals, his kindred, the
Officers of his House, all those that have Offices in the Datary and Chancery,
and some others who of right have the free expedition of their Bulls; besides
whom, the Pope does the same grace to whom he pleases. The Pope was
circumvented by these Mandates in this manner; when his Holiness had signed a
motu proprio and done the grace of a gratuitous expedition of his Bulls to a
particular person, the Subdatary of his own authority caused the name of some
other to whom he was minded to do that favor to be inserted in the same
Mandate, and so made it extend to two or three what the Pope intended but to
one. This or action was judged highly criminal, because, though the Sub-Datary
and the other Officers of the Datary may add something to Petitions even after
the Pope has signed them, yet it must not be in any thing that is essential,
le^t the grace which he has granted become unprofitable. As for example, The
Pope gives a Condjutory to a Canonship, the Revisors shall add thereto a
Prohibition to the Bishop to supply that Canonship, because otherwise the grant
of the Coadjutorship would signify nothing, in case the Bishop could supply it
upon death or otherwise; but they cannot grant new and distinct graces, as in
this case to make use of the Pope's signature to give the gratis of expedition
to persons his Holiness never heard of, or perhaps has denied that favor.

The fourth Article of Accusation was, for falsifying the Registers of Urban
VIII. The grace which the Pope has signed, is not accounted perfect and entire
till it be registered. After which the Officers of the Datary have no more to
do with it, because the Masters of the Register are as it were the Popes last
hand which gives accomplishment and the utmost perfection to a grant. Nor can
the Petitions or Registers be any more meddled with the^, unless in some very
light thing and which evidently changes nothing of the substance of the Grant:
as if the name of the Petitioner were not fairly written, or a mistake were
committed in the date; or a necessary clause omitted without which the Grant
would be insignificant; in these cases the Datary causes the Register and
Petition to be brought to him and rectifies what is amiss; but he cannot alter
the substance of the Grace, or add any one which the Pope has not granted.
There is a particular Constitution of the Pope which prohibits any person to
meddle with the Registers of a Pope, unless it be one of the Officers
belonging thereunto. This fourth Article of Mascambrun's accusation was founded
upon this Constitution. In the time of Pope Urban a Collegiate Church was
erected in the City of Fermo in Italy, consisting of four Canons and one
Archpriest. Besides the revenues assigned to each person in particular, there
was a common stock of 15. Crowns for any extraordinary Divident, of which each
Canon was to draw out three Crowns for his part. The Archpriest treated with
Mascambrun, and desired him to get the institution of this Collegiate Church
altered, and that sum of 15. Crowns which according to its first institution
was to be distributed amongst all, assigned to himself and the Arch-priests his
Successors. Mascambrun who by the credit wherein he saw himself with the Pope,
thought he was able to do all things, resolved to do this business by causing
the bull of the Institution to be corrected in the Chancery, To effect which,
it was requisite to change the clause of the Petition which Urban had signed,
and the Registers of the same Pope. As the Bull was carried to be corrected,
Monsignor the Regent of the Chancery made great difficulty to suffer it. But
Mascambrun spoke to him, and assured him that he had the Popes word and order
for it. The Regent seeing the Petition and Registers amended, permitted the
Bull to be amended too accordingly. This action was judged very criminal. For
besides that he could not pretend any legal authority to meddle with a Grant of
Urban whose Officer he had never been, to declare or interpret his will, he
made a dead Pope speak that which he could not speak more; and the Bull bearing
the name of Urban in the front, contradicted after his death what he had
expressly ordained during his life. They say, a piece of Land belonging to this
Archpriest, and lying conveniently for Mascambrun who had an estate
thereabouts, gave occasion to this fraud, and was the price of it. But that
piece of land must have been very small, since the Archpriest got by this
forgery but 12. Crowns yearly during his life; which more aggravates the
wickedness of Mascambrun who was tempted to commit so great Crimes for so
little Interest.

As to the fifth Article of Accusation, of having meddled with the Registers of
Innocent X. now reigning, the poor Mascambrun was convicted to have altered and
added therein, and made new Grants of great importance with his own hand, as
was proved by all the Registers.

All Rome knew that great forgeries were committed in the Datary; but very few
Persons knew in what manner the Pope was circumvented; which made many think
(though it was not so, as the sequel showed) that his Holiness willingly shut
his eyes, and consented in some manner, if not by approving, ac least by
conniving at the infamous actions of the Sub-Datary, in whom he professed to
have a perfect confidence.

These frauds began to break out much about September in the year 1651.
Boulboul an Expeditionary of Liege, solicited an affair. The Sub-Datary who
let no Grant, or any thing extraordinary be signed but what passed through the
hands of one of those five Expeditioners above named, who were his
Correspondents, and kept open shop for the sale of all graces, rejected the
Petition of Boulboul, and told him the Pope would not sign it. Boulboul who
knew what course was to be taken for attaining his end, addressed himself to
Gracco, Brignardel and de Goux, whom he found by chance all together, and
presented his Affair to them all three, promising them that he who effected it,
should have besides the charges of the expedition four or five pistols in Wine.
De-Goux who was the Sub-Datarie's most trusty Substitute, and the most
dexterous Person, dispatched the business. Boulboul having his Affair and the
account of the expedition, and being not very negligent in reference to the
Composition, had a mind to enquire whether this matter required four hundred
and six Ducats for the Composition, as it was set down to him in the account.
He was told that it used to pay but four hundred and four. To be assured
whereof, he went to the Composition-Office, to see upon the Book of that Office
how much it paid. He found that it was not set down. He inquired of the
Substitute of the Office whether it was through forgetfulness or otherwise,
that it was not entered? at length he found that this Affair was passed without
paying Composition. Whereupon being not bound to hold his peace, and being vexed
that De-Goux should go about to make him pay the Composition which himself had
not paid, published the matter through all the Datary.

The Prefect of the Compositions, named Brandanno, fearing to be called to an
account for the Composition moneys, made a great clamor that the Pope was
manifestly robbed, and said he could not have been defrauded of less than forty
thousand Ducats. De Goux and le Gracco seeing things were in this case, and
knowing themselves culpable of many things not yet discovered, fled to Legorne
by Mascambrun's counsel^, who with his own money paid the four hundred Ducats
purloined from the Composition, and appeased the noise. After which it was not
hard for him to make the Pope believe that there was only those two
Expeditioners that committed such lewd pranks, and he told his Holiness, that
it was requisite to take care for the preventing of these disorders for the
future by some good regulations. He added that those which were now complained
of, happened only through the negligence of the subordinate Officers of the
Datary; who instead of sending the Petitions from hand to hand according to the
ancient form, delivered them to the Parties and the Expeditioners, who having
them in their hands, made sometimes falsifications in them, or else got them
expedited before they had passed through all the Officers. Hereupon an Order
was published in the Datary forbidding all the Officers thereof to deliver any
Petition signed by the Pope either to the Parties or the Expeditioners, with
injunction to send the same from one to another immediately according to the
ancient form. Thus the Sub-Datary was to send the Petitions signed by the Pope
to the first Revisor; the first Revisor to the Officer of the lesser dutes; he
to the second Revisor; he to the Composition s; the Prefect of the Compositions
to the Sub-Datary; the Sub-Datary to the Missis; and this Officer to the
Register. This order as it secured the Datary and Sub-Datary for a time, so it
accused the Underofficers of negligence; who thereupon complained, but in
vain; there was no way but to suffer this reproach, the time being not yet come
wherein Mascambrun's miscarriages were to be laid open.

About the end of December in the same year 1651. they began to break forth,
upon occasion of a false Bull concerning the transferring of a Cause then under
cognizance of the Inquisition of Portugal, to Secular Judges. Some Lords of
high quality in Portugal had been accused to the Inquisition of that Kingdom of
a shameful crime. This Tribunal had secured the accused persons in its
prisons. There was all probability, that they would be treated with rigor, and
their estates, which were very considerable, confiscated. For which cause they
solicited the Pope for an Evocation or Removal, thereby to be remitted to
secular Judges by whom they conceived they might be more favorably dealt with.
Don Diego de Sonsa a Gentleman of very high birth in Portugal, solicited the
expedition thereof with the Pope. The Ambassador of France had also recommended
it many times to the Pope, who always showed himself unwilling to do any thing
in the matter, as well because of the indignity of the crime, as because he
would not prejudice the power and privileges of the Tribunal of the
Inquisition. There was found an Expeditioner named Brignardel a Genuite, who
undertook the business upon condition of a large reward which was promised him
if he could bring it about. This was no hard thing to him; it was but the
making of a false Bull, and under the same Bull which was written by Orozzino
the Italian Apostolical Scribe, to counterfeit the names of the Officers
through whose hands it ought to have passed in the Ch^ncery. Monsignor Bruningo
(who was Auditor of the Contradettes, and had heard the Bull read, when he
compared it with the Petition, which is the last thing done to Bulls after they
have passed in the Chancery or the Chamber, and have the Lead set to them)
knowing that Monsignor Mendez a Portuguesse had solicited the same with the
Pope, and meeting him in the Chapel which was held the last Sunday of Advent
which happened to be Christmas Eve, congratulated with him that it was at length
effected. Monsignor Mendez was extremely surprised at this congratulation, and
seeing that M. Bruningo persisted in positively affirming that he had heard the
Bull read, he could not forbear lamenting; Of which sadness his Friend
pressing him to declare the cause, he told him it was because the Inquisition
for Portugal hearing that he solicited this affair with the Pope, had put his
Father and his Brother in prison, for which reason he had forborne to meddle
with it further. That without doubt his Relations would be worse used when it
should be known that the affair was done, because it would be thought to have
been by his procurement. That for his part, he conceived that it was not
possible ever to be effected, knowing how averse the Pope was against it. He
desired him to advertise Cardinal Cechini the Datary of it, who without doubt
knew nothing yet.

Monsignor Bruningo went in the afternoon to Cardinal Cechini to wish him
joyful Festivals, according to the custom at Rome, and acquainted him with
this affair, assuring him that he had heard the Bull read. The Cardinal seemed
much dismayed at this news, and cried out in these words, Poracci noi! che dira
il Papa, il quale tante volte ha negato questa gratia? Miserable we! what will
the Pope say who has so often denied this grace? Monsignor Mendez went at the
same time to Cardinal Cechini under pretext of the Complement of the Festivals;
and the interests of his Father and Brother held prisoners by the Inquisition
of Portugal, caused him to set forth of what great consequence this affair was.
Hereupon Cardinal Cechini sent for Monsignor Mascambrun who was then in so high
a degree of fortune and authority with the Pope, that if there had been a
promotion of Cardinals in the Ember days preceding, it was held for certain
that there was a Hat for him. Cardinal Cechini told him, that all possible
diligence must be used to get this Bull, and show his Holiness that it was
none of their fault. Mascambrun Professed more astonishment at this affair than
any other person. He said, the Pope was never willing to do it, and therefore
it must necessarily have been expedited by fraud. Forthwith he went into his
Coach to go seek Brignardel, who was reported to be the man that expedited it.
He took him with him into his Coach and carried him to Diego de Sonsa who had
solicited the affair, and had the Bull; he caused him to deliver it to him the
same day about ten a clock in the evening. Next day being Christmas day he
showed it to the Pope and to Cardinal Cechini, and at the same time he caused a
Vessel to be provided for Brignardel to carry him to Genua.

The Pope having seen the Bull, and supposing upon the report of Cardinal
Cechini and Mascambrun that it had been expedited by a Petition forged in all
its parts, and even in the signature of his Holiness, he caused many of the
Officers to be put into prison; Laurenzi the Register who had entered the
Petition into the Register; Boncompan, Master of the Register, who had examined
it; Orozzino, the Apostolical Scribe, who had writ the Bull; Godefido Officer
of the Contradettes where the Bull had passed and had his hand; Monsignor
Bruningo who had examined the Bull; and Don Diego de Sonsa who had been the
principal solicitor and Agent in this affair. There was a great report that
the Assistant Jesuit of Portugal was arrested at le Giesu, and confined in
that house for his prison. But it is certain that he was examined by Marco
Rugolo, who was deputed Judge of this cause.

Mascambrun, whom it highly concerned to make appear that the Pop'es hand and
his own too had been counterfeited in this Petition, but was not yet suspected
of any thing by the Pope, had caused Marco Rugolo his great confident, and who
he was sure would not act in this matter but by his direction, and with a
perfect conformity and submission to his sentiments, to be deputed Judge of it
by his Holiness. Himself also, two of the ablest Clerks in Rome, to affirm
that there was great probability that the Pope's hand was counterfeited. He
caused many of the Expeditioners, who durst not disobey him in any thing, to
give out that the hands of the Pope and the Sub-Datary were counterfeited, and
that if they had been Officers in the Register, they would never have expedited
a Petition in that manner without advertising the Datary and Sub-Datary
thereof. These Depositions thus contrived tended to two ends; First to secure
Mascambrun from the accusation framed against him, afterward for having caused
the Pope to sign extraordinary graces under false Summaries; and therefore he
made these people attest that it was not the Pope's hand but counterfeited.
Secondly to save themselves by causing the destruction of the Officers who were
imprisoned for letting it pass thus falsifi'd. Rugolo, who was wholly devoted
to Mascambrun, and who whilst he was preparing the Process, had every day long
conferences with him till ten a clock in the evening, would not hear, nor allow
to be written down any Depositions but theirs, who designed the justification
of Mascambrun, and the Ruin of the Prisoners.

The process was carried on in this manner; and such as very well understood
the Villainies of that Wretch, could not without regret behold so many Innocents
going to be sacrificed for his safety: But no person durst or could speak a
word: Cardinal Cechini himself and Cardinal Pamphilio, though well informed of
many wickednesses which Mascamburn committed daily, and whose interest it
otherwise was that he lost the credit and power which he had with the Pope, yet
could not speak, partly because they knew not the chief Actor of these crimes,
nor understood clearly how he committed them; partly because he so possessed
the Popes mind, that none could speak against him without danger of incurring
his Holines's displeasure. But God raised up an honest man, very intelligent in
all these matters, named Joachim Vaultrin a Lorrainer by birth, who had been
first Revisor for the last two years; in which time having been very exact in
the exercise of his charge, he saw very far into Mascambruns ill carriage, but
he perceived little likelihood of forming Accusations against him that might
have effect, because he had formerly made some, which the Pope slighted, and
so they proved ineffectual. For above a year diverse contests had passed between
him and Mascambrun, because he would not comply to pass such extraordinary
Graces as Mascambrun intened; but finding that many passed without his being
able to hinder them, which he knew were manifestly contrary to the Popes mind,
he acquainted the Popes Confessor therewith, whose name was F. Thomasi Lolli
Cler. minor of S. Laurence in Lucina, and afterward Bishop of Cyrane. This
good M. Joachim delivered the Confessor a Note of four very extraordinary
graces which had been then newly expedited. The Confessor gave the Note to the
Pope, who finding it was about matters belonging to the Datary, thought it
sufficient to advertise Mascambrun thereof, that he might see what it was: but
the man being advertised thereof, had no great difficulty to divert the stroke,
because the Pope had so great a confidence in him, referring to him the care of
all the family of Pamphilio, that he easily believed upon his Report, either
that these matters were of no great consequence, or else were passed by
surprise, and Inadvertency: Wherefore the Popes Confessor meeting afterward
with M. Joachim, told him he must be quiet, for the Pope had seen his Memoire,
and did not think fit to do any thing upon it; so that the good man feared lest
the same might be the issue of the other discoveries which he might make in the
present Conjectures. But on the one side, the insolence which he could no
longer suffer, and saw arrived at that point that graces were publicly sold,
that none was passed but with money, and that with money any whatsoever might
be obtained; and on the other, the oppression of all the Officers in Prison,
whom he knew to be innocent, and who were all his friends, which he thought
himself bound to hinder if he could, made him resolve again to try by some
means to let the Pope know how all things went.

For this purpose he caused notice to be given to Monsignor Farnese Governor of
Rome by Don Diego, who served as Auditor to his Nephew Monsig. Albrici
Secretary of the Congregation of Regulars, That the course taken in this
business was not right; That the destruction of many innocent persons was
designed as a means for the safety of one Criminal; That he knew the bottom of
the business; and that if Monsignor Farnese pleased to be thoroughly informed
of it, he conceived he could give him satisfaction. Monsignor Farnese, who knew
the first Revisor to be a prudent honest man, was very glad to find means to
see the depth of so intricate a matter, gave him order by the abovesaid Don
Diego to come to him on Tuesday January 16. about seven a clock in the evening.
He repaired thither precisely at the time appointed; and after he had made some
excuses in reference to this irregular action, because he was a Priest,
protesting to Monsignor Farnese that the sole motive which induced him to this
discovery, was, after the fidelity he owed the Pope as his Officer, his desire
of the deliverance of the prisoners, and he designed not to contribute to the
death of Monsignor Mascambrun; he began his discourse against the iniquity of
the Judge Rugolo who had sold himself to Mascambrun; who had caused this
commission to be given him for the betraying of justice. He told him how
Mascambrun and Rugolo had conference together every day; that Rugolo would not
hear any testimony, but such as he thought would contribute to the destruction
of the prisoners, and would admit any thing to be written down which might
help to their justification. Moreover he told him that the principal head upon
the process drawn, was founded upon a false supposition; namely, that the
Pope's hand was conterfeited; because indeed it was the Pope's true hand, and
there was no falsification in it at all: whereof he forthwith alleged these
probabilities and conjectures.

First, because the Petition being a motu proprio it was found signed by Fiat
ut petitur; Which showed that they who expedited this Petition, being very
intelligent in the style of the Datary, had not counterfeited it. For if they
had minded to falsify it, they might as easily have done so by writing, Fiat
motu proprio, J. as by writing Fiat ut petitur, J. but having intended to cause
the Pope really to sign it, they had got it expedited with a Fiat ut petitur,
and not with a motu proprio; because the Pope makes a great difference between
things which he signs of his own proper motion, and those which he signs at
the request of parties. When he sees that it is a motu proprio, he does not
sign till he has first inquired into the particularities and circumstances of
the grace which he signs. Now the Sub-Datary not being willing to put it to
the venture, that the Pope inquiring into the circumstances of the affair in
question, might fall to examine the Petition, and if he found the same
correspondent to what Mascambrun should tell him of it, reject it according to
his professed resolution; or if on the contrary he pretended it to be another
business with other circumstances, the Pope might find out his fraud, he got
it signed with a Fiat ut petitur under some false Summary concerning a Coad
jutorship or some other ordinary matter which the Pope uses not to examine.

Secondly, That both the writing of the Pope and that of Mascambrun were very
difficult to be counterfeited. That of the Pope, because his letters are not
straight and even, but indented, by reason of the trembling of his hand, and
therefore in the judgment of expert persons his writing was very hard to be
handsomely counterfeited. That of Mascambrun, because the form of his Letters
are very unusual too: whence it is inferred that if these two hands be
falsifi'd, it would have been more easy to counterfeit the great R. on the
backside of the Petition, as any one may do without difficulty; which would
have been more advantageous to them, because having the mark of Registration
indors'd, it was not needful to carry it to the Registers, where the
falsification of the Pope's and the Sub-Datary's hand might have been
discovered. And it cannot be said that the hands of the Register and the Master
of the Registers is falsifi'd; so neither can the same be said of those of the
Pope and the Sub-Datary.

And whereas Mascambrun pretended that his hand was counterfeited, because in
the date of the Petition anno octavo was written with the last O wholly closed,
which he never used to close but half, as octavo; M. Joachim showed the
Governor many Petitions dated by Mascambrun's hand, where the O was perfectly
closed: which evidenced that he sometimes closed it, and sometimes not.

Thirdly, That if a sheet of Paper of the same sort with that of the Petition
in question were compared therewith, the sheet of the Petition would be found
shorter then the other two or three fingers. Whereby it was easy to perceive
that this Petition had been presented to the Pope with the Summary of an
ordinary grace, which after the Popes signing was cut off, and another written
down correspondent to the body of the Petition; by which means the paper of the
Petition became shorter.

Fourthly, That there were a great number of graces signed truly by the Popes
hand, which yet were very extraordinary, and which he would never have granted,
had they been asked of him. M. Joachim showed the Governor a Note of many such
graces, which the Pope had frequently declared that he would not grant, and yet
they were passed and signed with the Pope's own hand by the ministry of the
Sub-Datary who had carried them to him to sign; That consequently the same
judgment was to be made of the Petition in question as of them; and that as the
Pope was deceived when he was made to sign them, so in this Petition of
Portugal his Holiness had one thing imposed upon him instead of another, and by
that means was brought to sign it.

All these conjectures and reflections much astonished the Governor, (who till
then had suffered himself to be persuaded that the Pope's hand was
counterfeited) and led him to two resolutions; Frst to take the cognizance of
the cause from Rugolo, which he promised M. Joachim he would do, that so
justice might have place. Secondly, the next day, which was that of his
ordinary audience, to acquaint the Pope with all this story, and induce him to
send for M. Joachim to hear the same from his own mouth, and get some greater
light from him if he could. And he did accordingly.

The same day, Wednesday January 17. the Governor caused Rugolo to bring to
him the Original of the Petition which was in his hands. He compared it with
another sheet of Paper of the same kind, and found that it was shorter by two
fingers. He considered the hand of the Pope and that of Mascambrun which were
wholly like the signatures of other Petitions; and looking more narrowly upon
it, he observed that there was dust of gold upon that of the Pope; whereupon,
being otherwise very distrustful he told Rugolo that they who counterfeited
the Pope's hand must have been very cunning, in putting the dust of gold upon
it, knowing that the Pope uses no other. Rugolo answered that those people were
sly and subtle as Devils, that they knew every thing, and had not failed to
get that dust of Gold that they might render the thing more likely. This answer
increased the Governor's suspicion of this Judge, and confirmed him in his
purpose to take from him the cognizance of the cause; with which when he
acquainted the Pope, his Holiness approved it. He also caused M. Joachim to be
advertised that the Pope would hear from himself all that he had spoken to him
the day before.

On Thursday morning January 18. M. Joachim went to the Pope, who heard him
with great satisfaction for one hour and half together. He laid upon the
table above a hundred several graces which the Pope averred he never would
grant, and yet were expedited and signed with his hand. He discovered to him in
what manner he had been deceived, first by the flying Summaries, and after the
prohibition of those upon complaint made by him against them, by other false
Summaries wh ch were cut off after his Holiness had signed the Petitions. He
told him that undoubtedly this concerning Portugal, in reference whereunto a
process was preparing, had been signed in that manner, and that Monsig
Mascambrun, to escape being convinced that he had caused his Holiness to sign
extraordinary graces falsely and against his intention, was about to destroy
diverse innocent persons by suborned witnesses who had deposed that his
Holiness's hand was counterfeited. When he had ended all that he had to say
touching this matter, he motion'd to the Pope that since only the fidelity he
owed his Holiness, the honor of the H. See, and the desire to rescue the
innocent prisoners had obliged him to make these discoveries, his Holiness
would please to keep the thing secret, because it was much more easy to
Monsignor Mascambrum to get him assassinated, if he had notice of what he had
done, then to justify himself of the informations presented to his Holiness
against him. The Pope, having testified to M. Joachim his acknowledgment of his
fidelity, and recommended to him to have an eye over what should pass in the
Datary, he promised him that till the person of Mascambrun were in custody,
none in the world besides the Governor, should know what had passed between
them too. And because all the Datary knew that he was at audience with the
Pope, and every one would be curious to learn the business, and particularly
Mascambrun, who was vigilant to discover all that passed, and had great
jealousy of the first Revisor who had often opposed his designs in things
relating to his place; the Pope bid him give out that he was sent for to conser
with the Pope concerning some course to be taken that Summaries might be
always correspondent to the Petitions, so that he might no more be deceived.

The same day continuing his diligence for Mascambrun's interests, he caused
the wife and the sister of Brignardel to be arrested and made prisoners; and to
take away the scruple about the gold-dust which the Governor spoke of to him,
he gave order to a Sergeant to carry some in a little dust-box, and when he
went into the house to fling it upon a bed or a chair; and then at his going
away feigning to search everywhere what they could find, to take up the same
dust-box in presence of his companions: which was accordingly done. In the
evening Rugolo went to the Governor, carried the gold-dust to him, and told
him it was no wonder that he found such dust upon the Popes writing, since
there was a box-full of it found at Brignardel's house, which the Officers had
brought to him. The Governor suspecting the fraud of this wicked Judge,
answered him, that it was true that they found it there because himself had
caused it to be carried thither; and so he forbid him meddling from thence
forward in any manner with this affair.

Saturday following, January 20. Rugolo was commanded to depart from Rome,
which he did forthwith. The same day Mascambrun's Nephew who was married at
Rome, was arrested. And on Monday the Provost of the Capitol went to take
Monsignor Mascambrun in his Chamber of the Datary, where F. Mascambrun a
Jesuit was making him a visit, and he was carried from the Datary to the Tower
of Nona. The next day the Pope sent for M. Joachim, and said to him first of
all, Non habbiate piu paura, Mascambruno e priggione, ne uscira quando Dio
vorra, e la giustitia si fara. Fear no more (said the Pope to him) Mascambrun
is in prison, whence he shall come forth when God pleases, and Justice shall be
done. And after he had inquired of him many other things relating to this
affair, his Holiness dismissed him.

Forthwith the framing of his Process was taken in hand, and after he had been
convicted of the Five Articles of Accusation above mentioned, he was in fine
condemned to death for Treason, in that he had usurped the authority of the
Prince by passing all sorts of graces contrary to his intention. He was a
Priest and oftentimes while he was Canon of S. Mary Maggiore, he was seen to
officiate or say Mass in more solemn Festivals. He was degraded in the Church
of S. Savior in Loro upon Sunday April 14. The next day his Head was cut off
in the Court of the Prison of the Tower of Nona between three and four a clock
in the morning; and as soon as it was day, his body was exposed publicly at the
end of Pont. S. Angelo upon a Beir, covered with a very wretched Hersecloth,
with a wax Taper lighted on each side. His Head was laid near the Body upon
two Bricks, and covered with an old greasy Hat; that Head which three Months
before was confident to wear one of a Cardinal. Near the Beir there stood a
Beggar who asked the Alms of such who passed by for to get prayers to God for
that poor miserable executed Person, per questo povero justitiato.

All Rome ran to Pont. S. Angelo to see the deplorable spectacle of a Man who
for the space of seven years had engrossed all the Popes affections, who had
gained such a confidence with him, that he seemed to have none for any other,
who had filled the Pope's mind with suspicions and aversions against Cardinal
Cechini, who by that means kept this Cardinal in so strange a depression, that
though he was Datary, yet he had scarce any power in that Office, and never
went to audience but he was accompanied with the Sub-Datary, himself on the
contrary going alone without the Datary when he pleased; who had brought
Cardinal Panzirolo into dis-favour with the Pope, in which he ended his days;
who had likewise alienated the Popes affection from Cardinal Pamphilio, whom
his Holiness had chosen to make not only a Cardinal, but a Cardinal Nephew; and
lastly, who, if the promotion which was made during his imprisonment had been
made three-Months before, would undoubtedly have been a Cardinal. In reference
whereunto I remember; a friend of mine told me, that speaking four or five
Months before his imprisonment to M. Joachim the first Revisor, of the report
there was concerning the promotion which the Pope intended to make, and of the
certainty of a Hat for Mascambrun, he answered him, That he believed God would
not suffer so great an infamy in his Church, and that if he was to have a red
Hat, it would be at Pont. S. Angelo.

He remained exposed during four or five hours till the Society des Nobles
Florentins who are by their institution to assist condemned persons at their
deaths and bury them, carried him into their Church. The same Society had also
sent some of their Confreres to him to help him to dye well, and the Cardinals
Barberin and Sachetti who are Members thereof, went to him clothed in the
Sack-cloths of their Confrerie, carried him the indulgence at the point of
death which his Holiness sent him, and were present at his execution.

His first Sentence was to be hanged, but the Chapter of S. Peter's Church
(whereof the Pope had given him a Canonry a year before instead of his former
of S. Mary Maggiore) apprehending it a dishonor to them for a Canon of their
Church to be hanged, made so urgent instances to the Pope about it, that he
mitigated the sentence, permitting only his head to be cut off in the prison.

But before this latter sentence was pronounced upon him, a course was taken to
bring two of his principal Accomplices De Goux and Brignardel to Rome. De Goux
who was a natural Subject of the King of Spain, being of the County of
Burgundy, after he had spent two or three months at Legorn departed thence to
Milan, where coming to be known he was arrested Prisoner. And Brignardel who
was withdrawn to Genua the place of his birth, was solicited to go upon the
Territories of Prince Doria, where he was arrested likewise. The Pope so dealt
with this Prince and the King of Spain's Ministers, that the two Prisoners were
promised to be delivered to him. Whereupon a dozen Sergeants were sent from
Rome to Genua, with order to take as much people as was needful to conduct
them safe to Rome; and because there was some ground of fear that some attempt
might be made by land to rescue the Prisoners, one of the Pope's Galleys to
bring them with the more security. The Governor of Milan sent De Goux
accompanied with the Sergeants of the City, and a hundred Horse, as far as the
Territories of Genua, where he was received by the Genueses and conducted to
that City whither Prince Doria had already caused Brignardel to be brought;
from whence they were both put into the Galley which carried them to Civita
Vecchia, and thence they were conducted in a Carosse de Campaign or Cart, well
guarded to Rome, where they arrived the seventh of April, and were put into the
Castle S. Angelo eight days before the death of Mascambrun.

The innocent prisoners above mentioned were set at liberty; but some other
persons were committed, having been Accomplices of these disorders, of whom I
shall not speak further, then that two of them were arraigned, and being found
highly criminal, hanged and burnt at Rome at the end of Pont S. Angelo, the 27.
of July following.

The less culpable, which was de Goux, died in a very Christian manner: For
above three weeks before his Execution, acknowledging the grace of God in
causing him to dye a death that allowed him time for repentance, he resolved to
spend the remnant of his life in following Gods purposes upon him, fasting
almost continually with bread and water, and making a very exact review of his
whole life to a Confessor who visited him ordinarily every day.

I shall add also what became of Marco Rugolo, that wicked and corrupt Judge:
Having been at first only banished from Rome and the Ecclesiastial territories,
he retired to Posi, a place belonging to the Colonnesi in the kingdom of
Naples, where he spent his time in contemplating the Stars, and drawing
Horoscopes of many persons. At length he bethought himself to draw that of the
Pope, which he sent to Car. Ginetti's Auditor, with a Letter n which he
persuaded him to rejoice for the change which would shortly be seen by the
Pope's death, which was to come to pass in the month of November the same year.
This letter was intercepted, and the Auditor put in prison for it; and the
Colonnensi at the Popes request caused Marco Rugolo to be apprehended in their
territories. As he was bringing to Rome, he fell from his Horse, and broke his
thigh, which having been ill set by a Country-Chyrurgon, he arrived at Rome in
a very ill condition October the 8. which gave the Pope occasion to laugh at
this man, who foretelling the death of others, could not foresee the mischief
which was so near himself. I believe no more was done to him afterward then
being condemned to the Galleys; a punishment too light for all the crimes which
he had committed, and for the oppression of so many innocent persons whom he
had sacrificed to the interests of Mascambrun, using to boast, That there was
no innocent person in the world, but he could make good an Indictment against
him.

But to return to the coherence which this History of Mascam. has with ours,
Car. Cechini who was nominated by the Pope to be one of the Congregation which
we su'd for, was upon this business excluded. For the Pope, having taken up a
suspicion that he had had some hand in the miscarriages of the Datary (though
this was not credible, there having been so great misunderstanding between him
and Mascambrun, who was the Author of all those Enormities) treated him so ill
for four or five Months after the death of that Sub-Datary, that at length he
resolved in the month of September to demand his Conge, which the Pope gave him
with very rough words, so far as to reproach him that he had dishonored his
House and his Government. Whereunto the Cardinal answered very resolutely,
That he had done nothing unworthy of himself, which he would justify upon all
occasions. So he left the Datary, and went to live at his Palace in Campo
Marzo. And Monsignor Hieronymo Burtucci, whom the Pope of Senior Procurator and
Servant of his House, had made Sub-Datary ever since Mascambrun's imprisonment,
was now made Datary. At the same time the Pope took away from Cardinal Cechini
the pension of poor Cardinals, which may mount to twelve thousand Crowns
yearly, and prohibited him to come to any Assembly where his Holiness was
present; which was to exclude him from the Consistories, Papal Chapels,
Congregations of the Inquisition and others held before the Pope, at which this
Cardinal used to be present. This was the reason that he was not at any of
those which were held before the Pope about our Affair, though he was one of
the Five Cardinals, whom Cardinal Roma told us the Pope had chosen for our
Congregation, as I shall relate in its place.

At present I shall take notice of a thing which deserves to be added to this
Narrative, whereof I was informed by a Letter from M. Brousse, the Contents of
which follow.

The day before I departed from Rome, I went to see the Secretary of the
Congregation of Regulars, Nephew to the Governor of Rome, to inquire of him
news of the Bull of the Fathers of Christian Doctrine touching their
Regularity. He told me it was declared false, and that within four or five days
I might see the Brief of it. I replied, that I was ready to depart, but I
prayed him to tell me whether I might assure the Archbishop of Paris thereof,
who had given me Commission to inquire about it. He answered me Si Si, taking
me by the hand, and pressing it: This obliged me to proceed further, and ask
him whether what I heard was true, that Mascambrun had spoken of this Bull
amongst the rest which he confessed that he had forged. He answered me in these
words, Non e Mascumbruno ma il suo secretario, and fra pochi giorni sara
impiccato; It was not Mascambrun, but his Secretary, who within a few days will
be hanged: which intelligence I writ the same day to my L. the Archbishop.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning an ancient Manuscript which came to my hands touching an Affair of
Mr. Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia, whereby I found that the foundation of all
the matters in question bad been examined and decided by the Council of Trent.

DUting these Conjunctures there befell me an occurrence as considerable in its
kind, which had much more reference to our Affair then that whereof I have
given so long an account. It was a Manuscript of no small age, containing a
little Collection of some Pieces which treated of an Affair debated and
determined in the Council of Trent, about the same matters for which we were in
contest with the Jesuits; and it was determined by a general consent of all
the Commissioners to whom the Council referred the judgment of it, perfectly
according to our sentiments. On the second of April 1652. I caused the same
No^ries who verified our History of M. Pegna, to declare their judgment of the
quality of this Manu^ipt, having made two Transcripts thereof compared by them
with the Original, to make use of in time and place: To which purpose I caused
a description to be made of it as it was when I presented it to them, that so I
might make it be known for the same which accidentally was fallen into my hands.

There was question in this Affair concerning a Sermon made in the year 1550.
at Oudenay by a Dominican Friar name'd F. Leonard native of the same City which
is in the Continent that belongs to the Repub. of Venice, whether the
Patriarchal See of Aquileia has been trasferr'd since the destruction of that
ancient and famous City by the descent of Attila into Italy. This Predicator
had preached one of the highest Truths, and in the hardest terms to be digested
by humane understanding touching Gratuitous Predestination, which gave some
scanda^ ^o the people who murmured at it. The grand Vicar of this Patriatch
(whose name was Grimani, of one of the illustrious families of Venice)
nevertheless thought not fit to act in any sort against the Predicator to
constrain him to make amends for the scandal which he had given, without first
giving notice to, and taking orders ftom him whose grand Vicar he was. The
Patriarch Grimani having received Letters from his grand Vicar, conceived
himself obliged to answer him; but he was so far from finding cause to proceed
against the Predicator, that on the contrary he judged the Propositions
advanced by him very true, certain and Catholic; the reasons whereof he
deduced at large in his answer, which he took principally from the H. Scripture
and the works of S. Augustine. When the grand Vicar had received this Answer, he
caused it to be published to all the people of Oudenay, and recorded in the
public Registers of the City, wherewith every one was edifi'd and satisfied.
Some twelve or thirteen years after, namely in the year 1563. some persons,
enemies to the peace of that City, as well as to Christian Truths explicated
unto them by their Patriarch, who was a very learned and pious Bishop, began to
sow amongst the people Complaints against his Letter; they drew Propositions
out of it to the number of eight, which they accused of Heresy: In fine, they
raised so much division in the minds of the City of Oudenay and the adjacent
Region, that to hinder the troublesome consequences of those beginnings of
disturbance and misunderstanding, they sent Deputies to the Republic of
Venice, to pray that State to interpose its Authority and Recommendation to the
Council of Trent which was then assembled, that the cause of their Patriarth
might be discussed and decided; that his Homily (so they called his Answer to
his grand Vicar) might be there read and examined; and if it were true and
Catholic, they might be suffered to enjoy the Truth explicated by him to them
in peace and quietness; but if it were false, that it might be condemned.

I believe this Patriarch had been nominated to a Cardinals Hat by the
Republic of Venice; that people who aimed to cross his promotion, rendered him
suspected of Heresy to Pope Pius IV. by the extracts of his Letter which they
delivered to him; that the same waa debated of in the Congregation of the H.
Office; and that the Apology which he writ in behalf of his Letter against
those Extracts had been carried thither also: but because this was not really
clear by the pieces before me, I dare not affirm it as the rest which I have
already said, and am going to adjoyn.

Accordingly the Ambassadors of the Republic Of Venice represented to the
Council the neessity of making a solemn deputation for examining the answer of
that Patriarch to his grand Vicar, and the Apology made by him about the
Propositions extracted out of it. It was the last day of July in the year 1563.
that this nomination of Deputies was made in the Council who were in number
twenty six, namely two Cardinals, four Ambassadors, four Archbishops, thirteen
Bishops, two Abbots, and one General of an order. They examined both of those
Pieces; they made their report of them the thirteenth of August following in a
Congregation which lasted six hours, where they spoke all their Sentiments,
which they said were not theirs alone, but also of the Divines of their Nation,
with whom they had conferred in this matter. And all agreed unanimously that it
was so far from being true, that any word in that Letter and Apology was
Heretical, that on the contrary there was nothing in them but what was taken
from S. Augustine, S. Prosper, S. Bernard, S. Thomas, and other H. Doctors:
Which I account the more considerable, because the foundation of all the
doctrine which we held, and of all the Christian truths which we were to defend
in case of the Propositions in question, is manifestly contained in that Letter
and its Apology; and consequently besides other proofs which we may allege
thereof in all ages, we have this advantage that this very doctrine was
authorized in the last Council by a general consent of all those whom the
Council commissioned to examine it, and by the unanimous suffrages of all the
Divines of Christendom.

I have in that little Collection 1. The Patriarchs Letter entire. 2. His
Apology for it. 3. The Oration of the Deputies of the Clergy, and of the City
of Oudenay to the Republic of Venice. 4. The nomination, and the names of the
Deputies or Commissioners appointed by the Council for this Examination. 5. The
Votum of the Cardinal of Lorrain who was one of them. 6. One of his Letters to
the Pope about this matter. 7. Another Letter of the Presidents of the Council
to S. Charles Borromee about the same affair. 8. The Sentence of the Legates.
9. A Letter of Congratulation of the Republic of Venice to this Patriarch,
upon the happy success which his business had had in the Council.

All these Pieces deserve to be here inserted at length, but to avoid such
frequent and long interruptions, I shall reserve them to be annexed to the end
of this Journal.

CHAP. X.
Of other less important matters which besides those in the three preceding
Chapters passed in the Months of April and May; among the rest, of the arrival
at Rome of M. M. Hallier, Legault, and Joysel, Doctors of our Faculty, and the
Declaration which they made to us in presence of the Ambassador, that they came
to sue for a Censure of the Five Propositions as things already condemned, and
without admitting any Examen or Congregation.

TO return at length to our purpose, I was told on Saturday, the 4th. of May,
that the General of the Dominicans had had audience of the Pope, and delivered
him the Memorial which I mentioned above that he was to present. That he
requested therein, his Holiness would please to appoint that before proceeding
in this affair, things might be resumed as they were left by Paul V. because
that Pope and Clement VIII. his Predecessor had determined many things in
favor of his Order, which might serve for great preparations to what was to be
done. That his Dominicans had always been the Plaintiffs in this affair, and
at present they were endeavored to be rendered the Criminals. Hereunto his
Holiness answered, that he would have regard to his request, which he judged
very just; but he ought to be confident, that the matter de Auxiliis should not
be meddled with. I was told that the Pope gave the same answer to the General of
the Augustines who had audience of him; that he would not have the discussion
of that matter entered upon at all. That besides, his Holiness knew nothing
then of the Assembly of Consultors which M. Albizzi endeavored to procure
before Easter, but yet was laid aside for a while, chiefly because of this
interposition.

I learnt also that some days after the General of the Dominicans had
delivered his Memorial to the Pope, he addressed again to his Holiness to
present him the works of Albert the Great, the Impression whereof was then
newly finished. That diverse Fathers of this Order accompanied the General to
carry the several volumes of that Author; that the Pope inquired their names
and qualities; and that F. Fani companion of the Master of the Sacred Palace
being one of the number, when he was named, the Pope bid him take heed for the
future what Licenses for Printing he gave; because when a Book was printed at
Rome, it was construed that the H. See authorized the doctrine thereof. It is
likely what we had said to the Pope touching that of F. Annat was still fresh
in his memory.

I learnt further that the Monday foregoing a Consistory was holden, and that
it was the first since the vacancy of the Sub-deanery of the Sacred College by
the death of Cardinal Lanti. This Dignity belonged of right and according to
the ordinary usage to Cardinal Barberin, who was the most ancient of all those
that were there in person; but the Pope took it from him, and three thousand
Crowns of Revenue annexed to it, and contrary to custom, gave it by a special
Brief and privilege to Cardinal de Medicis Uncle to the great Duke of Tuscany,
who was indeed more ancient than Cardinal Barberin, but was not present in
person at at their Consistory.

Lastly, I learnt that two days before M. Albizzi took occasion in an Assembly
of the Inquisition to read the Letters which he had received from Paris, by
which it was signified to him that M. Hallier was set forth upon his journey
toward Rome, with some other Doctors; that the Cardinals, Barberin and Spada,
were at the reading of those Letters, and testified much joy for the sight of
so great and famous a personage, and who knew so well (as their Eminencies
said) the usages and customs of the University; but that which was more
considerable herein, was, that some intelligent persons conceived their coming
might prove the cause of establishing the sooner the Congregation which he had
moved for, and which would not be granted at the instance of us alone.

We had given and lent some Copies of the first Letter against the Minister of
Groaning to diverse of those persons whom I have mentioned, who lent it from one
to another, and testified much satisfaction therewith. On Thursday the ninth, I
carried one in the afternoon to Cardinal Ghiggi, who seeing by the Title that
it was writ against Marests, (Maresius, I suppose) wondered at it, as being
against a man whom he knew, and of whom he made no great account. I read to him
the place of that Letter, where there is mention of our hope that the Pope
would shortly determine our differences. To which he answered that we did well
in asking a Hundred to get Fifty; the meaning whereof is, that he believed it
would not be done, and therefore that we must have patience. That he had told
the Pope that the advantage which the Jesuits endeavored to make of the
Decrees which had been made at Rome, had caused all the stir, and that one
side could hardly be brought to yield to the other; adding to this purpose, Par
in Parem non habet imperium.

The General of the Dominicans seeing himself engaged by the interest of truth,
the Church and his Order to proceed in this affair since the delivery of his
Memorial to the Pope, resolved to acquit himself worthily of all the Duties
whereunto he conceived himself obliged by the high importance whereof he knew
it to be. Wherefore though he had about him without looking forth of the
Covent la Minerve, many Divines of his Order very intelligent and zealous, who
were capable of doing service therein; yet, to omit nothing in his power, but
to strengthen the number and ardor of those whom he might employ in the defense
of truth, knowing that F. Reginald of the Covent of Dominicans at Toulouse had
for a long time particularly studied all that had passed in these Contests
since the publishing of Molina's book, he sent him a Letter of Obedience to
come to Rome, dated 11. of May in the same year 1652.

We had not had time in our first visit to Cardinal Castagusti to inform him
of our affair, and he had desired us to take another opportunity to visit him.
We went accordingly on Tuesday the 14th. of May. He received us obligingly,
heard our discourse, and answered us both in Latin and Italian judiciously; in
conclusion he obliged us to come to him again on the Friday following to give
him a Copy of our Latin Manifesto, which we did accordingly.

On Sunday the 19th. we went to S. Peter's Church to Vespers; at our coming
from which we fell into the Company of Cardinal Barberin, who carried us to
walk in his two little Vineyards. Amongst other remarkable things which he said
to us, he discoursed very well how the opinion of Molina arose upon occasion of
the opposition which was made at that time to Calvinisme, and that things were
not so well undestood as to refute him without falling into the other extreme.
That however Molina's opinion having been judged not good, he was accused to
the inquisition in Spain, where (he said) to have only been cited, was a thing
highly ignominious. Wherefore the Society of Jesuits, seeing themselves
wounded in the affront which one of his Members had received, became wholly
interested for him, and have since been daily more and more engaged.

The morning of Friday the 24th. was spent in civilities with the Ambassador.
M. Hallier arrived in the Evening with M. Lagault, M. Joysel, and a 4th. named
M. Thomas, who was a Bachelor of the Faculty and Cousin to M. Hallier; but who
in the sequel professed not to be one of their deputation. One came to
advertise me of their arrival, and the lodging where they alighted, presently
after their coming. I was alone at home when I received this notice, and went
instantly to salute them, to congratulate with them for their arrival, to offer
them whatever they needed, either in reference to our House or our Persons. By
that time I got to their Lodging, they were at Supper with other Company. I
feared to disturb them by my appearance; and because it was already late, all I
could do was to return home, and leave my Servant there, to tell them when they
were arisen from the Table, what diligence I had used to wait upon them, as
also to make them the offers of service which I went to offer them my self,
if I could have found them in a condition fitting to be spoken with.

The next day M. de Valcroissant, M. Angram, and my self determined to visit
them. We sent about eight a clock in the morning to see whether they were in a
condition to receive our visit; but they were gone before to the Ambassadour's
house, where, because he came forth late out of his Chamber, they spent all the
morning, excepting M. Lagault, who left them, and went to see the Priests of
the Mission, and afterward came to us. We offered to stay him at dinner
with us, but he excused himself, for that he purposed to return to his
Colleagues at their Lodging. But the Ambassador retained them at dinner: and in
the afternoon we going to the Pope's Vespers, understood that M. Hallier and M.
Joysell were already gone from thence in one of his Coaches to see Cardinal
Barberin. So we deferred visiting them till the Evening. When we arrived at
their Lodgings, they were reconducting two Priests of the Mission who came to
see them, so that they received us at their Gate. He had no long conference
with them because they were called upon to go to collation. We invited them to
come dine with us the next day; but they were promised elsewhere, otherwise M.
Hallier professed sufficient willingness thereto.

As we were going forth the next day being Sunday, May 26. to accompany the
Ambassador to the Pope's Chapel; these Gentlemen passed by our Lodging. Our
Coach stood at the Gate, in which there was room enough for them and us, and we
desired them to go into it; but it being but a little way from our House to the
Ambassadors, and the Street fair and spacious, they would continue their way
afoot; which obliged us to do so too. I happened to walk with M. Hallier, who,
amongst other things told me most freely that he had so great correspondence
with Cardinal Barberin that he might in a manner pass for his Domestic; but
he knew not whether it were advantageous, or not, to be so. At our coming from
the Ambassador's, he caused M. Hallier and my self to come into his Coach; and
as we were near one the other, the Ambassador said, smiling, Do not fight; and
I answered him, That M. Hallier and I were not likely to fight, since our
business was to keep others from fighting.

It was the same day, that having left the Ambassador and these Gentlemen in
the Chapel, we made our last visit to M. Albizzi concerning our Impression,
and in which, as I mentioned above, he gave us the four pages of new Apostills,
which he said, questi Signori Cardinali would have us put into the Book, or
none at all: but he told us also in reference to the arrival of M. Hallier,
Joysell and Lagault, that they had had some Books at the Custom House, which
he had taken care to be sent back again. I learnt since that the excellent
Books which they took the pains to bring with them so far for defense of their
Cause, were nothing but Jansenius damnatus, The secrets of Jansenism; The
Crowns of Victorious Grace; The Jansenists acknowledged Calvinists by Samuel
des Marests, and other pitiful Libels of that strain, all filled with
falsities and calumnies, and the most part already ruined and confounded by the
answers made thereunto; notwithstanding which they forbore not to get them in
readiness for their service, and to reproduce them anew.

We were desirous to have them at dinner with us on the day de la Feste Dieu,
i. e. (of Corpus Christi) after the procession of the Sacrament which is
performed at Rome with great magnificence and solemnity. Wherefore I went the
day before about dinner time to their Lodging, where I found only M. Thomas, to
whom I made the invitation in their absence, and prayed him to be one of the
Company. As I was speaking to him, a Laquay came to tell him that his
Companions dined with the Ambassador. M. Thomas promised me, to acquaint them
with what I said to him; but to be certain whether they would do us that
honor the next day or no, I went soon after dinner to the Ambassadors, upon
occasion of the Pope's solemn Vespers, whither I purposed to accompany him. In
the Garden there I found M. Hallier and M. Lagault, to whom I made my
invitation. They answered me, that they yet had not time to look about them. I
replied that they might defer looking about them till Friday; but in the mean
time I desired that we might dine together the next day; They told me that it
should be another time. I answered that it should be when they pleased, and we
would expect their day and their order.

However we received one the next day from the Ambassador by his Mastre de
chamber and by himself, to dine together with him on Friday. Accordingly we met
there. During, M. Joysell spoke of M. Julien the elder, whose great age and
vigor both or body and mind, as well as of capacity, acknowledged by all the
world, rendered him venerable; he spoke contemptuously of him, giving him the
title of a tottering Wall; and of M. Julien his Nephew as of a simple Country
Curate. Whereupon I found my self obliged to take him up, and tell him more
than once that he spoke of two Doctors as considerable as any were in the
College of Sorbon. After dinner all the Ambassador's attendants being
withdrawn, I suppose by his order, that we six might be left with him alone;
after some general discourses about moral matters, he fell at length upon our
affair, and told us he was glad of this accusation, to exhort us all to act one
toward the other with all sort of civility and honors without any
demonstration outwardly of division and misunderstanding, without any complaint
or asperity on one side or other. He told us further, that he exhorted us
hereunto in the King's name, for fear least the Nation and our Faculty might be
dishonored, and our selves particularly by the heats and disputes happening
between us, if we acted otherwise. All which notwithstanding, either side might
vigorously represent what they had to plead in behalf of their respective
Cause. M. Hallier and his Colleagues agreed and promised all this very fairly;
M. de Valcroissant likewise promised the same in our behalf. I looked upon this
as a very commodious occasion to dive into some of the designs of these
Gentlemen; wherefore in confirmation as to my part, of what M. de Valcroissant
spoke in our names, I added that, besides the good dispositions we all ought to
have to this mutual candor and correspondence, as well for its own sake, as
for the honor the Ambassador did us in exhorting us so obligingly, it seemed
to me that we had all the reason in the world for it even at this time, since
our interests were common, and our intentions and solicitations ought to tend
to the same end, namely to obtain the soonest we could, the Congregation which
we had requested; that after we should have obtained it, then was the time that
according as we were engaged, our courses and intentions might be different;
but till then we might make all our pursutes together, and by consent.

The Ambassador who had no other design but to perform between us all the
offices of an upright and civil Mediator, replied, and told me, that I could
not oblige those Gentlemen to concur and join with us in what we demanded,
that it behooved us to leave them to do as they thought fit, as our selves might
also on our side: but otherwise to live good friends. I answered the
Ambassador, that I did not pretend to oblige these Gentlemen to any thing
against their own minds; yet it seemed that if they intended to do any thing
conducible to the illustration of Truth, and establishment of a firm peace in
the Church, they ought not to disagree from the Congregation which we had
demanded; as I beseecht the Ambassador to permit me to ask M. Hallier in
courtesy, whether he were not thus disposed? The Ambassador gave M. Hallier
time to answer. He had no great mind to it, and his Colleagues much less; but
however it was requisite for him to answer. Wherefore he said, that they had no
design to demand a judgment of the Pope, and that they had no other conditions
to request but what the Pope should appoint. That in what manner soever the
Pope declared, they should not be troubled, because he was the Judge both of
Doctrine, and of the Conditions wherewith he would decide it. But I said to
him, Do not you conceive that the Congregation which we have demanded, is to be
wished for in reference to the greater satisfaction of all the world? Will not
you help us in the assistances which we are obliged to make for it? M. Hallier
answered, that they would not hinder us from making such instances; but as for
themselves, they had in charge to desire of the Pope barely a Decision, without
being sollicitous concerning the Conditions. He did not yet speak clearly
enough; wherefore seeing him hesitate in what he said, I let slip these words,
You see they seek only a Judgment made in secret, (such as it may be) and
without the antecedent discussion of things. M. Hallier finding himself a
little pinched with this Reproach, went about to avoid it, by saying, that
there was no need of a Congregation, or Examination, because the question was
about things already decided, and that they had order to act thus.

The Abbat of Valcroissant interposed, and said it was not true that they had
order to act thus, because the Letter upon which he could ground this pretense,
was public and testified the contrary. And as for what M. Hallier said, that
these things were already decided. M. de Valcroissant told him, that it was
abundantly visible what they designed. That upon this supposition, they would
not only be contented with demanding a decision, but hinder to their utmost its
being made with the requisite solemnities and hearing of the Parties. That we
would not according to this intelligence which be gave us of their purposes,
oppose the same as much as possibly we could. That besides we maintained, (and
that with more reason then he) that the matters we were to defend, were decided
and judged in our favor, as we should show him; but this was it that was to be
examined, whether he had reason to affirm the same or no: whereas according to
his mind, there was no need of a Congregation to hear the parties, and less of
any examination, because things already judged used not to be examined; and
this was it undoubtedly at which they aimed, namely to hinder all hearing, and
all examination; That on the contrary for our parts, it was that we should
endeavor to obtain, according to the order which had been given us, and the
necessity we saw, so to do. That we hoped to effect it too, because it never
happened in the Church that considerable persons, such Bishops as commissioned
us, required the hearing of Parties, and it was denied either by the H. See, or
in Councils. But M. Hallier replied, that it never happened in the Church that
Parties were heard upon matters already judged and decided; and that it could
not, and ought not to be done.

As Soon as M. Hallier had thus opened his mind, M. Joysel and Lagault
testified, that they were dissatisfied with it. M. Joysel who sat next M.
Hallier, pusht him several times to hold his peace; and M. Lagault, who was
separated from him by M. Joysel, made signs to him with his eyes and hands to
speak no further.

The Ambassador also endeavored to divert this Discourse, and said, that it
made such ado about the manner of being heard in that Congregation; there was
danger lest at Rome (where they are very scrupulous) this demand might be
interpreted, as if we meant to give Law to them by prescribing to them the
ways of acting, and the order which they ought to hold, and as if we pretended
to instruct them undrr the pretext of being heard; That the matter ought to be
contracted as much as possible; That the King, who hitherto was but young,
beginning to grow up, would end these Disputes, and perfectly redress them.

The Abbot of Valcroissant answered the Ambassador, that we wished nothing more
then this were done the most spedily that could be; but yet to that speed other
conditions and precautions were to be attended to, in order to do it well. And
that our demanding to have it done in a regular and solemn Congregation,
wherein the Parties might be heard according to the usage of the Church and all
Tribunals, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, was no prescribing of Law to any
person; But we demanded as a thing just, and advantageous, and perhaps
necessary in the present conjunctures for the disentangling and clearing of all
the difficulties wherein Truth was endeavored to be oppressed. That moreover,
we could with as little reason be reproacht, that we pretended to instruct the
people at Rome, by being heard in a Congregation; that the same might be
retorted upon all parties, that demanded of their Judges time and convenience
to inform them; who for all that do not thence infer, that their parties
account themselves wiser then they. That when in Councils, and particularly in
that of Trent, Divines had contested and disputed in presence of the Council
for the clearing of things, those Divines did not thereby presume to be more
knowing then all those Bishops, nor to instruct an Ecumenical Council wherein
the Pope precided by his Legates, and the H. Spirit invisibly by its assistance.
But whereas M. Hallihr, Joysel and Lagault declared, that they would not concur
to a thing so just, and which would be so advantageous to themselves as well as
to us, if they were in the right, it showed that they distrusted their own
cause, and would continue to hold the truth in unrighteousness. That we
doubted not after this declaration of theirs in his presence and before us, but
they would do their utmost to hinder so great a Good: But this should not
hinder us from doing all that possibly we could to procure it.

M. Hallier was in some kind of little confusion, for having declared himself
so much in behalf of a thing so unjust and so unheard of; to make amends for
which, he said, that as for themselves, they were come to Rome to declare to
his Holiness, that they were ready to acquiesce in his orders, howsoever they
were passed, the decision effected. That the Pope had several ways to do it,
and that he might do it of his own proper motion without hearing any person.
That he might consult the Universities to have their sentiments in the matter,
and know what judgments were made of it by all Europe before he passed his
own. That he might erect a Congregation if he thought good. That he might hear
us apart, one side after the other, or publicly in presence of either Party,
viva voce only, or only by writing; either one way or the other: That they were
ready for all, and should be pleased with any. But at length falling to his
former strain, he said, that yet they were obliged to follow their orders. That
the Bishops who sent them, had no other thoughts but that these matters were
determined; and that they would act conformably thereunto; That this was their
Commission.

The Abbat of Valcroissant replied, and told M. Hallier, that what he spoke
would not be found true: That the Bishops demanded only a Judgment by their
Letter: That they did not say, that it should be Definitive: and they having
not said it, he had no right to say it; that he passed beyond his Commission,
and we would evidence the same to all the world.

To appease this Contest, the Ambassador said, it was no time to dispute this;
that M. Hallier and his Colleagues might act as they thought good, and we as we
pleased: But it was fit that both sides proceeded with mutual Civility and
Candor.

M. de Valcroissant answered the Ambassador, that M. Hallier's speaking before
us in this manner concerning the Bishops, whose Commission he pretended, could
not but oblige us to gainsay him; and that such words were not to be let pass
without an answer.

M. Joysel and Lagault, did all they could to make M. Hallier hold his peace,
and spoke to this effect several times, that each party might act as they
thought good, and neither side was bound to give account thereof to the other.

M. de Valcroissant, upon M. Hallier's saying that they cared not which way the
Pope proceeded, answered him, that yet there were certain usual Rules in his
Holinesse's judgment upon matters of Faith; and he asked him this Question, If
the Pope without any examination or consultation should pronounce upon some
Doctrine proposed, This Doctrine is Heretical, would it be well done? would you
approve it? wherefore you ought not to say so generally, howsoever the Pope
proceeds; but indeed we hope he will do in this affair, what shall be most
expedient for the peace of the Faithful, the clearing of Truth, and the dignity
of the H. See.

M. Hallier hereupon seeing himself so pricked, said, that if the Pope would
hear the Parties, as we demanded, he was not one that would shun the
Conference, and they would appear in the Congregation with us; but they were
come to Rome barely to tell the Pope their judgment, and were no Parties.

I asked him therefore in two words, And who are we? to signify to him, that in
effect we were as little Parties as themselves, and perhaps less; since we
acted not but by order of the Bishops who sent us, to beseech the Pope to erect
a Congregation for the clearing of all things by hearing of both sides therein;
and that there were very many complaints to be made against them for the
management which themselves, or the adherents of M. Cornet, whom they
represented (for they labored only to effect his enterprise) had held for
three years past to the present. M. Hallier and his Colleagues knew not what to
answer to this.

In fine the conclusion was, that we should never speak of the affairs and
questions in agitation when we met together; that we should visit one another
and talk upon occasions with charity, honor and civility. But as to what M.
Hallier demanded at first, that we should divulge nothing concerning our
affairs, nor write thereof into France, we utterly tejected so unreasonable a
Proposal, which could not be other then the effect of his fear lest it should
be known in France in what manner things were transacted at Rome, and which
accused all the Bishops that signed M. de Vabres's Letter (whose Deputy he
termed himself) of a prodigious insensibility, which he attributed to them in
so important an affair, if they had no curiosity of learning news concerning
it.

After we had taken leave of the Ambassador, we retired altogether, and as we
passed through those vast and spacious Rooms in the Palace of the Barberini,
where the Ambassador lodged, I went along with M. Hallier, who spoke two things
to me very considerable, which yet I cannot set down here but with much
trouble, to see the reasons for which himself affirmed that he had resolved to
engage in this affair. First, That when he entered upon the Syndicship, he
desired nothing but peace in the Faculty. But some began to push at him, and I
first of all, and so things by little and little came to the pass at which
they were now. Secondly, That the Pope had required his coming to Rome; that he
was come thither, and it would shortly be seen what would follow thereupon. I
answered nothing concerning the Pope; but as to his Syndicship, I told him,
that we believed (this is meant of afterward: for when I opposed his election,
none of the Doctors knew that I intended to oppose it, nor that I had the book
which was the cause of my opposition) that we believed (I say) that he would
pursue M. Cornet's enterprise. He replied, that it was not so, and that we were
mistaken.

As for his saying that the Pope sent for him, and that he was come by his
order; it is a thing I could never clearly understand, and believe it was not
so; there not appearing any probability at all thereof. However he believed it,
and not only believed it, but published it openly. I heard by a Letter written
to me the 22 of the foregoing March, that they boasted that they were summoned
by the Pope and the Cardinals before they set forth. And by another of the
12th. of April, that M. Cornet, and M. Morel, were not contented that M.
Hallier and his Colleagues had undertaken this Journey; but were pacified upon
M. Hallier's telling them that he was sent for by the Pope and some Cardinals.
I know not whether by this Pope and these Cardinals there were not really some
complot of M. Albizzi and some Cardinals, perhaps also some tacit consent or
other of the Pope upon some Proposal made to him about it. In brief, it is a
thing I could never clearly discover; but I leave it to the Readers to judge of.

But as for F. Mulard, who set forth from Rome in December, to carry them the
Letters and Messages which obliged them to resolve upon coming, he came back
again with them or shortly after. For to my knowledge he was seen at Rome on
Wednesday the 29th. of May, being the Eve of Corpus Christi, and he was heard
that very day to say, speaking of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, and swearing by
the name of God, By G. I have done so much that I have made them come; I have
put the Sword into their hands, let them fight now. But what said one to him?
Will you meddle no more in the matter? No (answered he) at least let them
begin; when they have done the business, I may add the last stroke of the
Pencil. It was added, That he could not be so supine as to forbear to meddle
till the end; and he corrected himself by saying, that he might do it also in
the interim, to put them in the way, if need were.

CHAP. XI.
Of what passed during the whole Month of June, and the beginning of July.

ON the first day of June I visited the Cure of S. Saviors Church, with whom
having made diverse reflections about our affairs, he told me, we should do
well in this so intricate a cause (wherein we had to deal with such potent
Adversaries who would endeavor to cross and check us in the least
circumstances of our business, when they could not as to the main) to retain an
Advocate that well understood the forms of the Court of Rome, that so we might
do nothing without his counsel in certain formalities requisite to be observed
in this Country, in which it was likely we were not instructed of our selves.

In the afternoon of Sunday the second, we went to visit the Fathers Divines of
S. Augustin's order. Whiles we were entertaining them, the General returned
home, and having seen us, came and conversed with us. After some Discourse
about the presence of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, that there was no need of a
Congregation, because the things were already judged, we took leave of him. He
accompanied us from the Cloister where he had found us to the Church, where
after we had performed our Devotions, ten or twelve of his Fathers whom he had
left with us, reconducted us out of the Church.

On Tuesday the 4th. I heard that M. Hallier went alone the day before to see
Cardinal S. Clement, and as he gave an account of his business, he told him
that he who was the cause of all the stir about the Propositions, was a great
Doctor that was at Rome. M. Hallier meant me; but the Cardinal either not
understanding him, or not willing to understand him, answered, that he wondered
how so great a Doctor could have been the cause of all this scandal. Then M.
Hallier explained himself, that he did not mean that that Doctor was great in
respect of that quality, but great of body, of a tall stature, quantitate
molis, non quantitate virtutis. He added, that all the evil in Jansenius's book
was contracted into the Five Propositions, or rather, that it was all contained
in the first alone. The Cardinal desired M. Hallier to recite it. M. Hallior
did so, but either by chance or wittingly omitted these words, secundum
praesentes quas habent vires. And at length setting forth, to what a pitch the
mischief of the division caused by the Propositions was attained, he told the
Cardinal, that the Jansenists were habited in one manner, and the Molinists in
another. The Cardinal kept directly to the point in question, and told M.
Hallier, he wondered how possibly a man so judicious as he could be induced to
quarrel with Jansenius about that Proposition. That there might indeed be other
things in that Author, which deserved Censure; but as for this, it was so
clearly Catholic, that there was nothing more firmly established in the
Scripture and the H. Fathers, particularly in S. Augustine, then what was
delivered by M. Jansenius concerning this matter; and that he had explicated
himself nowhere better, nor given less hold against his book then in this
place. The Cardinal dilated amply, to convince M. Hallier of his Assertion by
the indubitable principles of Theology, from which M. Hallier could not
dissent. On the contrary M. Hallier did what he could to defend himself by vain
distinctions, but always overskipping the main matter in question. At length
he was so put to it, that he could reply no more, and so this Conference ended.
Nevertheless he forbore not to tell the Cardinal whilst he was reconducted by
him, that it was good that the Propositions were condemned and censured, or at
least prohibited to be maintained, that I may use the Latin word les prohiber.
The Cardinal (who made the Narrative of this Conference to him from whom I had
it) could not believe what he saw, and doubted whether M. Hallier understood
Italian, though he begun to speak Italian, and the rest of their Discourse was
mixed, part Latin and part Italian.

M. Hallier, to explain in the sequel of this Discourse who the great Doctor he
meant was, named me; He accused me also to be an enemy of Religious Orders,
though no person ever opposed them more then himself before his reconciliation
with the Jesuits, and whilst one of his Maxims was, That the Jesuits had no
conscience. He uttered all other things he could in my disparagement, and to
persuade Cardinal S. Clement, that his persecuting the Propositions was only in
regard to their Heretical senses, he said, that for his part he was no enemy to
S. Augustin's Doctrine, nor to that of the School of S. Thomas, but he was
ready to subscribe to effectual Grace, and also to Physical Predetermination.

On Wednesday I went to la Minerve, to publish to diverse persons the design
which M. Hallier and his Colleagues had declared to us in the Ambassadors
presence; and all that I acquainted with it, condemned so unreasonable a
pretension. Also meeting with F. Delbene in the place Navonne on Friday, I
informed him of their purpose, which he pronounced very ridiculous.

On Saturday June 8. we went again to visit Card. Giori, whom we could not
inform of our affair the first time. He heard us gravely, and answered us with
great judgment.

In the afternoon M. de Valcroissant and my self went to the H. Office to see
the Fiscal, but he was not there; wherefore leaving M. de Valcroissant, to go
speak a word with the P. Companion of the Commissary, the Commissary himself
met me. He drew me into his Chamber almost by force, but such a force as
proceeded only from friendship. When I was there, he proposed some arguments to
me about the first Proposition. M. Albizzi intervened, and we spoke civilly
enough together. We continued the Discourse upon the same Subject, and occasion
being offered me to quote that excellent passage of the Homily of S. Austin,
taken out of his 92d. Treatise upon S. John, which is read in the Roman
Breviary on Friday between the Octave of the Ascension and Pentecost, where
that H. Doctor expounding the words of the Gospel of S. John, chap. 15. by
which our Lord promised his Disciples, that when he had sent the H. Spirit to
them, that H. Spirit should testify what this divine Savior was; Ille
testimonium perhibebit de me; he concludes with these after many others: Ille
ergo testim^nium perhibebit de me, and ves testimonium perhibebitis; dabit enim
vobis fiduciam testimonium perhibendi, charitas Dei diffusa in cordibus vestris
per spiritum sanctum qui dabitur vobis: quae utique Petro adhuc DEFVIT, quando
mulieris an^illae interrogatione perterritus, non POTVIT verum testimonium
perhibere, sed contra suam pillicitationem timore magno compulsus est ter
negare. When I had applied this whole passage to the first Proposition, M.
Albizzi had the goodness to tell me, That he doubted not, but when a man sins,
Grace is wanting to him; Not the Sufficient (added he) but the Effectual.
Whilst M. Albizzi and I were speaking, the F. Commissary was gone to fetch a
book, to show me some passage. He came back and read his passage to me, and
proposed his argument to me again before M. Albizzi, and he did it with a rude
and fierce tone; but when M. Albizzi had left us, he friendly told me, that it
behooved him for certain reasons to speak in that manner before him.

M. de Valcroissant had the patience to wait for me all this time; and when I
had found him again we went together to Cardinal S. Clement, who confirmed to
us most of the things which are above mentioned to have passed in M. Hallier's
visit to him; and particularly that in reciting the first Proposition he
suppressed the words secundum praesentes quas habent vires, and they demanded a
pure and absolu^ condemnation of the Propositions without distinction of
senses, examination or Congregation.

On Tuesday June 11th. I went to see F. Hilarion, who told me that M. Hallier
and his Colleagues had been with him, but he declared to them presently that
there was no need for them to give themselves that trouble, because he was not
of the Congregation. That they had no long discourse with him; but amongst
other things they told him, that the Propositions being matters already decided
and determined, they came with a belief that this affair would soon be
dispatched. The Father added, that we were not to fear that, but we needed to
deliver a Memorial to the Pope to beseech him that we might be heard; that
nothing would be done without it; and that he had heard that it was resolved
upon.

On Thursday the 13th, I was in the Pope's Presence Chamber, at the end of the
Congregation of the H. Office, whence I saw all the Cardinals come forth,
excepting Cardinal Spada who stayed with his Hol^ness. M. Albizzi followed
Cardinal Ghiggi to his apartment. I sent a Laquay thither to bring me word when
M. Albizzi was gone from thence, and immediately went to wait upon this
Cardinal; but as soon as I had spoken three words to him concerning M. Hallier
and his Colleagues, he told me that he had seen them; he said Yesterday, but it
was upon Tuesday. He gave me to under^and that the Pope would consider of the
Congregation we de^anded, and probably would erect it; and as soon as it was
established, it would set upon two things to examine. First, whether it were
expedient to make any Definition upon the Propositions, because the Pope was
not obliged to make any upon every occasion, and all matters propounded to him.
Secondly, to examine the grounds of the matters upon which such D^inition was
to be made in case it were resolved upon. And he seemed to intimate as if M.
Hallier and his Colleagues had had audience of the Pope, and were inclined to
consent to the Congregation. Whereupon I told his Eminence that there was no
great likelihood that this was the inclination of those Gentlemen, because
themselves had testified to us, that they aimed at a pure and simple
condemnation, without hearing Parties, as if the matters were already
determined, and because we knew also that they solicited to that purpose. The
Cardinal replied, That if they were formerly defined, they were not to be
examined again; but that this was the thing in question; that their word
would not be taken for it, and that nothing would be done in this affair but
by a Congregation, which should first examine all things exactly. I answered,
that provided this course were taken, we should be perfectly contented; but in
the mean time they diverted the Contest elsewhere, and drew it to things which
had no affinity with that which was in question. He replied, that these sorts
of solicitations were not much regarded at Rome, and that they were but lost
words; and he asked me, where and how they held such D. scourses? I told him,
that they had been with all the Cardinals, Consultors, and Qualificators;
whereat he seemed something to wonder, as of a thing of little consequence. I
told him, I feared I should be tedious to his Eminence, if I should acquaint
him with the grounds upon which they sounded their reproaches; and that we had
nothing else to answer thereunto, but that what they said would not be found
true; but supposing it were, and there were as much more, yet it was nothing to
the main business in question, which ought solely to be regarded. And thereupon
I fell insensibly to lay forth particularly the principal points of the
accusations and reproaches which they framed against us. I told him the grounds
thereof, namely, M. Hallier's Syndicship, the business of Santaret, the design
of accomplishing of M. Cornet's enterprise, the Religious Mendicants, the
Decree of the University against the Irish, in what manner M. Hallier imposed
the Minister of Groning's Book upon the Faculty. I summed up all this in very
few words, and confusedly enough, considering the matter. Yet Cardinal Ghiggi
apprehended all well enough, and told me, We ought not to be troubled about
their suggestions; that they signified nothing; and in reference to the
Minister of Groaning, he said scoffingly, that it was to allege a testimony ex
ore mendacis; He added, that all solicitations to other persons, besides those
which were named for the business, were lost labors, and even to those (who
perhaps would be Cardinals, perhaps Consultors, and perhaps others) all those
Prefaces and Discourses would be useless and superfluous. That the ground of
things that could be alleged on either side should be drawn up in writing as
compendiously as possible, and reciprocally deliverer'd to each part, that so
either might see what they were to encounter with, and without so doing, all
was to no purpose; and we might remain satisfied with this; and that nothing
would be done at Rome, in respect to what one party or the other affirms or
denies. Finding by the Cardinals discourse, that what we had demanded was like
to be granted, I asked him whether he had seen our Memorial. He asked me when it
was delivered. I told him on the first of January; He answered that he had not
seen it. VVhereupon acknowledging the equitablenesse of his Sentiment, that
what we had su'd for to the Pope, was sitting to be granted; I told him the
substance of the Memorial almost in its own words; but I added that I would
bring his Eminence a Copy of it, and professed to him how great submission we
and all the world with us should have for a Decision made in that manner. As I
was about to take my leave, I told him we feared least M. Hallier and his
Colleagues had a design to carry matters to some imposition of silence, or some
other remedy of that nature, which would produce nothing but mischief; that
they would never be brought to a conference but with regret, as partly in
respect of the difficulty they would find to defend so bad a Cause well, and
partly because M. Hallier, as able a man as he might be in other things, was
certainly little versed in the doctrine of Saint Augustine whom he had not read.
He told me that I ought not to fear; and that their wishes or wills would be in
no consideration at all. After this I withdrew, but I remember that in the
course of this conference, I told Cardinal Ghiggi of the approbation which M.
Hallier had given not two years since, whilst he was Syndic, to the first and
third Proposition taken in the senses in which alone we held them; and after
that approbation so freshly and solemnly given, new interests having made him
change his mind, he now prosecuted the condemnation thereof. I remember also,
that one told me in the Pope's Presence Chamber, that M. Hallier and his
Colleagues were gone that day to wait upon Cardinal Spada; that before their
parting from him they had spoken something to him in private; wherefore
reflecting upon his staying with the Pope, after the Congregation of the H.
Office, it seemed not improbable but he stayed so in reference to them, and the
affair about which they came.

On Friday, June 14. I carried Cardinal Ghiggi the Copy of our Memorial, which
he told me he would gladly see, lo vedro volontieri; and in the afternoon we
went to la Minerve to see the Procurator General of the Dominicans, whom we
found to be a very intelligent and resolute man. We visited also the F. Prior
of the Covent, who received us in the Sacristy, whilst M. Hallier and his
Colleagues were under the Cloister with F. Molano, whom they were come to visit.
After they had left him, F. Molano told us, that M. Halier had assured him,
that they would maintain Effectual Grace; and F. Fani whom we met, told us
also, that they had declared the same thing to the Master of the Sacred Palace.

He professed, that he did not otherwise impeach the Propositions than in
Calvin's sense, and that this was correspondent to the discourses which he had
held upon the way in diverse places; amongst others, at Lions, where he said,
That he was not going to Rome to dispute, but only to let the Pope know that
the Doctrine contrary to that of the Propositions, was the Doctrine of the
Church, which could not be opposed without Error; and that they who
contradicted it, were guilty of as pernicious tenants as those of Calvin, as he
said he would prove to his Holiness by the Book of the Minister Maresius which
he carried with him, and made a great stir with everywhere. All this is out
of a Letter written to me from Paris, May the 10th. upon the testimony of
People of Honor who heard him discourse in that manner, and sent the
Intelligence from Lions thither.

On Saturday the 15th. I went to see F. Luca Vadingo. I put him to speak of M.
Hallier and his Colleagues. He said he would not tell me what they had spoken to
him, as neither would he tell them what we should speak to him; but he would
serve both the one and the other alike. That he had professed to them how just
our Demands were. And upon my urging him to speak by saying that theirs did not
agree with ours; he told me at length, though with some hesitation, that they
had affirmed to him that there was danger, lest we might embroyle and perplex
things in a Congregation: whereunto he had answered, That men were as
quick-sighted at Rome as in any place of the world, Tanto oculati quanto si
voglia in altro luogo; and that there was one thing there which was not
anywhere else, namely, the infallibility of the Pope by the assistance of the
H. Spirit.

From thence I went to the Master of the Sacred Palace, where I saw his
Companion who told me, that M. Hallier and his Colleagues spread a report, that
we were all enemies to those of Religious Orders; that we set upon the Jesuits
to ruin them by doctrine, because none but they were able to resist us; and
when we had once pulled down the Jesuits, we would soon dispatch the rest. I
had no need to satisfy him concerning these accusations, because he was so
already; but he told me it were good that we removed such evil Impressions out
of the minds of others more credulous.

We purposed to demand Audience of the Pope the next day, to speak to his
Holiness concerning these new Comers, and to renew the Requests which we had
formerly made to him. I went to his Presence Chamber to facilitate the
procuring thereof; but I was advised in the afternoon to defer these instances
till there were greater necessity.

In the afternoon I went to Cardinal Roma: I complained to him, 1. what false
things, and remote from the business, M. Hallier and his Colleagues, as we
understood, spread every against us. 2. What their professed design was,
namely, to get a pure and simple condemnation, for that the things in question
were already determined. The Cardinal answered, And where are they so? we must
see how. I told him that perhaps they believed their word would be sufficient;
and that if they saw they could not compass a condemnation of that nature, we
feared they would then aim at an Imposition of silence (which would be
unprofitable and prejudicial) rather then come to a Congregation. He replied,
that every one does his utmost for the accomplishment of his designs: I
answered, that we all ought to have but one and the same, to wit, the clearing
of truth, the establishment of Peace amonst Divines, and that sutably to the
honor and dignity of the H. See. The Cardinal replied, that the clearing of
Truth included all the rest. I answered, that what he said, was very true; but
a Congregation was necessary for that clearing of Truth. He replied that it was
a thing already resolved and decreed.

I professed my joy for it. We arose up, and I asked him what persons were of
it, that we might visit them. He told me, this was not yet to be known, and
that it was fit that they were visited beforehand. I know not whether M.
Hallier had got some inkling hereof elsewhere; but the Cardinal said that they
were not altogether Strangers to it when they came to him, and that they had
spoken very reasonably, Mi pare (said he) che parlano molto a justamente.

I did not certainly understand that they had had audience of the Pope, till
Thursday the 17th. but then I learnt that it was very short, and that there
could not have been many things spoken of. I learnt also that they were
displeased at the Lodgeing where they were, and had seen another which had likt
them better; that they had agreed about the price; but the difference between
them and the owner was, that they would take it but for three Months, and the
Owner would not let it except for a year; and that it was at length compounded
by a Friend of theirs, who persuaded them to take it for six Months.

Tuesday in the afternoon I went to see a Discalceated Carmelite, Professor in
Theology, a Person of great parts, probity and prudence, born at Chartres, as I
think, as well as M. Hallier; his Name was F. Melchior. He told me that M.
Hallier had said to him that he found nothing to say against us to our manners;
that he was of the same mind with us in reference to the ground of doctrine;
that there was nothing but the novelty of terms, and the manner of speaking,
with the consequences, that he was offended at. As for his audience of the
Pope, that he had given him fair words; but it was not upon that that he placed
the principal hopes which he had of the success of his pursutes.

On Wednesday in the afternoon, the Abbot of Valcroissant and my self went to
Cardinal Spada. The Abbot very well represented to him the justice of our
Demand, and very solidly replied to the many frivolous answers and difficulties
which our Adversaries made about it; so that the Cardinal seemed by his
countenance much satisfied therewith. He told us, those Gentlemen had been with
him in the morning, that they had not spoken of all the particulars mentioned
by the Abbot, and that they had declared to him how they desired a speedy
dispatch of this affair.

On Thursday morning, June 20. -- came to visit me, and told me M. Hallier and
his Colleagues had been with him the day before. That he put him in mind at his
first complement of an ancient acquaintance which they had had, but obiter in
the University -- where they met. That after the complements he told him, that
he was not in that Court about the matters which had been agitated between the
Dominicans and the Jesuits; that those things were disputable and probable on
either side; but as for the Propositions, they were Heretical, and taught by a
mere Heretic. That afterward falling to discourse of the Propositions in
particular, there was not one of them but he undertook to confute sometimes
upon foundations contrary to those of the Jesuits, and soon after upon the
Principles and Maxims of those Fathers. That he admired this poor man, qui non
constabat sibi, who did not agree with himself, that if he committed the like
extravagances everywhere else, there needed none to ruin all that he said, but
himself. That he had told him, that as for the Propositions, whether in their
grounds, or their consequences, there was only St. Augustine and suoi scholari
that were of that Opinion. He told me that he reiterated to him many times,
That France was in a general combustion about these Contests. That of the
hundred and twelve, or hundred and eighteen Bishops in France, fourscore had
declared for the sentiments whch he defended. That these things were so
misconstru'd; that some Bishops, otherwise good men, had taken upon them to
maintain Calvinistical Propositions. That the University favored the
Jansenists too? who, (as M. Hallier told him, and he repeated to me several
times in his visit) held the Propositions wholly Lutheran and Calvinistical.
The Abbot Rondanini came to see us during this conference, and because we were
not ready to receive him, he went to take a Turn upon the Mont de la Trinite.
The Visitant departed, and the Abbot returned; we all three received him, M. de
Valcroissant, M. Angran and my self. In his long conference with us, he told us
mucb the same things concerning the Visits of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, as
are above related. When his visit was ended, F. Mulard came to see us. He went
to make a turn in the City, and left him with M. de Valcroissant, to whom he
told several particularities about his Voyage and that of M. Hallier, and since
their arrival at Rome this very remarkable, viz. that M. Hallier told him, that
the Pope signified to him at his audience that he had added Cardinal Ghiggi to
the four others which his Holiness had nominated for the Congregation with
honorable Titles, namely Roma, Spada, Ginetti and Cechini; Roma, he said, was
huomo da been an hone^ man; Spada huomo^capace, an able man; (these were the
qualities in which they excelled) without having added any thing concerning the
two other.

I had entreated F. Guerin to endeavor to get a Copy of the Memorial, which M.
Hallier and his Colleagues presented to the Pope that we might see, as we on our
part were very willing that all the world saw ours. For that purpose he
addressed himself to F. Noel, who had great intimacy with M. Hallier. F. Guerin
told me, that F. Noel assured him that there was no Copy of that Memorial iu
rerum natura. That it was very plain, and all it contained, that such and such
deputed to his Holiness by fourscore Bishops, beseecht him to decide the Five
Propositions in question, or the Questions contained in the Five Propositions.
That they represented to his Holiness that they were matters already decided,
and assured him, that these Propositions had no relation at all to the Dispute
between the Dominicans and Jesuits in the time of Clement VIII.

In the afternoon we went to see Cardinal Barberin, who was ready to go abroad
to Card. Brancaccio; we accompanied him thither, and after a short time spent
in taking the air, he brought us to our own lodging. Upon the way we spoke
concerning books. I complained chiefly of the malice of certain Authors who
writ against us, and for want of true grounds to do any thing, falsely imputed
to us some bad opinions, which we owned not; and afterward labored to prove
against us such things as we agreed in, and acknowledged true as well as
themselves. I instanced in the book of F. Annat de Ecclesia praesentis
temporis, which is wholly founded upon a false and calumnious supposition. The
Abbot of Valcroissant alleged also to him for example Riccardus, who makes use
likewise of the same fraud to impeach falsely the Third Proposition, opposing it
in a ridiculous sense of a Necessitating Grace destroying Indifference, in with
it was notorious, that neither we nor any Catholic maintained it. It was added
further, that if Riccardus had encountered it in a false sense, M. Hallier had
approved it during his Syndicship in its true sense. We arrived at our Lodging,
whether it pleased his Eminence to bring us, and so our Discourse broke off.

On Sunday the 23d. in the afternoon we went to see Cardinal Ghiggi. The Abbot
of Valcroissant very well refuted (as he had done before to Cardinal Spada)
some of the principal reasons, for which M. Hallier and his Colleagues
endeavored to obstruct the Congregation which we demanded, as also the most
considerable slanders, by which they endeavored to decry us as sworn enemies
of the H. See. The Cardinal heard all the Abbots Discourse calmly, and when he
had done, asked us where M. Hallier spoke all the things whereof we complained;
for he remembered none of them; and indeed, that all that was spoken to him in
that manner, entered at one ear, and went out at the other. That besides, he
was not yet commissioned by the Pope to take any cognizance of those affairs;
that every week six or seven hundred Letters came to his hands, that fourscore
went to one Congregation, and forty to another; that for his part, he was
chiefly taken up with things which they called Matters of State. That when our
business came to him, he would apply himself to it in a fitting manner; that
till then it was fit for us to have patience; that Time served to ripen things,
and that oftentimes the H. See was willing to let the heat of men's minds abate
a little. At length he recommended to us, to act peaceably, pacifica mente, and
we answered him, that he should always find us in that temper through our
whole deportment; but we could do no less then speak and represent the things
which we conceived important to our affair. And whereas he said, he would have
great care of it when it came to him, we told him we were very glad of it,
because he would find that it was very important to the honor of S. Augustine,
for whom he professed so great Devotion.

We went afterward to see Cardinal Roma; he was at his Palace, but was busy
about some affairs. His Maistre de Chamber told us, that his Eminence would be
glad to entertain us at leisure; and because he was the next day to consecrate
Monsignor Litta Archbishop of Milan, he desired us to defer our visit till the
Tuesday following. We had hitherto deferred to visit the Bishop of Bethleem; we
acquitted our selves thereof this day; and after diverse general Discourses, at
length falling upon the affairs which brought him to Rome, he showed us a
Memorial which he had to present against a Brief passed by Urban VIII. in the
year 1632. impowring Commissioners to make processes against Bishops. It was an
Affair wherewith he was encharged by the Clergy, besides the principal which
was to obtain Bishops for Portugal.

On Tuesday June the 25. passing before the Novitiate house of the Jesuits, I
entered into it, not knowing that it was so, being invited thereunto by the
goodliness of the Garden which appeared to me as I went along, the great Gate
thereof being open. I saw Cardinal Ghiggi there walking between two Jesuits;
but it did not trouble me, nor give me any irksome suspicion of him, because I
had a most firm confidence of his capacity, Equity, and Benignity toward all
the world.

In the Afternoon we went to Cardinal Roma's Palace, and were fortwith admitted
to him. And whereas amongst other things we complained of to him, we told him
that we were threatened that we should have but one or two Audiences for form;
he wondered that we could doubt of being heard as much as we could wish in an
affair so important to the H. See as this, in which it was not only to judge
(as the good Cardinal said) but to be judged by all the world; because as soon
as its Judgment were pronounced, every one would take the liberty to examine
it, and see whether it were passed according to justice and truth.

We went from thence to see F. Pascaligo, to whom we displayed our affair at
length: He was very glad, and surprised to hear it; and confirmed further to us
our intelligence concerning the order which was given between two or three
years before to certain Divines to write down their opinions, and deliver them
sealed up both concerning the Propositions, and the false censure of them
divulged under the name of our Faculty.

When we had quitted him, we went toward the Ambassadors Lodging, whether I
had purposed to go. We met our friends coming out thence, and a little after
F. Malgoires who came after them, and told us that he had disputed there for
two hours with M. Hallier. He told us several things of that Dispute, but
amongst the rest, two more remarkable. First, That M. Hallier held all these
matters so certainly condemned by the Council of Trent, that he would not so
much as hear of St. Augustine. Secondly, That upon his telling M. Hallier that
M. de Valcroissant maintained the five Propositions in question only in the
sense of Effectual Grace; M. Hallier replied, that the Sieur de Valcroissant
durst not subscribe that. We were extremly surprised at this Discourse, being
unable to comprehend how it was possible that after so many Declarations made
thereof formerly, and renewed upon all occasions, and by all means imaginable
with the greatest solemness, there should yet be found people that durst
confidently affirm such malicious calumnies.

I went to the Ambassadors: and found that Card. Barberin was there. I told his
Maistre de Chamber, that we had been at his Eminences Palace to wait upon him:
He answered me that there would be a good opportunity to do it the next day at
his return from la Minerve after the Congregation of the H. Office. When he
was gone, the Ambassador took Coach to go abroad to take the Air, and I
accompanied him. He told me there was some likelihood that a Congregation would
be erected, not for us to dispute in, but wherein we might be heard cosi, cosi,
so, so. I answered him, that we did not desire to dispute, but we earnestly
wished to confer one with the other, and that it might be done with all
Moderation, Civility and Respect possible, yet according to the formalities
requisite in all sorts of judgments for the full clearing of the thing in
contest.

On Wednesday morning we went to meet Cardinal Barberin at la Minerve, and
returned to his Palace with him. The Abbot of Valcroissant acquainted his
Eminence with the same causes of complaint we had of the carriage of M. Hallier
and his colleague, that he had told Cardinal Spada and Ghiggi, and answered in
like manner their objections and difficulties. The Cardinal made a little
recapitulation of what the Abbot said, and answered nothing thereunto, saving
that if the Pope gave him any Orders about our Affairs, he would endeavor to
acquit himself thereof with the affection and fidelity which he owed to the H.
See. He added, that we ought to be something contented now we had declared and
continued so to do daily; that we had no other interest in this Affair but to
preserve the Doctrine of Effectual Grace; since there was none but admitted and
acknowledged it was well as our selves. M. Angran replied to the Cardinal, that
indeed there was none that declared against, or durst do so; but there were
many who admitted only the name, and in their hearts denied and opposed the
thing; and that the whole invention and structure of the Propositions was set
on foot for nothing in the world else but to destroy it.

In the afternoon I went to see a Person that understood affairs very well. He
told us, that M. Hallier was (in concetto nella corte) suspected by the Court
to do what he did only out of a grudge; and that it would be advantageous for
us, if he continued to give the same opinion of himself that he had done
hitherto. I went next to Cardinal Roma; but hearing that M. Hallier was with
him, I waited till he came forth. I spoke but two words to the Cardinal, about
something which I conceived we had not sufficiently explicated to him the day
before. He asked me, whether I would not be glad to have a speedy end of this
affair? I answered him, that we wished nothing else, but that it were treated
with the greatest speed that could be; provided that speed were accompanied
with all the consideration necessary for the examination of it: and that in
this case the Counsel deserved to be practiced, which says Festina lent:
whereunto his Eminence assented.

On Thursday the 27th. we went, for the closing of the Solemnity of la Feste
Dieu, or the Festival of Corpus Christi to the Church of St. Peter, and as we
were going thither we met M. Hallier and his Colleagues who were with the French
Jesuits, Penitentiaries of that Church for that Nation. It was no very strange
thing, considering that the confederacy of those Doctors with the Jesuits was
so great, that almost every day, after their other visits were ended, they went
to le Giesu to confer with those Fathers about what they had done that day, and
what they should do the next. But yet a few years ago, such carriage in a
Doctor of Paris would have been construed a great prevarication.

On Friday we made a short Visit to the Resident of Polondi who was our
Neighbor, and who had told me in several accidental meetings, that the Queen
of Poland frequently inquired what we did at Rome. From thence we went to the
Ambassador, to accompany him to Vespers at St. Peter's Church. When they were
ended I beheld the ceremony of the white Gennet, which the King of Spain's
Ambassador ptesents every year to the Pope in the name of the King his Master,
in homage for the Kingdom of Naples. This year it was the Prince Pamphilio,
the Popes Nephew that presented it, the Spaniards having engaged him to take
upon himself for that purpose the quality of their Kings Ambassador
extraordinary, by promising to make him a Grandee of Spain; I heard the
Protestations which the Procurator Fiscal of the Apostolical Chamber makes,
That this Present which the Pope receives, does not prejudice the Rights of his
Holiness, nor those of the Apostolical Chamber to that Kingdom; and the
Repetition made thereof after him by the Pope himself, wherein he calls it
Regno nostro Napolitano; after which nevertheless he gives his Apostolical
Benediction to the King of Spain, his wife, children and people.

Of Saturday the 29th. being S. Peter's day, all the morning was spent in
Devotion at the Pope's Chapel, and in the afternoon I heard the secret Vespers
which are celebrated in the Pope's Presence Chamber, where few others are
admitted besides the Musicians that sing them.

Cardinal Ghiggi had familiarly asked me how he might get some books of the
handsome binding of France. Upon which occasion I was oblig^d to wait upon him
on Sunday afternoon the last of June; at which time I gave him a Copy both of
the Letter of M. de Vabres, and of that of the other Bishops which I presented
to the Pope. I told him of the frequent Assemblies and Counsels which M.
Hallier and his Colleagues held with M. Albizzi. The Cardinal answered, that to
give them audience, was the least thing that was due to them. But it all
signified nothing; that I might assure my self that this affair Caminarebbe per
via regia, would proceed in the usual Road, and be handled with a full and
public discussion; that nothing would be done otherwise: I replied that this
was all we desired, as well in reference to the circumstances, as to the matter
of Doctrine. He added, that he could in some sort give me assurance thereof,
Sicurezza. I expressed much satisfaction at this good word, and gave his
Eminence my most humble thanks for it.

On Tuesday the 2. of July I met M. Borne, M. Halliers Correspondent and ours
too. He asked me whether I thought we should make a long stay at Rome. I told
him smiling, that we should continue there at least (jusqu' aux Roys) till
Twelftide. He replied that that term would seem very long to those Gentlemen,
who were very weary already, and thought they should have dispatched sooner then
so.

On Thursday the 4. we went to give Cardinal Homodei full information of our
Affair, having been hindered from doing it at our first visit to him. He was
much satisfied therewith, and expressed a desire to entertain us again, and to
have the bottom of things laid open to him, that he might understand it;
promising if there happened any occasion wherein he might assist us to obtain a
happy issue thereof, he would employ his utmost to that effect.

Friday the 5. was the ordinary day that the Ambassador was to be accompanied
to his audience of the Pope: which Duty being performed, we went to visit
Cardinal Brancaccio, who was come to Rome about three weeks before, to spend
the Summer there: we set forth our affair to him at large, and he answered us
with great courtesy and erudition. And because he understood the French Tongue
well, he engaged us to lend him the book of Victorious Grace, which I carried
to him on Sunday following; but not finding him at home then, I went again to
his Palace on Tuesday the 9th, to entertain him again; and deliver the same to
his hands.

I visited again upon that Sunday July 7. Cardinal Roma, to put him in mind of
our extreme desire that the Congregation might be established whilst there were
Doctors of both Parties upon the place, and that we might once come to show
what we had to say in that Congregation; yet provided, that as much time were
taken as should be necessary for a thorough discussion of all our allegations.
The Cardinal answered me, that we ought not to doubt of that, and that the H.
See was so much concerned, that the affair might be transacted in that manner,
that we had no reason to doubt that it would pass otherwise. I told him that
this was as much as we wished, and that in the mean time we labored much and
made no progress; and that all we had done about the affair in our visits
hitherto, was almost as if we had done nothing at all. The Cardinal confirmed
his former asseveration, and added, that he hoped the Congregation would
shortly be erected, and that nevertheless he did not yet know the order and
pleasure of the Pope.

On Monday the eighth, I was giving a visit to Monsignor Sacrista, when M.
Hallier and his Colleagues came thither; they were led into another apartement,
and I presently quitted the place to them. The next day in the afternoon F.
Mariana came to see me, and give me an account of their conference with
Monsignor Sacrista; He said they spoke to him una man di spropositamenti,
abundance of impertinencies; amongst the rest, that the Propositions were
condemned by the Censures of our Faculty in the year 1650. that they made
several complaints against me, which were nothing to the purpose; and so of the
rest.

M. de Valcroissant had made an Advertisement to the Reader, to premise before
the works of S. Augustine, contained in the little Tome which we caused to be
printed. We were in doubt for a good while, whether or no we should print it
before we showed it to M. Albizzi, who was so hot upon reviewing it, even to
the Apostilles, least if he perceived that we did it without consulting him, he
might cause us some new obstruction. But on the other side, when we considered
that his former opposition was purely a vexatious and humorsome action; that to
give him this advertisement to the Reader to peruse, was to give it to the
Jesuits; that there was danger lest we should not easily recover it out of his
hands, and lest it might return at length maimed and with corrections to which
we could not conform; and that all this might much retard our Impression and
deprive us of the advantages which we hoped to obtain by publishing it: We
resolved at length, first, to take good heed that there might be nothing in the
said advertisement that were obnoxious to exception; and 2ly, to be contented
with the Imprimatur of the Master of the Sacred Palace, according to the
ordinary course: and lastly, to cause it to be printed without noise, and also
published before M. Albizzi had notice of it. But in case he should afterward
complain and make a trouble about it, then we should endeavor to defend our
selves and justify our proceeding against his assaults; and it would be time
enough to come into his hands when we could no longer avoid it.

Yet this resolution was not approved by our Friends at Rome without some fear;
however, we continued it, although they judged it something hazardous. But M.
Albizzi's ill dealing with us about the Apostilles, and fear of the same; for
this advertisement, if it once came into his hands, obliged us to venture all
the after-claps his Furiousness seemed to threaten. I had carried our
advertisement a day or two before to the Master of the Sacred Palace, and this
day (Tuesday the 9th.) I went to fetch it from him. He liked it well enough,
and delivered it to me without scruple, having first set his Imprimatur to it;
and so we caused it to be printed with the permission alone of the Master of
the Sacred palace, M. Albizzi not so much as hearing any thing of it.

Wednesday the 10th. I learnt that the General of the Dominicans had been with
the Pope on the Sunday preceding about the affair of the Conception; and that
the Pope told him that whereas none of his Predecessors nor the Council of
Trent had defined it, neither would he define it; and moreover his Holiness
acknowledged that the importunity made to him for it, was not so much out of
devotion and piety, as out of jealousy and ambition.

In which no doubt the Pope expressed as much moderation by rejecting the
Proposal, as the Authors thereof showed ignorance in prosecuting such a
Definition; since not only Prudence allows not the determining of the
Immaculate conception, but it is also impossible to do it, there being nothing
of it in the tradition of the Church; so that if the Pope would do it, he must
ground his judgment upon particular Revelations, which would be a visible
delusion, and open a way to all sort of error.

THE FIFTH PART.
Containing what passed during the last six Months of the Year 1652.

CHAP. 1.
Of the Declaration made to us, July the 11 th. by Cardinal Roma, that the Pope
had erected the Congregation which we demanded. Of our visits till the 21. to
the Cardinals that were of it; and of the Letter which we writ thereupon to the
Bishops by whom we were deputed.

THe occurrence which first offers it self to begin this Fifth Part, is one of
the most considerable of the whole Narrative. It is the Declaration which was
solemnly made to us by the Pope's Order, That he had appointed the Congregation
required by us, and looked upon by us as the certain means for the advancing of
Truth and Innocence above the malice of those who persecuted both of them by
Error and Calumny. This so advantageous and so desired Congregation was
declared to us in this manner.

On Wednesday evening, July 10th. a Note was brought me by one of Cardinal
Barberin's Laquayes, whereby I was advertised that my Colleagues and I must not
fail to repair the next day in the afternoon to Cardinal Roma's Palace, who had
something to tell us by the Pope's order at the end of the Consistorial
Congregation, which was to be held there. The Note contained these words.

A Monsiur de Saint Amor.
Che si compiaccia dimani dopo pranzo 11. di Luglio, corrente mese, essere co
'i sui compagni dal Sig. Card. Roma, che da sua Eminenza segli de ve parlare
dopo la Congregatione Consistoriale, d' ordine di nostro Signore. Per gratia
non manchi.

We repaired thither accordingly in good time, and finding that it was much too
soon, we went to make some particular visits in the neighborhood, till his
Maistre de chamber should bring us word that it was time for us to go thither
again. A little while after we were there, we saw Cardinal Patotta come forth
from that Consistorial Congregation, which was ended a little before. Cardinal
Roma reconducted him to his Chamber door at the furthest. Then there came forth
another Prelate, and we were introduced.

M. Albizzi stayed behind there, which was undoubtedly that he might peform the
Office of a Secretary or Public Notary, to take notice of what M. the Cardinal
should say to us, and what we answered; that so the action might be more
solemn, legal and authentic. He was seated as well as the Cardinal; but at a
convenient distance. Chairs also were placed for us, and when we were seated,
the Cardinal began in Italian to this effect; You are here Gentlemen (said his
Eminence to us) in the name of some Bishops of France, as also in your own, to
obtain of his Holiness the clearing of some Propositions which cause very
great trouble in France. The Pope has for that purpose ordained a
Congregation, as you requested of him, and to the end you may if you please, go
and particularly inform the Cardinals who are of it, of what you think fit; You
shall be advertised that there are Five of them, namely (said he) Spada,
Ginetti, Cechini, Ghiggi, and my self. Moreover when you shall be ready and
desire to speak to us all together in Congregation, you may advertise us
thereof; we will appoint a day for that purpose and acquaint you with it.

The Abbot of Valcroissant answered to the Cardinal in Latin, and told him, we
were much obliged to his Holiness for having had regard to the Remonstrances
made to him by us on the part of the Bishops of France who ^ent us, and who, as
well as we, had no other thoughts, as should be found in the sequel, then to
preserve in the Church S. Augustin's doctrine, to which alone we adhered. That
this resolution of his Holiness gave us much consolation, and hope that the
Church and the H. See would receive all sort of advantage and satisfaction by
it as well as our selves.

The Cardinal expressed briefly what desire himself had that this Congregation
might produce all good effects, and what hope he conceived thereof. After which
we made him our most humble remerciments, and he conducted us as far as he
could toward the door of his Chamber, excusing himself that his weariness
permitted him not to go further. Which I mention not in respect of any
advantage or satisfaction to us thereby, but only to give account how things
passed, and to acknowledge the goodness and courtesy of that pious Cardinal.

I can say nothing as to Cardinal Spada's satisfaction or discontent at the
Pope's granting us this Congregation; but I know that being that morning with
the Pope at the Congregation of the H. Office, he had much conference with M.
Albizzi, during which, though otherwise a very reserved Person, he gave great
external signs of commotion and displeasure, whatever the cause were.

Upon this Declaration of Cardinal Roma I laid aside my purposes of a journey
into France during this Summer, about Domestic affairs, which required my
presence. I now thought of nothing but applying all my industry together with
my Colleagues to every thing whereunto we conceived our selves obliged for the
attaining of the other fruits and advantages which we hoped for from our
Labors, which we had employed hitherto.

The next day we went to render thanks to God for the same, and to congratulate
with some of our particular Friends, and to carry the good news to the General
of the Augustines, who not being at his Covent, we acquainted some of the
principal Monasticks of his Order.

In the afternoon we went to the Ambassador, who was well pleased with our
intelligence, and told us he thought he had much contributed to it by his
importunity with the Pope at his audience eight days before. He told us also,
that they (meaning the Pope and all his Council) would make a clear
determination; that we should be heard as much as we desired; but they would
not have us enter into endless contests and disputes, tending to the
exasperation of the minds of men. I was beginning to answer the Ambassador,
that we were far from desiring to enter into such disputes; and to show him in
what honorable and civil, yet earnest and peremptory manner we always
maintained it necessary to hear us in presence one of the other. When Cardinal
Barberin arrived there, he coming incognito to see the Ambassador, we were
obliged thereby to end this conference: yet we omitted not to deliver the
Ambassador a Letter which the Bishop of Grass (now of Vence) writ to him
concerning our affair.

I conceive I should wrong the public as well as our cause, if the Copy of the
sad Letter remaining with me, I should not insert it here. It was addressed a
Monsieur Monsieur le Bailly de Valenscy Ambassadeur du Roy aupres de sa
Saintele, and contained the following words.

SIR,
THough I am tardy in rendering you most humble thanks for the favors which the
Doctors of Sorbon deputed to Rome by some of my LL. the Bishops of France have
received from your goodness; yet I beseech you to believe that I had at first
all the gratitude for the same which I think my self obliged to have by being
interested in their deputation. The affair about whech they are employed, is so
reasonable and so important to the Peace of the Church of France, which is
bound up with that of the State, that knowing the zeal you have for the glory
of both, I wonder not that you have by your just Protection countenanced those
whose designs are so innocent and conformable to their duty. The Bishops are
the centers of Ecclesiastical unity in their Dioceses, as the H. Father is the
center of unity in the whole Church. Wherefore observing divisions ready to
arise about questions of high importance, we conceived we could do nothing more
becoming the Episcopal Office, than to recur to his Holiness, that it would
please him to take cognizance of the dispute, and determine the same by such
ways as the Churth has used to follow in such cases, and have been practiced
by his Predecessors. It Is a Demand so reasonable and so just, that we cannot
imagine how it can be denied. Yet with all the justice of our Cause we still
need the continuance of your favor, and am bold to hope it. We know, they who
lately went to Rome, are strengthened with powerful Letters, and perhaps with
extraordinary Orders: but we know better that your Prudence is able to
distinguish between what Importunity, canvasing and Prejudice may attempt, and
what is for the solid service of the Prince and the true interests of Religion
and the State. You are concerned in this affair upon two accounts; As
Ambassador of the greatest King in the World, you love the peace of his
Kingdom, and you acquit that Charge with such courage and prudence, and your
deportment cannot be too highly commended. But you are also a Religious, and a
Religious of S. Augustine upon account of your Rule. Whence all the Defenders of
his Doctrine are encouraged to believe that you will second them in so holy a
quarrel, and that in this occasion you will fight for true Christianity, as
your Order does for Christendom. Your Embassage will be signalized for ever, if
during your exercising thereof, the Church see that famous Dispute terminated
by your cares, which has so long disturbed its quiet. I wish you that glory,
and account it mine, to style my self

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ANTHONY Bp. of Grass and
Vence.

When we came from the Ambassador, we went to the four Cardinals nominated to
us the day before by Cardinal Roma, to salute them as Deputies for the
Congregation; but we found only Cardinal Ghiggi to whom we expressed
extraordinary joy and satisfaction. He received us with great civility and
courtesy, and made as it were excuses for the slownes of ordaining the
Congregation, and told us the abundance of affairs at Rome had been the cause
thereof.

I went on Saturday the 13th. to give notice of the same to Monsignor Sacrista,
but finding he was at the Pope's Palace, I went thither to him, and in
discourse asked him whethether he did not think it expedient that we rendered
our most humble thanks to his Holiness for the Congration. He much approved
thereof, and immediately went to call the Pope's Mastre de Chamber to me, whom
I acquainted with my purpose, and concluded upon the next day for an audience.

M. Rousse Cure of S. Roch had sent me a Letter for the General of the
Capucines to whom I went to deliver the same in the afternoon; and discoursing
with him, I found that M. Hallier and his Colleagues had been with him to
beseech him that upon occasion of his visiting several of the Cardinals by
reason of a journey he was shortly to take into France, he would tell their
Eminences how in his first journey he had found that the Jansenists were
multiplied in all parts, and how necessary it was to discredit and exterminate
them, by cutting up their root before they could multiply further. Thus
sincerely did this good Father declare the whole project to me. I did not
disagree from him that thanks be to God, those whom those Gentlemen branded
with the name of Jansenists, were sufficiently multiplied; but I told him it
were to be wished that there were no persons in France or any where else but
such as were decry'd under that name, because there were not in the world
better Servants of God and the King, of the Church and the H. See.

We spent the Forenoon of Sunday the 14th. in the Pope's Presence Chamber
expecting audience, but it was was wholly taken up by Cardinal Corrado.

Monday the 15th. we writ a common Letter to all the Archbishops and Bishops
who had encharged us with theirs to the Pope, and in whose name we acted at
Rome. We sent them word that at length we had obtained the Congregation which
they wished, and we had solicited by their order. Take the Copy of the Letter
as it follows.

My Lords,
ALL that we have done hitherto at Rome, having been only to solicit the
Pope and Cardinals for the Congregation which your Lordships demanded of his
Holiness by your Letters concerning the Five Propositions; we conceived it
sufficient to give account to such of your Lordships as were at Paris how
things proceeded here. And till we had received his Holynesse's answer and
orders concerning your Letters, we did not think it expedient to write to your
Lordships in general. We presume your Lordships have understood what favorable
reception his Holiness made us in our audience at our first arrival; how we
represented to him the state of the affair concerning which you writ to him,
and the necessity of pronouncing a Solemn Judgment in the Case, and
establishing fpr examination of the Propositions, a Congregation in which the
Divines of different opinions might be heard. Your Lordships have also seen the
Memorial which we delivered to his Holiness according to the custom, to give
him a compendious account of your demand; and been informed that his Holiness,
after professions of his great esteem of your zeal for the Faith, the service
of the H. See, and the peace of the Church of France, told us that he would
maturely consider the importance of this affair, and the demand we made to him
in your name, that he would see what would be most expedient for the good of
the Church, and acquaint us with his Pleasure. After that, my Lords, we took
care to inform the Sacred College of the whole affair; and remonstrate to
their Eminences how profitable it would be that his Holiness established the
Congregation which you required for the examination and decision of the
Propositions. We have seen what great esteem their Eminences have of the
Prelates of France, and we are not able sufficiently to represent to your
Lordships the honor they do, and the favorable audiences they give us upon
that account. They have all acknowledged the importance of the affair, and
professed with much zeal that they will contribute all that lies on their part
for the interest of Truth and the peace of the Church. In brief, my Lords, his
Holiness who watches in behalf of the Church with a most pure intention, and
most exact prudence, has given us to understand his pleasure by the mouth of
my Lord the Card. Roma Dean of the Sacred College. On Wednesday last we were
advertised to repair to his Palace, that we might hear from his Eminence what
his Holiness had ordained upon your Letters, and the demand made by us to him
in your Names: We repaired thither at the hour appointed; His Eminence told us,
that whereas we were come to that Court to demand of his Holiness in the Name
of the Bishops of France, by whom we were sent, a Congregation for the
examining and deciding of the five Propositions concerning Grace, his Holiness
having our Suit, had granted the said Congregation; and that the Cardinals
designed for it, were my LL. Spada, Ginetti, Cechini, Ghiggi, and himself; that
if we would begin to inform their Eminences in particular, we might visit them;
and when we were ready to argue in full Congregation, we might give them
notice, and they would take care to assemble. We signified to his Eminence our
obligations to his Holiness for having thus provided for this important affair,
and told him we hoped it would have a good issue, to the clearing of truth, the
glory of the H. See, and the peace of the whole Church; and that when your
Lordships writ to his Holiness, you had no other design then to keep S. Austin
's Doctrine, received and approved by all the Church, and particularly by the
H. See, from being crushed and oppressed upon occasion of certain Propositions
invented to impugn the same, as we should make appear in the Congregation.
After which, we took leave of his Eminence with great sentiments of joy for
having understood the so just and so advantageous resolution of his Holiness.
Thus my Lords, you have some effect of our solicitude, and a testimony of his
Holinesses vigilance and wisdom in the government of the Universal Church. We
cannot but ascribe it to a manifest Providence of God, who always watches over
the H. See, that all the solicitations to his Holiness for a long time have
been fruitless; and that whatever instances have been used to induce him to a
Judgment disadvantagious to the Propositions, under pretext of the evil senses
whereof they are capable, his Holiness has always declined it, and at length
ordained a Congregation in which we may be heard, both by word of mouth and
writing. Without question all my Lords the Prelates of France will be extremely
well pleased to hear that his Holiness has taken this course, since in the
present case of the contest about the matter of Grace, no way can be more
expedient then this, for the clearing of truth, and our establishing peace in
the Church. And although diverse other Prelates have desired of his Holiness by
their Letter only a bare decision upon the Propositions, yet certainly they had
no other intention then your Lordships, though they did not so expressly declare
it; and the persons who have pretended that those Prelates desired not that his
Holiness would grant the Congregation which your Lordships demanded, have no
doubt acted contrary to their intention. This we have easily justified in some
occasions, by representing, that if those very Prelates were to take cognizance
in a Council of the Questions upon which they desire a Judgment from the Pope,
and if the Doctors should desire them that they would hear them first, and
consider their Reasons and Remonstrances upon the matters to be decided, they
would grant them that favor, and appoint the Divines to appear, that so they
might hear what they had to say: from whence we concluded, that in demanding
his Holiness's Judgment, they could not but approve that he should first hear
the parties who presented themselves, according to your request. We shall
endeavor, my Lords, to contribute what lies in us to the advancing of so
important an affair, protesting to your Lordships, that in imitating your zeal,
and following your orders, we aim at nothing in this Controversy besides the
clearing of truth in one of the principal mysteries of Faith and Christian
Piety, besides the peace of the Church, and the defense of S. Austin 's
Authority and Doctrine, which has always been in so great Veneration in all
the Church of France, which found its first Defenders there in S. Prosper, and
S. Hilary, which being afterward impugned, has been maintained by Caesarius
Archbishop of Arles, and by all the Fathers of the Council of Orange; by Avitus
Archbishop of Vienne, and by all the Holy Fathers who lived at that time; in
fine, which has had for its Protectors in the nineth Age the SS. Remigius,
Florius, Prudentius, and so many other Saints, and in general all the Fathers
of the Councils of Valence, Langres, and Toul, assembled from the greatest part
of the Provinces of France. We read in S. Prudentius Bishop of Troy, who was so
famous in his Generation for Learning and Piety, one of the fairest testimonies
of all Antiquity for the Authority of S. Austin's Doctrine touching the matter
of Grace, wherein that H. Prelate seems to address to all the Bishops of France
at this day, what he then writ to Hincmarus and Pardulus: Hoc primum (says
that H. Father) praecipueque, vestram sinceritatem monens and postulans, ut
doctrinam Beatissimi Patris Augustini, omnium absque ulla dubietate undequaque
doctissimi, Sanctarum Scripturarum autoritati in omnibus concordissimam (quippe
nullus Doctorum abstrusa earum scrupulosius rimatus, diligentius exquisierit,
verius invenerit, veracius protulerit, luculentius enodaverit, fidelius
tenuerit, robustius defenderit, fusius disseminaverit) vestri Pontificatus
tempore, commento quolibet impugnari non permittatis; quando tanto coelestis
gratiae munere donata existit, ut nullo cujusquam conamine ullatenus evelli
possit, cum eam and Apostolicae sedis sublimitas, and totius Ecclesiae
Catholicae unitas, auctoritate concordissima approbarint ac roborarint: adeo ut
nullus ei singulariter, verum Vniversitati Ecclesiae Catholicae cum ea and in
ea queat anniti. Si enim adversam fidei Orthodoxae in quoqua^ conspiceret,
nequaquam eam Romanae Ecclesiae Antistes Venerabilis Innocentius cum totius
Orbis Episcopis suscepisset, neque praedictum Patrem memorabilem suarum
Epistolarum communiter privatimque officiis affecisset, neque successor ejus
Zozimus eodem tramite concurrisset, neque Bonifacius ejusdem Apostolicae sedis
Praesul Epistolas Pelagianorum sibi delatas ei ad respondendum misisset, aut
responsionem ejus quatuor libris editam probabiliter atque honorabiliter
suscepisset. Coelestinus quoque memoratae Urbis Episcopus, quid contra Gallorum
insaniam super eo ejusque doctrina senserit, ex auctoritate Apostolica
Decretorum suorum scita declarant. Can it be doubted then my Lords, but the H.
See will in its Judgment upon the five Propositions concerning Grace, confirm
the Authority, and follow the doctrine of great S. Austin, approved and
received by all the Popes that have spoken of it, and which we find at this day
at Rome in general esteem, and most high Veneration? Ought we not to pray to
God that Innocent the Tenth may at this time happily terminate what Innocent
the First so well began, touching the Authority and Doctrine of the same S.
Austin? and ought we not, my Lords, to hope that all the Faithful, who shall
understand that things are preparing thereunto by the establishment of a
Congregation, will with a spirit of truth, submission and peace, await the
Oracle of the H. See, and that the troubles excited amongst them about those
Questions, will be calmed by degrees, to the edification of the Church? for the
good and honor whereof we beseech God to preserve your Lordships, with all the
respect and esteem which we ought to have for your Sacred Persons.

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servants, De Latane
Abbot of Valcroissant. De Saint-Amour. Angran.

Rome, July 15. 1652.
On Tuesday the 16th. I had occasion to go to our Printer, and as I returned I
went to F. Guerin, whom M. Hallier and his Colleagues had visited that very
morning. Among other things, M. Joysel had complained to him, that I reported
them to be the Emissaries of the Jesuits: I never had such a thought;
themselves had done it more then I: but I would fain know what they were else,
considering the confederacy and perpetual correspondence they had with those
Fathers, of which I had at my departure from this visit a fair proof from the
Bishop of Bethleem, who came the same morning to see us; for he told us he had
visited those Gentlemen before his coming to us, and found them all three with
three Jesuits at their lodging, laying their heads together. But to go on with
what F. Guerin informed me; he told me M. Hallier had said to him, all would
have been as well as possible could be, if we would have forborne (as himself
did) to drive the Jesuits upon the matter of Moral Theology: That it was
highly advantageous to himself toward the justification of his present
actings; that he had formerly been the sworn Enemy of those Fathers: That,
speaking of M. Arnauld, he said, he had taken the liberty to set forth diverse
Positions in his book of Frequent Communion, whereof he was afterward obliged
to make explications, of which he gave two instances: First, That Satisfaction
is necessary before Absolution: And secondly, That Priests have power as well
to bind sinners, as to loose them. Now to judge what reason M. Hallier had to
make these complaints, it is good to observe here by the way, that M. Arnauld
never thought of the first, and the second is very true: Quorum remiseritis
peccata, remittuntur eis; and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt, in the Gospel
of S. John, Chap. 20. v. 23.

F. Mariana dined this day with us: He told us, M. Hallier complained that he
found many Jansenists at Rome (so he called all such as gave not a blind belief
to his discourses, and had a sound and serious respect for S. Augustin's
Doctrine:) and truly all Rome was full of this sort of Jansenists. This
afternoon we went to the Palaces of the Cardinals Spada, Ginetti and Cechini,
to pay them our respects upon their being nominated for our Congregation, but
we found only Cardinal Ginetti, to whom we could acquit our selves of this
duty. Afterward we visited Monsignor Sacrista, by whom we understood most of
the same things that F. Mariana had told us concerning the discourse of M.
Hallier and his Colleagues in their visit: He added, that M. Hallier protested
to him, that he had no quarrel against Effectual Grace: That as for what passed
under Clement the VIII. and Paul the V. were he to take a side, he would rather
be for the Dominicans then the Jesuits: That he had been a great Enemy of
those good Fathers: That himself and I had been formerly very good friends:
That I had been sometimes his Scholar (perhaps I might have been, and indeed
when I commenced Doctor, M. Froger Cure of S. Nicolas du Chardonnet, who was
the Director of my Studies, happening to die in that conjuncture, M. Hallier
did me that office, which M. Froger was preparing to do for me the same day he
died) In brief, M. Hallier told Monsignor Sacrista, that he esteemed S.
Augustin's Doctrine good and Catholic, and yet in the course of the conference
he said, That when a Proposition is once condemned by the Church, it is not to
be regarded whether it be in S. Gregory, S. Augustine, or any other; supposing
thereby, with as much ignorance as irreverence toward S. Augustine and the
Church, That a Proposition of S. Augustin's in this matter of Grace under
contest, may be the object of the Churches Censure, which is as much as to
affirm, that the Church may condemn it self.

On Wednesday morning, July 17. we paid Cardinal Cechini the same duty we had
done the day before to Cardinal Ginetti: In the afternoon we went for the same
purpose to the Palace of Cardinal Spada, but could not find him, and therefore
went to that of Cardinal Roma, to thank him for contributing his assistance to
procure the erection of the Congregation: The Cardinal told us he was glad of
it, and that the business would be dispatched (si spedira presto:) That himself
and the other Cardinals were properly only to govern it, and see that all
things were transacted in a fitting manner, and according to form: That a great
number of Divines (una gran mano di Theologi) would be present to hear us; that
M. Hallier and his Colleagues had been sent for that very morning to him, as we
had been the Thursday preceding: That the erection of the Congregation was
signified to them, and that they were told, as we had been, that when they were
minded to be heard therein, they should give notice of their desire, and the
same should be assembled; and that they answered, that they were ready. I asked
the Cardinal, whose care it should be to advertise us when they pleased to
appear for a hearing, that so we might be present at it, and they reciprocally
present when we should be heard? Also, who were the Divines that were to be at
the Congregation? His Eminence answered, that neither point was yet resolved
upon: That sometimes charge was given to Divines to prepare themselves for
these matters, sometimes to others; that some had been excluded, others added:
That being he would speak nothing but was certain, he could not yet tell us any
thing concerning these particulars; but when the List was perfected it should
be delivered to us, that we might repair to the persons if we pleased, although
it would be very troublesome to visit so great a multitude (tanta gente.) We
rendered most humble thanks to his Eminence, and told him we would expect his
orders. As to the main business; he told us also in this conference, that he
had studied these Questions formerly, and understood them a little: We took the
liberty to tell him, that considering the difficulty of the matter, it was
necessary for a man to apply himself entirely thereunto: He answered, that the
Cardinals needed not so thoroughly to understand it as the Consultors; because
the Cardinals have but a judgment in point of Prudence, the Consultors a
Theological one, and the Pope a Decisive. Noi habbiamo un giuditio prudentiale,
i Consultori il Theologico, and sua Santita il decisivo. Yet it may be said to
the commendation of this pious Cardinal, that it were to be wished all the rest
had been as diligently acquainted therewith as he.

On Thursday the 15th, we went again in the afternoon to Cardinal Spada's
house, but had not yet the good hap to meet with him. As we came back, we made
a short visit concerning the business of the Congregation to the Cardinal of S.
Clement, in whom we always found an admirable insight into these matters, and
an equal vivacity and clearness of judgment: We were highly pleased with all
that he said to us in this visit, which had been longer, if the Ambassador of
Bologne had not intervened. We went thence to advertise Cardinal Barberin of
the Congregation, who carried us abroad to take the air, and brought us back to
our lodging. After which I went to our Printer, and as I returned, found F.
Guerin at his door, who told me M. Lagault was newly parted from him, and had
said to him, That were the Question only about Molina and S. Thomas, who held
differing Doctrines indeed, but such as may be followed indifferently, and
without error, they should not be so much concerned; but that the Propositions
were as manifest Heresies as the denial of Transubstantiation, and though they
were not in formal terms in Jansenius, yet it was clear, that they were the
whole foundation of his Doctrine.

On Wednesday the 19th, after we had accompanied the Ambassador to the Pope's
Palace, I met him again at that of Cardinal Pamphilio, whence he carried me
home to dine with him: He told me that he had much congratulated the Pope for
the establishment of the Congregation; that he had told him that his Papacy
would be the most illustrious of all those that had preceded him: that he had
the most glorious occasion in the world; Doctors and Bishops of either side
abundantly submissive, who respectfully attended the Oracle of his Decision,
etc. The Ambassador told me also, that the King meddled not in the business, but
as the common Father of all his Subjects, without inclining either to one party
or other. And moreover, that if he were minded to take a side in this matter of
Religion, it would be requisite that his Majesty did it after another way.

Returning after Dinner to our Lodging to take my Colleagues, we went to
Cardinal Spada, who received our professions of satisfaction for the erection
of the Congregation. From thence we went to see the Generals of the Augustines
and the Dominicans; but finding neither of them, I made a short visit alone to
the Cure of S. Saeviour, who acquainted me that M. Hallier and his Colleagues
began to say that it would not be meet that we argued in the Congregation both
sides present; and that one of the reasons which they alleged was, that it
would take up too much time: whereas on the contrary (said the Cure to me)
there is no more compendious and clear way then to speak in presence one of the
other; because should we do it apart, they would go one way, and we another,
and so we should put all into confusion.

CHAP. II.
Of the first Suspicions we had, that our Adversaries endeavored to obstruct
what was most essential to the Congregation, viz. an open hearing in the
presence of either side. Of the solicitations we made thereupon the rest of
this Month; and our discovering of a design to get Persons wholly suspected by
us appointed for this Assembly. A very considerable Letter which I received
about this time.

THe jealousies continually given us (for whose entertainment we were but too
apt) that M. Hallier and his Colleagues employed all their cares and the credit
of their Patrons the Jesuits and others to quash the condition of mutual
appearance in the Congregation ordained, obliged us to go on Sunday morning (
July 21.) to the Pope's Maistre de Chamber, and tell him that we thought fit to
defer our thanks to the Pope, because we conceived we should have occasion to
address to his Holiness within a short time about some business, and we were
willing to do both together. Wherefore we beseecht him to reserve till that
time the courtesy which he had promised us in introducing us that day to have
audience of his Holiness. Our design in this delay, was, to free our selves
from being obliged to speak to the Pope about this difficulty and circumstance,
and to get it handsomely rectified by the Cardinals without needing to move his
Holiness concerning it when we should give him our thanks for the Congregation
which he had granted us, that so our acknowledgement might be serene and fair,
as the Declaration of it made to us by Cardinal Roma was.

But before I mention our solicitations about this matter, I cannot forbear to
insert a Letter here, which I entreat the Reader to look upon as a thing by it
self; and which I transcribe not, although it has much reference to sundry
things before and hereafter related, but because I find it very elegant, and
apt in this place about the time in which I received it at Rome from a Doctor
of Sorbon, one of my intimate Friends, who writ the same to me from the place
where he then was, June 16. 1652. The Contents follow.

June 16. 1652. SIR,
I Received together the two large Letters you writ to me, full of testimonies
of the confidence and Friendship wherewith you are pleased to honor me. If I
durst, I should find fault with your going too far therein; for I can make no
other construction of your too favorable judgment of me, than that it
proceeds from a singular affection, which gives you an opinion of me far above
what I acknowledge in my self. I have always written to you with sincerity,
and freely signified to you my thoughts and sentiments concerning your journey
to Rome about the affairs which you manage there, and concerning the Proposals
which you have made to me. And because I see things not altered, or at least
vari'd only in appearance and some circumstances, I cannot change my judgment
or disposition. It Is true which you tell me, that the voyage and residence at
Rome is dangerous, and more for regard of the corruption of the mind then of
the body; because that of the latter is sensible and visible, and the other
being spiritual is indiscernible, and ofttimes carries its poison into the
bottom of the heart without being taken notice of, insensibly corrupting Faith
and Reason it self by humane prudence, and a manner of life and deportment
altogether Political, which people contract there, unless they be prevented by
God's special protection and favor. And to tell you true, though I am much
averse from that vice which passes for virtue in the world, yet I account not
my self so strong, but that I think fit to avoid even the occasions of it.
Nevertheless it is not this alone which keeps me from coming to you, and taking
upon me that part which you would assign me in the affairs wherein you are
engaged, and labor with the care and zeal which you have ever professed for
the Church and the Truth. If I conceived I could be as serviceable therein as
you apprehend, and could it reasonably be hoped matters would be so carried and
have such effects and issues as you aim at, solitude should no longer detain
me, nor the danger of the ways or residence at Rome keep me from offering my
self to God, to do him service, and second you in that which you endeavor to
perform to him. But I am so strongly persuaded of the contrary both by potent
considerations taken from humane prudence, as well as from reasons divine, and
founded upon the present posture of things, that all the Remonstrances in your
Letters have not moved me, although otherwise I may say (I think) without
flattery, I am very prone to resign my self and submit to my Friends, and so
devoted to satisfy and content them as far as my ability reaches, that I can
scarce deny any thing to them without doing violence to my self, especially in
things wherein the service of God and honor of Truth are concerned, and to
persons with whom I have some particular league and engagement of Friendship as
I have with you. No, Sir, I cannot believe that ever there will be a regular
and free conference about the matters in contest at this day; and should there
be one appointed, and persons found capable of debating the questions on either
side, and Judges intelligent enough of the truth and sufficiently impartial to
determine them (which is very difficult, not to say morally impossible) I could
not promise to my self the success which you aim at, and seem to hold for
certain. All that could be hoped, so far as I see, from such a Conference, and
most upright Judges, deputed to preside in it, is, that things would remain as
they are, and Truth not be more wounded and oppressed than it has been
formerly; should the Arbitrators be disposed to do something more, and to
pronounce in favor of Truth; they who have been inveigled into the contrary
part, the Temporal Powers engaged with them, and the Spiritual, who at the best
that can be hoped from them (if we may judge by things past) are indifferent as
to these matters, would quite stop the passing of such judgment, thereby to
avoid offending so many of the world; and under pretense of eschewing Division
and maintaining the Church's peace, leave things in the same state in which
they are. If you judge my conjectures, and the consequences I draw from them
disagreeing from your own thoughts, yet I am confident you cannot but say that
the suppositions which I make and from whence I draw those consequences, are
very favorable, and that I put the case of things as well as you can desire,
and in better than there is hopes of seeing them. For leaving you to find
Persons capable to propose, manifest and maintain the truth befittingly in a
regular Conference, I think you will not be backward to confess that there is
not the least likelihood of finding Judges sufficiently intelligent in these
matters, sufficiently well affected to Truth, and sufficiently proof against
all sorts of interests, to pronounce in its favor when they have discovered
it: And if they were truly such, undoubtedly one of the Parties would except
against them or elude and prevent their Judgment. These matters have been
agitated, examined, and determined too in in abundance of the most important
questions and difficulties by the authority and often time in the presence of two
great Popes very learned and of upright intentions. And you know what has been
the issue of those Conferences which lasted many years. You are far from seeing
your affairs in so fair a way; and if you promise your self a better issue
thereof, I attribute it to your zeal and the affection you have for the cause
you manage, which makes you build too much, and ground the hopes of your justly
desired success upon the good reception that has been shown you, and the fair
words and promises which are given you. You will permit me to mind you that
that coin is very current in the world, and more in the place where you are
than in any other; it is that wherewith all payment is ordinarily made; and many
times where there is least will and power to give, the promises are largest.
We have a very fresh example hereof, and in the same affair that you are
soliciting at present, in M. Sinnic and M. Bourgeois who prosecuted the same
before you. All the world knows how they were received well, heard courteously,
how they had sundry audiences of the Pope, who received their requests and
remonstrances by word of mouth and by writing, who gave them good words and
made them still hope from his Holiness all that could be hoped from a common
Father of all the Faithful. M. Sinnic was invited and treated magnificently by
Cardinal Barberin, who made him the goodliest promises in the world, at what
time in all probability the design of remanding him home was already projected,
and accordingly was effected shortly after. All the Proposals of accommodation
made to you touching the B. of Ipre's book, the Doctrine it contains, and the
Bull that has been made to fulminate against it, seem to me as suspicious as
the promises that are given you, and are of much more dangerous consequence.
You know Sir, by experience, in some general and particular Assemblies of the
Faculty in which you were present, how all people easily hearken to such
accommodations, how it is easy to be inveigled to remit something of the
interest of truth in such cases, either by surprise, or by weakness covered
with the pretext of peace; and how such accommodations and modifications are
prejudicial to the truth. These are wounds which prove afterward irremediable;
because they are made by those who profess to defend it; and in this they
injure it more then they who openly impugn it, and are its greatest Enemies. I
confess to you, I could never read without pity (and I speak it too without
any indignation) the Objections and Proposals made to you about the B. of
Ipre's book and the Bull; and that which most amazes me is, that they who made
those Objections and Proposals, pass for persons very intelligent and
well-affected toward the truths of Grace. For to reply that M. d' Ipre
intending to justify some Propositions of S. Augustin's, found among those of
Balus, which have been condemned, and desirous to reconcile the Authority of
the H. See, and of the Bull which seems to condemn them, says Haereo; it is but
to quarrel with that great Lover and Defender of S. Augustine, and Indict him
for a word, and for a word very well spoken, and which shows his great
moderation amidst his great knowledge, and the incomparable zeal he had for the
truth. How frequently does S. Augustine use the same manner of speech, or like
it in his works, when he meets with some difficulty, even against the most
important mysteries and certain principles of Faith? How often has he remained
in such dubitation, while he enquires the manner and way how original sin is
contracted; not to mention abundance of other difficulties, in which he
scruples not to declare his perplexities? and his modesty goes sometimes so
far, as to acknowledge and confess his ignorance in certain cases. If it be
demanded, how the Eternal Father begets his Son, how Jesus Christ gives us his
Body in the Eucharist, how that Body can be the Life and Food of our Souls: If
abundance of other questions be put touching our Mystery, touching the Articles
of Faith, touching the difficult places of Scripture, to reconcile passages
together which seem contrary one to another: who is there of the Doctors
Ancient and Modern, that continuing firm in what the Faith teaches us
concerning those Questions, not only says not as M. d' Ipre, Haereo, but
confesses not that he cannot render a true reason of what he believes, and
remains all his life in that ignorance? And shall it then be taken ill, that in
a very difficult and intricate Question or Fact, in which some unskilful or
ill-meaning persons have gone about to set the Authority of the Pope against
that of S. Augustine, pretending to subject some Propositions of this Doctor of
the Church to the censure of the H. See, M. d' Ipre who has labored with as
much and more diligence and fidelity then any one whatever upon this point,
upholding S. Augustin's Doctrine without injuring the authority and respect
which is due to the H. See, should say at the first view of this affair so
intricate and so difficult to disintangle, Haereo? They who frame these
complaints against that great Prelate, and they who wonder and suffer
themselves to be over-awed when they hear them, show they have no great
understanding in the Doctrine of the Church, and S. Augustine, nor much
stedfastness in what they know thereof. And though they cover their accusations
with the Authority of the H. See, yet I can tell you with assurance, that they
have not (or at least their proceedings argue not) so much zeal, nor so pure
and disinteressed respect for the Head of the Church, or the Church it self, as
M. d' Ipre has had and testified in sundry important occasions, both by his
actions, and by his writings. Other particulars wherewith he is charged, flow
from the same Fountain, and are no less unjust then groundless: If he has
written concerning the matters of Grace, since a prohibition of the H. See, he
is not the only man that has done so, but it is he alone that has written in
that manner that he has done, having only reported the sentiments of S.
Augustine, whom the Church owneth, not only as one of its Pillars, but as its
Master and Teacher, particularly in the matters of Grace; and he writ his book,
being a Prelate and Pastor of the Church; should all those who writ before and
after him, have incurred the Censure of the H. See; yet methinks all these
peculiar considerations ought to secure him from it. Nevertheless, by a most
manifest injustice, endeavors are used to get his book subjected to Censure,
and to acquit all others: Whereas it is alleged, as you tell me, that the
other books have not been informed against as this has been, and that had they
been complained of, and presented to the Pope, they would likewise have been
prohibited: This is to seem blind in these things and deeds either through
ignorance, or passion; through ignorance and want of understanding in these
matters, if we admit they speak really; through passion and interest, if
knowing well how the same have passed, and not believing what themselves
pretend, they think to make the same credited by others: For all the world
knows how many complaints have been made, how many Petitions have been
presented to the Pope against the Jesuits, and the books and writings published
by them about these matters, which yet they urge, are prohibited to be written
of. In one single printed Petition have been noted, I think, twenty Jesuitical
Authors, who have set forth books since that Prohibition, which is urged to
stop that of the Bishop of Ipre. When M. Sinnic passed by Paris to go to Rome,
he took with him a Copy of the Theses of Lovain, printed at the foot of the
Bull, wherein they were expressly prohibited. And for all this, ignorance is
pretended, and they say Justice should have been done against those Authors and
their writings, had complaint been made thereof to the H. See. I confess Sir, I
admire how any dare allege such excuses in the place where you are, as they so
confidently do; and how they can hold you in hand with, etc. You see Sir, with
what liberty I write and expose my thoughts to you in answering to your
Letters: It Is an evidence of the sincerity of the friendship I bear you, and of
the confidence I have in yours. Assure your self I do not forget you in my
addresses to Almighty God; I represent to him your affairs and necessities as
my own, and beseech him to make me as I desire to be always, more and more
yours; which I shall look upon as his mercy toward me, and the making me more
to be his. And I desire you to beg the same of him in my behalf.

The same day that we desired the Pope's Maistre de Chamber to defer the
Audience which he was willing to procure for us, as I related at the beginning
of this Chapter, I went in the afternoon to Cardinal Ghiggi, partly in
reference to M. Hallier and his Colleagues, partly to make some Remonstrances to
his Eminence touching the Consultors and M. Albizzi. I told him that I came to
speak to his Eminence about some things a little troublesome, which concerned
our affair; that I was loath to give him disturbance with them, but we could not
represent the same to him, to the end he might take some order therein if he
could, unless his Eminence were advertised thereof, that so if the Pope
happened to speak to him about them, he might be prepared to tell his Holiness
his sentiments. I told him, that when we were sent for to Cardinal Roma, to
hear the Declaration which he was to make to us from the Pope concerning the
erection of the Congregation, M. Albizzi was present at what the Cardinal said
to us; that by being so it seemed to us that M. Albizzi was intended to be
Secretary of the said Congregation, and that the same appeared to us very hard
to admit, considering his great prepossession against us, and the extreme
partiality which he professed as openly in behalf of our Adversaries. Now to
satisfy the Cardinal concerning his partiality, I intended to represent to
him, 1. What M. Albizzi had done in the business of the Hours. 2. That he had
told me that my opposing the Censure M. Cornet endeavored to get passed in our
Faculty against the Propositions, was a disservice to the H. See. 3. That upon
a bare suggestion of F. Mulard, he had obstinately maintained that we were not
deputed by several Bishops. 4. The manner wherewith, being in his Antichamber,
I had heard him speak of me to two Flemish Cordeliers. 5. His insolence at la
Minerve upon a very civil visit which we made to him. 6. His opposition, and
rigorous, and altogether unjust treatment of us about the impression of S.
Augustine. 7. What he had done on the other side to get published F. Annat's
book, if he could, against the Popes intention; and how he quarreled with the
Printer when he saw that Fathers book prohibited by the Pope. 8. The continual
correspondence he has held with M. Hallier and his Colleagues, since their
arrival, besides that which he has always held with the Jesuits. 9. What I
heard from F. du Plantet, that he had wonderful kindness for them and their
affair. 10. I had also purposed to speak to him about the diversity of the
Commaes, which he had caused to be put into the second impression of the Bull
of Urban VIII. purposely to comply with the Jesuits: But I could not
particularly acquaint the Cardinal with any thing but the insolence which M.
Albizzi had showed us at la Minerve, and his dealing with us about our
impression of some of S. Austin's works; but I did it with great resentment,
terming it barbarous and un procedere di Turco: I added, that it was a shame
that he should deport himself thus with the countenance of their Eminences, and
oftentimes acting in their names: That I had proofs hereof at hand, but it
would require an hours time for his Eminence to see them. The Cardinal seemed
moved at my discourse, and almost convinced of what I said; yet he told me,
that we might comfort our selves, for that the Pope and their Eminences would
look exactly into the matter, having purposed so to do; that he was sorry for
our discontent; but should a Prince have regard to the inclinations and
aversions which one side or other may have against persons, nothing would ever
be done: I assented to him, that to do so generally is difficult, yet
experience sometimes shows, that it is necessary (and the late History of
Mascambrun sufficiently evidences that I had reason.)

Then I proceeded to speak concerning the choice and alteration made of the
Consultors, attributing the same chiefly to the suggestions of M. Albizzi, and
adding, that we had cause to fear that he would do his utmost to introduce
persons engaged in the sentiments of the Jesuits, and exclude such as he saw
inclined to favor S. Augustin's Doctrine.

The Cardinal told me by the way, that S. Augustin's Doctrine, was out of all
danger, che non patirebbe niente. He said also, that the choice of the
Consultors was ordered by the Pope, who elected one person to day, and another
to morrow; that it depended wholly upon his Holiness; nor ought any to ask why
he did thus or thus, for he was the Master.

I replied, that indeed the Pope was the Master; but M. Albizzi having the
advantage to suggest to him this person or that, and to represent reasons to
his Holiness for the exclusion of some or others, he might bear a great stroke
in the nomination. That besides, he had so great a sway over the Consultors,
that they had not the liberty to speak their suffrages in his presence, when
they saw the same were not consentaneous to his sentiments and desires, lest
having private access to his Holiness every eight days, and a great freedom
with their Eminences, he might do them ill offices. That some of them had told
me that they had formerly been spoken to about these matters, but because they
had declared themselves a little too forwardly in behalf of the cause of Grace,
they had heard no further of them since. That my self had experience hereof,
upon an occasional meeting with the F. Commissary of the H. Office, when
discoursing very gently with him about the first Proposition, and he being
satisfied with the answers which I made to him, M. Albizzi superven'd, and
thereupon the Commissary became as it were Metamorphos'd, and not like the same
man, speaking to me with a rude and sharp voice; but when M. Albizzi was gone,
the Commissary resumed his former style, and told me it was requisite to use
such language as he had done only to please him.

The Cardinal answered, that the Pope speaking to him about M. Albizzi, said,
that indeed he was a man that sometimes spoke roughly and passionately, but
otherwise when any thing was to be done, he considered twice upon it.

I told the Cardinal how little versed M. Albizzi was in the matters of Grace,
and so was an incompetent person for the right discharging the office of
Secretary in a Congregation, wherein that business was to be thoroughly
examined. The Cardinal answered, that perhaps he would be the fitter for it,
because he was only to write down what should be dictated to him: I replied,
that to give a true Relation of a Disputation held between Dvines about this
matter, it was requisite for the Relator to understand fully the Opinions both
of the one side and the other, that so he might comprehend the knot of the
difficulty, and faithfully report what should be alleged by either party in
defense of their Sentiments. That heretofore, in the time of Clement the VIII.
and Paul the V. there were two Secretaries; and therefore admitting M. Albizzi
for one, it was our request that at least another might be added to him.

I proceeded then to acquaint him with a third thing which troubled us; namely,
that after we had Petitioned for a Congregation, in which the Parties might be
heard coram openly; that after it had been declared to us, that the Pope had
granted the Congregation which we petitioned for; yet it seemed M. Hallier and
his Colleagues endeavored to hinder the execution of the same as it was
promised. That we designing to speak nothing but what was true and justifiable,
were very desirous to have them present at the Declaration of our Sentiment, to
the end they might either assent and acquiesce in them, or be convinced thereof
in case of denial. On the other side, fearing they might vent many false,
fictitious, and frivolous things, we desired likewise to be present at their
Hearing, that so they might be awed by the apprehension of our replying to
them; or in case they uttered any thing of that strain, the same might be
forthwith excepted against by us, and refuted. That the communication alone of
Papers was not sufficient for this purpose, because possibly they might declare
themselves more amply in speaking, as to some things, which in their Papers
they would but slightly touch upon; yet this slight touching might be enough to
mind those Persons whom they have tampered with, of all that they have
beforehand privately suggested, which however extremely false, must needs pass
for true, unless it be refuted, which is not to be done, unless they be heard;
because the transient intimations in their writings, will scarce be taken
notice of, or make impression; That therefore it was absolutely necessary, not
only that there be an reciprocal communication of the Papers of one side to the
other; but also that we be heard viva voce, and that in the presence of both
Parties.

Cardinal Ghiggi asked me whether we had acquainted Cardinal Roma with these
things. I told him, That we had, but received no plain answer from him about
them. That I hoped his Eminence would be favorable to our Desires, because
besides the justness and advantageousness of them, they were also congruous to
the practice both of the Church and of the H. See. The Cardinal then replied,
that those Practices were understood well at Rome.

I added that we had express order to be importunate upon this point, and no
power to act otherwise; and therefore we beseecht his Eminence to bring it
about that we might suffer no difficulty therein.

The Cardinal began to be something moved at this, and told me; It seems then
you intended to give law to the Pope, but the Pope would receive none from any.
I answered that we intended no such thing; but all our business was to desire
in the name of some Bishops who sent us, a thing which they conceived the
Pope's justice, wisdom and prudence would easily condescend to their request.
He replied, But, questa parola, Vogliamo, That word, we will. I answered that
it was often used innocently to express that which is desired, without
pretending to give law to any person; but for my part I had not used it. He
acknowledged I had not; but added that this other, Non Possiamo, We cannot, had
the same meaning. I answered that it was requisite that we, who acted not in
our own names, should express by some some word our obligation to keep within
the limits the Power has given us; that it behoved us to follow our orders,
and that if we went beyond them, we should be subject to be disavow'd. He
excepted, But can those Bishops themselves impose Law upon us? I answered that
to desire of the Pope urgently, but yet with all possible respect a thing so
very just, was not to impose Law; and that I should not have spoken to his
Eminence so much as I had done, but only to avoid the necessity of speaking the
same elsewhere more publicly; and to the end that he knowing our orders, might
by his prudence and goodness assist us to execute them without further
publishing thereof.

Touching the choice of the Consultors, I proceeded to tell him that if it were
thought fit, I assent that all the Consultors and Qualificators of the H.
Office were indifferently taken, that so the business might clearly appear to
be done without any partiality. And should it be conceived that I made this
Proposal, because there were many Dominicans of it, I was willing that they
should be excluded as well as the Jesuits. The Cardinal excepted, Why so?
Why not a Dominican and a Jesuit? I answered, that as for the Jesuits, it
could not seem reasonable to admit them for Judges in a cause wherein they were
Parties; that we had declared them such at first; that 'twas they who had
excited all this contest, by their intrigues in our Faculty, to get S. Austin's
doctrine condemned, and that by the most strange and unequal proceedings
imaginable. That when the same should come to be laid open in the Congregation,
it would scarce seem credible how such projects could enter into the minds of
men who ought to have some Piety and Learning. The Cardinal replied, that
others might say as much of us, but that the truth of all would be seen in the
sequel. At the end of this Conference he reommended two things to me; First to
endeavor as much as we could to make our writings short and intelligible; and
secondly, to do all things with patience and moderation. I answered that I
conceived we had hitherto acted according to that temper, and in case it happened
we fell into any other, it would be an obligation to cause us to be advertised
thereof, to the end we might take a better course.

The next day in the afternoon I went to wait upon Cardinal Roma. I told him
that my Colleagues remained at our Lodging to prepare our Papers against the
Congregation, and that in the mean time I was come to acquaint him with some
things which troubled us as to that particular. I repeated to him almost the
same which I have newly set down. He made not so large answers thereto as
formerly; yet he satisfied my scruples as courteously as he could; and as for
the point of being heard in the presence of both parties, he readily
acknowledged the benefit of it, and the necessity there would be for it sooner
or later. However he advised me to repair to the other Cardinals, to tell them
as much as I had said to himself in reference to this Article.

The same Evening about ten a clock I received a visit from an Archbishop, who
chose that hour purposely to come and see me incognito, and could not longer
defer telling me some news which he conceived would be very acceptable to me.
He told me that he had conferred with the Pope that morning about our affairs.
That his Holiness himself gave occasion to the Discourse, and told him that he
still remembered the time when the Congregations de Auxiliis were held under
Clement VIII. and Paul V. that he knew all the world was then for the
Dominicans against the Jesuits; that for a long while together the publication
of the Bull whereby the Jesuits were condemned, was daily expected; that
nevertheless it was not published, though they well deser'vd it; But it was
conceived that the H. See acted prudently ( Fic stimato allora grand prudenza,
said the Pope) in not publishing their condemnation; because though the said
Definition would have appeared with the general satisfaction of all intelligent
Persons, yet those matters surpassed the reach of the unlearned, and the
generality of the Faithful. That moreover the Pope said that he knew the
Jesuits Sentiments were not good; and that if he condemned them, there were no
Persons of Learning and Ability throughout Europe but would be satisfied and
well pleased therewith: But that these Truths were so far above the ordinary
capacity of Man, and the weak being much more numerous than the strong, more
would be scandalized than edifi'd with such condemnation. Whence this
Archbishop concluded that if in the process of time I obtained not my designed
condemnation of the pernicious opinions of Molina and his Brethren, yet I was
sure the Pope would never pronounce any thing in favor of them; and
consequently those whom I defended were no wise in danger of being condemned.
He told me also that hereupon he had made a motion to his Holiness, that
considering the Jesuits were so violent in their exorbitances against S.
Austin's doctrine, he would please to make a Decree, by which all the Faithful
might be enjoined in general to follow that great Light of the Church and
embrace his Sentiments. That his Holiness paused upon this Overture, and as he
believed, would take it into consideration.

I had told Cardinal Ghiggi something of what I heard from Cardinal Roma about
the changing of the Consultors, June 17. which he did not so expressly confirm
to me in my visit of the 22d. Wherefore I thought fit to advertise Cardinal
Ghiggi of what I had understood from him in both conferences. For which purpose
I went to him on the 23d. and passing from one Discourse to another, he held me
about an hour in speaking sometimes about our affairs and sometimes about other
indifferent matters. Amongst other he told me, That we and our Adversaries
endeavored to ingratiate with those who sent us by making a great stir, and
giving them a punctual account of all our Diligences. Whereunto I answered,
That as for M. Hallier, he had professed to us, that those by whom he was sent
to Rome, were so little anxious about any thing that was done there, that he
offered me to forbear writing any thing touching our affairs into France, if we
would forbear too. But we could not accept the Offer, because the Bishops in
whose name we were there, were concerned for the least circumstances of what
passed either well or ill in our negotiations, so great interest did they take
in the affair wherewith they had encharged us, and accounted the same of such
high importance. I had received by Letters of June 28. a new Order precisely to
proceed in this manner; and therefore told the Cardinal that we could not
disobey in this point, but we should certainly satisfy this Duty every eight
days. Yet I added, that by writing nothing but the Truth we did our utmost to
eschew the exasperation of things, and rather to qualify and sweeten whatever
passages we had reason to be scandalized and discontented with. That moreover
we sought not to make a stir without necessity, because we could scarce be
sufficient for such things as were indispensible, and therefore had entreated
my LL. the Prelates to send two or three Persons more to assist us, that so we
might better acquit our selves of what was to be transacted both by Speech and
Writing in the Congregation.

Going the next day to speak with sundry persons whom I conceived were then to
be met with at la Minerve, I happened to light upon a Dominican of great age, yet
of a vigorous health and mind, who I afterward understood was called F.
Galassini; he advised me to take care to the nomination that was to be made of
the Consultors for our Congregation, and told me he had learnt from a good
hand, that before they were pitched upon, some Persons did their utmost to
oblige them to declare themselves for Molinisme.

The other considerations upon which, as I related above, the Cure of S. Savior
had counseled us to retain an excellent Advocate well versed in the Court of
Rome, least we might do any thing contrary to form, joined to those first
difficulties about hearing us in presence of either side, and those petty
reproaches of intending to impose Law while we desired to be heard, the Parties
present, obliged us at length to retain one, who, when occasion required, might
plead the justness of our Demands with more earnestness than we durst our
selves, and press his Holiness and their Eminences with more liberty than we
might take, being accustomed, as they are, to repair to them about affairs,
which they lay forth to them at large; and lastly, who might sometimes draw
some secrets and intimations from them, which their shyness kept from us. For
these reasons we went on Wednesday July 24. in the afternoon to Signor Eugenio
of Perugia, a man of great parts and of a very solid and free spirit.

I went next to give half a dozen of our books to the General of the
Augustines, who told me that himself was appointed for the examination of the
Propositions, but with injunction of secrecy. I heard also at the same time,
that Cardinal Roma was the cause that this General was put into the number of
the Consultors.

We went on Monday, Aug. 5. to la Minerve, M. Valeroissant and I, to give some
to the General of the Dominicans; but not finding him, we left them for him,
and gave some to diverse of his Order.

In the afternoon I went to carry a couple to M. Albizzi, who received the same
with civility enough, and said, there could be nothing but good, being S.
Austin's; and that he would shortly peruse them. I told him, we designed
nothing else in procuring this Impression, but the clearing of things; that
when he understood us, perhaps we should be more in his favor then we were;
but the calumnies of all sorts spread against us were so numerous, that I
wondered we were not less: He answered me, that credit was not given to all
reports; that he had lately been told of things alleged against him by us to
deprive him of the Secretaryship; that he did not value the suggestion; that
neither money, nor preferment, nor any other interest, could engage him to
procure the condemnation of the Propositions. I replied, that neither had we
any other interest but the service of Truth, and that of the H. See; that I
hoped he should find it so; but indeed, I had said upon some occasions, that
hitherto we had been much in disfavour with him, and that I wondered we were
not more, considering the ill impressions suggested to him of us. In fine, that
both he and I were to give account to God of the things which we should do in
this world; that the time would speedily come, and that it behooved us to
endeavor to do nothing whereof we might be ashamed before the Tribunal of his
Divine Justice. I offered him as many of our books as he pleased, and left him
with fifteen or twenty Letters newly brought him, which put an end to my visit.

The same day I made another particular visit, wherein I learned that the
custom of the Rota allowed us to print our writings in as great number as was
needful to deliver to the Judges; and that M. Hallier, and his Colleagues, were
taken in many places of Rome for people that attempted the ruin of S. Austin's
Doctrine.

On Tuesday, Aug. 6. I went to present our book to Cardinal Pamphilio, and
withal to give him thanks, as the Popes Nephew, for the establishment of our
Congregation. He received all with satisfaction and civility. Thence I went to
present one to Cardinal Cechini, and though he was weary with a Congregation
that had been held at his house all the morning; yet I forbore not to tell him,
that the book presented to him, contained all the Fundamentals requisite to be
known for the clear comprehending of the present Controversies in the Church,
and in what manner it was fitting to determine them.

Cardinal Ginetti, to whom I delivered one in the afternoon, put me in mind to
present a couple to each of the Cardinals of our Congregation; one bound in red
Spanish Leather, with their Arms stamped in gold upon the Cover, and the other
in Parchment, both of the best binding that could be had in Rome. For having
received these two, he told me, that one of them was to give to Monsignor
Ginetti his Brother. I signified to his Eminence, that I had another for him;
but that second was for their Divine, or such other person as they pleased to
favor with it, and whose assistance their Eminences perhaps might be willing
to use in the Study whereunto they would be obliged for the discussion and
decision of the Propositions. He asked whether this was all the informations
that we purposed to deliver to them? I answered him, No; but that this book was
the main foundation of them. Accordingly I went to present one to Monsignor
Ginetti, who told me he had already read some of our Adversaries Papers, and
should be very willing to read this work also.

Thence I went for the same purpose to Cardinal Barberin's Palace; but not
finding him there, I carried one to M. Holstenio, who testified very great
satisfaction therewith. He much commended our design, and told me that after
our example he would get printed some little Treatises of S. Cyprian and S.
Augustine De Unitate Ecclesiae, and De U^ilitate credendi, etc.

On Wednesday Aug. 7. I went to la Minerve to give some Books to such persons
there as had not yet received any, and to whom we were obliged to do it. I gave
two more to the General of the Dominicans, who told me that M. Hallier said in
a visit to him, That he did not intend against S. Austin, nor against S.
Thomas, nor against Effectual Grace; That he would not meddle with the matters
that had been handled in the Congregations De Auxiliis; in a word, that he
aimed only against Calvin.

When I gave one on Thursday Aug. 18. to the Procurator General of the
Capucines, he told me he had been very glad to see the Latin explication of
the Propositions, which was made shortly after M. Cornets enterprise, and
begins In Nomine Domini, etc. and that he was well edified therewith. He
received it from the F. Capucine Assistant of France named F. Brisse, to whom I
had sent it, having fallen into his acquaintance by going together once or
twice to his General. When I gave one the same day to the Procurator General of
S. Marcel, he told me that M. Hallier had made a second visit to him, in which
he talked after a quite other manner than he had done in the first. The F. Abbot
de la Paix at his receiving one from me, told me that Cardinal Lugo had
counseled him to take heed of us, for we went about to defend Jansenius under
pretext of defending S. Austin. When I delivered some to Cardinal S. Clement, I
presented some also to his Nephews, whose parts, studiousness, modesty and
civility were in particular veneration with me.

At my delivering some to M. Eugenio our Advocate, I fell into the knowledge of
a young Florentine Gentleman named Signor Cosimo Brunetti at his House, in whom
at that first converse I found a very great vivacity and solidity of Spirit,
with a free and ingenuous integrity, much fine Learning, a very prompt, open
and obliging nature. He sojourned at our Advocates House for his improvement in
the study and practice of the laws, and to observe the way and genius of the
Roman Court. I offered him a Copy, which he accepted with great professions of
acknowledgement for the civility which I showed him.

CHAP. IV.
Of an Audience which I had of the Pope, Aug. 9. when I presented our Tome of
S. Augustine to his Holiness.

ON Friday Aug. 9. I went to give one of our Books to the Popes Maistre de
Chamber, and desired him to procure me audience that morning, to present a Copy
likewise to his Holiness. Whilst I was in the Presence Chamber, I delivered
some to sundry Chamberlains of Honor and other Officers, who all received the
same not only with testimonies of civility, but also with professions of an
universal and high esteem of the works of that H. Doctor. Presently after, I
was introduced to the Pope, where having first rendered him our most humble
thanks for the Congregation which he had established in order to our affair, I
presented him the Book. At first he made some difficulty to receive it, not
knowing what it was, least his particular reception of it might be (as he told
me) interpreted for a public approbation. I signified to him that it was
nothing but S. Augustine, and that it was not to be doubted but his Holiness had
such Sentiments of approbation and esteem for the doctrine and works of that H.
Doctor, as his Predecessors had given him example. The Pope answered that there
was no doubt but S. Austin's doctrine was authorized by the Church, and ought
to be embraced as that of the Church it self; but every one endeavored to draw
the same to his own side, and pretended it congruous and favorable to his
Opinions. I replied that the preventing that disorder and foolish pretension of
our Adversaries, was partly the design of printing this Collection, in which
were the principal and last works which S. Augustine had written upon the matter
in contest, when the greatest difficulties possible to be brought against it,
had been both by those whom he opposed, and those whom he instructed, improved
to the highest degree to which they could be raised. That we had put into this
collection, not only some principal passages of those works, but the works
themselves entire, to the end it might be seen more clearly and certainly which
was the true and undoubted doctrine of that Saint. That they whom a secret
light of Conscience convinced that they falsely presumed this heavenly doctrine
to be consentaneous to their low and carnal opinions, thwarted this Impression
purposely to hinder it; that it had been retarded a full month by their
devices; but at length the Tribunal of the H. Office, whither we were drawn
upon this business, judged that there was no ground to inhibit the finishing of
it. That since it had been finished, I had presented Copies of it to almost all
the Cardinals of whom the said Tribunal consisted, and who all received the
same with satisfaction. The Pope replied and bid me give his to Cardinal
Ghiggi, and signify to him that he should deliver the same to his Holiness,
when it was time for him to read it. I answered that I should do what he
appointed, but I conceived nothing hindered but his Holiness might receive it,
and likewise read it when he thought good: That there was nothing at all new in
it besides the Preface, in which we had collected together the advantageous
testimonies of Saints, Popes and Cardinals touching these very works which we
had caused to be printed. The Pope replied that those who had been at Rome in
behalf of Jansenius on the part of the University of Lovain, had also made
Collections, to show the authority of S. Austin's doctrine; but it was a thing
concerning which there was not any doubt. I rejoined, that as for Jansenius,
his Holiness well knew that we had already declared to have nothing to do with
him, and that we took no side but that of S. Austin; but that the Passages in
the Preface were not only to show the authority of his doctrine, but also to
explicate the order and series of those works of that Father which we had
caused to be printed; the matters which were handled in each of these works,
and the occasion which induced S. Austin to compose them. Here I opened the
Book, and read some passages of the Preface as they presented themselves. The
Pope heard them willingly, and among the rest that of Pope Hormisdas, wherein
it is so expressly declared that the Sentiments of the Catholic Apostolic and
Roman Church touching the matter of Free Will and Grace are contained in sundry
of S. Austin's works, but chiefly in two, De Predestinatione Sanctorum, and De
bono Perseverantiae. After which the Pope received the Book which I was come to
present to him.

Then he fell to speak concerning our affair, and told me we must hasten to do
on our part what was necessary for the speedy dispatch of it, because he
intended on his to set about it with diligence, for some reasons which he
mentioned. I answered that we would use all possible expedition; that for that
purpose my Colleagues stayed at home in order to prepare our Papers, lest, being
uncertain whether his Holinesse's affairs would permit us an audience for
presenting the Books, they might have lost two or three hours in his
Presence Chamber; but had they been sure of admittance, they would not have
failed to have come also, and been partakers of the honor and comfort which I
received in this conference with his Holiness. That his Holiness might hence
see how we managed our time, and how diligent we were to be in a readiness to
employ the Congregation which his Holiness had granted to us. That I assured
him, my Colleagues had since notice of its erection, many times spent ten or
twelve hours a day about the business The Pope replied that so we must do if we
would have expedition of him; that he was old, that he had lived fourscore
years, and that if we hastened him not, he should go on slowly. I told him I
should acquaint my Colleagues with his Holinesse's desire of speed, and that the
same should further oblige us to redouble our diligences; but in the mean time
whilst we were doing what lay in our power, and all the Congregation were
employed in a serious discussion of what he had to represent to them, the
tidings of its establishment spread throughout all Christendom, would very
much quiet the most restless minds with the expectation of an approaching
satisfactious decision.

I further took the confidence to intimate to the Pope our extreme desire that
his Holiness's other affairs would allow him some time for the reading of that
little Book which I had presented to him, in order to prepare himself for the
Decision which he intended to make, not only in regard of the necessity there
was for it, to the end he might rightly apprehend of himself whether we or our
Adversaries truly maintained S. Austin's doctrine, but also in reference to the
incredible satisfaction which I hoped he would receive from it. Whereof to
raise in his Holiness some desire, by what my self had received as often as I
had read those little Treatises, I told him (what was most true) that I had
already read the same several times, and knew in general all that was contained
therein; but I had found so great a sweetness in the bottom of my Soul as
often as I had read them, that should I see all the Grandeurs and riches of the
world together offered to me on condition to lose the hope and liberty of
reading those works again when it pleased God to give me time and desire so to
do; certainly all those Grandeurs and riches would be as nothing to me in
comparison of that advantage.

I represented to him what might be desired from thence in reference to the
clearing of obscurities pretended to be in the Sentiments of this so
clear-sighted Doctor; and added, that I conceived I might assure his Holiness,
that our Adversaries could bring no Objection from Humane Reason or the
Authority of the Scriptures against the opinions we defended, but what we could
show in those very works to have been made to S. Austin, and make appear that
the Answers made thereunto in his time were the same with those made by us at
this day. After the Pope had had the goodness to hear all which I here relate,
and more amply than is recited, he answered me in these words with some kind of
astonishment; Dite gran cose, You speak great matters; and I replied in these
very terms, E vero, Beatissimo Padre, posso ingannarim, ma crado ch' io non m'
inganno. It Is true, most H. Father; the things which I speak are great and
appear little credible; I may be mistaken, but I think I am not. This answer I
uttered with so much confidence, and as so strongly persuaded of the things
which I spoke, and the Pope heard the same with such attention, that me thought
he also was half persuaded with what I had said to him.

In fine, I told him further, That 'twas a wonder how he had not been surprised
in this affair, after all the inventions and artifices employed to circumvent
him; that we hoped he would perceive the same in the sequel, and bless God for
it as well as we; and that when he should have one day made, as we hoped, a
solemn decision, the Church would have cause to say of him more truly than the
Poet Ennius ever had to say of Fabius Maximus:

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.
His Holiness smiled; and having given me his Benediction, I withdrew.

CHAP. V.
Of the extraordinary Summons made to us by Cardinal Roma, at the instigation
of M. Albizzi to provide within a Fortnight the Writings which we were to
deliver; Of the two first which we got ready within that time, and subscribed
upon S. Augusti 's day.

IN the afternoon of the same day I went to carry a couple of our Books to
Cardinal Barberin, who said to me as he received them, Gli altri se ne
serviranno ancora, The others (i. e. your Adversaries) will make use of the
same too. I answered, Eminentissimo si; They might serve themselves of them if
they could; but they would not find in them whereupon to support their opinions
if they followed the principles of Molina; that we would have sent each of them
a Copy, if we had not doubted either that they would have construed this
civility, as they did some which we showed them at their first arrival, as done
out of the fear we had of what they could do against us, whereas the same
proceeded merely from our benevolence toward them; or that they would have
taken it for a piece of mocquery and insulting on our part, so apparent was it
how little favorable or acceptable the little volume could be to them.

On Saturday Aug. 10. I gave one to F. Hilarion, who made great account of it,
and likewise highly approved our design of making the difference of the several
senses whereof the Propositions were capable, when we should come to that point
before the Congregation, hereby to save them that trouble, and to have
something fixed, to the defense whereof we might stick.

From that day till Thursday Aug. 15. the day of the Assumption, excepting that
I was obliged to go and distribute some of our Books to some Persons to whom
they were due, either upon account of their eminent and considerable dignity,
or in regard of particular friendship which we had with them, I continued in
our Lodging with my Colleagues, to finish and revise with them our first Paper,
entitled De gestis in negotio quinque Propositionum; to the end we might have
the same ready to appear before the Congregation upon the first occasion, and
leave it there after we should have spoken upon that subject what we had to
represent to them. But that Thursday evening a Ticket arrived which checked the
satisfaction we had in distributing our Books, and was a new occasion of
hastening.

A Laquay of Cardinal Barberin's brought the same to me about Sunset, and told
me he had received it from his Dean, that is to say from the Dean of that
Cardinal's Laquayes, who according to custom receives it from the Maistre de
Chamber, and encharges with it whom he pleases of his Companinions. This
subordination there is amongst the Laquayes, and the Dean is clothed in black,
and not in the colors of his Master, as the rest are.

The Ticket contained these words; Monsieur de Saint Amor, si compiacera d'
esser di matina con l'aleri due suoi compagni, dall' Eminentissimo C. Roma per
le quindeci hoar; Per gratia non manchi, che deve parlarli d' ordine di nostro
Signore. 15. Agosto 1652.

This Ticket gave us some amazement, and of the diverse reasons for which we
conjecture it written, and upon which we bethought our selves what to answer,
that which we judged most likely, was, that the intent of it was to instigate
us to hasten our informations to the Congregation as soon as possible: In which
case we had a very good answer to make, namely, that we were not behind hand,
since the Congregation was not yet perfectly formed, the Consultors who were to
be of it, not being yet determined, but provided they were so between that day
and the end of the month, we should be ready against that time.

Yet we could hardly believe that this was the business, because the Pope had
in my audience the Friday before professed indeed his desire of hastening, but
signified not such impatience as that we needed purposely to be sent for upon
so solemn a day; and because since that audience it was not likely that M.
Albizzi had seen his Holiness, considering that Thursday this year being the
day of the Virgin's assumption, there had been no Congregation of the H. Office
before the Pope, and consequently M. Albizzi had had no occasion to repair to
him on Wednesday evening; and I understood he had spent all that afternoon at
Cardinal Spada's Palace about a Law-Process which was examined touching a
defectuosity found in the Registers of the H. Office in reference to the matter
of the conception.

Accordingly on Aug. 16. we went to Cardinal Roma between eleven and twelve a
clock, uncertain what he had to say to us, but well prepared to answer to
whatever it might prove; M. Albizzi came thither also. The Cardinal entered
into his Chamber as he came from his Chapel, where he had said Mass, still
habited with his Cope, and a very modest Surplice, which was of plain silk, and
had no Needle Work. M. Albizzi entered into his Chamber before us, and after a
short time we were called in: Seats were placed for us right over against the
Cardinal, and M. Albizzi was seated on the right hand between his Eminence and
us. The Cardinal told us, that it was more then a month since the Congregation
had been established; that we had not yet delivered any writing in; that the
Pope desired to expedite this affair, and allowed us fifteen days more; which
past, if we were not ready, his Holiness would think what he had to do, and
take such course in the business as seemed good unto himself. M. de
Valcroissant answered, that since the first advertisement that we had received
of the establishment of the Congregation, we had not lost one moment of time,
as his Eminence should find when he saw our writings; that however we should be
ready within the time prefixed: The Cardinal replied, that he was glad of it. I
interposed, and told him, that though we had notice of the Pope's resolution
for erecting the Congregation, yet it did not yet seem to us perfectly settled,
because we were not advertised what Consultors were to be of it, and therefore
beseech'd his Eminence to tell us whether they were appointed. The Cardinal was
just going to answer me, but M. Albizzi interrupted him, and said, that we had
nothing to do to think of the Consultors; that they were not the persons that
made report to the Pope; but the Cardinals; and therefore the Informations
ought to be delivered to their Eminences within the time limited. The design
and project of M. Albizzi was, that we should give all the Informations and
Instructions touching our affair to the Cardinals within those fifteen days;
for he, as well as M. Hallier and the Jesuits, sought nothing else but to
stifle it, and make it abortive. But to avoid further manifestation thereof
upon this occasion in his presence, and making more stir about his interrupting
the Cardinal, and by that means depriving me of the opportunity of replying to
his Eminence: I made semblance of not having heard what M. Albizzi said; but
looking toward the Cardinal, and perceiving he answered nothing, I was silent
also, and we arose up. The Cardinal reconducted us through two Antichambers as
far as his Dining Room, and at parting desired us very courteously to make
haste, that we might not cause any delay in the dispatching of this affair;
perch si voleva spedir ta cosa: For that it was resolved to expedite the same
speedily. This Cardinals intention was very upright, for he had long complained
of the want of necessary order in it; but many others endeavored to drive it
on so fast, because they were unwilling to have it further examined: They could
not endure the carrying it on with that vigor as we did, and they feared, lest
our little S. Austin, which was growing to be common, and read by all the
world, out of the curiosity that every one had to understand so eminent a
Controversy, would make all the world, and the Pope himself become Augustinian.

From Cardinal Roma we returned directly to our lodging, and began that
afternoon to lay aside all other business, and to betake our selves all three
to our writings, that so we might prevent vexation, stop rumors, and give M.
Hallier and his Colleagues no occasion to break off and go away, as we were
informed they intended to do by All Saints day at the first, under pretext that
no progress was made.

Wherefore I fell to work almost continually without going abroad, together
with my Colleagues, till Tuesday Aug. 28. being S. Augustin's day, when we
signed the first Copy. All that I learnt in this interval, was the confirmation
of what M. Hallier had declared to the General of the Dominicans, that he
neither was against S. Austin, nor S. Thomas, nor Effectual Grace, nor what had
been done in the matter de Auxiliis, under Clement VIII. and Paul V. that
thereupon the said General asked him whether he assented to the Propositions
taken in the sense of Effectual Grace, and told him, that as soon as he found
that the Question in this affair was about the Controversy his Order had with
the Jesuits, which had not yet been decided, he would not suffer it to be
decided amongst other parties without interposing therein.

The same day, Aug. 28. we went to Cardinal Roma to present our first writings
to him: We understood that he kept his bed, and thereupon entreated his Maistre
de Chamber to give his Eminence notice thereof.

On Thursday the 29th in the afternoon, I went alone to Cardinal Roma: His
Maistre de Chamber told me, that he had acquainted him with our being there the
day before, whereof his Eminence was very glad, and told him he should be very
willing to hear us, and the first audience he gave when he was recovered should
be to us. I signified to this Gentleman, who was a very good and honest man,
that I conceived we had nothing to do till his Eminence's recovery, because I
believed he was the first to whom our writings were to be presented, and from
whom we ought to receive what orders we were to observe for appearing the first
time before the Congregation. The Maistre de Chamber answered, that he thought
that was the right course; nevertheless, if I pleased, I might repair to M.
Albizzi about it, because he, as Secretary, had the direction of every thing. I
replied, that I was unwilling to go to M. Albizzi, because perhaps his Eminence
would be better within two or three days; and in case his infirmity continued,
it would be time enough then to consider what course to take. He was satisfied
with this resolution, and I was very glad of it, being loath to come into M.
Albizzi's hands sooner then needs must; and partly because we might have
leisure for the making of other Copies of our Papers to present to the other
Cardinals, at the same time that we delivered the first to Cardinal Roma: To
which purpose I went to find out diverse Clerks or Copists; and excepting the
time of my attendance upon the Ambassador on Friday the 30th, I spent that day
and the next with my Colleagues, in setting our Clerks to work, and comparing
what they had written.

Aug. 31. going between four and five a clock in the afternoon to learn tidings
of Cardinal Roma, I found that he was gone abroad to make a visit hard by;
wherefore I staid till his return, and saluted him as he alighted out of his
Coach, congratulating him both for his recovery, and the hope it gave me that
his health would permit him shortly to look upon our Papers, and betake himself
to all the rest of our affair. He answered, that he was far from being
recovered, that he went abroad only by order of the Physicians to take a little
air; but as soon as it pleased God to restore his health, he would willingly
employ it in what concerned us. I replied, that in the mean time we would offer
our prayers to God to return it sufficiently for that purpose; and certainly it
was much our obligation and interest so to do, in regard of the understanding,
sincerity and uprightness wherewith we knew he would comport himself therein.

CHAP. VI.
Of two Conferences held at Paris during this month of August, between M. de
Saint Beuve, Doctor and Professor of Sorbon, and F. l'Abbe the Jesuit. Other
Letters written to us from Paris, during the same month, enjoining us not to
appear but in presence of our Adversaries.

I Received news at the end of this month of two famous Conferences held at
Paris, in presence of some persons of Quality, between M. de Saint Beuve and
F. l' Abbe the Jesuit, touching the subject of a work published by this Father
in reference to the controversies of the times. The Father received much
confusion therein, having been convinced of foul dealing, or little
intelligence of the points whereupon they conferred, which were many in number.
The Letter which M. de Saint Beuve did me the favor to write to me about it,
contains so clear and compendious an account thereof, that it may be inserted
here at length, with the satisfaction of those that shall read it, and without
much interrupting the course of the principal Narration in hand.

A Copy of the said Letter.
From Paris Aug. 2. 1652. SIR,
THe discourse of F. Annat is the common discourse of the Society. Those good
Fathers published here as well as at Rome, that the Pope is to pronounce with
all speed; and when they are told that there is no Congregation yet settled in
which the Parties may be heard, they answer, that his Holiness will not hear
any Parties, and that their Society has resolved not to enter into a
conference either at Paris or at Rome, touching the controverted Doctrine. This
is what F. l' Abbe said to me in the conference I have had with him, when he
wished it might be heard privately, for fear, as he said, it might be disowned
by the Society, which has resolved not to confer about these matters:
Nevertheless, I think not to offend them, if I acquaint you with some of the
particulars of it: You shall know then that he has composed a book entitled
Elogium Divi Augustini, Umbra ejusdem, Tumulus novae Doctrinae, Epitaphium,
Antitheses Cornelii Jansenii and Divi Augustini. He presented the same to M.
Dugue Bagnols, to whom he is known, for he lived long at Lions, and is
Procurator General of that Province. M. Dugue surepris'd at the sight of those
Antitheses, committed the same to the perusal of some friends, and by them was
assured, that they were full of falsifications; whereupon he repaired to the
Father, and engaged him to a Conference, for which I was chosen: The day,
place, and hour appointed in the presence of the Abbots Charrier, and de
Bernai, M. M. de Morangis, de Beaumont, Dugue, the Lieutenant Criminal of
Lions, de Pomponne and Croisi, at the house of M. de Bernai. I offered to make
good five things: 1. That the Author in contriving his Antitheses, had made use
of many Treatises constantly held not to be S. Austin's. 2. That it appeared
upon perusal of them, that he had no tincture of the reading of that Father. 3.
That he had corrupted his words shamefully. 4. That he had perverted his sense:
And 5. That he had falsifi'd M. d' Ipre in the places which he cited for his
Antitheses, both as to the words and the sense: I proved the former of these:
1. Because he cited as S. Austin's works the book De vera and falsa
Poenitentia, that De Praedestinatione and Gratia, the Hypognosticon, the 191
Sermon De Tempore, which is Pelagius's Confession of Faith, and the book ad
Articulos sibi falso impositos; and I justified all this by the testimony of
Cardinal Bellarmin; lib. de Script. Eccles. in Aug. and Hier. which as you see
admits of no reply. The second Charge I made good, by producing two and twenty
allegations ill made; among the rest, the fifth book ad Simpl. The three Operis
imperfecti; the ten contra Julianum: And to make it appear that it was not
through errors of the Printing, I desired the F. to tell me whether they had in
their College the third book of the Opus Imperfectum; if they had, to let me
see it: He promised I should, telling me, they had the same of two or three
Editions. The third was proved, by confronting the places as he cites him, with
the plain Text, and made horrible things appear; as for example, that he added
a Negation to an affirmative Proposition of S. Austin 's, etc. I proved the
fourth only by two places, the time enforcing brevity; the first of which was
an objection of S. Augustine, which he cited as if it was his answer; and the
other was the Pelagian Doctrine, which he called the Augustinian: And for the
fifth, I contented my self with choosing one place out of M. d' Ipre, which he
falsifi'd in the citing, by putting a negative for an affirmative: All this
convinced the Company, who demanded of this good Father; whether he had any
thing to object against me; whereupon apprehending that they were desirous to
see me act the Respondent as well as the Opponent, I declared that I was ready
to perform that part too; and for the subject of the next Conference (for it
was above six a clock) I said I was ready to maintain, that of all the
Antitheses of that Father, there was not one good: That day sevennight being
appointed, all the abovesaid persons met at the same place again, excepting M.
de Bernai, and M. de Pomponne, who were gone out of Town; but in their stead
came M. de la Moignon, the Father having professed that he would not confer if
there were more persons then at the first time, for fear lest the matter might
become public, which would be prejudicial to him, for he should be disclaimed
by the Society, which had resolved not to enter into Conference either at Rome
or at Paris: I began with the same declaration that I had ended the precedent;
and having again declared that I would hold my self worsted if, the Father
could prove against me, that so much as one of his Antitheses was sound; the
Father refused to confer about that point, but only about the ground of
doctrine: The Company told him, it would be more contentment to them, if he
kept to the business in hand, without meddling with the Controversy in which
they understood not very much; yet they could not bring him to accept my
Challenge: Wherefore I made another to the second part of his work, Umbra
Augustini, being a Latin Poem, speaking whereof in his Epistle Dedicatory, he
had written, Corrupit Augustini Doctrinam Jansenius, and Poema Prosperi de
ingratis parum gratus Poeta Gallicus: Emendat Poetam Umbra Augustini: I offered
to make immediately an Antithesis of his Poem, and that of S. Prosper, and to
show that they were perfectly opposite: He was unwilling to accept of this
offer too, but proposed to dispute at large of matters of doctrine, whereunto I
assented: He propounded five points: 1. That M. d' Ipre was condemnable, as
having written against the Council of Trent, and consequently against S.
Austin, by affirming, That a man moved by Grace, is necessitated as to his
liberty: Whereunto he was answered, That such a man is necessitated in sensu
composito, but not in sensu diviso; and told that M. d' Ipre says no more,
which is not condemnable, unless the whole School of S. Thomas be condemned
too: After many Contestations, the Father was obliged to consent with us. The
second was concerning Sufficient Grace, and it was proved to him, that M. d'
Ipre denied none but the Molinistical, in which he had so much reason, that
Aquaviva himself had condemned it: He was loath to yield to this, but at length
was constrained to it. The third was, concerning the necessity of sinning
without Grace; which whole Doctrine having been explicated, he was reduced to
the works of Infidels, and granted, that it was a Theological Question; whence
I inferred, that then M. d' Ipre was not condemnable in this point. And this
Doctrine appeared so fair to all the Hearers, that they declared highly for it.
The fourth concerned the Commandments, and I having showed him, that the
Doctrine maintained by us as to this point, was held by all the Thomists, the
Defenders of Congruous Grace, and the Church in her Prayers; having reduced the
Question to Final Perseverance, and proved that what the Father held, was the
Doctrine of the Pelagians, Epist. 103. and of Caelest. l. de perfect. Iustitia;
and having made out, that supposing the necessity of Grace to act, it follows,
that we cannot act without it; For, Necesse est sine quo aliquid esse non
potest; The Father could not condemn the Dominicans nor the Congrui, of whose
number he professed himself; and therefore was constrained to absolve M. d'
Ipre from the accusation which he had charged upon him. The last was touching
the Death of Jesus Christ; in reference to which, after I had explicated to him
the Doctrine of M. d' Ipre, and S. Austin 's Disciples, I showed him, that the
same was held by Vasquez, Pesantius, Pius, M. de Chartres, the Cardinal de
Retz, and in a word, by all the Divines who say that de singulis infantibus non
est provisum sufficienter; as also by those who say as much de infidelibus. I
made him see that his Doctrine was the same with that of the Semipelagians
against S. Austin, ad Cap. Gall. and S. Prosper, ad object. Vins. After which I
proved, that that whereof he complained, was no other but S. Austin 's: Whence
I concluded, that therefore M. d' Ipre, and S. Austin 's Disciples, could not
be condemned as to this Article. The whole Company remained convinced thereof,
nor did the Father gainsay it: It was almost seven a clock when this was done;
and the general conclusion was a complaint which M. Dugue made to the Father
for having termed S. Austines disciples Monstres, Lutherans and Calvinists.
Whereunto the Father answered, that it was written Poetice. Thus the conference
ended, and thereupon some of the Company remembering the title of that Poem,
Umbra Augustini; added to it, and Umbrae somnium. I conceived that I could not
conceal these Passages from you, because hearing of the same written by another
hand, you would never have pardoned me. As for other things, I entreat you to
endeavor to confer with B. Hallier in presence of some person of quality. I
have not received the Book of that Bernardine. I am now out of my Lectures; in
which I can say, that Ita explicatum est liberum arbitrium ut vicerit Dei
gratia. I think to read concerning the Euchartst next year, and to encounter
Mares (Maresius) to the purpose; but that design is not yet fully resolved
upon, M. le Morice intends to treat of Predestination, and to refute the third
Apology. M. Girard salutes you, and so does M. Beaumont, etc. and my self, who
am more then any other,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient servant, de Saint Beuve.

All the Letters I receiv,d from Paris of this latter date, during this whole
month, spoke of nothing but of the Congregation, of the establishment whereof
we had given notice to my LL. the Bishops. Those, in answer to the first news,
we sent of it were full of nothing but expressions of joy, benediction, and
hope; to see our Disputes happily terminated, to the edification of the Church,
and the glory of the H. See. But after they understood what restrictions were
desig'd to be made of the conditions, whereupon we had sued to the Pope for the
Congregation; that we were not assured, but with hesitation that our
Adversaries should appear there in our presence and we in theirs; that there
was but so much as the least thought of putting a Jesuit into the number of
the Consultors (a Member of that society who was our principal Antagonist, and
a Confrere of those who had made the chief corruptions in Doctrine, who had
been the first Authors of all these troubles, who had instigated supreme Powers
to fire and sword against us as against Plagues of that State and Religion;)
that besides this they heard what triumphs were made everywhere, because there
would be no regular conference before the Congregation; and that the same was
granted to us, but as a Ceremony intended to be observed for the condemning of
us with more solemnity, after we had rendered account of our Faith, by making us
undergo a kind of Examination.

The joy was soon turned into sadness, and the sweetness of the former hope
into bitterness; nevertheless it was not all lost. The goodness of the cause we
had to maintain, and the justice of the conditions upon which we demanded that
it might be lawful to defend the same, induced my Lords to enjoin us and our
friends to counsel us anew, that we should continue our instances, for the
effectual obtaining in the sequel all that we had at first demanded, and which
there was reason to presume with all kind of justice that had been promised us,
after the declaration made to us by Cardinal Roma from the Pope. Above all, we
were enjoined by them not to appear before any Congregation, except in the
presence of our Antagonists, and unless the proceedings were according to the
Laws of a regular Conference, as had been done under the Popes Clement VIII.
and Paul V. in the Congregation de Auxiliis.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Contents of our two first Papers: Wherefore one was concerning what had
passed in the Affair of the Five Propositions, and the other touching the
authority of St. Augustine.

NOtwithstanding the abovementioned Letters, we did not think that things were
reduced to such extremity; although we perceived some difficulties therein,
even greater then were yet apprehended at Paris. The last rudeness showed us by
M. Albizzi in presence of Cardinal Roma; first by pressing us with such
impatience to provide precipitously all our Writings about the Five
Propositions within a fortnight, otherwise the Pope would proceed without any
regard to what we should have to say; and next by interrupting the Cardinal, to
tell us disdainfully that it did not belong to us to inquire who were the
Consultors, nor to confer with them, instead of suffering the Cardinal to
inform us of them, who had promised us a List of their names as soon as they
should be determined: This last rudeness (I say) was hitherto unknown in
France, and none but our selves were yet sensible of the arrogance and scorn of
it. It was so deeply resented by us, not only in respect of the dignity of the
French Bishops by whom we were sent, who seemed to be injured in our persons,
but also upon our own account, who deserved to be treated after another sort,
had there been nothing else considerable in us, besides the honor we had of
being Doctors of the Parisian Faculty; that we were tempted to lay aside all
our other Writings, and put up our Complaits to the Pope by a Memorial, wherein
the action should have been represented as it deserved. But all things
considered, we judged it more fit to suppress our resentment for a time, and
defer our complaints to a more advantageous opportunity, then to afford our
adversaries ground to triumph further over us for delaying our Writings, and to
proclaim, as undoubtedly they would, that we deferred them on purpose, because
we had not confidence to produce them; which resolution was the more easily
taken, for that we conceived, that after we had presented the same to Cardinal
Roma, it would be more seemly to complain to him of M. Albizzies strange action
which passed in his Presence, and that his Eminence would do us Justice for it.
Thus our patience and moderation as well as extraordinary Diligence which we
took to finish them, were the cause that we had them ready, as I said by S.
Austin's day, signed them the same day, and went to present them to Cardinal
Roma.

Which though his sikness permitted us not to do, and his Dignity of Dean of
our Congregation forbad us to deliver them to any of the other Cardinals before
his recovery which we daily expected; nevertheless before I relate all the
occasions wherein mention will be made thereof hereafter during the month of
September, it will be meet to give a brief account of them here, it being
impossible to insert them at length, by reason of the too great interruption
which they would cause in this Narrative.

It must be remembered how I described the making of Memorials with an
inscription on the outside, containing the persons name to whom they are
addressed, those of the Supplicants, and the subject or affair about which they
speak. We prepared our Writings in the same form, though they were very thick;
the first containing twenty leaves, and the second an hundred and ten. We set
the Inscription upon them as they use to do upon Memorials, though not on the
backside, but in the first page of the first leaf. The Inscription of the
first Writing contained these words in Latin.

To the most B. Father Pope Innocent X. To my LL. the most eminent Cardinals,
Roma, Spada, Ginetti, Cechini and Ghiggi. And to the other Divines deputed, or
to be deputed for the Congregation touching the Affair of the Propositions
concerning Grace.

By MM. Noel de la Lane and Lovis de Saint Amor Doctors of the Faculty of
Divinity of Paris, and Louis Angran Licentiate in the same Faculty.

Against MM. Franceis Hallier, Franceis Joysel, and Jerosme Lagault Doctors of
the same Faculty.

The first Information upon matter of Fact.

The second Writing had the same Inscription, only with this difference, that
it was entitled, The first Information upon matter of Right.

It is to be observed in reference to these Inscriptions, that we inserted the
words, To the Divines and Consultors deputed or to be deputed: because when
Cardinal Roma gave us notice from the Pope of the Congregation, he said it
would consist of Cardinals and Theologians; and therefore they were to be
mention,d in that Title, for fear of giving them offense in case they were
omitted; but being we know not yet whether they were appointed or no, having
received no list of them, we thought fit to use said alternative words;
trusting, that if they were not determined, they would be shortly; and that
when they were, they would fall to examining our Writings in order to judge of
them, as well as the Cardinals, and before them too, notwithstanding what Mr.
Albizzi said to us as to that point.

We forbore to mention the Jesuits, yet because we reserved them for the
second Information touching matter of Fact, which we purposed to deliver in the
process of the Affair, and delivered accordingly, as shall be showed hereafter.

But to return to our two first VVritings abovementioned; The first contained
what had passed in the Five Propositions since M. Cornet propounded them to the
Faculty, July 1. 1649. till that time. It was almost the same with what I have
related in the first Part of this Journal, concerning what was done in the
Assemblies of the Faculty on the first day of July, August and September of the
same year 1649. the false Censure which they published throughout all France,
and sent to Rome under the name of the Deputies of the Faculty, what was done
in the Parliament, October 5. which we intimated, rather then set forth at
large; and concerning the patcht Peace which was made in the Faculty in
December: The Theses which M. Hallier signed as Syndic, in which the first and
third Proposition in the sense wherein we held them, were maintained in
Sorbonne with his approbation, Jan. 1650. The Letter which M. de Vabres
procured to be subscribed by a multitude of Bishops, the Subscriptions begged
here and there in all Societies; what was done upon this occasion in the affair
of the Irish, the false deputation of F. Mulard, and other things done at Rome,
from the time of our arrival, till July 11. 1652. when the Cardinal Roma gave
us notice of the Congregation. One thing also we observed in this writing,
which I have not so expressly related above; namely, that all these enterprises
were designed to procure by such scandalous and oblique ways the destruction of
S. Augustin's Doctrine, which they veiled under the obscurities of these
equivocal Propositions contrived purposely to deceive. Wherefore we concluded
this writing, requesting most humbly, that to the end all things might be done
in this affair without fraud and confusion, before the examination of the
Propositions were proceeded to, they might be altered and reduced into the
several senses whereof they were capable, in such sort, that they might be free
from all equivocation, and that the Catholic sense which they contained, and
we alone held, might be distinguished clearly and plainly from the erroneous
sense in which they may be understood (all that I relate of this Conclusion, is
nothing but a faithful Translation) that the senses being thus distinguished and
separated into several Propositions, we might declare which were those which
abhorred, anathematized, and had always anathematized with S. Augustine, the
Council of Trent, and the whole Catholic Church. That our Adversaries might be
also obliged to keep the same course, and govern themselves in such sort, as to
what they should argue and write against us, that there might be no question
between them and us of the senses which we had once condemned, and declared
that we acknowledged false, but only of those according to which we maintained
the Propositions to be Catholic, and pertaining to the Faith of the Church; by
which means the dispute between them and us would be clearer and shorter, and
all ambiguity and fallacious subtilty being retrencht, it would be more easy
and safe to pass Judgment upon them.

We declared further by anticipation, that we purposed not to maintain the
Propositions in any other sense, then in that which we should demonstrate to be
suitable to S. Austin 's Doctrine. Could any offers in the world be more
equitable and Christian? and could the same be refused by such as had the least
sentiments of charity, either Christian or Civil? But to follow my Translation,
we added, that being the whole authority of S. Austin's Doctrine was founded
only upon the testimonies given to it by the Supreme Pontifs and the whole
Church, and therefore ought rather to be styled and accounted the Doctrine of
the Supreme Pontifs and the whole Church than S. Austin 's; (...) the end (...)
remain safe and entire in the Church as it (...) been, and secured from all
impeachment in reference to those who dared to lift themselves up against it;
to the end also to establish between our Adversaries and us a principal and
certain rule of all the (...) which (...) should have both by speech and
writing (...) the Propositions, such as had been lately established by Clement
VIII. and Paul V. Lastly, to give our Adversaries place to clear themselves, if
they thought good, of the reproach charged upon them by us of having attempted
to destroy it; We summoned them to declare by an authentic Writing that they
acknowledged for true and indubitable (as we maintained they were) the
Propositions following.

I.
That any Doctrine, Proposition or Opinion touching the matter of Grace,
Free Will, or Divine Predestination, which shall be found to be S. Augustin's,
or necessarily or evidently coherent with his Doctrine, cannot in any wise be
condemned either of Heresy or Error, or with any other kind of Censure
whatsoever.

II.
That never any Doctrine or opinion of S. Augustine has been condemned of
Error by any Popes or approved Councils.

III.
That the Council of Trent has not defined or taught any thing that is
contrary in any sort to S. Augustin's doctrine touching Grace.

IV.
That all that S. Augustine has held against the Pelagians, and Semipelagians,
as a certain and Catholic Doctrine, ought likewise to be held for such; as
likewise nothing ought to be held which is contrary to that Doctrine.

V.
That to affirm that S. Augustin's Doctrine touching Grace is uncertain,
contrary to its self, exorbitant, obscure, harsh, unworthy of the Clemency of
God, little suitable for edification of the Faithful, or any thing else of
that kind; is injurious to Popes, Councils, Saints, and generally to the whole
Catholic Church.

VI.
That presupposing the H. Scriptures, and the Definitions of Popes and
Councils, the Doctrine of S. Augustine touching Grace is a most clear and
certain rule, by which the Propositions in question, and all other generally
whatever concerning Grace, Free Will, and Divine Predestination, may be
examined with certainty, and also by right ought so to be.

These six Propositions we demanded that our Adversaries might be obliged to
acknowledge together with us for true and indubitable; and to let them and our
Congregation know that we made not this Demand without reason, but for the
clear and plain stating of Principles upon which both sides were to build and
proceed, we presented to them the second Writing, which, as I said above, was
the First Information concerning matter of Right, and was thus entitled, The
Tradition of the whole Church in reference to the Authority of S. Augustine 's
Doctrine.

This second Writing was larger than the first, and contained eminent
Testimonies touching this matter of more than twenty Popes, of as many General
Councils, National or Provincial, and of above sixty either Saints, Fathers of
the Church, or illustrious men, or Divines, or Religious Orders, or famous
Universities, who during the space of twelve Ages had approved and commended
this Heavenly Doctrine, as well in the Greek Church as in the Latin: And we
answered also in the said Writing to all the Objections that the Jesuits are
wont to make against the Authority of that H. Doctor.

And because we are advertised that when Writings presented at Rome to
Congregations happened to be somewhat long, the custom was sometimes to draw
Summaries or Abridgements of them, for the ease of such as were to read them,
and that either to give them beforehand a Model of all the Contents of such
presented Writing, or to help them to recollect the substance thereof after
reading; we made one of both our Writings containing eight leaves. The
Conclusion whereof was, That having thus established the Authority of S.
Augustine 's Doctrine, we had nothing to fear in reference to the Propositions;
since we were sure likewise to show clearly that the sense in which we held
them, was as certainly the Doctrine of S. Augustine, as we had shown invincibly
that his Doctrine was that of the Church, after so general and continual esteem
and approbation as we had evinced it to have been in for twelve hundred years.
But moreover we published this Cartel of Defiance to the whole Molinistical
Host, that we were certain, and spoke it without fear, That that H. Doctor
would be found so congruous to all that we maintained, that our Adversaries,
however they might rack their Brains, and whatever pains they should take with
the whole Society not only of the Jesuits but of all others that would take
part with them, could never propose any Argument drawn from humane reason or
the H. Scriptures, which we could not make them see, had been proposed to S.
Augustine by the Pelagians or Semipelagians, and resolvl'd against them by this
H. Doctor, and which we could not in like manner refute very easily against our
Adversaries by the answers and the doctrine which we should extract out of his
Works.

Wherefore we further said, That our Adversaries, who made trophies upon the
least occasion, were injurious in reproaching us for seeking delays; since in
so short a space as six weeks we had with extraordinary diligence and pains
composed those two Writings; one concerning Transactions, and the other
concerning S. Austin 's authority in which we had reported above two hundred
testimonies of above a hundred several Authors, and those the most considerable
that could be cited in any Cause whatever; and that there was nothing that we
wished more, or could be more acceptable to us, than, as soon as the authority of
the said Doctrine were acknowledged and confirmed, as it ought to be between
our Adversaries and us, to proceed forthwith with equal diligence and
confidence, to make appear in the examen of the Propositions what that Doctrine
was.

And lastly, we told them that we did not think them to have so little insight
into the matter which we negotiated, as that they could think that we held
back; but that they murmured at the slownesse whereof they accused us, that so
they might keep things from being thoroughly examined (as they had done
hitherto) by urging them on precipitously; and that they had endeavored to
bring it about that we might be constrained to huddle over the business,
because they saw no other refuge for their so decryed cause, but to deprive
their Judges of the understanding of it, and to hinder the dispelling of the
clouds wherewith they had obscured the Truth and blackned the most innocent
intentions of its Defenders; being also as little ignorant that when things
should be examined as they ought to be, they could never escape; and that upon
the least Objection brought by them against us, either before the Pope or the
Cardinals or the Consultors, they should incontinently see themselves
overwhelmed with a hundred and a hundred passages of S. Augustine.

We spoke very high, but indeed it behoov'd us to lift up our voices and make
our selves heard;

Yet we said nothing but what we had well considered, and would very gladly
have been put to prove. And we held our selves so certain thereof, that we did
not declare these things only in speech or writings that were liable to be
disclaimed, but in Writings which we had duly examined, reviewed and
subscribed.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Writing of M. Hallier and his Colleagues which fell by chance into my
hands.

SUch were the Writings prepared by us in this Business and some time after
presented to the Pope and the Cardinals, as I shall relate in proper place; and
thus we began to treat this affair in order to its discussion upon so solid and
inexpugnable foundations. But because my purpose is to repose not only what I
know was done by our selves, but also whatever I could learn to have been acted
either by M. Hallier and his Colleagues or our other Adversaries, I think not
unfit to mention also in this place the Writing which I intimated above to have
been presented by them to the Cardinals, when they went all together to deliver
their instructions upon the Five Propositions, and in one single Audience which
might last an hour or thereabouts. The Writing bears no mark which intitles it
to M. Hallier and his Colleagues, or shows that they own it; and indeed I think
they never signed any at all in this affair. But it came to my hands upon
Tuesday Sept. 3. by the procurement of a certain Person, who got it purposely
to show me; and as soon as I had perused it, I coppyed it out.

In this Writing those Doctors especially studied not to appear Molinists, and
said they would not establish the Sufficient Grace of the Jesuits, but only
Sufficient Grace in general.

One may see particularly the spirit of M. Hallier in it, who always
endeavored to pass at Rome for a Defender of Effectual Grace; and who to get
those condemned whom he termed Jansenists, has always fastened upon them that
they taught a kind of Grace not Effectual, but Necessitating; That they denied
all Sufficient Grace, and other such Chimeraes which they attributed especially
to those that were at Paris, pretending that we disguised our selves at Rome.
And it is no wonder, that these Calumnies, not being refuted, because they were
sown secretly, and we would not speak before the Congregation except in their
presence, made impression in the minds of the Cardinals, some of the Consultors
and the Pope himself.

This Writing being very short, I shall set down here at length, except some
common passages upon the First Proposition, which have been refuted in several
Work:. It was without a Title, as many others were, and began thus:

Prima Propositio.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: Deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant, Jans. lib. 3. de gr. Chr. cap. 13.
Sensus est, mandata Dei hominibus justis qui praecepta divina transgrediuntur
esse impossibilia defectu auxilii sufficientis quo vel possint eadem implere,
vel necessariam ad ea implenda gratiam petere.

Nota per has voces (defectu auxilii sufficientis) non intelligi gratiam illam
versatilem quae modo effectum suum habet, modo non habet, quae a multis
Doctoribus Catholicis refutatur: Sed intelligi gratiam quae vere sufficiens sit
quocunque tandem modo, seu quae vere facultatem tribuat justo aut implendi
praeceptum, aut petendi gratiam necessariam ad illud implendum, ita ut per eam
justus inexcusabilis reddatur quando praeceptum transgreditur.

Secunda Propositio.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.
Sensus est, in statu naturae lapsae nullam esse gratiam Christi actualem
internam in voluntate residentem, cui voluntas humana de facto dissentiat.

Nota hic non attingi doctrinam Sancti Auguflini de gratia efficaci a se. Aliud
est enim asserere Sanctum Augustinum admisisse aliquod genus gratiae quae
infallibiliter effectum suum consequitur. and a nullo duro cord respuitur;
aliud asserere Sanctum Augustinum nullam aliam gratiam praeter efficacem
admisisse quae sufficiens sit. Primum Catholicum est; secundum non nisi a
Calvino ejusque sequacibus fuit assertum.

Quod Sanctus Augustinus gratiam Quam plurima afferri possunt expressa
testimonia S. Augustini ad probandam gratiam sufficientem.
aliquam sufficientem admiserit, patet ex iisdem quibus dicit Deum justo non
praecipere impossibilia, nec justum deserere prius quam ab ipso deseratur. Nam
cum mandata Dei non reddantur possibilia nisi per gratiam, and justi non semper
mandata Dei observent: sequitur eos aliquando actu and de facto gratia Dei
resistere.

Non itaque hic agitur de gratia sufficient versatili statuenda, quae modo
effectum suum habeat, modo non habeat: Sed tantum in genere quaeritur utrum
verum sit in statu naturae lapsae nullam dari gratiam quae vere sufficiens sit.

Tertia Propositio.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
Sensus est, ut actio quae meritoria aut demeritoria est, libera censeatur, non
requiritur ut fiat cum indifferentia, sed sufficit modo voluntary and sine
coactione fiat.

Haec autem sententia eadem est ac Calvini, qui nunquam eo sensu negavit
liberum arbitrium, quasi actiones nostrae voluntatis non essent voluntariae,
sed eo sensu quod negarit nobis inesse ^differentiam ad utrumlibet.

Quarta Proposttio.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent eam gratiam talem esse cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare.
Propositionis hujus duae sunt parts: Prima est facti; utrum scilicet
Semipelagiani admiserint gratiam necessariam ad initium fidei.

Secunda utrum haereticum sit dicere gratiam actualem Christi talem esse cui
possit humana voluntas consentire vel dissentire.

Neque etiam attingitur quaestio hic de gratia efficaci a se aut a consensu,
quia utriusque opinionis assertores fatentur quod gratiam Dei possumus abjicere
juxta Concilium Tridentinum Sess. 6. c. 5. Sed tantum quaeritur utrum gratia in
statu naturae corruptae talis sit, ut necessitatem inferat voluntati, adeo ut
ei non possit dissentire; quod nullus Catholicus umquam admisit.

Haec Propositio, supposita aliarum falsitate, necessario debet falsa judicari;
nam si impossibilia numquam sunt Dei Praecepta justis defectu gratiae
sufficientis cui actu resistunt, sequitur posse gratiae resisti. Nam ab actu ad
posse valet consequentia. Secundo si certum sit ad meritum requiri
indifferentiam, cum actio qua gratiae Dei consentimus, sit meritoria, sequitur
consensum ei praeberi cum indifferentia, ac proinde cum potentia dissentiendi.

Quinta Propositio.
Semipelagianum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse
aut sanguinem fudisse.
Duo quaeruntur circa hanc Propositionem. 1, Quid de ea sentiendum quatenus
notam haeresis affingit communi Catholicorum Theologorum sententiae quae
asserit Christum pro omnibus omnino mortuum esse.

2. Quatenus ex mente Jansenii Christus non pro omnibus sed pro
praedestinatorum salute tantum mortuus est, ita ut omnibus reprobis negata sint
auxilia sufficientia quibus possint salvari.

Hoc sensu examinata Propositione, intactae relinquuntur difficultates quae
occurrunt aut circa infantes sine baptismo decedentes, aut infideles, aut
obduratos. Nam qui dicit Christum non pro solis praedestinatis esse mortuum,
non dicit consequenter pro quolibet reprobo in particulari mortuum esse, sed
sufficit quod pro aliquibus saltem reprobis.

Quod autem pro justis saltem non perseverantibus mortuus sit, patet ex
Concilio Tridentino, ubi defint justis mandata Dei non esse impossibilia, quia
Deus iis gratiam necessariam suppeditat. Si enim possunt observare mandata,
possunt salvari, ac non nisi ex meritis Christi.

Idem Sess. 6. c. 3. Verum tametsi ille pro omnibus mortuus est, non omnes
tamen mortis ejus beneficium recipient. Ergo Christus pro iis etiam mortuus est
qui beneficium non recipient; at illi non alii sunt quam reprobi.

CHAP. IX.
Of our Solicitations during the whole month of September, to obtain that our
Writings which we presented to the Cardinals, might be communicated to our
Adversaries. Of the Death of Cardinal Roma which happened during this month. Of
the secret Congregations which began to be held at Cardinal Spada's house.

IT was the first and only thing which I did on Sunday the first of September,
to seek means how to get the abovementioned Writing, which yet I could not do
till two days after, and all that I learned on Monday the second, was, from
the Resident of Poland, who signified to me that a Gentleman of that Kingdom
told him, that he had been in the company of one of the Doctors of our
Antagonists and a Jesuit; which Doctor said, that there were but ten or a
dozen Doctors of our Faculty and four Bishops that maintained our cause, and
that the Pope had professed that he would make so good a Censure upon this
occasion, that there should be no more coming thither again. I sent likewise
those two days, to know whether Cardinal Roma gave audience, and understood
that he did not.

On Tuesday the third I went to see F. Melchior, who not being at home, I fell
into discourse with F. Dominique Priest of the same Order, a very able man, and
who taught Theology in his Covent, together with F. Melchior. He told me he
had been at the Covent of the Minimes upon Saint Augustin's day with M. Joysel,
who spoke so confidently of the condemnation of the Propositions, that he was
constrained to advise him not to go so fast, for there were many in the world
that did not, as he, account the Propositions Heretical, by reason of the
senses, as he explicated the same, which they admitted relating to Effectual
Grace. Their Discourse forthwith fell upon the First Proposition, of which F.
Dominique told M. Joysel what sense we held, and alleged some arguments for
it, which M. Joysel being unable to gainsay, answered in one word, That they
impugn'd the same as it was in Jansenius, and because it was there. F.
Dominique demanded, whether the being of a thing in Jansenius were sufficient
to make it deserve to be impugn'd and censured? M. Joysel answered, that it was
not; but yet if it were lawful to maintain Propositions because they might have
good senses, none should ever be condemned, because there is not any so bad but
may be well interpreted; and he brought this for example, That the body of our
Lord is not in the Eucharist, which he said might admit a good sense, because
it is true that it is not there Circumscriptive, that is to say, as other bodies
are in their ordinary places according to their natural extension. F. Dominique
answered, that if there had been any Heretics who had affirmed it to be there
Circumscriptive, as there had been others who have said that it is not there
really; then, before judging of the Proposition, which affirms the same not to
be there, it would be requisite to distinguish it with reference to those two
sorts of Heresies. So in the matter proposed, there having been Heretics who
have affirmed, that the Commandments of God are not possible even with the
assistance of Grace, and others that they are so without it, that is, without
that Grace which is necessary to render them possible with the last and next
possibility, and which has no more need of any other assistance for action; it
is requisite for right determining this affair, to distinguish the senses
according to which the said First Proposition may be extended, before judgment
be passed upon it.

The same Father told me another passage which fell a few days before from M.
Hallier, and for which he was sufficiently well taken up. This Doctor said,
that if Molina were rightly considered, it would be found that there was not so
much to say against him as people believed, and that there was much difference
between him and the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians. The answer returned to him,
was, that this Discourse was very strange from a man who pretended to subtilty
in these matters, For in the first place he was asked how it was possible that
there should be so little to say against Molina, considering all that had been
done against him in Spain and at Rome in the Congregations de auxiliis? And in
the second place he was told, that truly there was much difference between
Molina and the Semi-Pelagians, because Molina had said much more then they,
That the Semipelagians held, that only the beginning of the first disposition
to Grace proceeds from the part of man; that as for the rest, they assented
readily, that Man is governed by the motion and power of the Efficacy of Grace;
but Molina holds that Man is the primum mobile and chief master of his own
Salvation from the beginning, to the end.

In the afternoon we went to wait upon Cardinal Roma. His Maistre de chamber
told us, that we might send one of our Attendants to him upon Friday following,
and he would signify to us when we might probably have access to his Eminence.
In the mean time he advertised us that one of our Antagonists came thither to
know whether the Business were likely to go forward, and that he answered,
That it did not stick at us, that we had performed our parts, but themselves
might consider that Cardinal Roma was not in a condition at present for
affairs. He added, that if they came again, he would acquaint them with our new
diligence.

F. Epiphanius came to see us after Supper. The Discours^ happened to be about
the false censure of the Fa^ulty dispersed through the world, and which MM.
Henneguin, Peregret and Cornet avowed in the face of the Parliament not to have
been subscribed by any of themselves. F. Epiphanius told us, That M. Lagault
affirmed to him since his coming to Rome that it was signed by them, and that
there had been but one way which hindered us from being confirmed by the
Faculty.

On Wednesday the 4th. I went to Giesu Maria, where I saw F. Pancratio and
another chief Father of that House; they both confessed to me, that they had
taught the Molinistical Opinions, and that whilst they taught them they were
persuaded in their Judgments that none but these were consentaneous to truth;
but the reading of S. Augustine which they had happily undertaken, perfectly
undeceived them. In our Discourse intervened a very aged Prelate named
Monsignor Garotti, who spoke something concerning this matter, but vigorously
and as one that understood it well. He told me that all this affair was but a
business of animosity on the Jesuits part; that he remembered that Clement
VIII. having highly blamed the General of the Jesuits for their engaging in
defense of Molina's doctrine, the General answered the Pope, Vedremo,
Beatissime Padre, come la potremo diffendere, We will see most H. Father how we
shall be able to defend it: That thereupon he writ to all the Fathers of his
Society to send to him all the best arguments that they found upon this
Subject; and that a Jesuit talking with him (Monsignor Garotti) told him that
he had of his own head furnished his General with ten Reasons for such defense.

Perceiving Cardinal Roma's sickness to continue, it came into our minds to
impart our Writings and their Summary to M. Hallier and his Colleagues, that we
might get so far onward, and that they might employ part of their time in
perusing them, and prepare themselves to make such answers thereunto as they
should think fit. I went to see M. Cosimo, Cure of S. Savior, to desire him to
direct me to some Officer of Justice of his Acquaintance who were fit to make
such signification in due form and order. M. Cosimo told me, That this could
not be done, but either by the Secretary of the Congregation by whom our
Writings might be communicated to our Adversaries, and theirs to ours, and that
by Order of the same Congregation when it thought fit, after perusal and
examination therein; or else Order of the Dean, in case we could obtain of him
to permit us to hasten things, by indorsing them with Communicetur. That
otherwise he thought it an ill course to do it of our own Heads, unless
perhaps they would somewhat excuse it as possible to be our custom in France,
and as if we understood not that of Rome: But it was to avoid such
inconveniences that he had advised us to retain an Advocate; and since we had
means to prevent mistakes in our proceedings, it was best not to bring our
selves to such a pass as to have need of making excuses.

A visit which I made to Cardinal Palatta took me up all the afternoon of this
day, and in a converse sufficiently long that I had with him; that which I
learnt most considerable, was, that M. Hallier had visited him and told him,
That we were Jansenists; and that our aim was by shifts and under pretext of
some equivocations and interpretations of Propositions to cause the Church to
declare that she had acted wrong in her former condemnations.

On Wednesday the sixth, I went toward evening to Cardinal Roma's House. His
Maistre de chamber told me, That we could not hope to see his Eminence till
within two or three days more. I answered, That we would willingly have so
much patience, and asked him whethor there were not some way in the mean time
for his Eminence to appoint that our Writings might be communicated to our
Adversaries, to the end they might be employed in persuing them till he
recovered his health. He replied, That he would endeavor to acquaint his
Eminence with it; and we agreed upon the Tuesday ensuing for an answer.

A Discalceated Carmelite informed us the same day that M. Ollier was the man
that solicited in their Covent at Paris for subscriptions against the
Propositions, and their Fathers refused to do it.

On Saturday the seventh I acquainted a person, one of the most intelligent and
accomplished in the Court of Rome, with what had passed between M. Albizzi and
us, upon August 16. at Cardinal Roma's House. This Person counseled me not to
lose this occasion of making known to the Pope the animosity and partiality of
that Assessor, whereof the said Person gave me further clear and convincing
proofs. M. Othewin told me that M. Hallier being that morning taking the air
uprn the Mont de la Trinite, said to the F. Abbot of S. Antonie that he
(Hallier) held us fast, that we should not escape him, that he would cause us
to be put in Cornetto, which is as much as to say, in Bedlam, and some other
things of the same sttain.

The Ambassador had been sick for some weeks, and so we could not visit him,
but (thanks be to God) having by this time recovered his health, we went this
evening to congratulate with him. He fell to ask us about our Business how it
stood; and told us he had seen some of our Cardinals, amongst others Cardinal
Ghigghi, who seemed very pleasant and joyful; which was an argument that they
who usually are deep musers upon the smallest affairs that give them the least
trouble, must needs have found out some favorable expedient to get out of it,
and which afforded much satisfaction. We answered that that could not be,
because to get out of it, it was necessary to examine the affair in due manner,
which they could not do without trouble. Then we fell into Discourse whether or
no we should be heard in the presence of either side. VVhereupon he made
scruples, which we answered; and though he seemed in some measure satisfied
therewith, yet he told us, that he knew not whether it would be granted to us
or no. He told us further, that they had used diligences by the mediation of
the Nuntio's to get the Opinions of Universities, etc. and we answered him that
that course would not conduce much to the clearing of things, unless they did
us the justice and took the pains to hear us in the presence one of another.
We talked what had passed in the affair of the Irish, of the Letters which the
Jesuits had obtained of the Emperor, the King of Poland, etc. of the Cornetto
whither M. Hallier in companies threatened to send us. Here the Ambassador told
me, that the day before he complained to him of a Letter which I had written to
M. Bouvot Register of our Faculty, and which M. Bouvot had showed to M. Grandin
our Syndic, in which, he said, I sent word that there had not been seen in many
ages such a thing as the Congregation we had obtained, and that the Pope
speaking of M. Hallier, said that this Doctor seemed to his Holiness very
presumptuous. I answered the Ambassador, that indeed I believed I had written
to M. Bouvot, when the Congregation was declared to us; That I did not remember
what words I used to him about it, but I saw not the least appearance that I
spoke any thing near what I was charged with; because when I writ I endeavored
to do it as if it had been in presence of all the world, and as if my Letters
were publicly to be seen, because it was possible they might be so. That I had
written many indeed which I should be loath to have become public; but I writ
none which I foresaw not might incurr that danger; upon which consideration I
endeavored to write nothing whereof I might he ashamed and repent me, in case
they happened to be seen. How'ever, it would be very acceptable to me if he
plear'd to take account of that whereof M. Hallier complained, because I had
written none for a long time, whereof I kept not a Copy by me; and that though
I could send to M. Bouvot, yet I promised him to bring him a faithful Copy,
that so if I had deserved blame, I might receive it and make satisfaction; but
if there were found no cause of complaint, he might understand how groundless
those of our Adversaries were.

On Sunday morning Sept. 8. I went to see the General of the Dominicans about'
a particular affair of one of the Religious of his Order, concerning which a
Friend of mine had written to me out of France. F. Barellier his French
Assistant intervened in our Discourse. The General told me, among other things,
that M. Hallier speaking to him about me, accused me of having written against
the Pope; with which he acquainted me out of kindness and under secrecy, not to
exasperate me against M. Hallier, but to cause me to bethink my self what might
be the meaning of this accusation, which was of consequence. Yet I was not much
anxious about it, nor have thought much upon it since, knowing well that this
calumny was like all the rest which they used to devise against us, extravagant
and groundless.

On Monday the 9th. toward evening I went to Cardinal Roma's House. His
Maistre de chamber told me, That he had not stirred out of Bed of two days
before; that he was up that day, but was constrained to betake himself to bed
again immediately; that if he could recover a little, he would go speedily into
the Country to confirm it; that therefore he could not of long time intend our
affair, and that we might consider upon what we thought expedient to do therein
in the mean time. That M. Hallier and his Colleagues had been there the day
before, and he had told them the demurr was not on our part. He intimated to me
likewise, that, if it seemed good to us, we might visit M. Albizzi. Whereunto
I answered forthwith, That we could not have confidence in M. Albizzi, nor
treat with him; and that if Cardinal Roma pleased to write upon our Papers that
they should be communicated to the Doctors our Adversaries, it would serve them
very much and us too, advance our affairs, and put both sides into a condition
to wait some good space of time without impatience the secovery of Cardinal
Roma. He replied, That his Eminence was not in a condition to meddle therewith;
that M. Albizzi should no longer ordain any thing by his own authority; that it
behooved us to have recourse to the Pope for the knowing of his pleasure what
course we should take. I answered, That it was much better to expect yet for
some time; That if in case Cardinal Roma did not suddenly recover his health,
yet his indisposition might diminish and allow him to inscribe upon our
Writings that they might be communicated. Wherefore I entreated him not to tell
any person that he had spoken to me of M. Albizzi, but to signify to M.
Hallier and his Colleagues, when they came thither, that I had been there and
was obliged to have patience as well as themselves. Which request he granted.

Tuesday the 10th. in the afternoon I visited Cardinal Barberin. As Soon as he
saw me, he asked me whether we had delivered our Writings; adding that if
Cardinal Roma's sickness continued, some means must be thought upon to supply
that defect; that much time was spent without any thing done, that it was
tedious; but however we might hold our selves assured, that the Questions de
Auxiliis would not be meddled with, but only the Propositions taken into
consideration. To all which Discourse of the Cardinal, I answered what I
thought fit, and he carried me abroad with him to take the air, and returned me
to my Lodging.

I had attempted from Tuesday morning to get Cardinal Roma spoken to by his
Auditor for the Soit communique (Communicetur) of our Writings, and upon
Wednesday morning we went to a very good and pious Ecclesiastic, his
Eminency's cousin and intimate Friend to obtain the same courtesy of him, and
get him to persuade the Cardinal to do it, if possible. He promised us to
effect our desires, in case he found the Cardinal in a condition any wise
fitting to be spoken to; but he told us that he was very sick, and recommended
him to our Prayers. Afterward we went to the Augustines, whither we were
invited, to hear an Oration of the Divinity-Professor who then began his
Lectures. He spoke very copiously of the esteem that ought to be made of S.
Augustin's Doctrine; he urgently recommended to his Auditors the reading of
that Father's admirable works; but if they did not read them all, yet that none
should omit to read the little volum which had been lately printed at Rome by
persons whom he said he would not name; and yet without naming us he gave us
public thanks for it.

N^helesse we judged it expedient to visit the other four Cardinals designed
for our Congregation, that we might let them know what assiduous diligence we
had used in the preparing of our Writings, and what had hindered us from
presenting the same to them since they were ready. The same afternoon we
visited Cardinal Cechini, who intimated to us to deliver them to the rest in
the mean while till Cardinal Roma recovered. We answered that we had forborne
so to do out of an intention to deliver them to all at the same time, and that
they might have all a fresh remembrance of them when they should assemble in
the Congregation to hear us and regulate us according to what they should have
seen of us in writing. He replied, That for his part he should always
willingly concur with what the rest should ordain in the business.

Before our going to Cardinal Cechini, we had been at Cardinal Spada's House,
where arrived at the same time some of the Cardinals in order to a Congregation
which was to be held there; for which cause we retreated, having seen but not
spoken to Cardinal Spada. Hereupon when we returned thither at the end of the
Congregation as soon as he saw us, he came to us with a smiling countenance, and
told us he was sorry that he could not give us audience that day. We signified
to him in a few words what we had to say to him; but we were obliged to return
thither the next morning upon his invitation.

Before we went to him upon Thursday the 12th. I met with the Bishop of
Bethleem, who out of kindness conjured me for the honor of God to deliver our
Writings, adding that delay caused it to be suspected that we had evil designs,
and inclined the people with whom we had to do, to judge and condemn us without
hearing. That it was reported that time had been given us, that we had been
summoned, and that we had passed the term. That all these particulars were
registered. I thanked the Bishop for his affection, and answered him, that we
had also kept Memorials both by our Letters and otherwise, of the whole manner
wherewith we were treated, and of all that had been said to us. That we had
used the greatest diligence that could be required of us in preparing our
Writings. That we had more reason to complain of our being hastened as we had
been, than others had to complain of our having delayed. That we did not in the
least fear the most embittered and powerful persons against us, because they
could do us no mschief, but they must do the like to the H. See, since we had
no other interests in the whole affair but what were the same with those of the
supreme Pontificate. The Bishop assented that the manner of proceeding toward
us was exorbitant and strange, but yet it behooved us to condescend to the
state in which things were, and endeavor to stop the mouths of the most
passionate against us.

When my Colleagues and I went to Cardinal Spada, we told him that we had ever
since a fortnight before repaired to Cardinal Roma to acquaint him that we were
ready to appear in the Congregation when it should please him to assemble it;
and to bring him our first Writings; That we had been deferred from day to day
since that time by Cardinal Roma himself, to whom we had spoken once, and wbo
advised us to have a little patience, adding that as soon as he recovered a
little health, he would employ the same in our affair. Cardinal Spada answered,
that he would make report of what we said to him where it should be needful;
but that these Autuminal Sicknesses were sometimes dangerous, and besides very
long: that in case this of Cardinal Roma's should hold on, some order must be
considered of in reference to our affair. We replied, if it lasted, we doubted
not of the necessity of taking some other course therein; and we assured his
Eminence that on our part we would always be found disposed to further the
business with all sort of diligence, so far as the Things which we had to
manage would permit.

M. Hallier and his Colleagues came to wait upon Cardinal Spada, who was to go
to Monte Cavallo, and being he was ready to go just as we had finished what we
had to say to him, we became obliged to accompany him thither. When he was
entered into the Popes presence, we stayed in the Antichamber during that
Congregation. And Monsignor Sacrista who entertained us there a good while,
told us, among others, two remarkable things. First, That M. Hallier and his
Colleagues had long ago delivered their Writings touching the Propositions to
the Cardinals, and since begun to deliver new ones to them which related only
to our persons and designs. Secondly, naming some of the Consultors appointed
for our Congregation, he told us that F. Luca Vadingo would be one of them, and
that he was well informed of the whole intrigue of the affair, particularly
touching the Book of Jansenius; that in the beginning when he was first
sounded, he said, Let us see whether it be contrary to S. Augustine, and then
condemn it; or if they will not examine it, all that can be done against it is
to prohibit it for having transgressed the Prohibitions of writing concerning
this matter: That the cause stood thus when it was reported to Urban VIII. and
that after it was dispatched by the Pope, some persons had added what is found
in his Bull, That Jansenius had revived the Propositions condemned by Pius V.

When the Congregation was ended we went to Cardinal Ghiggi's Apartment, where
we waited for his return; and though it was sufficiently late, yet he prevented
us in speaking to us first, and caused us to enter into his Chamber. We told
him, that our Writings were ready. Which word we had no sooner spoken, but O
sia lodato Dio, God be thanked (said he to us) I think we have heard some
mutterings about them. The meaning of which in his mouth, was, that great
complaints had been made about them. We answered that it should be manifested
that we had not been faulty of any delay. (Indeed 'twas an extraordinary thing
that we could get our two pieces ready in so little time; and I think no person
ever labored at any work with more assiduity and speed day and night than M.
de Valcroissant and M. Angran did to dispatch them; and when they were done, to
get Copies of them quickly ready for their Eminences; we employed for some
days together twenty Amanuenses, whereof some transcribed one Quire and some
another.) The Cardinal replied that he did not say that we had caused any
delay, but that he exhorted us to endeavor to act in such sort that there
might be no appearance that we had, nor ground to suspect it: Ma al meno que
questo non apparisca. He told us also that if Cardinal Roma's sickness should
prove long, Cardinal Spada would be the person to whom we ought to address our
selves, as Dean, a chi bisognarebbe far capo.

I went in the afternoon with much anxiety to enquire the condition of Cardinal
Roma's health; Cardinal Barberin arrived there almost at the same time that I
did. We were answered that he was a very little better, whereupon Cardinal
Barberin returned without seeing him for fear of disturbing him. From thence I
went to see the person whom I had entreated to procure that Cardinal Roma's
Auditor might inscribe the Communicetur upon our Papers; for I had understood
that that was sufficient to authorize the imparting of them to the Doctors our
Adversaries; and he told me that Signor Francesco, (which was the name of his
Eminence's Cousin whom I spoke of) had told him that his Auditor could not
write the Communicetur without first receiving his Master's order; that himself
(Signor Francesco) could not speak that day nor the next to Cardinal Roma to
cause him to give his Auditor such order; but in case his health continued in
the condition wherein he beheld it, he hoped that he might do it by Saturday or
Sunday following.

Friday the 13th. was the day of the Ambassador's usual audience; and before he
went to it, I entreated him that in case the Pope spoke to him about the delay
of our Writings whereof complaint had been made, he would tell his Holiness,
that that which hindered us for a fortnight, in which we could have delivered
them, was Cardinal Roma's sickness. The Ambassador answered me nothing
touching our Writings, but asked me immediately whether I had heard tidings of
his health that day; and told me with a most sincere sentiment of esteem and
grief, that if that Cardinal should be taken away, the Church would have a
signal loss in him. We sent about noon to know what news of him, and
understood that he was very much better then the day before. In the afternoon
we went again to Cardinal Cechini to give him the same information concerning
our Writings that we had given to others; but we were referred till that day
seven night to speak with his Eminence.

On Saturday in the afternoon I went to Cardinal Roma's house, where I learned
that his health still grew better and better; and in the joy and hope that his
Maistre de Chamber had of it, he told me that M. Albizzi coming thither the
Thursday before to the Consistorial Congregation which was held there, he had
said to him with a free air; Questi Dottori Francesi vengono sempre qui, and
l' Eminentissimo non puo attendere a sto negotio per hora. Fra tanto
bisognarebbe far qualche communicatione di scritture, etc. Those French Doctors
are always coming hither, and his Eminence cannot at present intend their
affair. It may be requisite in the mean time to make some communication of the
Writings of one side to the other, to employ them. But he had no sooner opened
his mind to M. Albizzi, and done speaking, but M. Albizzi told him, Non si vuol
disputare qui di questa cosa, It is not intended to dispute that point here.
Which averseness of M. Albizzi from what he proposed to him, kept him from
speaking any thing more to him about it.

On Sunday the 15th. I accompanied the Ambassador to the solemnity of the
Chapel which was performed that day as the Anniversary of the Popes election;
and whilst Cardinal Barberin was renewing to him the ceremony ad multos annos,
there came a very great rumor of Cardinal Roma's death. VVhereupon believing
that God had disposed of him, we went in the Afternoon to Cardinal Spada, to
tell him that when he pleased we were ready to appear before the Congregation
and to deliver our Writings. The Cardinal told us that he would give us an
answer on Wednesday or Thursday at the furthest, and that in the mean time we
might visit those other Messieurs, to the end they might read our Writings. I
did not believe that by questi altri Signori Cardinal Spada meant Messieurs the
other Cardinals of our Congregation, but the Doctors our Adversaries, and that
his Eminencie's intention was that we might communicate our Writings to them in
the mean time. M. the Abbot of Valcroissant understood it also in this manner;
and he and I having replied to the Cardinal that that was our Purpose (that so
we might be more assured what was his, and act without fear of proceeding
contrary to his intentions) He told us that that was not his meaning, but when
it should be time to communicate them, if the Congregation judged it expedient,
they should be communicated reciprocally at the same time, to the end there
might be neither advantage nor disadvantage on one side or other, accio non sia
nc vantaggio ne svantaggio.

On Monday the 16th. toward evening I went to see F. Melchior, who informed me
that since some days they had been much troubled in their Covent about a
Thesis, which was to be maintained there, of which the Doctors our Antagonists
and the Jesuits having had notice, endeavored to hinder the Impression by M.
Albizzi's means, and made a great stir about it. That M. Albizzi for that
purpose sent for the Procurator General of their Order, to whom, as soon as he
saw him, he made great reproaches, for that the Professors of the Covent de la
Victoire taught Jansenisme; the greatest proof whereof alleged by him was that
they conversed with us, and for this consideration he threatened them to give
them a Mittimus to depart out of Rome. That all the day preceding, though it
were Sunday, was employed in goings and commings to and from M. Albizzi about
the said Thesis. That M. Albizzi had a design to have seized all the Copies
that were wrought off; but he to whom they belonged had been more diligent in
getting them from the Printer than M. Albizzi had been in sending to take them
thence. That M. Albizzi seeing himself prevented herein, sent to their Covent
in the Pope's name to prohibit the Person that had them to part with any of
them; and afterward sent order to their Procurator-General with threatening
that he should remain responsible for them. In fine, all this bustle was made
against the said Thesis, because it was known to be composed conformably to the
mind and doctrine of Councils, S. Augustine and S. Thomas; ad mentem
Conciliorum, Sancti Augustini, and Sancti Thomae, and that it was almost wholly
framed in their very words. F. Melchior told me likewise what diligence they
had used both in addresses to the Master of the Sacred Palace, who licenced the
Impression, and to Cardinal Ghiggi, from whose good will and protection they
promised themselves assistants in this affair: and all that had passed therein
he related to me more distinctly and particularly than I do here, because I set
down only the most remarkable things which I writ thus confusedly when I
returned home after their visit.

On Tuesday morning being the 17th. we sent up our prayers to God for the
eternal rest of the Soul of Cardinal Roma, whose death happened the evening or
the night preceding. It was a great loss both to the H. See and the Sacred
College: He was a man of known and generally esteemed integrity throughout the
world. He was of very easy access, very equitable, and unmovable by favor
or faction. He had a very sedulous care of his Bishopric of Tivoli, and
divided himself between the administrations of it and those whereunto he was
obliged in reference to the Offices he had at Rome, with indefatigable pains.
His charity and liberality toward the poor and his Church were so large, that
they left him no thought of laying up of treasure upon earth either for himself
or any of his kindred: and he gave them no part of his Ecclesiastical goods
besides one furniture for a Table which he gave to one of his Brothers, as he
would have given the same (he said) to any other Stranger, if he had not had
that Brother, to the end he might have in the time of repasts some company and
conversation. But this is not a place to speak of the particular actions and
virtues which rendered him so commendable during the whole course of his life;
it shall suffice to add here in reference to our affair, that he was more
intelligent of, and better affected to St. Augustin's doctrine than he ever
professed to be. But I was informed above a year before that he studied it with
particular affection; and that he was enlightened in it by the informations
which he caused to be given him by a very learned Dominican, who had such
confidence in me and in the secrecy which he promised himself that I would keep
for him, and the good use that I would make of the knowledge which he imparted
to me of the correspondence which he had in this affair with Cardinal Roma,
that as soon as he had finished a Writing to give him, he showed me a Copy of it,
and when they had conferred together about it, advertised me likewise how his
Eminence took and apprehended the matter, and in what sort he accounted himself
convinced of it. I kept secrecy herein so faithfully, that I never spoke so
much as a word of it to my Colleagues themselves, who only knew that this
Cardinal being very pious and equitable, it was very advantageous to us that he
was Dean of our Congregation. But now there is no longer any danger in speaking
it. I preserved and still keep the Copies of those informations, which Cardinal
Roma believed peculiar to himself; and looked upon as his own labor, having
therein employed that of a man whom he knew very intelligent and impartial,
whom he otherwise considered as his ancient friend, and who undertook the same
by his motion, having nothing else in his view but God and the Truth: The
Propositions in question were considered and handled in these Informations, as
we had always considered them, capable of several senses very opsite, but as
pertaining to the faith of the Church, when they were purged from their
equivocations, and reduced to the sense in which they would be necessary
sequels and clear dependances of the Efficacity of Grace. This may be seen in
those Writings themselves, which I have thought fit to place at the end of the
Collection, because they deserve to be kept to posterity. It may be judged
thereby whether the death of this great and pious Cardinal was not a signal
loss to the H. See, the Sacred College and indeed to the whole Church; it
deprived us of a considerable Prop both in the Congregation whereof he was
Dean, and in all other dependances of our affair to which he was sincerely
affected; and of which he said a hundred times to the Ambassador, as well as of
that of the Bishoprics of Portugal, that it was a shame they were not ended.

Wherefore his death, which according to the judgment we were able to make of
it, was very unseasonable for us, could not but be resented by us with
particular sorrow; but having considered that our affair was more God's than
ours, that he had not removed this prop without secret but just reasons of his
inscrutable judgments, and that he could, if he pleased, deliver it from
oppression, and instead of one man whom he took from us, give us a thousand
others with as much facility as he could, if he had pleased, have sent to our
Lord in the time that he was sought to be hurried to death, more than twelve
legions of Angels, to secure him from it; we comforted our selves for the
loss, and fell again to prosecute our affair with new care, diligence and
vigor.

In the afternoon we went to visit Cardinal Ghiggi, M. de Valcroissant
represented to him with what diligence and sincerity we had labored to put our
selves into a state to appear at the Congregation ever since it was declared to
us, and after having spoken there to leave some thing in scriptis that might be
worthy of the subject and the assembly; and on the contrary, in what manner we
had been censured in the mean time as tergiversators, and those that
endeavored to decline the clearing of things; but we conceived that hereafter
we should not be thus dealt with, when it were once considered who sent us, and
what was the weightynesse and importance of the things which we had comprised
in so little time in those two first Writings which we brought to him; and
which accordingly, after this was spoken, we presented to him. The Cardinal
received the same civilly, and with a sentiment of humility desired us to pray
to God for him, that God would please to open his understanding to comprehend
the same aright, adding that, for his part, he would study them very willingly
and carefully. He told us also that from thenceforward, either the Pope or
Cardinal Spada must be addressed to, for direction concerning what should be fit
to be done in the Congregation. We answered, that we hoped his Emnence would
have a hand therein too, and take care that all things might be observed
according to the necessary forms. He replied, that as for himself, his
Obligation should be to study the Writings which we had given him, and if in
reference to the management and direction of the affair Cardinal Spada pleased
to confer with him, it would be a thing that depended on his civility; Sarebbe
la sua urbanita.

Wednesday morning Sept. 18. I visited the Ambassador, and went abroad with him
to take the air. Amongst diverse things which we spoke about our affair, the
most considerable was, that he told me some had spoken at Court of the
Jansenists (or those that were denoted by that name) a people very ill affected
to the King's service, even so far that some of them at Paris had left off
praying for the King, and prayed only for the kingdom. That hence it was
concluded that they approached very near to the Calvinists who were enemies of
Kingly Government; that the King and Queen were rendered odious to that Party,
by saying that they were not favorable to it; and to temper in some sort the
extent of these false and malicious teproaches, (the Ambassador told me also)
that it was said that all the Jansenists were not of the same humor, but that
the malicious of the Party made use of the rest, who were good people, to cover
their most evil designs under their reputation, as they carry Images of wax
before Processions. I answered the Ambassador, that these calumnies deserved
that an Answer should be given to him, to let him see the malignity of those
that invented them. Whereupon he told me, That he had charged M. Hallier with
the threatening that I acquainted him M. Hallier made of the Cornetto or
Ergastulo against us; and that M. Hallier swore all the Oaths in the world,
that he never spoke so; and nevertheless I was as well informed as any man
could be that he had spoke so, and indeed it was very true.

We made diverse visites on Wednesday afternoon, Thursday and Friday both
morning and afternoon, to wait upon the Cardinals Spada, Ginetti, and Cechini,
and present our Writings to them. The first of the three whom we found ready
for it, was Cardinal Spada upon Saturday the twenty first in the forenoon. M.
de Valcroissant set forth to him very well and plainly the state of our affair,
and gave him our Writings, and the last that he spoke of being the Summary, the
Cardinal began his answer there, and told us that he would not look upon it,
nor make use of it, till after he had perused the large Papers. According to
the character that had been given of him to me diverse times, he was a man
likely to take that pains; but however he made us this promise, and received
them courteously.

When we went to him on Thursday in the afternoon, we found there a secret
Congregation, at which were Monsignor the Patriark Spada, a criminal Judge; the
Capo Notaro of the H. Office and M. Albizzi: and when we went on Friday to
Cardinal Ginetti, we found a Congregation of Cardinals assembling there; and as
we were retiring, there arrived one, who advertised me that on Tuesday
following a Congregation of Consultors were to be held about our affair, and
that I must take heed, because some persons who were favorable to us, and
ought to be there of right, were excluded.

In the afternoon of Saturday, amongst other little businesses I went to carry
Monsignor Sacrista our Writings of matters of Fact, and the Summaries of both,
that he might have some kind of Idea of that of S. Austin's authority, a
perfect Copy whereof could not then be had for him. He told me one very
considerable thing, which was, that the Pope in discourse with him a few days
before said to him, That the Jesuits fomented Heresy.

On Sunday September 22. we went in the morning to Cardinal Ginetti: He was
reconducting a Person to whom he had given audience, and returning came
cheerfully to us, and said to us, as if to congratulate with us for what he was
going to speak, E ben, sara per Martedi la Congregatione, Well, the
Congregation will be on Tuesday. I apprehended that we ought to be so far from
being well-pleased at the Congregation's assembling before our Writings had
been seen by those of whom it consisted, or communicated to our Adversaries,
that on the contrary we had reason to be sorry for it. Wherefore being we had
not yet certainly understood this news from any person, and accounted the
Assembly which was to be held without our participation and convenient
advertisement of it, as good as nothing; to the end we might more cautiously
declare our Sentiments to this Cardinal, as soon as he had regaled us with these
complements, E ben sara per Martedi la Congregatione, I answered seriously and
coldly in these words; Che Congregatione, Eminentissimo? What Congregation is
it, my Lord, that your Eminence tells us is to be on Tuesday? The Cardinal
judging by our Answer that we had heard nothing of it, and fearing he had gone
too far in opening a secret to us whereof we were not to be advertised, fairly
changed the Discourse and asked us what brought us thither? We told him, It was
to present our VVritings to him, which accordingly we did. As he received them,
he said he would read them most diligently, diligentissima mente; and after he
had read them, he should be very glad to hear us concerning them.

Departing thence, after some small visites, I met a certain Person in the City
who told me that the General of the Dominicans intended to present a Memorial
to the Pope, to get time to send for some able persons of his Order, besides
those he had already, who might represent to his Holiness the interests that
his Order had in this affair.

In the afternoon I visited that General, to show him one of our VVritings
concerning Matters of Fact and our Summary. He presently sent for one of his
Order to transcribe them. We conferred together a long time, and all our
Discourse was, whether we had taken a right course in the business, and whether
it would not be better to deliver VVritings concerning the Propositions, then
concerning S. Augustin's authority; because he feared least whilst we took
this care on one side to defend it, they might ruin it on the other by
condemning the Propositions. I represented to him on the contrary that we were
obliged to take that course in conformity to the desire and letters of our
Bishops, who had written to the Pope, that in order to do something of profit
and edification in this cause, it was requisite to resume the affair from its
original and by its principles; rem a fontibus and ex integro violare. That
however admiting we had taken a wrong course in reference to the mode of the
Court of Rome, and done a superfluous thing in proving the authority of S.
Augustine, whereof no Body doubted; it would then be easy to make our
Adversaries acknowledge it, as we required them, and establish it as we
demanded; that the worst was it might occasion possibly two months delay in the
Congregation, which would not be altogether unprofitable; wherefore if those of
the Congregation had any sense of justice and equity, and so great an esteem
for S. Augustine, that it were not necessary to say any thing in behalf of his
authority, it being so universally acknowledged and beyond all contest, they
would have nothing to do but first to confirm it as we desired; and after they
had complied with our need and infirmity, and we were ready to take the right
course in which we had failed, then to dismiss thoroughly the fantastic
Propositions, I spoke to him about the Memorial which he was to deliver to the
Pope, and about which he had been that day in the Pope's Presence Chamber to
desire audience. He answered me that he could not deliver it, not having been
introduced to audience. That his purpose in pressing to deliver it that day
was, to hinder and get deferred the Congregation designed upon the Tuesday
ensuing; that since he could not declare that day, he would wait to present it
after that secret Congregation was past.

When I left him and had been a good while entertained about our affairs with
sundry very affectionate and able Persons of his Order, I went to see another
General of an Order, a very intelligent Person who very well understood the
Jesuits, and who, speaking of them, said one thing which may amaze those that
shall read it, viz. Non e piu gran fortuna nel mondo, che di non connoscerbi,
and non esserne conosciuto. There is no greater advantage in the world than not
to know them, and not to be known by them.

On Monday the 23d. we went in the morning before the Consistory, to see
Cardinal Ghiggi (in whose equity, good intention and candor we had very great
hope) and endeavor to set forth to him how unusual and strange the
Congregation intended to assemble the next day seemed to us, we not having been
advertised of it, our VVritings not having been well examined, and perhaps not
any of the Consultors who should be called to it, having heard any thing of
them. His Maistre de bre referred us to 3. in the afternoon. We failed not to
return thither at the time appointed. His Gate was shut, no audience to be
as'kd or hopt for.

Had we been admitted, we could only have let him know our dissatisfaction
that the proceedings in this affair were so little conformable to the Suit we
had made as well by the Letter of the Prelates which we delivered to the Pope in
1651. and which there was a full years leisure to consider, as by our Memorial
of the 21. of January, six Months before it was plainly and nakedly declared to
us that the Pope had granted to us the Congregation which we had requested of
him. But for all this we could not have hindered the assembling of the
Congregation which they resolved to hold on Tuesday morning. It was signified
on the Wednesday foregoing to be that day, in the usual order and according to
custom by Tickets fastened on the Hall-doors of the Cardinals who were of it,
(and elsewhere if need require) whereby notice is given of the day, hour,
place, and subject that is to be treated of. All this had been done, and the
Subject was also chosen and appointed to be the first Proposition. And that
even three days before we had delivered to Cardinal Spada our preambulary
writings touching things wholly different from the first Proposition. But the
first notice we received of it, was that which Card. Ginetti gave us.

Tuesday the 24th. being come, a friend of ours went to Cardinal Spada's
Palace, to observe what should pass there and advertise us thereof. The hour
appointed was 13. a clock, that is, about eight in the morning. Cardinal
Cechini arrived there first, about half an hour after seven; and before eight
all the rest, of whom the Congregation consisted, arrived there one after
another in this Order. The Procurator General of the Capucines; Aversa: The
General of the Augustins: F. Palavicini, a Jesuit; F. Campanella a Carmelite,
who had also been a Jesuit before he entered into the Order of the Carmelites;
Monsignor Albizzi; The Master of the Sacred Palace: Cardinal Ginetti: F.
Delbene: The Procurator General of S. Marcel: The Commissary of the H. Office:
F. Modeste Procurator of the Conventual Cordeliers: Cardinal Ghiggi: F. Luca
Vadingo. The four Cardinals retired together in private for some time, and M.
Albizzi with them: and a little after, which was about nine a clock, they
caused all the other persons above named to enter. At Dinner time every one
returned home. This is all that I leatnt after they were separated; and that
they were to assemble again in the same manner that day seven night.

In the afternoon I went to S. Andrew de Laval, where I spoke with F. Delbene,
from whom I could learn nothing, saving that we had reason to be satisfied with
what passed that morning. And as I was speaking to him of the reasons which
hindered us from being contented with such proceeding, though perhaps in
reality we had cause to be so, he said we might represent the same to the
Cardinals, if we thought good; but he counseled me, if we did it, to do it a
little less vehemently than I had done to him. F. Pascaligo with whom I
conferred likewise in private, was much concerned in our Discontent, and judged
the Proceedings with us hard and grievous. Yet he confirmed to me that we ought
to hold our selves assured of F. Delbene, that he was absolutely for us; and
according to what he could judge by his countenance; since the Congregation of
that morning, he could not but be well pleased with what had passed therein.

The next day some of our friends congratulated us thereupon, and counseled us
to urge on our Affair in this good conjuncture, by delivering our Informations
conformable to the manner in which they had began to proceed. But we excused
our selves from so doing, alleging that this secret and invisible management
of such a difficult and intricate matter as ours, was too subject to foul
dealing; and that besides we were obliged to do nothing that might prejudice
the intentions of the Bishops who sent us, and in whose names we had demanded
of the Pope a Congregation, in which the Proceedings might be with the greatest
Solemnity, and according to the free, open and fair forms which had from all
time been observed and practiced in the Church. But our friends asked us,
Whether by standing upon those forms and intentions of the Prelates, we would
leave them to make qualche Sproposito, some odd Decision besides our purpose?
And we defended our selves from that Panick fear, by alleging, that if they
had a mind to do well, we had taken the right way; but if they were disposed to
suffer themselves to be carried to any undue and unsearchable Resolution, the
private and secret Informations which we should deliver them by the way, would
not hinder them from it: That when all was said, we could do nothing that was
contrary to the intentions of the Bishops who sent us.

The same day in the afternoon I found occasion to take a copy of a new
Writing, which I was told was delivered by M. Hallier and his Colleagues to the
Consultors. I was employed therein till eight a clock in the evening, together
with some other persons who helped me. We took it to pieces, and copied it out
leaf by leaf, every one transcribing as much as he could; he that had it being
obliged to restore it; and we fearing never to see it again, if we lost this
opportunity of transcribing it.

This writing was intitl'd, Damnatio Propositionum quinque ex Jansenii libris
excerptarum. They attributed all the Propositions to Jansenius, without
reciting any passage out of him, but only referring to some places; nor was any
sense or explication set down of the three last Propositions.

But upon the first they thus expressed the sense of Jansenius; Mandata Dei,
etiam a justis, quando praecepti implendi necessitas imminet, observari non
posse, Deo denegante iis adjutorium suum, tam illud quod ad praecepti
observationem sufficiat, quam istud quo gratiam ejusmodi emereri possint: quod
utrumque justis denegari docet: which is false, captious, and founded upon the
Ambiguity of the word Sufficient, as it would have been easy to show, if we
had had the liberty to defend Jansenius.

They impugned this sense by diverse passages of Scripture, very remote from the
matter in question: as, Jugum meum suave est, and onus meum leve; si vis ad
vitam ingredi, serva mandata.

In the Sequel they confusedly recited the ordinary passages of the Bulls of
Baius; of the Councils of Orange, Trent, Colen and Sens (which have been
explicated a hundred times) without speaking a word of the Explications that
have been made upon them: And especially, they urged diverse censures of the
Faculty against Luther and Calvin; which shows that they impugned the
Propositions in the sense of Luther and Calvin, or gave cause to the Pope to
construe them, in that sense.

The sense which they put upon the second Proposition, with reference to
Jansen* is very remarkable; Propositionis istius (said the writing) apud
Jansenium sensus est, nullam esse Dei gratiam interiorem, cui homo per liberum
arbitrium dissentiat aut dissentire possit in statu naturae corruptae, cum in
eo statu nullam admittat gratiam quae non sit efficax ad eum effectum ad quem
datur; gratiae autem efficaci nunquam dissentiatur, aut etiam, ex tertia
Propositione, dissentiri possit; hinc concludit interiori gratiae nunquam
resisti. Vid. Tom. 3. lib. de Great. cap. 14, 22, 25, 27, 28. lib. 3. cap. 1, 2,
3.

Thus whilst the Pope and Cardinals declared to us viva voce, that they would
not have us speak of Jansenius, and that they considered the Propositions in
abstracto; these Doctors did not forbear to oppose him in their secret writings
which were not communicated to us. And indeed had they been communicated to us
in a legal way, whatever purpose we had not to speak of Jansenius, we should
not have forborne refuting so great a falsity, as the charging him with having
taught that Effectual Grace cannot be resisted, and that Internal Grace is
never resisted; and accordingly we could not but say something again in defense
of that Prelate against the like Impostures, in the Answer to the sixty
passages of St. Augustine produced by M. Hallier, which we did not deliver to
the Pope, till we heard the condemnation was already prepared, and which was
not examined at all, as shall be shown in due place.

The passages cited by M. Hallier and his Colleagues upon reference to the
second Proposition, are the same which are every day in the mouths of the
Molinists, and which are transcribed from the writings of M. le Moine.

Touching the third Proposition; it may be observed, that though no sense be
particularly set down of it, yet Jansenius is charged to have taught, That man
has no power to resist Effectual Grace, because such Grace does necessitate.
And therefore he is combated with these words of the Council of Sens against
Luther; Non multum distat a Manichaeo Lutherus: Nam cuncta quae ab homine
fiunt, necessario fieri Lutherus credit.

They continued the same order in the other Propositions, heaping up passages
full of Abuses and Falsities, because they knew that those writings being
secret, they would not be refell'd by any person. Touching the fourth, they
cited the false Council of Arles of the year 476. the Letter of Lucidas, the
Council of Carisi, and other false or Semipelagian pieces.

This was the reason why they were so afraid to appear in a contradictory
conference, well knowing that these passages which were capable of blinding the
eyes of the Cardinals, whom their great employments kept from being througly
instructed in these matters, and who take all passages for good that are
produced before them, could have served for nothing but to confound them in
case they had had Adversaries to their face to confute them.

Thursday the 26th. going in the morning to Monte Cavallo, I visited F. Fani
who was highly disgusted that the Thesis of F. Melchior which was composed
almost in the very words of Augustine, had been stopped by M. Albizzi, who
intended to to get it deferred till Easter, because, he said, they were then at
Rome upon the examination of St. Augustines Doctrine. This reason so highly
displeased F. Fani, that he told me he would endeavor to acquaint the Pope
with it; and Monsignor Sacrista was so touched with it, that he exhorted me
that we should deliver an express Memorial to the Pope about it, to let him
know how this Assessor treated that great light of the Church under his Papacy.
But for that this Insolence was but an accessory to the principal things which
we had in our hand, and we might more commodiously represent the same at
another time, we did not think fit to make it a particular affair different
from our own which wholly employed us, and which by the new Difficulties raised
against us upon every occasion, gave us more trouble and business then it would
have done, had it been managed in that usual and public way in which Cardinal
Ghiggi had long ago assured us it should be.

F. Hilarion and F. Vbaldino were both of the number of those which ought by
right to have been of the Congregation which was held on Tuesday at Cardinal
Spada's house, and both very fit persons to pass a Judgment on the
Propositions with knowledge of the cause; but both of them had reasons which
kept them from being present at those kind of Congregations, F. Hilarion held
to the Judgment which he had delivered when the false censure of the Faculty
was examined before the Pope; and as for F. Vbaldino though he would not be
present in person at the Congregation, yet he thought fit to send his Vote and
Judgment thither in Writing, according to the course and practice of those
Divines, when any reason obliges them so to do. He entrusted it with the
Commissary of the H. Office, who presented it to the Congregation; but Cardinal
Spada refused, and would not receive it. I went to see that Father on Thursday
the 26. in the afternoon, and besides what I have related concerning his Vote;
he told me that the greatest part of the Congregation was spent on things
remote from what ought to have been debated; that there was no likelihood that
they could come that way to a handsome Decision, and that before they could
agree what mischief to do against us, they would employ some time and
consultation to resolve upon it.

The same day I met with F. Alvarez an eminent Dominican and first Professor of
Divinity in the Covent of la Minerve, who told me, that our Consultors found
themselves much entangled, si horavano impicciatissimo. That amongst others,
the General of the Augustines did not dissemble what haste the time allotted
for this affair put him upon, and how troubled he was to see that they were
obliged to speak in a Congregation of learned and venerable persons, before
they had time allotted them to inquire into the things whereupon they were to
pass Judgment: That to be able to speak solidly of all the matters which were
to be handled there, and were propounded, required the reading of St. Augustine,
Jansenius, our Writings, and those of our Adversaries.

After diverse visits which we had made to Cardinal Cechini to present our
writings to him, at length we were admitted to it on Friday morning, Sep. 27.
But first the Abbot of Valcroissant set forth to him very largely in Latin the
state of things, and what manner we accounted just and expedient to handle this
affair for the right understanding and judging of it. Having heard us fairly,
he bid us address to the other Cardinals before the Congregation, which was to
be held on Tuesday following, in case the Signature of Grace did not hinder it,
because in that of the Thursday foregoing, there had been no speech at all of
these perambulatory matters which ought to be first judged of before setting
upon the Propositions; but the Ax has been laid directly to the root of the
Tree, and they had began with the Propositions. We did not open our selves very
much to this Cardinal what esteem we made of those Congregations; but we told
him, that this equitable manner of interpreting the things which we had
represented to him, caused us to believe that when he had seen our writings, he
would understand and determine together with us; that to judge aright of this
Affair, and in order to the due comprehending of it, it was requisite first to
dispatch all those preliminary demands, and then rightly state the Propositions
and Questions which were to be decided, and upon which our Adversaries and we
were to contend. In fine, he professed, that he took things well, and had they
depended on him, he would have given his Judgment for the treating of them in
the manner we desired. But he was already fallen into the Popes disfavour, as I
have related above; and if he had much of the spirit of Justice, yet he had
very little Authority: He was present at those private Congregations, whereas
there were none but Cardinals; but his disgrace and misunderstanding with the
Pope, did not allow him to appear anywhere in the presence of his Holiness, nor
so much as to speak amongst his Confreres with the liberty which he could have
done, if he had not been in that condition of disfavour.

I learnt in the afternoon, that the General of the Dominicans had new cause of
complaint about the Congregation, namely, that the F. companion of the
Commissary of the H. Office, and the F. companion of the Master of the sacred
Palace, who by right ought to be of it, were excluded out of the number of the
Consultors.

Saturday the twenty eight, I met with a very learned Dominican, who being
drawn to speak of the first Proposition, told me that he accounted it very
true, and out of all danger of censure, if they did justice unto it; but that
they who had a desire to condemn it, would fasten upon the expression and
manner of speaking, that so they might have whereupon to ground their
condemnation. That nevertheless he believed, there was no place to attaque it
that way, because the manner of speech was not bad, because it was derived from
the Gospel. Which he proved by the example of that young man who asked our Lord
what he should do to inherit eternal life; and our Lord having answered him,
That he should sell all that he had, and give it to the poor and follow him;
the young man became sad thereat, because he was very rich. VVhereupon our Lord
said to his Disciples, That the rich should hardly enter into the kingdom of
God; because it was more easy for a Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle
(which is yet impossible) than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
Which having moved his Disciples who were present to put this Question to our
Lord, Quis ergo poterit salvus esse? who then can be saved? Our Lord answered
them, Quae impossibilia sunt apud homines, possibilia sunt apud Deum: That the
things which were impossible to men, left to themselves, were possible to them
with the grace of God. Behold the very word (said this Dominican) which is in
this Proposition, used by our Lord in the Gospel, and in an Hypothesis like to
that in the Proposition: For the young man, upon occasion of whom he used it,
was righteous, having kept God's commandments from his youth, and S. Augustine
says of him, that erat juvenis gratia and aetate. And our Lord bidding him
sell his goods and give them to the poor, does not give him an advice, but
enjoynes him a thing of commandment; for in the circumstances of that time a
man could not follow our Lord without forsaking all. Besides, that our Lord
places the Impossibility not upon the sale of the Goods but upon Salvation.
Now it cannot be said that the Obligation that lies upon men to save
themselves, is only a counsel and not a command. And nevertheless our Lord
makes use of that word, Quae impossibilia sunt apud homines. Why then, said
this Dominican, may it not be made use of in reference to the Righteous
mentioned in the Proposition, to whom the commandments of God are impossible in
this manner when they have not yet all the grace which is needful for the
observing of them; and to whom they become afterward possible with the help of
that Grace when they have received it, possibilia sunt apud Deum (as it is also
said in the Gospel) and which is to be presupposed in the Righteous meant in
the Proposition, to whom it is said that the commandments are impossible only
secundum praesentes quas habent vires, according to the small strength they
have during the time, that those commandments are not yet altogether possible
to them, with the utmost possibility which needs no other grace to act?

As for the Council of Trent, which condemns this manner of speaking (said the
Dominican) it is in speaking against Luther, that it condemns it; against Luther
(said he) who held that God's commandments were impossible to men, even moved
and excited by Grace, etiam sub gratia^ posito, which is meant of Actual Grace;
for otherwise, the Council should have added it in vain: and Luther spoke
universally of all the Righteous; the indefinite term of the Council being to
be resolved into an universal. Now there is much difference between saying that
God's commandments are impossible to all righteous men, with whatever actual
grace they be aided and assisted, (which is that which the Council condemns)
and saying that there are commandments of God which are impossible to the
Righteous whilst they have not yet the Effectual Grace, whereof they stand in
need to render the same possible unto them in such sort, that there be not
wanting to them any assistance for acting effectively; which is that which is
affirmed in the first Proposition.

This was the sense of that Dominican, who understood and considered it in this
manner. The Pope, to whom it was expounded otherwise, and who understood and
considered it otherwise, has condemned it. I stand to the condemnation which
he has made of it, under which this sense which this Dominican had, is not
comprised and involved. I do not say, of the Proposition for it is condemned;
but I say of the Catholic verity, which he considered under the terms of that
same Proposition: which verity is not condemned with the Proposition.

Monday the 30th. being by occasion in the Covent of the Augustins, I visited
the Senior professor of Divinity, and in the Discourse we had together, I told
him that he should do very well to persuade the General of the Augustins,
underhand to demand in the private Congregations held at Cardinal Spada's
House, that before any thing else, Justice might be done to Saint Augustine,
whose Doctrine and Authority had been so unworthily affronted; and I told him
plainly, That I could not speak to the General of it my self; because I would
not take notice of the private Assemblies which were held about our affair, nor
give occasion of saying that I made any secret and particular information to
the Consultors which were of them.

CHAP. X.
Letters written to us from Paris during the month of September, by which we
were enjoined not to engage in the Congregation, but upon condition of being
heard in presence of our Adversaries. Two or three remarkable things which
happened to the Jesuits during that time.

It Is a thing which still amazes me when I consider it, how the joy and hope,
which our Bishops and Friends had of the Declaration made to us at the erection
of the Congregation, were destroyed in a little time. Besides what I have
spoken thereof above in the end of August, he of our Bishops who had the most
experience in the Court of Rome, and also the greatest correspondence there,
caused us to be advertised, that we should keep our selves strictly upon our
Guards, and that it was signified to him from Rome, That the Congregation was
not appointed but to put us in a condition of receiving a contradictory
judgment against our selves, whereof the design was already resolved upon. And
during the whole Month of September, they who were at Paris caused the like
adviso's to be given us continually.

By the Letters of September 7. we were given to understand as from them, That
they had been written to from Rome that the Congregation was not granted us in
order to do us Justice, but to circumvent us, with a design to pass a
contradictory Judgment in the cause which we defended; and therefore we ought
to have a care of surprises.

By the Letters of the 13th. That what I had signified to them by the last
which they received from me did not surprise them. That they had long ago been
persuaded that M. Hallier and they with whom he acted in consort against us,
would use all their endeavors to elude the congregation, and not to appear in
it; but they held themselves assured, that so long as they had such Deputies as
our selves with the Pope, they ought not to fear that we would depart in any
thing from the Order which they had given us for obtaining a Congregation, in
which the Parties might be obliged to appear solemnly, and to act according to
such forms as were Canonical, and necessary for passing such a Judgment as
might be received by all the Faithful with benediction and without contest.
That if nevertheless the people with whom we had to do were obstinate, in
declining to appear before the Congregation according to the legal forms, they
enjoined us to have recourse to our Commission, which imported that we should
be heard publicly in a Congregation where our Adversaries might appear; to
hold our selves to that clause, and not to infringe the same in any manner
whatsoever. That they were too well persuaded of the justice of the Pope and
Cardinals, to believe that after so legal a Declaration they could find any
thing to gainsay our proceeding. That consequently we should remember that
besides this power we had no other. Wherefore if there arose any difficulties
to the prejudice of it, we should have recourse to them, and send them word
what was required of us. That that which obliged them further to recommend the
same to us again, was, That the Jesuits and Friends of M. Hallier reported at
Paris, that he would be coming away about the end of October to be at Paris in
the end of November, and that he would bring a censure along with him.

By the Letters of Sept. 20. my Lords approved the conclusion of our VVriting
of matters of Fact, and that which we had delivered concerning S. Augustin's
authority, whereof we had sent them a copy. They were very well pleased that we
thereby obliged our Adversaries to acknowledge that authority, and our Judges to
establish it, because when this should be once done; the remainder of the
contest would be easy to dispatch, but they recommended to us above all to
take heed that by occasion of our Writings our Adversaries did not endeavor to
make our affair a process by writing, because it was the only means that could
be left them to save themselves. That M. Lagault had written to a Person, a
Friend of my Lords, as triumphing already for the victory whereof he was
certain; that it seemed by his Letter that he was in a manner sure that no
hearing would be allowed us in the manner that we had demanded, and that all
that would be granted, would be to hear us in private the most speedily that
possibly could be.

And lastly, By those of the 27th. of the same month, That we should always
take heed not to engage in the Congregation otherwise than in presence of our
Adversaries; that the said Lords had not sent us but upon that condition; and
that we should act in such sort, that our Adversaries as well as our selves
might reduce all that they should say into writing, and that they might be
obliged to sign the same, according to the custom of Congregations.

About this time two or three remarkable things passed amongst the Jesuits.
They caused to be maintained in their College in the Town of Grets, in Germany
(Graecii) this Proposition, That it is not a matter of Faith that Innocent X.
is a true and lawful Pope, Innocentium X. esse legitime Pontificem, non est de
fide.

They made a great solemnity at Rome for the secular year of the foundation or
possession which they had of a College established for Germans and Hungarians.
They caused an Oration to be pronounced by a young German Count which one of
their Fathers had composed; to which they invited all the Cardinals, who
accordingly were all present at it, if I be not deceived, except Cardinal
Spada, who perhaps was detained elsewhere by some more grave employment. They
caused the said Oration to be printed, and it was censured a few days after by
the Master of the Sacred Palace. I remember amongst diverse things in it
deserving reprehension, which were in very great number, it was said by a
sufficiently silly figure of Rhetoric, that the Pope favored Heresy.

Some Persons having considered that it was little edifying to see the Jesuits
wander to and fro in their Churches and under their Cloisters, to receive and
make visites, etc. in the time that the Divine Offices of the Grand Masses and
Vespers were celebrating amongst them, whilst they caused the same to be sung
by Laymen commended for it; they caused notice to be given thereof to some of
those who were of the Congregation de Riti, of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. The
General of the Jesuits was advertised a little while after, that that
Congregation was upon the point to make a Decree, 1. To oblige them to
officiate in the double Festivals of the first and second class with Deacon
and Subdeacon, and other convenient Acolytes at the grand Mass and Vespers
with a Priest, Portecierges, (Taper-carriers) and Porte-encens
(Incense-carriers) etc. 2. To hinder them from keeping the Octaves of the
Festivals of their Bien-heureux (Blessed) who were not canonized. The General
and his Assistants having deliberated what to do in this occurrence, resolved
to prevent the Decree by putting it in execution, thereby to take from the said
Congregation the cause of making one, which might be published and become some
matter of humiliation to them. Wherefore on the first of October when they
celebrated the Holyday of their Bienheureux Borgia, they officiated at the
first and second Vespers, and at the grand Mass with the Ceremonies above
mentioned, according to the intention of the Congregation, whereof they had
gotten intelligence, and contrary to what they had accustomed, they kept no
Octave of that Festival. Till All Saints day there happened no Festival for them
of the first and second class, and during the whole month of October they did
nothing but after the ordinary way. The Pope who was advertised of these
doings, and who intended to prescribe something further to them, caused one to
tell the General, whom he had not seen of a long time, that he must repair to
his Holiness. But the General would have been dispensed withal, alleging that
he feared the Pope would not explicate himself more clearly; that he might
prescribe them something further, whereunto it behoov'd them to obey, and that
it was better to keep themselves as they were. Nevertheless he could not
gainsay it, it behoov'd him to go to the Pope upon the Octave of All Saints. He
represented to his Holiness the alteration which the Congregation de Riti had
introduced in their Society; that nevertheless they had submitted to it, and
prevented the Decree by obeing it. The Pope answered him, that he was well
pleased to understand that they had obeyed so readily; but that they deceived
themselves in believing that the Congregation intended to oblige them to
officiate in that manner only in the Festivals of the first and second Class;
that they must do it as often as there should be a grand Mass and Vespers. The
General replied, That his Holiness obliged them to that which was not practiced
in any House of Religion, not even in Collegial Houses, where they do not
officiate in that manner upon ordinary Festivals. That he entreated his
Holiness to consider that there was none in his Society that was instructed in
the Ceremonies; that in many Colleges there was not company enough for that
and the other Functions. The Pope answered that it must be done as his Holiness
had said, in all the Houses of their Society throughout the world; and that if
they did it not of themselves, he would cause the Decree to be published. The
General replied that they would obey, and so he withdrew. Accordingly the
second Sunday of November they officiated in the professed House of le Giesu
with the abovesaid ceremonies. They celebrated the grand Mass with Deacon and
Subdeacon, the Portecierges and the Port'-encense. In the afternoon at Vespers
which were those of S. Martin there was a Jesuit who officiated in his
Surplice and Cope; within the Railes there were two Portecierges and one
Port-encense, and two other Acolytes in Surplices, all Jesuits. When they had
about this time at their College the Forty Hours, they performed the same in
like manner. They were obliged likewise to use the same solemnity in the
Noviciate when there should be a grand Mass or Vespers sung; but it was not
believed that they would make much have in taking up this usage out of Italy,
where they were more distant from the Pope's presence. But let us return to the
things which concern us.

CHAP. XI.
New Solicitations for the Communication of our Writings, and a new Writing of
M. Hallier's which fell into our hands.

WE did not go out of our Lodging on Tuesday the first of October; but we
understood the next morning that a second Congregation was held at the House of
Cardinal Spada. That the other Cardinals were so late in appearing there, that
Cardinal Spada being impatient thereat, sent Laquayes to their Eminences to
know whether they would come. That at length Cardinal Ginetti and Ghiggi
appeared there, but Cardinal Cechini did not come at all. That the consultors
entered very late, and that the congregation lasted but a very little time.

In the afternoon I visited the Ambassador. He told me that the day before he
had seen two of the Doctors our Adversaries, who acquainted him, that the
Conferences were begun, that they were not sent for to them, and that they let
them alone. I answered the Ambassador, that these were the proceedings which
they desired, being acceptable enough to people that had no mind to appear
publicly before the Congregation. The Ambassador replied, that nevertheless
they declared that they were ready so to do: I answered, That they were ready
indeed, as those who to play the Bravoes, make show of willingness to fight a
Duel, but underhand, for fear of becoming engaged to fight, get guards set upon
themselves. The Ambassador said, that he had always told me, that it would be a
hard thing to get them at Rome to resolve upon giving us a public hearing. I
answered, that we were not yet at the end of the Affair; that we should be too
blame, if we complained so soon that they would not hear us; that we still
hoped they would do according to the promise made to us at the declaring of the
Establishment of the Congregation which we had demanded. That these first
conferences which the Consultors had together, were perhaps on purpose to
venilitate the Propositions among themselves, thereby to reduce them to clear
and distinct senses; which was the first thing that we had represented to the
Pope as necessary to be done in order to proceed profitably and sincerely in
the whole Examen and decision of this Affair. The Ambassador went to see the
Cardinals Capponi and Vrsini: I accompanied him in those two Visits, and in the
Discourse that I had with him by the way, I entreated him to take some occasion
to get M. Hallier and M. de Valcroissant to enter into a conference together
about some point of the matter in question, and that it might be in his
presence, or of two or three of his friends with him, that so it might be tried
in what manner both the one and the other would scan and discuss of things; and
that both sides of us might be put a little in breath by that Essay. The
Ambassador answered me, that it was not fit for him to thrust himself so far
into the discussion of these matters: I replied, that it would not be to decide
them; but no more then as when the King causes the Regiment of Guards to be
exercised, where every one does what he would do in a battle, yet without any
being victorious or vanquished, or so much as any fighting offered on one side
or other.

The Curee of S. Savior had been gratified by the Pope with the Office of
Sub-bibliothecary of the Vatican, which is a considerable quality as well in
regard of the esteem which is thereby made of the capacity of the person to
whom it is given, as in regard of the appurtenances annexed to it, and for that
it puts a man into the rank of the Prelacy, which obliges him to go in a Coach,
and clothed with violet, di pavonazzo. 'Twas Cardinal Ghiggi, his Countryman
and ancient friend, who induced the Pope to acknowledge the merit and labor of
this Curie by conferring the said Dignity upon him. He was ours as cordially as
any man could be another; and as soon as he had in his hands the badges of his
Magistracy, which were the keys of the Vatican, and the Achives and Presses
where the Books are; he came to offer us the use of them, not only at the
ordinary times when such as have permission may resort thither, but also at all
hours that we pleased, day and night. He told me on Thursday, October 3. that
the good Master of the sacred Palace, who knew not what intimate correspondenee
we had with him, entreated him out of kindness to us, to accommodate us with
such books of the said Library as we should need.

If I did not fear to fall into too frequent and tedious Repetitions of the
same thing, I would here set down another Conference that I had with F. Mulard
in presence of Sig. Domenico Ferranti and F. Fani, in which he told more things
concerning his Deputation the foregoing year, and of that wherewith he affirmed
himself encharged this year from the King about the same Affair, and of M.
Hallier's letters to the Cardinals and M. Albizzi, then I have yet related. But
to leave it all, and speak no more of it, I will only add two new particulars
more here, not hitherto mentioned. First, That in the beginning M. Joysel was
not to have been one in the voyage wherein M. Hallier was engaged; That the
Letters of Recommendation from the Court in behalf of these Doctors, spoke only
of M. Hallier and M. Lagualt; that M. Joysel aftetwards entreated them to take
him into their company. And secondly, that the year before when his General
charged him upon his obedience to return into France, he did it partly because
of the Complaints which the General of the Dominicans made against him to his
General, when he saw him solicit this Affair against us.

In the Afternoon we went to the Cardinals of our Congregation, to put them in
mind, that it was a fortnight since we had presented our writings to them; that
we conceived; that they might have since perused them, and that in our
judgments it was expedient, that they would please to communicate them to the
Doctors against whom they were made, to the end they might be ready to answer
thereunto when their Eminences should think fit that we appeared with them in
the Congregation. And lest they might forget this request after our departure
from them; we made a short Memorial of it, of which we transcribed and signed
as many Copies as were requisite, to present the same to each of them. The
Memorial was thus inscribed on the outside: Eminentissimis ac Reverendissimis
Dominis, And within side thus: Eminentissimi Reverendissimique etc.

This, etc. is the ordinary style and form wherewith Memorials are concluded,
comprehending all the words of respect, affection and good wishes, that they
may be added by extending more at length.

After the, etc. the Memorial was thus signed. Natalis de la Lane Doctor
Theologus Facultatis Parisiensis, Abbas beatae Mariae de Valle Crescente.
Ludovicus de Saint-Amour sacrae facultatis Parisiensis Doctor ac Socius
Sorbonicus. Ludovicus Angran ejusdem sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis licentiatus,
ac insignis Ecclesiae Trecersis Canonicus.


We went first to Cardinal Spada, whom we found not at home, and thence to
Cardinal Ginetti, with whom we spoke. We had little time to speak with him,
when we presented our writings to him, and therefore upon this occasion we gave
him an ample account of what was contained therein; after which he answered us
in Latin, as M. de Valcroissant had spoken to him, and said nothing about the
Communication which we requested, but gave us some genral terms of Assurance,
that nothing would be done in this Affair, without first considering the whole
exactly. Next we went to Cardinal Ghiggi, who retured not till night from
taking the air with the Pope: When we had acquainted him with the subject of
our coming to him, he answered us, that he knew not whether that course would
be judged expedient, that this business would not proceed so fast, that it
would go forward with leaden feet, that nothing would be done therein but very
leisurly molto posatamente. After which, touching the word Adversaries, he
said, that he did not like the using of it between us, because he believed that
both sides sought the Truth: we replied, that he did not like the using of it
between us, because he believed that both sides sought the truth: We replied,
that did we know a gentler word whereby to denote the people with whom we were
in contest, we would willingly use it; and as for the scruple that he made
about the Communication of our writings, it surprised us extremely; because
Cardinal Roma had promised the same to us in the Popes name, after we had been
a whole year in suing for it. Cardinal Ghiggi answered, that he knew not what
Cardinal Roma might have said or done: but however it should be taken into
consideration what course would be expedient. He had some conceit, that this
Request and Memorial were addressed to himself alone; but we told him that we
should present the same also to the other three Cardinals; whereupon he
answered us, that they would confer about it together; and after they had done
so, perhaps it would be found requisite to consult his Holiness.

Saturday the fifth, we went in the forenoon to Cardinal Spadas house to
present our Memorial to him, but not finding him there, we went to that of
Cardinal Cechini, to whom we presented it, having first acquainted him with the
cause why it was made. Cardinal Cechini answered, that he had not as yet
perused all our Writings, that they were much longer then those of our
Adversaries, and the days already very short, and that his eyes no more allowed
him to read any thing by a Candle. But that he gave us one Advice, namely to
beware in the other instructions or informations that we should have yet to
make, of falling upon the matters of Grace which had been heretofore
controverted between the Dominicans and the Jesuits; because according to what
he had heard, he believed it was not the Popes intention that the same should
be meddled with in any sort, considering that after the long conferences and
disputations about them under Clement VIII. and Paul V. all the Regulation that
could be effected therein, was, that Paul V. imposed perpetual silence to both
parties upon that Subject. We answered, that we beseecht his Eminence to give
us leave to assure him, that the silence imposed to the Parties by Paul V. was
not to be perpetual, but only a Provisional Order to hinder the parties from
preventing his Judgment, and taxing one another of Heresy, till such time as
the posture of things permitted him to publish his Decision, which was already
made in favor of the Dominicans against the Jesuits, and whereof there was a
Bull drawn up, as appears by sundry undeniable Records at Rome. That since that
time, the Jesuits instead of making right use of that Silence which was
enjoined principally in their favor (for a Condemnation was the thing first
intended) and returning by degrees to the doctrine of the Church, whch they
were convinced to have deserted, on the contrary they have always receded
further and further from it, and have at length so spread their erroneous
imaginations everywhere in the Church, that they dared now a days to cry them
up as the doctrine of the Church, and thereby gave an occasion to Heretics to
reproach the Church of forsaking Tradition, and the dictates of the Scripture
in these matters. That it was time to remedy this Disorder, and for the H. See
and the Church to make known to all the world what was their common Doctrine
and Belief as to these points. That it was the duty and interest of the one and
the other, no more to keep under a Bushel by a longer silence the Light which
ought to be set upon a Candlestick, or upon a Hill to give light to the whole
world, and teach every one the true way of his salvation. That this mystery of
Grace was one of the principal points of the Church's Faith, the knowledge
whereof was most profitable to the Faithful, to keep them in the
acknowledgement of what they owe to God, and in the Christian humility which is
so necessary to them. That for this reason the great Apostle of the Gentiles
writing to the Romans to expound the same to them, tells them that he would not
have them ignorant of it, least they might leave some entrance for vanity into
their minds: Nolo enim vos fratres ignorare mysterium hoc, ut non sitis vobis
ipsis sapientes. That hence S. Fulgentius had taught us that the blessed
Apostle intended not to have that Doctrine kept in silence which he had left in
writing: Beatus Apostolus noluit sileri quod voluit scribi. That S. Augustine
had observed that it was in his Epistle to the Romans principally that this
Apostle had unfolded this Mystery, to the end that the knowledge thereof being
conveyed to that Great City whose Dominion extended over all the Nations of the
World, the same might from thence be diffused through the whole earth, as
flowing from the Head to all the Members: De cujus praedicatione maxim ad
Romanos Apostolica Epistola loquitur, ut jude se praedicatio ejus velut a
capite orbis toto orb diffunderet. That it would be a very strange thing for
those wholesome waters which ought to flow from that Source into all
Christendom, deriving a happy fecundity upon it, to be stopped up and retained in
that Source by a continual silence, which must needs cause everywhere a sad
drought and sterility; That one day God, who said to his Apostles, Go, preach
the truths of my Gospel throughout the world, might reproach their Successors
for having kept those Truths captive and extinguished them in the very center of
their safest Sanctuary, as they would be, if instead of protecting them
against the assaults of their enemies, the H. See condemned them to a perpetual
silence. Wherefore there is no appearance to say that such silence was imposed;
or if it was, there would be a necessity and evident obligation to break it. As
for that which Cardinal Cechini said to us of not entering into the matter de
Auxiliis, we answered, That we would not meddle with the same further than the
things to be examined should engage us; But we could not dissemble to his
Eminence, that if they would not have those matters entered into, then neither
could any examen or discussion of the Propositions be taken in hand, because we
maintaining the same only by reason of the connection which they had with
Effectual Grace, whereof they were consequences and necessary dependances, when
reduced to the sense in which we intended to defend them, and so nothing could
be established, judged or pronounced upon them one way or other, but the whole
matter must at the same time be decided one way or other likewise. That there
was so great a concatenation between all the Maxims that could be advanced on
one side or other in this matter, that one single point being once granted on
either part, it was easy to reduce all the rest thereunto by necessary and
evident consequences; Non habet aliud summa quam p rtio; That it had been the
artifice of the Jesuits and their Confederates in this last affair to hide the
Catholic truths of this mystery of Grace under the ambiguous terms whereof the
Propositions were composed, thereby to involve some one of those truths under
the condemnation which they might obtain of the Propositions, extend the
condemnation of a Proposition to that truth, conclude evidently from the
condemnation of this the condemnation of all the rest, and from their
condemnation pretend afterward that their sentiments which are diametricaliy
opposite thereunto, were authorized and established for Orthodox by the H. See.
That nothing but the evidence and importance of the Mischiefs likely to ensue
from such a surprise as they would have put upon the H. See, had moved the
Prelates by whom we were deputed, to send us hither to give notice thereof.
That it belonged to the Pope and their Eminences, upon whom his Holiness
relied, to take heed thereto; and that if we had some small interest therein,
though our affection to the H. See, and the part which that affection caused us
to take in an affair which so highly concerned it, the Pope and their Eminences
were far more highly engaged and interested therein than we. The Cardinal heard
this discourse with great attention; he seemed to us affected with it; and
whereas he had been hitherto little accustomed to such language, the Sentin e^t
which he expressed to us upon it made us conceive that he was one of those that
considered the consequence of the things which we represented to him, and would
to his power do us justice therein.

On Sunday the 6th. we went again to Cardinal Spada's house, to whom we
delivered our little Memorial, and told him that we had addressed the same to all
the Cardinals of the Congregation, because when we requested him the first time
that he would please to ordain the communication of our Writings, he had
answered us that it was requisite to make the same request to the others, and
they would all together take order therein. Whereunto he returned that he would
make report thereof, and it should be considered what was expedient.

The same day I visited Monsignor Sacrista who told me that the Jesuits were
resolved to defend their Panegyric of the College of Hungary against the
Decree of the Master of the Sacred Palace; and that they said that as to what
they advanced therein, viz. that the Pope favored Heresy, it was a figure of
Rhetoric, whereby they put abstractum pro concreto; and that generally in Rome
the common sentiment was that the Pope knew them well, and that he had them not
in gran concetto, that he made no great account of them, that he loved them not
overmuch.

Monday the 7th. F. Mulard was again upon the point to return into France; and
he acquained me with sundry small news; amongst the rest, That the year
foregoing he had presented to the Pope and the Cardinals Roma and Spada, the
Writing above mentioned, intitl'd, An sit sopienda, etc. That F. Annat was
Author of that intitl'd, Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus. And upon my saying
that it was a great shame that M. Hallier was so miserably become the
Colporteur (the Pamphlet-venter) of the Jesuits, in that he received of them
the Writings which they put into his hands, without so much as examining them,
and went about to present them to the Cardinals, he took upon him to defend his
good Cousin from this reproach, telling me that he had made another since. And
when I pressed him to tell me what it was, he answered me that it was only a
collection of passages out of S. Augustine (I believed he received the same from
the Jesuits as well as the rest) but F. Mulard added, that M. Joysel and M.
Lagault had also undertaken to compose something upon this Subject, but that
what they had written was worth nothing at all. Lastly, He told me that F.
Annat was likewise about to return into France, and that those three Doctors
used all their endeavors to persuade him not to depart from Rome so long as
themselves were there.

We did not go out of our Lodging on the forenoon of Tuesday the 8th. But in
the afternoon I visited F. Vbaldino who congratulated me for the good success
of our Cause in our Congregation, and for that the whole Assembly had agreed to
all that we had demanded in behalf of S. Augustine. I remonstrated to him that
it was not enough that they agreed thereunto by word, but it was requisite that
they declared the same in writing, and obliged our Adversaries to do the like.
He acknowledged it, and further confessed to me that the way they had hitherto
held in the Congregation both in reference to that point and to the
Propositions, was not that which ought to be taken. He told me also, that one
of our Adversary Doctors had been to visit him; he could not tell me his name;
but according as he described him, I believe it was M. Lagault. He told me that
this Doctor said to him, that if these matters were not speedily defined, and
if the root and course of these Heresies were not cut off, all would be lost in
France, and that at length there would be no remedy left. That they did not at
all contend against S. Augustine; That they would not meddle with the matter de
Auxiliis: That they acknowledged and confessed Effectual and Special Grace
particular, which was not given to all the Righteous in general, without which
there was no perseverance, and with which all such as received it could and did
really persevere, which had been acknowledged and defined by the Council of
Trent, as F. Vbaldino constrained him to grant. After which the same Father
told me, that he urged the Doctor further, and made this argument to him: You
acknowledge then that that Grace causes Holy Action, sanctam operationem;
which M. Lagault granted. Now, said the Father to him, Omnis actio praesupponit
posse; ab actu ad posse valet consequentia. If then such Grace gives the
Action, it gives also the power proportionate and correspondent to such Action.
Therefore who so has not such Grace, has neither such action or such power.
Now to him that has not this power, though God's commandments be possible to
him with another possibility, yet they are impossible to him with this. To
which the Doctor could not answer, but fell to cry up M. Hallier's great
labors in behalf of the H. See, for which he deserved to be rewarded. He was
so copious in this Declaration, that F. Vbaldino told me, he could not but have
great expectations. Toward evening I visited Monsignor Sacrista who told me
that there was held that day another Congregation at Cardinal Spada's house,
although there had been a signature of Grace upon the same day.

We had made some transcripts of the Summary of our Writings, to justify to
some of our friends that we had not taken pleasure to slink back during the
time which we had employed in composing them, and to give them an Idea of what
we pretended therein. I had lent one of them to M. Bouvier, who came to restore
it on Wednesday the 9th. and who told me that the face of our affair was
changed since a fortnight; that the wind sat in a good corner for us; that the
common Bruit was that the Jesuits would be mortified, and that the Pope would
count our affair among the great occasions of displeasure which they had given
his Holiness.

In the afternoon I met M. Delbene, to whom I said pleasantly that I should
willingly ask him tidings of what passed in the Congregations which I
understood were held at Cardinal Spada's house; but I considered the Obligation
which I knew he had to keep secrecy. He professed that he was sorry for the
restraint that was upon him, but as he left me, he said pleasantly too, Viva
Sant' Agostino.

On Thursday the 10th. I went to accompany Cardinal Barberin to Monte Cavallo.
He told me that it was a long time since he had seen me, and asked me whether I
had heard of the little Book of Gravina which F. Nolano had caused to be
printed, in which the authority of S. Augustin's doctrine was pleaded for;
adding that it seemed to him very superfluous; because all the world was
obliged to reverence it; perch noi siamo tutti obligati a riverire sant'
Agostino. I cannot tell whether or no by this Discourse he meant to intimate
that the Writing which we had presented was not necessary. I saw Cardinal Spada
arrive, in whose train was M. Hallier and his Colleagues. Monsignor Sacrista
told me in the Pope's Antichamber that one of the Consultors had signih'd to
him that it was fit we presented a Memorial to the Pope to get M. Albizzi out
of the Assemblies; because, said he, Grida l'uno, minaccia and burba l' altro:
He calls out upon one, he threatens and mocks another, he gains others by
hopes, etc.

In the afternoon by chance I met with two Pieces of Writings which M. Hallier
and his Colleagues had presented September 29. in the hands of one of the
Consultors; one of which was upon the first Proposition, and the other upon the
second. Out of the great confidence he had in me he lent them to me, and we
forthwith fell to transcribe them very diligently, that we might speedily
return them into the hands of him who had the goodness to lend them to me.

Finding by these Papers that there were three others upon each of the other
Propositions, in the days following I used some care to procure them; and
understanding, as I was going about it that M. Hallier had made the same
complaint to Cardinal Ghiggi of the Letter which I had written to M. Bouvot,
that he had formerly made to the Ambassador, I visited that Cardinal upon
Friday the 11th. in the afternoon. He declared that complaints of that nature
made no great impression upon his mind; nevertheless I showed him a Copy of a
Letter which I had written, and offered to leave it with him, that he might see
how unjust and ridiculous M. Hallier's complaints were. But he was contented
that I read to him what I would of it, and what I conceived most necessary to
undeceive him. And indeed he was satisfied therewith.

I proceeded otherwise with the Ambassador when I carried him a copy of the
said Letter, presently after I had promised it to him: For I left it with him,
to the end that if he thought good he might give it M. Hallier to send to M.
Grandin, and compare it with the Original which I had written to M. Bouvot. The
Ambassador willingly took it, after he had read it, to make the said offer to
M. Hallier, telling me, that there was no ground of complaint in it, and I
might without any fear send it open into all Countries in the world.

When I went to Cardinal Ghiggi, I repaired to the Capucines to see F. Brisse.
M. Lagault arrived there at the same time that I did, and attending till F.
Brisse came down we discoursed together. He said that M. Cornet had reason to
propound the Equivocal Propositions to the Faculty, because they were every day
endeavored to be put into Theses; but should there have been any cause of
blaming him for it, yet he had been cleared by four and twenty Bishops who sent
them to Rome to demand their condemnation. He said also, that were the question
no more but concerning Molina, we should soon agree, and they would forsake
their party. That indeed Molina had placed the Efficacy of Grace in dependence
on the Will, that therein he was wrong, that he had deserted S. Augustine; but
should things be reduced to that Question, they should not be much concerned,
but leave us to act as we pleased: All this he said, whilst we were expecting
F. Brisse. Whereunto I answered, when F. Brisse was come to us, asking him
about what then was the question in those Propositions, if not about the point
of Effectual Grace which Molina had impugned; after so many Declarations made
by us that we did not stand for them, but by reason of the senses according to
which they might be reduced, and had an indissoluble connection with that kind
of Grace: He replied, That the Propositions were a distinct matter from it, as
the Popes Declaration to them and also, to us manifested; namely, That his
Holiness would not have any meddling with the things which had been handled
under Clement VIII. and Paul V. I would gladly have replied something to him,
but after this he left me in displeasure, telling me that we had good Judges,
and should know shortly what would be the issue. He spoke in such manner as if
he had been fully assured of the victory, and left me no room to reply to him;
so that when he was gone, I was contented with minding F. Brisse to take notice
what he had heard.

Saturday the 12th. among other persons whom I visited in quest of the three
Writings abovementioned, I spoke to the companion of the Commissary of the H.
Office, by whom I learnt that a few days before M. Hallier and his Colleagues
had visited the Commissary, and that during the visit the Commissary sent to
him for a Writing which he had lent him, to return the same to them. It was
thus intitl'd, Jansenius a Thomistis gratiae per seipsam efficacis defensoribus
damnatus: It was since printed, as I shall observe hereafter under the name of
F. Annat, though M. Hallier presented it to the Consultors instead of
Instructions which he was to present to them. It was founded upon nothing but
perpetual equivocations of Grace Sufficient and Next Power, and upon the
Chimera of Necessitating Grace which they attributed to Jansenius. What it
contained most considerable, was refuted by the Dominicans in an Answer which
they made to another of M. Hallier's writings, wherein he repeated the same
things, and whereof I shall speak in its proper place.

The same day I met with an Ecclesiastic who was Agent at Rome for the
Archbishop of Malines, and I gave him notice that Jansenius was directly and
openly assaulted in all those Writings which we had discovered, to the end he
might advertise the Divines in Flanders thereof, and they might see what they
had to do for the particular defense of that Prelate's Book, since we could not
interest our selves therein, nor speak of it in any sort.

On Sunday the 13th. I visited the General of the Augustines. He spoke of some
Writings which had been showed him from our Adversaries. F. Mulard had showed
him one which he came to demand again three days after, out of which he had
extracted as much as he could whilst it was in his hands. It was, as he told
me, a pretty thick Book bound in parchment, intitl'd, Liber quinque
Propositionum quas octuaginta Galliae Episcopi Romano Pontifici ad Censuram
obtulere. He said, that when F. Mulard came to fetch it from him, he told him
that he was going to get it printed. I say nothing of it here, because I doubt
not but it was the same which was since printed at Paris by the Cramoisis with
the King's privilege, dated January 26. 1653. and with this title, Informatio
de Quinque Propositionibus quas Episcopi Galliae Romano Pontifici ad Censuram
obtulere.

This General showed me two other Writings which he said were given him by M.
Hallier himself; they were the same mentioned above to have been shown me by
one of the Consultors, to whom also they were given by the same M. Hallier,
September 29. The first was against the first Proposition, and the other
against the second; and neither of them was any thing else but a heap of sundry
passages out of St. Augustine, which the compilers pretended to be against the
Propositions. I shall hereafter give an account of the first of those Writings
when I come to speak of the Confutation of them which we presented to the Pope
in a grand audience, which his Holiness gave us on the 19th. of May, in the
year 1653, and by what I shall say of that, the Reader will be able to judge of
the second. But in the mean time I shall observe one particularity here which I
told this General, as soon as he had informed me that M. Hallier in person gave
them to him, upon which I cannot speak so minutely in what I shall have to say
hereafter thereupon in general.

Amongst sixty Passages which were stuffed in the former of those Writings
against the first Proposition, there was one which wat taken out of Pelagius's
Confession of Faith sent by that Heretic to Pope Innocent the First, but
received only by Zozimus his Successor; and this passage was cited as out of a
work of St. Augustin's, namely the 191 Sermon de Tempore.

It was a fault either of ignorance or malice, into which the Jesuit Ripalda,
M. Morel and M. le Moine fell one after another; and they had been blamed for
it in the excellent Tracts printed against them, in which they had been so
clearly convicted thereof, that though it had been excusable in M. Hallier, to
have been the first that cited that work as St. Augustin's, yet it was no
longer excusable after the public confusion, which those three other Divines
above named had received for it. Nor did he cite it with such confidence, but
that he declared that he would agree that St. Augustine was was not the Author
of that Piece, but Pelagius. Notwithstanding which, he maintained that he had
right to cite it, upon the reasons which he alleged for his so doing, which
not only were false, but showed most palpable and strange foul dealing in him.

He said in that Writing that he might cite that piece, because though it were
Pelagius's Confession of Faith, yet it was certain that the said Confession was
received and approved for Catholic by Zozimus, and that two Bishops of France
named Heroes and Lazarus, who had accused Pelagius as an Heretic, were found
and declared by that Pope Calumniators, as appeared by the Letters of the same
Pope to the Bishops of Africa; Sed cui placebit hunc sermonem sancto Augustino
abdicare ut Pelagio attribuat, nobis gratum faciet, si modo addat quod e re
est, confessionem istam Pelagii a Zozimo Pontifice probatam fuisse, a clero
Romano cum gaudio susceptam. Judica um ex earum lectiene litterarum absolutae
fidei Pelagium fuisse, Herotem and Lazarum delatores Pelagii tanquam
calumniatores habitos fuisse, ut constat ex Epistolis Zozimi ad Episcopos
Africae. See where M. Hallier fixes as to this point; see his language in the
year 1652. See with what boldness he dares speak in a Writing which he
presents to the Ministers of the H. See, in a business wherein the Catholic
Faith is concerned; affirming a thing for true which himself knew long ago to
be altogether illusory and full of falsity and lying.

For in truth, this confession of Pelagius was received and approved by Zozimus
for Catholic, and those French Bishops were decry'd and defamed as
calumniators by the Letters which that Pope writ upon this subject to the
Bishops of Africa. But those Bishops of Africa having by their answer given the
Pope to understand, that he had been surprised by the ambiguity of the words of
that Heretick's confession of Faith, and by the appearance of his submission to
the H. See, the same Pope afterward revoked the Approbation which he gave to
the said Confession of Faith; and those Bishops whom he had decry'd as
Calumniators, were acknowledged for very holy and zealous Bishops. Ought M.
Hallier to produce before the H. See a Piece as approved by a Pope, which he
knew very well the same Pope afterward disapproved by revoking his
Approbation? Ought M. Hallier to defame those two Bishops once again in this
Writing, after himself had justified them sundry times in his printed works as
well as the Card. Baronius and Bellarmine? And how could he resolve to speak of
them again in secret as Calumniators in the year 1652. after himself had been
in the years 1632. and 1644. a public witness of their innocence and merit?

He was so in the year 1632. in a Book which he dedicated to Pope Urban VIII.
intitl'd Defensio Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae, in the Preface whereof being to
show, that Bishops have oftentimes censured Errors which sprung up far from
their Diocesses, he proves the same chiefly by the examples of those of France,
and descending to the two in question, behold how he speaks of them in that
Advertisement to the Reader p. 34. Quid quod (says he) Lazari and Herotis
Episcoporam Galliae delationibus Celestius and Pelagius Heretici, qui Africam
praesertim suis erronibus infecerant, Galliam vix ac ne vix quidem attigerant,
toti orbi propalati fuerunt? Quos tamen cum falsis accusationibus apud Sanctam
Sedem Celestius accusasset, accusatus ipse, ut Catholicus, ILLI VERO INJVSTE a
ZOZIMO PAPA INFAMATI SVNT VT INIQVI ACCVSATORES, QVAMVIS HEROTIS NOMEN VT
SANCTISSIMI VIRI Prosper Aquitanicus summis laudibus extulerit, and Vtriusque
de Pelagio and Celestio fugiendis missas litteras Carthaginensis Conc^lii sub
Innocentio Primo Patres approbarint. ZOZIMVS VERO SENTENTIAM POSTEA SVAM DE
CELESTIO ET PELAGIO REVOCARIT, etc.

And in the year 1643. the Jesuits exasperated at the zeal which M. Hallier
testified in behalf of the interests of the University, whose Privileges those
Fathers endeavored to invade, having published a Book under the borrowed name
of the Abbot of Boysic, in which they aspersed M. Hallier's person with
calumnies, and proclaimed him an heretic, a calumniator, and one of the
greatest enemies of Religious Life; they maintained that he was likewise an
enemy to the H. See it self, and proved this last charge, amongst ot^ers, by
the passage which I have newly transcribed out of his Advertisement to the
Reader. M. Hallier, to answer to the Accusations of those Fathers, in the year
1644. published a Book intit'd A Defense of the doctrine of M. Fransois Hallier
Doctor and King's Professor in Sorbonne By himself. And in the 36 page of that
Book he answers to the abovesaid Accusation in these words: The Accusation,
says he, wherewith you charge me, when yoa blame me for taxing Pope ZOZIMUS,
as if he had unjustly defamed two Bishops, HEROES and LAZARUS, falls upon a
person as eminent for his learning as for the Purple wherewith his merits were
sometimes acknowledged; I mean the great Cardinal Baronius, who sath the same
expressly in his 5th. Tome upon the year of Jesus Christ 517. It would be
ridiculous in y^u to pretend that that Illustrious Cardinal could be injurious
to the person of Popes and the honor of the H. See, which he has so worthily
upheld. Do not find fault then that I write boldly, that which he has
Affirmed, and that without losing any thing of the respect which I shall
always inviolably render to the Soveragin Pontiffs, I relate one Act which
cannot be dishonorable to Pope ZOZIMUS, who, it is known, was surpised in
that Affair.

I might further add here, that if the approbation which Zozimus through
surprise gave to that Confession of Faith of Pelagius, authorized all that it
conrain'd, the same Pope having likewise by the same surprise approved the
request which Celestius presented to him, containing a Doubt contrary to the
Faith in the matter of Original sin, it would be lawful to bring in doubt the
Catholic Faith concerning Original sin, by alleging that Zozimus approved the
request of Celestius, in which he expressly declared that he doubted of it, as
may be seen by that which Saint Augustine says thereof, lib. 2. ad Bonifac.
cap. 3.

I spoke part of this to the General of the Augustines, and observed to him
many other falsities and extravagances in the other reflections of M. Hallier
and his Colleagues upon that single passage: This good General could scarce
believe and comprehend how it was possible, that persons of knowledge and
probity should suffer themselves to be led into such enormities; but he
acknowledged yet more by this example, how greatly the Conference demanded by
us viva vice, and by writing with people that used such practices, would be on
the one side advantageous to all the Consultors and Cardinals and to the Pope
himself, since it would save them much trouble, which was requisite otherwise
to be taken before they could discover in the Writings of our Adversaries the
like blemishes, which flew into our eyes as soon as we cast sight upon them (so
present and familiar were these matters to us) and which they might all easily
acknowledge after we had discovered them; and on the other side, how decisive
the same Conference would be between our Advesaries and us, since it would give
us the advantage to reduce them publicly before all the Congregation, and in
presence of his Holiness to confusion and silence.

Nevertheless I must add something here in defense of M. Hallier, since I
profess to set down as well what I find favorable as disadvantageous to our
Adversaries, and likewise to our selves, having no other design but exactly to
report the truth of all passages I met with, both on their part and ours, in
the course of this affair. Now all that can be said to diminish the wonder of
seeing him fallen into such shameful contradictions, is, that in all likelihood
he took these Writings perfectly prepared and transcribed as he delivered them
to the Consultors from the hands of the Jesuits, and that he distributed the
same to them without so much as once reading them beforehand. Which yet must be
confessed is a very pitiful Defense, and altogether unworthy of a Doctor upon
whom so many Bishops relied in so important an Affair.

Tuesday morning October 15. I walked abroad with F. Petit, who informed me that
F. Annat was gone for France five or six days before; and that M. Albizzi, as
well as our Doctors had done their utmost to retain that Writer at Rome, whose
Artifices and Disguisements were so proper for the covering of Truth with
darkness, and its Defenders with calumnies.

In the afternoon I understood that there had been no Congregation that day at
Cardinal Spada's house, and that the Consultors were countermanded when they
were just ready to go thither. Various were the conjectures what might be the
cause of this countermand. Some conceived it to be some unforeseen impediment
arrived to Cardinal Ghiggi from the Pope; but I did not believe so, because the
Tuesday before Cardinal Ginetti could not be there by reason of the Signature
of Grace, at which he assisted, and yet the Congregation of Cardinal Spada was
held in his absence; and it would have been no harder to set the Consultors to
dispute in Cardinal Ghiggi's absence then in that of Cardinal Ginetti; since
Cardinal Cechini was come to Cardinal Spada's house and F. Palavicini too,
before the news of the countermand was sent abroad; and Cardinal Ginetti had
no business to hinder him from being there if he had not been countermanded.

F. Malgoires came to see us on Wednesday evening, and amongst other things he
told us, that the Doctors our Adversaries professed themselves well pleased
with the course which the Congregation held. That having had some conference
with M. Hallier a day or two before, he had reduced him that he could not
answer touching the parity which he propounded to him of the decision of the
Council of Trent, which defines, that the Righteous cannot without special
assistance persevere to the end, that is to say, keep God's Commandments to the
end of his life with the ordinary perseverance of the same Righteous person in
the fidelity and practice of the same commandments, and that M. Hallier having
granted that the Commandments of God were in some sort impossible to the just,
who wants that special assistance which is not common to all the just, and is
yet so necessary to this for the keeping them to the end, that according to the
definition of the Council, he cannot do it without such assistance, he could
not tell him any reason why the same Commandments might not also be said
impossible in some sort to the same just person, when in the course of his life
he likewise wants that particular assistance which is necessary for keeping
them, and without which it is as true according to the Council that he cannot
do it, then as this is when he is arrived at the end of his life and he fails
therein.

Saturday the 19th. having visited the Cardinal S. Clement, he told me there
had been some speech a few days before about adding Consultors to our
Congregation, and that the Procurator General of the Carmelites della scala
having been mentioned, it was answered that he was not right, and that he was a
Jansenist; and another being nominated, that neither was he right, because he
frequented us too much; that is, as this Cardinal said to me, their intention
in this Congregation was, that after the Consultors had all spoken their
suffrages, they would report to the Pope that they all condemned the
Propositions unanimously una voce. That if it came before him, he would not
fail to speak there, as he conceived himself obliged to do, with vehemence and
freedom, as he had done formerly in cases that required it, and whereas he was
present. That if God disposed of the affair otherwise, and the thing should be
passed without his intervention, he would humble himself before the height of
his judgments.

Sunday the 20th. in the afternoon I received a Visit from an unknown person,
who was extremely important with me to give him some information touching our
affair, because he was ready to go into the Country, and in the course of his
Journey, he was to see diverse Cardinals who would ask him news of it: I
suspected that he came to get me to speak something, and afterward report what
I had said where he pleased; whefore I excused my self from telling him any
thing (how important soever he was) alleging that the affair was too vast and
ample, to tell him any thing of it in a little time. He tempted me as much as
he could, to cause me to fall into a Narration insensibly; but all he drew from
me, was, that the only means that I knew, to satisfy his curiosity and that
of the Cardinals, to whom he desired to give intelligence, was that he
endeavored to get from one of the four Cardinals deputed for our Congregation,
the copy of the Writings which we had presented to them, and to buy at the
Booksellers the small works of St. Augustine newly printed.

The General of the Augustines, whom I visited about some other affair the next
morning being the twenty first, told me that by his care in reading that H.
Father, he was furnished from the Fountain which answers to all the Objections
propounded against his Doctrine, which was the same that we defended.

Tuesday the 22. toward evening I went to see F. Vbaldino, who told me that
the Messenger of the H. Office came the day before to advertise him that there
would be no Congregation that day at Cardinal Spada's house; at which he had
wondered, having not yet been there, if he had not looked upon it as a mistake
of the Messengers, who being sent about in general to all, made no difference
of those upon whom there lay some exception.

Wednesday in the afternoon we visited Cardinal Spada, who was very ready to
receive us. The Abbot of Valcroissant told him that we came to his Eminence, to
understand whether our Writings had been communicated; and if they were not, to
beseech him that they might be speedily. As also to advertise him, that we had
already prepared others for the proof of the first Proposition; and that we
demonstrated so evidently that it was agreeable to the Catholic Faith in the
sense wherein we considered it by the connection it had with the Effectualnesse
of Grace, that it was impossible to shake it, it was so clearly and solidly
founded upon indubitable principles. The Cardinal answered us, that the
Congregations begun to be held touching the Propositions, had been interrupted
the two foregoing weeks by some Occurrences, but they would begin again the
Tuesday following, and be so no more. And upon what we represented to him
(speaking about the first Proposition) of the sense in which we maintained it,
and of the necessity of distinguishing the diverse senses which the Propositions
might admit, thereby to avoid involving Catholic truths with errors in one
Censure^; he answered us, that they would consider the Propositions precisely
as they were in themselves, without having regard to the sense either of one
side or other; using these words which he accompanied with a gesture of his
hand in the air; Le ponderiamo iu abstracto. Whereunto we replied, that if the
business were only to consider the Propositions in abstracto, we would not
have moved a step about it, nor taken the least interest therein, but we had
regard only to the fundamental Doctrine which was in contest upon occasion of
those Propositions, and which would be manifested by the distinction of senses
and the clearing of the whole matter.

As for the communication of Writings whereupon we insisted, he told us that in
the last Congregation something had been spoken which had reference thereunto;
but it was not judged expedient to make such communication. That indeed it was
resolved to take into consideration all that we should write and speak viva
voce, let it be as much as we would. That we might deliver as many Writings as
we pleased, one, two, four, six, ten, mettete giu (that was his word) lay them
down, entire Volumes. That we might demand to speak as much as we would, that
they would hear us, that all should be received, that all should be considered
and weighed with care; but as for communication of Writings, it was not thought
meet. That should the Doctors of Flanders have come, they should have been
treated in that very fashion, that we should be so too. That we had su'd for
the Congregation before the coming of M. Hallier and his Colleagues. That though
they should not have come, yet it would have been established, and we should
nevertheless have been heard in it. That the same course should be as if they
were not there. M. de Valcroissant began to reply to him, saying, that the
communication of our Writings would be more profitable, because when it was
seen what either side had to allege, things might be more handsomely cleared,
and what should be found untrue therein might be more solidly refuted. Here
Cardinal Spada interposed, and said we were not ignorant of what our
Adversaries could say. That we knew so well what could be alleged on either
side touching these matters, that there had been so many Writings made pro and
con, printed and otherwise, that the communication of Writings was not
necessary; that moreover they had taken this course al tempo d' Vrbano, under
the Pontificate of Pope Urban VIII; that we were now under that of Innocent,
and that they were not in a condition which allowed any other way. He had
scarce done speaking, but he put his hand to his Cap, and rose up to end the
Conference, and take away all place of Reply. So we were obliged to arise
likewise, without speaking any thing further, and retire.

When we came from Cardinal Spada, we separate our selves, and I went to make a
particular Visit to a Cardinal, who confirmed to me Cardinal St. Clement's
opinion, that the prime design of those who assembled the Consultors of the
Congregation, was, after that they had made them dispute sufficiently, to tell
the Pope that they all agreed upon the condemnation of the Propositions; but he
added, that God caused things sometimes to succeed otherwise then men
propounded to themselves, and that sometimes there needed but a little Remora
to stop the greatest Machines. As for the late passages at Cardinal Spada's
house, wherewith I acquainted him, he told me that it was his opinion, that in
case they continued to deny us a thing so just, ordinary and easy, it would be
fit that we presented a Memorial to the Pope to give him notice of it, and to
tell him, that we came to Rome to defend the Catholic Faith against one of the
most malicious enterprises that ever was contrived to its prejudice. That we
hoped that what we had to represent touching this affair, would be examined
according to the ordinary forms of justice, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.
That seeing that to the prejudice of the assurance which had been given us from
his Holiness at the advertising us of the Congregation, things were handled
there in a manner quite contrary, which could nothing but continually disturb
our minds, and keep matters in the confusion and obscurity whereinto the malice
of the Authors of this enterprise had cast them, we beseecht the Pope to give
us leave to return home with his Apostolical Benediction; and that we hoped he
would be mindful of the Advertisement which we had given him, and not suffer
him self to be circumvented by the Ambushes which we had told him were prepared
for him. I answered this Cardinal that this resolution was bold, that
nevertheless it might become necessary; but I feared it would bring things to
that pass which our Adversaries most desired; because one of their two great
troubles, was, to see us upon the place openly laboring to manifest the truth,
and directing means to sundry persons for the understanding of it, who would
not think upon it without us. The Cardinal replied, that I need not fear that
the Pope and his Ministers would take us at our word, if they had the least
common sense, S. hanno qualche intendi mento; that on the contrary they would
fear our departure from Rome with so great and just causes of dissatisfaction,
which after our departure would not be unknown to any body, and do so great
prejudice to the reputation of the H. See, when so manifest a denial of justice
by it were spread abroad. They will for certain be afraid, said he, lest you
should depart, and this will oblige them to give you content. Nevertheless he
added, that things were not yet so urgent as to drive us to this course. I
answered, that they were not; but yet the Discourse of Cardinal Spada which put
us off so far, and cast us upon so many troublesome difficulties with hope of
so little fruit, made me suspect that perhaps we should do him a pleasure to
act in that manner, and that he desired to make us fear the pains and
tediousness which we should undergo in the sequel of a Proceeding so unlikely
to promote our affair by all our labors, to drive us to that pass as to
resolve to prevent those troubles by departing, and leave the Pope and their
Eminences in quiet. The Cardinal and I ended this Discourse, both of us saying,
that time would render us more knowing in the things that should pass, and in
those which we should be obliged to do. In the mean time, after much reflecting
upon the necessities which might one day impell us to have recourse to that
unacceptable Remedy, I writ into France by the Courier which set forth on
Monday following, to the end the state of things with all necessary
circumstances might be communicated to my LL. the Bishops who had sent us; and
that if it should prove requisite to come to that extremity, we might not do it
without their privity and order. But I know not whether in the particular
relation which I made of this Visit, I did not forget one thing which I am
sure the same Cardinal said to me, either in this Visit or in another,
complaining to him of the great credit of the Jesuits and their partisans, who
deprived us of the means of obtaining the least things of justice; he answered
me, that this was not to be wondered at, nor ought it to hinder us from doing
what lay in our power for defense of the Truth. That we might call to mind the
prodigious power which the Arians once had; that they governed the Emperors,
that they assembled Councils; that they domineered therein; and that they drove
most of the Catholic Bishops from their Sees; And yet, said he to me, what is
become of all this? They were a long time the strongest, and Masters of all,
and nevertheless all this is vanished; even their Writings are perished, and
there are no more footsteps of them but in the Books of the Orthodox. Sooner or
later the case will be the same with all those that oppose the true grace of
Jesus Christ; that therefore we ought not to be discouraged, but do our duty,
continue our endeavors, pray fervently to God, and patiently wait till it
please him to show that mercy to his Church.

Thursday the 24th, F. Reginald, the famous Dominican abovementioned, arrived
at Rome, to engage with the Religious of his Order in defense of the cause
which was common to them with us.

Friday the 25th, the day of the Ambassadors Audience, when I went to his
house, I found M. Hallier and his Colleagues, M. de Valcroissant, and M. Angran,
discoursing together, in presence of the Bishop of Bethleem, and two other
Prelates; I drew near, and all that I heard was, that M. Hallier, to purge
himself no doubt from the blame charged upon him of hindering, not only the
conference, but also the communication of writings, said, that he had two
things to declare in reference thereunto. 1. That he maintained that the
matters in contest were already defined, and that this was the first thing to
be looked after: And 2. That if they were not, it was requisite in the second
place to consider whether it were expedient to define them; yet to all this
neither the communication of writings, nor the conference did hurt; but the
Ambassador appeared ready to go forth, and this discourse passed no further.
While the Ambassador was with the Pope, I went to see the new Nuncio designed
for France: I had no time after the first words of civility, but to give him
one of our little Volumes of St. Augustine; for his entertainment sometimes in
reading it during his journey, and to tell him, that who so had well read that
book, knew wherein all the present Disputes in the Church consisted; and who so
had not read it, could not know them, how intelligent and able soever he might
be in other things.

I spent all Saturday the 26th with F. Reginald, in carrying him to Saint
Peter's, and the other Churches and places in Rome, whither he was disposed to
go after his arrival.

Sunday the 27th we went again to Cardinal Spada's house, where after we had
passed the time in his Gallery, from nine a clock till between eleven and
twelve, he came to receive us in the chamber which is before that Gallery: M.
de Valcroissant told him, that the last day we were with his Eminence, we had
not time to acquaint him with some Reasons which we intended to represent to
him for the communication of our writings: That we had great cause to wonder
that we were still constrained to solicit it after so Authentical a
Declaration as Card. Roma had made to us in the Popes name, that his Holiness,
without any restriction, granted us the Congregation which we had demanded, and
in which we had expressly demanded that our writings might be reciprocally
communicated. But to show this Cardinal the particular reasons of our making
that demand, and prosecuting the execution of it, the Abbot de Vaelcroissant
told him, that our Adversaries in this cause were so accustomed to produce
calumnies and false suppositions, both in matters of Fact, and of Opinion, that
it was absolutely necessary for us to see what they alleged, that so we might
satisfy and wipe it off: That the matter in question was extremely vast, and
yet very closely linked together: That though many writings and printed works
had been composed about it, yet it was very difficult to find what to adhere
to: That it had been extremely imbroil'd by our Adversaries; That an answer
given by conjecture, was not so likely to satisfy, as one given and applied
plainly, when the question is stated. That our Adversaries either assented to
the mutual communication of Writings, or not; if they did, there was no reason
to deny it; if not, it was a sign that they distrusted their own cause, and a
reason which rendered such communication more necessary; and that indeed they
saw in their consciences, that they could neither answer to what we alleged
against them, nor make good what they alleged against us: That all these
Reasons evinced, that the communication of Writings was more necessary in this
important affair, then in all others wherein it was daily practiced: That it
was a way without comparison more compendious, clear and certain, to make all
the world comprehend the truth of things, then not to do it; and that we hoped
that when their Eminences had considered what we urged to him, and which we
beseech'd him to represent to his Holiness, if he judged it meet, for the
obtaining of the communication of Writings, they would conceive it as equitable
and necessary as our selves. The Cardinal answered, that this did not depend on
him alone; that we might move the other deputed Cardinals about it, and he
named Ghiggi, Ginetti, and Cechini. That as for what he had said to us the last
day, it was grounded only upon the practice which had been observed since these
questions began. That Pius V. under whom they were first debated, heard no
Parties, nor caused any Writings to be communicated in order to the framing of
his Decisions: That Gregory XIII. who followed him, did not follow this way:
That Urban VIII. took the same course as those two Popes; that at present we
were under Innocent X. that it did not appear why it was necessary to run into
those intricacies (in queste faccende) pero; that nevertheless we might speak
to the three Cardinals above-named, as also to Cardinal Pamphilio, whom the
Pope was pleased to have come to those Congregations, that at least he would be
there on Tuesday following: That we might likewise speak to the consultors;
that he believed we knew who they were. As for the Doctors our Adversaries,
they had presented Writings three months ago, and professed that whether there
were any communication of them or not, they should be contented: That all they
demanded was, that they might be treated as we were, and that our writings
might be communicated to them, if theirs were to us: That since so long time
that they were composed, it was not possible but either side must have seen the
others writings, and that they were by this time in France too: That, in fine,
we might visit the persons whom he had named. Much might have been replied to
Cardinal Spada, and he left us time to do it, though it was very late; but we
did it not, conceiving we had obtained enough of him, that he permitted us to
renew our solicitations to the others.

Tuesday the 29th in the morning, I met the F. General of the Capucines, who
stopped me, though I was in a Coach, to ask me what news of our Congregation; I
spoke very coldly thereof to him, as one that had no news of them, nor was the
least concerned for any: He told me, that that which was to be held that
morning, was deferred to the next day in the afternoon, of which I learnt the
reason the same day in the Antichambre of Cardinal Ghiggi, whom we visited; and
it was, for that there was that morning an examination of Bishops.

We told Cardinal Ghiggi that we came to put him in mind of the little
Memorial which we left with him about the communication of writings: He asked
us, whether we had presented the same to the other Cardinals? We answered,
that we had; but did not tell him that we had yet once been with Cardinal Spada
about it. Cardinal Ghiggi told us, that the Congregation had been interrupted
since the presenting of our Memorial, by reason it was the time of being in the
country, and taking a little fresh air after the great heats of Summer, that
therefore it had not yet been spoken of; but the Congregation would begin again
the next day, and then perhaps it would be mentioned: The Abbot of Valcroissant
answered, that we had many strong reasons which evinced the necessity of such
communication; and he intended to repeat the same which he had alleged to
Cardinal Spada; but he scarce touched upon those concerning the calumnies and
false suppositions of our Adversaries, as well in reference to Facts as
Opinions; but Cardinal Ghiggi replied, That as for all those calumnies and
falsities, no regard would be had of them; that the chief and only business
would be to give a succinct and clear account of the reasons of what we held;
that it was not yet resolved, whether or no to make of this affair a Process,
una lite; that if a day were set, to enter into so public discussions of it
between parties, it would cause much noise and bustle: That as we were already
three and three out of France, there might come three others out of Spain,
three from Flanders, three from another place, etc. The Abbot of Valcroissant
answered, that all which his Eminence said, did not hinder but that the
reciprocal communication of our writings was necessary; since if, for example,
we should not see the writings of our Adversaries, we could not defend our
selves from what falsities and calumnies they might allege therein, both
against our persons and the truth, nor represent the same to their Eminences.
The Cardinal asked us, whether we certainly knew that they had presented any
writings; and added, that perhaps they had not yet presented any. But however
(said he, ending as he began) we have not yet spoken of your Memorial; perhaps
we will speak of it to morrow, and you shall understand our resolution. It was
a thing not unpleasant to be observed, that he informed us that they had not
yet spoken of it; and Cardinal Spada told us, as a thing already determined
amongst them, that there would be no such communication.

The two last days of this month I learned nothing at Rome, but the very great
correspondences and confederacies which Cardinal Spada had with Cardinal
Barberin, whereof I was told in two converses which I had about that matter
with a Banquier of very great Note, intelligence and freedom.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Letters which were writ to us from Paris, during the Month of October,
touching the manner of proceeding in the Congregation.

ABout this time all places were full of news concerning what was doing at
Rome, and what the Jesuits with M. Hallier and his Colleagues expected and
boasted was in hand to their advantage, for the consummation of their
Enterprise against the Propositions, without their being obliged ever to appear
before the Congregation in our presence; and these news daily more and more
astonished our friends, and the Bishops who sent us. VVhereupon, almost all the
Letters written to us during the whole month of October, were nothing but a
continual renewing of former injunctions not to recede from the conditions
wherewith the Bishops had given us charge to demand a Congregation of the Pope,
and wherewith the Pope had caused the same to be promised to us by the late
Cardinal Roma, without any modification or restriction. The difficulty about
communication of writings, was not yet known in France; on the contrary, we
were enjoined not to suffer our selves to be circumvented in such sort that our
affair might be made a simple Process in writing; but we were obliged never to
separate the communication of our writings from the obligation which should be
laid upon our Adversaries to be heard in our presence, and we in theirs, viva
voce, in the Congregation, touching all that by either side should be presented
in writing; as also to have a care, that all which they and we should speak
there, might be written down. Moreover, we were prescribed not to present any
writing after those which we had delivered already, but according to the forms
used under Clement VIII. and Paul V. till after we had declared viva voce, what
we were to leave there in writing, and till we were assured that the
consequence thereof would be the communication of the same to our Adversaries.

It would be tedious to relate all the Letters here which were written to us
during this month about this matter; but it will not be impertinent to insert
two or three, which will teach the Reader some other particularities concerning
this affair, which might otherwise remain unknown to him: The first was dated
October 8. from Chalons in Champagne, and was thus directed, A Messieurs,
Messieurs de la Lane, de Saint Amor, and Angran, Docteurs de la Faculte, and
nos Deputez a Rome. The contents follow:

Messieurs,
ALL good men rejoice with us for the blessing which God has given to your
solicitations and cares; which joy was particularly grounded upon the
assurance given you, that the established Congregation would proceed according
to the forms practiced from all time in the Church, and in a like case under
Clement VIII. and Paul V. and without which it seems not possible for the truth
to be perfectly cleared. I know that M. Hallier has written to Paris, that he
would hinder your being heard; yet I cannot doubt but Providence, which has
taken so particular care of this affair, will dissipate all his intrigues; that
the H. Father will do us Justice; that he will grant what he has had the
goodness to promise, and that he will take the same course in this cause that
his Predecessors did, since it is so worthy of the honor of the H. See, and so
necessary for the re-establishment of peace in the Church: Wherefore all my LL.
the Prelates, for whom you act, conjure you to remain firm, that is, never to
speak but in presence, and to deliver no writings, saving in the forms observed
in the Congregations de Auxiliis, under the Popes abovementioned. They rely
upon your accustomed prudence and courage, and I remain ever,

MESSIEURS, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, F. E. and C. de
Chaalons.

He who used to write to us in the name of all my said Lords, when they did not
do it themselves, in his letter of October 11th. set down this clause:

My Lords were glad of the Resolution which you have taken to speak high: They
desire you not to relax in any thing; for it is highly important to the cause
which you desired. They are very certain M. Hallier will use all means to
obstruct an exact discussion of it. He is a man that intends no conference,
whatever show he makes. He conceives the Dispute would not be advantageous to
him, because he has confessed to many persons, that he never read St. Augustine.

Write as little as you can in explication of the Five Propositions: for you
ought to fear that M. Hallier will perplex the Affair in proceedings by Writing.

And in a Letter of the 18. from the same person, there was this clause
touching the same matter.

The Molinists in these parts hold for certain, that you will not be admiteed
to speak in presence of your Adversaries before the congregation; alleging,
that the Question is only about Five Propositions, which may easily be judged
by all those that have never so little understanding and any tincture of
Divinity. They boast, that in the first congregation held at Cardinal Spada's
house, the first Proposition was determined. My Lords have confidence in God,
and hope he will destroy all their designs who go about to dishonor his Truth:
Above all, they rocommend to you, to be steadfast and undaunted in extremities.

I received one dated the same day from a Doctor, my particular friend, who
lived in Sorbonne, and always writ to me in Latin. He comforted me for the news
of Cardinal Roma's death, and professed the more sorrow for it, because instead
of a most equitable Dean of our Congregation whom we had lost, there remained
another very partial and highly animated against us: His Letter was in these
terms.

A diebus aliquot resciveramus mortem Eminentissimi Cardinalis Roma, cum
litteras has accepimus. Certe non potuimus non lugere viri optimi and
amantissimi aequitatis inopinatum exitum; dolorque noster eo major extitit quod
tibi causaeque vestrae adversarium esse accepimus Cardinalem Spada. Scriptum
enim mihi est e Flandria non potuisse cum ipso convenire D. Sinnich, ita durum
se ipsi praebuit. Jactare vulgo se habere argumentum, cui Jansenista (sic enim
loquitur) nullus respondeat. Idque dixisse olim P. Courvaisier minimo Burgundo.
Addidisse etiam, se etiamsi Cardinales caeteri in doctrinam illam consentirent,
aut certe mitius habere vellent, solum se adversus omnes pugnaturum: Haec te
monendum censui.

I find, after this, one from M. de Saint Beuve of the 25th. of this month,
which deserves more then any other to be here inserted at length, as well for
that he speaks touching the same necessity of being heard in presenee, as
because a more illustrious Testimony cannot be brought how he and I were always
affected to the H. See, and how we always considered the Propositions which
were at length condemned by it. The Letter was particular to my self, and
contained that which follows:

SIR,
WE are here troubled at the News, that the congregation is begun since
Cardinal Roma's death, in which Cardinal Spada is President, a Jesuit is a
Consultor, and M. Albizzi Secretary, and that it is held without your being
called to it. Though we could not imagine things to be so as is boasted in
these parts, and that it seems your Letters assure us of the contrary, since by
your last you signify, that you were soliciting their Eminences to ordain the
communication of your Writings to our Adversaries, and that it would please
them to set the day of the first congregation; yet I cannot dissemble to you,
that the manner after which they talk here, makes us fear, that there is
something of Truth in their Discourse, and that perhaps our Adversaries are
plotting something according to their usual slights and artifices. This is it
which troubles us, and whereof we entreat you to give us some light. And in the
first place, I am to signify to you, that you must urge the carrying on of
things in order, and that they be not done in secret. The Prelates who sent
you, did not put you upon that journey to demand a secret Assembly of his
Holiness, but a public and solemn congregation, like that de Auxiliis, in
which the parties might he heard in presence one of the other, both viva voce,
and by Writing. The Pope granted the same to you, as being a thing very just,
and which cannot displease any but those who hold a Doctrine of Darkness:
Wherefore prosecute the Execution of his Holinesses Order. But now Sir, Was
there ever any thing more remote from Equity, then to make our Enemies Judges?
for is it not in some manner so, while a Jesuit is a Consultor? Who knows not
that they are our right Adversaries? As for M. Albizzi, there is as little
reason that he should be Secretary, since it is notorious, that he has had
inimate communication with M. Hallier about the Affair in question before the
said Sieur Hallier went out of France. When the Faculty was assembled to be
surprised by the Nuncio's means, who sent to demand, whether it had deputed you
to his Holiness about this Affair, M. Hallier, whom I accused of having sent F.
Mulard the Cordelier in quality of the Faculties Deputy, and encharg'd him with
Letters subscribed by himself as Syndic, which Letters Mulard carried open to
F. Diuet to be sealed by him; M. Hallier (I say) confessed before the whole
Faculty, that he had written to Rome to M. Albizzi; but he added, that it was
only in answer to a Letter from him touchong the present controversies. All the
Faculty can testify, whether M. Hallier had the confidence to deny it. So that
to have M. Albizzi for Secretary, is to have a person whom we have had all
reason to suspect ever since M. Halliers Declaration before the Faculty.

Moreover, Sir, every one knows that in Flanders it is loudly complained of in
Books that M. Albizzi inserted something into the Bull touching M. de Ipre,
which was not in the sense of the late Pope of happy memory. This alone ought
to hinder him of being suffered to exercise the Office of Secretary, without
complaint and remonstrance to his Holiness against it. Perhaps they will say,
That a Secretary is neither Judge nor Consultor; it is true; but then it cannot
be denied, that he has very great power in a congregation. And besides, though
he could do no great matter, yet it is not suitable to order, at Rome
especially, where all things are done so exquisitly, that the very adversaries
of the Church are constrained to acknowledge the prudence of the proceedings,
wherewith things are carried there. But if Sir, they will not do you justice in
these points, I conceive it will be more expedient to produce nothing, then to
submit to such a congregation as that which is contrary to the intention of his
Holiness. And in this case leave them to ordain what they think good, we shall
very well know how to acquit our selves in all things. Let them perplex and
entangle the whole matter as much as they will, yet it must be reduced to three
points. 1. Who are the Authors of those Propositions. 2. Whether it be true,
that they consist of equivocal terms, which is the cause that they have sundry
bad senses. And 3. Whether they be condemnable according to the sense of the
necessity of Grace Effectual ad singulos actus, which is the only sense in
which we have maintained them hitherto, and pretend to maintain them for the
future. Now being we know that they cannot be condemned in this sense, hence it
is that we have no reason to apprehend any thing. If they will make a
Gallimawfry of them, it will be easy to let all Europe see both the goodness
of our cause, and the bad proceedings taken to disparage a Doctrine which they
durst not openly condemn. Those persons will twice think what they shall do;
and I can scarce believe that they will contribute to the oppression of Truth,
and of the persons who defend. The Doctors of the Faculty of Paris ought to be
more considered then to be slighted; and it is not needful to alienate the
minds of those who have all possible devotion for the H. See, which will be
done undoubtedly, in case they do not do them justice in an Affair which speaks
for it self. 'I have often said it to M. Duvel, and I know not whether he has
told it to the Nuncio, There are many persons very little affectionated toward
the Holy See, who wish, that justice be not observed toward us, hoping thereby
to draw us to their party. For my part, I hope God will not so abandon me; but
I know not whether this will not much diminish the high esteem which ought to
be had for what proceeds from so venerable a Throne; But this, Sir, is enough
touching that point.

I cannot end this Letter without letting you know, that M. de Marca nominated
to the Archbishopric of Toulouse, being in court last week, said to M. Nain de
Beau. Master of the Requests, and to M. Queras our Confrere, that when he
consented to the setting of his name to the Letter sent to his Holiness, he did
it only at the entreaty of F. Petave and M. Hallier, who writ to him about it;
and that it was never his intention to demand of the Pope a condemnation of the
Propositions, but only that it would please his Holiness to pronounce upon the
present controversies. And when the abovenamed persons replied to him, that the
Letter subscribed with his name, demanded of the Pope the condemnation of the
Five Propositions, he was amazed at it, and desired to see a copy of the
Letter, which was promised him. And accordingly one being found in the hands of
M. Lovistre Curee of Mantes, where the court then was, M. de la Militire took
upon him to transcribe and present it to him. You see, Sir, how the Prelates
have been inveigled, and how the Pope is imposed upon, when it is represented
to him, that all the Prelates whose names are at the bottom of that Letter,
demand of him the condemnation of the Five Propositions, as being the causes of
all the stir and contentions. Moreover, these two Gentlemen have had the honor
to confer with him about the senses of the Propositions, and he acknowledged,
that ours was not condemnable, and he said only, that his opinion was, that
whosoever has Faith, has all that is necessary from God to pray actually; and
he advanced this Doctrine, founded, he said, upon that word of S. Augustine,
Fides impetrat: You may judge by this, what sentiment the Thomists have upon
this point.

The Book of F. Martinon came forth here some days ago: It Is a Transcription of
all that has been written against us by our Adversaries; but not a confutation
of all that we have opposed to their sentiments. It has abundance of evil and
unjustifiable Propositions: It bears a Warlike title: It may easily be rendered
a pitiful piece in one printed Quire, or a work like to Vulpes capta.

We are given to hope for one from M. Annat shortly; we expect it with joy, not
doubting but that it will be of use for the manifesting of the Truth;

I am, Sir, etc.

The beginning of this Letter shows the truth of what I said to Cardinal Ghiggi
in the andience he gave me on July 23. that I was not hasty to send word into
France of such things as might cause dissatisfaction there, so long as
necessity and our obligation of informing our friends and our Bishops of what
passed at Rome, permitted me to defer, or wholly dissemble them. When I writ
touching this matter to M. de Saint Beuve the last day of September, I said
nothing of the delay of communicating our writings, nor of the dubiousness
signified to us, whether it would be granted or no; nor of the Memorial which
we had resolved to present as a more express demand thereof, which might knock
at the door of justice of the Cardinals chosen by the Pope to render the same
to us; and which might leave to posterity more express monuments of the
prosecutions and unheard of difficulties whereunto we were reduced, in case we
should one day be obliged to acquaint the world with such irregular
proceedings. I thought it sufficient to tell him only, that we were soliciting
their Eminences to ordain the Communication of our writings to our Adversaries,
and to let them know, that we were ready to appear at the Congregation when it
should please them to assemble it. And I used this reservedness out of hope
that we should obtain justice at length, and that the denial or difficulty
which they then caused about it, might not be known to any person. But it
pleased our Adversaries to publish the same everywhere, by reason of the
triumph which they presumed they had over us by that injustice: so that
considering the necessity of letting it appear, all we could do, was to give an
account thereof to our Bishops and friends, and however to leave them still in
hope that justice would be done us after we had employed for the obtaining of
it all the patience, perseverance, submission and power which we conceived
necessary to that effect.

We spoke no longer even at Rome in this conjuncture, of causing our
adversaries to appear at the congregation in our presence; yet we did not
renounce it; for we had presented our two writings only upon a certain
expectation that we should be so heard. But we were restrained only to demand
the communication of our writings, that so our request might be as easy as
possible, and such as even the openest injustice could not refuse; intending
after the obtaining of this point, to demand likewise that our adversaries
might appear to hear what we had to add viva voce to what we had written; but
till we had surmounted the first difficulty, we were silent as to the other
things which we had to ask, to the end we might obtain this more easily.

I spoke more openly thereof then I had done to M. de Saint Beuve, to an
Italian who was at Modena, and could not be ignorant of the least circumstances
of our Affair, in regard of the great correspondences which he had in the Court
of Rome, the Genius whereof he perfectly understood, especially in reference to
our Disputes. He answered me by this Letter of the second of November, that all
those obstacles were only the contrivances of Cardinal Spada, who being
extremely passionate, sought nothing else but to discover the sentiments of the
Consultors, to the end that if they were favorable to his purposes, he might
press on the Affair to condemn the Prositions, and that in case he saw that he
could not get them to conclude against them, then he might spin out things in
length; Take the Letter as it was written to me in Italian:

Reverendissimo Signor.
Recevo le lettere de V. S. e vedo conquanta cautezza per sua part, and art
per l' altra se tratta il negotio. Jo stimo che il tutto sia concesso del'
Eminentissimo Spada, qual e per mio credere appationatissimo, e non cerca
sapere il sentimento di quei Consultori per altro che per vedere se siano
favorevoli alli suoi capritii, e quando vedra di non potere concludere contro
le Propositioni, tirara il giuditio in longo; ma se le paresse potere
condennarle, accelerera and precipitarara il tutto. Non potendo io fare altro,
raccommando la causa a Dio, and in questo spero ogni been, e a V. S. facio
humile riverenza.

Modena li due Novembre 1652. Di V. S. Reverendissima divotissimo servitore.

The substance of this Letter goes before it, and therefore it needs no
translation. It was subscribed with the name of him who writ it: but as soon as
I received it, I tore off his name, and I do not think it yet time to restore
it here.

CHAP. XIII.
What we continued to do during the whole month of November, especially for
getting in Audience of the Pope, to present our Papers to him, and obtain that
the same might be communicated to our Adversaries, with an Epistle to his
Holiness touching the same matter.

ON Friday November. 1. I understood that the Congregation was held on Wednesday
before in the afternoon at Cardinal Spada's house; that Cardinal Ginetti was
not there, but Cardinal Pamphilio was, that it lasted till six a clock at
night, and that F. Palavicini and M. Albizzi stayed after the rest, to confer
together.

Sunday the third I visited the General of the Dominicans about a case of a
particular Affair. I acquainted him by the by, with the Memorial which we
designed to present to the Pope for three things; whereof the first was the
communication of our writings; The second, the Jesuits: The third, M. Albizzi;
He approved all, and told me on his part, that if things went long in the
present course, his order could not forbear to interpose and declare themselves
very highly.

Monday the 4. in the morning Monsignor Sacrista sent to desire me to come to
the Popes Presence Chamber at ten a clock. I went thither and spoke with him:
He told me that the Pope had chosen two or three other Consultors to add to the
Congregation, and among those an Augustine named F. Celestin very much his
friend. He prayed me to visit him, and give him some information of our Affair,
because the Congregation was to be held, as I think, the next day. I desired
Monsignor Sacrista to dispense with me from visiting F. Celestin, because
whilst the Congregation acted as it did, we did not acknowledge it, and could
not considet it as that which we had demanded, of the Pope, and his Holiness
had granted to us. Monsignor Sacrista prayed me to go see that Father, as if I
knew not that he was to be of it, but only as his particular friend, because it
was requisite first to free him from the evil impressions which M. Albizzi had
given him against the Propositions, when the said Father went to take the oath
of secrecy from the hands of that Secretary, telling him in a scornful manner
that it was to pass judgment upon certain erroneous Ptopositions, or some
other like note wherewith M. Albizzi branded them. Whereupon I promised
Monsignor Sacrista to visit that Father with the reservedness which he advised.

In the afternoon I went and carried him one of our little Volumes of S.
Augustine, whereof I made him a present. After some mutual civilities, we fell
to speak of the affair about which I was at Rome; I gave him a brief account of
it, and we entered into the matter of the Propositions. He told me that he had
but barely looked upon them; that they were delivered to him in a Note without
any other addition, but he judged by the outside and the surface that there was
some evil meaning in them, yet considering them a little more, he found that
they were reducible to a good sense, which might be justified. As I was going
to speak a word to him concerning Effectual Grace, and the connection they had
therewith, he prevented me, as understanding it well, and himself explicated
the nature of that Grace in two words, namely, quae dat posse, velle and
operari. Nevertheless he told me that care must be had of the delicateness of
the ears of the Cardinals, who not being broken and accustomed to Theological
terms, upon the least umbrage that a Proposition could give them, were very
inclined to conclude its condemnation. I told him also that we had demanded
that before passing of judgment, they might be cleared of all equivocal and
doubtful terms, and reduced to several clear and determinate senses, upon which
we might give our Declarations before the Congregation, and in presence of
those who persu'd the censure of them, etc. He accounted all this perfectly
just and necessary, and requisite to be pressed, and that it behoov'd us to
renew our instances for it, farne nostre proteste. I answered that this was the
chief point of our affair, and a thing of great justice. I desired him likewise
to assist us to obtain it if he came in place where he had any power. But to
the end it might not appear that he did it upon our recommendation, I conceived
it were good that he did us the courtesy upon the first opportunity, whilst it
was not yet known that he had any correspondence with us. He replied that he
would do it willingly, and in this first interview he spoke in all points as an
intelligent and equitable person.

The rest of this week we made no considerable visit. Only we went to our
particular Friends to take their advice about certain things which we thought
to do, and which I shall relate hereafter in the time and order that they were
done.

During all the time that passed since the presenting of our two Writings and
their Summary to the Cardinals designed for our Congregation, we caused to be
transcribed by a good Copist a very fair and correct Copy of them to present to
the Pope. We caused the same to be bound up in the best Vellum with the Pope's
arms stamped in gold upon the cover. The three Writings together composed a
small volume in Folio about an inch thick. In the beginning of this Book and
before all those Writings we placed an Epistle to the Pope, whereof take here
the Translation:

Most Holy Father,
YOur Holiness having by your goodness and your justice established the
Congregation for examination of the grand questions concerning Grace, we
thought fit before all things to compose two Writings which we present to your
Holiness; one whereof contains what has passed in the affair under debate, and
the other concerns S. Augustin's authority. We fear not most H. Father but
your Holiness will approve this proceeding, since we tread in the steps of
Celestin I. Clement VIII. and Paul V. doing nothing but what they did in a case
altogether like. Thus we take for our rule the first and the last judgment
which the H. Apostolic See has pronounced touching this Contest; and the way
whereof we make use to end it, is, to follow both its ancient Decisions, and
those which it has made in these latter ages.

Soon after S. Augustin's death, some Priests of France found fault with his
writings, and troubled the peace of the Churches by undiscreet Questions;
whereupon Prosper and Hilary had recourse to Celestin, and reported to him what
was published in France against the said Father. They complained that some
Priests in France went about still to call in doubt that which had been proved
in the Writings of S. Augustine, confirmed by the Popes Innocent, Zozymus and
Boniface, and established by Councils; and they demanded that before all things
the H. Apostolic See would repress the temerity of those French, and confirm
the doctrine and authority of S. Augustine. This care of Prosper and Hilary
received commendation from the mouth of Celestin, and taking from the Priests
of whom they complained all liberty of detraction, he ordained that the
authority and doctrine of S. Augustine, should remain inviolable in the Church.

Molina having had the boldness in Spain to renew those ancient complaints
made of the Priests of France, and once again to make head against the same S.
Augustine; and this new doctrine being accused to the H. See in which Clement
VIII. presided at that time; this H. Pope would not have that Cause examined
before him till he had first ordained that the authority of S. Augustine should
be approved according to the Constitutions of his Predecessors, and his
doctrine considered as a rule by which all controversies touching the
assistance of God's grace ought to be examined, and Pope Paul V. afterward
ordained that the same thing should be exactly and religiously observed.

Yet there are found at this day, most H. Father, New Censors amongh the
Priests of France, who, to defend Molina's doctrine, have had the presumption
to rise anew against S. Augustine; who trouble the peace of the victorious
Church by Questions which they borrow again from the School of those Authors
already condemned, and who call in doubt the principal Articles of Christian
Grace, and of the doctrine of that H. Doctor. It Is for this cause that we are
come to your Holiness in the name of some of the most illustrious Bishops of
France, who with a pastoral care watch for the peace of the whole Church, the
honor of S. Augustine and the dignity of the H. Apostolic See. We have
complained of the Propositions which have been invented to prepare ambushes for
the doctrine of S. Augustine and for your Holiness. And to the end they might
be examined, and this whole affair fully and perfectly cleared, we have su'd to
your Holiness for the erection of a Congregation in which both sides might be
heard viva voce, and by writing. Your Holiness has accordingly established it,
and they have appointed us to pre-present our Writings to them. We have
therein first related to your Holiness and the Congregation what has been
acted in reference to the Propositions; in doing which we have followed the
example of Prosper and Hilary commended by Pope Celestin, discovering by what
means and artifices S. Augustin's authority is encountered, and with what
excessive boldness the Jesuits by an unheard of conspiracy attempt to destroy
it under pretext of these equivocal and fallacious Propositions. In the next
place we have defended the best we could S. Augustin's authority, which is
assaulted in so dangerous a manner, and has received so great wounds; and we
have proved it by the Tradition of the whole Church, namely by the testimonies
of twenty Popes, fifteen Councils, and threescore and ten Fathers and Divines
of great reputation. Which we have done, to the end your Holiness and the
Congregation might understand on the one side the justice of our complaint, and
observe on the other, how necessary it is to express the temerity of those
Censors. And to the end your Holiness might have the goodness to practice from
the entrance of this contest the same that Pope Celestine did heretofore, and
Clement VIII. since, in occasions perfectly like to this, for the defense of S.
Augustine's doctrine and authority, and to support it with a new
recommendation; we have conceived that before all things we ought to summon our
Adversaries to acknowledge the authority and doctrine of that Saint, not only
with unprofitable and ineffectual words, or deceitful elogiums and praises
full of disguisement and fiction, but by solid and express approbations, till
your Holiness shall have established it your self according to the example of
your Predecessors by a public Definition against these few accusers who can
scarce be repressed any other way; which is the only and most profitable
remedy that can be made use of for the peace of the whole Church.

We know, most H. Father, that there is no practice or endeavor omitted by
our Apversaries to hinder the effect of so just and necessary a Demand; we know
that there is nothing in the world which they fear so much as to be constrained
to subscribe as they ought, to the authority of S. Augustine, or to see your
Holiness treading in the steps of Celestin I. and Clement VIII. confirm it
anew, repress the temerity of these Censors, and give for rule of this
controversy a Doctrine that has been established for so many ages; because,
as soon as they shall be obliged to admit the same against their wills, or shall
see your Holiness solemnly confirm it, they will be out of all hope of
prevailing against the Propositions, under the obscurity of which they aim only
at the condemnation of S. Augustine, according to their formed design, although
they affect not to express his name.

Your Holiness will hear with wonder, that after having openly attaqu'd S.
Augustin's doctrine with their utmost strength, both by themselves and by the
help of the Jesuits, whose defenders and confederates they are, they now
openly proclaim their submission to it. They will have the boldness to profess
themselves public Panegyrists and defenders of that Father even in presence of
your Holiness. But their doing thus will be only to palliate the contempt they
have of him with feigned respect, and to free themselves from blame; it will be
only to avoid the punishment of the insolence wherewith they outrage him; it
will be only to hide the aversion which they have for his Doctrine, under the
commendation which they give to his Person; it will be only to diminish the
care which is to be had in these controversies, in examining which are the true
sentiments of that H. Father, and to make it believed that it is not concerned
in the Propositions which have been presented to your Holiness, since
themselves who impugn them, profess to follow the doctrine of that Father, and
so reverence his authority; to the end that having avoided the condemnation of
their temerity by such feigned and captious elogiums of S. Augustine, and got
off without being obliged to subscribe to any thing, or your Holiness having
ordained them so to do, they may with their Partisans thence forward reject his
authority with more boldness than ever, condemn his doctrine, and continue to
banish it from their Schools as Calvinistical and dangerous, especially in case
your Holiness should be induced under some pretext to condem the Propositions,
because they will not fail afterward to make the censure fall upon S.
Augustine, and indeed they would have some ground for their doing so.

These are the designs of our Adversaries, and we doubt not but they will be of
no force with your Holiness, whom they have not been able to surprise hitherto,
whatever slights they have made use of; since if that unhappiness should
happen, it would be an exposing the principal Inheritance which the H. See
possesses as by succession, to pillage and depredation, a transporting of it by
the hands of the Churches own children to its enemies, as no doubt it would
come to pass by the contempt of S. Augustin's authority and doctrine; it would
be a nullifying the authority of all the Fathers; it would be totally to
exterminate the antiquity of doctrine and venerable Tradition; it would be to
abolish the respect which is due to the Decrees of the H. Apostolical See; it
would imply that the Church has unjustly condemned the enemies of Grace; it
would give occasion to believe that the H. Council of Trent favored the
Pelagian Heretics, and gave new forces to the Calvinists. In fine, it would
give ground to say, that your Holiness has made but little account of all the
ancient Decrees which your Predecessors, Innocent, Zozimus, Boniface,
Celestine, Sixtus, Leo, Gelasius, Hormisdas, and others have pronounced in
favor of S. Augustine, or rather that you abolisht them.

It must be confessed, most H. Father, that these things are of great
importance, and seem almost incredible; but besides that they are evidently
manifested to such as shall read these two Writings which we now present to
you, they will be more visible and conspicuous in the whole sequel of this
affair, and we are ready to convince our Adversaries thereof.

Your Holiness will no doubt foresee dangers so extreme and imminent, you will
hear complaints so necessary, you will take time to inform your self fully of a
cause so important; and your pastoral vigilance will apply it self with no less
wisdom, integrity and justice to this great affair which is of high
consequence to the whole Church, to the H. Apostolic See, to the Faith, and
Christian piety, then to all the other affairs of the same Church. We know
that God has, as one of the principal effects of his favor, given us in our
days such a Pastor, that if it happened sometimes that your Holiness cannot be
advertised of the importance of things, yet when you are so, you cannot but
ordain all that is requisite in justice, reason and equity; and we know
likewise that all that we say is so certain and considerable; we know that the
whole Church is reduced to so great extremities by all the contrivances of our
Adversaries in this contest, that your Holiness would before now have provided
for so urgent a necessity, if the true state of this affair had been sooner
laid open to you, which it has not been till the present.

Nevertheless what ever great promise we seem to engage our selves to here, we
dare confidently affirm, that we shall give most clear and indubitable proofs
thereof, provided the Congregation which your Holiness has established obtain
its full and entire effect, and time and place be allowed us to convince our
Adversaries in their presence viva voce, and by writing. 'Twill then be that
your Holiness and the whole Roman Church shall really know, that it is not
without Cause that we have laid open to you the greatness of this danger, and
that our complaints have been neither false nor frivolous when we brought them
to the H. See, and to the Supreme Tribunal, before which S. Bernard has taught
us, that no person ought to draw any advantage from falsehood.

We are, Most H. Father, Your Holiness's most humble and most obedient Servants
and Sons, Noel de la Lane, Doctor of Divinity in the Faculty of Paris, etc.
Louis de Saint-Amour, Doctor of the Sacred Faculty of Paris, etc. Louis Angran,
Licentiate of the same Sacred Faculty, etc.


Perhaps it will be thought strange, that we have spoke in this Epistle so
earnestly in favor of the Propositions; I shall give the reason of it in
another place, where I shall show that this does not hinder but that we always
condemned them in the same sense wherein they were condemned by the Pope: And
to speak ingenuously here, I acknowledge that it was I who was the Author of
the course for the reasons hereafter mentioned; and that in this Epistle, it
was I who entreated M. de Valcroissant who penned it, to add these words, nec
sane immerito; that it would not be without soms grounds that the Jesuits
would reflect such condemnation upon S. Augustine. We conceived that the Pope
would peruse of all our writings, at least this Epistle, which was addressed as
an Epistle Dedicatory to his Holiness, and we judged it reasonable to give him
this Idea, to the end the more to oblige him to cause the distinction of senses
to be made as we demanded. But let us proceed with our Relation.

During the same interval, we prepared a particular Memorial to present to the
Pope with our book, whereby we demanded three things of his Holiness, wherewith
I will acquaint the Reader, by inserting here the Translation of the said
Memorial. It was thus inscribed;

To our most H. Father Pope Innocent X. 1. For the Communication of the
Writings of the Doctrs of Paris, whose names are subscribed. 2. Touching the
Jesuits. 3. Touching M. Albizzi.

Most H. Father,
SInce the time that Cardinal Roma, of happy Memory, informed us on July 11. by
order from your Holiness, of the establishment of the Congregation which we
demanded of your Holiness, by our Memorial presented to you on Jan. 21. we have
not ceased to labor to get ready the first informations necessary to our
cause; whilst we were busied therein with the greatest diligence to which we
could be obliged by any reason or consideration whatsoever, we were suddenly
summoned to repair to Cardinal Roma, who advertised us, that we must get ready
our instructions touching this affair within fifteen days; that otherwise,
after that time expired, your Holiness would think of other means to provide
therein.

We conceived, most H. Father, that this Order might have been procured by our
Adversaries, and by M. Albizzi's means, in whose presence it was signified to
us, and who at the same time put an affront upon us, which we pass over in
silence for the present; but we did not think that it came from your Holiness,
as well because it was not suitable to the nature and posture of the affair, as
because in the audience which we had of your Holiness eight days before we
heard nothing of it, your Holiness on the contrary testifying to us, that you
were satisfied with the diligence wherewith you knew we labored therein; and
it was not likely that M. Albizzi had seen your Holiness within those eight
days.

Nevertheless, most H. Father, that we might not make any complaint to your
Holiness without absolute necessity, and to take away all color of blame for
our imaginary delay, we testified no resentment at all for it, but resolved to
get our first writings ready to be presented by the time prescribed, and we
labored therein day and night with so great and extraordinary closeness, that
at length we finished them upon the 28th of August. We went to present them the
same day to Cardinal Roma; but the sickness which befell him at the same time,
caused us to defer it from day to day, till the 17th of September, on which,
and the following days, we presented them to the other Cardinals of the
Congregation; since which, most H. Father, notwithstanding so great hastening of
us, we have not heard a word of their being communicated to our Adversaries,
though we have sundry times made suit for a thing so just, easy, ordinary and
necessary. Wherefore we humbly request:

1. That your Holiness will please to consider the vast extent of this affair,
how many things are essential to it, how many other dependant on it, upon which
it is needful that the parties be heard, and the Judges informed, that so they
may understand the true state of it, and fit it to be brought before your
Holiness, to make such decision of it, as may remove out of the Church all
occasion of Error and Division among Catholics touching rhese important
points of the Faith and Christian Piety: How much time will be requisite for
the doing of all this aright, and how tedious the affair will be, unless speedy
course be taken to exclude all delay: Be pleased therefore, most holy Father,
to appoint that our writings may be speedily communicated to our Adversaries.

2. And because there are two sorts of them; some who appear openly, but are
indeed the least, being scarce any thing else but the Agents and Instruments of
the others, such as are M. Hallier and his Colleagues; others who are our true
and principal Adversaries, namely, the Jesuits, who have raised all this stir
to overthrow S. Augustine, and root his holy doctrine out of the Church, by help
of the Five Propositions, whereof the Censure is prosecuted, as we have
formerly intimated to your Holiness in the Memorial presented last Lent, and as
will appear daily more and more in the progress of this contest; We most
earnestly supplicate, that our writings be signified, not only to the said M.
Hallier and his Colleagues, but also to the Jesuits, and that both the one and
the other be obliged to appear before the said Congregation, and both by speech
and writing answer to the Accusations made, and to be made in this affair
against them. This was always our meaning when we made suit for the
Congregation, to the end the affair might by help thereof be so advanced, that
these controversies might once be terminated at the same time with all the
world, and that our pains might be instrumental to procure herein a general
quiet to all the Faithful; and we conceived, that considering the state of
things, no other course could be thought more expedient: But because we find
that they have brought those Doctors upon the Stage, thereby to exempt
themselves from appearing, out of design that if their own sentiments should
come to be condemned (as there is all reason to hope) they might always keep a
refuge to themselves, and put the Church into new trouble about these matters,
under pretext of not having been heard, and that their Doctrine was not the
thing in question, we conceive our selves obliged, most Holy Father, to make
this more express and precise Supplication for it to your Holiness.

3. And whereas the abovesaid M. Albizzi is a person very closely united with
them, one that has always backed their designs, whatever they were, from whom,
since we have had the honor to address to your Holiness about so great an
affair, we have received contempts, obstructions, checks, and other ill
treatments upon all occasions wherein we have had to do with him, whose
greatest design in this affair, is to hinder the thing which may be most
necessary for the service of your Holiness and the Church, namely, the full
clearing of this affair with sincerity, and the most suitable, usual, and
fitting means: For these and other causes, most H. Father, we beseech your
Holiness, with all due respect, that you will please to regulate the Consultors
which are to be present at the said Congregation, and not appoint the said M.
Albizzi for a Consultor, and much less for Secretary, since it seems necessary
to choose for that place among the Consultors, the most moderate, impartial, and
learned person, and one who is least diverted by other occupations; which four
qualities being all wanting in the said Sieur Albizzi, and for that by some
occurrences we suspect that he pretends to that employment, your Holiness will
pardon us if we take the boldness to dissuade you in this matter, and do us the
favor to believe that we would not do it, if we did not consider, that as St.
Augustine writes to Innocent the First, God has placed you in the H.
Apostolical See by a particular gift of his Grace, and has rendered you such
during our days, that we ought rather to fear being accused of negligence, if
the respect we owe to your Dignity kept us from telling you the things which we
see it is so important to the Church to be represented to you, then that you
will hear them with displeasure: and if we did not find that there is great
necessity for it, in reference to the service of Truth, the Church, and
likewise of your Holiness, whose years we beseech God to multiply, and diffuse
upon you all sort of blessings.

Subscribed thus; Noel de la Lane, Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris,
and Abbot of Valcroissant. Louis de Saint-Amour, Doctor of the Sacred Faculty
of Paris, and of the Society of Sorbonne. Louis Angran, Licentiate in the same
Faculty, and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Troie.


Sunday the 10th, we went with our book of writings and this Memorial to the
Popes Presence Chamber, to desire Audience, and present them to his Holiness:
We could not obtain it; but I met F. Celestin in the Presence Chamber, who told
me, that he had visited the Cardinals Spada and Ghiggi, and spoken to them
about the necessity of making a conference between the Parties, but he found
their Eminences not in the least inclined to it.

In the afternoon I visited F. Lezzana, to know whether the report were true,
that he was made a Consultor: He answered me, that he was excluded, as being
suspected by them touching his Faith: Me excluserunt, said he, ut suspectum in
fide. He told me also, that in a visit to Cardinal Spada about the present
Controversies, he recommended S. Augustine to him, as him alone among the four
Fathers of the Church, that deserved the Title of Doctor by way of Eminence, in
regard of the sublime and vast knowledge which was diffused in all his
writings, and of the multitude of Heretics whom he encountered and overcame:
He said, that Cardinal Spada received this intimation well enough, but he durst
not go so far with Cardinal Ghiggi, because his Eminence had told him in a
discourse, that he had read Vasquez, Merat, Suarez, and a fourth Jesuit
Author, whose name comes not into my memory: To which he might have added a
commendation commonly enough given to this Cardinal, namely, that he had made a
Compendium of Suarez Metaphysics.

The next morning we went again to the Popes Palace for Audience, but had no
better success then before. In the afternoon F. Melchior came to see us, and
told us, that they in their Covent were threatened that the Congregation de
propaganda fide, should visit there in reference to Jansenism, whereof they
were accused.

Tuesday the 12th, we attempted again, but in vain, to present our book to his
Holiness. As I was going up to the Presence Chamber, I met a General of an
Order coming down, who told me that the time was favorable enough to make the
complaints which he knew we intended to make against M. Albizzi.

Wednesday the 13th, there was a Consistory which caused the Assembly of the H.
Office at la Minerve to be deferred till afternoon: I went to take a turn
there, and met F. Celestin again, who told me that the Assembly at Cardinal
Spada's house had been appointed for that day, but was remitted to the next. I
met also F. Capisucchi, Secretary of the Congregation dell' Indice, who upon
that, and perhaps other accounts, had great familiarity with Cardinal Spada: He
told me, as if to congratulate with me, that our Congregation would be held the
next day in the afternoon at that Cardinals house: I answered him seriously and
coldly, that it was none of ours, non e la nostra. He repeated his complement,
and said, he might very well know; for otherwise that of the Index was to be
held, which it could not be, by reason ours was to be held the next day at
Cardinal Spada's house. Whereupon I explained what I had answered, and told him
plainly, that I did not say that a Congregation would not be held at Cardinal
Spada's house which might hinder his, but that the Congregation held at
Cardinal Spada's house, might perhaps be some preparative to ours, but was not
ours. And so the Father well apprehended what I meant.

The same afternoon I visited F. Pancratio, who told me that F. Jean an
Augustine, otherwise called Tartaglia (who was added by Cardinal Pamphilio, as
a new Consultor to the Congregation at the same time with F. Celestin)
acquainted him, that the Thomists were agreed upon the falsity of the first
Proposition; whereupon he desired him to remember that they were Compatriots,
and not be so hasty, but to give this matter a few moments hearing before he
determined any thing touching it. A little while after I understood that this
good F. Tartaglia had put himself into a Covent of Barefooted Carmelites, out
of a considerable motion of Piety: He had been Fellow-Student with F.
Palavicini, and purposed to put himself into the Society of the Jesuits; which
purpose having communicated to a certain Religious person (from whom I
understood it) the said Religious asked him why he minded to become a Jesuit?
F. Tartaglia answered him, that his design was to retire out of the world, to
mind God and his Salvation, etc. The Religious asked him, whether he conceived
he should be retired from the world by becoming a Jesuit? and represented to
him on the contrary, that he would thereby be more engaged in it: That whereas
he had perhaps some talent above the generality, he must exercise it in all
employments upon which these Fathers thought fit to put him; that they spent
most of their life in visits, directions, negotiations, etc. F. Tartaglia was
so prevailed upon with these Reasons, that instead of becoming a Jesuit, he
made himself a Barefooted Carmelite; but the Religious told me, that however I
was not to expect any good from him in reference to our cause, for he was
imbued with the same Principles of Molinisme that F. Palavicini had sucked in,
and that in the whole Order of Carmelites, it would be hard to find a Molinist
like him: That once his Superiors taking occasion of a slight indisposition
which he had, sent him into the country under color of taking the air, but
indeed to remove him from his Profession of Divinity, because he taught
Opinions contrary to those of S. Thomas; that nevertheless, after a years
interruption, he was restored to the exercise of his charge, after promise of
Reformation; but he always returned to his first sentiments, and taught
according to the same principles of Molinisme.

Sunday the 17th we returned again to get Audience of the Pope, but it began so
late, and was likely to be so short, by reason he was to go abroad to take the
air in the afternoon, that we determined not to wait for it.

Tuesday the 19th we went again, but there was such a multitude, and amongst
others Cardinal Sforza, who ingrost almost all the time, that we despaired of
having any Audience that day.

In the afternoon I visited F. Pascaligo, who told me that F. Celestin had
taught Scientia Media, as well as F. Tartaglia, and that in print. We went to
see the Ambassador, who desired us to dine with him the next day.

We went thither, and both at dinner and after, the discourse was concerning
the pains we took to get our writings communicated (for during those
solicitations, there was no speech of being heard in presence) Whereupon the
Ambassador told us, that we need not trouble our selves about it, for without
doubt it would be granted us, when things were in a condition to permit it;
that it was practiced in all Processes of the Rota, and consequently would not
fail to be allowed in a general and important affair as ours was. That in the
Rota they sometimes made ten and twenty Decisions before they passed Sentence;
that the same would certainly be done in our affair, and instead of ten we
should have thirty: That we must not be impatient, but walk abroad, and divert
our selves; that we must calmely spend our time in studying and clearing up our
selves, because whenever we testified the least impatience, it would be taken
for obstinacy and disobedience. We answered him, that we were willing to do all
this, so long as it caused no prejudice to our affair. He told us, that the
Pope had signified to him that there should be two Congregatons in a week. We
answered, that they might make as many or as few as they pleased; that it did
not move us. That while they were such as the present, as we could not hinder
them, so we had no regard to them. That this was not after the manner that we
demanded, and that was promised us. He told us likewise, that the King would
procure both for us and our Adversaries to be heard, and to represent as much
as we pleased the justice of our cause. And upon our saying that, we had gone a
fortnight together to all the Audiences of the Pope, to present the Book of our
Writings to him, he did us the favor to offer us to introduce us on Friday
following when himself was to go; or else to take at Audience for us for the
Sunday ensuing.

Thursday the twenty first, I was in the Pope's Presence Chamber during the
Congregation of the L. Office, and came down from thence with the General of
the Augustines, who asked me where M. Hallier's lodging was, that he might go to
restore him the Writings which he had had of him.

Friday the 22d. we went to the Ambassador's house to accompany him to the
Popes Palace. He told us that we were down in his Note, and we desired him to
procure us audience for Sunday next, because we should then have more time to
speak to the Pope, then if we did it in his presence. Yet because we were not
sure whether it would be desired till Sunday, or whether we might not be called
whilst the Ambassador was there, we tarri'd in the Presence Chamber expecting
the issue. A quarter of an hour after the Ambassador had been at audience, he
came forth unexpectedly and with some commotion in his countenance, as I
observed. N. Piques Secretary of the Ambassy had in his hand the Memor^als of
Affairs, whereof his Master was to speak to the Pope, ready to deliver to his
Holiness 's Maistre de Chamber at his coming forth according to custom. But as
he drew near to present them, I perceived the Ambassador made a sign to him
with his head, not to deliver them.

We let him depart, and stayed in the Presence Chamber. The Ambassador of
Venice, who was to have audience next him, was not yet come. M. Angran, who had
not observed as I did the countenance and commotion of our Ambassador,
conceived this interval a fit opportunity for presenting our Book to the Pope,
and therefore motion'd that we might desire the Maistre de chamber to introduce
us. I told him and M. de Valcroissant, that assuredly the Pope and the
Ambassador had had some brush; but I entreated them not to speak of it, because
I knew not whether any besides my self took notice of it. The Ambassador went
down to Cardinal Pamphilio, where he was three quarters of an hour at audience.
I went thi^her likewise, and learned that the day before a Gentleman arrived by
Post from Monsignor Corsini who was going Nun^io into France, to advertise the
Pope that he was stayed at Marseilles, and could not pass further. In the
afternoon I went to see the Ambassador; As Soon as he saw me, he told me that he
could not speak to the Pope about us; and I answered, that I perceived as much
at his coming forth from the Audience. He replied, that indeed it was not
difficult to perceive; for (said he) we were at big words this morning. I went
abroad with him to take the air, where he told me, that a Cardinal Bishop in
Marca Anconitana, had sent to desire him by a Gentleman to procure for him all
the Writings that were made touching the Propositions.

Saturday the 23d. I met the Bishop of Bethleem, who told me that M. Hallier
informed him the day before that the Bishop of Amiens was dead, and before his
death made abjuration of Jansenism in the presence of VVitnesses. He told me
also, that he had received order from the Clergy to make no new Demand to the
Pope touching les causes majeures, and that the Clergy would continue firm in
the practice of the ancient Canons.

I had not ended with the Bishop of Bethleem when a certain Ecclesiastic came
to me, and tol, me, that he had visited F. Hilarion that week about our
affairs; and that speaking to him of M. Albizzi's extraordinary partiality,
the Father told him, that it was true that M. Albizzi was very hot in the
business, and that he had added some words of his own to the Bull of Urban
VIII. He mentioned expressly these three, In praejudicum fidei; and that a
Cardinal (St. Clement) making great complaints thereof, M. Albizzi had recourse
to F. Hilarion, as thinking himself a lost man unless he helped him. That F.
Hilarion having seen the said words, said, it had been better if they had not
been there; but since they were so, it was requisite to endeavor to salve them.
Wherefore in the Congregation of the H. Office having interpreted them in this
sense, namely, That it was a thing which would turn to the prejudice of the
Faith, if the Pope's Decrees were not better executed, etc. Cardinal St.
Clement's complaints were ineffectual, and M. Albizzi escaped and got out of the
mire.

But this danger wherein he saw himself, and the favorable interpretation by
which he escaped, did not render him more moderate in this matter, nor disposed
to confine the sense of the words of the Bull within those bounds. On the
contrary, he extended them upon occasion the most he could, it being his
interest and satisfaction that they might be verified if it were possible, and
that every one might understand them, not only according to the explication of
F. Hilarion, but also in the rigor of his own terms. He would be looked upon as
the legal interpreter of them, because he had been the Instrument, as himself
declared in the first Visit which my Colleagues and I together made to him,
having fallen into a passion against those who doubted of the truth of the same
Bull; and telling us that he could better testify concerning it then any
other, because it was himself that penned it, and caused to be added in it, that
Jansenius revived the Propositions of Baius. This passage, as well as many
others, I had omitted in my Journal, which one of my Colleagues perusing, called
it to mind, and sent it to me in a Letter, as it it is here transcribed.

F. Petit came to see us in the afternoon. He told me, that after many
Solicitations which he had made to M. Albizzi in the name of M. Hersent, to
know what was requisite for him to do that he might be absolved from the
Excommunication which had been fulminated against him by the Congregation of
the H. Office; M. Albizzi at length answered him plainly, That M. Hersent must
come to Rome to unsay and retract in a public Sermon, and to preach the
contrary to what he had preached there upon the day of S. Lewis, and caused to
be printed in his Sermon. He made this answer, and yet he knew that the
Congregation of the H. Office had nothing to gainsay, either in the sermon by
it self, or in its relation to the Epistle and to Jansenius. F. Petit, who did
not know him so well as he, had recourse to Remonstrances and Prayers,
representing to him the difficulty of the Journey, and told him, that M.
Hersent inquired what behoov'd him to do in the place where he was, for
obtaining absolution; and he would perform it punctually. At length M. Albizzi
yielded a little, and answered him with much difficulty, grumbling and shaking
his head (they are the very words of F. Petit's Letter to M. Hersent, which
fell into my hands since) That people must not think to delude and abuse the
authority of the H. Office thus, which used not to absolve such contumacious
persons by a Procuratour; that therefore M. Hersent must repair to the Nuntio,
and before him make an Act and a Protestation of his submission and obedience
to the H. See, and declare that he renounced all the sentiments and opinions of
the Jansenists. That when M. Hersent had sent him such an Act, he would then
see what was fit to be done for him, and endeavor to cause satisfaction to be
given him, but upon any other terms there was no hope.

Sunday the 24th. we repaired again to the Pope's Presence Chamber: there was
but half or three quarters of an hour's time for audience, which was given to
the Nuntio newly returned from Florence, and to the General of the Capucines.
The General of the Dominicans desired one as well as we, and told us that he
was in the same bottom with us, sumus in eadem navi. He offered to persuade us
to present informations to the Congregations held at Cardinal Spada's house,
but we declared to him our steadfast resolution, and the necessity under which
we were, not to proceed further then we had done, till we saw a Congregation
established bona fide with all the conditions wherewith we had demanded, and
which was resolved to proceed according to all the usual and requisite forms.

The new Sub-Bibliothecary told me in the afternoon, that the King of Poland
had lately written to the Pope to press the condemnation of the Propositions,
and that he more apprehended in his Dominions the divisions which might arise
about them then the Wars of the Tartars and Moscovites. The new Nuntio was
arrived there not long before, and when he went to salute the Queen, she asked
him news of what was a doing at Rome touching this matter. He answered her
Majesty, That he knew not in what posture this affair was, but assured her that
he was forbidden to speak of it, either by words or by writing. An admirable
Answer in the mouth of a Nuntio speaking to a witty and intelligent Princess,
as that Queen is!

Wednesday the 27th. we went to visit Monsignor Canzoni Bishop of Borgo. The
Book of Jansenius was lying upon his Table. He told us among other things, that
he could not express the astonishment and compassion which he had to see how
outragiously that Prelate was decry'd and considered as a capital enemy of
Religion and the H. See; when he remembered with what general applause and
consent in the Consistory (whereof himself was then Secretary) he was promoted
to the Bishopric of Ipre, and that the expedition of his Bulls was granted to
him gratis. And amongst the reasons why this grace was done to him, besides his
rare learning, he told us that it was considered that he had been thrice in
eminent Conferences with Heretics, against whom he nobly maintain d the honor
of the Church and the verity of the Faith* And this remembrance encreas d the
grief he had for the persecution done to his Book and his memory. After which
he fell to speak of the Congregations which were held at Cardinal Spada's
house: We told him expressly that we expected some of another sort, and looked
upon those only as such as might serve for preludes and preparations to those
which we demanded.

Thursday the 28th. the Sub-Bibliothecary came to see us, and tell us (he said)
some news of what passed in Cardinal Spada's Congregations. Nevertheless all
that he informed us, was, that F^ Palavicini was sufficiently mortified at the
last which was held; and that he (the Sub-Bibliothecary) heard from the
Antichambre where he was, that every one cried up his own Sentiment vigorously,
gagliardamente.

Friday the 29th. we went again with our Book to get audience of the Pope. He
gave none but to a Polish Gentleman newly arrived at Rome, a German who was
going away, and to three Auditors of the Rota. All which was dispatched very
speedily, and justified what a friend of mine well versed in those things told
me upon the stairs, that of late the Pope gave as little audience as he could,
and made choice of such as might give him the least disturbance.

In the afternoon I met F. Delbene, to whom I spoke earnestly how the Cardinals
were obliged to hear us before they proceeded further in their Congregations,
and what injustice they did us if they resolved upon any Censure before
examination of the Propositions, as we demanded in all the necessary forms. He
consented to all that I said, and he answered me, fariaeno male; no lo faranno.
They should do ill; they will not do it. Parting from him, I met with F.
Mariano, who told me much good news concerning the F. Commissary of the H.
Office, the Master of the sacred Palace, F. Celestin, and the whole
Congregation. He told me, that the weakness of F. Palavicini was discovered
every day more and more; that his Companion F. Tartaglia the Barefooted
Carmelite had all his own Order upon his back to keep him from acting as a
Molinist in any thing that he had to do in this Congregation; that Cardinal
Spada speaking familiarly concerning M. Albizzi to Monsignor Spada the
Patriarch, he shak'd his head, and signified by that gesture that he was not
satisfied with him; that the Dominicans abovementioned were very much heated
since they perceived the evil intentions wherewith this affair was carried; but
there were very many who were incensed against us, and chiefly against me,
because they received no information about the Propositions from us.

Saturday the 30th. we received a Visit from the Bishop of Bethleem, who told
us, that having received one the day before from M. Hallier, he in some sort
blamed that Doctor for that we were not heard before the Congregation, nor our
Writings communicated. Whereunto M. Hallier answered, that we sought nothing
but protractions; That should any Writing be communicated to us, we would
desire six months time to answer it; That for his part, he had no need of
hearing us; That let us be admitted first into the Congregation, and he
afterward; that without having heard us, he would answer directly to all that
we spoke; That we had only Jansenius; that he knew all that Jansenius said;
That as for the audience which we sought to have of the Pope, we should never
obtain it; That a Congregation was appointed for us; that we had no longer any
thing to do to speak to his Holiness. That this was the course at Rome; and to
show how much our protractions were to be feared, he took into consideration
diverse cases of affairs of State, to which delays are altogether prejudicial.
The Bishop of Bethleem told us that he had undertaken to speak with us, that he
might know out design, and as a Mediator procure of the Cardinals the
reciprocal communication of our Writings. We thankt the Bishop for his good
will, and desired him to tell M. Hallier, that we wished that our Writings might
be communicated more speedily; but we should have patience till it were done;
That as soon as we had theirs, we would use all possible diligence to answer
them; That we never sought any protraction in things, but what was necessary
for the right examining of them; That we would not have any composition of the
business with him, and that he aimed at nothing but to procure a good
determination from the Pope after our Contests had been examined in the legal
and accustomed forms.

The same day I was to visit F. Pascaligo. He told me, that so far as he could
discover what passed in Cardinal Spada's Congregations, things went there
rather well then ill; That such as at first were but indifferent, began to be
well treated; That there needed but one resolute person to sway the whole
Assembly, most of which, though well meaning persons, had not read St.
Augustine. He told me also, that Cardinal Ghiggi had demanded of some, whether
there were not some way to find a Mean and Temperament in this affair. I
answered him two things. First, that they could not at Rome do a greater
pleasure to the Heretics, then if they came to condemn any thing that was
Saint Augustin's. And secondly, That the H. See ought to beware, not only of
condemning a Catholic Maxim, but also of absolving or suffering error. That
it ought to take equal heed, what was fit to be done, and what was not. And
that it would be a less ignominy to it if it did not condemn an Error which
came under its Cognizance, then if it condemned a Truth.

CHAP. XIV.
What passed at Paris during the same Month; especially the violences of the
Jesuits against some Doctors S. Augustin's Disciples, to remove them from
their Employments.

WE were busi'd at Rome all this Month in the most vigorous and assiduous
pursuit that was lawful for us to make there, for the first audience in the
Congregation which we demanded might be granted to us together with our
Adversaries, after our first Writings had been communicated to them, to the end
they might come to such audience prepared to answer to those Writings, and to
what we should add thereunto viva voce. We could neither obtain to have a day
set for such first Audience, nor that our Writings should be communicated, nor
know whether they would grant us either one or the other. In the mean time the
Jesuits, and the Doctors their adherents continued triumphing at Paris
beforehand for the approaching condemnation of the Propositions, of which they
held themselves sure, and in which they involved ours. By this means they
caused great doubtings and distrusts, both in the Prelates who deputed us, and
in our friends, what might be the issue of the Congregation which was signified
to us, and what justice we should have done us by it; wherefore they sent us
word by a Letter of the 22th. That we had done very well in demanding of
Cardinal Spada a Hearing and a communication of our Writings; but that it was
said there (at Paris) that it would never be granted us, because they would not
engage themselves at Rome into the bottom of the Dispute. And they enjoined us
severely not to deliver any instruction which might engage us in a single
process by writing. Also M. de saint Beuve writ to me the same day that we
ought to continue our instances that the Authors of the Propositions mi^t be
known, our innocence declared, and the NECESSITY OF EFFECTVAL GRACE established,
which was the whole point of the Question; and that if we could not obtain
this, that at least it might be inserted into the Bull, in case any were made,
that we had always declared that we undertook the defense of the Propositions,
only in the sense wherein they implied the Necessity of Effectual Grace; that
by this means the Bull would be favorable to us, and moreover, make our
Adversaries pass for calumniators and successors of these Semipelagians, as
well in their manners and proceedings, as in their doctrine.

But the Jesuits and their Adherents did not stop at these threatenings of
future things; they already made advantages as well at Rome as at Paris of the
Victories which they had not yet obtained. They assured their Partisans at
Rome, that the Decree which they made against the Propositions, would be
received with applause in France by all the Court and all the great persons of
the times; and in France they animated all the powers, both Ecclesiastical and
secular against the learned and pious persons of whom they were jealous, as
against person already condemned and declared Heretics; the affairs of M.
Manessier and M. Cordon, whereof one had been elected for the place of Regius
Professor of Divinity in the University of Caen; and the other for that
Principal of the College of Montaigu, who were both cast out of their charges,
are two memorable examples thereof, which I than insert here with the
circumstances wherewith I understood the same in a Latin letter written to me
the 29th. of this month. For that it contains nothing but affairs of the
University, I shall leave it in the language of that place.

Terrent minis Molinistinae quos ratione vincere non possunt. Hac se art
putant Romae plurimum authoritatis habituras, si potentiam secularem ostentare
possint. Timeri volunt quando persuadere and vi argumentorum vincere nequeunt.
Ita profecto, ni fallor, Romae agent quemadmodum Lutetiae. Hic de futura, ut
aiunt, Censura triumphant, illic de Optimatum protectione gloriabantur.
Enimvero non semel ad vexandos adversarios Romano nomine abusi sunt,
eviceruntque ut irascerentur ex Optimatibus and Principibus aliqui in homines
Romae damnatos, and tollendos censerent quos Pontificium fulmen ferisset. Nuper
hac usi sunt calumnia ut D. Manessier Cadomensi Cathedra, and de Cordon Montis
acuti Primatu dejicerent; nefas aiebant, in eos confer suffragium, quorum
doctrinam Papa proscriberet. Quam artem ubi non procedere senserunt, ad vim
apertam versi, utrumque suo loco pellere voluerunt. Litteras quasi a Rege
miserunt ad Gubernatorem Cadomensem ( Lettres de cachet, i. e. under the Privy
Seal) quibus mandabatur, juberet protinus D. Manessier urbe cedere, sive
lectiones orsus esset, sive non, seseque confer ad Comitatum, Regi actionum
suarum rationem redditurum. Invigilaret quoque P. de Folleville Oratorii
Sacerdotis and Professoris Theologi lectionibus et doctrinae. Delata res ad
Cadomensem Academiam, movit indignationem omnium. Causam D. Manessier suam
fecere Academeci Proceres. Rescripsere ad Parisiensem Academiam, ut suo alumno
patrocinaretur, obstaretque ne Theologi Professores paterent impotentissimorum
hominum libidini. Nondum res conclusa est apud D. Rectorem. Moras nexuit D.
Morel, qui Decani loco illis Comitiis interest; causatus rem esse periculosam,
Regiae voluntati intercedere, ingratiam nescio quorum hominum perditae
doctrinae, quorum reliquiae et Romae et in Gallia Regia auctoritate brevi
conterendae sint. Non impediet tamen ne Parisiensis Academia Doctoris sui
defensionem suscipiat. De D. Cordon res ita se habet. Mortuo de Canel, Bursarii
palam fecere quam propenso in illum animo essent. Hoc male habuit Molinistas.
Statim illi advolare ad Poenitentiarium, qui nomine Capituli inspector est, ut
electionem istam disturbaret. Itur ad Carthusianos item illius Collegii
inspectores; convenitur Prior. Doctores scrupulum movent, videret nempe ne
grande piaculum committeret, reusque esset violatae Religionis, si hominem
haereticum, daemonis filium, daemonem ipsum, et quid non? Collegio been
Catholico praefici sineret: omnia mala bonaque, justa and injusta tendanda esse
ad Dei gloriam. Ille egregie animatus hisce declamationibus Bursarorum animos
tentat. Vbi non potest ad suam pertrahere sententiam, quid agat? Molitur
facinus indignum, indignissimum. Tres ex iis (sex autem omnino sunt habentes
jus suffragii) hactenus ut Bursarios ab ipsis quoque Carthusianis, a Capitulo,
a Primario, ab omnibus habitos, ipso electionis pervigilio bursa dejiciunt,
nescio quid causati. Non cedere illi abdicati quoque, de vi queri, appellare,
interesse velle Comitiis, far suffragium; eligunt D. Cordon semel, iterum;
biduo enim repetita suffragia. Opponunt sese Prior and Procurator
Carthusianorum. Inde ad Senatum. Nam cum periculum esset ne Capitulum
Parisiense rei indignitate motum adversus Carthusianos sentiret, obtinuerunt
placitum libello supplici oblato, quo rei totius cognitione and judicio
Capitulo interdicitur. Tum alio libello supplici obtiuuere ut de Marlier, quem
Carthusiani Primarium volebant, licet non electus, Primarium lite pendente
ageret. Duo Consiliarii sese contulere in Montanum Collegium, ut in illud novum
Primarium inducerent. Restitere Bursarii, intercessere decreto facto non
auditis partibus. Inde, quod summae aequitatis judicium est, abiere ad
Cathusianos duo illi Senatores ad paratum convivium. Tertium etiam habere
voluerunt, quo, non obstante intercessione, prius illud Decretum firmarent; sed
rejecta est a Senatoribus importuna petitio, quorum magna pars graviter tulit
tam praecipitanter rem illam actam esse ab uno aut altero Senatore inconsulta
Curia. Nam ita duo prima illa decreta facta sunt. Rem alias persequar. Sed non
omittam Principis Senatus dictum, quo rem dixit ad Regiam auctoritatem
pertinere, necesse esse ut mos ipsi in Montano gereretur; quasi Regium edictum
sit, ne quis adversus injustam Monachorum tyrannidem reclamet. Vale.

29 November. 1652.
CHAP. XV.
The continuation of our Solicitations during December, to obtain the audience
of the Pope which we desired, for presenting our Writings with two Memorials to
him: one for communications of the said Writings; and the other against F.
Modeste, M. Albizzi, and the Jesuits.

THe first day of December the first Sunday of Advent; upon which the Pope
usually went to Chapel; but some indisposition hindering him from doing so, and
yet permitting him to give particular audiences, his Holiness appointed this
day, at Cardinal Vrsin's request, to give audience to diverse Polonians who were
returning into their own Country. We endeavored also to get opportunity to
present the Book of our VVritings to his Holiness; but some obstacle hindered
him from giving audience either to the Polonians, or to us. They returned
thither on Tuesday, and we likewise: but they were so long at audience that
they left none for us, though it appeared that the greatest affair which the
Pope had with them, was, to give them his Benediction and indulgences.

In the afternoon I went to visit the Ambassador, who was going to see
Cardinal Albieri whither I accompanied him. We had been once or twice before
to visit this Cardinal; and that we might be no more disappointed, I took this
occasion to agree upon an hour for the next day with his Maistre de chamber. In
going and coming I spoke to the Ambassador touching the communication of our
writings. He told me that all the fear was of protractions which might happen
thereby. I answered him that so much must be resolved upon as was absolutely
inseparable from a legal examen; and besides such, we sought none: I manifested
to him by the whole course which he knew we had kept hitherto, that we had not
caused any, and I gave him all reasonable assurances that we would never
occasion any. On the contrary I showed him that our interest as well as our
intention was, to see this affair as soon ended as we could procure it; that if
after a thorough discussion it were found that we were in the wrong, we should
be glad to see a solemn and authentic condemnation, and that were favorable
to truth, pronounced against us; that the Pope, the Consultors, our Adversaries
and we ought to aim at no other; that likewise if it were found that the
sentiment of the Jesuits and M. Hallier and his Colleagues were not conformable
thereunto, it behoov'd to spare them no more then us to the prejudice of truth.
The Ambassador acknowledged the truth of all this, and told me two things
sufficiently remarkable, to let posterity know what infamous and shameful means
were made use of to decry us and disparage a holy and wholesome doctrine. He
told me that M. Hallier and his Colleagues had showed him a Letter of M. de
Marca Bishop of Conzerans newly nominated to the Archbishopric of Tholouze
(whose hand the Ambassador said he knew well, having received many Letters from
him whilst he was in Catalonia) in which that Prelate signified to them that
the Jacobins had informed him that a certain woman being at Confession
confessed that she had forgotten herself in the conjugal fidelity which she
owed to her husband, and alleged that Grace failed her three times. The second
thing which the Ambassador told me about the same matter, was, that a certain
man being sick in the quartier of the Jocobins, (viz. the Reformed in the
Street S. Honor), received the Viaticum from M. de. S. Roch in the usual
manner; That yet afterward being visited by two of that Order who went so
comfort and exhort him, telling him that it behoov'd him to think upon God and
his Grace; The man answered, that he did not believe himself to be one of those
for whom God had prepared it: That thereupon the Jacobins told him that he must
beg it of God; and that he answered that he had not so much as the Grace to
pray: They replied that he ought to have confidence that God had merited it for
him by his death; the man answered that he could not persuade himself that he
was one of those for whom our Lord died. That the man was recovered a little;
that yet it was not known what would become of him in the end: but the
Jacobins. and M. de S. Roch were much troubled about it, and that it made a
great noise in his Parish. But in the mean time it was manifest what evil
effects had been caused by spreading in the Church the difficult and strange
Questions of the Mystery of Grace, namely Libertinisme and Despair.

I could not this day give the Ambassador the Answers which these examples or
rather fictions deserved, because we arrived at his House, and the Discourse
broke off. But being the next day at S. Louis, one told me in the Sacristie in
presence of sundry Ecclesiastics who stood about the Fire, that the talk was
in Rome, that the Confession a la mode was, to say, instead of I have failed,
Grace has failed me; whereupon conceiving that this Discourse proceeded from
the Letter which M. Hallier had showed the Ambassador, I first remonstrated to
the Company, as well as I could, and the place permitted, the injuriousness and
impiety of those who thus sought to make ridiculous the prime maxims of the
Gospel by false and senceless consequences. After which I went to dine with the
Ambassador that I might have occasion to speak to him both privately and at his
Table, and by answering those foolish and temerarious objections, ruin them in
the same place from whence in probability they first began to be dispersed.

I said as I had done at S. Louis touching the first, That when it is said that
Grace is necessary to all actions, the meaning is not, for the doing of them
simply, because there are many other motives of civil honesty and natural
equity obliging us thereunto, which are sufficient for the doing of them, as is
clear by the examples of so many Pagans who received no Christian graces, who
had not so much as the smallest light of Faith, and who nevertheless were
chaste, just, charitable, faithful and generous, out of the consideration of
what they owed to the interests of their honor, their friends and their
Country. But the meaning is, That Grace is necessary for the doing of the least
action upon the principles of Christian love, and profitably for salvation,
etc. And as for the second example, to take away the scandal it might give in
case it were true, I affirmed that it was not an effect of the sound doctrine
of Grace (whereof Christian Piety obliged men not to be ignorant) but of the
ill use and false consequences drawn from it by its enemies; That from this
example we ought to take occasion to humble our selves before God for avoiding
the like error; That men ought to spend all their lives in fear and confidence,
to work out our own salvation and hope in God with trembling: That S. Paul who
did not find himself culpable for any thing, nevertheless did not presume that
therefore he was justified; but although he had no such presumption, yet he had
a holy hope of his salvation by the strength of him through whom he could do
all things; that it behoov'd to follow his example in either respect, and that
every one ought to labor after his salvation as if it wholly depended on
himself, and yet hope in God's mercy and grace, as being unable to do any thing
but by grace.

I also caused the Ambassador to read about two pages of S. Prosper's Epistle
to S. Augustine, wherein he acknowledged was contained and reduced the ground of
all the ordinary Objections brought against the doctrine of Grace which we
defended. But he asked me whether S. Augustine answered to all that, as I assured
him; and if so, how was it possible that the Pereyrets, the Halliers, and other
famous Doctors of the Faculcy had not read it, or if they had, why did they not
understand it? I answered him, that I wondered at it as well as he; but I
believed his admiration would diminish, when he should consider that this was
not more strange, than to have seen the Chief Priests among the Jews who were
no less able or considerable in their kind than the Pereyrets, Halliers and
the rest, go about to kill Lazarus as soon as our Lord had raised him from the
dead, because the evidence of that so famous miracle was the cause that many
amongst the Jews embraced the faith of Jesus Christ.

The same day being Wednesday December 4. we repaired to the house of Cardinal
Altieri at the time appointed. We discoursed largely of the quality and state
of our affair; he heard us with great attention, and received it well, not
doubting of the necessity of hearing the parties in presence, and reciprocally
communicating their Writings, and that after the Congregations of Cardinal
Spada he sufficiently ventilated the matter, in case they should resolve to
pass judgment upon it. At the end of this visit he told us, he should be
glad to see us again and discourse about the Propositions, which had been given
to him in a Note which he drew out of his Pocket, where they were barely set
down without any citation, apostil or gloss whatsoever. We answered that we
should have the honor to see his Eminence whenever it pleased his Eminence.
Nevertheless when we made a succinct reduction of the Propositions to the sense
of Effectual Grace in which we maintained them; he forthwith acquiesc'd
therein, and answered us as one that had sufficiently read S. Augustine. He
also demanded of us to see our Writings, on condition to restore them as soon as
he had seen them, and caused them to be transcribed; and we promised to bring
or send them to him speedily. He had told the Ambassador and confirmed the same
to us, that being to take his leave of the Pope in the Consistory held on
Monday December 2d. in order to retire to the place of his ordinary residence;
the Pope said to him that he must not depart yet, because he intended to put
him into some Congregation; and the Cardinal himself and the Ambassador
conceived as well as we, that it was ours for which the Pope designed him. Of
which we were very glad, because he appeared to be very equitable and very
intelligent. But some time after he departed from Rome, without our knowing the
reason of it, although he desired to keep correspondence with us; and indeed he
not only read our writings de Gestis, and restored it during his stay at Rome,
but after he was gone sent to us in diverse Pacquets the Copy of the other
concerning S. Augustin's authority; and according as he dispatched it, a certain
person from him brought it punctually to us.

Friday the 6th. I met M. Joysel. We talked long together about indifferent
matters. At length he asked me whether we should stay much longer at Rome? I
answered him that I wished we were ready to go from thence by the next week, if
it were possible. He asked me whether we were not weary of Rome? I told him that
my Colleagues and I had particular affairs enough which obliged us to return
into France the soonest we could; but we had patience seeing we could not make
things go on so expeditiously as we desired. He replied that for their parts,
they had formerly had much employment at Rome, but now the main of their affair
was dispatched, that they had presented their Informations to the Congregation,
and demanded nothing else but that they might return. He informed me also, that
they were going to begin, or had begun to hold two Congregations a week at
Cardinal Spada's house, and made as it were an excuse to me for it, telling me,
that it was done without any solicitation of theirs, and the Pope himself
appointed it so of his own accord: whereunto I answered, that instead of two I
wished there were four, if it might be, because it was but so much preparation
for the right clearing of things, and in order to the better understanding of
the parties when audience should be given them. Touching the reading of the H.
Fathers, and particularly St. Augustine, he told me, that it was requisite to
consider the spirit and the design, and not to stop at the words and the
letter. I answered him, that both ought to be considered: We fell to other
discourse, and parted.

Saturday the seventh, I had some engagement to go to the Ambassador in the
morning. In his Antichamber I found Monsignor Glioddi with whom I discoursed a
long time. As I was speaking to him of the long delays of communicating our
Writings, and of the frequent Congregations which notwithstanding were held
touching our affairs at Cardinal Spada's house, he told me that it was not to
be wondered at; that he knew neither the bottom of our Affair, nor the order
that was kept in it; but many of another nature often passed through his hands,
and that they had this custom at Rome to inform themselves very carefully of
an Affair, and to view and possess all the Writings concerning it before they
ordained the same to be communicated to the parties. That it was very likely
that the same course would be held with us, and perhaps that which hitherto
hindered such Communication, was, that they were minded to see whether the cause
were such as was fit to be decided before they put it into the hands of the
parties; because if such Communication wete once made by their order, they
should be more obliged to decide it, then they were by the private and
superficial disquisition which they had hitherto been about.

Sunday the eight I learnt nothing, saving that a Prelate told me as we came
out of the Chapel, that the day before he had discoursed with the Pope
touching the Jesuits; and that his Holiness was very well disposed to do
justice to those that should demand it against them, as willingly as if they
demanded it against any other person whatsoever. In exchange for this
Intelligence, I gave this Prelate a Copy of a very handsome letter which was
written to me touching their Panegyric of their College of Hungary, which was
condemned two months before by the Master of the sacred Palace.

Monday the ninth we went to the Popes Presence Chamber to present to him the
book of our Writings; but finding many people there expecting audience, and
consequently that it would be very difficult to get any, we considered that the
Pope went frequently abroad to take the air, and that we might present the same
to him at his Return; and though this course seemed less advantageous, and it
was a little disparagement to our persons and affair, yet the long time we had
sought an audience, the fear of greater delay, and the necessity there was that
the Pope should see more amply the state and importance of the business, and
especially the redoubling of the Assemblies of the Congregation, prevailed with
us to resolve upon it: wherefore we went thither in the afternoon for that
purpose; but by that time we got to Monte Cavallo, we understood that the Pope
was already returned.

The next morning we went again to his Presence Chamber, that we might omit no
occasion in the which we could hope to get our desired audience; but 25. or 30.
persons were demanding it as well as we, though almost none were admitted to it
besides Monsignor Fagnani.

Friday the 13. we accompanied the Ambassador to the Ceremony which is yearly
performed on the day of S. Jean de Lateran for the rest of the soul of Henry
IV. of glorious Memory. Passing by Monte Cavallo as we returned, we found that
the Sermon was newly ended, and saw the Cardinals and Prelates coming forth.
There was one told me that the Preacher who was a Jesuit, named F. Olive,
after he had cited many Canonists about the matter whereof he treated, said,
But some Divine must be cited too; and he cited S. Augustine, who said, he is,
as I think, the Prince of Divines, Il quale, come io penso, a'l Prencipe de'
Theologi.

It was a slight commendation in his judgment who related it, that this
Jesuit gave S. Augustine before that illustrious Assembly, to purge himself in
some sort from the esteem which began to be had of them in Rome, that their
Society were enemies to that H. Doctor.

The same person that made this Observation, told me, that he had spoken a day
or two before to Cardinal Ghiggi, and mentioned certain defects in some of the
Consultors, in regard whereof an impartial judgment could not be expected from
them. That he had particulatly spoken of F. Campanella who had been a Jesuit;
of F. Modeste who was become a perfect Dependant on M. Albizzi upon account of
his pretention to the Generalship of his order, and M. Albizzi's promise to
procure it for him; of F. Tartaglia companion in studies with F. Palavicini; of
this same Jesuit who was said to be of such strong and able parts, that he
alone could overturn all the world. To all which the Cardinals whole answer
was, that F. Palavicini was so far from being of such abilities, that on the
contrary the world stopped and checked him every day.

The same person told me further, that because the General of the Dominicans
could not get audience of the Pope, himself had advertised his Holiness of the
Thesis which the Jesuits had caused to be maintained in Germany, viz. That it
was not de fide, that Innocent X. was lawful Pope. That the Pope was surprised
and scandalized at it, and sent to the General of the Dominicans to demand the
said Thesis, that he might see and be assured of it by his own eyes.

In the afternoon I was at the Sermon at la Minerve, at the end of which
several Dominicans and others of our friends came to me under the Cloister, and
blamed me highly for letting all Cardinal Spada's Congregations pass, without
interposing at all, and giving any instruction either to the Cardinals or the
Consultors. But I endeavored to satisfy them by assuring them that so soon as
the Congregation should be established according to our demand, and the promise
which was given us, and proceeded according to such forms as were accustomed
and necessaty for the hindering of all sorts of surprises against Truth and
Innocence, and that it were rightly and duly signified to us; that then by Gods
help, we would not be wanting in any thing which the Cardinals and Consultors
could expect from us, for their cleat and full instruction in the whole Affair;
but so long as they proceeded in these Congregations as they had began, so that
we understood only by chance and by stealth upon what days they were held, the
delivety of our Adversaries instructions to them, and the rest of their
actions, we should never consider them otherwise then we had done hitherto;
namely, as some Preparatives to the Congregation which we had demanded, but not
as the Congregation it self. That the vast amplitude and extraordinary
importance of this Affair, as well as the precise commission which we had
received from our Bishops, did not permit us to go beyond those bounds. That if
the Pope and Cardinals chosen by him for this Congregation would not forbear to
proceed without regarding what we had represented to them, and to condemn the
equivocal Propositions which were presented to them, without distinguishing the
different senses whereof they were capable, they might put all into confusion
in the Church, if they thought good, and give us the dissatisfaction of not
having been able to obtain of them the most just things which we had demanded,
and which it was incomparably more their interest to grant us then ours to
obtain. That by denying the same to us, they might cause a drop of blood to
spring into our faces, but it would be such as came from the mortal wound which
they would give themselves and the H. See. That we wished we could hinder so
dismal a disorder and scandal; buc that under the apparent pretext of a hope to
hinder it, which might prove deceitful, we would not put our selves in hazard
to see another arrive which might be more prejudicial both to them and to us.

During this week the Subbibliothecary told me that the Bishop of Angelopolis
had obtained a Decree against the Jesuits a year ago, but could not get it
expedited since that time, by reason that Cardinal Spada hindered it underhand,
though himself had been one employed in the passing of the said Decree. The
Agent of the Bishop of Angelopolis who honored us with a Visit in these
Conjunctures, testified great grief and resentment to the Subbibliothecary that
he was forced thus to consume so much time unprofitably in getting his Decree
delivered to him: For, said he, if it be not just, do not pass it; if it be
just, do not retain it. The Subbibliothecary offered the Agent to speak of it,
and present him to Cardinal Ghiggi, in whose probity and sincerity he had more
confidence then in his friendship, that his Eminence would give contentment to
this Agent, either by himself, or by express order from his Holiness. He spoke
to the Cardinal, and presented the Agent to him. The Cardinal touched the knot
of the Affair, and acknowledged the injustice; and without making a stir, or
speaking to Cardinal Spada, an express order came from the Pope to those who
were to make expedition of the said Decree, that they should make the same
without delay. And accordingly in less then three days it was expedited for the
Agent, who could not, as I said before, obtain it in a years time, though he
solicited for it with all manner of care and diligence, and was a man so
intelligent, vigorous and undaunted, as I believe is not often met with.

Saturday the 14th I met F. Malgoires in the City, who told me, that a few days
before, he had much started M. Hallier and his Colleagues, by telling them, that
they could not gain any thing hereafter by their pursuites to get the
Propositions condemned, because the Pope having already declared, that he would
not have Grace Effectual by it self meddled with; though it should come to pass
that the Propositions were condemned, yet it would be nothing to the connection
which they have with such Grace; so that since we held them only in the sense
according to which they have such connection, the condemnation passed upon them
would give them no advantage against us.

The ancient Procurator General of S. Marcel had desired of me, to let him see
our Writing de Gestis. I carried it to him this morning, and asked him by way of
Exchange, whether he had no sort of Writing which M. Hallier and his Colleagues
had showed him. He told me that they had been to see him several times, but
never left half a line with him. He told me also that in Cardinal Spada's
Congregations, they were upon the fourth Proposition. That hitherto they had
only given their sentiments by speeches in few words, in poche parole. That he
believed their Eminences would see their sentiments in writing at length, per
extensum, but he was not certain of it.

We gave our Writings thus freely and indifferently to be seen by all such as
testified to us the least desire of it, whether they were Consultors or not.
For we considered no person under that quality, no notice having been given us
of them, excepting that we acted a little more reservedly toward such as we
knew were Consultors by the private intelligence of our friends. Thus I carried
our writings de Gestis to this ancient Procurator of S. Marcel, (who was one of
the Consultors) his lodging being in the way by which I was to go elsewhere,
and I sent the same some days before to F. Bordone, (who was none) and who
lived in a remote place off the City.

But the Letter written to me by this latter, the next after he had received
the said writing, deserves to be reported here, because of the singular esteem
it professes of S. Augustine, and shows what pity it was that a man so full of
esteem for that H. Father, and who by his charge of Qualificator of the H.
Office should by all right have been of the Congregation, was yet excluded with
some others as well affected toward St. Augustine as he. The Contents of the
letter were these.

Illustris. Signore, Tengo copia del fatto sopra le controversy de gratia, del
quale S.V. Illustris. m^ h^ honorato, confarmete partecipe; ammirando la
flaccielagine e temertea di quelli che vogliono combattere la doctrina di sant
Agostino, DELLA QVALE S. CHIESA NEL DEFINIRE LE CONTROVERSY DI SIMILI MATERIE
COME REGOLA INFALLIBILE SEMPER SI E SERVITA. Di S. Cosmo di Roma li. 5.
Decembre 1652. Di. V. S. Illustris. devotissimo servo nel Signore.

Signed thus, F. Francisco Bordone.

I have received (said he) the copy of your writing concerning Facts in
reference to the controversies about Grace, which you have done me the favor
to send me. I admire the Impudence and rashness of those who go about to impugn
S. Augustines doctrine, of which the H. Church has always made use, as of an
infallible rule for deciding the controversies of these matters. I thank you,
and kiss your hands, etc.

Your most affectionate in our Lord, etc.

Tuesday the 17. M. de Valcroissant and M. Argran continued to solicit for
audience to present the Book of our Writings, and the Memorial above mentioned
to the Pope, wherein we petitioned, that they might be communicated. And
moreover a second Memorial which we had signed on Friday before, December. 13.
wherein we advertised the Pope of sundry things which we conceived his Holiness
would find very important in themselves, and yet more regard of their
consequences, which I will not trouble the Reader with here, but leave him to
judge thereof by the reading of the said Memorial, whereof the translation
follows:

To the H. Father Pope Innocent X. touching some orders given by his Holiness
to M. Albizzi, and violated both by him, and the Jesuits, and F. Modeste
Consultor of the H. Office.
Most Holy Father,
YOur Holiness having considered the Memorial which was presented to you in
Lent last against the impression wbich was making of a Book of the Jesuits,
whereof F. Annat was Author, touching their sufficient Grace, and other like
matters against Jansenius, with the authority of the sacred congregation of the
H. Office; your Holiness judged the reasons for not permitting the said
impression so considerable, that although the Book was already finished, yet
your Holiness forbad proceeding in it, and appointed that all the sheets of it
which were printed, should be suppressed and carried to the H. Office.

The orders, most H. Father, could then be no otherwise then obeyed; but since,
the same orders have been slighted, and your Holinesse's intentions frustrated
and despised; inasmuch as though the course of the impression of the said book
was stopped, nevertheless they have caused another to be printed at Paris
concerning the same matter, against the same Advesary for the same ends, and by
virtue of the same permission of the H. Office, albeit the same permission had
been at least suspended and hindered by those orders of your Holiness.

And although the said Book be printed at Paris, yet neither can M. Albizzi,
nor the said Author with his Companions, nor F, Modeste Consulter of the H.
Office who approved it, quit themselves of having contemned, transgressed, and
voluntarily, and with deliberate purpose violated the express and formal
pleasure of your Holiness touching this matter, which was to them sufficiently
known, as your Holiness may evidently see, if you please to consider the
following reflections.

The said permission of the sacred Congregation of the H. Office was granted at
the request and solicitation of M. Albizzi on May 13. in the last year 1651.
The Memorial against the Book which was printing here, was presented to your
Holiness in Lent last; your Orders given to M. Albizzi at the same time, were
by him executed upon H. Thursday and Saturday, and the same Memorial put into
his hands: Lastly, the Approbation of F. Modeste was signed the 14. of July
last, and this new book was not published at Paris till toward all Saints,
with the said permission and approbation in the Front.

If M. Albizzi, most H. Father, had had a sincere desire to obey your Holiness,
he would not have failed to have recalled and required from F. Annat the
permission which had been given him, since himself having solicited, and got
it expedited, he must needs know, that it was general, not only for that Book,
but for others like it; and since he might have perceived clearly by the
Memorial, that among the reasons which your Holiness had to prohibit the said
book, there was not any which concerned it in particular, but all were
generally as much against any other book of the same nature and subject, as
against that.

But moreover, most H. Father, the said Sieur Albizzi has manifested clearly
with how great repugnance he executed the orders which your Holiness gave him.
He has shown how much more he valued his passions and his intimate leagues
with the Jesuits then your Holiness's commands. We have made it appear, that
though he executed them, yet he did not approve them; that his own were very
different from those of your Holiness; and that indeed if it had been possible
for him, he would willingly have avoided the necessity of executing them, which
seemed so hard to him. Your Holiness judged by the said Memorial, that it was
expedient for your service to suppress the said book; M. Albizzi made great
complaints that your Holiness was advertised of its impression; he was sorry
that the book was not published before the news of it came to your Holiness, and
he was so full of resentment for it, that the Printer repairing to him often
during that time, and above a month after, about other business, M. Albizzi
always made new reproaches, sometimes for the unprofitable expense, sometimes
for other disadvantages which the Jesuits had suffered by the suppression of
the said book, which was not done but because he had not been either secret or
diligent enough to get it published before we could give notice of it to your
Holiness. There cannot be imagined, most H. Father, a Minister more opposite
and contradictory to the commands and service of his Prince then he; and it is
not to be doubted, but having demeaned himself after this manner in reference
to this book, he has as much and mare connived, or positively contributed to
the other*

As for F. Annat, is it credible, most H. Father, that when he saw his first
book prohibited by your Holiness's order, he knew not the reason why? That he
did not acquaint his Companions with it, who were in continual expectation of
his work; and that none of them had heard tidings of our Memorial which was in
the hands of the said Sieur Albizzi, who along time has acted nothing in those
Affairs but with their privity? Is it credible, that when F. Modeste gave his
approbation to the second book above three months after the suspension of the
first, which he had also approw'd, he had not the curiosity to know what was
become of the first, if at least he was then to learn? It must needs be
acknowledged, most H. Father, that all the persons we speak of, have had a hand
in this misdemeanor, though perhaps not all equally, but M. Albizzi more then
any. It is beyond all doubt, that they well enough knew what they did; but they
never thought that it would come to the ears of your Holiness, but persuaded
themselves that we would not have either vigilance enough to discover them, or
resolution enough to advertise your Holiness of their Miscarriage.

But what can F. Modeste allege for himself, to whose care, fidelity and
judgment the examination of the said books was committed? How can he excuse
himself for having made a Panegyriek of the latter, as a work most worthy to be
published, and the most agreeable to the H. Fathers, to the Councils, and to the
Doctrine of S. Augustine that can be imagined, if under vain pretexs there be
found in the said Book more injurious contempts toward S. Augustine then in any
other, if therein Principles are established most prejudicial to his authority,
if therein his sentiments are perverted after a most odious manner, and if
those of the H. Fathers, Councils and Popes are treated therein with
disguisments full of deceit and imposture? Certainly he will not be excused by
having pretended to the General-ship of his order, nor because M. Albizzi
promised him, as it is publicly reported in Rome, to make use of all his
credit for his promotion, thereby to draw and embark him in the practices of
the Jesuits; and if this excuse be not receiveable, we believe he cannot find
any other to justify what he has done in this matter.

Many other reflections, most H. Father, might be made upon things so
important; but to avoid being tedious to your Holiness, we refer them to your
prudence, and most humbly beseech you, to believe that all which we say, is
only for your service, and that of the H. See, and that it will be as easy to
make it all good against any whosoever shall be found concerned therein, as it
is to promise it, provided it please your Holiness either to hear us your self
touching this matter, or in the Congregation which you have appointed for us,
when it shall be held, or in presence of whatever other Judges who shall hear
us aecording as so weighty and difficult a thing requires. After which
referring all to the good pleasure of your holiness, we beseech God to multiply
the number of your years, and shour upon you all sort of Benedictions.

Signed thus, Noel de la Lane Docto in Diviniiy of Paris, and Abbot of
Valcroissant. Lovis de Saint-Amour Doctor of the sacred Faculty of Paris, and
of the Society of Sorbonne. Lovis Angran Licentiat in the same sacred Faculty
of Paris,and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Troie.


CHAP. XVI.
In what manner we were at length constrained to take occasion of the Pope's
return from taking the air to present our Writings and Memorials to him. A
Conference with the Ambassador, and other things which I learnt till the
Festivals of Christmasse in the year 1652.

Whilst my Colleagues waited in the Pope's Presence Chamber for an opportunity
to present our Writings and Memorials to him, I was with the Ambassador to see
whether he intended to go to his usual audience upon Friday following; and if
so, to beseech him to procure one for us in order to the presentation of these
Papers, and to desire him to read them. The Ambassador told me that he did not
know whether he should go to audience on Friday or no, and that he would not go
without being first assured that the Pope would receive him as he ought to
receive the King of France's Ambassador: but in case he did go, he would
certainly obtain for us our desired audience. I signified to him all that we
had formerly said to the Pope, and that the Memorials and Writings which we
were to present to him, were so clear, that there was no need of our adding
thereunto any thing by word of mouth, saving a request to read them; for which
in case we had no admittance during his audience, it would suffice us if we
could by his mediation present the said Writings and Memorials to the Pope
during the approaching Festivals, at the ending of a Chapel or other solemnity.

After this, all that we did out of our Lodging till Sunday the 22d. consisted
in three familiar visits of which I made one to the General of the Augustins
upon Thursday the 18th. who told me that they had been so extraordinarily
hastened in their Congregations that he had not had time to read half what he
wished, in order to prepare himself for what he was to say. The second with M.
Valcroissant to F. Tostat a Minime, who had been Confessor to the Abbot de S.
Cyran during his imprisonment in Bois de Vincennes, and who rendered such fair
testimonies of his virtue and after so Christian a manner, that it well
appeared that he had conversed with him besides in Confession. And the third,
all alone to F. Luca Vadingo on Friday the 20th. who told me that many of the
Consultors wondered that they were set about this affair and passed judgment
upon it, una sola part informante, being informed but by one side. That
nevertheless we should do well to continue as we did, and not fail to make our
Remonstrances in time and place for not being heard. He asked me also to let
him see our Writings but not to tell any that I had shown them to him.

The Ambassador was not at audience on Friday; and we could not reasonably hope
to make use of his mediation for presenting our VVritings and Memorials to the
Pope on Sunday the 22d. at the end of Chapel. Wherefore we were constrained to
expect the Popes return from taking the air, which the fairness of the day
caused us to hope he would not fail to do. It proved so; and at his return when
he came near the Presence Chamber, he stood still. M. de Valcroissant presented
our Writings and Memorials to him saying, H. Father, This is the Book of our
Writings which we beseech your Holiness to have upon your Table, and these two
Memorials we pray that your Holiness will please to read. The Pope asked what
side it was for. It was answered that it was upon account of some Bishops of
France in behalf of S. Augustine per Sant' Agostino. The Pope repeated the
words, per Sant' Agostino with reflection. And then having considered us a
little more attentively, he said, So, So, qui e; I know, I know what it is. M.
de Valcroissant added that it was in reference to clearing the Five
Propositions and defending them in the sense of S. Augustine. VVhereupon the
Pope making a sign to one of his Officers which followed him, that he should
take the Book and bring it to him, he gave us his benediction, and as he
withdrew, said, Si vede adesso, and lo considerero ancora io, This affair is
now under examination, and I will likewise examine it afterward.

Returning from Monte Cavallo we went to the Ambassadors house, to advertise
him of what we had newly said to the Pope; but finding him retired to write
into France, I went thither again the next day about dinner time. When I had
given him the abovementioned account, he answered, That he had always told me
that they would use all necessary speed; and I replying that they had not
hitherto used too much, since we could not yet obtain that our first writings
might be communicated, he began with a higher tone, and told me that such
communication might draw out the affair in length, and that it was requisite I
knew that the King would have it dispatched, and would allow but two Religions
in his State, the Catholic and the Calvinist. I answered the Ambassador that
on our part we would do all we could to accelerate the expedition of it; but I
believed the Kings interest was not so much to have it dispatched, as to have it
dispatched well, according as the Catholic Religion, which I believe we
defended, required; and that if the King were minded to have but two Religions
in his Dominions, I did not think that he would admit the Molinisme which we
opposed. But I entered upon a more considerable reflection, which the
Ambassador approved, and told me he would accordingly write that day into
France, namely, that being the event of the judgment which was to be made in
this affair was uncertain, and probably enough might and ought to be made
against the intentions of the Doctors our Adversaries, it seemed to me
important for the honor of the King, not to concern himself in their behalf,
to the end that if they should come to be condemned as they deserved to be, it
might not be said that his Majesty was engaged in a Party which was worsted.
The Ambassador retained me to dine with him. After dinner we fell again upon
these matters, in reference to which he said diverse things to me, whereof I
shall here recount the principal, according to the order in which they came
into my memory, and I set them down at that time. He told me that since the
King was come to Paris, the wings of those whom he called Jansenists were much
clipped, that his presence had dissipated above three thousand of them, nay more
than six. I desired him to name one of them to me. He told me that by Letters
from Gentlemen and other persons of quality it was signified to him that
Monsieur such a one, and Madam such a one had renounced the Party. Nevertheless
he named to me no person of those six thousand who were already fallen off; but
he mentioned M. Singlin and F. Desmares, whom he called two grand Pillars; that
it was written to him that they hung but by a thread, and had protested that
they would renounce the party as soon as the Pope had determined. That the
Sermons preached about it had caused the Barricadoes at Paris. That the
Spaniards looked upon these contests in doctrine as a fit means for fomenting
the divisions of the State. That the Spaniards ca^'d not to meddle therein. I
replied that they had meddled therein five or six years ago, when the Doctors
of Lovain came to Rome to endeavor to stop the course of these divisions: but
they could not compass their ^ent. He told me further that we had made a g^at
breach in the Sorbonne (which formerly ^de Rome to tremble by the ability and
reputation of its Doctors) by having divided our selves and co^ to that pass as
to put our selves under the judgment of a dozen Monks; that we were derided at
Rome for having reduced our selves to these terms, etc. I answered the
Ambassador that the H. See was the head and center of the Church; and therefore
recourse had been made to it from all parts of the world, not only by ordinary
Doctors as our selves, but by Councils of Bishops; and consequently the same
might be done beseemingly enough. That when we demanded a Congregation from the
Pope, we hoped he would compose it not only of able Monasticks, but also of
other persons of the Clergy eminent in knowledge and considerable by their
Learning, as well as by the rank and authority which their Quality gave them in
the Church, that so the Congregation might be suitable to the weighty matter to
be decided by it, to the persons that were to contend therein, and to the whole
Church as being concerned in the judgment. That we already knew several of the
persons whom the Pope had chosen for the Congregation held at Cardinal Spada's
house, but knew not yet those whom his Holiness might add to the same
Congregation, to make it such as we had demanded of him. That it was easy for
the Pope, even without going out of Rome, if he were willing to ttansact things
with the ordinary forms and solemnities which we had demanded, to add still to
those already nominated a good number of intelligent and qualified persons who
might render the Congregation full and solemn; but indeed although, as I said
before, it was a thing very commendable and natural to have recourse to Rome in
a time of need, yet it was really shameful and deplorable to be put to such
needs and not to be able to regulate our selves; that therefore I confessed
that they who were the cause of the division between us were extremely to
blame. And hereupon I gave him a full relation of the whole affair, to let him
see that neither the Prelates who sent us, nor we, were the cause thereof. Thus
the Conference ended; but it was very long considering that it was a day of
dispatch, it being above four a clock before I could take leave of the
Ambassador.

One visit more I made on Tuesday the 24th. to F. Pascaligo, who told me that
he heard from a Consultor, that Cardinal Spada's Congregation was upon the 4th.
Proposition; that the same Consultor said to him, that as concerning matter of
Fact, he conceived it was evident by the Epistle of S. Prosper; but as to the
censure included in the Proposition which condemns the Semipelagians as
Heretics for having been of such an Opinion, it seemed to him (the Consultor)
that it was contrary to the Orders of Paul V. who had equally prohibited either
party to condemn one another.

CHAP. XVII.
A Consultation between my Colleagues and me, whether in case they persisted at
Rome to refuse to receive from us, in order to an examination and judgment,
any but secret and private information, we should at length comply and deliver
the same in such manner. Our Reasons for and against it. Of the Letters which
we writ thereupon to Paris, and the Answers we received.

WHatever steadfast resolution we had taken and professed touching the
Assemblies of the Cardinals and Consultors held at Cardinal Spada's house, yet
we were incessantly anxious concerning them, and feared some troublesome sequel
from them. They troubled us so far, that we fell into consultation whether it
would not be expedient for us to comply with the time and the disposition of
things and minds, and deliver to the said Cardinals and Consultors secret and
particular informations in writing touching the Propositions, to the end to
prevent such mischiefs as might happen by their absolute condemnation, rather
than let them pass on to such condemnation by keepgin close to the Order which
we had received not to proceed but before a Congregation, wherein the forms
usual in Ecclesiastical and civil judgments might be kept. We could not agree
amongst our selves what to think most expedient, and so to send to our Prelates
to beseech them to permit us to act according co such necessity as we should
all acknowledge. But our opinions being different in the business, we were
obliged to signify to them at length what reasons we had on either side,
either to comply or to continue firm in the order which they had given us; that
so upon consideration of the same they might let us know their resolution, and
send us orders what to do.

The Opinion amongst us for complying with the Congregation's manner of
proceeding was grounded upon very urgent reasons. The bottom of all which was,
that notwithstanding out instances for the communication of our writings, and a
hearing in presence of our Adversaries before the Congregation, we could get no
plain answer concerning those two points, but still the Congregation frequently
assembled and proceeded to the examination of the Propositions, and passing
judgment upon them. We considered that being they saw not our writings, nor
heard us before them, they could not be so fully instructed concerning S.
Augustin's Principles, as they would be if they heard us or perused our Papers.
That the more they became engaged by declaring what they could do against the
Propositions, the more difficult it would be to reduce them, when we should
afterward come to speak before them in the Congregation. That if we always
persisted in demanding those two things without ever obtaining them, and they
still proceeded as they did, they might at length pronounce a judgment upon
the writings alone which M. Hallier and his Colleagues, or the Jesuits supplied
them with, the same remaining unrefuted by us, and consequenly make a decision
to our disadvantage: whereas if we presented to them such writings as we could
compose, and refuted those of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, as was easy for us
to do, ours might be so strong and convincing, as we saw that already was which
we had ready upon the first Proposition, and we might so well refute all those
of our Adversaries which came to our hands, that it would be morally impossible
for the Consultors not to remain convinced of the righteousness of our cause,
and of the truth of the Propositions reduced to the sense which we defended,
and not to be obliged by evidence of the things which we should tepresent to
them in our writings, to declare themselves in our favor, and to pronounce to
our advantage by distinguishing the senses, and approving those which we
maintained. We were further confirmed in these apprehensions by knowing that
M. Hallier and his Colleagues were highly pleased with our insisting upon the
communication of our writings, and a public audience with them, without being
able to obtain the same; because by this means they were at liberty to say and
deliver in writing whatever they pleased, and feared no confutation or
gainsaying; and that if by so doing they could obtain, as they hoped a
favorable judgment against the Propositions, the credit which they had in the
world would enable them to make as high use of it for the ends they aimed at,
as if the same were passed after the greatest solemnities, and with full and
perfect cognizance of the cause.

We considered moreover, that the thing most to be feared in taking this
resolution, was, either that the writings which we should deliver would not be
regarded, or our verbal representations in particular visits not sufficiently
attended to, and the same judgment be nevertheless passed, which in that case
would be more prejudicial to us after our writings and remonstrances; because
it might he said that it was decreed after the Parties had spoken and written
all that they could, and consequently it would not be so easy to reclaim
against such judgment if it brought any prejudice to the truth, as it would be
in a time more favorable if it were passed without hearing us, as the
prepossession and precipitation wherewith they seemed to proceed caused us to
mistrust: But it could hardly enter into our minds that they would so lightly
pass over our writings, and give so little attention to our words in a cause
of so great importance both to the H. See and themselves as this. Wherefore it
seemed to us a safe course to present our writings to them, and visit them
severally to inform them; thereby to prevent the mischievous judgment which
they might pass; then to wait, till it were given against us, to provide
against it in a more favorable time, which perhaps would never happen. But we
were further to fear lest if, after having made so great instances both for the
communication of our writings and for a common hearing with our Adversaries, we
came to comply, and took another way; we might never obtain either the one or
the other of those things both which appeared to us so necessary. But against
this fear we questioned with our selves what advantage we could draw either
from such eommunication, or Hearing, if they continued to deny the same to us
till judgment were passed, as it was likely they would do by the present
proceedings. Wherefore all these considerations made us conclude that it was
requisite to comply with the time and disposition of the persons with whom we
had to do.

But on the other side the reciprocal communication of writings on which alone
we insisted in expectation of a common audience, and concerning which alone the
question had been in all the solicitations which we had made since Septem.
seemed to us a thing so just in it self, and so equitable to all persons that
had the least degree of reason, that it might seem we could not hope for
justice in any thing whatsoever if we could not obtain it in this. What reason
then was there to go and deliver writings about Propositions obscure and
intricate, difficult to be unfolded and comprehended, and yet more to be
resolved, to persons who seemed so unmoved and regardless of our most earnest
and respectfull suit for a thing so evident and pleading so highly for it self?
We considered that not only equity and the light of nature were violated
herein, but also the customs from all time observed in Councils, and before the
H. See it self. That this secret and dangerous proceeding into which we were
consulting to engage, destroyed Ecclesiastical liberty and the confidence of
such as might oppose themselves to novelties and errors in hope to find
countenance from the H. See when they laid forth their complaints and
remonstrances unto it in presence of such as they found themselves obliged to
accuse. That the very interest of the H. See, and the sincere affection we bore
toward it engaged us to preserve the avenues and recourse thereunto free and
open to all the Faithful in whatsoever needs might arise in all ages; and
consequently not to comply with this hugger mugger proceeding, which would be
of ill example and dangerous consequence to all Christendom. That if any
justice were to be hopt from this Congregation upon the account of writings and
particular informations viva voce, those were sufficient which it had already
received from us touching the evil designs of the Authors of the Propositions,
and the authority of S. Augustin's doctrine. That till this Congregation had
done us reason upon those writings by obliging our Adversaries to acknowledge
the said Authority in such manner as was requisite to the due examen of the
Propositions, we could not hope thar it would do us more upon the other
writings and informations viva voce which it might receive from us. That if we
could flatter our selves with hope that our writings would be so clear and
invincible, the reasons which we should allege so palpable, and the
productions of our Adversaries so easy to be confounded that it would not be
possible but that all the Cardinals and Consultors must yield thereunto and
become favorable to us; yet we ought to consider that amongst the same persons
who composed the Congregation, there were diverse Consultors, who though perhaps
not so experienced and exercised as we, either in the matter of Fact or Right
relating to our contests; yet were sufficiently instructed therein by all that
had been already deelar'd thereof, to regulate themselves and inform othets.
That there might be many of them well affected to S. Augustine and his doctrine
touching Grace Effectual by it self, who might represent to their Confreres and
the Cardinals as solid and unmovable foundations, as we our selves were able to
represent to them, if not with as much force and largeness, because we were a
little more versed therein, yet well enough to supply what might be defective on
our part, and effectually enough to persuade the Congregation of the evidence
of the justness of our cause, or at least of the necessity of hearing us more
amply in the forms which we demanded before they hazarded their own reputation
and that of the H. See by a precipitated judgment, if it were capable (as we
undoubtedly supposed it by the reasons which inclined us to the resolution of
delivering our writings and informations in private) to suffer it self to be
prevailed with and fully persuaded in our favor by those which they saw in our
writings, and heard from our mouths. That if on the contrary we flattered our
selves too much when we thought that it was morally impossible for all the
Consultors not to be convinced of the evidence of our reasons and the truth of
the Propositions reduced to the sense in which we defended them; if old
prepossessions of many were stronger upon their minds than the reasons
propounded in this manner for defense of those truths; if they were capable
notwithstanding such reasons to continue in their ancient sentiments, and
conclude the condemnation of the same truths, it were better to leave the other
Consultors (who understood those truths as well as we) to allege the reasons
for them unprofitably to their brethren, than to make a vain attempt our
selves, and by so doing abandon the right which we had to require a Proceeding
in the Open and Universal way, which had been both prescribed and promised us,
and to defend truth in the accustomed forms which had been also promised us,
and according to which they that maintained it had no reason to fear any thing.
So that it was more expedient that we persisted in our former demands and
pretensions against the manner of Proceeding held by the Congregation, which
appeared so unjust and prejudicial to us in case it were continued to the end,
then to acknowledge it for lawful by condescending to submit to it, that we
had ground to hope from the equity of the Pope and the Cardinals that after
they had held the private Congregations at Cardinal Spada's house as often as
they conceived necessary for their own satisfaction, they would afterward give
us the like by according the justice of our suits. Thas if they did otherwise,
we ought to be patient, since we could not force them to do justice whether
they would or no. And if they proceeded in this course so far as to make a
Decision, it would not be injurious to us, unless it were so to Truth; if
Truth were wounded thereby, we must resolve to suffer with it, and comfort our
selves in such suffering by assuring our selves that the same Truth which
engaged us therein would secure us sooner or later; it being certain that the
same may be said of it which is said of Righteousness in the Gospel, Blessed
are they who love it, and who hunger and thirst after it, because they shall be
satisfied therewith.

But besides, we had this further important consideration, That we were not
come to Rome either for the defense or examination or determination of the
Propositions simply, as if our hopes and pretensions reached no further. What
interest could we have in the success of that work of darkness, or in the
condemnation or defense of such Propositions in themselves? We who had always
considered them as the object of our aversion, and as the unhappy instrument of
a pernicious design for the unworthiness whereof we had always reproached
their Authors. But we had taken this occasion in which the exorbitant outrage
endeavored to be done to the H. See and the Faith by the Jesuits and their
Adherents, was so visible, and the artifice whereby they contrived to get their
errors authorized, so audacious and surprising; to the end that all persons who
had any love for the H, See, for the Faith, and for Sincerity, entering into the
just indignation which so shameful and unrighteous procedure merited, and
acknowledging the necessity of securing the H. See and the Faith from the like
ambushes for ever, might at length resolve to embrace the means necessary
thereunto, which were no other than to condemn the errors which gave occasion
to these conspiracies, and establish the Faith against which they were
projected. So that this design obliging us to be able to manifest boldly, and
with a holy confidence before the Judges which should be assigned us, all the
errors whereinto the infirmity and extravigance of humane wit had suffered the
Jesuits to be led, contrary to the Maxims of the Gospel, as well in Doctrine
as in Morality, we were obliged also to preserve that Christian freedom,
without which our Jorney was frivolous; and was it a way to preserve it, by
yielding to act after so vile and abject a manner? to wrangle pitifully about
the terms of fantastic Propositions; to place all the success and fruit of
our pains in what might be ordained concerning them; to appear privately before
Judges who would seem to us like Idols, all whose words would be mysterious as
Oracles, to exhaust all the force of our industry, labor, patience, bodies and
minds, without being assured that any thing we writ or spoke; would be
thoroughly weighed, or so much as read and remembered, and in a fear that every
one of those to whom we had spoken, would never dream of us after our backs
were turned.

All these reflections seemed so strong to us both on the one side and the
other, that we could not end the difference between us. We were obliged to writ
into France, and represent the same to the Prelates who sent us, and to our
friends that so we might have the judgments of the latter, and the resolutions
and orders of the former to conclude amongst us what we should do in such
perplexed and important extremities. We writ thither in the beginning of
November, what I have above related; and toward the end of this month December
we received such answers as the Reader, I conceive, will not be unwilling to
see.

The first is a Letter which was written to us in Latin, on Novem. 28. 1652. by
two of my Lords the Bishops who sent us, being the only persons amongst them
who were then at Paris. They writ the same to us in Latin, that it might not
only serve for our particular direction, but also to justify our proceeding
before the most scrupulous persons of the Court of Rome, by letting them see
what they had prescribed us in the Original it self. This Letter was written
before we durst signify to their Lordships at Paris all the difficulties with
which we were surrounded, because we were still in hope that we should be
delivered from them at Rome, without needing to make them known at Paris; but
the vigilance of the Prelates prevented our needs. Nevertheless I shall insert
only their last Letter here, and subjoin the Answer which we returned thereunto
on the 30. of December.

The first written to us after the newly mentioned, by one of our especial
friends, who consulted many others about it, is of December 6. 1652. in these
words. I have read all the reasons which you have sent me; I find that all
those which are not for communicating, (with the Consultors, as we proposed)
are the strongest; the others sway me not all. -- Nevertheless I expect a more
valid determination. If there proceed any thing from that Congregation in
favor of the Molinists, I foresee a horrible persecution, because the
Ecclesiastical Superiors who might hinder it, will be the prime Ministers of
it; and we are already looked upon as Victimes, shortly to be sacrificed to the
Idol of the Jesuits.

The same person writ to me eight days after (December. 13.) in this manner; All
the Resolutions of our friends are, that you offer not any instruction
whatsoever to the Congregation as it is now held. It is requisite that you let
all be said against you that can be. You are only to speak boldly, and
represent that you act only in the quality of Commissioners. You shall declare
that since you are dealt with so hardly, you will writ to the Bishops: that
they may discharge you of your Commission, and recall you home. In truth it is
an amazing thing to see a Congregation proceed in the mannet that this does. We
find none in the Church that ever was like it.

There are no persons here who have a sincere love for Truth, and true zeal for
the honor of the H. See, but sigh at so unjust proceedings. I know some who
afflict themselves with watchings, fastings, and other austerities, to pacify
God, who without doubt permits this unhappiness because of our sins. We shall
never cease to offer vows and prayers to God, to implore him to diffuse a
spirit of justice and truth in the hearts of all those who compose that
Congregation.

The same day December. 13. M. de Saint Beuve, (whose testimonies I so willingly
produce, as well in regard of his own merit, learning and integrity as of his
quality of Professor in Divinity, which he discharges with great ability and
reputation) writ me a Letter touching the same matter, whereof the Copy follows.

SIR;
WE have all reason here to wonder at the rumors which are spread about, and at
the discourses of the most considerable persons touching the Doctrine of Grace.
A week ago the Queen said before a great company that we should shortly be
condemned at Rome. The Jesuits say as much to their Confidents, and some of
them proclaim the same with as great a certainty as if it were in their own
disposal. Though I know very well that it is impossible for Truth to be
condemned by the H. See, and though I See not that that which we defend is
subject to censure, since no person can justify that the Proposions are held
by any Disciple of St. Augustine; yet I confess I am something afraid, that
considering the manner of proceeding held by the Assembly instituted for their
examen, we may receive some displeasure from it. What can we expect from a
Consultor who being a professed Jesuit, is by obligation engaged to act as our
formal Adversary? What ought we not to fear from an Assembly in which he who
has fomented the Divisions of Divines hitherto, by declaring himself of a
party, and a Solicitour, by the very confession of M. Hallier in our Faculty,
holds the pen, and has the Office of Secretary? And lastly, what likelihood is
there that an Affair can be well understood when no hearing is granted to the
Parties, and when the Communication of their Adversaries Productions is denied?
How can any one know what they would have? how judge of their defenses? But the
worst of all is this, something will be decreed, which shall make nothing to
the decision of the present controversy, and shall nevertheless be made use of
by the Sectators of Molina as a strong determination against effectual Grace.
Thus Truth will suffer, and those who defend it will be persecuted, and the
Churches troubles continued. Whereas were your writings reciprocally
communicated, and you allowed audience, it would be known wherein all the
difficulty consists. And as your Memorial is a great overture to Peace, since
by it you declare that the Propositions are not ours, but are equivocally and
maliciously framed on purpose to involve a good Doctrine in the condemnation of
a bad; and since you demand only that the several senses may be distinguished,
with protestation of submission to the Judgment which shall then be passed, it
were an easy thing to resolve peace to the Church by doing justice to those
who sue for it. All things therefore being considered, my advice is, that you
complain to the Pope of that Consultor and that the Secretary, and absolutely
except against them. Also that you request his Holiness to ordain, that all
which has been and shall be done till you be heard in presence, one side of
the other, and have had communication of eithers productions, be declared null,
as being against all order of justice. If you obtain not that which you demand,
I conceive you may crave his Holinesses benediction, and depart, as having
nothing to do in a place where audience is not afforded you in an affair for
which alone you went thither. You may come back into France, and expect what
shall be determined at Rome. But since they cannot hurt us, without doing
extreme wrong to the grace of Jesus Christ, if we suffer any thing, we will
comfort our selves tanquam digni habiti pro nomine Jesu contumeliam pati. The
interest which we have, is common to us with the Disciples of S. Thomas, and no
less with the H. See, whose Doctrine we defend. We have been wanting neither
to Truth nor the H. See, and therefore we hope likewise that the H. See will be
wanting neither to us nor Truth, whereof it is the defense. It behooves us to
pray very earnestly, and expect all from the H. Spirit.

I am, etc.

Eight days after, M. de S. Beuve writ another letter to me, which is here
subjoined to the foregoing.

SIR,
I Do with great reluctance give credit to the words which the Ambassador said
to you, since his sentiments can be no other then those of him who sent him,
which we every day understand to be not advantageous to the cause for which you
are at the Popes feet. By the last Post I told you what the Queen said before a
great presence; and since that, I hear that the King has also said, that four
Propositions of the Jansenists are already condemned. I can scarce believe that
their Majesty's spoke this, except from the Ambassadors Letters. For which
reason I must desire you not to trust to what that Lord shall say to you, M.
the the Official told me, he has learnt from a Jesuit, that there are two
condemned, viz. that concerning the Possibility of the Commandments, and that
concerning the death of Jesus Christ. I answered him, and all such as have
spoken to me as affrighted with these rumors, That it behoved to expect the
Bull, which I was certain would be advantageous to us. For either his Holiness
will distinguish the senses, and then our opinion will be approved, it not
being possible for the Doctrine of the Effectualness of Grace to be condemned;
or else he will not distinguish them, and then he will pronounce nothing
against us, since we hold them good but in one sense alone, and not absolutely.
Whether by writing or by speaking, In the name of God let it be declared, 1.
That we are not the Authors of them, 2. That being fabricated of equivocal and
captious terms, they include sundry senses which we detest. 3. That we do not
and never did pretend to maintain them saving in the sense of Effectual Grace
necessary to to every good action.

I know not how what M. Hallier has said to you, can agree with what he writes
hither. He spoke to you about taking a new lodging, and yet has given notice
to M. de S. Malo, that he is upon his departure, and shall speedily come back
into France. His arrogance does not surprise me. I have known him too long, to
be scandalized at it. I pray God reform him yet more within then without. M. le
Moine gives out here, that F. Annat has left him his Memoires upon the Five
Propositions: and so you see he is the Truckler under that good Father. I am
gald the Dominicans bethink themselves of stirring; it is their duty. It shall
be a secret amongst us till you allow us to speak of it. I am not far from your
conjecture touching the Popes designs in this affair. Is it true, that the
examination of M. d' Ipre's book is taken in hand at Rome? If so, it were to be
wished, that the Doctors of Lovain would make haste. I have sent you the right
Title of F. Annats Book, and without doubt it is the same which you obstructed
there. There is nothing to be done as from the Parliament, touching the
permission for its Printing. The discourse about the retractation of M. d'
Amiens at his death is ridiculous.

I am, etc.

Another particular friend of mine who was likewise Doctor of Sorbonne, and was
at that time in Normandy, writ one to me December 22. whereof the Copy follows.

I Received all your Packets in Normandy, whether I went about some affairs. I
have read your two writings; one of which is an abridgement; the other a
Narration at length of all things which have passed in the affair of the Five
Propositions. I find the Narrative very well composed, saving that it seems to
give too much advantage against the Propositions, by speaking of them
frequently as equivocal. I expected to find it extremely high, and feared it
might be a little too vehement, by so much of it as you signified to me; but it
seems extraordinary moderate, and the person who you tell me is not spared in
it, has no reason to complain, except perhaps he may believe that you speak
not seriously in the commendations which you allow him. I am willing to
believe, that you have done it with knowledge of the cause, not to prejudice
that of the Truth which you defend, by speaking with more smartness of the
persons who oppose it, and of the violences and artifices wherewith they carry
on their opposition. I cannot but wholly approve your resolution of declining
to proceed further, or deliver any new writing, till answer and satisfaction be
given to what you have already offered. If the communication of your
Adversaries writings be denied to you, together with the conference viva voce
which you have demanded to have with them, for representing of your Pleas and
Refutations, that so things may be laid open before your Judges, who cannot
otherwise take a right Cognizance of your differences so as to pass judgment,
and determine them according to Truth and Justice, it is an evident sign, that
they are not disposed (as you sometimes believed) to do justice to you, and the
cause which you manage. This is the universal opinion of all intelligent men
concerning their strange proceeding. And methinks it obliges you to keep firm,
and not to advance further by producing new Pieces, till reason be done you
upon your first productions. They would be glad to have you write always, and
to receive from you as many Requests, Informations, and other writings as you
please, provided they be not obliged to answer and satisfy you; and all those
writings would serve for nothing, but to give them more liberty to condemn you;
and the condemnation would be the more dangerous, for that it would seem in the
world to have been passed with cognizance of the cause, and after hearing you,
and receiving all the requests and justifications which you presented to your
Judges, etc.

Another of December, 26. was writ to me from Grodna in Poland by M. Fleury the
Queens Confessor, which though not relating to the manner of the Congregations
proceeding, yet showed that in all places the Jesuits already promised
themselves an approaching and indubitable condemnation of the Propositions; It
had this passage; A few days ago, a Father Jesuit in this Court writ to an
Officer of the Queens, that which follows.

If the news from Rome be true, before our Return, the Truths which I have
preached to you, will be again confirmed by the H. See. I say again, because
they are already comprised in the Council of Trent, and some others. He to whom
this Letter was written, made a good answer to it, thus;

I have always believed that the Council of Trent would be received at Rome, as
it is by all the faithful. I will not perplex my self with questions which
surpass my capacity. When I am taught a Doctrine agreeabie to that of St.
Paul, and as it is explicated by S. Augustine, I shall believe it, and not
otherwise. The Holy sacred Ecumenical Council of Trent confirms me therein,
and teaches me what I ought to believe. I beseech God to give me Grace to be
willing and able to practice it. It Is from that Grace alone that I expect my
salvation. I entreat you, reverend Father, to pray to God that I may obtain it,
and that when I have it, I may persevere in it. He who returned this answer is
a wise and prudent person; and though no great Book-man, yet God has well
instructed him in these Truths, of which many who believe and call themselves
Divines, are very ignorant.

December. 27. M. de Saint Beuve writ a large letter to me again from Paris, in
which he gave me a particular account of what had passed in the affair of M. de
Chavigny, which the Jesuits spread abroad at Rome as an authentic proof of
the confederacy and Cabal of the Directors of Port Royal, but was really an
illustrious proof of their unconcernedness and evangelical vigor for the
salvation of the great as well as the small, whom God in Mercy committed to
their safe guidance. After M. de St. Beuve had ended this story in his letter,
he spoke thus to me touching our affairs.

I consent with you, that an affair of Doctrine ought not to be brought into
negotiation; You must keep firm, and insist upon the pronouncing of a decisive
judgment. None but such as defend a lie, desire accommodations, and say with
the Harlot before Solomon, Non mihi, nec tibi, sed dividatur. The furthest we
can go, is, in case the Propositions be condemned, to require that it be
expressed in the Bull that they are not ours, and we neither do, nor ever did
pretend to maintain them otherwise then in the sense of the necessity of
Effectual Grace. As also that it be added, That nothing shall be inferred from
such condemnation against this Doctrine.

And at the end of a Letter of the same date, he writ these words to the Abbot
of Valcroissant, I have signified to you or M. de S. Amor, that my advice was,
that in case you could obtain neither the communication of Writings, nor a
hearing in the Congregation, you ought to withdraw. M. de Chaalons is not of
the same mind, but thinks it best that you remain firm and stay for a
definition, which cannot be disadvantageous to us, since the necessity of
Effectual Grace cannot be condemned.

But now follows the Letter which was writ to us, November. 28. by the two
Bishops above mentioned, and the Answer which we returne^ thereunto, December. 30.

A Messieurs, Messieurs de la Lane, de S. Amor and Angran, Doctors of the
sacred Faculty of Paris, and our Deputies at Rome.
ALthough by continual experience and testimonies we find, that the most
important affairs may be safely entrusted to your fidelity, learning and
courage: and nothing appears in your Conduct below either the judgment which
we made of you, or the esteem which you have publicly acquired in the world;
nevertheless as we have deputed you to the H. See with our Letters,
recommendation and authority, so the cause of the whole Church now in
agitation, leads us to animate you frequently by our exhortations and
remonstrances. We have with satisfaction understood, and the first labors
which you underwent in this contest, have manifested to us how careful you have
been in the beginning this dispute with the defense of S. Augustine, the
inducement whereunto is the peace of all the faithful, and in fighting for the
authority of that H. Father of the Church, whom though always very
considerable to Popes, some persons are not afraid to trample upon throughout
France with a most incredible and scandalous temerity. For if Pope Celestin was
circumspect with Apostolical vigilance, to keep that Prelate of H. reputation,
whom his Predecessors had always ranked among the most excellent Masters of the
Church from being exposed to the contempt of some Priests of Marseille; is it
not just to use the same remedy in an occasion which is more dangerous? And
there are found many persons either of the Priesthood, or of the religious
habit throughout France, who are with more temerity carried against S.
Augustine then the Semipelagians were heretofore; is it not fit to seek
protection for him in the same See from whence he derived his principal
authority? wherefore as we congratulate with you for having formed this design
with much prudence, and defended that H. Doctor with very learned Writings; so
we promise our selves that you will not only execute the things which have been
recommended to you from us, but also in your management observe the same order
which we have judged necessary to prescribe to you. We should have no ground to
give you this advertisement again, considering the constant fidelity wherewith
you acquit your self of your duty, were it not that they who defend Molina's
cause, boast publicly here, that they will so order it, that there shall be
neither conference of Doctors on either side before such as are appointed
Consultors, nor any communication of Writings. And though the Authors of this
public humor are not known, yet it is spread so throughout Paris, and other
Cities of France, that we should seem wholly to abandon the cause of Religion,
if we did not exhort you to act in this cause (as we doubt not but you do) with
a zeal proportionate to your great prudence. As Soon as we received intelligence
of the Memorial which you presented to our H. Father, we observed at the same
instant your constant and steadfast resolution, not to deviate in the least from
the Commission which has been given you, but to execute punctually what we
have committed to your fidelity and industry. And when our H. Father granted
you the effect of your demand and ours, he made us conceive a sure hope that he
purposed to terminate this difference by such a way as was fitting to advance
the Glory of God, the tranquillity of the Church, and the Quiet of the
Faithful. For what can happen on one side or other more desirable to those who
are divided by diversity of opinions, and have recourse to the H. Apostolical
See, then that the Truth be displayed by a peaceable and friendly disputation,
that the wild and confused reports, and humane Artifices wholly cease for the
future, and that all things be examined by the light of Truth, and in the midst
of that splendour which invirons the authority of the H. See? But what can be
imagined more advantageous to persuade those who not being engaged on any side,
and holding themselves distant from all sorts of prejudices and prepossessions
of mind, make profession of embracing that opinion which the supreme Vicar of
Jesus Christ shall declare to be Catholic, after the pronouncing of a solemn
judgment upon the matter? Is there any who would stop that Sanctuary against
afflicted innocence, and not permit Catholic Bishops, Priests and Monasticks
unworthily out-rag'd by a thousand several calumnies, to defend their faith
before their proper Accusers, to pronounce the most horrible Anathama's against
the false Doctrines wherewith they are charged, and to discover the deceits of
their Adversaries and Contradictors* But it will be said perhaps, that the H.
Apostolical See will of its own accord take care enough to bring Truth to
light, unmaskt of all its own covetings and obscurities. Who cannot entertain
this hope? certainly we know the Sea of Rome has hitherto used this vigilance;
and we promise our selves that it will use no less for the future. Our H.
Father Pope Innocent X. has hitherto sufficiently manifested that vain Reports
are of no moment with him, but that on the contrary he will weigh all things
with a judicious maturity. But as we have always conceived that amicable
conference of both parties viva voce, and by writing, was the certainest means
to discover Truth, and most agreeable to the practice of the Church; so the
more we advance in the progress of this affair, the more we are confirmed in
this opinion. For since on the one hand the advantage of such Disputation is
indubitable and evident, and on the other there is no danger to be feared from
it, nor any thing to dissuade it; it is manifest that such a means ought
chiefly to be made use of, the success whereof is likely to contribute most to
the honor of the H. See, the Edification of the Church, the confirmation of
the public Peace. For though the pre-eminence of the H. See of Rome be
sufficiently great of it self, not to have absolute need of such kind of
Consultation, even when it is to pass its judgment about Doctrines of greatest
importance; nevertheless we hope that the H. Father will have great regard to
the present circumstances, and in this case consider less the exact rigor of
his Right then the utility of the whole Church, and the design of calming these
storms and tempests in all ages to come. All things are lawful for me, said S.
Paul, but all things are not expedient. So in the time that Clement VIII. of
most H. memory established the Congregation de auxiliis, he did not think he any
wise weakened his authority (which he kept up very vigorously where he lived)
when he suffered not only the Dominicans and Jesuits to be publicly heard
disputing, but even the sentence which was passed by the Consultors to be
reviewed and examined anew, for fear the Partisans of Molina should complain of
the least wrong done them, and of being condemned without hearing, as they gave
out without ground or pretext. That B. Pope understood that the principal
authority annexed to the Sea of Rome, is nowise wounded by the reciprocal
Conferences of Divines, as that of Ecumenical Councils suffers no diminution,
and the respiration of the H. Spirit which is always persent to them, remains
nevertheless constant and undubitable when the Doctors are caused to dispute
publicly before the Canons are drawn. Now whereas all the Prelates of the
Gallicane Church have no other desire nor aim then this, that no person may
have any doubt for the future, and that after these so important matters are
judged, they may no longer be the subjects of contestation and dispute, (having
had no other notice in recurring to the H. See by their letters, but the zeal
of procuring peace) we doubt not but this means which is most visible, carries
with it the public tranquillity, will be well pleasing to the whole world. But
if some of those who are now at Rome, so give up themselves to be led by their
own passion as to employ all their endeavors to obtain a Censure (in any sort)
of these Propositions which have been fraudulently invented; if they decline
all examen conducible to the discrimination of what is precious from what is
vile and despicable, of truth from error, and of faith from perfidiousnesse;
all their humane artifices tend only to hinder the communication of writings in
order to a serious discussion; if only the name of a public Dispute makes them
so to tremble that they use all sorts of means to secure themselves from it;
Does not this Tergiversation manifest to the world how little sincerity and
integrity there is in their pretended design of seeking the clearing of Truth?
and may it not be concluded that they have just reason to distrust the goodness
of their cause, since they are afraid to maintain it in the presence of their
Adversaries? May it not be conceived that they are seized with a secret fear of
letting all the world see in the open daylight of a Congregation, how remote
they are from S. Augustin's doctrine, since they fear being obliged to dispute
with those who know all the windings and fallacies of the new Authors, not only
by domestic study, and private intelligence, but also by a long experience of
many years, being ready to discover and refute the same upon the place? In the
mean t^me it is of this very thing that the Jesuits and their Partisans boast
and glory at Paris; and all their business is to declare openly that they will
bring it to pass that there shall be neither public disputation nor
communication of writings at Rome. The truth is, we should hold their
discourses worthy of nothing but slighting, if we had not to do with men who
use all imaginable endeavors and stir all sorts of engines to bring about
their designs. But for that reason we being at Paris, have writ this Letter to
quicken your courage and fidelity; and we should have caused the same to be
signed by many Prelates of the Gallican Church, had the case admitted longer
delay, and allowed us to advertise the LL. our Confreres who are dispersed into
several Provinces of this Kingdom. Continue therefore to act as you do, tread
in the same way which we have prescribed you, and keep such a course as is
advantageous for the stifling of all deceits, and for the procuring of peace.
Demand with urgent suite a Congregation in which things may be examined and
treated viva voce and by vvriting in a mutual conference, not in private and
secretly. Thus minding you of the orders which you have received from us, we
pray that you may be clothed from Heaven above with the strength of God
himself, whilst you defend the Cause of his Spouse.

Paris, Nov. 28. 1652. Signed M. and N.

The answer made by us to this Letter is here subjoined:

My Lords,
THe Letter which we lately received from you has much comforted us, in that
it informed us of your approbation of the first Informations which we presented
to begin the Instruction of the weighty cause which you have committed to us;
as also of the course which we have observed hitherto therein. We always
remembered, My Lords, that the principal and most express design for which you
writ your first Letters to his Holiness touching the Five Propositions in
question, was, to obtain of his Holiness, that before passing of judgment
upon them, it would please him to establish a solemn Congregation, in which all
the interessed parties might be heard in presence one of the other, viva voce
and by writing, together with mutual communication of all their writings; to
the end that the H. See having taken exact cognizance of all that either side
pretended and had to say, it might pronounce an authentic judgment, by means
whereof all the differences in the Church touching these matters might be
regulated, truth and falsehood perfectly distinguished, and a firm and solid
peace as to these important points established amongst all Catholics. The
advantage and needfulness of this your design, My Lords, we ceased not to
represent to his Holiness, their Eminences, and all persons of Literature, to
whom we could fairly address for that purpose since our arrival in this City
till the eleventh of July last, when we were sent for by the late Cardinal
Roma, to understand from his mouth by order of his Holiness that he had
established the Congregation which we had so importunately demanded. After
which, my Lords, we spent some days in rendering our first respects, and the
testimonies of our acknowledgements to those Cardinals designed by the Pope for
this Congregation, conceiving there would be more leisure than we desired for
all necessary preparations, because it would be ready to take the cause in
hand, as well by reason of the ordinary heats of the season wherein it was
established, as before we considered that it required time to advertise and get
ready all the interessed parties, the Consultors who were to be of it, not
being yet nominated. All which considered we might have remained so for some
time, and not so soon have used the power which you committed to us in
beginning to give his Holiness and the Congregation a general Idea of the
state of the affair, in expectation till all the other persons who were to
come, whether from you or elsewhere, were assembled in this City, and then to
enter further into the matter. But we were strangely surprised when MM.
Hallier, Lagaut and Joysel, (who had hitherto endeavored to hinder the
establishment of the Congregation by demanding always only and purely an
absolute condemnation of the Propositions, as of things already condemned and
needing no examination) hastened ten or twelve days after to carry writings to
the Cardinals, as their Instructions to their Eminences, out of a design, as we
then suspected, and afterward found, to be quit of it so, and reduce all our
contestation to an information which cost them but a few hours in private, and
without any witness of what they alleged, whether touching matter of doctrine,
or the actions, opinions and designs which they might impute to their
adversaries. We took notice also of a rumor spread abroad almost at the same
time, namely, that this Congregation was very contrary to our intentions and
designs; that we had not demanded it but only for form, and out of a conceit
that it would not be granted, that we sought only how to get away after it was
established: which discourses we suspected that our Adversaries published, to
engage to take the same course which themselves intended to hold, and to
deliver tumultuary writings upon which the affair might be judged without
hearing us otherwise. This was it, my Lords, which obliged us to set upon the
cause, according to the power which you had given us in case of need, and which
caused us to hasten with extraordinary diligence the two Informations which you
have seen, one of the principal transactions since the first of July, 1649.
till that time, and the other of S. Augustin's authority, thereby to delineate
the first platform, and lay the foundations of what was to be done in this
affair, in attendance of the arrival o^ such as might come hither; and we found
our selves engaged to do it, as if we had been the sole parties. For
considering our Adversaries humor, and the temper of those who upheld them, if
we had given the least intimation of other persons being expected besides us,
for terminating this affair with all the world, they would have triumphed after
a strange sort; and published as a most certain thing that we sought nothing but
evasions and protraction. Thus, my Lords, it was requisite to yield to the
disposition of the time and persons, and we were further obliged to redouble
our diligences by the occasion mentioned in our Memorial of the tenth of
November. But, in brief, though we were ready by S. Augustin's day, and went
the same day to present our Writings to Cardinal Roma, yet the sickness which
surpised him the day before, and his death which happened afterward, caused us
to defer presenting them till the time specified in the same Memorial. We
conceived, my Lords, that they ought to have been forthwith communicated to our
Adversaries, and desired it of their Eminences when we presented the same to
them, as a thing of no difficulty. We had done it of our own heads, if
consulting a Friend to commend us to some Officer of justice who might do it,
he had not hindered us by telling us that perhaps their Eminences would not be
well pleased with that haste, it not being the custom of the Place to do it
without their order. At length, my Lords, after a fortnight and more was past,
and we saw that there was no speech of communicating them, we renewed our
request to their Eminences, and left a short Memorial with them to put them in
mind of it. The same solicitation to the Cardinals we continued near the whole
month of October; and though to us it seemed a very easy and ordinary thing,
yet one of them having told us that perhaps it would be needful to speak to
the Pope about it before it were resolved upon, we conceived that at the
presentation of your said writings to the Pope (whereunto we were obliged) it
would be expedient to present a Memorial likewise to him for this
communication, and for the two other things contained therein touching the
Jesuits and M. Albizzi. We began the tenth of November to endeavor audience
of the Pope for this purpose, and when ever his Holiness has given any since
that day, we have not failed to attempt an admittance. But the multitude of
affairs wherewith his Holiness is encumbered day and night, not having permitted
to give much during this time, we were constrained to attend his Holiness a
week ago also in his Presence Chamber as he returned from taking the air. His
Holiness taking notice of us, stood still, to know what we would say to him.
We presented to him our Writings and the abovementioned Memorial with another
touching a new Book which F. Annat has caused to be printed at Paris, contrary
to the express intentions of his Holiness. We had not time to speak much to
him concerning what we presented, but beseecht him to have our writings only
by him, and to read those Memorials. He told us with much goodness and
courtesy that himself would consider upon it all, and do what should be
expedient.

You see, my Lords, how far we have been able to prooceed in this affair. This
week we are preparing to renew to their Eminences the memory of that request
for the communication of our writings. We understand that his Holiness has
substituted Cardinal Pamphilio instead of the late Cardinal Roma, which is a
new testimony of the care which his Holiness continues to take touching this
affair. In the mean time, since October to the present, their Eminences have
often assembled, and summoned together many Divines of diverse Religious Orders,
and different Sentiments, even Jesuits too, to hear them, and it is affirmed
to us, that these Congregations are appointed for the examination of our
business. We have also understood that MM. Hallier, Lagaut and Joysel, have
frequently visited those Divines, and carried to them sundry writings touching
the Propositions, and made many private Informations, as if the Decision
demanded by us ought to be made in that form, and without other solemnity. This
is what they desire, because they see well that they are not able to maintain
in public against us what they allege, nor answer to what we have to allege
against them. We have neither visited, nor intend to visit any of those
Divines under the notion of Consultors and Judges, nor have we given them any
information upon the Propositions, either by speech or writing; but since we
have been told what their manner of proceeding is, we never cared to know who
they were, because we perceived that neither your Orders, my Lords, nor the
quality of our affair could consist with such actings; and we have always had
too great confidence in the equity and prudence of his Holiness and their
Eminences to fear that they will conclude this affair without hearing us, as
the weightinesse and condition of the cause deserve, and according to the
requests which we have made, and so often reiterated to them for it. You have
further represented to us in your Letter with so powerful reasons the
importance of acting thus, and so expressly enjoined us to follow the same
course still, which you may be secure we will observe most exactly. All the
Congregations which their Eminences have made, and the delay of the
communication of our writings, make us not impatient, nor ought they to make
you so, my Lords, because we doubt not, but it is done to the end their
Eminences and the Divines may better understand the state of the affair, and
the controversy before calling the parties to a public hearing. We are
informed that it is a thing usual enough here in all judgments to view the
writings before appointing the communication of them; and the quality of this
affair which concerns the foundation of faith and Christian Piety, deserves
more attention and maturity then others less important to the H. See. Upon this
account it is that we slight the reports which our Adversaries disperse here
and at Paris; namely, That they shall speedily have such a censure as they
desire. It Is an artifice they make use of to frighten and amuse S. Augustines
disciples in France, and to decry them by the expectation which they raise in
all the world of an approaching condemnation, which cannot happen but against
those who visibly oppose the authority and doctrine of that incomparable
Doctor. Nevertheless whatever hope we have that no judgment will be passed
without the communication which we demand, yet not to omit any thing of our
duty to Truth, the H. See, and your Orders, we are preparing a new Memorial
wherein to represent with the strongest reasons the justice and importance of
such communication. And because we otherwse find that if our Adversaries once
see things in such a posture that they shall be obliged to appear, they will
endeavor to shift it off, and urge among others two most false suppositions
which they have broacht; namely, first, that the present difficulties are not
the same with those which were under Clement VIII and Paul V. And in the second
place, that touching those Matters silence is imposed for ever: we have
likewise another Memorial ready to present to his Holiness, whereby we clearly
show the Falsehood of either allegation. We shall probably present these two
Memorials before the next month be past, sooner or later according as we shall
see it expedient. In fine, my Lords, we have not remained idle the rest of the
time which we have had free; we have still been preparing some writings
beforehand as well upon the subject of the Propositions as upon other things
whereof we are to inform the Congregation in the progress of the affair, that
so both may be produced the most speedily we can, when time for it shall come,
and by the extreme diligence which we shall use in all occasions, we may quash
the conceit which our Adversaries endeavor to beget in the world that we seek
protraction, designing by this means to derive upon us the odium of the lasting
of these contests, which we desire with all our hearts to see terminated, and
which they themselves first raised, and still keep afoot. It Is true, my Lords,
the weight which lies upon us is very great, especially hitherto, inasmuch as
not appearing yet in the Congregation, we cannot wholly rid our selves from
fear of the surprises wherewith we are threatened by the rumors which are
spread abroad, that they will hinder it from ever coming to pass; and that it
cannot be but these fears must greatly perplex us by the sollicitudes which
they create in us, and by the diligences to which they oblige us in order to
understand their designs and projects, as much as we can in the darkness
wherewith the affair is still covered. We shall have great need of the
assistance of those whom you have designed hither, that so we may be able to
discharge all that we shall see expedient to do, as well in the present
disposition of things, as in those whereunto we hope to bring them. But
however, neither the multitude of the adversaries we have, nor the abundance of
things we are to do, astonish us; we shall go into the field which is open to
us with all possible diligence, circumspection and industry; and we hope that
God on the one side, and his Holiness and their Eminences on the other, will
supply what shall be wanting on ours: as for the desire of getting out of
affairs, we believe there is not more either in our Judges or our adversaries,
then we know there is in you, my Lords, and in our selves, unless perhaps there
be this difference between our adversaries and us, that their desire of
hastening things, and their importunities for that purpose, are effects of their
design of obscuring and embroiling them, and our desire of hastening the same
also, how great soever, and though, as we conceive, it surpass theirs, is
nevertheless accompanied with a constant resolution not to hasten more then the
perfect clearing and solid establishment of them will permit; with this mind we
shall act in all that we shall do, write and speak in this affair. We beseech
you, my Lords, to be assured of it, and rendering you again the most humble
thanks which we owe you for the approbation wherewith you have received what we
have done till the time of your Letter, and for all the other care which you
take to encourage us by your advertisements, we beseech you also once more to
believe that we will not depart from the same in any thing, and that in this,
as in all other things, we shall always be mindful of the respect which we owe
to your Sacred Character, and of the high Obligations which we have to be,

My Lords, Your most humble and most obedient Servants, De la Lane Abbot of
Valcroissant. De S. Amor, Angran.

Rome, December. 30. 1652.
The Memorial spoken of in this Letter which we say we had ready to present to
the Pope against the two most notorious Falsehoods which our Adversaries
endeavored to make pass with his Holiness for most current Truths, namely,
that in our contests there was no relation to the matter which was treated of
under Clement VIII. and Paul V. and that perpetual silence was imposed upon
this matter, was not presented to the Pope as we supposed it would when we writ
this Letter, because there arrived no necessity and occasion for it afterward,
as shall be seen in the Sequel. Nevertheless we sent the same a while after to
the Bishops; and this is the reason that it is sometimes spoken of in the
Letters written to me from Paris after it was received there, which I shall
insert in their proper time to denote the Sequel of other things mentioned in
those Letters. But being this Memorial, though prepared, was neither signed by
any of us, nor presented to the Pope; and for that the substance of the
principal things mentioned therein is contained in diverse places of this
Journal, amongst others in a visit which we made to Cardinal Cechini, October. 5.
1652. and in the writings of the Dominicans, I shall wholly omit it for
brevities sake, and proceed to what remains.

THE SIXTH PART.
Containing what passed during the first six Months of the Year 1653.

CHAP. I.
New Solicitations in the beginning of the Year 1653. for the communication of
our Writings; Discourses touching that matter with several Persons,
particularly with Cardinal Spada and the Ambassador.

AS Soon as the Festivals of Christmas were past, we renewed our solicitations
to the Cardinals appointed for our Congregation, to obtain of their Eminences
that our Writings might be communicated to our Adversaries; which we found our
selves obliged to do, partly because it was likely the Pope had referred to
them the two Memorials which we had presented to his Holiness December 21. for
that purpose, and partly by reason of the Answer which we had lately made to
the Bishops who sent us, which was a new obligation to us to redouble our
diligences in an affair so just and necessary.

The same day that we returned that Answer, we went to visit Cardinal Ghiggi:
The Abbot of Valcroissant acquainted him how we became obliged to present those
two Memorials to the Pope; he related to him what they contained, particularly
the first; and as mention was made of Cardinal Roma, this Cardinal told us that
the Pope had substituted Cardinal Pamphilio, for which, as we continued
speaking of our Memorials, we signified him our satisfaction only by gestures.
When M. de Valcroissant had done speaking, he offered to give a Copy of those
Memorials to his Eminence. The Cardinal answered, that it was better that he
received them not, that so if his Holiness should happen to speak to him of
them, he might find him wholly free from Prepossession in the business, not
having yet seen nor received them; he told us nevertheless, that it might be
the Pope would not speak to him of them, but debate concerning them perhaps
with other Cardinals then these appointed for our Congregation, perhaps with
those, perhaps all alone; that perhaps he had already done reason therein by
writing upon them what he thought good, that he counseled us before we
proceeded further, to repair to his Holiness's Mastre de chamber, to know
whether the Pope had not delivered them to him with this resolution written at
the bottom: Thus Cardinal Ghiggi excused himself from taking them, and by what
he said to us we saw no likelihood that the Pope had yet spoken any thing to
him concerning them.

The next day we went to Cardinal Pamphilio's house, where we found M. Hallier
and his Colleagues, who departed before the end of the audiences. We were
admitted to audience, but so late; that we could do no more but make a
complement to him touching what we learnt the day before of his being of our
Congregation in our visit to Cardinal Ghiggi.

In the afternoon we went to inquire of the Pope's Maistre de Chamber whether
his Holiness had delivered our Memorials to him. He answered us that the Pope
did not remit affairs of such importance to him. From thence we went to the
Ambassador's house to accompany him to Chapel to the Vespers of the
Circumcision. After they were ended, I waited upon him home. He told me upon
the way that there was newly sent to him from the Court a famous Book of F. Du
Boss a Cordelier concerning the death of Jesus Christ for all, I answered him
that I believed I had one ( viz. the Apology of the H. Fathers) wherein that
was marvellously well refuted. Being arrived at his house, I spoke with F.
Pique, Secretary of the Embassy, who told me that M. Hallier and his Colleagues
expected the condemnation of the Propositions as soon as the Congregations held
at Cardinal Spada's house were ended; and that they were very well pleased with
the manner in which things were transacted. I answered M. Pique that those
Gentlemen had all reason to be satisfied therewith, since they were on one side
delivered from the pains of justifying their calumnies, and defending
themselves from our accusations; and on the other all corresponded so well to
the unhappy designs of their pernicious enterprise. That nevertheless I
believed Justice would be done upon all the so reasonable demands which we had
made; and that I did not think it imported the King's service, and the quiet of
the State, to pass judgment suddenly in this affair without examining it, and
to precipitate a Decision without considering whether it were proper to clear
and establish the Truth, to secure Innocence from Oppression, and to calm and
reconcile men's minds.

The first day of the year 1653. we went in the afternoon to visit Cardinal
Spada. After the Abbot of Valcroissant had given him account of the contents of
our two Memorials, he answered us that it was not the custom at Rome to handle
things in that way of disputation; that it was practiced neither in the
Congregation of the H. Office, nor in that del' Indice which was established
since the Council of Trent; that indeed Books were looked into, but the Authors
were not heard to argue; that there would be no end if that course were
followed; that it was not practiced under Pius V. Gregory XIII. Urban VIII. nor
under this very Pope in the affair de' due Capi, of the two Heads, (he meant in
the examination made at Rome of the Book concerning the authority of S. Peter
and S. Paul.) As for the Jesuits he assured us in the Faith of a Priest
(laying his hand upon his breast) that since this affair was begun, not any
Jesuit had spoken to him, excepting what F. Palavicini, one of the Consultors,
had spoken publicly in the Congregation. As for M. Albizzi, that the part he
had in this business was very small; that all he did therein, was, that when
the Consultors had spoken in those Congregations half an hour, or three
quarters at most, according as they pleased in full liberty, he writ down their
conclusion. As for the Consultors, that it was but a work of supererogation
which was required to be practiced in this case, that it was not the order to
say to persons, Go visit this or the other; that they were known well enough,
that they came to the Congregations, that either side was left at liberty to go
and inform them; Come (added he) Sappiamo been che si fa dall' una and dall'
altra part, as we well know both parties do. The Abbot of Valcroissant
answered that the Propositions in question were none of those which were
condemned by the Bull of Pius V. which probably was not published but by Gregory
XIII. That it was no wonder if the Parties were not heard in that case, the
said Bull having been closely drawn up without any persons having been
advertised of it, so that it was not possible for any to present themselves and
demand a hearing touching that matter. That although things were thus
transacted under those two Popes, yet under two others, their Successors,
namely Clement VIII. and Paul V. an other procedure was observed, mutual
audience and communication of writings allowed to the Dominicans and the
Jesuits in their contests about Molina's Book. As for Urban VIII. that there
was likewise no opportunity of hearing parties in reference to his Bull, which
came forth unexpectedly too, and was but a renovation of that of Pius V. and a
Declaration that there were in Jansenius Propositions condemned by that of Pius
V. In which no doctrinal judgment was made as was intended to be in this case;
for which consideration it was very expedient that the parties might be heard
disputing together. That the Council of Trent accounted the same so important,
that it made many summons to those upon whose Opinions it was to pronounce, to
appear there to defend the same, and represent the grounds of them; that it
sent safe conducts to them, to the end they might repair thither in all
liberty; and that they not coming, at length it caused their Sentiments to be
disputed and maintained by Divines who so well took their part, and propounded
their reason with so great vigor, that an Historian of that time records, that
themselves seemed of that persuasion. Cardinal Spada answered hereunto that
they had in a manner observed the same course in the Congregations held at his
house. That Divines of diverse Orders and different Opinions, Dominicans,
Jesuits, etc. had been caused to come thither. That besides, so much had been
written and printed on either side touching this matter, that it was not
possible to be ignorant of any thing that could be said therein. That the very
writings which we had composed were to pass through so many different hands,
both of Consultors and Copists, that they could not but reciprocally come into
the hands of either party; and that this gave power enough to each side
sufficiently to answer thereunto. The Abbot of Valcroissant replied that
although very much had been written upon this matter, yet it might be said that
the Propositions had not yet been written upon as was requisite; that they had
been least of all meddled with; that besides, this matter was so vast, so
entangled, so subject to ambiguities and equivocations, that it was more
needful to discuss the same in the presence of the parties than any other
whatsoever. That for want of so doing great broils and occasions of division
and scandal might arise, as it was easy to foresee by the professions of
Pelagius and Caelestius which were received as Catholic whilst they were not
opposed by Adversaries who understood and discovered the doubleness of their
hearts and words. I know not how Cardinal Spada construed those acts of
Pelagius and Caelestius; but he told us that our Adversaries had more reason to
complain of those equivocations than we; but however, that it was one thing to
say that it would be expedient to hear the parties in that manner, if the Pope
pleased, and another to speak of it as a thing necessary; and he added one word
more, to give us to understand that it was unprofitable harping upon the same
string, to speak of it so much as we did. Nevertheless I forebore not to speak
two things to the Cardinal which we had hitherto let pass without answering.
One was touching his repeating this day a question which he had made to us in a
former conference, namely, How we would have done if no Doctors had come of the
contrary party? Whereunto I answered, 1. That they were come, and we acted with
them as being there. 2. That turning over my Papers some days before, I
observed that in a visit which I made to his Eminence Aug. 1. 1651. after I
had spoken to him of the hope I had of the establishment of the Congregation,
and the purpose of the Bishops who sent me, to send other Doctors the Autumn
following, he asked me whether there would also come Doctors of the contrary
party; and that I answered him that it was not necessary for any to come, to
the end we might have Adversaries, because they were already upon the place,
namely the Jesuits. 3. That the affair deserved the designing of a time in
which the Congregation should begin, and in the mean while that notice of it
were given in all parts by the Nuntio's which his Holiness had resident with
Christian Princes, to the end such learned men, as found themselves interessed
therein, and were minded to engage in it, might repair to Rome by that time,
and there represent their reasons and their interests.

The second thing was in reference to the Cardinal's saying, That they knew
well that we resorted to inform the Consultors on either side; and I told him
that we had not visited any of them in that quality. That that which occasioned
my visiting them incontinently after my return to Rome, was this; being come to
advertise the H. See of the shameful and dangerous surprise intended to be put
upon it, I conceived that after advertising his Holiness and their Eminences of
it, it was fitting that I advertised all persons whom I could understand were
usually employed at Rome in affairs of Doctrine, by that means to obstruct such
surprise as much as I could, and make others as diffident as possible, who
might be tempted for the future by the same people whom I knew to be the
Authors of this. That in my Visits to them, having met with diverse able
persons, and commended them to my Colleagues, they became desirous of knowing
them, and thus we afterward visited them sometimes, and were reciprocally
visited by some of them who repaid our visites; but we never visited them in
the quality of Consultors of our Congregation, nor to give them any
Information. That we had not yet made any upon the Propositions, nor produced
others besides the two writings and their Summary which we had presented to him
and to the Cardinals Ginetti, Cechini and Ghiggi in the month of September, and
to the Pope about ten or twelve days before. During the course of this
audience Cardinal Spada's Maistre de chamber came to advertise him aloud (in
all likelihood on purpose to hasten us away) that several persons attended for
him; nevertheless we took no notice of it, but continued what we had to say;
and at length, as we parted we told the Cardinal that as to the manner of our
demanding the communication of Writings and public audience in presence of our
Adversaries, we conceived that we did it with all due decorum and respect to
the H. See.

The same day we visited Cardinal Ginetti, and gave him account of the contents
of our Memorials, for which he thanked us.

Thursday January 2. we visited Cardinal Barberin before he went to Monte
Cavallo. He fell to speak concerning books, upon which occasion I mentioned
that which F. Annat had printed at Paris, the Cardinal excused it, as if it had
been no great matter to have caused it to be printed at Paris, Stampato in
Parigi, notwithstanding the orders which the Pope had given that it should be
suppressed at Rome. We also said something to his Eminence concerning the two
Memorials which we had presented to the Pope, as well against that Book, as for
the communication of our Writings. But the hour of going to Monte Cavallo being
come, our conference was broken off.

In the afternoon we went to see Cardinal Cechini. We acquainted him with our
two Memorials, but had scarce told him the sum of the first, but he
interrupted us with some compassion, telling us that we did not come any thing
near the matter which was to be considered. That he had read all the writings
which we had given him from one end to the other; but they did not touch the
point in question: Nolunt (said he) considerare quid actum est, vogliono
cercare la verita abstrahendo, etc. They will not consider what has been acted
in reference to the Propositions, but seek the truth nakedly and by
abstraction, determine them according to the terms whereof they consist, and I
would to God (added he) I might tell you with what care, intention, and
sincerity the work is carried on. I answered the Cardinal that the affair was
of greater importance then their Eminences apprehended. That the Propositions
which they examined were only the occasion, but not the principal motive of our
coming to Rome. That we were come thither only upon the consideration of
Effectual Grace by it self necessary to all Christian actions, which was one of
the principal Mysteries of our Faith, which the Authors of the Propositions
endeavored to overthrow, by the bad senses whereof they had maliciously
contrived them capable, and with which the same Propositions taken and reduced
as we understood them, and as they who framed them covertly opposed them, had
an indissoluble concatenation. That consequently for the right judging of those
Propositions it was necessary rightly to know and establish the ground of that
Mystery. That therefore when we understood that there was some tendency at Rome
to pass judgment upon the Propositions, we came to beseech the Pope, that
before doing of that, this Capital point on which they depended might be
examined and decided. For it being once known and rightly settled, it would be
easy afterward to pass an equitable and certain judgment upon the
Propositions. That till that were first done, nothing could be determined with
a legitimate and sufficient cognizance of the cause. Upon which ground (I
further told him) we had been obliged to draw a Memorial against the false and
ridiculous pretension of those who said that there was nothing to do in this
case with the matter De Auxiliis, because indeed the first Enthymeme which we
intended to make for proof of the five Propositions, in the sense wherein we
understood them, was this; Grace necessary to every Christian action is
effectual by it self; Therefore the five Propositions are true, reduced to the
sense which we defended. That if those who impugn'd them, granted me the
Antecedent, and denied the consequence, I would convince them thereof in one
afternoon; if they denied the antecedent, I must prove it, and so we shall fall
directly upon the matter of De Auxiliis. The Cardinal seem touched with the
force wherewith we deduced all this to him; and he answered us, that for his
part, he should readily consent to the treating of the affair as we demanded;
but he was not the Master of it, and on the contrary was obliged to conform to
the manner wherewith it had been hitherto carried and examined. We told him
that the Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. treated it after another fashion
whilst these matters were agitated between the Dominicans and the Jesuits; and
that those Popes were so diligent therein that after much private study they
were personally present in fourscore and seven Congregations, besides those
which were held at first by the Consultors. That we hoped also that the present
Congregations were but preliminary to such as should be held afterward in the
form wherein we demanded, whereunto we beseecht him to contribute what he
could: Which his Eminence heartily promised us.

After this visit we made one of civility to M. Noiset, who acquainted us with
the surprising news of the imprisonment of Cardinal de Retz happened at Paris
December. 19. The Courier extraordinary who brought the intelligence to the
Ambassador arrived the day preceding, and the Ambassador acquainted the Pope
with it that morning after the Assembly of the H. Office; it was soon after
dispersed all over Rome, but we were ignorant of it till the evening.

Friday, January 3. we visited Cardinal Altieri and gave him one of our little
Volumes of S. Augustine. He re-delivered to us our first Information De Gestis,
and gave us to understand by what he said touching our affair, that he
comprehended exceeding well, both the extent, dependences, consequences and
importance of it. He told us it was an affair worthy of a Council, but things
not being in a condition for one, it was requisite in the mean time to use all
possible care in it at Rome. That the decision ought not to be hastened, but a
right course taken with all necessary precautions, as hearing the Parties, and
all things whose observation we required. That yet he did not disapprove what
had been done hitherto, because it was good that they rendered themselves in
private capable of understanding the nature of the business before venturing to
hear and judge others.

Saturday, January 4. the evening we were invited to dine the next day with
Cardinal Barberin, who acordingly treated us with much magnificence and
courtesy. We had little time for discourse in the afternoon, by reason of the
Vespers of the Three Kings, to which we accompanied his Eminence.

Sunday the 12th. of this month I visited a very intelligent Divine of the H.
Office, with whom I was familiarly acquainted, partly to blame him for refusing
to be a Consultor of our Congregation when it depended only of himself; and
because his absence had occasioned the introducing of F. Tartaglia in his
stead, who as much favored the interests and pretensions of the Jesuits as he
might have obstructed them. He answered me smiling, that he had already been
blamed for it by one of the Consultors his Friend, but upon another reason,
namely, because he had lost the occasion of making molte buone risate per le
pazie, i. e. of laughing in many cases at the fooleries and impertinences which
had been uttered in those Congregations by some of the Consultors who were
contrary to S. Augustine, and understood not the first Principles, nor the most
ordinary terms of the things which were there handled. He told one serious
thing, namely, that a friend of M. Albizzi informed him, that being lately upon
occasion with him, he had heard him say, That some words which he remembered
Pope Urban said to him at the time of making the Bull against Jansenius, much
troubled his mind, gli davana gran fastidio; the words were, Vedete,
Monsignore, non est nostrae intentionis sugillare aliquem inaudita part, i. e.
Take heed, Sir, it is not our intention to condemn any one without having heard
him. I wondered at this Discourse, and asked him that made it, how these
Compunctions could seize upon M. Albizzi. He answered me, that perhaps he had
been touched with something which he had heard spoken in those congregations;
that nevertheless he knew not how, but he was certain of the thing, and he
enjoined me not to make him the Author of it, and several times repeated the
abovementioned words.

Amongst my Papers I have found one authentic Piece which confirms this truth,
viz: an Act passed before a Notary, February 22. 1647. by M. Sinnigh Doctor of
Lovain shortly after his return from Rome to Lovain, by which he testifies upon
Oath that in the audience which he had of Pope Urban VIII. in presence of M.
Papius and M. Vercanteren, November 26. 1643. the Pope said three things to
them. 1. That by the Bull which he had published touching the Book of M.
Iansenius Bishop of Ipre, and other Works composed about the same matter on
either side, he had no other intention but to confirm the Bull of Pius V. which
was already confirmed by Gregory XIII. 2. That he had expressly appointed that
none should be noted particularly in the said Bull by the expression of his
name. 3. That it was not his intention to do any prejudice by this Bull to S.
Augustine 's doctrine, and that those were to be checked who durst say the
contrary. And that he (M. Sinnigh) having replied, That then it was strange
that the name of Iansenius was inserted in the Bull contrary to his Holinesse's
precaution; The Pope answered him, That as for that, they must speak to M.
Albizzi who was the compiler of the Bull; He attests also in the same Act that
on April 28. 1644. having had audience of three Cardinals, Spada, Pamphilio and
Falconeri, in presence of M Albizzi, and the Abbot of S. Croix in Jerusalem
named Hilarion, he said among other things, That that he was ready to show, 1.
That all the points concerning Grace and Free Will contested between Iansenius
and his Adversaries, were the same with those which were in dispute between S.
Augustine and his Adversaries. 2. That all the Arguments wherewith the Doctrine
of Jansenius is encountered by his Adversaries, are the same with those which
the Pelagians and their Partisans employed to encounter the Doctrine of S.
Augustine. 3. That all the Calumnies whereof they made use to decry Jansenius,
were employed against S. Augustine during his life, and after his death. To
which he added, That he engaged himself to burn Jansenius's book with his own
hand in the field of Flora, if he failed to prove any of these points. That he
had said near the same thing to our H. F. Innocent X. soon after his assumption
to the Pontificate, November. 5. 1644, in the first audience which he had of him.
This is the substance of the said Act, which I judged fit to be placed at
length in its own language among the pieces which I shall subjoin to this
Journal.

The first time I visited Monsignor Sacrista in the beginning of this year, he
told me that the Jesuits had dismis'd from their places the Prefects,
Professors, and other Superiors of the College wherein the Thesis above
mentioned was maintained, viz. That to believe that Innocent X. was true and
legitimate Pope, was not de fide. He told me also that the Pope was much
displeased with M. Albizzi. The Procurator General of the Augustines came to
us, and in the Sequel of this Converse, having showed them a Letter which I had
lately received out of France, in which one of our Confreres spoke
disadvantageously enough of the Propositions, by reason of the bad senses which
might cause them to be condemned; they very appositely replied, that the good
which they admitted, ought to be considered first, and they being secured and
established, then the condemnation of the bad might be thought of.

Tuesday the 14. being the Feast of S. Hilary, I went again to Monsignor
Sacrista at the Pope's Presence Chamber, where I also spoke with the Bishop of
Borgo, the Commandeur du S. Esprit, M. Campore, and others. I told the most of
those with whom I discoursed, what was in the Lessons of the Breviary of the
Life of that H. Bishop, who going to Constantinople, and finding that the Faith
was in great danger there, conceived no better and safer way to defend it, then
to demand (as he did by three Petitions or Memorials which he presented to the
Emperor) that his Adversaries might be obliged to appear before his Imperial
Majesty, and enter into a conference with him touching the matters in question;
Vbi extremum fidei periculum animadvertit, tribus libellis public datis,
audientiam Imperialem poposcit, ut de fide cum adversariis causam disputaret.
That we made the same suit to the Pope, and if the same happened to M. Hallier
and his Colleagues which did to the Arian Bishops, who were more powerful with
the Emperor in credit then in Doctrine, for fearing the abilities of S. Hilary,
they became reduced to embrace rather any other expedient then enter into
conference with him, to avoid which they were fain to persuade the Emperor to
remit him unto his Episcopal Sea with honor; Verum cum Vrsacius and Valens
Ariani Episcopi, quas Hilarious scriptis confutarat, praesentis eruditionem
pertimescerent, Constantio persuaserunt, ut specie honoris in suum Episcopatum
restitueret. Which was sufficient to the Church of France to receive St. Hilary
with open Arms, as returning victorious over the Heretics to whom he had
offered a disputation, and they durst not accept it, as S. Jerome reports. Tunc
Hilarium e praelio Haereticorum revertentem, ut inquit S. Hieronymus, Galliarum
Ecclesia complexa est. All those whom I spoke to that day in the Pope's
Presence Chamber, acknowledged that this was the very true case in which we
were before the Pope, in respect of M. Hallier, and his Colleagues, and many of
them told me that themselves had the same conceit in seeing their Breviary,
before I advertised them of it.

In the afternoon we went to visit Monsignor Bentivoglio, to inform him of our
affair in the same manner as we had informed others, Cardinals, Prelates,
Consultors and other learned men since our arrival at Reme; and we were the
more satisfied with our giving him this information, for that he acquainted us
with the high esteem which he had of the Bishop of Angers, one of those who
deputed us.

From thence we went to la Minerve to speak with the General of the Dominicans,
whom we found not there, but spoke with several of his Order; F. Mariana being
there, told us, that the Pope had deprived M. Albizzi's son of the Government
of Fort Urban, of which he had been Governor for several years. This Fort is
so called because Pope Urban VIII. caused it to be built upon the Frontiers of
Romania toward the State of Modena. The Sub-bibliothecary assured me, that he
had a while since told Cardinal Ghiggi, that it was expedient to take some
order concerning that Fort, in regard of the Popes displeasure with the said
Seigneur Albizzi, for which the Pope was minded to remove the Assessor of the
H. Office from his employment; and that it was not fit to restore a
discontented person, and leave a Fortress upon the Frontiers of the Estate in
his hands, and in the disposal of his Son. That he knew not whether this advice
of his to the Cardinal was the cause that it was so done, or whether it was
intended before he spoke of it; but he had spoke thus to Cardinal Ghiggi; and
the thing was executed soon after. F. Mariana told us also that our two
Memorials were still upon the Popes Table, and that Monsignor Sacrista who saw
them there since my parting from him, informed him so. The report of M.
Albizzi's disgrace was forthwith spread all over Rome, with a circumstance too,
whereof F. Petit came to advertise me in the evening, but of the truth of which
I always doubted, namely that it was an effect of the Memorials which we
presented to the Pope against him. But however it came to pass, it was a very
rude shock for him; because besides that he saw his eldest son whom he had by
his first wife deprived of his employment, he had several others of an age
which required providing for, by his second wife. Wherefore when he received
the news of this disgrace, he complained at first very high in the Popes
Presence Chamber; but some of his friends minding him not to show any
resentment, as well in respect of the Pope, as not to injure his Children
further, and for the consideration of his reputation, in regard of the Public,
and particularly of his Envyers, who would be the more joyful for his
sensibility, he altered his Note, and fell to say, that the Pope was Master of
his own places, which it was not expedient to leave always in the same hands;
that his Son was yet young enough, and that indeed no other reason ought to be
inquired of what was done, then the pleasure of him who did it.

Wednesday the 15. I went in the afternoon to see some book in the Library of
Car. Barberin, but finding no body there, I went to the Ambassador, whom I
accompanied in a Visit which he was going to make; being returned from which,
he took me into his Chamber to discourse about the state of our Affair. I told
him we could not recede from the demand we made in the beginning for a
Conference and reciprocal Communication of writings with our Adversaries; for
the reason whereof I alleged the importance of preserving in the Church that
custom and liberty, because it was ever judged the most facile and sure
recourse of those who defended the faith against the errors of its opposers,
which I confirmed by the example of S. Hilary; the History of whom he had read
the day preceding in his Breviary. The Ambassador was moved with it, but
attempted to find some difference between that case and ours, because S. Hilary
made that offer and demand before the Emperor who was not instructed in those
matters, and could not judge of them; and that we were before the Pope, who had
authority to judge of them, and whom we ought to presuppose instructed in those
things, were there nothing but the light and assistance which he received from
the H. Spirit. I answered the Ambassador, that the difference of these
circumstances was nothing to the substance of the example which I brought,
because it was only to let him see, that the confidence wherewith a single man
well instructed in the verity of the Faith, demanded to confer publicly with
an Army of its Opposers, sufficed to maintain it and confound them. But to take
away the foundation of this difference, I produced to him the example of the
Council of Trent, which though it had no less authority to judge nor light then
the Pope, and though the assistance of the H. Spirit was no less promised to it
then to the Pope, yet conceived a Conference between the opposite parties about
a matter to be so useful and proper for clearing it, that it always practiced
it before it passed decrees. Then I proceeded to the reasons which rendered it
more necessary, and showed that it was much more due to the suit which we made
for it both in our names, and in those of the Bishops who sent us, being of a
Degree in the Church considerable enough to oblige the Pope not to deny what
they demanded with so great instance and respect, since had they appointed it
themselves in their own Diocesses, they had Authority so to do. We discoursed
long about this point, and at last coming to speak of the Concernment which the
King took in this business, I represented to the Ambassador, that it was not
his Majesty's interest to have a huddled Decree made at Rome, which might
excite trouble in the Church and his Kingdom, and give him a pretext to
persecute his Subjects, who though rendered suspected, were most affectionate
to him; but that his true interest was to procure the passing of one, against
which there might lie no cause of blame, according to the accustomed forms of
Ecclesiastical judgments, and which might produce Peace amongst Divines by a
solid clearing of the Truth. That I conceived also that the King ought to
beware of rendering himself so easily the Minister of a Decree obtained by
surprise, of which the Obtainers might make use for the oppressing of the Truth
and its Defenders, because though the Calumnies dispersed of them at the Court,
and the false Impressions given of them to their Majesty's, had inclined them
to look upon those people as the Object of their Aversion; yet other occasions
might come to pass, in which Decrees might be made not so agreeable and
advantageous to the service and contentment of their Majesty's, as this
appeared to them; and to the execution whereof it would be pretended at Rome,
that they were no less obliged, and whereunto perhaps they would be
necessitated by extraordinary ways, of which there were but too many examples.
The Ambassador told me that most of the world held all this affair to be
nothing on our side but a Cabal: I answered, that this might indeed be said of
us, as it might have been of S. Hilary, and those twelve or fourteen Bishops
who retired half a days Journey from Rimini to a little Town which at this day
bears the name of la Catolica, the Catholic, after so great a number of other
Bishops had subscribed a Confession of Faith which destroyed the Faith of the
Church; and that if the H. See came to pass a judgment in our favor, as I
doubted not it would, if it examined things and decided them, it would be
manifested that it was no Cabal. The Ambassador replied, that there was a
suspicion of us at Court, and that it was believed, that we only sought
protractions, to the end that while the affair remained undecided, the number
of our Partisans might still increase, and our party be strengthened. Hereupon I
laid open to the Ambassador as well as I could our sincere Intentions and
particular interests, that things were handled and dispatched the most speedily
that could be: Yet I told him there was this difference between our Adversaries
and us, that they desired to hasten the Decision for the confounding of all
things by precipitating them under the pretext of the blame which they charged
upon us of seeking to retard them; but for our parts we were so desirous to
promote them in such manner, that the speed used therein might not hinder their
being examined with convenient leisure and attention. I likewise told the
Ambassador the whole contents of our two Memorials; of which there was nothing
but he judged reasonable. I spoke in general of the notorious falsehood I had
observed in the Writings M. Hallier presented to the Consultors touching
Pelagius's Confession of Faith, which he cited knowingly as a work of S.
Augustine, or at least relying upon the honesty of the Jesuits, from whom he
received and presented them, without troubling himself so much as to read them.
The Ambassador seemed moved at this passage, and spoke in such a manner as gave
me to know, that if what I said were found true, M. Hallier would fall in his
and all the worlds opinion into the contempt deserved by an action either so
malicious or so servile, and one way or other so contemptible. I know not how
in the Sequel of our converse he fell to read two chapters of F. du Bosc's
Book; But I know, that what he had read giving me occasion to speak of the
necessity of considering the place, a Proposition in the place whence it was
extracted in order to the right judging of it, I brought him this example,
Manducemus and bibamus, cras enim moriemur, Let us eat and drink, for the
morrow we shall die; And I asked him whether considering it by it self, he would
not take not for a Proposition unworthy to be produced by a Christian, and as
befitting only the Discourse of a Sardanapalus, as undermining the foundations
of Religion and Christian Piety, as destroying all hope and pretention of an
Eternal life, and favoring Libertinism and Debauchery. Nevertheless (I told
him) I had taken it out of the Books of a Writer to whose Labors and
Preaching the whole Church was mainly beholding for the light of Faith which it
had received, who excited us more then any other to renounce the interest and
pleasures of the world and our very selves; and that in a place where he
establishes one of the principal foundations of our salvation, namely, The
Resurrection of the dead: In one word, out of S. Paul to the Corinthians, Chap.
15. verse. 32. where after other proofs of this fundamental Truth of our
Religion he brings this, That if it were not certain, it were in vain that we
performed all the painful and laborious actions of Christian life, we should
only cheer up our selves, and pass our Lives in delights agreeable to our
carnal inclinations, being they would be so short, and we should have no other
afterward. Si (secundum hominem) ad Bestias pugnavi Ephesi, quid mihi prodest,
si^mortui non resurgunt? Manducemus and bibamus, cras enim moriemur. Whence
the Ambassador who saw how impious and dangerous this Proposition was, when
separated from that place, and divided from what precedes aed follows it,
acknowledging also how holy and edifying it was considered in its own place,
might easily judge of the necessity and justice of considering those under
examination, with reference to the persons to whom they were imputed.

Thursday the 16th. in the afternoon we visited the General of the Dominicans,
to acquaint him with the weighty and important reasons which retained us from
delivering secret and private Instructions upon the Propositions to the
Consultors of the Assemblies held at Cardinal Spada's house. He approved our
reasons, and desired us to communicate to him the writings which we presented
to the Pope, as accordingly we did we same day. He told us he conceived that
the thing further to be feared in this affair was, that some Provisional Remedy
would be used therein, as Imposition of Silence. Whereunto I answered, that we
were as well prepared against so unworthy an Expedient as against the rest, and
that we had a Memorial ready to present to the Pope against such imposition of
Silence, as soon as we saw the least need of presenting it.

The more our Adversaries sought to keep their Writings concealed, the more we
endeavored to communicate and make ours public. We had long ago provided a
Copy of our first Information De Gestis for the Ambassador, to the end to
inform him with the most care we could of all that we did in this affair. Which
Copy I carried to him on Friday the 17th. and desired him to ask M. Hallier for
his only for an Evening, not that I might see them, but that having received
them from his own hand, I might show him (the Ambassador) the notorious
falsehood which I had mentioned to him, and that he might not doubt of M.
Hallier's being guilty of advancing it. The Ambassador assented, and told me
that an Abbot (whom he named) lately signified to him that he heard M. Hallier
and his Colleagues say, that there was not a page in S. Augustine explicable
according to the Letter, his Writings were so obscure and perplexed. I answered
that himself might make experience of it when he pleased to read them; but if
he was minded to read something of them in a language more natural to him, I
would show him the contrary by the Translation of the Book De Correctione and
De Gratia, which I believed he would very much like.

I understood that M. Albizzi did not enter into the Assembly of the H. Office
which was held on Thursday before the Pope with the Cardinals, as he was wont,
but stayed without with the Consultors, and entered not but with them. This
made me suspect that the Pope had spoken to the Cardinals about our Memorials;
but I learnt afterward that possibly he was excluded upon an other business
which concerned him more nearly, and which I suppress; though I know the
particulars of it very exactly, that I may avoid saying things disadvantageous
to him, which are not necessary to my Subject, since I do it unwillingly when I
am obliged to it by that consideration, and would willingly omit the same, if I
did not fear to alter the truth, and frustrate those to whom I owe it.

Tuesday the 21. we went in the evening to Cardinal Ghiggi, in whose
Antichamber we found M. Hallier and his Colleagues. When M. du Noiset who was
a^ audience came forth, they entered; and we when they came forth. The Cardinal
spoke first to us, and reflecting upon the persons who newly left him, said,
Existimabant negotium finitum esse, with some other broken words which we could
not hear well, but, as I believe, signified nothing but that those Doctors were
mistaken in conceiving that the business was done. Whereupon the Cardinal told
us that it did not belong to them to know the times and seasons of it, Non est
vestrum nosse tempora vel momenta. After he had ended the Abbot of Valcroissant
told him that we came to his Eminence, to know whether the Pope had ordained
any thing touching our Memorials, and that the affairs lately supervening and
taking up the Pope and their Eminences (to wit, the imprisonment of Cardinal de
Retz) kept us from coming sooner to desire tidings of them. The Cardinal
answered us that those affairs lasted still, but he believed the Pope had read
our Memorials, because there seldom passes above eight or ten days but omnes
supplices libelli all the Memorials were read, and answers given to them. We
fell to speak of the two principal things demanded by those Memorials, namely
the reciprocal communication of our Writings, and that a public audience in
presence of either side; and to persuade the Cardinal of the justness of our
demand, M. de Valcroissant represented sundry reasons to him taken from the
nature of the affair. The Cardinal construed all those reasons contrarily to
what we hoped; for he considered them as if thereby we pretended to give Law to
the Pope in a thing whereof he was the Master. The like he judged of the
certainty wherewith we spoke of the indubitable truth of our opinions, and the
falsehood of the others whom we opposed; as if this great confidence was a
defect of submission to the Decision which might be made thereof by the H. See.
On the contrary, we gave him what verbal assurances could be given, that we had
in our hearts as true a submission as this confidence was great; and we told
him, that his Eminence could not consider those two qualities as opposite to
one another, because they were both natural and ordinary to the defenders of
truth; as on the contrary they who impugned it wanted both, or had the same but
falsely and in appearance. After which the Cardinal advised us to be short in
the Writings we intended to deliver, and to explicate our designs and
pretensions briefly, and yet more than we had done in the summary of the two
first Writings which we had presented. He also said that we should do well to
repair to Cardinal Spada between that time and eight days after, and make our
instances to him, if we desired to be heard in presence of our Adversaries,
because he believed our VVritings would be received and audience given us; but
he gave us to understand, that it would be severally, one side after the other.
He asked us also whether we had visited Cardinal Pamphilio, and testified some
desire that we would not fail to go and inform him. We answered, that as for
that particular we had done all that we could, after we understood that the
Pope had made him of the Congregation; but our affairs could be only
transiently explicated; that as often as we had been at Cardinal Pampbilio's
house we found it so full of people expecting audience of his Eminence, that we
were obliged to return without demanding any, and that we were loath to accost
him in his multitude of encumbrances with the least overture of our affair. But
we had desired his Maistre de chamber to procure some time for us in which we
might speak with him in a fitting manner; that he had given us hope of such an
opportunity, but not yet effected it, though he had seen us often in his
Antichamber whither we repaired to put him in mind of it. Indeed we had been
four times at Cardinal Pamphilio's house since the next day after Epiphany, and
could never find him in a condition fit to be informed. But in the mean time we
caused a Book of our writings, like that which we had presented to the Pope, to
be transcribed, intending to present the same to his Eminence, either when we
should speak to him about our affairs, in case the Book were ready when that
good hap should arrive, or some time after we had entertained him therewith, if
we saw his Eminence first. We acquainted Cardinal Ghiggi with all this, and he
was glad of it; having some suspicion that we neglected to visit Cardinal
Pamphilio, probably because he conceived that we did not think him much skilled
in these matters, nor much at leisure to be instructed therein. At last we
acquainted Cardinal Ghiggi with the notorious falsehood in M. Hallier's
writings, of which I had told the Ambassador. The Cardinal asked us pleasantly
whether the falsity was in those which M. Hallier had given in facto, or in
those which he had given in jure; for he told us instantly that that Doctor had
given none but in jure; and besides added he, they were indeed de communi, and
little serviceable to the Congregation.

When we went from Cardinal Ghiggi, we repaired to Signor Eugenio our Advocate,
to acquaint him with the odd estate of our negotiation, and to desire him to
visit our Cardinals in our name, and beseech them to deliver us from the
tediousness and perplexity of those importune and extraordinary solicitations.
We did not meet with him; but being returned home, we were told that a Laquay
had been there from Cardinal Spada, to tell me that his Eminence desired to
speak with me the next morning.

CHAP. II.
Cardinal Spada 's offer to us in the end of January, to hear us in the
Congregation held at his House; and our Answer, that we were ready to appear
there when justice was done us upon the conditions demanded by us. The Letter
which I writ thereupon to the Bishops who deputed us.

I Failed not to go to him the next morning; and because all that he said to me
in this visit and two others, one in the afternoon of the same day, and the
other on Thursday the 23d. before he went to the Pope, was of consequence
enough to be signified punctually to my LL. the Bishops who sent us; I shall
not relate it otherwise than by inserting the Letter, though very long, which I
writ to them thereupon on the Monday following, being the 27th. I directed the
same to the two abovementioned, who were then at Paris, and it contained these
words:

My Lords,
Within these eight days a thing has passed in our affair, of which we
conceived our selves obliged to give you notice without delay; and I am charged
to do it, because I acted most therein, and MM. de Valcroissant and Angran
being employed about other things which press us, referred this care to me.
They conceive that nothing is to be neglected amongst all the things which I
have to acquaint you with; and therefore I shall endeavor rather to represent
the same exactly to you then in few words. We hold it our duty to give you
account of the least particularities, that you may the better understand the
main, leaving it to your prudence to make relation thereof to my LL. your
Confreres, according as you shall judge expedient for their satisfaction, and
the good of the affair which you have committed unto us.

On Tuesday last returning to our Lodging in the Evening we were told that one
from Cardinal Spada had left word there that his Eminence desired to speak with
me. Which Order I failed not to obey the next morning; and being introduced
into his Chamber, he told me that he had Order (without specifying from whom,
tengo ordine were his words) to let me and my Colleagues know, that if we had
any thing to propound to the Congregation held at his House, and would appear
there, we should be admitted; and if we were ready, it might be on Monday: That
the Doctors our Adversaries might be admitted afterward upon Wednesday; and
they should be treated in the same manner as we. That thus things would be
transacted calmly, and nothing innovated in the ordinary practice according to
which they proceeded.

I answered the Cardinal that he told me very acceptable news, in telling me
that the time was come in which we might appear in the Congregation. That we
never wished any thing else, and we should do it with great contentment; but
that the term which his Eminence proposed was something short for the first
time, which required a little more than ordinary preparation, and proportional
to so grave an Assembly, and so weighty an action. That it would not be my part
to speak, but M. de Valcroissant's. That I could not precisely tell his
Eminence whether he could be ready by the day appointed by him. That I hoped
so; but I must first speak with him before I could give his Eminence a positive
answer.

Before I proceeded further in my Answer, the Cardinal told me that if Monday
were too soon, it might be deferred till Wednesday; but he was desirous of a
precise answer either that morning, or without fail in the afternoon, that he
might afterward give such Orders as ^ere necessary for the Assembly.

I answered him, that I would not fail to bring him one in the afternoon at
furthest; but besides the time needful for M. Valcroissant to prepare himself,
we should be glad to have some wherein to confer with the Consultors
particularly before seeing them in public. That we had not been told hitherto
who they were; and therefore I desired his Eminence to cause a List of them to
be given us.

His Eminence presently took up a pen and writ one himself, then bid me
transcribe it; which I did presently in his presence whilst he read some
Memorials; and though I saw something which I might say to him immediately, yet
considering that I was to return suddenly to him, I thought best to defer it
till I had conferred with my Colleagues. Wherefore as soon as I had done the
Catalogue, I took my leave.

Thus passed this Visit. Being returned to my Lodging I gave account of it to
my Colleagues, and showed them the List which I had written, containing the
names following.

1. The Master of the Sacred Palace. 2. The General of the Augustines. 3. The
Commissary of the H. Office. 4. F. Raphael Aversa, formerly General of the
Regular Priests. 5. The F. Procurator, General of the Conventual Cordeliers of
S. Francis. 6. F. Campanella of the order of the Carmelites. 7. F. Luca Vadingo
of the reformed order of S. Francis, Superior of the Covent of S. Isidore, a
native of Ireland. 8, F. Ciria sometimes Procurator General of the order of the
Servitae. 9. F. Delbene Superior of the House of S. Andre de la val, of the
order of the Theatines. 10. The Procurator of the Capucines. 11. F. Sortia
Palavicini of the order of the Society of Jesus, and Reader of Divinity in the
Roman College. 12. F. Maistre Celestin Bruni, an Augustine. 13. F. Tartaglia of
the order of Barefooted Carmelites.
This list, and what I have above mentioned, being considered by us, the
principal thing whereupon we could presently resolve, was, that M. de
Valcroissant should stay at home to prepare himself to appear in the
Congregation on Wednesday following, and that M. Angran and I should return
presently after Dinner to acquaint Cardinal Spada with that and other things
needful to be represented to his Eminence.

Accordingly, my Lords, we went to Cardinal Spada, and told him that M. de
Valcroissant could have wished a little longer space for his preparation the
first time; that nevertheless we left him at home to begin to get ready against
Wednesday next which was the longest time allotted us by his Eminence. That we
had considered of some things needful to be provided for before hand, if they
were not already; namely touching the two Memorials presented by us to his
Holiness, whereunto we had yet received no answer. That we knew not whether the
Pope had taken any order or no: that in one of them we desired that when we
should appear before the Congregation, not only the Doctors who were here
against us, but also the Jesuits, our principal parties, might be obliged to
appear there in our presence, and answer to the Accusations and instances which
we had already made, and were yet to make against them in the progress of this
Affair. That before our appearing it was needful that the same were ordained by
his Holiness. That moreover we had considered, that in the list of Consultors
given us by his Eminence, there was the name of a Jesuit; that a Party could
not be a Judge, and that we were unwilling to acknowledge a Jesuit for such,
and less this then an other; because besides the quality common to him with all
the rest, we had some writings of his which he gave the last year to his
Scholars in the Roman College, in which we were ready to show that he taught
pure Pelagianism, Maxims directly opposite to all the Essential principles of
S. Austin's Doctrine against the Pelagians. That besides him, we found among
the Consultors the Procurator General of the Conventual Cordeliers, whom we
conceived to be F. Modeste, who made a Panegyric upon F. Annat's Book newly
printed; in which the Doctrine and Authority of S. Augustine were unworthily
injured. That we had accused this Father to his Holiness as having prevaricated
in this point of his duty, and we could not own him for a Judge in a cause
wherein we accused him as Criminal. That lastly his Eminence had not signified
who was to be Secretary in the Congregation; that if they intended to choose
one amongst the other Consultors, we had nothing to say; but if M. Albizzi
pretended to continue in that office as we heard he had hitherto done in the
private Congregations which their Eminences held, we were not resolved to come
where he exercised that charge, because he was a man too much suspected by us,
for reasons represented in our Memorials, and others which we should deduce
more largely in time and place, if it were needful. That we most humbly
beseecht his Eminence, that all this might be regulated between this and
Wednesday, if it were not already, and this granted, we would not fail to be
ready to appear that day in the Congregation.

The Cardinal replied to us, that this discourse seemed very different from
that which had been held in the morning. That we said indeed that we would
appear, but withal made Demands contrary to the purpose which we pretended to
have of so doing. That we well knew, that there was no resolution to hear us in
presence of both sides, that it was not the manner of the H. Office. That his
Holiness might order things without all these Formalities: That all the
Congregations which had been held were not necessary: that if their Eminences
were obliged always to observe that course in all affairs, it would not be
possible for them to dispatch any. That the Favor done us in offering to hear
in the manner propounded to us, was not due to us, that we might accept it if
we would; that if we would not, no body was forced to receive it: Beneficium
(said he) non confertur invito: that however we had no reason to refuse it,
since they promised to hear us as largely as we pleased; instead of one hour
three days; and to receive as many VVritings as we were minded to present; two
Reams of Paper if we would; and that they assured us nothing should be done
till every thing were first most exactly weighed and discussed. As for the
Consultors whom we refused, he could assure us, as he had done formerly, that
since the establishment of the Congregation, no Jesuits nor any other from
them had spoken to him concerning these affairs. That if we refused those whom
we mentioned, our adversaries might likewise refuse others. That we ought not
to have any ombrage concerning these Divines, since they had no decisive voice;
Audimus, said he, illos disserentes, as we shall hear you. That were Prelates
there with their Eminences, they should have no decisive voice; but after
hearing the Arguments of either side, their Eminences were to consider the
whole, make report thereof to his Holiness, and all to be judged and regulated
according as Justice, and Truth, and the Obligation incumbent on the H. See to
provide for the needs of the Church and the Faithful required. As for the
Secretary, that his Office was very small and little important in those
Congregations, that he had no power at all; that all he did there, was, after
the Divnes had spoken an hour more or less, when they came to conclude and say,
Sum igitur in voto, etc. to writ down the words dictated to him by the speaker,
which were also written down by others who had so much curiosity.

This, my Lords, is the substance of the Answer which Cardinal Spada made to
us: If himself had dictated it, no doubt it would have been better digested and
expressed then I am able to relate it: It Is a very difficult thing to represent
in writing the discourse of any one whatsoever, but more one of so great and
high a Genius as is that of Cardinal Spada; wherefore when you read what I was
able to collect, I beseech you to supply with your imagination, the force and
vivacity wherewith his Eminence spoke it.

Toward the end of his Discourse he fell upon the principal point of our
demand, viz. to have our Adversaries present, and we stood so much upon it,
that the rest were no more spoken of* Wherefore having urged to us again that
the presence of Adversaries, and the disputation which we demanded, was not the
use of the H. Office. When he had done speaking, we replied to him that our
intention was not in any wise to cause any alteration in the Laws and practices
of the H. Office; but his Eminence was also to consider, that we had not
recourse to it. That we had recurr'd to the Pope as the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
and head of the Church, to whom in the name of the Bishops who sent us, we had
represented the intended surprise of his Holiness, entreated him to beware of
it, and considering the combustion caused amongst Catholics by these contests,
most humbly desired him to establish a Congregation like that held under
Clement VIII. and Paul V. in which the parties were heard viva voce, and by
writing in presence one of the other. That the Letters which we first
presented, were most expressly to this effect. That the Memorial which we
delivered after those Letters, contained the same also most evidently. That all
our remonstrances by speech touching this affair, both to his Holiness and
their Eminences for a whole year together, before the Congregation was declared
to us, were only to obtain the same in that form. That at length the
Congregation was declared to us without any restriction, that we had given
notice thereof to the Bishops who sent us, that the report of it was spread
over all the world; that we had acted till the present in that confidence, and
could not but be a little amazed at the difficulty which we found in the
performance.

I think, my Lords, we had not gone much further in this reply, when Cardinal
Spada interposed and told us that we ought to consider what he had told us
already several times, to wit, that when this affair was in agitation under
Pius V. there were no parties heard, nor in the time of Gregory XIII. nor
afterward under Urban VIII. and lastly, under the present Papacy things were
not handled otherwise, and that it was resolved not to alter the course.

We inserted in his Discourse that between the times of those Popes newly
mentioned there was Clement VIII. and Paul V. under whom the proceedings were
in the manner which we demanded.

His Eminence continuing his Discourse, answered that it was true; but that it
was not intended now to bring upon the Stage again the matters agitated in that
time; that the Question was only about qualifying precisely Five Propositions,
what they were in themselves according to the very words in which they were
comprised. That this might be done by the single inspection of them as they
lay, without considering what had been acted, or hearing the Parties
contradictorily.

We told his Eminence that we could not enough wonder, how any could pretend to
decide the Propositions without meddling with the matter De Auxiliis. That it
was very easy to prove evidently, that none of them could be touched, but the
whole matter De Auxiliis must be decided and carried one way or other by most
certain consequences.

His Eminence answered that this was our pretension; that our Adversaries had
another, and took themselves to be as well grounded in theirs as we in ours.
That they conceived it very easy to separate the Propositions from the matter
De Auxiliis, as certainly as we believed the contrary. And lastly, that we
ought not to doubt but the Persons employed to determine them would consider
all their consequences and dependences; and therefore there was no need of
such a contradictory conference as we demanded.

We replied to his Eminence that this Matter was of it self so difficult, so
subject to equivocations, so embroiled and obscured by our Adversaries; that a
reciprocal Conference could not but be very advantageous for the dis-intangling
of it, and exposing it naked to the eyes of the Congregation. As for what he
said concerning determining the Propositions in the manner he mentioned, it
was not at all the design either of the Bishops who sent us to Rome, nor
ours; that we very little cared what value was set upon a word subject to
diverse interpretations, or how far it might be extended; that had nothing but
this been in question, the Bishops who sent us would not so much as have set
pen to paper, nor we have come out of our Closets; but the ground of their
solicitude and ours, were the Catholic truths contained in those
Propositions; which were taught us by Jesus Christ, and derived down to us
by the Holy Scriptures, and by the continued Tradition of Popes, H. Fathers and
Councils, which we observed were endeavored to be overthrown under the pretext
of some bad senses in which the Propositions might be understood. That thus
the Propositions were not the primary object of our thoughts and cares; but
having been taken by our Adversaries as a very plausible means to ruin the
whole Catholic Doctrine concerning Grace; and knowing very well that they could
not be touched without immediately falling amongst all the difficulties which
are in the Church touching this matter; not to divert out of the way which our
Adversaries put us upon to obtain, that they might at length be terminated, we
judged it sufficient if the Congregation which we demanded were established for
deciding the Propositions, to the end it might be obliged to decide all the
remainder to the bottom. That in fine, not to enter further into the
discussion of what we said, if the Propositions* did not relate to the matter
of our Grace, we had nothing to do in the business, because we were sent only
upon that account, and that was it which caused the present divisions in the
Church; that we came to the H. See to seek a sovereign remedy which might
conduce to the establishing of a solid peace amongst Catholics, by perfectly
clearing the truth; that the Congregation which we demanded was esteemed the
remedy most suitable and proportionate to the present circumstances that could
be used; that having demanded it so expressly, and for so long time together,
and it having been signified to us without any restriction, we had all reason
to presume, pretend and believe that it was established; if it were, we desired
the execution of it; if not, all that we had to do, was, to demand the
establishment of it.

The Cardinal urged to us the delivery of our Writings to the Congregation, by
which we had in a manner owned it, and professed to be satisfied with the
institution of it; and he asked us wherefore we scrupled to proceed in the
manner already begun, since we were certain regard would be had to all which we
should represent as well this way as an other; besides that His Holiness was
not obliged to receive from us what rule he should hold in the conduct of this
Judgment.

We answered him, that we delivered those Writings out of a reasonable
presumption that the Congregation having been purely and unconditionably
granted us, it was established according to the terms wherewith we demanded it;
otherwise we should have delivered no Writings, but continued our Instances for
its establishment; and besides many reasons which we had represented for the
obtaining of it, and the obligation imposed on us by the Bishops to prosecute
it till we obtained it, we had yet a most powerful one; namely, that as far as
we could understand after throroughly examining our selves, and considering the
cause we maintained, we saw not that our Adversaries could charge us with any
thing which we could not very easily wipe off, whether in fact or opinion, but
we did not perceive the Case so fair on their side; that therefore having to
oppose to them none but most certain Truths, which we are ready to make good by
most convincing proofs; and conceiving them to have nothing considerable to
charge us with but what was false, fictitious and calumnious, we were not
resolved to weigh what they had to say with what we had to say, as it would be
if we have not the means solidly to refute their allegations, and manifest to
the Congregation that they can give no solid answers to what we shall object
against them. Now whereas his Eminence several times urged that it was not
necessary for the Pope to comply with whatever we demanded in this affair; we
declared to him that we no wise doubted of the Pope's plenitude of power, and
the universal solicitude which he ought to have for all the Churches, enabled
him with a right to suppress of his own accord a Heresy either newly sprung
up, or already increased in any part of the world whatever, not only without
hearing of parties contradictory in judgment, but also without the secret
Congregations which had been held to the present, as Cardinal Spada himself
said before, and as we could easily prove by the example of Celestin the first,
when upon the advertisement whieh he received from S. Prosper and S. Hilary, he
vindicated S. Augustine against the contempt cast upon his Doctrine by the
Priests of Marseille, though in a less degree than that of the Jesuits and
their Imitators at this day. That if a Pope took this course in every case, and
made a good Constitution to repress the boldness of whosoever perverted the
Maxims of Faith and Good manners, such Constitution would be very legitimate
and valid, and all the Faithful would be obliged to revere and obey it
according to the laws and customs of the Church: but as our affair stood at
this day, we conceived it just and for the interest of the H. See as well as
our own and that of the Church, to do what we requested of the Pope with
all importunity, submission and respect. That it was a demand from which we
could not recede in any thing, being but Commissioners. And being we
apprehended this stedfastness of ours might be somewhat displeasing, that we
might not seem to persist in it out of obstinacy, we declared that in reference
to any other course after the orders which we had received from the Bishops, it
was requisite to write to them to know whether they continued in the same
resolution; that if they altered it, which was not likely, we might also take
another way than what we now held; but till they changed their Orders, we were
obliged not to depart from them.

His Eminence asked us by the way, whether we desired this Expedient to prolong
the affair; to which it might have been answered, that if we had such a purpose
we should have embraced the offer he made us of giving us as many audiences,
and receiving as many Writings as we pleased: but we assured him that if we
were put to the proof in the way we demanded, it should be seen how extremely
desirous we were to see the affair speedily ended, and that never any delay of
the Decision would be caused on our part.

As we proceeded to assure him, that if he were the chief in the business, we
were so respectful of his Sentiments and submissive to his ways, that we
should consult him what he conceived fit for us to do; the Cardinal replied
that we might do as we thought good, either accept or not accept the offered
favor of hearing us as he propounded. That if we would take that evening to
deliberate with M. de Valcroissant, he would allow us that time to advise
together, but he desired to know our last resolution the next morning before he
went to the Pope at the Assembly of the H. Office. We scrupled not to refuse
this favor from his Eminence.

Thus, my Lords, we rested upon this Visit. His Eminence no doubt spoke many
other things in confirmation of those which I have represented to you, and with
more energy than I have been able to relate them; but I conceived it would be
sufficient if I reported to you the substance of the the principal; some having
escaped my remembrance, and others being not essential to the business.

Thursday morning M. de Valcroissant stayed yet at home to prepare himself
against Wednesday, but M. Angran and I repaired again to Cardinal Spada's
house, as he appointed us the day before. We gave him our answer almost in
these very words, viz. That we could not accept the offer made to us by his
Eminence, but upon the conditions which we had mentioned; that upon those terms
we were ready to accept it, and comply with it; that we dispair'd not to obtain
the same when his Holiness and their Eminences had considered how just and
important they were, and never were denied by the H. See when demanded; that
perhaps it never happened in any kind of judgment that the Judges signifying to
one Party that they were ready to hear it, and the party answering that it was
ready to speak on condition its adversary might be present, the Judges denied
such a condition. We added that (to show his Eminence that it was not
particular obstinacy, but an express obligation which caused us to act thus)
besides our General Commission oftentimes reiterated to us by us by particular
Letters, we beseecht his Eminence to look upon one which we had received lately
wherein the aforesaid Order was most expressly renewed. And hereupon, my Lords,
we presented to him a Copy of the Letter which you did us the honor to write
to us the 28th. of November last; we desired his Eminence to read it, and
offered to leave the Original with him for more surenesse.

His Eminence replied that there was no need of it, yet if we pleased for our
own satisfaction to read it, he would hear it. So we read the Original to him.

Which ended, his Eminence excepted at those passages of the Letter whieh
concerned our adversaries, and said in their defense, that they seemed not to
him desirous of avoiding a mutual conference, but on the contrary professed to
wish it, and to be ready for it; and further declared that however the H. See
proceeded in this affair, they were contented.

We answered that we wondered not much if in some occasions they professed to
desire such a Conference; but we conceived that what emboldned them to speak
thus of it, was their perceiving that it was not likely to be granted to us;
and that if they should find that they must come to it, they would not be so
desirous of it.

His Eminence replied, that it was one thing to conjecture the secret
intentions of persons, and an other to tell what of them appeared outwardly;
but as for what appeared of those Doctors, none could deny but they were so
disposed; and were perfectly submissive to all that should be ordained by the
H. See, not only in reference to the Decision it self, but also as to the
manner of proceeding.

These affected compliances which our Adversaries have always in their mouths,
and boast of upon all occasions, called to my mind that the principal artifice
made use of by Pelagius and Caelestius to circumvent Pope Zozymus, was the
professing an absolute submission to him, as Annal. Eccles. ad an. 417, and 418.
Baronius observes. But we answered his Eminence that we did not judge of them
by their secret intentions, but by what they declared at their first coming in
presence of a person of unexceptionable credit, who would attest the same to
his Eminence, if it were needful. For when it was proposed that they and we
together should by common consent sue for such a Congregation, upon being
pressed to it, at last they answered plainly, that if we could obtain it, they
would appear before it; but they would first do all they could to hinder it,
demanding formally a pure and absolute condemnation of the Propositions without
hearing of parties. We added that this proceeding did not surprise us, because
we certainly knew they could make good nothing against us, either by speech or
writing when it came to be compared with what we had to say on the other side
to overthrow it.

His Eminence said, that we spoke very confidently, and our Adversaries no
less; that they had showed as well as we, by the Books which they had made
touching this matter, that they could easily defend themselves viva voce and by
writing, it being easier to do it this way then by printed works of which all
the world must judge.

We answered that we could not persuade our selves that his Eminence had
perused the Books of both sides; for then he could not but have found that they
were reduced by this way to the necessity either of being silent, or alleging
nothing more but indefensible things.

The Cardinal did not assent to this, nor yet altogether gainsay it, but
leaving the cause between both, and saying that this was our conceit, ann
perhaps others were of another mind, I know not how we fell again upon the
principal subject of our discourse; but his Eminence alleged for instances
against our demand the Conference of Poissy and Fontainebleau and other
ordinary Disputations which produce no fruit.

We answered that it was not to be wondered, because in those Conferences and
ordinary Disputations there were no Judges to determine upon hearing of the
parties, which was in the right.

His Eminence further said, that he wondered at the assurance wherewith both we
and our Adversaries spoke of our affairs. We answered that this was a motive to
persuade the bringing of us together, that it might be seen who had reason in
the allegations advanced in the absence of their adversaries.

His Eminence said that Conferences served only to exasperate men's minds more,
and produce division and noise. We answered, that if any one fell
impertinently into heat in these Conferences, it would be to his own prejudice;
and besides upon the first appearance of such misbehaviour, a little admonition
would settle all again; and we beseecht his Eminence to consider what we had
represented to him for the obtaining of a Conference.

He replied that we might solicit it, and if the Pope appointed so, well. We
answered that we solicited not only his Holiness, but likewise his Eminence
for it. That we knew the Pope would do nothing therein without his advice, and
that his Holiness had so great esteem of him that we doubted not but to which
ever side he inclined, he swayed much in the business. Wherefore we had
recourse to him and supplicated him to further our suit with his Holiness.

The same Evening, my Lords, I went to acquaint the Ambassador with the
passages of these three visites to Cardinal Spada, and to beseech him to speak
thereof to his Holiness the next day, being that of his audience, and procure
one for us, to the end that we might make our Remonstrances to him our selves.
The Ambassador promised me he would. And accordingly the next day when his
audience was ended, he told me that he had spoken largely to his Holiness about
the passages of the said visits, who was informed thereof before and knew the
whole contents of our Memorials. That his Holiness was considering to take
order for every thing, but would do it in his own time and in the manner which
himself judged fit; that in the mean time we must be quiet and patient; and get
our selves ready to appear possibly before his Holiness and our Adversaries
present when we least expected it. That he was resolved to end this affair with
all possible solemnity, and that neither the one side nor the other should
return into France before we had been heard as amply as we could desire.

You see, my Lords, in general what account the Ambassador gave me of the Popes
intentions. He specified nothing precisely concerning the particular of our
demands, but said enough to oblige us to be ready for every thing.

I assured the Ambassador that we should joyfully and quietly attend the
effects of his Holiness's good purposes, and considering afterward how the
Pope could be so soon informed of what had passed between Cardinal Spada and
us, I discovered that the day before this Cardinal with Ginetti, Pamphilio and
Ghiggi stayed an hour with his Holiness after the other Cardinals of the H.
Office were gone at the end of their ordinary Assembly, to which Cardinal Spada
went immediately as he left us. Hence I doubted not but in that time this
Cardinal reported to his Holiness how we stood disposed. I shall add no more to
this Letter but the rumor which I was told by one who heard it from our
Adversaries, viz. that the abovementioned Cardinals stayed with the Pope to
make report to his Holiness of the Affair of the Five Propositions, which were
going to be decided, not to say (as the Relator did) condemned; as if this
affair were in a condition to be judged, and as if an hours time sufficed to
give his Holiness the information necessary for that purpose. A thousand such
bruits and more groundless they disperse abroad; and provided they find any
intention to dismay S. Augustins Disciples, and excite some tempest against
them they care not what way they take. Indeed we ought by this time to be proof
against those Artifices and vain fears. Would God our Adversaries could abstain
from the one, and we avoid the other, and that his Mercy may give us all a
sincere love of Truth, and a true spirit of Peace: In which wishes I remain,

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servant, De Saint-Amour.
Rome 27. Jan. 1653.
The fairness of this Letter shows how the circumstances of time obliged us to
carry our selves with Cardinal Spada, and to suppress such things as might
exasperate him, had it been intercepted. I remember, that to oblige me to
appear in the Congregation in their manner, he endeavored to frighten me,
bidding me take heed what I did; and telling me that if we did not appear,
things might happen which might cause us to repent it. But I answered him
resolutely, yet with respect, that the Pope and their Eminences might do what
they thought good; that we were only to answer for the justice of our demands,
and they for what they should do thereupon.

The multitude of things spoken in this visit permitted me not to reply to his
example of the Conference of Fontainebleau, whence he inferred the
unprofitableness of all Conferences; which would have been easy to do, there
being nothing less suitable to the Cardinals design then the example of that
Conference of Fontainebleau, which is known to have been so glorious to the
Church, to have conduced to the conversion of so many Heretics, and to have
covered with eternal confusion one of the greatest props of Heresy in France.

CHAP. III.
How we observed that the Congregation held at Cardinal Spada's house was only
a part of the Inquisition. The Audience given there to M. Hallier and his
Colleagues: the Letter which I writ thereupon to the Advocate General Brignon. A
Conference which I had with the Ambassador touching what had passed between us
and Cardinal Spada.

THE foregoing Chapter contains the principal and most considerable Passages
from the time of my being sent for to Cardinal Spada till the departure of the
Pope, Jan: 27. Some small particularities remain not unworthy to be related.

Wednesday the 22. after our second Visit to Cardinal Spada, we went in the
evening to advertise Cardinal Ghiggi of what had passed in those two visits,
and of the necessity of making the same answer the next day to that Cardinal
which we had already given him. At first Cardinal Ghiggi would scarce hear us,
but turned the whole carriage of the Affair upon Cardinal Spada who was (he
said) Dean of the Congregation; but reiterating the Remonstrances, and
beseeching him to consider that we were come to beseech his Eminence to assist
the justice of our demands, in case Cardinal Spada made report thereof to the
Pope the next day, as we believed he would; he heard what we had to say with
more patience, and more courteously received our request that he would be
favorable to us.

On Thursday morning having been so late with Cardinal Spada that before his
going to Monte-Cavallo there was no time but for his Mass which was just
beginning; and finding, as he conducted us, M. Hallier and his Colleagues
staying to attend upon him thither, we thought good to perform that duty to his
Eminence as well as they, thereby to oblige him the more to be mindful of us
and the justice of the things which we had represented to him.

As we were going down stairs, he caused his Maistre de Chamber to signify to
M. Hallier and me, that we should go in the Coach with him. This Doctor and I
sat near together, and talked peaceably: I put on the most free and cheerful
countenance I could, that the Cardinal might know that the justice of the
things demanded by us, though he were not disposed to grant them, kept us from
discontent and anxiousness about the issue.

In the afternoon we went again to our Advocate to tell him how things stood;
after which he said, that according to the ordinary forms there was not the
least difficulty in our affair, but he had heard that they would burlare gli
uni and gli altri, delude both the one side and the other. Nevertheless he
promised to visit their Eminences in our name, to make such instances to them
as our affair required, and to endeavor to know the reasons which moved them
to baffle us in that manner.

In the Evening a Laquay of Cardinal Spada's addressed himself to us, to know
M. Hallier's lodging, which I told him, and believe he was to give him notice
to appear before the Congregation on Monday following.

Being on Friday amongst the attendants of the Ambassador, I heard some
Frenchmen say one to another, that M. Hallier and his Colleagues said the day
before that our affair was just going to be dispatched, and that those Doctors
believed it would have been ended that day, because the Cardinals Barberin, S.
Clement, and Colonna went out of the Congregation of the H. Office before them
which were of ours, and these, viz. Spada, Ginetti, Ghiggi and Pamphilio stayed
after the rest a whole hour with the Pope; but as I sent word in the abovesaid
Letter to the Bishops, it was only about the report which Cardinal Spada made
of what had passed between him and us.

Saturday in the afternoon we visited M. Gueffier and gave him an account of
all that had passed in our affair. He was highly pleased that we had had
recourse to the Pope himself, and not to the Congregation of the H. Office. And
the next morning he came to tell me that he was desirous to write into France
that we were in danger of acknowledging in these contests the Congregation of
the H. Office, whose jurisdiction and authority is not owned in France. I
answered that we were far from it on our part, and I read the abovementioned
Letter, which he counseled me to send word for word as it was drawn to the
Bishops to whom it was written; and prayed me to inquire in the mean time a
little more exactly whether the Congregation was summoned with the Title of the
H. Office.

Monday the 27th. I went to see the General of the Augustins, and recounted to
him the last weeks passages in our affair. He was pleased therewith, and prayed
me to let him presently set down something thereof in writing, or promise to
give him a Narrative, which I willingly did. At my request he showed me the
Ticket for appointing the Assembly to be held that afternoon at Cardinal
Spada's Palace, and offered to give me a copy of it, taking up his pen for that
purpose; but bethinking himself he said It was best that I transcribed it my
self for fear of some inconvenience. I did so, and these were the words of it.
Die Lunae 27. Januarii erit Congregatio Sancti Officii in Palatio Eminentissimi
and Reverendissimi Domini Cardinalis Spadae. Forthwith I went to M. Gueffier,
to show him what I had discovered.

Afterward I went to see F. Luca Vadingo, and his Ticket was wholly like the
foregoing. In the afternoon I sent one to the Gates of our Cardinals to see if
there were any left, and bring one to me if it could be done without offense,
that I might have an Original written with the hand of the Cursors of the H.
Office. That which was fastened at Cardinal Ghiggi's gate was brought to me,
containing the same words with the former, and these besides on the backside,
Sancti Officii, Eminentissimo and Reverendissimo Domino Cardinali Chisio; and
within, before Die Lunae and the rest, Eminentissime and Reverendissime Domine.
I acquainted M. Guffier with all this, and he writ that day into France what he
thought good; and for my own part, I did my Duty therein eight days after, by
a Letter which I writ to M. Brignon, February 3.

At the Congregation thus summoned this afternoon, H. Hallier and his Colleagues
were present; and all that I learnt they d^d there was intimated to me the same
Evening by a Friend who was purposely at Cardinal Spada's house to see what
past there. He did it in the following Note.

The Congregation begun about three a clock. Your Adversaries ariv'd about a
quarter of an hour before, and fell into talk with F. Campanella. When the
other Qualificators and Cardinals were come, their Emininces retired into their
accustomed chamber, the Qualificators into theirs, and the Molinists into that
where the fire was. They did not enter where the Cardinals were at the same
time as the Qualificators, because F. Palavicini was not yet come. On the
contrary they went so toward the Stair-head that one would have thought they
had been going away. But meeting that Father upon the stairs, they came back
with him, and entered into the Congregation, and there stayed till the Ave
Maria. When they came forth, the FF. Tartaglia, Campanella, Celestin and Aversa
congratulated them; and so did F. Delbene in ceremony. This is all that I could
spy or understand; The Ticket upon Cardinal Spada's gate was like that brought
you from Cardinal Ghiggi 's, so that there was no necessity of taking it, the
great multitude also being there. I kiss your hands, and cause some good Souls
to pray to God for you, that by his assistance you may be victorious on
Wednesday over your Adversaries.

The good Priest who writ this Note believed that we were to appear indeed on
Wednesday according to the Offer which he knew Cardinal Spada had made to us,
and coming to see us the next day he wondered at our resolution and answer,
that we could not appear unless upon the conditions abovementioned; and the
more, because he came to tell us from Monsignor Sacrista that he concluded by
discourse with Cardinal Ghiggi that it was likely a Bull would be passed for
condemning the Propositions, yet without hurting S. Augustine or Effectual
Grace. This good Priest was a little startled at this report, and blamed us
both from himself and Monsignor Sacrista of a little obstinacy. Wherefore to
justify our selves to the latter, as we did immediately to the former, I went
on Tuesday in the afternoon to him, and after some discourse on either part
about the business, I told him that we were responsible only for the demands
which we had made and still insisted upon; that the H. See was so for what it
should do upon those demands; and that it was a strange preposterousness, to
see the H. See deaf to the horrible accusations made against the Jesuits, who
outrag'd it by going about to engage it with themselves to dishonor S.
Augustine and hfs Doctrine, and that the same H. See was inclined to grant to
those Reverend Fathers a condemnation of the Propositions which ^hey had
contrived purposely to accompl^sh the treacheries and outrages which they
intended against it.

The next morning I talked with several persons at la Minerve about the same
matter; and after they had heard me, the conclusion of the plurality was, that
we had done well, and been mindful of one of their Proverbs, That the Ass
which suffers himself to be laden at the beginning of the journey, must carry
the same burden all the rest of the way.

The last visit which I made during this month to the Ambassador was upon
Friday the 31. toward Evening, to beseech him to explain to me a little more
largely what he had told me the week before at his coming from audience
concerning the Pope's good purposes to give us contentment, and to hear us in
presence of our Adversaries. The Ambassador fell at first to speak of our
Memorials, and did me the favor to repeat to me the particularities which the
Pope said to him thereupon, adding that we spoke a little too vehemently
against the persons of whom we complained. I answered him that it was necessary
to speak so; that nevertheless we did it with great circumspection, weighing
all our words, and taking heed whether it would be easy for us to prove what
we found our selves obliged to allege. And to show him more particularly all
that we had said therein, I offered him a copy of them which he willingly
accepted. As for the principal affair, he told me the Pope intended to have the
Votes of the Consultors in writing, examine them himself, caused the
Congregation held at Cardinal Spada's house to assemble before his Holiness* to
dispute the same matters in his own presence which were debated there. That the
examination ended, he would appoint public prayers, make a Jubilee, and other
such solemnities, before the resolution which he was to take in this so
important occasion. That he would also first assemble all the Cardinals with
their habits of ceremony, Rochets and otherwise. That himself would appear in
his Cap, and clothed with his other Pontifical ornaments. In brief, that the
business would be very solemn. But that he (the Ambassador) could not tell me
all that he knew, yet we should assuredly see the affair determined with
perfect solemnity; that in the mean we ought to trouble our selves about
nothing else, but to get ready to appear before that venerable Assembly, and
represent all that we conceived necessary for justification of the cause we
defended, possibly too (as he hoped) in presence of our Adversaries, that
nothing might be wanting to our contentment or the discussion of the affair. I
testified to the Ambassador great satisfaction for the hope he gave me, and
told him that course would be admirable and afford great edification to all the
Church, provided it were followed and put in execution. He answered that I need
not doubt of it, and that sometimes Popes, ill-lik'd for other reasons,
performed extraordinary and important things in which God's protection and
direction was manifestly seen, and which obliged such as were otherwise not
well pleased with them, to heap all sorts of applauses and benedictions upon
them.

The Ambassador added that nevertheless he must advertise me that many at Rome
disapproved our carriage. That it was mere disobedience that we would not be
heard, except after our own fashion. That we had no reason to pretend a
necessity of hearing us as Parties in the affair; That they would not so much
as hear of that word; that there was nothing in the points, which concerned the
Faith; and that the aim both of the one side and the other was to seek the
truth, and contribute what every one could toward finding it. I answered the
Ambassador that the Faith of every one being that which might be dearest to
him, there was nothing in which he might be a party with more reason then when
that is concerned. That a man assaulted therein, had more reason to defend
himself, then his goods, life and honor. That it was the most ordinary matter
of contests that could spring up in the Church; and that if in other judgments
it was fit to beware of suspect Judges, and to procure the observation of
forms, more ought to be taken in such cases wherein a man's faith is in
question. The Ambassador replied that the offers of hearing us in the
Congregation appointed for our affair made us culpable of our own wrong; and
since we would not accept them, perhaps we would wonder that a Cardinal should
come to him to make a public Memorandum or Act of those Offers, and of our
refusal and disobedience. That consequently thereunto a Decree would come
forth; and that for his part, he could not but give way to the Act demanded of
him, and write into France how things passed. That verbal processes would be
made at Rome of the whole transaction, entered into the Registers of the H.
Office, and found there to the end of the world. I answered the Ambassador that
the offers made to us of hearing us, were not pure and simple, no more then our
refusals; but we were offered to be heard in a secret and private Congregation,
in which there was a Secretary and Consultors, our professed Adversaries, in
which they were to be Judges, and we to be heard severally, instead of obliging
our Adversaries to appear there in our presence to answer the accusations which
we had to make against them, and also to produce their defenses before us and
their charges against us. That provided the Act were made not only of the Offer
and our Refusal, but also of the circumstances pertaining both to the one and
the other, it could never be but to our advantage and glory; but if the
circumstances were omitted, and the Act nakedly entered into the Registers, I
should endeavor (and I added that I had done it already) not to omit them in
the Letters which I was obliged to write into France, to give an account of our
negotiations at Rome; and I hoped those Letters would become public and remain
monuments to posterity as authentic and permanent, and more credible than the
Registers of the H. Office, since they would show their defect, and want of
fidelity and exactness. As for the Ambassador, if he were obliged to send word
into France concerning the said Offer and Refusal; I hoped from his justice and
generosity that he would not deny my most humble request to send the
circumstances of them too; as also to consider that 'twas no disobedience to
request so just and necessary a thing of the H. See as we demanded, of being
heard pro and con by word of mouth and writing in presence of our Adversaries
upon the matter in question; especially being obliged thereunto as we were, by
the Commission given us by the Bishops who sent us. That if the Pope had at
first done us this justice and grace together, as we might have hoped; or
rather if the Declaration which he made to us by Cardinal Roma that he had
granted the same to us, had been performed, we should not have been constrained
to renew our instances so long and so often; but we had been obliged to
reiterate the same, and endeavor to surmount all the difficulties laid in our
way from time to time; and thus it was not through obstinacy but necessity that
we acted in this manner. The Ambassador seeing me so courageously defend our
proceeding against his exceptions, told me, He was not always so bad as he
appeared, but spoke all this to let me know how things were construed at Rome:
and because the Pope and Cardinal Spada were wholly surprised and astonished at
the resolute manner wherein I had spoken to his Eminence about this Subject. I
answered the Ambassador that in all I said to Cardinal Spada I did not think I
had any ways violated the respect which we owed to his Eminence and the H.
See. The Ambassador replied that he had nothing to blame me for thereupon; but
our downright and flat refusal to appear in the Congregation amazed them, and
that they looked upon it as if we intended to give law to them, which they were
wont not to receive from but to give to others. I told the Ambassador again
that no Judges in any place of the world conceived that the Parties contending
before them had the least thought of giving them law, when they humbly demanded
the favor to represent to them the merit of the cause upon which they were to
pronounce; and besides that this seemed to me a First Principle known by it
self, and needing no proof, that the Commission of the Bishops who sent us was
to us a Law which we might not transgress. The Ambassador answered me that if
those Bishops were themselves personally at Rome, they durst not act there as
we acted; because there were means to reduce them, and in case of too much
perverseness to depose them. I replied that it was strange that so much
difficulty should be made at Rome to grant to us and those Bishops a thing
which had been formerly so easily granted to the Dominicans and the Jesuits in
a like contest under Clement VIII. and Paul V. in the Congregation de Auxiliis.
The Ambassador answered me that they knew at Rome what was done in that
Congregation, and had the Acts of it. I replied that we had them too, and knew
as well as they all that passed therein: which the Ambassador took as too
confidently spoken, because it implied that we paralleld our selves with them.
Then he asked me for an example of any Saint, who refused to be present in a
Council as we did to be in this Congregation. I instanced in S. Chrysostom,
whose Festival the Church had celebrated but four days before. Yet he said we
should do well to appear there, because if we were heard severally, perhaps it
would be a means to oblige them to hear us afterward in presence of our
Adversaries. I answered him that nothing hindered but they might do it at once,
if they had any such intention; and that moreover perhaps the case would be the
same as with our Writings which we had fairly presented upon a full confidence
that the same would be communicated without any difficulty; and yet we could
never obtain the communication of them, whatever instance we had made for it.
The Ambassador said that perhaps the reason was, because we had demanded it
with too great earnestness; that they would communicate them when we demanded
it no more, and least thought of it. That they would do things after their own
fashion, and not be forced to any thing. That they were the Masters, and would
have it appear so.

CHAP. IV.
Passages at Paris and elsewhere upon occasion of these Contests, signified to
me by Letters during the same month of January.

AFter the account of what I could learn to have passed at Rome during this
first month of the year 1653. I shall present the Reader with some things done
and spoken at Paris and elsewhere during the same time, which I understood by
the Letters of some Friends, considerable and unexceptionable persons.

After the Ambassador had told me what M. Hallier showed him in a Letter which
he received from the Bishop of Conzerans since nominated to the Archbishopric
of Tholouze touching the Frantic sickman and hs uncouth confession, I writ to
Paris about it to the Cure of S. Roch and M. de Sainte-Bouve, for satisfaction
therein, and that being informed my self, I might give the Ambassador a true
account of those two stories; and after he knew how apocryphal and forged they
were, (according as I believed them) he might no more take notice of and object
such detractions and calumnies to me. M. de Sainte-Beuve sent me an Answer
first dated the third of this Month, and here it follows:

SIR,
FIrst wishing you the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ for all this year, I
shall tell you that we wondered at the pretended Letter of the Archbishop of
Toulouse; Whose learning and prudence, in my opinion, destroy the whole Story.
What I writ to you concerning him the first of November is very certain; MM.
Queras, le Nain, and de la Militiere will make it good when it shall be
necessary: nevertheless for more sureness I will get him to speak by his most
intimate Friend; I will know whether he is changed, or whether he is imposed
upon, and send you word by the next return. As for M. Hallier I cannot but
tremble to see the terrible judgments of God upon him, and the loss of his
reputation, which began in the Clergy, in the Assembly whereof he was the
Promoter, which continued in his Syndicship of our Faculty, and which he is
going to complete at Rome. Would to God it might be with the edification of his
Soul: but when I consider that he bids war to Truth, and that his negotiation
tends only to the persecution of persons of whose probity be is fully convin'd,
I confess I am as it were besides my self, and find thereby what it is to
forsake God. Pray to him, I beseech you, that he do not abandon me to the
desires of my own heart, but make me to know his Truths, and live according to
them. I am, etc.

Eight days after this Letter, the said Sieure de Saint Beuve writ me
another, which served to clear to me what he had told me in the preceding
concerning the new Archbishop of Toulouse, and contained other particular
things remarkable, enough to be inserted in this Journal.

He sent me word, That our Friends at Paris were anxious about what was doing
at Rome, because they heard that the Congregations were held very frequently,
and we not admitted to audience; that we our selves knew not their proceedings;
but it was noised at Paris that three Propositions were already examined and
condemned. He wished that we would present to the Congregation which acted, a
request like the first Memorial delivered to the Pope, and therein declare that
the Propositions UT JACENT were not ours, that we always condemned them in the
bad sense which they included, and never pretended to defend them in any other
sense but that of the necessity of Effectual Grace; and he believed that this
would fully secure us. He was not troubled for their being condemned, provided
that by the same Bull of their condemnation it was declared that no prejudice
was meant thereby to the doctrine of Effectual Grace; which he judged to be in
effect a gaining of the Cause for us. He deplored the injustice of the whole
proceedure observed at this time against S. Augustine's Disciples, against whom
every particular interest was made to pass for a point of Doctrine; and amongst
others in the business of Caen, which being begun by a very strange and
irregular thing which he observ^d, namely, by a Privy Seal Letter composed by
F. Paulin a Jesuit, and the King's Confessor, in which a Swordman was
appointed to watch over the Doctrine of a Professor of Divinity, had many
sequels of the same strain. He further took notice of several persecutions and
calumnies raise d against us, which the Authors cried up for convictions of our
evil doctrine; but he added that the main and most important thing was, that he
and our other Friends stuck all to the Memorial which we had presented to the
Pope; that if it pleased him to distinguish the senses of the captious
Propositions, they would disapprove those which his Holiness disapproved, and
approve those he approved, which they knew well to be that of Effectual Grace.
And as for the Argument which the Archbishop of Toulouse 's Letter supplied, he
esteemed it as ridiculous as any other; and added that this Prelate ingenuously
confessed that the Letter was his; that he writ it to M. Hallier whom he made
use of at Rome for the obtaining of his Bulls: that he sent word of things as
they were reported to him; but he positively denied that he had empowered him
by that Letter or any other to prosecute at Rome any condemnation of the
Propositions framed by M. Cornet, etc.

I do not wholly relate what M. de Saint Beuve said of the Archbishop of
Toulouse touching the sick person of the Parish of S. Roch, referring the
Reader for further knowledge of the truth to what the Cure of that Parish writ
to me himself the same Tenth of January. His Letter was in these words.

God give you the good day and good year which you sent to me from Rome
beforehand, and which arrived in time at Paris. As for the main business of
yours, I knew nothing, before I received it, of the two cases said at Rome to
have happened in my Parish. Upon inquiry touching the sick man, I have found that
it is true that about two or three months ago I administered to a certain man
desperately sick, and heard the general confession which he made with
bitterness and fervency; and for fruits worthy of repentonce, he faithfully
performed what I appointed him. He received also the most holy Viaticum in
presence of sundry persons of condition and virtue. One and the other Sacrament
being received by him with great fervency and piety, and great hope in God's
mercy and grace, as well of amending if he lived, as of his salvation and life
eternal if he died. Now God has prevented him in his mercies, and I took my
time well; for the deliration began already when he received the Sacrament; but
afterward he was seized with so great and furious a delirium, that for three
weeks or a month he was not capable of any ratiocination; and not only wanted
judgment and the use of reason, but being of a hot and boiling temper he
uttered all sorts of words, Blasphemies and Oaths (though when in health no
swearer at all) and many times despairingly said, that he was damned, and that
there was no God for him, and other such language to which a furious Raving in
a hot temper is apt to lead a sick man. During this time the Father, Reader of
the Jacobines of S. Honor visited him, and it is true that he answered him as
he did every body else, That he was damned, and other like; but that he
formally answered him according to the three Questions contained in yours,
namely, 1. That he did not believe that he had grace. 2. That he had not so
much as the grace of Prayer. 3. That he could not persuade himself that he was
one of those for whom Jesus Christ dyed; this, under correction, is very false;
and I am certain that had he been learned (as he was not) or been of these
Opinions and Doctrines concerning Grace, he was not then in a condition to
answer about them so distinctly and formally; and should he have answered so,
yet the disorder and despair of his answers ought not to be attributed to the
Questions of Grace, but purely to his great and high Delirium. Nor do I think
that the abovesaid Father so propounded those three points to him; if he did,
'twas very imprudently done, considering the sick-man's condition.

As for the second Case touching the Woman who in Confession said Grace had
failed her thrice, instead of saying she had sinned thrice; it did not happen
in my Parish; but yesterday two Jacobines told me they heard that it was in the
Confessional of a Sub-penitentiary they knew not whom. So that it is but a
hearsay; and I will inquire more largely of this Case, and of the first too. I
forgot to tell you that the abovesaid sick-person is returned to his right
judgment and perfect health, and lately came to thank me for my ministering to
him; and that he never seemed to me to adhere to those three or other opinions.
I will look into the business, and write of it to you more largely. When he
visited me, he told me that he remembered nothing at all of what passed, and is
reported to have been spoken or done to him by during his delirium.

Though the Bishops who signed the Letter of M. de Vabres, did it only for
particular Engagements, and without any pubick deliberation of the Clergy, yet
their great number made M. Hallier and his Colleagues take the confidence to
speak and act at Rome, as if they had been sent by the whole body of the Clergy
of France. But to overthrow this falsehood and presumption when occasion
presented it self, wherein we might reproach them with it, we procured an
authentic piece at hand to convince them. The Abbot of Valcroissant writ a
Letter touching this matter to the Abbot of Marmiesse, who was then Agent
General of the Clergy, and returned him this answer.

SIR,
I Received the Letter which you did me the honor to write to me, and sought
in our deliberations of the Clergy whether there were any ground for the
business concerning which you write to me. The Clergy of France has not
deputed any Doctor to Rome about the Questions which are agitated there. It Is
true, sundry Prelates no doubt out of a Principle of Charity, writ some time
ago a Letter to his Holiness; but it was as a particular thing, and no act of a
formed Assembly. This, Sir, is all the satisfaction I can give to your
questions. Be pleased to believe me always perfectly,

SIR, Your most humble and faithful Servant, The Abbot of Marmiesse, Agent
General of the Clergy.

I have not yet set down one circumstance of the reasons which the Pope told me
he had to hasten to pronounce judgment upon the Propositions, in the audience
which I had of him, July 9. 1652. namely, by reason of the Divisions which they
excited everywhere, he having lately been advertised that they began to excite
some in Poland. I reserved it for this place, that I might at once clear it.
For some time after, being certifi'd that the Jesuits had employed not only
the recommendation and Letters which they had obtained for this end from the
Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, but also from the King of Poland: I
writ thereupon to M. Fleury, the Queen of Poland's Confessor, from whom I
received the following Answer.

From Grodna in Lituania, January 17, 1653. SIR,
I Read to the Queen the Contents of your Letter of the last of November. She
was amazed when she heard that you were assured that the King of Poland had
written in favor of the Fathers, and to press the conclusion of our affair,
and that his Majesty feared that doctrine might spread in his Kingdom. Two
days after, the Queen told me in presence of her first Physician, a good
Friend of the Fathers, that he had spoken to the King about it, and the King
affirmed that he had not written. He said indeed that he had been much pressed
to do it, and that within three or four days; but always refused to write,
and would leave the cause to be judged without meddling in it; that it was not
an affair for a King but for the H. See and the Pope. This, Sir, I thought good
to write to you, that you may be confirmed in the knowledge you have otherwise,
that the good Fathers employ other weapons than Study and Prayer for advancing
their designs, and for the judgment of an Affair wholly Ecclesiastical, etc.

It Is clear by this Letter, that the King of Poland had not written about this
matter. Yet the assurances given me at Rome of the receipt of his Letters there,
were very express; and that which the Pope himself said to me, was a very
evident confirmation of it; So that it seems doubtful whether amongst the Arms
made use of by the good Fathers to promote theit designs, there was not a
supposititious Letter of the King of Poland, as there had been a False Censure
of the Faculty of Divinity of Paris.

Their false Deputy, F. Mulard, was at Chartres the same Month; where upon the
Eye of the King he visited M. Feron Doctor of the Society of Sorbonne and Abbot
of S. Laumer, and told him that he was come from Rome, and should return
thither suddenly with good tackle against the Thomists. That the H. F. would
shortly pronounce upon the controverted Propositions, and according to all
probability in favor of the Molinists. This notice was given by the said Sieur
Peron the next day in a Letter to an intimate Friend of his, Doctor of Sorbonue.

M. Brousse sent me word by one of the 24th. That a Friend of his, a
considerable Officer of the Queen's, told him that he was present on Monday
before, when the Bishop of S. Malo told her Majesty (no doubt upon the Letters
which he had received from M. Hallier) that three of the Propositions were
already condemned, and the rest would be so suddenly. That these reports were
dispersed abroad, and occasioned many persons of Quality to resort to him for
information of the truth.

In fine, I learnt by the Letters of this Month, that as Orders were given, and
extraordinary endeavors used to pluck M. Cordon out of the College of
Montaigu, and M. Monassier out of his Chair of Divinity in the University of
Caen; so the like had been employed to hinder two Fathers of the Oratory from
preaching ar Paris in the two Churches where they were retained. That M.
Argentier went to the Marguilliers of S. Bennet, to tell them from the Queen
that her Majesty would not have F. Des Mares preach there, and that a Letter
under the Privy Seal was sent from the King to F. le Boulx to forbid him
coming to Paris where he was also to preach in another Church.

CHAP. V.
Containing what passed in the first days of February, particularly concerning
a Memorial prepared by the General of the Augustines touching the Five
Propositions. Of a Letter which we writ to our Bishops, informing them that the
Congregation appointed for us by the Pope took the style of the Congregation of
the H. Office. And of a Writing of M. Halliers which came by chance to my hands.

THe first of February I visited Cardinal Altieri, who was about to return me
the Book of Prevailing Grace which we had lent him, and the first Chapter of
our Writing concerning S. Augustin's authority, which he had caused to be
transcribed, being to return to his Bishopric the Monday following. He told me
that he thought the Pope had intended to add him to our Congregation, but for
certain respects, because he must have added others too, it was not done; and
that his Holiness was willing that when he took his leave again in the last
Consistory, their long Discourse should make the world believe that they had
many affairs; but they had none at all, and all that they said was only
familiar and indifferent things. I know not whether I was mistaken in my
suspicion that the cause of the Pope's declining to add this Cardinal to the
Congregation was his having opened his mind too freely to others about the
necessity and justice of hearing the Parties as we demanded, and seriously
sifting the whole matter de Auxiliis, before any thing could be reasonably
pronounced upon the Propositions. But so it was, we were deprived of his
protection, and bore his absence with the same submission to God's good
pleasure which we used in all other difficult^es opposite to our desires of
seeing his Truth triumph over all those who assaulted and oppressed it so
unworthily.

The same morning I went to la Minerve, where I learnt that F. Barellier and F.
Reginald went the day before to the Ambassador by their Genera'ls order, to
beseech him to allow them to intervene in the affair of the Propositions,
against the Jesuits; and that the Ambassador answered them that their
intervention would be no wise displeasing to the King, whose whole interest in
the affair was to have it decided with the greatest diligence possible.

Sunday, Feb. 2. the day of the Purification, having first accompanied the
Ambassador to the Pope's Chapel, and according to my weak measure performed
the duties of pyety required by that Festival, I went to our Advocate who told
me that being with Cardinal Spada at the end of a Congregation held at his
House, and speaking to him about our affair, his Eminence told him strange
things cose stupende; which yet our Advocate did not explain to me exactly.
That as for our demands, the Cardinal said the Pope had given order to treat
this affair in the manner wherein they acted, and till his Holiness appointed
otherwise they could not alter it. That it was not in their power, but if we
would obtain more than was hitherto done, we must address to the Pope. Touching
the persons against whom we excepted, our Advocate told me further that we
could not accomplish our desire; that he advised us to desist from it,
otherwise we should make so many persons our Enemies to no purpose. That in
conclusion he asked the Cardinal how the affair stood then in the Congregation;
who answered him that it was under examination whether the Propositions were
any of those which were condemned by the Bull of Pius V. That in case they were
not, we had reason; if they were, then our Adversaries had. That nevertheless
after it were found that they were not, the next Question would be, whether
they were true in themselves or no, which was a hard thing to judge, and
therefore the Congregations were frequent. That Si vorrebbe far qualche cosa,
they were desirous to do something considerable; but there was no great
likelihood of bringing it about; they met with great difficulties; that after
the making of a Decision, it was not known whether they who were condemned by
it would acquiesce in the Condemnation. In summa, in a word, 'twas an affair
likely to last to the end of the world, fin alla fine del mondo. Giesu m' ha
detto grancose, che pareva quando parlava a gli altri che le loro Signorie
fossero tanti demonii. and quando parlava a loro che gli altri fossero tante
bestie: Jesus (said our Advocate ending his Discourse) the Cardinal spoke
strange things; he said when he talked with your Adversaries, he seemed to hear
them say that you were very Devils; and when he talked with you, that your
Adversaryes were wild Beasts.

Tuesday Feb. 4. in the morning two Augustines visited us from their General;
to desire us to appear in the Congregation, though it were for no more but to
make the Declarations upon the Propositions which he had often heard us make in
visits and particular meetings. We professed to these Farhers that we wished
nothing else but an occasion of making those and other Declarations with all
possible solemnity; but to appear before the Congregation whilst it acted as it
did, and the persons excepted against by us were amongst the Consultors, was a
thing whereunto it was impossible for us to condescend and conform. When these
Fathers left us, I went to Mass at la Trinita del Monte, where I met M.
Gueffier, who told me he had blamed the Doctors our Adversaries for appearing
and being heard in Cardinal Spada's Congregation the last week.

Wednesday the 5th. I went to see the General of the Augustines, who repeated
his desire of our appearing in the Congregation, Though it were (said he) only
to testify your submission. That it would be expedient that we spoke all three
there; that one of us represented perhaps the occasion of our undertaking this
journey; that another laid open the truth of the Propositions in the sense
wherein we maintained them* and that the third tefuted the Objections which
could be brought against them. That above all it would be requisite that we
took heed of saying any thing in defense of Jansenius; and as for the Bull
issued against him, that we professed that we made no scruple to receive it.

I thanked him for his affection, and represented to him some of the Reasons
which kept us from complying with his desires. He redoubled his instances; I
repeated my excuses, and Cardinal Roma's Brother supervening ended our
Conference.

Thursday the 6th. a friend of ours advertised us that F. Luca Vadingo told him
that we should undoubtedly be heard; but it were good that some Doctors from
Flanders came to Rome for the interests of Jansenius, since we declared that we
would not meddle with his defense.

Friday the 7th. being the day of the Ambassador's usual audience, when he
returned from it, I went to him, to see, whether he would inform us of any
thing touching the purpose which he said the Pope had to hear us solemnly; but
he told me, he had other things to extricate. And in the afternoon being at S.
Peter's Church, I was witness of Cardinal Corrado's piety whom I saw at Prayers
above an hour and a quarter all alone upon his knees behind a pillar, without
train.

Saturday the 8th. I was informed that in Cardinal Spada's Congregations F.
Palavicini being several times in dispute with some Consultors who validly and
learnedly confuted what he alleged, M. Albizzi, to hinder the like
inconveniences, at length brought an Order of the Pope that none of them should
speak but in his rank, and measure his discourse by an half-hour glass which
was introduced for that purpose.

The same day I saw the draught of a Memorial which the General of the
Augustin's was resolved to present to the Pope upon the fitst favorable
occasion; in which he beseecht his Holiness to consider, 1. That the
Propositions were contrived purposely to involve in their condemnation the
total ruin of S. Augustine's doctrine under the name of that of Jansenius,
which was so decry'd. 2. That their Authors had comprised in them the whole
matter of Grace. 3. That they had propounded them in general without the name
of any Author, in hope that they would be speedily condemned. 4. That finding
that they could not make them so bad but they would appear capable of some
Orthodox sense, they afterward attributed them to Jansenius, that at length
they might be condemned under that pretext. 5. That being considered even with
reference to that Author, they included the sound Catholic doctrine of S.
Augustine and S. Thomas, whereof Jansenius made profession. I shall here insert
the Copy of the said Memorial, having been permitted to transcribe it.

Beatissime Pater,
EX obsequio in auctoritatem hujus sedis ac debito officii mei pro tuenda
doctrina S. Augustini quam tuetur S. Thomas and ejus schola, humiliter
supplico, ut advertat, quod sub his quinque Propositionibus latet eversio
totius doctrinae ejusdem S. P. Augustini; quem cum diserte ut Doctorem
Ecclesiae adversarii impugnare non possent, pretextu doctrinae Jansenianae tam
invisae eum omnino impetere cogitarunt. Iu illis enim quinque Propositionibus,
data opera, and magno artificio, and majori dolo, comprehensa est tota materia
de Auxiliis, de possibilitate praeceptorum, de gratia sufficienti and efficaci,
de liberate liberi arbitrii; quae quatuor capita totam hanc materiam
comprehendunt. E primo quidem Propositiones in abstracto proposuerunt,
existimantes quod statim proscriberentur. Vt adverterant non posse per se
Censuram damnabilem habere, quia eas ita confingere non potuerunt quin bonus
aliquis appareret earum sensus, easdem Propositiones retulerunt relative ad
doctrinam Jansenii, ut saltem hoc titulo condemnarentur. Caeterum and cum hoc
quoque respectu involvitur doctrina sacra and Catholica ejusdem and S.
Augustini and S. Thomae quam Jansenius profitetur. Quare, etc.

Moreovet the same day I learnt that they who most ardently wished the
condemnation of the Propositions began to confess that they were not of the
number of those which were condemned by the Bull of Pius V. but were found in a
greater number of those which this Pope had collected to condemn, and were left
behind, yet being of the same quality with those which were condemned, they
deserved the like condemnation.

Sunday the 9th. I went to the Sub-Bibliothecary at the end of his grand Mass,
to tell him that I heard that Cardinal Ghiggi had said that the Propositions
might be condemned without touching S. Augustine or Grace Effectual by it self;
and to beseech him to advertise his Eminence of it, that he might take heed
what wrong this report might do to his reputation. He told me he would seek
occasion to speak to him about it; but in the mean time he advised us to frame
a handsome Memoral, to represent to the Pope, that the usage of the Church had
been in such Cases as this to assemble Councils either General or Provincial;
and that it was free for all the Faithful to enter into such Councils, and
represent to the Church so assembled what every one thought fit to represent in
defense of the Catholic Faith. That the Tribunal of the H. Office was
established for the punishment of Criminals who subverted the Maxims of the
Faith, but not to make Canons and Decisions. This Consideration of the Tribunal
of the H. Office, the style whereof was transferred to our Congregation,
troubled us much, and obliged us to write another Letter upon the tenth of this
Month to our Bishops, and give them account of some particulars touching the
said Congregation, not signified to them by my Letter of the 27th. of January,
and especially to know of them what we should do, if all the difficulties we
had made of appearing were redressed, and there were only this that hindered
us. The Letter follows:

My Lords,
HAving reviewed the Letter which was written to you a fortnight since
concerning the offer made us by Cardinal Spada to appear, if we would, in the
Coogregation held at his Palace, and our answer thereunto; we found it not so
exact but there remain some circumstances which deserve to be signified to you.

Though we had refused to appear for the reasons therein mentioned to you, yet
we understood a day or two after, that it was appointed to be held on Monday,
and that M. Hallier, Lagault and Joysel were expected to be there alone without
Adversaries. We were told that the Tickets customarily fixed upon the Gares of
the Cardinals belonging to it, run thus, Eminentissime and Reverendissime
Domine, Die Lunae 27. Januarii, 1653. erit Congregatio S. Officii in Palatio
Eminentissimi and Reverendissimi Domini Cardinalis Spadae, hora 21. And upon
^nquiry we found it to be so. But having thereby the more curiosity to know
whether the abovesaid Doctors appeared there; we sent a man at the time
appointed to see them enter in case they should come thither; which accordingly
they did. Afterward we understood a remarkable observation made of their
deportment whilst they were in the house.

The Cardinals were in the usual Chamber of their retirement expecting till all
their Eminences were come, the Consultors in another, and M. Hallier with his
Colleagues in a third. When all their Eminences were arrived, they went into the
Chamber where the Consultors were, to begin the Congregation. F. Palavicini the
Jesuit was no^ yet come, and his absence probably was the cause of deferring
the admission of those Doctors. For there passed a considerable time, about a
quarter of an hour, during which they who were without the place of the
Assembly, wondered at the delay of introducing these Gentlemen. Themselves
showed some signs of impatience by their carriage; but at length it was
perfectly visible; for they left the Chamber where they were, being near the
place of the Assembly; they passed into the Out-room, went down the stairs, so
that it could not be known whether they were going away in good earnest or not.
But F. Palavicini being come, and meeting them upon the stairs, the cause of
their impatience was clearly known. For after such a salutation as uses to be
between persons of perfect correspondence, the Doctors turned short and came up
again with that Father; and as soon as they were returned to the place where
they were at first, they were all four introduced into the Assembly.

What several reflections were made hereupon, my Lords, is not needful to
tell you, but we cannot omit the intimate correspondence of these Doctors with
that Father. It Is believed their introducing was not deferred till that Fathers
coming without some very particular reason. Nor that it would have been so,
had any other Consultor then he been absent; since at other times immediately
upon the arrival of the Cardinals, the Congregation begins, though some other
Person of the Congregation be not come; and especially this, which we are told
is sometimes held in the absence of one of their Eminences.

Another thing which a little amazed us, is, that these Doctors appeared there,
though the Congregation taking the Title of the H. Office, is a Jurisdiction,
however venerable in the places where it it is received, not owned in France,
and consequently to which Frenchmen cannot have recourse about an affair risen
in France, and which concerns in some manner the whole Gallicane Church. As for
our selves, my Lords, had we had no other consideration but this, to hinder us
from appearing, this would have greatly troubled us, and we durst not have done
it without first consulting the Ambassador to know whether neither the King nor
his Estate, nor the Gallicane Church would be prejudiced thereby. Perhaps these
Doctors inquired thus about it; but conceiving they did not, we beseech you, my
Lords, to resolve us what we shall do in a like case, namely, supposing all the
other difficulties which have hitherto kept us from entering into that
Congregation, were removed, and there remained no more but this.

We conceive those others will not be redressed so suddenly but we may have
your answer hereupon beforehand. But to the end you may judge thereof with
more certainty, we think our selves obliged to represent to you in few words
some circumstances on either side, which you cannot comprehend there so well as
we do here.

What may be said to induce us to appear in this Congregation, though under the
title of the H. Office, is, that though the affair be handled there, yet
perhaps no mention will be made thereof in the Pope's Constitution, but it will
be drawn in form of a Brief or ordinary Bull. 2. That the Pope being to be
assisted with information in this affair, his Holiness is free to take whom he
please for that purpose. That had he appointed but three persons only, to be
informed by us concerning what we had to represent to his Holiness, he relying
upon those persons, we should have had nothing to say. Wherefore his Holiness
having chosen Cardinals the most employed and versed in matters of Doctrine,
and added to them thirty of the most experienced Divines in Rome, we ought to
be satisfied with this establishment. 3. That though all the Cardinals designed
for our Congregation, and most of the Divines employed in it, are Officers of
the H. Office, yet some are not, and so it cannot absolutely be said to be that
of the H. Office. 4. That the affair is not treated nor reported, at least
hitherto, in the general Assembly of the H. Office.

Now to this it may be answered, That whoever is engaged in the information of
an affair, contributes very much to the judgment of it, and the Registers of
the H. Office will without fail very authentically set forth that the whole
procedure of this affair was before its Tribunal; and so its Jurisdiction will
be acknowledged by us, and by you also, my Lords, in this so important affair,
and that without contradiction; and supposing (as is very uncertain) the Brief
and Bull speak not at all of that Tribunal, yet Monuments will be left to
Posterity in what manner we acted in this Cause. 2. That the Pope being the
Common Father of all the Faithful, may well comply with what the Customs of
those who have recourse to him will admit; and there are other Cardinals,
Divines and Bishops in great number in Italy, whom he may summon hither to make
a Congregation somewhat solemn and more proportionable to the affair than this
of which we speak is hitherto. 3. That no Cardinal is of this Congregation but
is of the H. Office. That the Secretary of the Congregation is the Assessor of
the H. Office. That of the thirty Divines chosen for it at first, only two not
are of the H. Office, namely the General of the Augustin's and F. Aversa; and
there is great reason to doubt, whether by being chosen for this Congregation,
they be not eo ipso made Qualificators of the H. Office; which may be said also
of the two other Divines substituted since in stead of the two Qualificators of
the H. Office, who would not be present at these Assemblies. To which may be
added, my Lords, that although no report be made of this affair to the General
Congregation of the H. Office, yet the whole conduct is as that of the H.
Office, the manner of proceeding secret; excommunication to whosoever shall
tell the least word of what is done in those Assemblies; all the Consultors
having no other suffrage touching what is treated there, but a deliberative
one; and all the rest generally according to the order and manner of the H.
Office; which was also one reason urged by Cardinal Spada in answer to our
instances for a contradictory Conference, as we signified to you by our last.
As for the reasons, my Lords, on either side relating to the substance of the
thing which we propound to you, you know them better than our selves, and
sufficiently see the consequences which can be foreseen on the one side and the
other. Wherefore we shall content our selves with having mentioned these to
you, and we believe they will suffice to clear the thing perfectly to you about
which we consult you, and we beseech you most earnestly to send us your
resolution with all speed.

Other things remained to tell you, my Lords, concerning the choice of the
Consultors, and the proceeding hitherto held in this affair; but because some
of them are such that we need further light before we can speak of them with
assurance and plainness, we shall defer them till we be better informed, and
can acquaint you with them all, contenting our selves for the present to have
spoken to you of these. We are,

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servants, De la Lane, Abbot of
Valcroissant. De Saint-Amour. Angran.

Rome, Feb. 10. 1653.
But when I reflect upon this Letter, I must confess, that how displeasing
soever it was that an affair referred to the Pope by Bishops of France should
be examined in the Inquisition, a Tribunal not owned in France; nevertheless it
would have been an advantage to us, to have had it discussed in the full
Congregation of the Inquisition, and not in this part, which M. Albizzi had
cunningly culled, by removing those whom he thought likely to be contrary to
his designs. For had it been examined before the proper Judges of that
Congregation both Cardinals and Divines, without affecting or excluding any,
it is credible things would have passed after another sort. Cardinal S. Clement
alone, who had right to assist therein, and was excluded by this attificial
choice, would have so cleared things, that he would have overthrown all the
designs of the Molinists, and procured a distinction of the senses of the
Propositions, which was all that we desired. Besides, there was amongst the
Consultors the F. Abbot Hilarion; the Abbot of S. Peter in vinculis, since
Archbishop of Manfredonio; F. Vbaldino General of the Sommasques; F. Bordone of
the Order of S. Francis; the General of the Dominicans, and another Dominican,
Companion of the Commissary of the H. Office; Monsignor Paolucci, the
Procurator General of the Augustines, and possibly two or three more, all
excellent Divines, and very zealous for S. Augustine's doctrine, and Members of
this Tribunal, who being joined to those of the Consultors who were favorable
to us, would have been stronger as well in number, as they were incomparably in
Learning. And the reason alleged for excluding the Dominicans particularly,
and Cardinal S. Clement, as if they would have been partial in the business was
the worst pretext in the world; since M. Hallier and all the rest protested
daily that the Dominicans had interest therein, and that the points in contest
were such upon which they fully agreed with the Jesuits.

Tuesday the 11th* a New Writing against the Propositions fell into our hands;
it was of a hand like that of the others, whereof we knew M. Hallier and his
Colleagues were the Distributers. We forthwith took a Copy of it, that we might
return it without delay to the person who did us the favor to communicate it
to us.

In this VVriting, after the Propositions in the front, they attributed the
same to Jansenius, citing him in this manner.

(1.) A page Indicii facti 19 ad 22. (2.) a 33 ad 50. (3.) a 1 ad 18. (4.) in
Hist. Haer. Pelag. and Semip. (5.) a page 59 ad 63.

The false censure of the Sorbonne was cited in this manner: Has Propositiones
Sorbona sequenti Censura notavit.

The first Proposition was branded as Calvinistical, and as condemned by the
Sorbonne in Luther. Damnavit in Luthero primam Propositionem ut impiam,
Blasphemam and Haereticam.

Primam Propositionem (said the VVriting further) Jansenistae cum Calvino
communem habent. It attributed to Jansenius that ridiculous fiction of
Necessitating Grace. Intenditur (said this VVriting) hac Propositione, ac
imprimis scilicet, hominem in eo statu collocare, in quo si peccat, necessario
peccet, quia defectu gratiae non peccare non potest; si vero been agit,
necessario been agit, quia GRATIA ILLVM AD AGENDVM NECESSITAT. Calvinus hoc
etiam dixit. Propterea recte concludit hominem libero arbitrio carere. Nam
revera si homo ex necessitate agit, libere non agit.

Thus they securely vented Calumnies in private Writings, and further affirmed
this Falsehood upon the fourth Proposition in these words:

Porro eo fine hanc Propositionem adstruunt Jansenistae, ut consequenter ad sua
Principia loquantur, ut gratiam sufficientem tollant; ut qui been agit, been
agere necessario dicatur, cum gratiae resistere nequeat.

And upon the fifth; Hanc Propositionem adstruunt, ut consequenter loquantur.
Si enim Christus pro omnibus mortuus non est; Ergo nullam gratiam illis
confert, saltum in ordine ad salutem, qui damnantur. Ergo necessario peccant.
Ergo praecepta Dei illis impossibilia.

About the same time accidentally came to my hands another Writing upon the
Propositions somewhat longer than the former, which tended only to show that
they who prosecuted the condemnation of them were not contrary to the Thomists.

It was an abridgement of a longer VVriting mentioned above to have been
dispersed at Rome, and since printed at Paris, viz. Jansenius a Thomistis
damnatus. Only there was added diverse passages of S. Thomas which the
Dominicans confuted and endeavored to present the said Confutation to the
Pope, with the other Writings which his Holiness would not hear of. It Is
observable that it determined not any sense of the Propositions, nor attributed
them to Jansenius, but handled them in abstracto. It cited sundry passages of
S. Thomas and the Thomists, to show that the Commandments are not impossible.
That there is a Sufficient Grace in the sense of the Thomists; That Sufficient
Grace is resistible; That the Will is not necessitated by Effectual Grace. None
of which things were ever disputed in France, but thought fit by these
Gentlemen to be brought into question at Rome, thus making an imaginary dispute
and Chimerical adversaries; which was very easy for them to do, because they
spoke alone, and writ what they pleased, without our knowing any thing of it
when they dispersed these Writings, or being able to refute them had we known
it, their subtilty in this affair having always been so to carry it, that they
might be free to calumniate as much as they would, and not be subject to
conviction. But the advantage to be drawn nevertheless from this proceeding, is
this, that it discovers that the doctrine of Effectual Grace is so established
in the Church and particularly at Rome, that they who impugn'd it in France
were obliged to declare by all ways at Rome that they meant not to touch it;
and being they opposed the Propositionly by Citations of the Thomists who are
Defenders of Effectual Grace, it is a manifest proof, all those which this
History affords of the condemnation which they obtained of them, does no
prejudice to that Grace, as we have a hundred times protested.

These false accusations show what necessity there was of a contradictory
Conference, in which the Calumnies wherewith the minds of the Cardinals were
prepossessed would have been not only laid open but destroyed in a moment. For
to do it we needed to say no more, but that we taught nothing of all that which
M. Hallier imputed to us; that we did not reject all Sufficient Grace, but only
that of Molina; that we did not hold that Effectual necessitates but only that
it infallibly causes to act; that men have a power to resist it, though it is
not resisted: And so of the rest. This declaration alone would have stopped
their mouths, and reduced the Dispute to precise terms, by obliging them to
confess that either the Question was about nothing, or else designed against
Effectual Grace.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Conference, Feb. 14. between M. Hallier and his Colleagues on the one
part with the General of the Dominicans, and some principal Fathers of his
Order on the other.

M. Hallier and his Colleagues having understood the visit which the Father
Barelier and Reginald made to the Ambassador to entreat him that the King would
allow the resolution of their Order to intervene in this affair, conceived
themselves obliged touse all their endeavors to hinder it. For which end they
repaired to the General on Tuesday, Feb. 11. Some days before we had visited
him, and speaking of the design of all those who prosecuted the Propositions to
destroy the Doctrine of Effectual Gtace by their condemnation, we thought fit
to give him the proofs thereof in a short Writing, wherein we laid open their
sentiments and designs; and accordingly, not thinking of any thing else we went
to carry it to him upon February 14. But coming to la Minerve, F. Reginald met
us, and told us that M. Hallier and his Colleagues were with the General, and it
would be well that we delivered our Writing to him whilst those Doctors were
there. We did so, and waited till their departure to speak with the General,
and know what was the subject of their Visit. He received us but coldly, and
told us that those Doctors had visited him in complement; and that as for the
Paper which we caused to be given him whilst they were there, he had not yet
seen what it was. Whereupon we gave him an account of it, and read it to him.

The next day we were informed that M. Hallier and his Colleagues had not
visited the General of the Dominicans only in complement, as he civilly told
us, but to protest to him that he had no design to prejudice the Doctrine of
Grace Effectual by it self, which his Order professed to defend; to convince
him of which, they were ready to subscribe the Five Propositions in the sense
of such Effect^ Grace, provided on the other side he and the (...) his Order
would concur and contribute toge^ (...) them to the condemnation of the same
Pr^tions as they were contrary to the doctrine ^ sufficient Grace. That for
this purpose he de^ speedy Conference in his presence with some principal
Fathers of his Order, and they should all find how they ( Hallier and his
Colleagues) held the same Sentiments with the School of S. Thomas. Only they
desired that F. Nolano and Reginald might not be of this Conference; because
they were too hot upon this matter, and things would be more easily accommoded
if they were not. We understand also that the General accepted this Offer, but
would not yield to the exclusion of the two said Fathers; whereupon M. Hallier
and his Colleagues at length consented. That the same Evening the General
acquainted the Fathers of his Order with all this, and ordered F. Reginald to
draw up the Five Propositions distinctly, in the sense of Effectual Grace,
intending to cause M. Hallier and his Colleagues to subscribe them before
entering into any other accord with them.

The same morning M. the Abbot Viole told me that M. Joysel was impatient to
return, and expected a condemnation of the Propositions the second week of
Lent; that he had in a friendly and pleasant way blamed M. Joysel for daring to
come to Rome about this affair, being so little versed in the matter in
question; that he could not understand how so many other props of the Party
came to rely upon him; and that M. Joysel ingenuously answered, that who had a
mind to come, came, but of his own accord, and without procuration from Bishops
or any body. I told the Abbot, that I was glad to understand this
particularity. Whereupon he went about to retract, and excuse M. Joysel, saying
that perhaps they had received procurations since he was at Rome. But I
answered him that it was too late to disguise what he had spoken so plainly.

Thursday the 13th. I understood that besides what is above related, M. Hallier
and his Colleagues offered the General to confer not only with his Fathers, but
also with us; and that the General answered that being that the Pope and
Cardinals would not yield to a disputation between us, he was loath to suffer
one before himself, or to be the Mediator of it. That nevertheless the General
purposed to speak to the Pope the next day, and tell him what had passed
between him and M. Hallier and his Colleagues; and that if his Holiness thought
good that he should set them and us to dispute together, to try whether we
could close, he should do it willingly, and account himself happy in being able
to contribute to our reconciliation. I desired him who gave me this
intelligence to pray the General not to make any such motion to the Pope,
because we had no reconciliation of Doctrine to make with them; and that as for
Conferences, it was more expedient to make them in a full Congregation. After I
was returned home, and given account hereof to my Colleagues, they approved my
answer.

In the afternoon we went to the General, and assured him again of their design
who persecuted the Propositions, to make use of their condemnation against
Effectual Grace and S. Augustine; of which we gave him new proofs; and he
promised us to beware of suffering himself to be diverted by M. Hallier and his
Colleagues from the Capital point of Effectual Grace which they promised him to
subscribe, being that alone for which himself and we were concerned. After our
departure, one of their Fathers who had some intelligence of what passed in
Cardinal Spada's Congregations, told us that all went very ill there for the
Propositions; that nothing was spoken of but their condemnation; but because
the Pope had given order whatever were done, to beware of meddling with S.
Augustin's doctrine, or the matter De Auxiliis, they scarce knew what course to
take. That yet he feared our resolvedness not to appear in Congregations but
after our own way, might exasperate them against us, and carry them to
extremities. We answered that we could not hinder them from doing what they
thought good; yet all they could do could not hinder us from acting as we were
obliged. An other of those Fathers told us that M. Hallier and his Colleagues,
had since their visit to the General endeavored to defer the Conference
designed to be on Friday till Monday or Tuesday following; but the General
would not yield to it, fearing to lose time whilst it was uncertain what the
intentions of those Doctors might be. That otherwise they beliv'd they tended
to deceive; but they should find themselves deceived; for either they would
subscribe the Propositions as they promised in the sense of Effectual Grace,
and so we should have all we desired; or else they would not, and so
manifesting their promises as equivocal and fraudulent as the Propositions,
they should oblige their whole Order to stand no longer in suspense, but engage
against them in this affair.

Omitting some less considerable passages, which would cause too great
interruption, I shall proceed to insert the Relation of the Conference which
was held on Friday the 14th. word for word as it was given me soon after in
Writing by one of the Dominicans.

A Relation of a Conference between M. Hallier and his Colleagues at la Minerve,
Febr. 14. 1653. and the General of the Dominicans and some Fathers of that
Order made by one of those Fathers.
M. Hallier and his Colleagues came to the General of the Friars Predicants on
Tuesday Feb. 11. 1653. The subject of their long discourse with him, was, That
they agreed with the Thomists, and admitted Grace Effectual by it self, but
held also that God gave Sufficient Grace. That in this sense they impug'd
Jansenius, and desired of his Holiness in the name of fourscore French Bishops
the condemnation of the Five Propositions, in the maintaining of which the
Order of S. Dominicus was no wise interessed.

The General would not determine any thing with them, saying that the affair
was too important to be decided in a moment; that he would consult with his
Divines about it; that nevertheless he protested that he undertook not to
defend Jansenius, unless in what he taught conformably to the sentiments of S.
Augustine, whom the Fathers of his Order so vigorously defended under Clement
VIII. and Paul V. That if it could be known that the interest of that Doctrine
was not mingled with Jansenius, he would not stir at all; but if it were never
so little concerned directly or indirectly, he could not but interpose in the
business.

M. Hallier answered, That they were ready to show both to him and his Divines
in his presence, that he was not concerned therein.

Whilst they were in this debate, M. de S. Amor, M. the Abbot de Lane, and M.
Angran came to la Minerve, and meeting F. Reginald (by whom they understood
that their Adversaries were with the General) told him that they came to
present a Writing unto him which contained the sentiments of M. le Moyne,
Pereyret, and others who prosecuted the condemnation of the Five Propositions.
F. Reginald answered them that it was very important that that Writing were
delivered to the General before he concluded any thing with those Doctors, and
therefore sent a Friar of the General's chamber to deliver it to him, and tell
him that it was very important that he please to read the few lines written in
the Paper. Which done, M. de S. Amor and the others waited till M. Hallier
and his Companions were gone. After which they were admitted to the General,
who received them somewhat coldly. The same Evening that General called for
Reginald, told him that M. Hallier and his Companions were ready to subscribe,
and to that purpose were to come on Friday to confer with us; and that they
were very urgent that F. Reginald might not be there, which the General would
not yield to, and so at length it was resolved upon. F. Reginald answered, that
great heed was to be taken of surprises; that the Jesuits admitted Effectual
Grace; that in the Congregations of De Auxiliis they proceeded so far as to
affirm that God physically and really moves the Will before it acts; and yet
under these fair words they had equivocations which wholly enervated Grace;
that therefore it was needful to go with great precaution. VVhereupon the
General commanded him to draw up the Five Propositions in the sense of
Effectual Grace, according to the sentiments of S. Augustine and the Fathers of
the Order; which he did in this form:

I.
Gratia de se efficax vere, realiter ac physice praemovens ac praedeterminans,
immutabiliter, infallibiliter, insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter, ita est
necessaria ad singulos actus etiam ad initium fidei and ad orationem, ut sine
illa homo etiam justus non possit adimplere Dei Praecepta etiamsi and conetur
affectu and conatu imperfecto; quia deest illi gratia qua possit, sive qua
fiant ipsi possibilia possibilitate cum effectu, ut loquitur Augustinus de Not.
and Great. cap. 42.

II.
In natura lapsa nunquam resistitur gratiae interiori, id est, efficaci, in
sensu explicato in prima Propositione, quae secundum phrasim Augustini vocatur
interior.

III.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur libertas ab
omni necessitate, sed sufficit libertas ab omni coactione, hoc est, a violentia
and naturali necessitate.

IV.
Admiserunt Semipelagiani gratiae interioris necessitatem ad singulos actus,
etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant Haeretici, quod vellent eam gratiam
talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare, id est, in
hoc erant Haeretici quod vellent gratiam illam non esse efficacem modo
explicato in prima Propositione.

V.
Error est Semipelagianorum dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino mortuum esse aut
sanguinem fudisse: quia videlicet Christus est quidem mortuus pro omnibus quoad
sufficientiam pretii sufficienter, non tamen efficaciter, quia non omnes
participant beneficium mortis ejus.

During these two days F. Reginald by the General's Command showed the
Propositions which he had drawn to the other Fathers who were to assist at the
Conference, namely to F. Galassin, F. Nolano, F. Alvarez Regent of la Minerve,
and F. Libelli Bachelier and Regent also; and advised what they were to beware
of.

Friday the 14th. being S. Valentine's day the Molinist Doctors came hither
presently after dinner, and were brought into the great room of the
Inquisition. The General also being entered, after a little Ceremony M. Hallier
and his Companions were placed in Chairs near a Table upon which was set a
Standish with Paper, in case there should be any need of writing. The F.
General sat directly against M. Hallier on the right hand, F. Galassin over
against one of his Companions, F. Nolano opposite to the other, and F.
Bachelier to the Regent, who was placed next to those Gentlemen, and after him
F. Reginald.

The F. General begun in Latin, saying that those Doctors had taken the pains
to come and enter into conference with the Divines of his Order about the
affair of the Five Propositions; and therefore he desired them that they would
unfold their sentiments.

M. Hallier thereupon spoke, and said in Latin, That the University of Paris
had always a great respect for the General and his Order; upon which he was
very copious. That the Propositions had no relation to the dispute of the
Friars Predicants with the Jesuits; but were an affair totally distinct; that
none was concerned in it but Jansenius who had revived the Propositions of
Baius condemned by the most great H. and learned Pope Pius V. the light of that
Order, in whose praises he was very prolix; That the said Bull was published by
Gregory XIII. renewed by Urban VIII. and Innocent X. That the Congregations
were held to this end with precaution in no wise to meddle with the matter De
Auxiliis. He was long upon this Discourse, during which the last of his
Companions was folding some papers upon the table.

When he had ended, the General spoke, and repeating briefly and judiciously
what M. Hallier had said, showed that the question was not about the defense of
Jansenius, but only to explain how the Propositions could be censured or
condemned without touching the matter De Auxiliis; that this seemed to him very
difficult, that nevertheless he should be glad to know the sentiments of those
Doctors.

M. Hallier replied and spoke many things in general, repearing what he had
formerly said; and added that when the Friars Predicants defended the efficacy
of Grace before Clement VIII. and Paul V. these Propositions were not treated
of; that when the Jesuits argued against Effectual Grace, that it would follow
that the Commandments were impossible to those who had not such Grace; that
this was absurd, and therefore it ought to be concluded that Grace is not
Effectual of it self. The Friars Predicants answered, by denying the Major and
granting the Minor. That the Jansenists granted the Major and deny the Minor.
That all the Thomists admitted Sufficient Grace; that Jansenius denied it; and
consequently the Thomists were far from Jansenius.

Hereupon F. Nolano said that this was so common amongst the Thomists; that S.
Augustine was of another mind; and that they ought not to deprive us of the
weapons of S. Augustine. But the General interposed, and said that the Question
was not about Sufficient Grace.

After which M. Hallier repeating the same things, added that this was the
whole difficulty between the Dominicans and the Jesuits, but not the present
question. That the Thomists affirmed that Effectual Grace did not pertain to
the First Act and Power, but to the Second; that they admitted Effectual Grace
which causes to act infallibly, insuperabiliter, iudeclinabiliter. But this did
not hinder the Commandments from being possible, even to those who have not
such Grace, because God gives them Sufficient to perform them, or else to
obtain and impetrate that which is necessary.

F. Nolano interposed again that there was no ground either in S. Augustine or
S. Thomas for such Sufficient Grace; that on the contrary they denied it. That
if S. Augustine were suffered to be condemned in one sole point of the Doctrine
of Grace, his authority would be no longer considerable in the Church; that we
ought not to suffer it; S. Augustin's doctrine having been approved by the
Popes, Celestin, Homisda, Gelasius, and Clement VIII. that it was highly
important to stand stiff upon this.

The F. General replied again that this was not the question, and therefore M.
Hallier might proceed, who repeating the same things concluded that the first
Proposition had no connection with the questions De Auxiliis, agitated under
Clement VIII. and Paul V. And that for their parts, they never intended the
condemnation of the Propositions but in the sense of Jansenius. That they had
affirmed the same in the first Memorial, which they presented to the Pope in
the name of fourscore Bishops who deputed them.

Whereupon the third read the Memorial which they had presented, and said the
same things which M. Hallier had done. The second likewise spoke something to
the same sense.

Then M. Hallier added that they had always made the same protestation; and
that when they were called before the Congregation, they so protested, because
they saw well that those Questions were not to be meddled with.

The general answered him, that then it was not without reason that he feared
and intended to stir; and he demanded whether his fear was just and
well-grounded.

M. Hallier replied, that the F. General's fear was just, and that he did well
to fore-arm himself; but for their parts, it was in no wife their intention to
get the opinions of the Dominicans condemned. Then he proceeded to the second
Proposition, and briefly explicated it, saying that the Thomists admitted
Sufficient Grace, not only external but also internal, which men may resist and
do oftentimes resist; but Jansenius denied them; and so there was no connection
of the Propositions with the doctrine of the Order of Friars Predicants. As for
the third, he said that Jansenius affirms that it is sufficient to make an
Action meritorious, that it be done without constraint, though it be necessary.
That S. Thomas, Qu. 6. De Malo affirms this Opinions heretical.

The second added, that the Thomists affirm the same.

The third cited some Thomists.

M. Hallier said, that the fourth and fifth had as little relation to the
Dominicans opinions, because these Propositions were never agitated in the time
of Clement VIII. and Paul V.

After M. Hallier had ended, the F. General commanded F. Reginald to speak
first and declare his judgment. He was the last on M. Hallier's side, who said
that being thick of hearing he entreated the General to cause him to come
nearer, and to place him where he might see him. Whereupon the Father exchanged
places with F. Nolano.

But when he began to speak, M. Hallier said he could not hear him, and
therefore the General commanded him to speak louder. Which he did, and said
that three things were to be supposed: First, that it could not be made an
Article of Faith, That there is Sufficient Grace common to all; that it was a
dispute in the Schools; that many Authors deny that there is any Grace purely
sufficient, but that all Sufficient Grace is effectua^ for some acts, that in
this sense Jansenius did not deny it. And however Jansenius's opinion were with
which he would not meddle. It was certain, that a decision of Faith could not
be made concerning Sufficient Grace, especially such as is general, because S.
Augustine denies it, Nunc autem quibus deest, etc. as he speaks of Sufficient
Grace, which he says is denied to some. Secondly, It Is to be supposed that the
Sufficient Grace admitted by the Thomists, is very different from that of the
Divines of the Society; that these latter hold a Sufficient Grace which may be
and is determined by the Consent of Free Will, either present or foreseen; and
besides this Sufficient Grace they admit no other necessary to all acts. But
the Thomists with common consent admit a Sufficient Grace which gives power,
but is not determined by the consent of the Will, and besides this Grace they
hold that for a man to act he needs another Grace powerful and effectual of it
self. Thirdly, That this Grace, necessary to all actions, even to the beginning
of Faith, Prayer, and other Good Works, causes the will to act infallibly,
insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter, and that independently on Scientia media,
and the conditional Prevision of God. That this being supposed, the Proposions
were true in the sense of such Effectual Grace. That in the disputes De
Auxiliis the Thomists had answered the Objections of the Jesuits, who drew all
these Five Propositions as absurdities following from the Effectual Grace which
the Thomists had explicated by the word of Physical predetermination; that it
was a Question whether it pertain'd to the first act or the second, because it
reduced the power of the first act into the second act. That in the
Congregations De Auxiliis several points were disputed of, especially Grace
necessary for performance of the Commandments; and that when the Jesuits
objected, that if Effectual Grace were necessary, the Commandments would be
impossible to those who had not such Effectual Grace, the Thomists answered
that they were impossible in sensu Composito, but not in sensu Diviso: that as
S. Augustine in the 42d. Chapter of the Book De Natura and Gratia distinguishes
a possibility which he calls cum effectu, and another which may be called
simplex, as may be collected from other places of S. Augustine; so the Thomists
distinguish two Impossibilities, which, in the School-terms, they call in sensu
Composito, and in sensu Diviso; that accordingly they distinguish that in sensu
Composito, it is impossible for him who has not Effectual Grace to observe the
Commandments; which is as much as to say, that it is not possible for him with
that possibility which S. Augustine terms Possibility joined with Effect,
Possibilitas cum Essectu; but they are possible in sensu Diviso, that is, with
a simple and remote possibility or power. And therefore he conceived that the
first Proposition could not be absolutely and without distinction condemned,
without doing great wrong to the doctrine which the Fathers Predicants had
defended in the Congregations De Auxiliis, considering also that in the first
Proposition Sufficient Aid was explicated in the same manner that many Thomists
explicated it, viz. in these words volentibus and conantibus, which ought to be
understood of an imperfect will and endeavor, proceeding from a Sufficient
Grace explicated in the sense of the Thomists.

As for the second Proposition, he said that he conceived that neither could it
be absolutely condemned without doing wrong to the doctrine of the Thomists;
because if by Internal Grace we ought to understand Effectual Grace, as S.
Augustine understands it, it is certain the Thomists always held that, to speak
properly, it is never resisted, yea that it cannot be resisted; though in a
sense less proper they confess that it may be resisted, that is, a man may not
give his consent, because he who consents, consenting freely, always reteins a
power of not consenting.

As for the third he said, that if by Liberty from Necessity it was understood
that to the making of an action meritorious it must be free from all Necessity,
even that which is called Necessity of Infallibility in sensu composito, or
from Necessity in general, and the like; then in condemning this Proposition,
all the Thomists, yea all the Schools who admit it will be condemned. But if
absolute or natural Necessity, which takes away the indifference of the Object
be meant, then will Scotus with his School be condemned; and it is not
convenient to require the condemnation of so famous a School.

As for the fourth, that it depended upon History, and that the Thomists
always maintained in the Congregations De Auxiliis that the Semipelagians
erred in that they would not admit at least for some acts, Grace Effectual of
it self, but only admitted Sufficient Grace which may be determined by the
Will. That therefore if this Proposition were condemned absolutely, the
Thomists would be condemned too, and deprived of all their proofs which they
drew from S. Augustine to prove Grace Effectual of it self.

As for the last, it appeared sufficiently by what he had said in the
beginning; because if they would have it that Jesus Christ died for all, that
is, by his death merited for all universally and without exception Sufficient
Graces, it was a Question of the School which could not be determined. That if
it were determined in this sense, that Jesus Christ merited for all Sufficient
Graces determinable by the Will, then Effectual Grace would be destroyed. But
if they only aimed to get it defined that Jesus Christ died for all
sufficiently, in regard his blood was of infinite value and sufficient for all,
this fifth Proposition would not be condemned, because neither the
Semipelagians ever spoke so much in this sense, nor the Disciples of S.
Augustine ever accused them of Error, for having said that Jesus Christ died for
all in this sense. And therefore he concluded that the Propositions could not
be condemned absolutely, without wholly ruining the Doctrine of the Thomists.

F. Reginald having thus ended, M. Hallier replied, That the Question of
Effectual Grace was very remote from Physical Predetermination; that the
Thomists never placed Effectual Grace in such Predetermination; that Grace was
a thing very ancient, and Physical Predetermination a thing very new invented
by some new Thomists.

At these words F. Reginald made a little sign with his Head, intimating that
he did not approve them; at which M. Hallier taking offense said that he spoke
Truth, and that he ought not to shake his head at it; for 'twas true that it
was a novel invention. F. Reginald, out of respect to the General, and because
he was in their house, replied nothing.

M. Hallier continuing his discouse, said that 'twas true that the Thomists, to
reconcile and accord freedom with physical Predetermination, used the
distinction of sensus Compositus and Divisus, but not to conciliate Effectual
Grace with Liberty; That this Effectual Grace did not pertain to the First Act,
nor consist in a physical Predetermination; that besides he had read S.
Augustine very well, who never used those words Possibility with Effect and
Possibility simple; that they admitted Grace Effectual of it self necessary to
all Good works even independently on God's provision, which he had taught
publicly long ago, and was ready to teach again; that he had protested thus
before the whole Congregation of Cardinals and Consulters at his audience
there; But that the Necessity of this Grace in no wise rendered the
Commandments impossible to him who wanted it; That he who had it, had always a
power to resist it; that the Council of Trent had so determined when it said
possit dissentire si velit, and that consequently a man consented without
Necessity. That the third Proposition had been condemned against Michel Baius,
that constraint alone takes away liberty.

F. Reginald replying, desired M. Hallier to excuse him if he told him that for
certain all the Thomists, except one or two, held that Effectual Grace is a
physical Predetermination; that even they who placed it amongst indeliberate
acts, said it is predetermined physically, and that therefore the Thomists used
the distinction of sensus Compositus and Divisus, as well in reference to
Effectual Grace as physical Predetermination; That when the Council says
possit abjicere, possit dissentire, it means in sensu diviso, and not in sensu
Composito. That physical Predetermination is not a new invention as to the
substance of the thing, that the word Predetermination ought not to be
disputed, being found in S. Thomas and many other ancient Doctors. That as for
the distinction of Possibility with effect and simple Possibility, it is found
in S. Augustine, who uses the word Possibilitas cum effectu in chap. 42. of the
book De Gratia and Libera Arbitrio; as for the other part, simple posibility,
he confessed it is not found formally in S. Augustine, but is evidently
collected out of the fifth book De Civit. Dei.

M. Hallier rejoined to the last point saying that the term Possibility with
Effect was never found in S. Augustine, and repeating the same things which he
had said before; especically that he had always protested that they pursued
not the condemnation of the Propositions, saving in the sense of Jansenius, and
not in the sense of Effectual Grace which they held.

M. Hallier's Companions spoke the same things which they had said before,
adding that in all Memorials they had used this exception, because they saw
that otherwise they should do wrong to so many and so learned Divnes of S.
Dominicus.

Here the R. F. General interposed and said, Then our fear is just, since you
acknowledge it requisite to make those protestations.

M. Hallier answered that they had taken order for that, because the speech
which he made in the Congregation would be inserted in the Bull, to the end it
might be known that the Propositions were condemned only in the sense of
Jansenius.

Then the F. General commanded F. Alvarez Regent of la Minerve to speak, who
said that he saw no more difficulty in this affair; that if these Doctors
acknowledged Grace Effectual of it self indepently on God's provision, they
must also acknowledge the truth of the Propositions in the sense of Effectual
Grace, and consequently that the Commandments are impossible to him who wants
it with an Impossibility consequent and not antecedent; and next, that a man
never resists internal, that is, Effectual Grace; and that this necessity takes
not away merit; and so of the other Propositions. That since they agreed in
doctrine, it remained only to consider how it was requisite to proceed in this
affair; that he conceived it expedient to unfold the Propositions and demand
the confirmation and definition of them in the sense of Effectual Grace, and
their condemnation in the other senses.

M. Hallier permitted not the F. Regent to end, but told him that he
acknowledged the Effectual Grace as mentioned by F. Regent; that he admitted
that the Commandments are impossible to him who wants it, with an impossibility
consequent and not antecedent; that they were ready to subscribe thus much
privatim, but not as Deputies, provided their Reverences would subscribe the
condemnation of the Propositions in the sense of Jansenius.

F Galassin told them, that the match was not equal; that a General could not
subscribe it, they subscribing only as particular persons.

M. Hallier answered that he demanded only the condemnation of Jansenius who
was condemned already.

F. Reginald having desired leave to speak one word, said, But what if
Jansenius has had the same sense as the Thomists in all these Propositions, or
in any one of them? this is the business. Why is it denied to distinguish that
sense? wherefore (continued he) to avoid this inconvenience, it will be
requisite to make a common Memorial addressed to his Holiness and the
Congregation, wherein to lay open the sense of Jansenius, and, it not being the
same with that of the Thomists, to pursue its condemnation.

M. Hallier and his companions answered altogether that they could not do it,
nor recede from their first Memorials, nor from the precise orders given them
by the fourscore Bishops who disputed them.

The F. Regent said to them, Neither can we agree with you, since you will not
explain the sense.

Whereupon M. Hallier and his companions said, that they insisted upon the
condemnation of Jansenius, and the five Propositions, so far as they denied
sufficient Grace.

The F. Regent answered to them, He acknowledges it in the same Proposition,
volentibus and conantibus with an imperfect will and endeavor; for that will or
velleity, and imperfect endeavor proceeds from an imperfect and small Grace,
which is in effect the sufficient, as many Thomists explicate it.

The Doctors replied, that if he admitted it, he contradicted himself.

The F. Regent said to them, If Jansenius contradicts himself, will you demand
that he be condemned in both the two contradictions? It is requisite therefore
to expound him before condemning him. For two contradictions cannot at the same
time be true, nor consequently defined.

The Doctors answered that Jansenius formally denied sufficient Grace in Tom.
3. l. 3. chap. 1. and the following, that he called it a Monster, and was as
well against the Thomists as the Jesuits.

The F. Regent urged them and told them, Jansenius admits habitual Grace,
Gifts, Infused virtues, he admits also Inspirations and internal Illuminations
which make us know Good, for since we cannot will what we do not know; and in
this first Proposition he says that the Just man wills, he supposes the
knowledge which comes from supernatural light and inspiration. In the third
place he admits that he has an imperfect will and Endeavor: Now this velleity
and imperfect endeavor proceeds from some Grace, as Jansenius says, and this
Grace is termed sufficient by the Thomists; therefore he admits all that the
Thomists admit, and that you admit: For what is it that you admit more in him
who does not fulfill God's Commandments? You admit habitual Grace and virtues;
Jansenius admits them: You admit Illuminations; Jansenius admits the same: You
admit a small and weak Grace for these Velleities and imperfect endevors;
Jansenius admits it also: You admit a Grace in him who peformes the
Commandments; Jansenius admits the same: What is it then which you admit
further in him who does not fulfill God's Commandments?

The Doctors were much pressed, and never answered; but speaking all at a time,
never answered to the question made to them by the F. Regent, who urged the
same arguments upon them twice or thrice.

At length they answered, (and I think it was the last who answered) that
besides this they admitted a sufficient Grace, which gives the utmost and
complete power, in such manner, that therein is wanting to him who keeps not
God's Commandments, only the bare action which proceeds from Effectual Grace.

The F. Regent told them that this sufficient Grace was not in the sense of the
Thomists.

Then F. Libelli Bacchelier said that S. Thomas in 1. 2, 9, 109. act 9. and 10.
and in many other places, says that a Just man cannot fulfill the
Commandments and do good without the motion of God; that such motion is
Effectual Grace; and that therefore in some sense it is true that a man who
has not Grace, has not a complete power; that this was the opinion of most
Thomists, and that it was necessary to declare the sense in which they would
have the Propositions condemned.

F. Tolano added that the first Proposition could not be condemned without
condemning those two express Articles of S. Thomas, wherein he affirms that a
man cannot do good without Grace; and that it is evident that he speaks of
Effectual Grace; that S. Thomas never taught any other; and therefore it was
requsite to explicate the Propositions before condemning them.

The F. Regent fell again to press the Doctors, and said, That what they
admitted further in him who keeps not God's Commandments, is not at all
received in the School of S. Thomas, though some Thomist should have said it.
That if they would do any thing and agree with the Thomists, they must
necessarily explain the Propositions, and afterward in a Memorial either
general, or in particular, demand of his Holiness the condemnation of the
Propositions in the sense which should be found false; that it imported very
little whether Jansenius or some other were the author of them.

The Doctors replied hereunto that they could not in any manner recede from the
Memorials which they had presented, nor the orders which fourscore Bishops had
prescribed them. The F. Regent rejoined, Neither can we agree with you.

Whereupon the R. F. General said to M. Hallier, that they must not take it ill
if he took his Course, since he saw what interest all his Divines found, and
themselves confessed his Order said that the Propositions might not be
condemned without explication.

This done, all arose from their seats, and after they had conferred a little
apart, the F. General accompanied the Doctors to the bottom of the stairs
into the Cloister; from whence F. Nolano, Libelli, and Reginald, accompanied
them to the gate of la Minerve. This is the account of that Conference.

CHAP. VII.
Of a long audience which I had of Cardinal Ghiggi upon the same 14th of
February.

THE same day that this Conference was held at la Minerve, I was a long while
in Cardinal Ghiggi's Antichamber before his mass begun. When it was ended, the
first that had audience was the Secretary of the Congregation de Propagande
fide. After him F. Modeste, and next him two persons in a curt garb who seemed
to be but of mean condition. When there was no body more that desired it, I was
introduced. I told the Cardinal that the last time we had had the honor to see
him, amongst the reasons then represented to him for the communication of our
Writings, I had acquainted him that happening to see one which was presented to
their Eminences by our Adversaries, therein, casting my eyes upon a place, I
found a great falsehood. That I was come again to confirm the same to his
Eminence, and to show him if he pleased that it was not only an enormous, but
also a bold and wilful falsehood. That his Eminence was concerned to know with
what sincerity either side acted, and if he pleased to let me see that Writing
of our Adversaries, I would instantly show him the falsity. The Cardinal took
this Proposal quite otherwise than I expected, and with an air wholly contrary
to his usual gentleness and courtesy. He answered me sharply, that it was time
for us to resolve to submit and comply with the Pope's pleasure; that we had
been told often enough already that there should be no communication of
Writings. He asked me how I could know whether the others had presented any;
that perhaps they had not; that he knew as little whether or no we had. I
replied that his Eminence amazed me with this, for I conceived ours were both
for bigness and matter considerable enough not to be forgotten. The Cardinal
said, that at least we had not presented them a tutti to all; that Cardinal
Pamphilio had none. That for his own part he knew not which were ours, and
which were those of our Adversaries. That we had very late bethought ourselves
of demanding a communication of Writings. That we spoke not of it at the
beginning, before our Adversaries came. That we might have reason in desiring
the Pope that he would please to define certain Propositions; but to impose law
upon him touching the way of doing it, was not just. That we said, Vogliamo
parti, vogliamo contestare; We will have parties, we will enter into
disputation with them; that it did not become us to speak in this manner; Non
est vestrum (said he) nosse tempora vel momenta, quae Pater posuit in sua
potestate. I answered his Eminence that the demand we made for the
communication of our Writings, was not new. That on July 10. 1651. I delivered
to the Pope the Letters of the Bishops who sent us, and that those Letters
expressly demanded it. That in our audience of the Pope, Jan. 21. 1652. we left
a Memorial with his Holiness, wherein this demand was expressly contained. The
Cardinal scarce suffered me to make an end, but he asked me, What meant you to
say partibus auditis, seeing you had no parties then? No sooner had I begun to
answer him that the Jesuits were our principal parties, and always upon the
place at Rome; but he interrupted me again, saying, Ha, You would now fall upon
the Jesuits and grapple with them; but the Pope will not suffer it. That we
must resolve to proceed more mildly, and not speak, as we did, of causing the
Jesuits to be declared Heretics. Then with a more gentle tone he told me,
that he had always received me favorably; that he was not obliged to do so;
that he might give me a bare hearing, and then reconduct me without speaking so
much as one word to me. I thankt him for the good will which he professed to
me, and told him that I conceived likewise that on our part we had endeavored
to correspond therewith; that our carriage had been modest and fair, and that
the demand we made was never refused to any person by the H. See. He asked me
whether I was sure of it. I answered that I knew no example. And he replied In
some: as if to conclude, that if we had nothing else to demand, we might be
quiet, and that it was not handsome in us to be so steadfast and resolute to be
doing a pugni at cuffs. I answered him that I conceived not that there was any
fighting before Clement VIII. or Paul V. or in the Council of Trent. He replied
that the times were now otherwise, and, as if to dismiss me, he asked me what it
was that I pretended. VVhereupon I represented to him how little time he
afforded me to speak, and satisfy his complaint of our not having yet
presented our VVritings to Cardinal Pamphilio; and I told him that we knew not
of his being substituted in the place of Cardinal Roma till he (C. Ghiggi)
informed us of it the last of December; though indeed Cardinal Spada had told
us once in October that he believed Cardinal Pamphilio would come to a certain
Congregation which he designed for us. That ever since we had done our utmost
to present our VVritings to Cardinal Pamphilio, but could not, by reason of the
great multitude which we found at his Chamber door, as often as he gave
audience, notwithstanding his Maistre de chamber had frequently promi'sd to
befriend us. The Cardinal replied that nevertheless Cardinal Pamphilio was at
all the Congregations held during the month of October, November and December.
I mentioned again the communication of our Writings, and beseecht him that
since I saw him altogether resolved to deny it to us, he would do me the favor
to let me understand the reasons why he became of this mind, having testified
to me in my former visits that such Communication was so necessary that nothing
could be well done without it; to the end I might signify the same to our
Bishops, and they, if it satisfied them, reverse the Orders which they had
given us to persist in demanding it till it were granted. The Cardinal
hesitated a little what answer to make; at first making semblance of doubting
that he never was of that mind, or having forgotten it. But I pressed him, and
said, Yes, My Lord, before the Congregation was established when M. Hallier came
to relate to your Eminence all that came into his head against us, and I
beseecht your Eminence not to value what he said; you answered me, that all
those tatlings, chiacchiare, were to no purpose; that they went in at one ear
and out at the other; that it was requisite to come to the proof, to writing,
to set down the business in paper, to demand of the other what he has to
answer to it, who must also do the like, etc. In brief, your Eminence said so
expressly, that to bring any thing to effect, it was necessary for all to be
done which we demanded in our Memorial; that I asked your Eminence whether you
had seen that Memorial, and you said it was fitting to do all that we demanded;
but you had not seen it, and would be glad to see it; and therefore I carried
it the next day or two days after to your Eminence, and you were well pleased
with it. But since that Congregation has been established and our Writings
presented, we have been held in suspense for some time whether they should be
communicated or not; afterward we were told that it was conceived that they
should not; then from time to time our hope has been diminished, and now it is
flatly denied. Your Eminence will extremely oblige me by telling me the reason
of this alteration; that so being satisfied with it my self, I may signify it
to the Bishops. The Cardinal began his answer something in anger, saying,
Polevale dimenticare questo, You might have put this out of your head, but told
me no reason of this alteration; and instead thereof fell to blame me, for that
the Pope having declared from the beginning that he would by no means meddle
with the matter De Auxiliis, yet we forebore not in our first Writings to drive
the affair directly to it. I acknowledged that we had very well understood what
the Pope said to our selves concerning his resolution not to meddle with the
matter De Auxiliis; and that we had nevertheless made all the importunity we
could to induce the Pope to make an exact and serious examen thereof; because
it was not possible to pass a Judgment well upon the Five Propositions in
question (being in the sense according to which we defended, and our
Adversaries in their hearts opposed them, but visible consequences from that
Capital Principle and Essential Point of this matter) without first judging of
the truth or falsehood of that principle. Wherefore though we found the Pope
purposed to decide the Propositions without touching the matter; yet it did not
stop us, because we hoped that in the progress of the affair the Pope would
discover the error and defect of that purpose, which had been suggested to him
by M. Albizzi or some other. I had scarce named M. Albizzi, but the Cardinal
interrupt^d me in anger, and said, This it is, all is laid upon M. Albizzi.
They of Flanders said M. Albizzi had falsifi'd the Bull of Urban VIII. yet he
(the Cardinal) had showed them that 'twas not so. After which he added some
words which I heard not plainly, but conjectured by these two words istos
pervicaces and pertinaces (meaning I suppose as well us as the Doctors of
Flanders, that their sense was that there was no way to reduce those obstinate
persons to reason. I took no notice of all this; but continuing what I was
speaking, added, that indeed we doubted not but M. Albizzi and perhaps others
with him had persuaded the Pope that he had imposed perpetual silence touching
the matter De Auxiliis; and that this was the cause why the Pope would not
engage upon an unprofitable and superfluous labor which would terribly wrack
him, and whereof he could not hope to see any issue for himself, or fruit for
the Church. That it could never be proved that such a silence was imposed
either by Clement VIII. or Paul V. That if it had, we could show the Pope and
their Eminences that that Ordinance ought to be revoked; and that it could
never be upon any occasion so necessary as this of the Propositions, by reason
of their indissoluble affinity with that matter in the true and orthodox
senses, for which alone their Authors prosecuted their Condemnation, and we
endeavored to hinder it. The Cardinal suffered me not to make an end of what I
was speaking concerning the connection of the Propositions with Effectual Grace,
but acknowledged that it was true, that they perceived it well, and that this
gave them most trouble. That they considered all this; and that I ought not to
doubt of it. I observed in this Conference that the Cardinal offered twice or
thrice to end it, and about this place he turned toward the door (for we were
walking all this while) whetefore I resolved to say nothing at all more to him,
but suffer him to speak while he pleased. I was so dissatisfied during the
whole discourse, that I believe some sight of it appeared in my countenance;
which I conceived not unfitting to be observed by the Cardinal. When he had
done, I suffered my self to be reconducted by his Eminence without speaking a
word. He continued still to set forth to me, though not without some sticking,
what care they took to effect some suitable and fitting order in this affair,
concluding that they desired that we would contribute thereunto on our part,
instead of obstructing them, as we did; desideraremus manus adjutrices non
impugnatrices. After which, perhaps a little to temper the bitterness of these
words, he added, when he was come to the place of parting, that we ought on
either side to pray to God for his assistance in this affair, Oremus Deum, etc.
I said nothing more at all to his Eminence, but made him a most humble and
serious reverence, which might intimate to him as much my dissatisfaction as
respect.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the two Memorials which our Advocate presented to the Pope in our behalf in
an audience which he had of him, February 17.

HAving in vain endeavored to give the Ambassador a Visit, and an account of
our affairs, I went alone to F. Luca Vadingo, who restored me our Writings De
Gestis, and said he wished all the Cardinals had seen it. He told me of the
Jesuits reproaches cast upon us by reason of the two stories of the frantic
sick man and the loose woman. He told me that we were accused of causing
disturbance everywhere, because we would not let our Penitents dispose of a
penny but by our order, as appeared by the story of M. Charigny. By all which I
perceived that these goodly fictions were spread amongst the Consultors of our
Congregation as well as amongst the rest of the world. In brief, this good
Father informed me, That their cares were so thronged with these vain
reproaches, that in all their Congregations there was not so much as one word
spoken concerning our Writings.

Saturday the 15th. one came from Cardinal Barberin to invite us to dine with
his Eminence the next day: Which we did; and amongst sundry Discourses in the
afternoon, he friendly blamed us that he had not yet seen any of our Writings:
Which obliged me to carry him a Copy a few days after. He showed us several
curiosities and rarities in his House, amongst others a very goodly suit of
Tapistry given him by the late King whilst we was Legate in France. He carried
us abroad for a while to take the air, and returned us home.

The continual difficulties and troubles which we suffered for fout months in
pursuing the communication of our Writings, and the little hope Cardinal
Ghiggi's late repulses left us of obtaining it, caused us to take a resolution
to employ our Advocate thence forward in soliciting it, to try whether he
could be more happy in it then we; wherefore before our going to dine with
Cardinal Barberin, I went to acquaint him at large with the reasons of our
demand and the objections made against it, that so he might be prepared to make
good the one and answer the other when he should address to the Pope and
Cardinals. And least he should forget any thing of what I said to him, I left
an Abstract thereof with him, which I shall here insert translated out of
Italian. I intended it only for the use of our Advocate, but as it seems, it
passed from his hands into those of the Pope, as I shall show afterward.

Reasons in behalf of the demand made by the Doctors of Paris, defenders of St.
Augustine, for a Conference.
1. It Is an affair upon which the eyes of the whole world are fixed, and whose
success every one attends, as well in regard of the substance of the things in
question, as of the manner of proceeding.

2. The Heretics also are in great expectation concerning it.

3. A report is already dispersed into all places, that the Congregation
demanded by these Doctors was granted and signified to them without any
restriction, by the deceased Cardinal Roma of pious memory, according to the
order which his Eminence received from the Pope.

4. That although it had not been so; yet their demand is just and
consentaneous to the usage of the Church. The Council of Trent practiced the
same toward Heretics, summoning them for that purpose, and offering them
permission and full liberty to answer even to the things which the whole
Council should object to them; Etiam ad Objecta Concilij generalis respondendi.

Clement VIII. and Paul V. practiced the same since between the Dominicans and
the Jesuits. Under Clement, after other great examinations preceding, 68
Congregations were held in the space of three years, at which that Pope was
personally present, and 19 in like manner under Paul; in which Congregations
the Domininicans and Jesuits were heard in presence one of the other both viva
voce and by writing.

They between whom the present contest is, are not of meaner condition or
consideration.

5. The matter is subtle and knotty of it self. Great surprises in it have
sometimes been put upon the H. See, because the Parties were not present and
heard. Moreover it has been grievously embroiled by the subtlety of
Adversaries. It requires now a more exact discussion then ever.

6. It Is an affair more important alone then all others of the H. See together.
It concerns the first principles and essental Elements of Christian Faith and
Piety; yea the whole Catholic Religion.

That which is demanded is the last and sovereign remedy which has always
been in the Church, for repressing heresies and maintaining Catholic truths.
The H. See never denied it to any that demanded it. If it denies it now, it
takes away all courage, vigorous means, and boldness from Good and sincere
Christians to oppose errors. By this demand alone S. Hilary sometimes overcame
the Arians in the face of the Emperor, though one of those Heretics.
Wherefore, etc. It is hoped the Pope, etc.

Objections Answered.
1. It Is said in the first place that there are no Parties in this affair.

Answ. Propriety, life, honor, and above all, Faith, is the matter which causes
controversies, and parties amongst men. The quality of Judge of Ecclesiastical
Controversies which belongs to the Pope, shows that there may be Parties in
things of Faith. And in those at this day, the contest is so enflamed, that
never were greater, more opposite and more formal parties.

2. That disputations never produce any fruit.

Answ. It Is true, when they are made Metaphysically, only by words in the air
and without Judges. But in this affair, Ecclesiastical Conferences viva voce,
and by writing and before Judges, are demanded.

3. That such conferences exasperate men's minds more.

Answ. Suppose they do, yet those exasperations would soon pass over, because
they will be ended by the Judgment intervening. But by delay in the true way of
attaining thereunto they are fomented and increased daily more and more;
because they who are in the wrong, not fearing to be ever convinced so long as
the proceeding is thus, every day attempt some new project against the truth;
and they who maintain it, are animated more to defend it against such
endeavors: And neither the one nor the other will resolve ever to be quiet till
after a solemn and authentical decision.

4. That this Disputation is demanded, only to delay the judgment of the affair.

Answ. There will be always seeking to delay the Judgment till it be examined
and cleared fittingly to be judged of, as the truth, the honor of the H. See,
and the good of the Church requires. That this way is looked upon as the only
one in the present circumstances, for arriving to a perfect and sufficient
knowledge to pass it; and it shall be seen with what diligence and sincerity
this course shall be managed.

5. That perhaps the H. See will not engage it self at this time to make such a
Decision.

Answ. When the H. See shall have taken a sufficient information of the affair,
to be able to make such decision, it will not be obliged to make the same
unless it Judge it necessary. It may defer it for as long as it shall please
and think expedient; and perhaps with more credit then refuse a fitting
information.

6. That the Adversaries are contented with such as is made in the secret
Congregations.

Answ. They have reason not only to be contented with it, but also to desire
it, having no other means and hopes to escape; nor can they otherwise secure
themselves from the necessity either of discovering what they are, or of
acknowledging S. Augustin's authority, and the true Grace which must be
confessed by him that pretends to be a Christian, as says that H. Father.

It will be replied on the contrary, Your Adversaries desire a Disputation no
less than you, but they refer themselves to what the H. See shall think most
fit.

Answ. When they say they desire a Conference, they dissemble, they delude.
When they affect to seem thus perfectly submissive to the H. See, it must be
remembered what Baronius observes, namely, that the great artifices of Pelagius
and Coelestine to circumvent the H. See, were such affected testimonies of
their counterfeit submission. Whereof our Adversaries are the more to be
suspected, as the impostures and ambushes which they have made against it
within four years are stranger.

7. That our Demand argues disobedience to the H. See, and implies as if we
intended to give law to it.

Answ. We are not so inconsiderate as to commit either the one or the other,
nor so blind as not to see a difference between those faults, and a most
humble, just, important and reasonable suite as ours is; nor so timorous as for
such frivolous dreams as are objected to resolve to forsake so beaten and
common a way in the Church.

It Is themselves that pretend to give law to the H. See and to us also; having
boasted to all the world from the beginning of the Congregation that they would
never permit a Conference either viva voce or by writing. And this the more
obliges the H. See to grant it to us; because it is neither just nor edifying
that the H. See should be conceived to receive law from them, nor yet that we
should receive it.

We saw the matter reduced to such extremity that we could no longer conceal
our dissatisfaction from the Pope; we considered the Congregation often
assembled at Cardinal Spada's Palace so improportional to the grandeur of the
affair to be decided, and the dignity of the persons who had recourse to the H.
See for that purpose; we saw that it acted in a manner so little Canonical, and
so little conformable to the proceeding which we had prayed the Pope might be
observed in that which we demanded; in fine we considered that it had so much
of the H. Office, both as to the persons in it, and the course it followed,
that we were resolved to make a new demand to the Pope of the first
Congregation which we had demanded as having scarce any regard to this, but
disapproving it as much as the circumstances of things would permit us to
declare. Wherefore we made a new Memorial, which I beseecht our Advocate to
present to the Pope the next day, Febr. 17. when he was to have audience of him
about other affairs. He promised me to do what he could in it, and I to send
him the Memorial the next morning before he went to the Pope. It was thus
inscribed on the outside: Beatissimo Parti Innocentio Papae X. Pro Doctoribus
Parisiensibus S. Augustini Defensoribus. And the Contents follow: BEATISSIME
PATER,
ITERVM SVPPLICATIO, ITERUM PRECES, alebat S. Bernardus ad Innocentium
secuudum, ET DECIES REPETITAE NON DESINENT. NON DESISTIMUS QUIA NON DIFFIDIMUS.
BONAM CAUSAM HABEMUS ET AEQUUM JUDICEM Innocentium Decimum. Illi supplicamus
iterum humillime, pro negotio quinque Propositionum solennem illam, opprimendis
fraudibus, indignandae veritati, comparandae paci maxim opportunam, quam
petimus Congregationem concedi, in qua Parts tum voce tum scripto coram
audiantur, omniaque illarum scripta mutuo commnnicentur; sicut postulant
Ecclesiae consuetudo, negotii magnitudo, and ipsius Sanctae Sedis Apostolilcae
usus, non ita pridem a Clemente Octavo and Paulo Quinto suae Sanctitatis
Praeessoribus observatus, priusquam ad tantae litis diremptionem accingat se
Sanctitas tua, ut tandem re perspecta penitus, sententiam far velit. Hocque
petimus it erum humilliame, juxta literas Episcoporum Galliae, quorum nomine
hic agimus, Sanctitati tuae oblatas die 10. Julii anni 1651. juxta Memoriale
exhibitum a nobis Sanctitati tuae die 21 Januarii 1652. aliaque ad id
pertinentia, juxta declarationem hac de re nobis factam die 11 Julii ejusdem
nnni 1652. ab Eminentissimo bonae memoriae Cardinale Roma, nomine Sanctitatis
tuae, Cui omnia fausta ex animo precamur and annos de nostris. Hae die 17 Febr.
1653.

Sic subscriptum: Natalis de la Lane Doctor Theologus Parisiensis, Abbas Beatae
Mariae de Valle Crescente. Ludovicus de S. Amor Sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis
Doctor and Socius Sorbonnicus. Ludovicus Angran ejusdem Sacrae Facultatis
Parisiensis Licentiatus, ac Insignis Ecclesiae Trecensis Canonicus.




I could not meet our Advocate to know what he had done with this Memorial till
Tuesday afternoon; and then finding him in haste to go abroad, I was referred
by him to M. Brunetti then at his House, whom he had acquainted with the
success.

M. Brunetti told me, that when our Advocate had ended his other affairs with
the Pope, he asked whether his Holiness would permit him to present a Memorial
to him; The Pope asked him in whose behalf? The Advocate answered, in ours. The
Pope asked him, what we demanded? Our Advocate told him, The establishment of a
Congregation which might hear us contradictorily viva voce, and by writing. The
Pope replied, Do not they know that there are two parties in this affair? Bring
them to this, and assure them for the rest, all shall be done with the
necessary precautions. After this Answer the Advocate durst not press further,
but rose up to retire; As he was going, the Pope called him, and asked him what
the Memorial was, and what it contained? Our Advocate gave him account of the
Contents again, and the Pope answered as before, that there were no parties,
that he would take order sufficiently for every thing without that trouble,
that he assured us of it. Whereupon our Advocate rose up and was going away,
but the Pope recalled him once more, and for that he had spoken with some
esteem of it to the Pope, his Holiness seemed something curious of it
notwithstanding his outward unwillingness; which our Advocate observing, drew
the Memorial with the abovementioned Abstract out of his pocket, and presented
both of them to the Pope, conceiving the latter very proper and effectual to
back the former.

Two or three days after our Advocate confirmed the same to me, and told me
two things more. First, That the Pope testified to him an esteem of our
persons, and a desire to give us satisfaction, particularly as to the
Conference which we demanded; but withal bid him advertise us that we might
bring ill suspicions epon our selves, if we persisted obstinately to give no
information but in that manner. And Secondly, That the Pope mentioned Cardinal
Spada as the person who told him that there needed no Conference in the Cause;
and that he answered the Pope, That Is very strange, H. Father; for he told me
on the contrary that it stuck only at your Holiness, and that as soon as you
appointed it, he would willingly do it. That the Pope seemed amazed at this,
and that his wondering obliged him to confirm to his Holiness what Cardinal
Spada had said to him by adding, No, H. F. when I tell you this, I do not lie;
Cardinal Spada spoke it to me, I assure your Holiness. I thanked our Advocate
for his interest and affection in our affair, and we agreed that he should
carry Copies of our little Italian Memorial which he so much liked to the
Cardinals; and when need required, address to his Holiness again in a second
audience, and press him further.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Writings which the General of the Dominicans intended to present to the
Pope with his Memorial to intervene in this affair.

TUesday the 18th. in the forenoon I understood that the General of the
Dominicans had been the Sunday before to get audience of the Pope, but could
not; and therefore entreated Monsignor Sacrista (who had opportunity every day
to speak to the Pope before or after Mass) to present his Memorial, and some
few Papers to his Holiness. I have not the Copy of that Memorial; but for the
Papers, I have most, if not all of them, which I shall insert in the annexed
Collection.

Here I shall only say, that as the Jesuits and M. Hallier represented our
Opinions after a calumnious and fraudulent manner, so the Dominicans showed
themselves equitable and intelligent in laying open their designs. Now the
endeavor of the Jesuits and their Accomplices, M. Hallier, etc. was to hinder
the Pope from giving them audience and receiving their Writings, which
contained a full elucidation of the Controversy. But as they could not hinder
them from coming to my hands, so neither shall they hinder me from preserving
them to posterity as a monument of the zeal of that Order for the defense of
Jesus Christ's Grace, and of the clearness wherewith those famous Divines
extricated this so entangled matter.

Only two differences will be found in their proceeding and ours. One, that
whereas by the express order of the Pope, the Cardinals and all our Friends at
Rome, we abstained from so much as naming Jansenius; these Divines who had
received no such Order, defended him expressly in reference to the Five
Propositions, and formally maintained that they were not his. So that if the
Pope had pleased to decide this question of Fact, it was strange that on the
one side he so often forbad us to speak of Jansenius; and on the other denied
to hear and receive the writings of the most famous Religious Order in the
world for knowledge in Divinity, and who were ready to defend that Bishop, and
to show that the Five Propositions were not his.

The second difference is this; Although they explicated the Propositions in
the same manner as we did, and no less then we maintained the common doctrine
of Effectual Grace, yet they did it in terms incomparably more powerful then
ours. So that if those Eminent Divines have reason to say as they did, that
they never maintained the Five Propositions, because to maintain the sense of
Effectual Grace whereunto they were reducible, was not to maintain them, we had
more reason to say so then they.

But reserving these Writings for the end of this Journal, I shall only reckon
them up here, and exhort the Readers to peruse them carefully as containing a
perfect elucidation of the Controversy. Perhaps I shall not rank them in the
same order as they were intended to be presented to the Pope; but that is no
great matter.

The first of them begins with these words: Beatissimo Patri Innocentio;
Eminentissimis sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalibus and Doctissimis Theologis
Censoribus pro negotio quinque Propositionum ab Apostolica sede deputatis. In
this Writing they refuted M. Hallier's great pretension that the Five
Propositions in question had no reference to the matter De Auxiliis; and showed
that the Jesuits had objected all Five to the Dominicans in the Congregations
under Clement VIII. and Paul V. and the Dominicans maintained them all in a
Catholic sense, which is that of Effectual Grace.

The second Writing shows, that the Jesuits have three principal intentions in
this affair. First, to get Molina's opinion obliquely defined. Secondly, to
overthrow all that was done in ten years in the Congregation De Auxiliis. And
Thirdly, to ruin S. Augustine's authority. All which they manifested by clear
proofs.

The third Writing contains an explication of the Five Propositions with
reference to Jansenius; and therein they show that this Prelate never held the
first but by determining it to a most Catholic sense; and that he never
maintained the four others at all. They also unfold his Doctrine touching the
matter of these four Propositions.

The fourth Writing was almost to the same purpose, and seems made by some
other Divine of the same Order.

The fifth is also a Catholic explication of the Five Propositions, and a
deduction of the consequences ensuing from their condemnation in a Catholic
sense; and instead of these Five Ptopositions they substitute five of Molina's
to be censured.

The sixth clears Jansenius's opinion touching Sufficient Grace, and shows that
he has admitted in effect all that the Thomists understand by that term.

The seventh is a refutation of all which M. Hallier alleged out of S. Thomas
and the Thomists, against the Five Propositions in a Writing which fell into
their hands; it is that which I spoke of above.

The eighth was a compendious enumeration of passages of S. Thomas and others
falsifi'd by M. Hallier in diverse VVritings which fell into their hands.

The ninth was an Abstract of the Outrages of the Jesuits against S. Augustine;

The tenth contained the reasons which had animated the Jesuits against
Jansenius; namely the just parallel which he had made of their doctrine with
that of the Semipelagians.

The eleventh is an explication of these four Questions; namely, whether
Jansenius admits that Internal Grace is resistible; and they show that he does.
Secondly, Whether Jansenius admits Sufficient Grace; to which they answer, That
he admits the thing, but rejects the word, with reason. Thirdly, Whether
Sufficient Grace can be proved by S. Augustine; and they answer by
distinguishing the word. They show that a Grace Effectual for one Effect, and
Sufficient for an other, may be proved by S. Augustine. Fourthly, Whether the
Congregations cited in the first Writing were held before the Pope; and the
answer, that they were so in the year 1062. and that all Five Propositions were
maintained there in a Catholic sense.

Such clear and compendions Writings as these will be found by who so peruses
them, being presented by an Order so considerable at Rome and in the whole
Church as that of the Dominicans, might and ought to have made some impression
upon the Pope's mind, and induced him to distinguish the senses of the
Propositions, had he been pleased to receive and examine them; but, as I have
said, he was so fearful of engaging himself therein that he would give no
audience to the General of this Order, though he requested it seventeen or
eighteen times, his Holiness doubting that it was for this purpose that he
demanded it; and a Prince of his near alliance, having taken a very favorable
occasion to speak to him about it, his Holiness made a semblance of not hearing
him, as shall be seen hereafter.

CHAP. X.
Of what passed at Rome from Febr. 19. to the end of the same Month.

Wednesday the 19th. I went to the Sub-Bibliothecary at the Vatican, and
showed him that two Memorials which the Advocate commended by him to us had
been presented to the Pope: wherewith he was extremely well-pleased. After
which he told me how dejected his Heart was at a common rumor that Cardinal
Ghiggi his Friend and Benefactor was in a strait union and intelligence with
the Jesuits; because if it were a mere report and false, it wronged his
reputation; and if it were true, 'twas yet worse. By this his grief he gave me
occasion to tell him nakedly the whole Conference which I had lately had with
that Cardinal. And upon my saying that I had minded his Eminence that before
the Congregation was established, or he had seen our Memorial, he acknowldg'd to
me that all was fitting to be done which we demanded; the Sub-Bibliothecary
interrupted me, saying, He said the same to me, I will maintain it to his
Eminence; and the next time I see him I will not fail to charge him with it,
and tell him friendly and freely, Come Signor Eminentissimo, How my Lord, etc.
After which the Sub-Bibliothecary told me, that it was good and necessary in
this Court to make a little noise, and carry it high, e buono in questa Corte
di far un puoco di rumore. And yet some-wise qualifying his Counsel, he said
that when I addressed to the Cardinals 'twas good that I did it with the fleam
and calmness del Signor di Sainte-Amour; but when to others, to this or that
General or Consultor, with the fire and ardor del Signor Cosimo de Ricciardi,
which was himself. Not to increase his grief, I was extraordinary moderate in
recounting to him what passed in my Visit to Cardinal Ghiggi, and
nevertheless it very much amazed and afflicted him.

Returning home I passed by la Minerve, and gave the General of the Dominicans
a Copy of the two Memorials which our Advocate left with the Pope. I told him
also what extraordinary repugnances Cardinal Ghiggi showed to a Conference and
the communication of writings. The General said that they doubted him much more
since the late Declaration he made what part and interest he took in this
affair. He told me some particularities of M. Hallier's visit to him ten or
twelve days before, which I do not repeat here, because they are mentioned in
the relation of it before inserted.

I went again to la Minerve in the afternoon, to show F. Reginald some
Propositions of S. Augustine, which F. Adam knowing for such, taxed of impiety
and heresy. As I was showing the same to him in that Jesuits book under the
Cloister, the General passed by to go into the City; we showed them to him too,
and he thankt me for the double obligation which he said he received from me
that day.

As I was coming from la Minerve, I met F. Angelo Ricci who told me he had
heard in several places in the houses of Cardinals and Prelates, (and one might
be assured of what he said, he was so wise, reserved and circumspect) that many
bad tenets were imputed to us, from which he advertised us to endeavor to
defend and justify our selves. These bad tenets were (he said) concerning
Venial sins, Public Penance and the Pope's power. He was one of those who
were troubled at our resolution not to inform the Congregation at all, whilst
it remained secret and acted in obscurity as it did. Wherefore to remedy this
his conceit as well as I could, I told him, that the best and sovereign means
to purge us from those calumnies, was, the Congregation which we demanded,
before which our Adversaries might impute what they pleased, but yet should be
obliged to keep to certain heads, upon which after we were well justified, they
would be no longer creditable in imputing the same or any others to us. For
which end it was requisite that we endeavored the obtaining of such a
Congregation before which all things being cleared, calumnies would be
destroyed and confounded, and till then we ought to suffer them with patience,
since we could neither hinder them nor defend our selves from them. He exhorted
me however that seeing the Signori on whom we depended would not grant what we
demanded, we would conform to their course; being, the more steadfast we
persisted in the contrary, the more danger we should be in to exasperate them.
The great goodness and gentleness of so accomplished a Gentleman and virtuous
an Ecclesiastic, obliged me to tell him for his satisfaction (if it might
prove so) that though the Congregation we demanded seemed to us so easy and
necessary a means for discovering the falsehood and malice of those calumnies,
yet if we could employ any other that were capable to overthrow them, we would
willingly do it.

Thursday the 20th I had much talk with M. Hallier and his Colleagues in the
Pope's Presence Chamber, where they spoke many remarkable things, and M.
Hallier amongst others very contemptuous words against the Arrests and
authority of the Court of Parliament. And touching the voices of Mendicant
Doctors, whom we endeavored to reduce to two suffrages of each Order in the
Assemblies of our Faculty; they told me they were persuaded that we did not
attempt it, but only to the end we might more easily establish the points of
doctrine which we had a mind to introduce there. But I think it more fit to
pass over this Dialogue then to recount all the particularities of it which I
writ down the same day.

Friday the 21. I went to carry the General of the Augustines a Copy of our
Memorials: He thankt me for them, and told me he had had audience of the Pope
that day seven night, about other affairs, yet took occasion to mention ours;
and represented to him that it was a very difficult and hazardous matter, that
it could not be searched with too much wariness, that no precautions and
diligences ought to be neglected in it; because it was manifest that the five
Propositions were invented only to ruin and and overthrow S. Augustin's
doctrine. Whereupon the Pope answered him that he would have either side heard
and that in his own presence; Vogliamo che tutti siano sentiti, and inanzi di
noi. This good General out of the abundant joy which this hope gave him, told
me there was yet an excellent means of making this examen, and discovering the
effects of Nature and Grace, namely, by considering a little with attention and
reflection, all that passes daily within our selves. He told me also that we
must be prepared with three things, in order to refutation of what our
Adversaries might oppose to us. First, to explicate solidly some principal
passages of S. Augustine, which they always objected to us. Secondly to do the
like with some of the Council of Trent, which they likewise made use of.
Thirdly to observe very distinctly, wherein consisted the Doctrine of Calvin,
and declare how it was different from that of S. Augustine. He said, It was a
shame to see the Writings of our Adversaries, in which they boldly cited false
Councils, which, having had the curiosity to search, he found to be such. He
showed me many sheets of Paper written with his own hand, containing
Observations which he had already made upon this affair. He had collected all
that passed in Cardinal Spada's Congregations. And being I wondered at his
great pains and exactness, amidst his many other businesses inseparable from
his quality of General; He told me he never spared his pen to ease his memory.
He said 'twas a strange thing that Vasquez having without contract, taken the
liberty to explicate the Propositions of the Bull of Pius V. without complaint
ever made thereof by any body; yet the same act was a crime of State in
Jaensenius. That the answer which they gave in this case, was, that Vasquez
ly'd, and that Cardinal Tolet had not writ in his Journal, that which Vasquez
says was told him by that Cardinal. Which was neither a good answer, nor a
proof that Vasquez ly'd, because the Cardinal might have told him a thing by
word of mouth, which he had forgot to set down in his Journal. He lent me the
book of Turrienus printed at Lions 1623. to read the Bull of Pius V. in it. He
had noted it with his own hand in diverse places, and I found that in page 611.
right against this paragraph, Deinde sciendum est inexpositione, etc; this
General had writ these words; Die 7. Febr. 1653. Cardinal Spada, dixit Vasq.
mentiri, quia aliter reperitur in M. S. ejusdem Toleti. Which was a secret
revealed innocently, and without incurring excommunication, which who so had
revealed it knowingly, could not have escaped. This, I suppose, was spoken by
Cardinal Spada to ward off some objection, which he could not otherwise avoid;
and was a new proof of his engagement in the defense of the contrary party.

Coming from this visit, I made another, in which I learned that Cardinal
Barberin said in discourse with Cardinal S. Clement the day before, that it was
ill done to set upon Jansenius for these five Propositions, because he was more
obnoxious in regard of some others which concerned the honor of the
Apostolical Decrees. He had said likewise two days before, to F. Reginald (who
acquainted me with it) that it was requisite to condemn Molina and his
disciples, and that his Eminence was something displeased with the Approbation
which M. Albizzi had given to F. Annats book.

Saturday the 22. we went to hear a Sermon, which F. Mariana made at S.
Laurence in Damase. It was an excellent Sermon, and almost all concerning
Grace, its necessity and effectual power. Cardinal Barberin was there also.

Monday the 24th. one of my friends told me that Cardinal Ghiggi had spoken to
him of us, as much displeased with us, because we acted as if we minded to give
them law, and never spoke of submitting our selves to the H. See, whereas our
Adversaries highly professed it upon all occasions. It Is true we did not affect
to gain the good will of the Romans by such low flateries, though we had in our
hearts as great and perhaps more sincere submission to the H. See then they who
gloried in it and made advantage by it. But our submission was regulated by
reason: and we were never of those who think Popes cannot be surprised, and
that it is lawful for them to neglect all kind of forms, and the most
necessary means for discovery of truth, as was done in this case, by supposing
that the Divine Inspiration would supply for all.

Tuesday the 25th I went to visit F. Bachelier at la Minerve who was sick. I
met a person there who told me that Cardinal Pamphilio had by mediation of
other persons solicited the General, not to intervene in our affair; but all
that could be urged to him had not moved him from his purpose. A Prelate there
also told me, he had seen the General's Papers which he designed to present to
the Pope.

Wednesday 26. we went to accompany the Ambassador to the ceremony of Ashes. At
Monte Cavallo we met the Abbot de la Paix, who told us we had the best reason
in the world, but our resolute manner of carriage was not approved. Whereupon I
showed him that we were obliged to act so, and for his further satisfaction,
desired F. Guerin, who was to visit him in the afternoon, to carry him a Copy
of the Latin Letter, written to us touching this point by our Bishops Nov. 28
and of the two Memorials presented to the Pope by our Advocate.

As we returned home I visited F. Luca Vadingo, who told me we should do well
to translate into Italian the Letter of the Cure of S. Roch, which I had showed
him concerning the Disparing sick man of the Archbishop of Toulouse, and show
it to the Consultors, to defend our selves from the false impressions which our
Adversaries, who never rested, gave them of us. He told me also that our
writings both de Gestis and of S. Augustin's Authority, with their summary,
were shown to him, and other Consultors by turns. He ask't me if I knew
whether any Doctors of the University of Lovain would come, because they would
be very necessary in the cause to represent the interest of Jansenius. In fine,
he told me also that we should do well to show that this Controversy was the
same with that of the Dominicans and the Jesuits. That the first Proposition
was concerning the Necessity of Grace, the second concerning its Efficacy, the
third concerning its compatibility and agreement with Free Will, the fourth to
know whether the same were necessary to the beginning of faith, and the fith
whether there be a sufficient Grace given generally to all men.

I spent the afternoon at la Minerve, where I found F. Fani, who told me that
the Congregation was appointed to be next day at Cardinal Spada's house; and
that if he were there, all he would answer to the passages of Scripture
alleged by the Jesuits against the Propositions, should be, that these
passages were the very same which the Semipelagians heretofore opposed to S.
Augustine, and that he referred them to what S. Augustine answers thereunto.

After some particular visites on Tuesday the 27. coming by Cardinal Spada's
Palace in the evening I saw M. Albizzi's coach alone, still waiting for him,
and without doubt all the rest of the Congregation which had been held there,
were departed before.

Friday 28 I understood that in this Congregation, order was given to the
General of the Augustines, F. Luva Vadingo, F. Delbene, the Master of the
sacred Palace, and the Commissary of the H. Office, to Write down their Vote or
suffrage per extensum, and that speedily, to have it ready when it should be
demanded of them. That they said they wondered why this Order was given to them
rather then to the other Consultors; and that Cardinal Spada answered that the
others had delivered theirs in Common, in a particular Congregation held
purposely, to which they had not been sent for with the rest, because they were
of a contrary sentiment. That one of those that were at that particular
Congregation confessed ingenuously, that they had subscribed the condemnation
of the Propositions, and that the Cardinals had done the same and were all
highly incensed against us.

In the afternoon I met F. Galassini, who told me that a few days before he
saw M. Hallier and his Colleagues much plunged with an Instance brought in
defense of the truth which they impugn'd under the first Proposition, and that
they could not get quit of it; and no marvel, for indeed it was not possible.

A supposal was made of two Just persons, who both endeavor to perform a
Commandment of God whereunto they are both obliged; one performs it
effectively, the other does not. They were asked what is wanting to him who does
not perform it, unless the Effectual Grace; which is necessary to them for
performing it, and which enables the other to perform it; and whether it is
not this Grace which renders the Commandment possible with the last and
complete possibility, to which nothing is wanting? This good Father told me he
never saw men so puzzled as these great Doctors, and that they could not answer
a word to this Instance.

CHAP. XI.
Of diverse Works published at Paris by Molina 's Partisans during the same Month
of February. Of sundry rumors and menaces which they dispersed there. And of
the Letters which were writ to us from Paris during this whole Month and the
beginning of March, both touching the Matter and our Answers to Cardinal
Spada's Offer.

THe Letters writ to me from Paris this Month gave me intelligence of diverse
Books newly printed, amongst the rest of one which M. Pignay complained of in
the Assembly of our Faculty prima mensis, to the end the Faculty might nominate
Doctors for examining it, and after an extract and report made of it, proceed
to its condemnation in the ordinary forms. One of the antientest Doctors
deputed for its examination sent me word that 'twas a Book injurious to the
living and the dead, to the King and the State, to the Church, to the Bishops,
to the Faculty, to the Parliament, to the Archbishop then living, to Cardinal
de Retz; in fine, to all sorts of persons. And notwithstanding sundry Doctors
M. Cornet's Adherents, amongst whom were M. Charton and M. Morel, were very
stiff against M. Pignay's motion; and to hinder the nomination of Deputies for
examining the Book, caused M. Mulot Dean, and M. Grandin to rise from their
places, and to go out of the Assembly with them, conceiving it would break up
by their absence; Yet the Doctors who remained finding it was not just that a
Dean and a Syndic should thus bafflle the Faculty, and break its Assemblies
when they pleased, held the Assembly in their absence, and did justice upon M.
Pignay's Supplicate, by nominating Deputies for examination of the Book
complained of. It was composed by a Fueillant, and entitled, Chronicon seu
Continuatio Chronici Ademari Monachi Engolism ab Anno 1032. ad Annum 1652.
Authore D. Petro a Sancto Romualdo Engolism, etc.

Two others were published under F. Annat's name, which were nothing else but
the very writings which M. Hallier and his Colleagues presented at Rome to the
Cardinals and Consultors of the Congregation, and of which mention is made
above; the one being entitled Jansenius a Thomistis condemnatus; the other,
Augustinus a Baianis vindicatus. But which was most strange, besides the
unworthy abjectness to which Doctors of Paris debased themselves in being the
Pamphletventers of the Jesuits, in a cause wherein those Doctors appeared
outwardly the principal parties; the same work was printed and published a
fortnight before as M. Hallier's, with the extract of a Letter in French by him
written at Rome in December preceding; wherein that Doctor sent word that the
Propositions would be shortly condemned, that the Pope and Cardinals judged us
unworthy to be heard, and that the condemnation would be pasesed nevertheless.
And the same Book was published afterward under the name of the abovesaid
Jesuit with a Latin Preface, in which according to his wonted confidence and
shamelesness, he affirmed that we had been heard as much as we would.

But leaving aside this spirit of duplicity and lying, which caused both of
them to speak so differently of the same thing; they showed evidently thereby,
what we were taking pains to prove at Rome, that M. Hallier and his Colleagues
were in this affair only the Agents of the Jesuits, and those Fathers our
right Adversaries; who consequently ought to appear before the Congregation to
defend themselves, and neither they, nor such as were known devoted to them,
(as F. Modeste, and M. Albizzi) to have seats amongst those who were to hear
and pronounce upon our differences.

The abovementioned Writing, Jansenius a Thomistis, etc. gave occasion to two
printed Letters which were directed to F. Annat touching its being one while
attributed to M. Hallier, and another while challenged back by that Father. One
of these Letters was dated, Febr. 7. and the other Febr. 12. both excellent.
But I am so much an Enemy to the least Faults which escape even innocently
against the Truth, that I cannot but correct one here which I observed in the
reading of them. In page 23. it is said that the transient audience which we
had of the Pope in his Presence Chamber at the presentation of our Writings and
Memorials to him, lasted a very considerable time. Which by what I have above
related, is convinced to be a mistake in the Author's intelligence.

The same month another came forth, not quite new, but a second Edition. 'Twas
the Antitheses of F. L' Abbe the Jesuit between Jansenius and S. Augustine,
upon which he had conferred and been confounded by M. de S. Beuve, as is before
mentioned; and yet this Father caused the same to be printed again, as if he
knew not the weakness and falsehood of his work. He followed blindly the passion
which inspired him with this incredible boldness, and crowned it with no less
an outrage against S. Augustine. For at the end of his Antitheses he added an
Advertisment to the Reader, wherein he tells him confidently, that those
testimonies of S. Augustine which he cited, show the falsehood of the Five
Propositions of the New Doctrine, or Jansenius abstracted and contained in
those Five Propositions; and that if after all this, the Opinions of S.
Augustine seem still obscure to any one, he need but be a little patient till
Rome declares what S. Augustin's Opinions were, or what they ought to have
been. Ex allatis divi Augustini testimoniis refutatas habes quinque Theses
novae doctrinae, seu, ut loquuntur aliqui, Jansenium in quinque Theses
digestum. Si cui tamen post tot testimonia, obscurus adhuc videbitur Augustini
sensus, expectet tantisper, BREVI LOQVETVR ROMA QVID SENSERIT AUGUSTINUS, AVT
QVID SENTIRE DEBVERIT.

In the Letter in which M. Brousse gave me notice of this second Edition, he
concludes after these words; Behold, according to this Advertisement, S.
Augustine eonvicted, and nothing more remaining but a Bull to declare him a
Heretic, and remove him out of the Litanies as the Jesuits have already
removed him out of the number of the Doctors of the Church, by putting S.
Nicolas in his place in the proud Mausolaeum which they have erected in the
Court of their College of Clermont, to the memory of Cardinal de la
Rochefoucaut!

M. de S. Beuve about three weeks after writ to me two reflections upon the same
advertisement. The first was concerning the three last lines about S. Augustine,
to whom, he said, this Discourse was highly injurious; that 'twas to accuse him
of having erred, and by extreme arrogance to pronounce before Rome, by saying
that within a little while she will speak and declare what ought to have been
the sentiments of that H. Doctor. The second was upon the former part of the
sentence; Ex allatis D. Augustini testimoniis, etc. for (said M. de S. Beuve)
he thereby openly declares that their design is to involve in the Censure of
Five Equivocal Propositions of which themselves are the Authors, the whole
Doctrine of Effectual Grace so strongly made good by M. d' Ipre against
Molinian novelties.

M. le Maistre Doctor and Professor of Divinity our Confrere happened to be very
sick; upon which occasion the Abbot Ollier made a Sermon at the Church of S.
Sulpitius (the Cure whereof he had resigned a little before) which deserves to
be reckoned amongst the extraordinary Pieces which appeared this month. The
business was thus. M. le Maistre caused his usual Confessor to come to him, who
was one of the Carmelites of the great Covent: He desired the H. Viaticum,
which was brought to him from the Parish of Sulpitius. Upon the ordinary
exhortation which the Priest made to the sick person, he out of sentiments of
sincere Christian piety testified some fear of the dreadful and hidden
judgments of God. The Priest spoke largely to the contrary, and perhaps a
little too much concerning the inexhaustible abyss of his mercy. But being a
man of less abilities then M. de Maistre he could not free him from this holy
fear which is inseparable from solid Christian piety; and therefore went away
displeased and angry; suspecting also that some body from Port Royal or the
House of the Incurables had infused this fear into him. He made report in the
Church of S. Sulpitius of what he had seen, and heard, and of his suspicion
that the sick person who was a Priest, was almost besides himself, and reduced
to despair by him who had ministered to him, and that he spoke of nothing but
repentance and God's judgment. Upon this occasion the Abbot Ollier made a
Sermon at S. Sulpitius, in which he showed at first extraordinary commotion and
grief that all was lost. And then alleged in the first place that the cause of
this his vehement affliction, was, that a sect of people was risen up in the
Church who drew the people into error with themselves; which error consisted in
their standing upon external repentance alone, so far as to contemn internal;
and that nevertheless they continued puffed up with pride. After diverse
injuries suggested to him by his zeal against those people, he instanced (as an
example of the pride whereof he accused them) in a man whom he affirmed that he
saw cruelly mangle his whole body. Secondly, He said that these new Sectaries
held for an undoubted Maxim, That Absolution is never to be given to any but
those in whom perfect Contrition is found; which he said was an Error condemned
by the Council of Trent, and of which he brought no other proofs, saving that
he was ready to dye for it. In the third place he accused the same people of
believing that Absolution is unprofitable and did not remit sins; and that
external penance alone remitted them. Fourthly, That they generally believed
it was necessary to salvation to forsake Cities and retire into Deserts.
Fifthly, Himself affirmed, that for obtaining remission of sins in the
Sacrament of Penance, there was no more preparation or repentance necessary
then is required in adult persons for Baptism; and that this was the pure
doctrine of the Council of Trent. And in the sixth place, That for the direction
and amendment of life, it is not requisite to make use of the rules of the
ancient Fathers of the Church, but of those of the Doctors of the present times
who had converted so many souls to Jesus Christ.

This was the substance of his Sermon, in which appeared so many errors and
calumnies. He who gave me this account of it in a Latin Letter of Feb. 22. had
exactly taken it. Which Letter containing this judgment touching our refusal
to appear in Cardinal Spada's Congregations, but upon such conditions as we
demanded, I shall here insert at length, and with it two others, conceiving
them worth the Reader's pains to peruse.

QVid sit de Cardinalis Eminentissimi Spadae nuperrima denuntiatione sentienda,
haud satis mihi liquet. Multi multa variaque dicunt, nec idem est ac constans
omnium hac de re judicium. Si tamen licet in re tam difficili aliquid
suspicari, arbitror virum in rebus gerendis versatissimum, hanc tentasse viam
dirimendae litis illius maximae, quae omnium brevissima videbatur, si vos
consentientes habuisset. Ita enim and satisfaciebat Ignatianis qui nihil pejus
decollatione oderant, nec vobis videbatur facturus injuriam, si rationem illam
judicii probasse^is. Etenim mihi persuadere nunquam potui, prudentissimos
viros, tanti momenti quaestiones, in quibus totius fidei Christianae cardo
vertitur, ex praeconceptis opinionibus and praecipiti judicio definituros. Et
quanquam Eminentiss. Cardinalem Spadam illi sententiae quae Jansenio tribuitur,
infensum non unus pridem mihi nunciavit, publiceque dicere habere se argumenta
duo quae Jansenistarum nullus solvere valeat, arbitratus sum tamen illum non
adeo sic adhaesurum privatae sententiae, ut cum se judicem intelligeret, uon
experiretur an qui aliter sentiunt, nihil habeant, nihil aut excogitarint aut a
Deo acceperint, quo veritas illustrari posset. Sit enim persuasus licet dum
privatum gerit, privatis rationibus, quas ut plurimum quasi partus quosdam
animorum plurimum diligimus; at ubi judicem induit, aequus esse debet, and
antequam ad judicandum accedat, omnibus se prejudiciis exuere. De Traditione
quaestio est quaenam vera sit, quaenam a Christo per Apostolorum, per
Augustini, per summorum Pontificum manus Ecclesiae concredita; quid illi
conform, quid illi adversum sit, res est obscurata pristinis contentionibus;
multa per humanam Philosophiam and complicationis superbiam inducta sunt, quae
sinceram Christi fidem involverunt: Enucleanda sunt illa, separandum est
humanum a divino, falsum a vero; quod fieri non posse, nisi concertatione mutua
oppositarum partium, ac utriusque doctrinae explicatione comparationeque certum
est. Itaque licet Apostolica seeds, licet Concilia divinam gratiam in
definiendis articulis Fidei semper sperare debuerunt, quae nunquam ipsis
deerit, licet ad illa perfidia habere non possit accessum; Audire inter se
Disputantes semper in more positum fuit, ut ex illa veluti collisione veritas
excitaretur, cujus scintillae sese postea in universum orbem dispergerent.
Istud non schismaticis, non haereticis negatum est, quanto magis Catholicis
concedi oportet; qui se Pauli, Augustini, Thomae, veterum recentiumque
Pontificum, adeoque discipulos Ecclesiae profitentur, and Sedis Apostolicae
vocem toties gratiae Christi vindicem iterum audire gestiunt clare loquentem,
vera falsaque distinguentem, atque a Molinianis tricis atque argutiis, quibus
tamdiu veritati illuditur, sinceram fidem and Christi doctrinam eruentem! Quod
quidem ut maximi momenti est, ita and servata quantum licet legitimi judicii
forma fieri debet, ut quemadmodum olim dum Concilium generale cogi non poterat,
Romanus Episcopus convocatis vicinioribus and suburbicariae regionis Episcopis
de fide consultabat, and disquisitione facta discernabat; sic etiam hisce
temporibus pro ea qua pollet auctoritate, pro ea qua urgetur charitate, ad
pacem inter fideles stabiliendam, ad tuendam veritatem, summus Pontifex
Innocentius X. collationem instituat solennem, ut pollicitus est, quaestiones
ventilari and examinari jubeat; ut mature examinatis omnibus, discordiae semina
penitus auferantur. Neque aliam mentem esse arbitror Eminentiss. Cardinalium
deputatorum and Consultorum. Qui enim sibi in animum inducant, se tam exact
novisse omnia quae ad fidem Traditio nemque pertineant, ut nullam aliunde lucem
haurire possint! Nam egent lectione, studio, meditatione diligenti, ut quotidie
discant quod prius ignorabant, and aperte videant quod apertum and obscurum
apparebat; sed an ea legere, meditari, and videre unius aut etiam paucorum est,
nisi disputatione and contrariorum oppositione, quae optima discendi Methodus
est, adjuventur? An credere Spiritum sanctum immediate cujuscunque hominis
ingenio illabi, and revelare quae fidem explicant, nisi omnem in exquirenda
veritate sollicitudinem adhibeant; Cum ne totius quidem Ecclesiae Concilia id
unquam speraverint a Deo obtinere, nisi and prolixas preces and maximam
diligentiam adhibeant? sed ista prolixius quam putaram de re minime dubia,
quamque firmissime credere Romanos Cosultores non ignoro.

Tacere non possum duo quae Adversarionum tuorum fidem, probitatem and
sinceritatem ostendunt. Primum est, Abbatis Ollierii zelusne imperitus dicam an
furor, qui nuper in S. Sulpitii Ecclesia, cujus se cura nuper exoneravit,
concionem habens ea dixit, quae non Sacerdotem modo; sed ne hominem quidem
pudoris alicujus decerent. Occasionem hanc furori dedit D. le Maistre Socius
and Professor noster; aegrotabat ille; advocavit Confessarium suum, Carmelitam
scilicet ex majori Conventu* postea Viaticum petiit; adfertur ipsi ex
Parochiali Ecclesia S. Sulpitii, accedit ad eum Sacerdos, qui talem agrotum
neque ex nomine neque ex vultu nosset, sed confidens ac securus; tum qui
decumbebat ex sensu vere Christiano testari quantum metu Divinorum judiciorum
teneretur: alter mihi homo and ad misericordiam inclinatior spem ingerere,
misericordiam opportune importune ostentare; aliquod tempus ea in pugna
perditum est; sed sensit Sacerdos qui ad aegrotum accesserat, quam impar esset
congressus Achilli. Subiratus discessit: inde suspicio aliquem a Portu Regio
aut Incurabilium Nosocomio infudisse metum hunc. Refert quod viderat, quod
audierat, quod suspicabatur; hominem sacerdotem fere dementatum, and adactum in
desperationem, a nescio quo, certe non e seminario; nihil loqui nisi
poenitentiam, nisi judicium. Excitatur rumor, animatur zelus, succedit
indignatio, inde in Cathedram veritatis post aliquot dies; Quid ibi? multa
convitia; verberatur aer petulantibus maledictis, haecque docentur and
stabiliuntur, Christiana pietatate scilicet plenissima. Primo, tam insolentis
iracundiae causa affertur, nempe invaluisse Sect^m novorum hominum populum in
errorem inducentium, quorum error hic esset, ut Poenitentiae soli exteriori
adhaererent, ad contemptum usque interioris; qui interim superbia inflati
remanerent, etc. Tum post contumelias non paucas, exemplum attulit superbi quem
ipse viderat (exempli fides sit penes dicentem tam sincerum) corpus suum
dilaniare. Secundo, nunquam abs^lutionem dandam nisi iis, in quibus perfecta
contritio deprehenderetur; quam doctrinam errorem volebat a Concilio Tridentino
damnatum; cujus rei aliud nullum argumentum attulit, nisi quod protestatus est
se pro eo mori paratissimum. Tertio illorum quoque opinionem esse, Absolutionem
esse mutilam, non remittere peccata, quae sola exterior poenitentia remitteret.
Quarto eos universim credere, quod ad salutem consequendam necessarium esset
urbes deserere, and in deserta recedere. Quinto ad consequendam remissionem
peccatorum in Sacramento Poenitentiae non esse necessarium majorem
dispositionem neque plus poenitentiae erigi quam ad Baptismum exigitur ab
adultis, hancque esse puram doctrinam Concilii Tridentini. Sexto, ad
directionem and emendationem morum, antiquorum Patrum Regulis utendum non esse,
sed hujus saeculi Doctorum qui tot animas ad Christum converterunt. Ista ad
verbum ex compendio brevi concionis illius reddiderunt. Alterum quod monendum
habebam, videbis in Epistola P. Annati, quam ad te missam mox mihi dictum est.
Vale.

21 Febr. Anno MDCLIII.
The third of these Letters was from M. de Saint Beuve, and here follows:

Paris, Febr. 1653. SIR,
WE have understood with wonder; by your last, how Cardinal Spada has at
length a list of the Consultors, and offered you a hearing in the Congregation
which it pleased the Pope to grant to you for the Controversies about Grace.
But we have understood with joy in what manner you carried your self in this
Occurrence, and all of us extremely approve your answer. It is not fit to
appear so long as Palavicini, Modeste and Albizzi are Consultors; all of them
carry their exception in their foreheads; and I doubt not but his Holiness will
do you justice if you represent to him that it is not reasonable in a Cause of
the Jesuits for a Jesuit, or an approver of the Jesuitical doctrine contained
in F. Annat's book, to have a suffrage, and much less he, whom all Europe knows
to have been their Agent for oppressing S. Augustin's doctrine. It Is notorious
that the Jesuits are our right Adversaries, and that the Doctors who appear
there as such, are only the Sollicitors of their affairs, lending them their
name and service, acting nothing but what they direct, and produce nothing but
by their appointment. The last Book which came forth here under F. Annat's
name, and this Title; Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus, is a convincing proof
thereof; for this Jesuite's Book is nothing else but the Writings which M.
Hallier and his Colleagues presented to the Congregation. The approbation which
F. Modeste gave to the former Book of the same Author, entitled Augustinus a
Baianis vindicatus, shows that that Approbator declaring himself thereby for
our Adversaries is no longer fit to be a Consultor. And what can be said in the
behalf of M. Albizzi, who engaged M. Hallier to go to Rome, who writ to him so
frequently, and received his intelligences and answers, as M. Hallier confessed
in the open Faculty, when he was accused of corresponding with the Jesuits in
this affair, and subscribing the Letters which he sent by F. Mulard, in quality
of Syndic, though he had no order from the Faculty to write? It Is necessary,
therefore, Sir, that these three persons be excluded from the Congregation;
Justice requires it; and the honor of the H. See no less. When they are
excluded, then you may appear, but according to order; not to make a harangue
or remonstrance, but first to hear the complaints of our Adversaries, and then
answer them by distinguishing the bad sense from the good, which we defend and
you would establish. To this purpose you must speak, propose and answer.
Afterward 'twill be your part to oppose, and then Rome will see that it is not
of Propositions made at pleasure that S. Augustin's Disciples complain. Then
will follow the answers of the Molinists, who will do no small matters if they
save themselves from Censure. This is the Order, Sir, which is to be held and
not departed from. If our Adversaries have carried their Complaint to the H.
See, we shall also carry ours. They could not find Propositions in our Books
worthy of Censure, our Doctrine is so Orthodox, and therefore they framed some
of their own invention; but we have drawn such out of their Books as they can
neither disown or defend. This, no doubt, they foresee; and therefore endeavor
their utmost not to appear in a Disputation; which you must insist upon and
take the advantage of this Congregation. M. Hallier is to return after Easter,
and go directly to S. Malo, without coming to Paris, as I understand by the
Almoner of the Bishop of S. Malo. And if so, you judge right, that he desires
to decline all dispute. He has written to M. Amyot, that he shall shortly have
the Propositions condemned, that he has been heard in the Congregation, and
that you stand off and dare not appear there. His Letter was published in the
Sacristie of S. Maderic and read in the seats of the Sorbonne by him to whom it
was directed. This vain boasting confirms me in the same conceit, (besides
that understanding persons have inferred the same) namely, that it is false
that any Proposition is as yet condemned, seeing the Parties have not been
heard. To think that judgment shall be pronounced without hearing you as you
demand, is to think an impossibility. For how can they pronounce upon our
sense, if they know not what it is? which they cannot but by our selves. To say
that they will pronounce without distinguishing the senses, is ridiculous. For
besides that nothing would be pronounced in this case upon the present
controversy, which is not touching the Propositions, but touching the different
senses which they have, the Thomists would become involved in such an absolute
condemnation. So that there is no more to be done, but to keep in the same mind.
We will send you help, to the end that in case of sickness the Congregation
may continue. He will set forth, I hope, the first week of Lent, etc.

The third of those Letters was written to me by order of my LL. the Bishops to
whom I had addressed mine of Jan. 27. And the Copy is here subjoined.

Febr. 21. 1653.
The answer to the Letter of Jan. 27.
SIR,
I Have communicated your Letter to my Lords, who were much surprised at your
being sent for by Cardinal Spada, to appear before an other Congregation then
that which it pleased the Pope to grant you upon your suit. They remember very
well that his Holiness cans'd the late Cardinal Roma to signifye to you, that
having regard to the Letters and Memorial which you presented to him, he
granted you the Congregation of Five Cardinals, namely, Roma, Spada, Cechini,
Ginetti and Ghiggi, for the discussion and examination of the five
Propositions. Since that time my LL. always relied upon the establishment of
that Congregation, and persuaded themselves that the judgment of the Five
Propositions would be passed according to all the forms of Ecclesiastical
justice; that you should be heard in presence of your Adversaries, the Writing
communicated, all causes of exception against the declared opposers of your
cause admitted, and finally that the Pope would decide the questions in such
manner as the like have always been decided by his Predecessors, in Councils
and particular Congregations. When they were most at quiet, your Letter comes
and gives them notice of another Congregation to which you were summoned; this
amazed them; nevertheless your judicious answer to that summons comforted
them; they extremely approve the same, and enjoin you to insist upon it, and
not go beyond it. M. Hallier will do any thing that he pleases. My Lords pray
you to continue in the terms of your answer, hoping that the Pope being just
will have regard thereto; and lastly they recommend themselves to you and
beseech God to fill you with blessings.

By Command of my Lords N.

After the departure of the Post, my Lords condering the present posture of our
affair, and fearing the ill consequences which they foresaw, conceived it
befitting their Episcopal care to endeavor the prevention of the same;
wherefore those who were then at Paris, writ forthwith a new Letter to the
Pope, which came not from them till eight days after, and was delivered to us
at Rome in its due time. The French translation of it is here inserted, the
Original Latin in the Collection ensuing. Being directed To the most H. F. Pope
Innocent X. it proceeded thus.

MOST H. FATHER,
BIshops highly affectionate to truth, and the Churches peace could not receive
more welcome news then the assurance given us last Summer, that your Holines's
paternal affection and Apostolical care had induced you to establish that
Congregation, so much desired by us. As Soon as we received this intelligence
from the Doctors who solicit this great affair at Rome in our name, we
rejoiced to understand that they had succeeded happily, that the supreme See of
the Church approved and professed to embrace that means, which may be in some
manner termed the only one likely to re-establish public tranquillity: From
that time we conceived a firm hope, M.H.F. that the clouds of calumnies and
humane artifices being dispelled, Truth, hitherto outrage'd and oppressed by
its enemies, would find as many protectors as judges: and that being an
Ecclesiastical Judgment was likely to be passed for deciding such important
questions, relating to the Faith, according as has been always practiced, we
ought to remain quiet in expectation of what so solemn a Congregation should
produce. For the Jesuits having caused these five Famous Propositions to be
contrived at pleasuere by persons devoted to them, the structure whereof is so
artificial and the sense so equivocal, thereby to overthrow S. Augustin's
authority, and make the novel opinion of Lowis Molina, triumph over the
sentiments of the Congregation of Rome, the consent of so many Ages, and the
Orthodox doctrine of ancient Divines, we could not doubt but the esteem and
reputation of that H. Doctor of Grace, would be in safety when it should be
examined before that supreme Tribunal, which has made him so renowned in all
the earth, by the glorious elogies which it has given him. But, M. H. F. as
much as we rejoiced then at the news of that Cogregation, so much have we
since been surprised with the astonishment of the sudden change of which the
Divines deputed by us to your Holiness have informed us by their last Letters;
to wit, that the proceeding in this grand affair is become very different from
what we believed, and that this Congregation is not, as was promised them, a
Congregation in which the parties are heard in presence viva voce, and their
Writings respectively communicated, for taking away all suspicion of fraud; but
that a course is held wholly different from what they had informed us that they
had obtained of your Holiness.

This, M. H. F. appearing wholly contrary to our hope of seeing the Churches
peace re-establisht, we could not understand without extreme grief; considering
what boldness it gives to S. Augustin's declared enemies, with incredible
mischiefs will ensue from it, of what new troubles it will afford matter to
turbulent spirits, what damage the H. See and the whole Church will receive,
if Molina's Partisans effect what they have used so many slight and artifices
to obtain, which is, That it be not plainly declared in what precise sense the
Propositions be condemned, but only that a judgment be passed without
distinguishing the senses which are proper to them for deciding the capital
point of the whole controversy: which would afford means to the enemies of the
H. Doctor of Grace, boldly to abuse the said judgment hereafter not only
against him and his disciples, but likewise against the authority and
reputation of the H. Apostolic See.

We beseech your Holinsse therefore to admit this complaint, being attended
with no less affection and respect then grief and anxiety. Some small sparks
have already caused a great flame on all sides, and the violence of this evils
spreads everywhere. The children of the Church are divided, their Mother sighs
at it, and the wisdom of their Common Father is alone capable to supply a remedy
thereunto. This affair is treated with very much heat, but Y. H. may wholly
extinguish it by using clear and precise words, in passing a judgment on the
sense of the Propositions, which is the whole subject of this dispute; for by
this means Y. H. will stop the contests of those who are divided into different
opinions, and which both sides have maintained with so great ardour. Now to
attain to this M. H. F. and that none may allege any excuse to cause delay, it
it seems necessary in the present state of things, first, that liberty be
given to our Deputies to declare their sentiments in presence of their
Adversaries who are at Rome, to the end to discover their artifices; and that
what shall be alleged by either side in defense of their opinions, be
respectively drawn up into public acts, by some unsuspected person, that
copies thereof be given to the parties, and that they interchangeably
communicate what they advance for the establishing their own or opposing the
sentiments of their Adversaries: That afterward the Jesuits, being more
obliged then any others to maintain this contestation in regard they uphold the
new doctrine of Molina, and are declared enemies of that of S. Augustine, may
enter into the cause, inasmuth as they are indeed the principal parties, as is
evident from hence that the writings presented to the Congregation were made by
Fransois Annat of their society, who has been so bold as to print the same
publicly at Paris under his own name. That M. Albizzi abstain from the
Congregation; since the causes of exception against him are so just and evident
that they are known to all the world. And lastly that F. Modeste, who has not
feared to approve F. Annat's book as soon as it came from the press, may be
likewise removed out of the number of the Consultors, having by so manifest a
fore-judgment shown how much he favors Molina and is contrary to S. Augustine.

Your Holiness, M. H. F. sees that these proposals tend not to eschew the
judgment of the cause, but seek the means of establishing the Churches peace.
And we hope, your Holiness will favorably admit requests, which as things
stand, are not only just but necssary; which are full of low respect to Y. H.
and which have no other aim but the good of souls which it has pleased God to
commiit to us, the authority of your judgment, and the glory of the Apostolik
See. We know that one of the principal duties of Bishops is with great care to
watch, that the Consciences of their people may remain in peace and Christian
tranquillity; and that if when Tares are sown amongst them, we be so negligent
as to sleep instead of plucking them up, God will require a severe account of
us for it. This is it which makes us renew our supplications to Y. H. more then
ever, to conjure you not to use a remedy in this occasion less then the evil,
but to end this grand difference by a Judgment: which may decide the bottom of
the dispute, ruin error in its root, and establish a firm and sure peace.
Which will most certainly come to pass, if it please Y. H. to grant us a
Congregation like that which Clement VIII. and Paul V. established, open and
free to all parties, of which no person may complain, and which may be famous
for ever. We beseech Our Lord Jesus Christ the Author of all graces to preserve
Y. H. in health for the general good of all Christendom.

We are, MOST HOLY FATHER, etc. Y. H. most humble and obedient Sons, N. and N.
In the absence of our Confreres.
Paris, Febr. 24. 1653.
By the same return one of the same Prelates sent me the following.

SIR,
I Have read with great joy the generous resolution which you have taken, not
to It was not to return into France, as I designed for six Months together
about my domestic affairs.
desert God's cause which you have hitherto so vigorously and happily defended;
as also the My Letter of Jan. 27.
Narrative of your transactions with Cardinal Spada. Nothing more weighty and
judicious; and I hope you prudence and constancy will at length bring about the
Congregation which we wish. I have understood with very much satisfaction how
the Order of Dominicans proceeds. Be pleased to continue your adherence with
them as to the fundamental controversy which concerns Effectual Grace. For
obtaining a solemn Congregation, I see nothing more conducive, then to persist
in urging that the H. See never denied to hear Bishops who demanded Audience of
it; That since the time of Pius V. Greg. XIII. and Urban VIII. there have been
no parties that demanded to be heard and to confer; nor can there be any
obstacle now since M. Hallier and his Colleagues agree to it; They professed so
in words, and Cardinel Spada did them the honor and the kindness to say for
them that they were ready to do it. So that this is meant but ad hominem.
As for the circumstance of the Inquisition, we conceive it has nothing to do
in these parts at present. It will be good if the Ambassador can move in the
business, and give the Pope to understand that the French cannot acknowledge
that Tribunal. I am more then ever most really etc.

The same day N. de Saint Beuve writ one to me which deserves as well as any
not to be denied the public light, it is so clear, sincere and comprehensive.

SIR,
YOU are very obliging in taking so much pains to encourage me, upon
supposition that I am very anxious for the success of our affairs. Perhaps
something of my style may have occasioned that your judgment; but though
otherwise obliged to you, I cannot but tell you that I never had any
apprehension, knowing the goodness of our Cause, and your vigilant and prudent
conduct. The reports spread hitherto by our Adversaries have not shaken me, but
I hoped well when I heard that they Decided beforehand, and published Judgments
before the merit of the cause was known. Nevertheless I cannot omit what they
have vented this week. F. Paulin said at the Louvre that we were in such
contempt at Rome, that we were not thought worthy of being heard. You see what
a great honor this man does to the H. See, since he judges it capable of
Prepossessions to the prejudice of the course of justice which refuses not to
hear the most wicked wretches in their own defense. At the College of Navarre,
they say you have done as Luther and Calvin did. That first you referred your
difference to the Pope, and when he was taking course to pronounce concerning
it, you appealed to a Council, or rather demanded to be heard in a Council.
These people are as knowing in history as they are honest in reporting your
actions. In Sorbonne it is said that you were upon flight, and that not daring
to appear before the Pope, because your condemnation was inevitable, you
demanded to have a Council assembled. At the Bishop of Malo's house, it is said
that M. Hallier is to set forth in the beginning of Lent for France, and to be
at Lions by Easter, from whence he goes to Roanne, and thence to Nantes for S.
Malo, with design to dedicate himself for the rest of his days to the service
of M. de S. Malo, more then ever. And upon my objections that it was hardly
credible that M. Hallier could be returning so soon, unless he came away before
the decisio^ of the cause, I was answered that he hoped to have judgment by
that time, but would come back however, having sufficiently labored for a year
together. Whence I conclude that M. Hallier must suppose that the business
would not be determined, by his return; for should he come into France with the
least advantage whatsoever, he would come to Paris and to the Court to receive
honors and complements for it; and also to demand some recompense, either an
Abbey or a Bishopric. But this is enough about them; let us return to our
selves. Nothing can be more prudent and commendable then your proceeding with
Cardinal Spada; your Narrative of it has fully satisfied me. You have nothing
left to do but to keep your ground, and insist upon this especially. It Is a
thing unheard of, that in an important Controversy the Bishops of France
demanded a hearing and a conference before the Pope, and were denied. That if
it be true that our Adversaries desire to be heard coram, there is no
inconvenience in granting, the one side demands, and the other consents to.
That it is the only means to restore a calm in the Church, without which,
whatever else be done, the stirs and contentions will continue. That if an
absolute condemnation be passed upon the Propositions without distinguishing
senses, the Molinists will forthwith make advantage of it against the Thomists;
and that the senses be distinguished without knowing of us which is ours. In
fine, Sir, you must either be heard contradictorily, or else remain silent,
patiently expecting what the determination will be.

I forget to tell you that M. Hallier and his Colleagues write that he has been
heard, that both he and his Colleagues spoke an hour and an half with with great
applause; and that the whole Assembly admired his abilities and moderation,
your denial to appear having given great advantage to your Adversaries. But for
my satisfaction I shall be glad if you signified to me what you have learnt of
their Orations. I am,

Sir, etc.
The same day a Doctor of the Faculty deputed for the examen of the new
Chronicle of the Feuillant, sent me word by two Letters, that after a long
Conference thereupon, they found the Book full of impieties and injuries; and
(to make short) he signified to me the week after that the Kings authority was
interposed to forbid the Faculty to censure it, though it was injurious to
Kings as well as to the Pope and Bishops, but principally to Kings. Take part
of that former Letter written Febr. 18.

Redeo a privatis Doctorum Comitiis, in quibus Chronici Ademari continuationem
a Fulgensi recens editam expendimus. Tot sunt impie, insulse, contumeliose
dicta, ut examen nos ad usque multam noctem tenuerit. Hos duos dies, quod mihi
incumberet ut aiebant de illo refer, studio ad id necessario consumpsi; quare
prolixius non vacat.

And part of the latter written to me March 7.

Chronicon Fuliensis omnibus Ordinibus, Pontifici, Episcopis, Regibusque
praecipue injuriosum, mendaciis erroribusque plenissimum, Censura notari qui
Regem obsident non sunt passi. Nec dubito quin Syndieus aliique ejusdem notae
homines, prohibitionem hanc a Ministris Regiis extorserint, ita illorum indoli
belle convenit cum hoc opusculo tenebrarum.

But they were not successful in their solicitations from the King and his
Ministers to the Archbishop of Paris and his Officiate, to hinder the
condemnation of it, as they hinder that of the Faculty. For the Archbishop
caused his to be published against it at the end of Parochial Masses on the
first Sunday of Lent, in spite of all obstacles laid in his way from the
Court. And the Keeper of the Seals, having himself conferred with the Official
about it two hours, received from him so evident an account of the necessity
and obligation which the Archbishop had to condemn it, that he was constrained
to yield to his reasons. This particularity was signified by M. de Sainte-Beuve
in a Letter of March 7. in which he added that he had begun to read S. Annat 's
Book entitled, Augustinus a Baianis vindicatus; and truly (said he) I pity
him, he is so weak, calumnious and injurious to S. Augustine. And in another of
March 14. That he found himself obliged to refute him in his Lectures, which
was easy for him to do, the Father's grounds being nothing but Imposture, and
his strength consisting in captious arguments.

It Is a strange thing that notwithstanding our refusal to appear in the
Congregation separately from our Adversaries, and to present other Writings
till our former were communicated, was so equitable and well-grounded; Yet
their Eminences resolution not to admit of either, but to proceed to judgment
in the affair without it, ceased not to make us fear ill success, if we
continued firm in our denial. Wherefore we fell upon the same Consultation
which he had held about three months before, namely, Whether in case that after
all our reptesentations of the justice and advantage of such communication they
should continue inexorable, and that a pure and absolute Condemnation were
likely to ensue (much to the prejudice of the Church's truth and to ours) it
would not be expedient that we yielded to inform them after their mode, rather
then let such a Censure come forth. The reasons for either part, abovementioned
at large, were again considered, with additions of new; but we were divided
now, as formerly. We writ therefore severally into France our opinions, and the
reasons of them. Not one of our Friends or Bishops thought fit that we should
recede from any thing of our demand and proceeding, they judged it so
equitable, and were so persuaded that if Justice were not done us in this
point, we could not hope it in anything. This their judgment I shall extract
out of a Letter written to him of us three, who was of the same mind, March 7.
1653.

Reflecting upon the debate which you have had again with M. D. M. the more I
consider the affair, the more I am on your side, and cannot yield to his
reasons. I cannot think that if the resolution be taken to censure the
Propositions, it is in the power of any thing that you can produce, to alter it.
For the Condemnation will be concluded upon Politic reasons, to which you
shall never be put to answer, and so never cut the knot of the affair. But if
on the contrary the consideration of truth be more prevalent then human
reasons, and they will not condemn it, you will be happy in having persisted so
steadfast. You see how I incline according to my weakness and little
intelligence; but I find not humility enough in my self to say that I submit to
everything. I confess I cannot do it upon the reasons of M. D. M. though I have
all imaginable respect for him. Continue firm, I beseech you, and do not all
three give out, whatever happens. If you do, you will be looked upon as persons
that had some good resolution at the beginning of the enterprise, but
relinquisht it upon the first difficulties. Christians are not crowned but upon
perseverance.

But to sum up all my intelligence of this Month, I shall here only insert
what was signified to us March 21. in the name of the Bishops who sent us.

My Lords are enga'd in an Affair of great importance which concerns the
Archbishop of Sens, and has wholly taken them up this fortnight. All that they
had given me in charge to tell you, is, That there are parties enough there,
since M. Hallier, Joysel and Ragault are there, who demand an absolute Censure
of the Propositions in the name of the Bishops, by whom they pretend themselves
sent; and that you defend them in the sense of S. Augustine, which is the
Catholic sense. That those Doctors cannot excuse themselves from appearing in
your presence to justify their demand, and give account why they pursue the
condemnation in such manner as they do. If they refuse, you must remonstrate to
his Holiness, what an injury it is to the authority of the H. See; since the
grand causes of the Church, amongst which this is one, ought to be treated
before the H. See, and consequently according to all the forms of
Ecclesiastical Judgments, (whereof the meanest require that the parties be
heard to argue their rights) that so the judgment may be received without
contradiction.

CHAP. XII.
The intelligence of M. Hallier and his Colleagues with the Jesuits, manifest
by the Writings which those Doctors presented to the Consultors, and were
printed at Paris in F. Annat's name, which I endeavor to discover to the Card.
Ghiggi and Spada, but to no purpose. A discovery of another Writing of M.
Hallier upon the third Proposition.

F. Annae's printed Book, entitled Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus, I received
on the first of March; which occasion I took too visit Cardinal Ghiggi, whom I
had not seen since our great Conference above related. This Book and the
Title Page fixed upon the corners of the Streets of Paris I made use of, as a
manifest proof, to let him see a truth, otherwise but too certain, yet not
admitted by him, namely, That the Jesuits were our principal Adversaries in
this affair; seeing the Doctors who appeared against us were supplied by those
Fathers with the Writings which they were to present to their Eminences and the
Consultors. The Cardinal answered me, that the Jesuits had not meddled in the
business since their defending the Theses in Flanders; that he heard indeed
that those of France had done some thing, but it was not considerable; that it
behoov'd all star quieto to be quiet. I replied that it was not we who set a
foot the Propositions from whence all this trouble arose; but that we were come
only to advertise the H. See of the practices against it, and the Catholic
doctrine of Grace contained in the Propositions, and to entreat that nothing
might be done without hearing us thereupon in a solemn Congregation. After
which falling to speak of the bad sense which the Propositions admitted, I
said, that we were agreed as to that; and that it was not our intention to
maintain them in those senses; but yet we endeavored to hinder an absolute
condemnation of them, in regard of the evil use which might be made of it; and
least they who pursued it might afterward apply it to the Catholic truths
whereof they were capable. That a Proposiiion ought to be looked upon twice,
and all its circumstances and sequels weighed before it be condemned; that if
'twere sufficient to the condemnation of a Proposition that it admitted a bad
sense taken in the letter or the evil construction according to which they who
disliked it pleased to understand it, many in the H. Scripture would not escape
Censure. For example of which I alleged these, Non est justus quisquam; Qui in
carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt; Peccatores Deus non audit; and those which
the Church delivers every day, in the Gloria in excelsis, addressing to the
person of our Lord, Tu solus Sanctus. The Cardinal answered that they
considered all this; that nevertheless we did well to discharge our minds con
tutti, with all, as he believed we did. The supposition which I perceived he
intended apparently to make by this discourse, that we had represented all our
reasons to all the Cardinals and Consultors too, con tutti, increased my
suspicion of their proceeding in the two last Assemblies toward the
Consultors, namely, that they would really pass to the condemnation of the
Propositions, and take the visits which we had made to them to obtain a
conference and communication of Writings with our Adversaries, as judicial and
sufficient informations to condem us formally. Wherefore I told his Eminence
that what I had now said was only to show him the necessity and advantage of
hearing us according as we desired, for a thorough examination of all things;
that we had spoke nothing to them but for this end; that his Eminence, I
believed, was the only person to whom I had spoken so much as I had now done;
and that we were so far from thinking to inform the others, that on the
contrary we had avoided all occasions of doing it, because we would not do it
but to good purpose, which could not be but according to the manner and form
which we demanded.

The same day I desired our Advocate to go to the Cardinals of our
Congregations, and press them with the most urgent reasons he could to grant us
a Conference. We talked largely together about the consequences which were to be
feared in case they should not grant it; and he undertook to visit them for the
purpose aforesaid, except Cardinal Pamphilio, whom, he said he could not yet
address to; but for each of the rest he took a Copy of the two Memorials which
he had presented to the Pope, to leave with their Eminences, after he had
spoken to them what he intended.

Tuesday the 4th. I went to show F. Annat's book to Cardinal Spada, that he
might thereby see that the Jesuits were in the cause as well as M. Hallier and
his Colleagues, in as much as these Doctors were but as the Agents and
Pamphlet-venters of those Fathers. The Cardinal answered that he had never told
me that those Fathers were not of the same opinions, or that they acted not
something underhand, but that they had not spoken to him about them* and that
the Pope having put two Dominicans into the Congregation for one Jesuit, we
were rather favored than otherwise.

We heard in the morning at la Minerve that the General of the Domincians was
gone to get audience of the Pope to present his Memorial and his Papers to his
Holiness, and that the Commissary of the H. Office desired to speak with M. de
Valcroissant as a particular Friend, and that we might go to him by the back
stairs. In the afternnon I accompanied him thither. He propounded to us some
difficulties upon the first Proposition, in which having received satisfaction
from M. de Valcroissant's answers, he told us that it would be good that we
could meet together some times, but in such a place as might not give jealousy
to any body. I spoke to him concerning F. Annat's book newly printed; I showed
it him, and told him it was the same Writing which M. Hallier and his Colleagues
had presented to him four or five Months before. He answered me that he had one
of them too; but had not had time yet to read it.

Some days before this visit a Writing of good length made by our Adversaries
upon the third Proposition fell into my hands; we caused it to be transcribed
by several Amanuenses, that it might be precisely restored by the time at which
he who lent it us was obliged to return it. Afterward recovering two others,
one upon the fourth, and che other upon the fifth Proposition, we apprehended
that these three Writings were parts of an entire Treatise upon the
Propositions, and consequently that we wanted what had been commented upon the
two first; but we could never light upon them.

That upon the Third Proposition was nothing but a heap of passages and
argumentations out of Ricardus and F. Pelau in his Treatise of Liberty; and
besides an infinite number of wrested citations, it was wholly founded upon a
point not at all in question. For it pretended to show that according to the
Fathers, Free Will requires some kind of Indifference. Now this was never
disputed, none having ever denied that Free Will is always inseparably in this
life joined with the indifference held by the Thomists; that is to say, with an
active power of acting or not acting. Nevertheless upon this false foundation
all the said Tract is built, and falls to the ground by the sole distinction of
two sorts of Indifference, whereof one, which is held by Molina, destroys
Effectual Grace, because it infers that a man may so act and not act, that it
sometimes comes to pass that the Will acts not and consents not to the same
Grace which causes it to act at another time in the same dispositions; and this
is that which we opposed. The other, held by the Thomists, does not in any sort
destroy Effectual Grace, since it so gives the active power of not doing that
whereunto Effectual Grace determines us, that yet it never comes to pass that
the thing is not done. And as for this sort of Indifference, we not only never
rejected it, but have formerly admitted it in a hundred places of our Writings.

But hence it is easy to judge what impression might be made upon the minds of
the Cardinals by the noise of a hundred passages pretended to be formally
against the opinions of the Jansenists, which they understood only by the
fabulous and calumnious reports which it pleased our Adversaries to make of
them in their Writings and Discourses.

And it is pleasant to observe that as they attributed to those Utopian
Jansenists which subsisted only in their own brains, the imaginary Opinion of
an absolute Necessity which takes away the power of acting and not acting, and
destroys Indifference; so they make them speak after their mode, and attribute
answers to them, which no body ever thought of.

Respondent primo Jansenistae voluntatem hoc quidem posse si velit, quia si
vellet, hoc ipso actu illud faceret; sed non posse illud velle propter grntiam
qua impedit ne id velit. Which is a ridiculous answer sorg'd by them at
pleasure; for no body denies that the Will can resist Effectual Grace, and has
the active power to will it, though it never comes to pass that it does will
it, because Grace makes it will the contrary, and determines it to will, not to
use the power which it has.

Respondent secundo, (say they further) hoc sensu Voluntatem posse dissentire,
quatenus absente gratia non operatur illud bonum ad quod per gratiam excitatur,
quod ea praesente necessario operatur. This is properly the ridiculous Chimaera
of the Necessitating Grace which destroys the active power of resisting it
self whilst it is present. It sprung first in F. Annat's Imagination, who
diffused it into those of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, and by their means
endeavored to persuade the Cardinals and Consultors of it.

It Is easy to triumph thus over Adversaries by attributing to them imaginary
opinions and answers. The length of this Writing hinders me from transcribing
it particularly. I shall only add that it is concluded with the ordinary
Protestation, that they do not persecute the Propositions in the sense of
Effectual Grace, and that the question is not about the points contested
between the Dominicans and the Jesuits.

Colligitur secundo (say they in the writing upon the Fifth Proposition) quid
dicendum sit illis qui hanc esse putant controversiam de auxiliis Divinae
Gratiae tamdiu olim dissertatam sub duobus Pontificibus inter Thomistas and
Jesuitas, jamque hoc pretextu Janseniani utuntur ut Censuras eludant; and cum
non putent posse Thomist as in eandem ruinam trahi, cum illis ipsi commmnione
sententiarum and connexione erigantur and stent, vel certe ut tanquam in pari
causa dum ulterior expectatur definitio, eadem liberate fruantur docendi
quodlibet qua fruuntur illae duae familiae. Sed in co quoque latius aberrant,
quam toto coelo. Nihil omnino illis exprobatur de quo Thomistae cum Jesuitis
contenderint, nihil exigitur quam quod sucrit concordissimo duorum illorum
Ordinum consensu atque suffragiis constitutum, quod possibilia sint praecepta
Dei transgressoribus, quibus transgressio ad culpa imputatur; quod detur
auxilium sufficiens atque internum eui homines dissentiunt; quod indifferentia
ad agendum and non agendum a liberate arbitrii quae requiritur admerendum and
demerendum sit inseparabilis; quod non sint Haeretici qui dicunt liberum
arbitrium Deo moventi per gratiam efficacem dissentire posse ('it is the sense
which they give the Fourth Proposition) and quod sensus divisus quo id posse
dicitur, non sit idem quod ex hypothesi mutationis and substractionis ejusdem
gratiae, sed ita ut cum illa sit expedita ad dissentiendum potentia, quod
Christus sit etiam pro reprobis mortuus, ut illis media salut is obtineret.

This is the close way whereby they oppose us, fathering these ridiculous
opinions upon us, or rather upon those who were in France. For they pretended
to spare us, by endeavoring to persuade that we did not speak sincerely, or
understood not the end of this new Heresy.

CHAP. XIII.
Proposals made to me by Cardinal Barberin about the Doctrine of the Thomists.
The Beginning of the Congregations before the Pope. His Holiness's
reconcilement with Signora Olympia by whom he is entertained at Dinner upon the
day of the Annunciation with his kindred, who endeavor to deter him from the
Congregations, but in vain.

MArch the 4th. Cardinal Barberin returned to me our VVriting De Gestis, and
upon the 5th. I carried him our Summary. He asked me why we did not wholly join
with the Dominicans? I answered him, that they did their own business, and we
ours; that we might have our particular aims and pretensions, though their
Doctrine was no-wise different from ours, at least at the bottom. He fell to
speak of Jansenius, and said, that he admitted the same Sufficient Graces which
the Thomists taught; for which he cited Chap. 3. lib. 4. I answered him that I
could not tell, having not read the Book; but that no doubt there are such
small Graces as the Thomists call Sufficient, and acknowledge as well as we not
to be such really in the sense wherein the World takes the word Sufficient,
since they do not suffice, there being need, besides these Graces, of that
which is Effectual by it self, to perform the good action which would not be
done without it. He asked me whether I had the Writing entitled Jansenius a
Thomistis damnatus? I told him I had it, but did not speak of it to his
Eminence, because it would shame M. Hallier, who had been the Distributor of it
under the Paedagogy of the Jesuits, and whom I knew his Eminence honored with
his affection.

In the afternoon I received a Visit from an intelligent person, who informed
me, 1. That next week una Congregatione Papale a Congregation in his Holiness's
presence was to be held. 2. That F. Lezzana had been retained by the Pope to be
of the Congregation instituted for examining the Propositions, but was, by he
knew not what insinuation of M. Albizzi with the Pope, excluded. For proof of
which he told me, that Monsiguor Sacrista informed him that he, was that Father
who said he was going to take the Oath required by the Congregation; that
afterward he was left out without any thing spoken to him; and that though he
was very patient and submissive to Providence, yet he had testified to Cardinal
Ginetti some resentment of the stir. 3. That before the Commissary of the H.
Office had considered upon the Propositions, he was much animated against them;
during which tempest M. Albizzi made use of him to sound the minds and opinions
of others before they were apppointed for the Congregation. 4. That likewise
the Master of the Sacred Palace had the Propositions in abhorrence, as he who
told me this found when asking of him permission to read the Writing composed
upon them, which begins In Nomine Domini, etc. for he answered him (Guardateri
d' imbe' vervi di queste cose) Beware of being infested with such things; and
that to obtain such permission he was fain to carry a Friend, who was well
known to the Master of the Sacred Palace, to assure him thar he was a man not
likely to be surpised by heretical Sentiments, per inhereticarsi. 5. That the
Fathers Delbene, Luca Vadingo, and the General of the Augustines were at first
of another mind than what they were of after they had carefully studied these
matters.

Thursday the 6th. I learnt at la Minerve, that the General of the Dominicans,
despairing to get audience of the Pope, intended to take the opportunity of the
Congegation of the H. Office at which he is always present, to present a
Memorial to the Pope, that his Holiness would please to afford him the audience
which he had so often sought in vain. He promised me himself also, to cause his
Fathers to draw up a Relation of the Conference which they had had with M.
Hallier and his Colleagues, not to publish, but to preserve in the Archives of
their Covent ad perpetuam rei memoriam.

In another Visit I understood that the Consultors had order to be ready to
deliver their Votes or Sentiments in writing upon the third Sunday of Lent (if
my Informer was not mistaken in the day) and that the Congregation was
thenceforward to be held before the Pope, but that they were all charged to
take their measures so, that no one might speak above a quarter of an hour. I
learnt also in the same Vi^ite, that the Consultors disaffected to the
Propositions, finding the mind of them, and conceiving that any thing was
lawful for them in the Congregations held at Cardinal Spada's House, made great
clapping of hands and noise there, and M. Albizzi with them, crying Avaunt
Heretic, Avaunt Lutheran, when the well-affected to the Propositions spoke the
best things to defend them. In fine, that the five Cardinals oftentimes slept
and snor'd there; sometimes all together; so that one of the Consultors seeing
them in that posture, took the liberty to say to another these words. At least
if there be any that keeps Sentinel, aiming thereby to hold the Consultors in
their duty, that heed might be given to what was spoken, and the same
afterward reported to those that slept, Al meno se fosse qualche d' uno che
facesse la Santinella. But whether they slept or wakt, certain it is that the
manner of handling things in the Congregation upon the Information of one party
alone was very unfit to instruct them in the matters whereof they were to
judge. Which made us many times with eyes of compassion look upon those
Cardinals, who having spent their lives in employments for the most part more
Secular then Ecclesiastical, and Political then Theological, and being engaged
in an innumerable multitude of other businesses, were appointed to give their
own judgments, and form that of the Pope upon the most difficult matters of
all Divinity, and upon which judgment cannot be passed without temerity,
unless care be taken for instruction therein by exact, assiduous and
deliberate reading of the Scripture and the Fathers.

Immediately after Dinner I received a Note, signifying to me, 1. That the
Congregation would be held on Monday following before the Pope. 2. That his
Holiness was so prepossessed that no good was to be hoped. 3. That nothing was
thought upon but a Condemnation. 4. That it was said of Monsignor Gavotti, that
he began to dote, because he very well understood the doctrine of S. Augustine,
and remembered also what passed under Clement VIII. and Paul V. 5. That all
things tended to mischief, and to prevent the Dominicans of time to interest
themselves in this affair. 6. That there was no place for saying any thing in
order to stop the course of this mischief. The Original of the said Note was
thus:

La Congregatione e stabilita per lanedi.
Pare il Papa prevenuto in modo, che nulla si spera di buono.
Le prattiche si famo per condennare. Null' altra cosa piu si medita.
Monsignor Gavotti e tenuto per semo.
Ogni cosa tend al male, and a fare presto, per levare campo a Domenicani.
Non si puo parlare.
In the Evening I learned that a Letter from the Nuntio in Flanders giving
intelligence of the death of M. Calenus who had highly defended Jansenius,
being read in the morning in the Assembly of the H* Office, the Pope was
displeased that he was entertained with nothing but that affair, and said
angerly that he would end it, Voglio finir sta cosa. And that Card. Barberin,
Spada, and a third, with M. Albizzi talking together about the Propositions,
before the Pope's coming, Cardinal Spada said, We will condemn those
Propositions; They must be condemned. They will not obey the Bull; but hold
these Opinions, because they say the Book is not condemned, but only
prohibited. It must be condemned; and more he said to the same purpose.

All these unacceptable Items obliged us to go on Friday the 7th. to desire
audience of the Pope, to know what was determined upon our two last Memorials
which our Advocate left with him, and to take occasion to speak to him the most
plainly and earnestly we could concerning our present needs. But we could not
be admitted: Monsignor Fagnani, and the Inqusitor of Spain took up all the time.

Hearing that the Pope had occasionally spoken to Monsignor Fagnani concerning
our affair, I visited him the next day in the afternoon. He told me, that the
Pope having asked him whether he had heard of it, he answered, No; his
Holiness seemed troubled about it, and intimated a purpose to end it, telling
him that he caused prayers to be made for it (the Vicegerent had sent by his
order, to put a Bill upon the Sacristies, to recommend it to the prayers of
those who said Mass, and likewise to some Covents to enjoin the saying a Mass
of the H. Ghost and Litanies: all which was done with very little Ceremony, and
in such sort that we, who observed the most we could all things pertaining to
our affair, had not taken notice of it, if F. Petit who had care of the
Sacristie of S. Louis, had not told us that he believed the Bill sent thither
concerned us, and if a Monastic of la Minerve had not by chance intimated the
same thing to me concerning those Letanies.) M. Fagnani added that he told the
Pope that his Holiness did very well; that he could not be too circumspect in
an Affair of that importance; that though his Holiness was assisted by the H.
Spirit in Canonizing of a Saint, yet many things were striictly heeded, for
fear there might be some suborned witness; and that in the matter of so
abstruse a doctrine as this was, and wherein the Faith and the Belief of the
Faithful were concerned, there was more danger of a surprise, and consequently
more need of all possible precautions. That the Pope seemed to consider upon,
and be well pleased with what he said.

After Cardinal Ghiggi had given us notice that Cardinal Pamphilio was added to
our Congregation, and something blamfd us for not having presented a Copy of
our Writing to him, to take away all occasion of displeasure, we thought fit to
do it with the best grace and most ceremony we could. Wherefore we caused a
new Copy to be made by the same Amanuensis who made that which we presented to
the Pope. Being finished toward the end of this month, we got it bound
exquisitely, and besides the two Writings and their Summary, which we had
presented to the Cardinals, we added the same Epistle prefixed to that given to
his Holiness; And before all a particul^r Epistle to this Cardinal, which we
subscribed upon S. Thomas his day; whereof a faithful Translation follows:

To my L. the most Eminent and Reverend Card. Pamphilio.
MY LORD,
OUr H. F. Pope Innocent X. the Vicar of Jesus and Successor of S. Peter in the Sea of Rome, has at this day no greater Cause to decide then this, since the
Grace which makes us Christians, is therein is disputed, and S. Augustine whom
the H. See has owned by perpetual approbation ever since Innocent the First,
called in question. It suffices, my Lord, that you know thus much, that you may
be convinced what part to take, and what care this Cause of Faith requires of
you in so important an occasion.

When Pope Innocent X. chose you among others to support the weight of the
Churches affairs, and employ your Ministry in the negotiations which concern
the H. Apostolic See, he engaged you wholly to his own person, not only by
the Purple wherewith he adorned your Eminence, but also by the society of his
Family and Name, which is a very strict alliance; and was pleased to
communicate to you all the luster and glory of his Papacy; Your Eminence
entered not into the Pamphilian Family by the quality of your birth, but by the
consideration of your merits; not by the advantages of blood, but virtue; so
that there lies an indispensible necessity upon you contributing with so much
more ardor the fidelity of your services to the dignity and honor of Innocent
X. as this link which unites you to him, being an effect of virtue, is much
more great and considerable then those which are derived from Consanguinity. We
fear not then, my Lord, that it will be a diverting your Eminence from the care
of the great affairs which exercise you, when we beseech you to read the
Writings which we present to you, and to employ some time in examining with
great care the whole Cause in question, there being nothing in the whole Church
more considerable for the honor and reputation of Innocent X. then this affair
concerning the grace of Jesus Christ.

The reading of all things which have passed in this Difference will increase
your Eminences vigilance and care, because you will find how justly their
designs are to be suspected, the beginnings whereof are full of so many
intrigues and deceits. Neither the canvasings nor the solicitations of our
Adversaries, nor the ostentation of the favor of the Grandees of the Times, nor
the false Protestations which they make to defend the Faith and uphold the
dignity of the H. See, will be capable of shaking you, because you will fear on
one side their surprising his Holiness, as they have already many times
endeavored, and on the other you will be lead to suspect that cause of in
justice which has needed so great a number of subtleties to support it.

As much as our Adversaries have placed their hope in humane artifices, in
winding and captions subtleties of words, and in terms which they have
invented to vilify and disparage our persons; so much have we taken care to
establsh our hope only in the assistance of God's grace, in sincerity and
upright dealing, in the integrity of the H. Apostolic See and in the the
equity of Innocent X. We hope therefore, my Lord, that you will employ all your
credit with his Holiness, to promote the Congregation which we have demanded of
him, as being the most advantageous means of ruinning all kind of Deceits, of
clearing truth, and procuring peace, and which all the world, as well as we,
conceived established before we had the honor to present these Writings to him,
to the end the whole Church may know and posterity one day relate how prevalent
simplicity and fair dealing, truth and justice were under the Papacy of
Innocent X. when he was assisted with the Counsels of a Cardinal who was the
emulator of his Glory as well as Heir and successor of his name.

And although in all these things our own interest is less imported then that
of the H. See, and we could be quiet henceforward, if we were not moved with
the concernments of truth, the H. See, and the spouse of Jesus Christ, and the
peace and edification of the Faithful; nevertheless all these these things
make so sensible an impression upon our minds, that we shall consider as a
signal benefit all the offices which your Eminence shall do for us with his
Holiness toward procuring the success of a demand so just and necessary.

We are, My LORD, Your Eminences Most humble and obedient servants, Noel de la
Lane Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, and Abbot of Nostre Dame de
Valcroissant. Lovis de S. Amor Doctor in the sacred Parisian Faculty of
Divinity, of the House and society of Sorbonne. Lovis Angran Licentiate of the
same sacred Faculty of Paris, and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Troies.

March 7. 1653.
Sunday March 9. with the Letters from Paris I received the Advertisement of
F.L' Abbe so injurious to S. Augustine and the H. See, and by which that Father
so manifestly discovers their design against S. Augustin's doctrine. I thought
fit to show it to as many persons as I could, that so the evil purposes of
those Fathers might be more and more known, especially it coming to Rome so
opportunely the day before the first Congregation was to be held before the
Pope. Amongst others I went to show it to Cardinal Spada and the General of the
Augustines, and left Copies of it with them; adding more largely by word of
mouth what was written to me concerning it. I found the General of the
Augustines shut up, to study against the next day's Congregation. Yet I was
admitted to speak with him, and he told me that they did not yet precisely know
what would be treated of the next day before the Pope, whether all the
Propositions or only one; but it behooved them to prepare for all and leave
themselves to be governed by Grace.

Monday the 10th. the Congregation was held before the Pope in the afternoon.
All that I could learn concerning it, was, that the Pope first made a short
discourse, declaring that he intended not that in any thing which might be done
in the progress of this affair, the doctrine either of S. Augustine or S.
Thomas should be prejudiced. 2. That the Consultors had more time and liberty
to speak then they expected. And 3. That it lasted two hours and a half.

Wednesday the 12th. I repaired to see Cardinal Barberin before his going to la
Minerve, but met him coming down stairs. He took me into his Coach, and asked
me the same question which we had done eight days before, Why we did not
declare that we held no other opinions then the Thomists? I answered him as I
had done formerly. But the same day he told the General of the Dominicans, as I
heard on Friday following, that we refused to subscribe the sufficient Grace of
the Thomists, because happily in my discourse I had said that although we
acknowledged those Graces which they styled sufficient, yet we could not agree
to use that Term; being those Graces were not truly sufficient for the Action
in regard whereof they were so called, though effectual for their proper
Effect; nor that they were given generally to all the world without excepting
any person, as some of their modern Authors have taught, but not all either the
best or the most ancient. Now I wondered much that such a discourse by the by,
could serve his Eminence for a ground to tell that General seriously and
without distinction, that we denied to subscribe the sufficient Grace of the
Thomists, when it was propounded to us; as if it had been propounded seriously
that we migbt make a solid Declaration, and as if we had absolutely denied
those sorts of Graces.

In the afternoon I had accidentally a long converse with M. Joysel, all the
particularities whereof, to avoid prolixity, I shall not here insert, but take
notice only of three or four. First, speaking of the Congregation which we su'd
for, he said, it was not according to the Custom of the Church, but a thing
unheard of, and never practiced, and that they had above forty passages or
examples to oppose us with in that point. Secondly, I speaking to him of the
Writings which they delivered to the Consultors, and F. Annat lately printed
(...) first he denied it. Thirdly, when I affirmed the same so confidently,
that he could not doubt but I had certain intelligence thereof, he confessed
it, adding that it mattered not whence a good thing were taken. And Fourthly,
when I told him that this showed their correspondence wiih the Jesuits, he
answered me that the condition of a Doctor were very unhappy, if it obliged to
renounce the acquaintance and commerce of the Jesuits.

Thursday the eleventh I carried Cardinal Spada a Copy of the printed Preface
of F. Annat's Bibliotheca, to confirm to him further how those Fathers
interessed and carried themselves in this affair. And the next day I showed the
same to our Advocate, that he might see by the thing spoke of himself therein,
the extrem impudence and shamelessness of that Writer. Our Advocate, scarcely
beliving his own eyes, desired to transcribe what concerned himself, that he
might keep it as a proof of the spirit of Lying and bitterness of those good
Fathers. But I said him the labor, promising to send him an entire Copy. As
for the Memorials delivered to him to be presented to our Cardinals, of which I
asked him tidings, he said he had been with but two, namely Ginetti and Cechini,
and not with the others, because those two refused to receive a of Copy those
Memorials, after (as they alleged) the Pope had declared his pleasure, and
signifi d that he would not grant the contradictory audience and reciprocal
communication of writings demanded therein. So that our Advocate returned the
same to me, saving one Copy which he kept for himself. But to comfort me in
some sort for the trouble it might be to me to see things so remote from our
hopes, he told me one out of friendship which he hap learned in discourse with
Cardinal Ginetti, who was his great friend and opened his mind to him, namely,
that his Emincence believed that nothing would be done; or if any thing; such
as would do neither hurt nor good, questo non portareble ne nocumento ne
grovamento; and that we had reason to be not a little satisfied, because we had
saved a Bull which our Adversaries would undoubtedly have extorted from the H.
See, had not we come to Rome.

Friday the 14th. after accompanying the Ambassador to the Pop's Palace, we
went to that of Cardinal Pamphilio, to try whether we could present our book to
his Eminence before the Ambassador came thither; but we could not. In his
Antichambre we found the Bishop of Borgo, who in a long converse told us, that
being lately in a company where F. Palavicini was, this Jesuit said of S.
Augustine, that he was no great Divine, che sant' Agostino non era gran Theologo.

I made a visit in the evening, wherein I learned two things. First that an
Officer Of the Pope's chamber said that if his Holiness could condemn us, he
would willingly do it, because he saw all France wholly disposed to receive and
cause to be executed all the Decrees which he should make, if they were against
the Jansenists; but if nothing could be done against them, nothing should be
done at all. Secondly that there had been a Congregation the Wednesday
foregoing at the Pope's Palace, which lasted three hours, and that one of the
most sagacious Consultors had said to a Cardinal who told it me, that all
things went alla peggio, were in a very bad posture there; that there was
another appointed on Tuesday following, and that all who knew his Holines's
accustomed circumspection and slownesse, and the heavy and long manner of
proceeding of the Court of Rome, (which occasioned the Anagram and Proverb Roma
Mora) wondered extremely at this extraordinary speed, and presaged no good from
it, because it was wholly contrary to the genius of Rome, and yet amore to that
of his Holiness.

We spent all the morning of Tuesday the 18th. in the Antichamber of Cardinal
Pamphilio, to see whether we could present our Book to him. But his door was so
environed with persons desirous to speak with him, amongst whom were the
Generals of the Sommasques, the Conventual Cordeliers, and the Jesuits,
crowding (to use M. Albizzi's words) tanquam aliqui de populo, as all the rest
did, to enter where his Eminence was; that all we could do was to get out of
the throng, and in expectation till it was over, talk with some Prelates whom
we found in the Antichamber, amongst which was the Bishop of Borgo. At length
the multitude diminished, and many who were as earnest as we, were at last
constrained to return as well as we without speaking to the Cardinal; the
Resident of Genua coming to his Eminence after he had done his audience with
his Holiness.

Thursday the 20th. as I was going to Cardinal Barberin, I met F. Reginald in
the street, who told me that a Consultor asked whether he might safely affirm
in the Congregation that we acknowledged the Sufficient Graces held by the
Thomists, because he hoped to make great advantage of such a Declaration; for
if we would do this, he hoped that M. Hallier and his Colleagues might make one
in favor of Effectual Grace. I answered F. Reginald that there was no
difficulty between the Divines of his Order and us as to the substance of those
imperfect Graces which they term Sufficient; but that before making a
Declaration of so much before a Congregation, there ought to be such a one
established as we demanded; and that while this continued to act as it begun,
we could not make any before it, being resolved not to own it. As for M.
Hallier and his Colleagues, we would not hear of any Treaty with them.

When I came to Cardinal Barberin, I told him that the last time I had the
honor to see his Eminence, he asked me whether we agreed with the Thomists, and
I was now come to satisfy him. For which purpose I presented to him the third
Chapter of the Information which we had prepared upon the first Proposition. He
answered me, that those Writings were very long, that all the world could not
see them; That if we would present a little Memorial, and thereby declare that
we held Sufficient Grace, as Alvarez and Lemos. -- I replied that we could not
give any such private Memorial, but this and every thing else should be seen in
the progress of the Congregation when it should be held. He told me that the
Congregation made have. I answered his Eminence that it was without our
partaking in it, and so long as it was held in that manner we could do no
otherwise.

I spent the afternoon at Cardinal Ghiggi's apartment, but he would not give me
audience. The things considerable which I learnt there were these: First, That
the Pope had promised F. Lezzana a while since to give him permission to write
and print concerning the matter de Auxiliis, as this Father told me, and that
he came to desire his Eminence to put his Holiness in mind of it. To which the
Cardinal answered, that he must have patience till after Easter, and that in
the mean time it would be seen what would be the result of those Congregations.
And Secondly, That a Fourth Congregation was to be held before the Pope upon
Saturday following in the afternoon; which I discovered by a Bill which I saw
fixed upon the door of Cardinal Ghiggi's apartment by the Mandatario or Cursor
of the H. Office, and contained these words, Eminentissim. and Reverendissim.
Domine, Die Sabbathi 22. cnrrentis Martii erit Congregatio coram Sanctissimo
hora. 20..

On Friday evening I received the Letters, which came from Paris the last day
of February, That of my LL. the Bishops to the Pope, spoken of above, was in
the packet. On Saturday the 22d. I went to tell the Pope's Maistre de chamber
that we had received Letters for his Holiness from our Bishops, and desired to
present the same to him. He asked me what they concerned. I answered, the
Things treated of in the Congregations before his Holiness. He referred me to
Monday.

The same afternoon I understood that Cardinal Spada, by reason of some
indisposition, was not present at the Congregation held that day; and that the
General of the Dominicans went on the morning to desire Cardinal Ghiggi to help
him to an audience of the Pope, which he had so long solicited in vain.

The same person who had told me some days ago that all went very ill in the
Congregations held before the Pope, told me on Saturday the 23d. that the day
before they began to be in a better estate.

On Monday we went to present the new Letter of the Bishops of Fehruary 24 to
the Pope; but Cardinal Trivultio took up the greatest part of the Audience that
day, and the rest was given to others.

Tuesday, being Annunciation-day, after we had accompanied the Ambassador to
the Pope's Palace, we came back to la Minerve to take our places in the Quire,
where we might conveniently see the distribution of purses yearly made to the
Pope on that day to a prodigious number of young Maidens toward their
preferment. There had been a long misunderstanding in the Family of the
Pamphilii's; and Signora Olympia the Pope's Sister had not seen the Pope while
it lasted. The reconciliation was lately made, and being Signora Olympia dwelt
in the Palace Pamphilio not far from la Minerve the Pope was invited to dine
there with all his Family at the end of the Ceremony. It was agreed between the
Pope's kindred (who feared that his extraordinary attending those long and
frequent Congregations in which matters were handled which he had never
studied, might prejudice his health) to represent to him the danger into which
he put himself, and desire him to ^a^ another course. Some of them too who knew
the merit of the suit which we prosecuted, who were sensible of the repulses
which we suffered; who liked our Cause, and feared it might receive some injury
by this hastiness, and least the dis-satisfaction which those who were
concerned therein should receive thereby, might produce some in the Pope; spoke
to him with the rest, as well for those considerations as for that of his
health, all that they could to allay the forwardness and ardour of his
Holiness. But all served but to heat him the more. He wondered at his former
averseness to hear of this matter afar off, considering the facility which he
found in it then, and the pleasure which he received from all that he could
hear spoken of it. He said he never was in Congregations which gave him less
trouble and more satisfaction. That they lasted but two or three hours, and
that if he had not had compassion of some good old men amongst the Consultors,
who were obliged to be always standing, he should willingly have held them
longer. And this satisfaction appeared so great to the Pope, that himself
wondered at it, considering his ancient aversion; and he attributed this great
and so sudden change to a particular and extraordinary assistance of the H.
Ghost upon his person. Signora Olympia who saw the Pope so satisfied with these
Congregations, asked him what matters were treated of in them, which could be
so well-pleasing to his Holiness. The Pope answered her that 'twas about
certain subtilties touching points of Faith which she did not understand; and
yet (added he) I know not whether if you were there when one of the Consultors
(whom he named) speaks you would not understand them, he unfolds them with so
great plainness and clearness. Signora Olympia replied nothing; but the Prince
Justinian (who was also Kinsman to the General of the Dominicans, and his good
Friend, and to whose mediation this General was obliged to recur some days
before; to get his Memorial and the other papers presented to his Holiness)
told the Pope that he understood not much in those matters but he had read all
the Papers of that General who had entreated him to present the same to his
Holiness; and as much as he could judge of them, he found them very compendious
and clear; and that he believed that if his Holiness should read them, he would
also find much satisfaction in them. The Pope gave Prince Justinian no answer,
whereby he apprehended that the Pope continued in his unwillingness to receive
the said General's papers; And the discourse about this matter went no further.

Cardinal Spada was not present at the two Congregations held before the Pope
the week foregoing, whether he were constrained to be absent by some
indisposition as his Secretary told me, or whether he counterfeited a distemper
to cover some discontent which he had received in the former Congregations, as
most believed; But on Tuesday morning I heard, that the Cardinals of the
Congregation were at his Palace on Monday without the Consultors; and I
believe, with many others, it was partly to oblige him not to be longer
displeased, but return the soonest he could to the Congregations, which were to
continue to be held before the Pope, as accordingly the Fifth being held on
Wednesday afternoon, I heard that he was carried thither in a Chair; which some
believe was merely a Ceremony to complete the concealment of his pretense.

CHAP. XIV.
A Visit which I made to the Ambassador touching these Congregations. New
Propositions delivered to the Congregation as equivalent to those under
examination, but most of them comprised in more odious terms. M. de
Sainte-Beuve's judgment upon them. Four Congregations held in eight days
before the Pope.

THe same afternoon I went to see M. Gueffier, with whom I found the F. Vicar
of S. Antony, with his Companion. The discourse falling upon the demand which
we made to be heard viva voce and by writing contradictorily with our
Adversaries, these Fathers told me that M. Hallier and his Colleagues affirmed,
that it was not the custom of the Church. That when the example of Clement
VIII. was alleged to them, they answered that 'twas a fault which that Pope
had committed; and when they were pressed with the example of the Council of
Trent, they said that the Conferences among the Divines there, were only upon
preliminary preparations.

I accompanied M. Gueffier to the Ambassador's Palace, where I waited till he
had done giving audience to others, that I might speak with him last with more
leisure. I told him how the Congregations were continued before the Pope,
without our being yet spoken to about a hearing, or any show that they thought
of us. The Ambassador answered me, that we ought not to fear that we should not
be heard, for we should be as much as we pleased. That he well knew what the
Pope had said to him; That he told him he would take such course in this
affair, that there should be no tail of it left. That if after we had been
heard as much as we pleased, other persons in France desired it, and had any
thing new to propose; they should be waited for, to know what they had to say,
before passing of Judgment. That the Pope told him, That he knew there were
some who presumed to have definitions after their own construction; but in an
affair of this importance he was loath to hasten or do any thing till after a
most exact discussion; That should he employ ten years in laboring in it, if
God afforded him so much life, he should not account his time and pains
misspent. That many persons of quality (some of which he named to me) had
written to him concerning this affair; but he had answered them all, that they
need no more to be troubled then we, for assuredly we should have satisfaction
in this point, and that he was not in jest when he spoke about affairs of
Religion. That besides, the Pope had told him that he should be glad if we
would not give him so many Memorials. I answered him, That it would be easy
for us to forbear, if his Holiness did us justice. But we had received another
Letter by the last post from our Bishops to the Pope, which, if he spoke to him
about our affair, we beseecht him to tell his Holiness we were desirous to
present to him. The Ambassador promised me to do it upon Friday following,
which was the day of his usual audience.

He kept his word, and told me on Friday as soon as he came from audience that
he had spoken to the Pope; but the particulars I could not conveniently receive
from that day, by reason that two Danish Gentlemen went, with him from Monte
Cavallo to dine with him, and stayed there almost the whole day; and therefore
I repaired to him again on Saturday. He told me that the Pope said there was
not time enough on Friday to receive the Letter during his audience, but we
might return upon the first day that he gave any, and we should have it; or if
it were any thing of have, we might give the Letter to Cardinal Ghiggi, who
would infallibly show it his Holiness. I asked the Ambassador whether he
perceived that the Pope's resolution to hear us continued? He answered, That he
could not tell me all that he knew therein; but we must expect, and undoubtedly
nothing would be done without such hearing.

Thursday afternoon M. Angran and I went to present our Book to Cardinal
Pamphilio; but being hindered from doing it by a Congregation then held at his
Palace, we returned thither on Friday for the same purpose, but without effect.

Upon more attentive reading of the new Letter of our Bishops to the Pope, and
considering how it might be taken by him and the Cardinals, to whom it would
undoubtedly be communicated, we feared that being the intent of it was only to
obtain a Conference; and the Ambassador assured us, That we should have one, it
might be unseasonable to press for it by that Letter. Wherefore we resolved to
defer delivering it, (as we had intended to do on Monday March 31.) till some
new difficulty obliged us to it; or else to forbear altogether if we saw the
performance of what we were yet made to hope.

'Twas not only the Ambassador who assured us that we should be heard before
the Pope as much as we could wish; but 'twas the general talk in Rome, that we
should be summoned presently after Easter. Whereupon I began to keep close in
my Lodging, more then formerly, to labor with my Colleagues to finish the new
Writings about which they had been constantly employed since the delivery of
the first, and which we resolved to present to the Pope at the first audience
which he should give us. The time which I had been forced to spend, and the
little fruit which we found in all our Visites and Solicitations to the
Cardinals, and the small necessity of continuing them longer, made me resolve
to make no more to them; and thence forward I could observe nothing of what was
done or spoken at Rome, but what came to my knowledge occasionally.

Yet I thought fit to advertise the Ambassador of the change of our Resolution
touching the Letter which we had received for the Pope, and he had mentioned to
his Holiness. I did so on Thursday April 3. and acquainted him with the
reasons abovementioned. He much approved our purpose; and told me that nothing
pressed us to deliver that Letter, which we might do when we pleased, but
assuredly we should be heard; and that by the last he received from M. de
Bienne, he signified to him that the King concerned not himself in the
business either on one side or other, that all his Majesty demanded was that
it might be dispatched, and that speedily. I answered the Ambassador that we
desired the same; but yet it was to be remembered what I had read in a Book of
M. Hallier's, That sicut Erroris spargendi, ita veritatis indagandae sua sunt
incrementa, that as Error is not spread of a sudden, so Truth needs some time
to be sought out and discovered; That a Statue is not made with the first
stroke of the hammer, and that a Looking-glass or a Diamond must be ground a
long time before they come to be smooth. The Ambassador replied that some
affairs were spoiled by too long demurre; I consented, but added, That others
were lost by too much speed; that it was requisite to consider the nature
whereof they were, and to use a reasonable moderation in all. That in this we
would never cause any delay but what was perfectly necessary. That we would go
directly to the Question, and by the shortest and surest way we could, and that
we would not do like those who had lately out of I know not what design set
afoot Five metamorphiz'd and disguised Propositions in the Congregation. Thus
they were written in a loose leaf, without citation, date, or subscription,
and given to the Consultors to pass their Judgments upon, and also
communicated to other Divines of Rome, whose Sentence concerning them some
Eminent persons demanded. Propositiones primae examinatae a Dominis, etc.
1. Aliqua Dei praecepta, etc. 2. Interiori Gratiae, etc.
And the three other famous ones as they were first framed by M. Cornet, after
which were added the following: Propositiones mutatae.
1. Non potuit natura humana etiam de absoluta Dei potentia creari sine donis
supernaturalibus. 2. Auxilium sufficiens fuit necessarium in natura integra, in
natura lapsa non datur. 3. Omnia opera humano modo facta ab homine existente in
peccato mortali sunt peccata mortalia. 4. Non datur libertas quoad
indifferentiam actus, sed quod coactionem. 5. Christus mortuus est solum pro
praedestinatis.


I do not remember whether I showed this Paper to the Ambassador; but I
remember well that he told me he could not believe what I said concerning those
new Propositions; but I Answered that I was well assured of what I spoke,
having received them from a most veracious person to whom a Consultor
communicated them, to entreat him to help him to reduce his judgment upon them
into Writing.

On H. Saturday F. Lezzana sent me a Copy like the foregoing, and desired me to
furnish him with some Writing touching the matters, if we had any; The next
morning I went to him, and asked him what was the design of broaching these new
Propositions. He told me that he himself did not understand it, but he had
barely received order to set down his judgment of them in Writing before the
end of the Festivals. I apprehended that the time of the end of the Festivals
extended to a fortnight after Easter: but he told me 'twas no more then the two
Holidays of Monday and Tuesday; and that the satisfaction which he should give
to the person who laid that task upon him might be of some importance to our
affair.

I gave intelligence hereof to M. de Sainte-Beuve by the next Port, April 7. I
spoke but obscurely to him of the manner how I came by them, telling him that
they dropped out of a Consultos pocket; least speaking more clearly, and my
letter coming to be intercepted, the Consultor who gave them to my friend,
whose assistance he desired, might believe himself and the whole secret of the
privacy between him and my friend discovered; M. de Sainte-Beuve's answer was
as follows.

SIR,
A Second information in facto, is not thought of here, every one says you have
all the Memoires for it, and that it is a piece whch requires your care. As for
the Answer to F. Annat's book, I shall tell you that it is under so good a hand
in Flanders, that that Good Father will have no great cause to please himself
in the excellency of his work. The Answer is begun to be printed here; I think
you will be as well satisfied with it as I am; but you must have a little
patience, for the work is long. Were we capable of being astonished at the
reports of the Molinists, we should be quite disheartened with these which are
dispersed here. The most moderate amongst them affirm, that they shall
speedily have a Bull, by which all the Propositions will be absolutely
condemned, and that the Pope is resolved upon it. This discourse was made in
Sorbonne, and is dispersed by the Jesuits. The Bishop of Rennes tells me he
heard it from them; but the braggadocioes add that the Ambassador has
forbidden you to stir out of your house, that the Pope accounts you unworthy
of his audience, and that you have in vain offered the Pope 400000. Crowns to
suspend his Judgment.

This talk comes from Lions by a Letter of a Fueillant. To speak ingenuously to
you, I never saw any thing like their discourses, nor more resolution then
there is in the minds of ours. If some are in fear, because the Pope has held
so many Congregations in so little time, others rejoice at it, considering that
being himself takes such pains, it is a sign that he will be fully informed of
the affair, which is the only thing we wish. For it is fit that truth be
manifested, and the whole Church see that M. Cornet maliciously framed the five
Propositions to raise an universal disturbance amongst Catholics. I pray God
make him understand the greatness of his fault, which is such that I know not
a greater. I cannot tell whether you have contracted an obscurity by contagion
of the place of your residence, or whether you affect it; but I assure you
there is a great deal in your Letter, in part of which you tell me of the note
which contains the Propositions dropped from a Consultors pocket. What think you
is the design of them? Are they to be substituted in stead of the former? If
so, 'twill be easy for you to come off. For as for the first, there needs no
more to be said, but that we conceive that the Repugnancy by reason of which
humane nature cannot be created without supernatural gifts, proceeds not from
the Omnipotence, but from the Goodness, Providence and Justice of God. As for
the second, we say that the sufficient aid, such as was in uncorrupted nature,
is not an aid which is granted to our corrupted Nature; for that aid was
subject to the Will. The third Proposition is an Heresy. As also the fourth and
fifth. We all subscribe to this sentence, if there be no more in question but
this,

I am, etc.

Four Congregations were held before the Pope in the seven first days of this
month, each of which lasted about four whole hours, namely, Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday of the Passion week, and H. Monday. I heard on H. Tuesday
that in that of the day preceding there was great contest among the Consultors.
Of the other four and the six foregoing in the three weeks before that of the
Passion, we could discover no more then what is above related, which is almost
nothing.

CHAP. XV.
The arrival of F. Des^mares and M. Manassier at Rome. A notable Change of a
zealous disciple of Molina, who became an ardent one of S. Augustine, by reading
the little volume which I gave him of the twelve principal Maxims of the
Christian Faith touching Grace; which he reduced into as many Latin Disticks. A
calumnious Memorial dispersed in Rome and all Italy, as presented to the Pope
by the Clergy of France about this affair. Another Writing of our Adversaries,
framed to delude the Dominicans, and full of impostures.

ON H. Wednesday we were much comforted by the arrival of F. Des-mares and M.
Manassier at Rome, whom our Bishops sent to share with us in the pains which
we foresaw this affair was likely to require in the progress of its examen, and
which M. de Valcroissant, Angran and I, could never have undergone alone
without sinking under them; for the examen was not yet begun, and we were
already overcharged. This re-enforcement and succor was as acceptable to us as
necessary, and the more, because we had long desired it, and been much troubled
to obtain it. But in truth we could not by any means have been without it, had
the affair been carried as it ought to have been, especially considering the
various dispositions of those with whom we had to do, all agreeing this point,
to drive on that affair with unimaginable speed; for which purpose it was
rumor'd that we aimed at nothing but delays.

These two new Colleagues arrived about half an hour before it was time to go
and accompany the Ambassador to the Tenebres (a ceremony so called) of S.
Peter. Yet I omitted not to go; I gave him notice of their arrival, and that
they intended to have the honor of seeing him at his return. He answered me
that he should be glad to see them, and that the Pope would certainly be so
too. After having accompanied the Ambassador to S. Peter's Church, I returned
home, and M. de Valcroisant, Angran and I, went along with them to his palace.
He received them with his accustomed courtesy, and confirmed to us what he had
so often said to me, that we should be heard as much as we could wish, the Pope
having so assured him.

Upon H. Thursday I went again to the Ambassador with F. Des-mares and M.
Manassier, to accompany him to S. Peter's Church. He enjoined his Maistre de
Chamber to take care of them that they might conveniently see the great
Ceremony, or rather the several Ceremonies of that Eminent day. He had scarce
left us, but the Pope came forth carried in his Pontifical chair; he took
notice of them very attentively, and fixed his eyes upon them all the while his
Chair was passing by. So that I conjectured the Ambassador had already
acquainted him with their arrival; and accordingly he told me so the next day.
I shall not stand here to describe the Ceremonies, which lasted all the
forenoon; but I cannot omit the Ambassador's particular courtesy, who in
several occasions performed the charge which he had given his Maistre de
Chamber, having the abovesaid persons near him, discoursing with them, and
causing them to pass before him in such places where the Suisses, who kept the
doors, would not otherwise have permitted them entrance. We were all there at
the Pope's Quarter, above the principal door of S. Peter's Church, during the
fulmination of the Bull In Coena Domini; and the Benediction which he gives
afterward to the people; which is a narrow place scarce capable of a quarter
of the Cardinals, Bishops, Ambassadors, Princes allied to the Pope, and the
Officers inseparable from the person of his Holiness in this Ceremony; which my
other Colleagues and I had seen the year before.

But to omit these external magnificences, I had in the interval of the
Ceremonies an encounter which gave me great satisfaction. There was in Cardinal
Corrado's Court a learned person of great parts, named Il Signor Honorato, who
having in several places heard talk of the subject of our Contests, and the
Maxims imputed to us, could scarce credit them; and for his further assurance
took the liberty to visit us long before. When he visited us, he was full of
the conceits and phantasmes of Molinisme; and having propounded to us what he
pleased concerning the Propositions, and heard the answers which we made
thereunto ingenuously according to S. Augustins's doctrine, he seemed to us
outwardly not averse from them; yet, as he told us afterward, he was wholly
scandalized at them in his mind. Nevertheless being we conversed with him upon
the terms of honest liberty and civility, he believed himself obliged to us. He
esteemed our persons, but deplored our errors. When he met us, he received and
returned our salutation civilly; but he was inwardly much troubled that such
honest persons, as he accounted us otherwise, were so unhappily engaged in such
extravagant Opinions, as ours seemed to him. We had a while ago printed our
little Volume of S. Augustine, and as I was going to distribute some Copies of
it, I met this honest Gentleman in a narrow place, where we were obliged to
speak together. After some discourse, I conceived it not unfitting to offer him
one. If he could have fairly declined it, he would, but fearing to injure the
civility and heartiness wherewith I seemed to offer it, he accepted it, though
with repugnance and regret. For some time he kept it, and would not read it; at
length he read it; and it was at first an occasion of great perplexity to his
mind; then, of much inquietude; afterward of many tears and prayers; and at
length the ground of a consolation which surpassed all the rest. He told me
nothing of all these his secret sentiments till after that he was fully
convinced of the Truth, which he had discovered by reading those Divine Works,
which he did in private without the assistance of any person. This reading
alone so rectified his former mistakes which he hitherto had accounted Orthodox
Truths, and so convinced him the certainty and excellence of the Orthodox
Truths which we defended, which he had mistaken for pitiful Errors, that I
cannot express with what humility and resentment he professed himself bound to
God for it. I have seen him since several times so tenderly sensible thereof,
that tears of joy and consolation have come into his eyes. But it was upon this
day that he told me the first and most acceptable news of it.

A while afterward he brought me twelve Latin Disticks, into which he had
reduced as many prime maxims of the Christian Faith touching Grace, which S.
Augustine in his 107. Epistle to Vitalis says, Christian Catholics hold as so
many certain rules of their Belief concerning that mystery. He showed them to
me, only to see whether he had rightly taken S. Austin's sense; but I found
those rules so well comprised in verse, considering the confinement of Poetry,
and that they were composed by a person newly enlightened with those truths;
that I desired him to give me a Copy of them, and have thought fit here to
insert it. With which I shall also insert a faithful translation of the place
of S. Augustine wherein those Rules are, to the end the Reader comparing the
Disticks therewith may understand them more easily* and better judge of this
first essay of a man newly reclaimed from Molinism.

Because (says S. Augustine) by the Grace of Jesus Christ we are Christians and
Catholics; we know:
I. That Children have done neither good nor evil in a life peculiar to them
before their birth; and that it is not according to what they have merited in a
former life (it being impossible that every particular could so merit) that
they come into the miseries of this life; but being born carnally according to
Adam, they contracted from their first birth the contagion of ancient death,
and are not delivered from the punishment of eternal death, which a just
Sentence has past upon all men, unless they be born again in Jesus Christ by
Grace.

I. Mortuus heu primi contracta morte parentis
Nascor; at in Christo vita renata mea est.
II. We know that Grace is given neither to Children nor to persons of Age
according to their merits.

II. Nulla nec infanti nec adulto gratia, quam te
Forte putes factis promeruisse datur.
III. We know that the Grace which is given to persons who have the use of
Reason, is given to them for every Action.

III. Recti quicquid agas, renovari ad singula credas,
Hanc tibi quam gratis vim dedit ante Deus.
IV. We know that Grace is not given to all men; and that they to whom it is
given, it is not so by reason of the merits of their good works, nor in regard
of the merits of their Will. Which appears clearly in Children.

IV. Omnibus anne data est divina haec Gratia? Paucis.
An meruisse juvat? Nil: Voluisse? Minus.
V. We know that to whom it is given, it is given by the free mercy of God.

V. Felices animae, quibus haec sors contigit: atqui
Credit gratuitum munus id esse Dei.
VI. We know that to whom it is not given, it is by the just judgment of God
that it is not given.

VI. Vae tibi, vae misero, cui non data gratia; sed te
Credideris justi judicis esse reum.
VII. We know that we shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive acccording to what he has done whilst he was in this
mortal body, and not according to what he would have done either well or ill if
he had lived longer.

VII. Quae quis agat vivens Christo sub judice, non quae
Mox erat acturus, si licuisset, erunt.
VII. We know that Children also shall receive good or evil according to what
they have done, being in their Bodies. But regard will be had to what they have
done, not themselves, but by those who answered for them in Baptism. Upon which
account they are considered as having renounced the Devil, and as believing in
God. Whence it is that they are reckoned in the number of the Faithful, and
comprehended in that Sentence of our Lord, Whosoever shall believe and be
baptized, shall be saved. As on the contrary they who have not received
Baptism, are comprehended in this other Sentence, Whosoever shall not believe,
shall be damned. -- According to this they shall be judged, and not according
to what they would have done if they had lived longer.

VIII. Sors eadem manet infantes post funera: nempe
Qui vivis datus est sponsor, is actor erat.
IX. We know that happy are they who dye in the favor of the Lord; and that
all which they would have done if they had lived longer, concerns them not.

IX. Felix si in Domino moriens; qualisne futurus
Tu fueras, non tunc discutiendus eris.
X. We know that they who believe, being of Age to believe of themselves, do
it by their own will and free arbitrament.

X. Cuique suum manet arbitrium, su^ cuique voluntas:
An credis liber, testis et ipse tibi.
XI. We know that we act according to true Faith, when we who believe, pray
God for them who will not believe, that they would believe.

XI. Funde preces, rectaque fide te fundere credas;
Sponte ut nolenti det Deus ipse fidem.
XII. We know that when any of those who would not believe, begin to believe,
we ought to give thanks to God for it, and that we are accustomed so to do.

XII. Si quibus hanc dederit, grates debentur eidem;
Atque agimus, nostris quod dederit precibus.


Returning from -- on Friday, we passed through the street of the Booksellers,
and going into his shop to whom we had given our little S. Augustine to sell, he
told us that some days before he had been cited to the H. Office, and
interrogated concerning some words spoken in his shop derogatory to the respect
due to the H. Father. At the end of the week following I went to him again, and
he told me that one of his Apprentices had since I saw him, been also examined
at the H. Office; but when I endeavored to get some knowledge of his
examination, he told me they were forbidden to tell any thing of it under pain
of excommunication.

On H. Saturday I heard that Cardinal S. Clement had visited the Ambassador a
few days before, and confirmed to him what I have said above of the little
understanding in these matters which his Eminence found in M. Hallier.

On Easter Tuesday the Sub-Bibliothecary told me that having been to give the
Pope the complement of the Festivals, and spoke to him about the Vatican
Library, he also added something concerning our affair, but soundly and
vigorously after his way a mio modo. That the Pope was pleased in hearing him,
and nevertheless testified to him some esteem of M. Hallier, saying, he had
made a Book against the Jesuit Cellot: upon which he answered the Pope,
Allora, Beatissimo Padre era buon Christiano; Most H. F. that Doctor was then a
good Christian; but uniting with those Fathers in their Conspiracy against
Grace, by framing the five Propositions in question, he was become a turn-coat
in faith and Religion. That the Pope replied that he would use all necessay
diligence in this affair, that he would cause the same to be examined again by
able Divines, that he would also appoint prayers on purpose, to obtain the
Assistance of the H. Ghost. Nevertheless are perceived no other traces of
these good purposes, neither before nor after, but what I have related of the
Congregation, and the Notes sent to the Sacristies and Monasteryes. The same
person told me likewise two days after, that having been to make the like
complement to the Cardinals Barberin and Ghiggi, the former told him that he
forsaw great danger of division, in favor of which side soever the Pope should
pronounce; whereunto he answered, that they who backed M. Cornet's enterprise
were, vel omnium scelestissimi, vel ignorantes, either the most wicked men in
the world, or ignorant, And the second, that Nissano Jesuita era nel calendario
del Papa, That there was no Jesuit in the Popes Calendar, i. e. of whom he
made any esteem.

The same Tuesday I found Monsignor d' Ornano in the Vaticane, who told me he
had lately seen a Memorial either of the Jesuits or the Doctors our
Adversaries touching our affair. I desired him to let me see it. He said he had
restored it. But if he could procure it again, he would send it to me. Two
days after he sent a Copy of it which he was pleased to get purposely
transcribed for me; but about three weeks after it became very public, and was
dispersed by the distributers of secret intelligence in written hand with their
Gasette of the 10th. of May.

I cannot affirm that this Memorial was made by M. Hallier and his Colleagues,
though it began thus, Supplica alla Sanctita and Nostro Signore ill Clero della
Francia medianti alcani Doctori qua capitali della Sorbona di Parigi, che, etc.
The Clergy of France supplicates your Holiness by the intervention of the
Doctors of Sorbon here arrived that, etc. But however, it shows what false
impressions were given of us at Rome, and through all Italy. For it was nothing
else but a repetition, without any proof of the same Calumnies (concerning a
Necessitating Grace, an absolute impossibility to keep Gods Commandments, and
the Death of Jesus Christ for the predestinate alone) wherewith our Adversaries
filled all their Writings.

About the same time a Father of the Datary brought me another Writing, which
was carried about from hand to hand in Rome, and we had not discovered any
thing of it. By the reading of it, we found that it must needs have been made
at the time that M. Hallier endeavored to draw the Dominicans to his party, or
rather to hinder them from joining with us. For the whole scope of it, was to
show that the cause of the Thomists had no relation to that of Jansenius, and
that they could not be concerned in the Censure which the Pope should make of
the Propositions. It began thus without any Title; Ex multis capitibus
perspicuum est Jansenistas causae suae parum fidere, etc. And to prove that the
Dominicans had no interest in this affair, it reasoned thus; Patres Dominicani
nunquam hactenus negarunt praecepta Dei homini justificato per auxilium gratiae
esse possibilia, nec nunquam dixerunt gratiam eis deesse qua possibilia fiant,
eo scilicet tempore quo ipsos sub mortali peccato obligant. Nunquam etiam
negarunt dari veram gratiam sufficientem, cui voluntas humana actu resistat,
licet eidem consentire possit; and efficacem, cui actu consentiat, licet eidem
resistere seu dissentire possit. Quod necessitas antecedens libertatem destruat
s and quod Christus mortuus sit pro omnibus, multu in losis habet Sanctus
Thomas, nec unquam Thomistae negarunt, nec ullum ex iis invenio qui vel unam ex
quinque Propositionibus astruat, in eo scilicet proprio sensu in quo eas
Jansenius and Jansenistae adstruunt.

Now this particular sense upon which they accused the Jansenists, was, That
there is no sufficient Grace, neither according to the sense of the Thomists,
nor according to the sense of Molina; and that Effectual Grace produces an
antecedent Necessity. Non agitur de modo rei, sed de re ipsa; non de modo quo
gratia efficax est, sed de gratia sufficient quam tam hi quam illi admittunt.
Et de efficaci; utrum scilicet necessitet absolute and antecedenter voluntatem,
quod certe utrique negant, and soli adstruunt Jansenistae. Non agitur etiam de
modo quo gratia cum libertaee concilianda est, sed de liberate ipsa, quae
revera per necessitatem antecedentem distruitur. Whence they conclude according
to their wont; Ergo in hac causa Jansenistarum nullo modo includitur celebris
illa quaestio de Auxiliis; nempe utrique concedunt divinae gratiae humanam
voluntatem consentire ac dissentire posse; hec ipsum Jansenistae negant. Igitur
diversa sentiunt. But it had been easy in a Conference to have concluded on
the contrary, Hoc ipsum Jansenistae non negant. Igitur idem sentiunt.

It Is clear therefore that this fiction of Necessitating Grace, is the chief
Engine of which they made use at Rome, to decry S. Augustin's Disciples, who
never dreamed of it.

And it is remarkable that they take for granted, that the Jansenists teach this
Necessitating Grace; this Antecedent Necessity in formal terms, and not by
consequence; and that when it is objected to them, they acknowledge it to be
their opinion. Wherefore they confess in this Writing, that indeed the
Jesuits pretend to conclude from the principles of the Thomists, that they
admit Antecedent Necessity and Necessitating Grace. But (say they) the Thomists
deny the Consequence, and continue steadfast in denying it: whence they
distinguish them from the Jansenists. Equidem (says the Writing) Jesuitae
adversus Thomistarum praemotionem physicam pugnantes, arguunt ex hypoohesi tria
gravissima absurda sequi. Primum illam praemotionem afferre necessitatem
antecedentem voluntati; nempe talis est praemotio illa seu praedeterminatio
physica, ut actus ad quem praedeterminat, sine illa est nec possit, nec possit
illa posita non sequi. Igitur Necessitatem Antecedentem voluntati affere
videtur; igitur and libertatem destruere. Sed Thomistae negant utramque
consequentiam, hoc est, negant a sua praedeterminatione destrui libertatem, vel
antecedentem illam inferri necessitatem, adhibentque suam dtstinctionem sensus
compositi and divisi, vel actus Primi and Secundi. Et licet praedictae
distinctiones difficultatem forte non expediant, in his tamen Thomistae
constantissime sistunt, and semper negant ex sua praemotione hoc absurdum
sequi, scilicet violatae libertatis and illatae necessitatis.

Thus separating the Thomists from those whom they style Jansenists, they must
needs pretend that the latter admit those Consequences, and teach that
Effectual Grace destroys Liberty, and antecedently necessitates the Will.
Consequently, whereunto they thus reduce, the Dispute toward the end of the
Writing. Non igitur in hac Jansenianarum Propositionum causa de scientia Media,
nec de Praedeterminatione Physica; sed de Divinorum mandatorum Possibilitate,
de Gratia sufficient, de libertatis indifferentia, de sufficientia meritorum
Christi, de Gratia non Necessitante

In fine, lest the Thomists should be jealous of the consequence of the Decree;
they endeavor to satisfy them by this pleasant reason; That the Bull made
against the five Propositions would hurt them no more them the Council of
Trent. Quod aatem res seu causa Praedeterminantium seu Thomistarum in integro
relinquatur, etiam si quinque Jansenianae illae Propositiones Decreto
Pontificio damnentur, vel quia jam damnatae sunt, damnatas esse declaretur,
manifestum est. Nempe ex hoc decreto non magis urgeri poterunt quam modo
urgentur ex Tridentino...... Nec minus faelie contra novum illud decretum sese
tueri poterunt, quam modo contra Canones Tridentinos sese tuentur.

By these shameful Calumnies they amused the Cardinals and Consultors at Rome,
who had no great mind to be undeceived, seeing they heard but one party; Which
undoubtedly was a fitter way for them to be deluded then if they had heard none
at all. And should they have heard us severally, it would have been to little
advantage, since we not knowing many times what M. Hallier spoke, it was
impossible for us to refute it; and should we have known it, it would have been
in some sort unprofitable; for he published that we disguised our Sentimens, and
that his aim was against the Jansenists of France: There needed but one regular
Conference to reduce him to reason, by obliging him to prove the calumnies
which he alleged; but the Pope was too much prepossessed against this only
means of terminating a Dispute so full of duplicity and so little understood.
It would not be granted us, whatever instance we made for it during two full
years. But what followed, has but too much justified the necessity of it.

On Easter Tuesday, M. Hallier and his Colleagues went to visit the Count de
Rochford who arrived at Rome a little before the Festivals. They might have
performed this Visit at a fitter time; for the rain took them in the way, and
they were thoroughly wet when they came to him. In their Discourse, they first
desired his assistance in their cause, in regard (as they said, whether in
raillery or otherwise) of the coming of F. Des-mares. Secondly, They told him,
that they did believe the communication of their Writings would not be granted
us, but that they knew that we had them. Thirdly, That 'twas we who had caused
F. Annat's Writing concerning the Thomists to be printed, but maimed and
disfigured, (Then which I knew not whether there can be a more extravagant and
groundless lie). And lastly they confess, that indeed F. Annat had got many
things ready before their arrival, and they had made use of them. A person
present at the Visit told me all this the next day.

Thursday the 17th. the Bishop of Borgo came to bid us adieu before his return
to his Bishopric; and told me, that he believed the Pope intended to send for
several able and qualified Pastors out of Rome, that he might be able to
pronounte a solemn judgment, ex ea Cathedra upon our affair; and that Cardinal
Sachetti said to him, that 'twere a shame there were not more at Rome capable
to understand it well, and pronounce a judgment upon it correspondent to its
merit.

CHAP. XVI.
The Declaration of our Sentiments touching the sufficient Grace of some
Thomists agreed to by the Fathers of that Order. A Congregation held April 18.
by the five Cardinals without Consultors. An Audience solicited for F.
Des-mares and M. Manassier. A remarkable saying of a French Prince. The reason
which obliged the Pope to be willing that we should be heard in his presence.

APril 8. in the evening I visited F. Reginald, who falling to speak concerning
their sufficient Grace, I told him that he knew sufficiently our sentiments of
it, that we agreed in the thing, and doubted not but there were such small
Graces which were the beginning of a right Will and Conversion, besides which
for a through Conversion was required a more powerful Grace effectual by it
self for that effect, as those other small Graces were for their proper and
particular effect; but call those small Graces Sufficient in regard of the
effect for which they so styled them, we could not, because they were not
really so, needing still another Grace to act effectually; that 'twas in this
sense that the word Sufficient was taken in the World; and that the other
notion of the word Sufficient, which they admitted in their School, for a Power
depending in the action upon another Grace, being unknown, it gave too much
advantage to the Molinists to admit a word which they abused; but otherwise
'twas only quaestio de nomine, since we granted what they meant by the term
Sufficient, and they rejected all that we rejected under that word: That being
agreed upon the thing, we needed not dispute about words. That we could not
grant that those small Graces were given generally to all, nor should we say
that they gave a perfect, neat and complete power, because these terms were
abused as well as that of the Sufficient, the World understanding thereby a
Power whereunto nothing is wanting, though we denied not the thing which they
understood by those words of Next Power. That he should never have any thing
else from us; and that if the Fathers of their Order were apt to stand upon
their Niceties, and leave the main of the Controversy in which we agreed with
them, we should nevertheless continue to pursue our point without their
assistance, and endeavor alone to find strength enough in the Truth for the
defeating of all its opposers. F. Reginald, both this day and two days after
when he came to visit us, told us, that the Fathers of his Order desired
nothing else of us, after this declaration of our Sentiments, except that we
would not attaque the Authors of their Order, who taught that this Sufficient
Grace (besides which an other Effectual is necessary to act well) is given to
all the World, and gives a certain Next Power which suffices not to act; We
answered him, that we should not stand upon the disputes of the School, being
about nothing but words; and that we had no design to oppose the sufficient
Grace of some of their Authors, or what they taught concerning it, but only
that of Molina, professed by the Society of Jesuits, because 'twas only this
which we judged incompatible with the faith of the Church in this matter.

The same day a new Congregation was held at Cardinal Spada's Palace, where the
other four Cardinals of it and M. Albizzi were present, but not any Consultor;
It lasted three hours; and after it was ended, Cardinal Pampilio stayed a long
while alone with Cardinal Spada. This was signified to me at night by an
excellent man of one of the first Orders in the Church. Si e fatta hoggi la
Congregatione de soli cinque Cardinali, essendovi intravenuto il Card. Cechini;
vi e stato anche inimicus crucis Christi (so he styled M. Albizzi) Si e
comminciata all 20 hoar, e finita all 23. E restato dopo il Card. Pamphilio
solo con lo Spada, and e notte ne e partito. Credo sia per consegli domestici
Pamphiliani.

A friend of one of those Cardinals coming to visit us on Monday the twenty
first, told us that he had said to that Cardinal, that he would give an hundred
Crowns on condition that I would give him a Teston every day till this cause
were ended; and that the Cardinal answered him, that I would be a great gainer
if I gave him every day but a Julio; and that they all understood nothing in it.

He who writ me the abovesaid Note came also to visit us, and told us, that F.
Aversa informed a considerable Prelate of the Court of Rome, that he had highly
protested in the Congregation, that he had all imaginable esteem and veneration
for S. Augustin's doctrine, but the Five Propositions non havevano che fare con
Sant' Agostino, had no relation to it. He told me also that it was publicly
laughed at in Rome, that M. Albizzi being no Divine, was yet Secretary of the
Congregation.

I further heard the same day, that the illustrious F. Mulard was newly come
again to Rome. Nor was it long before he gave us matter of divertisement by the
complaint which he made to us of his good friends. For finding him two or three
days after at the Ambassador's house, he came to me, and told me, that M.
Hallier and his Colleagues were so impertinent as to accuse him of having given
us F. Annat's Writing about Jansenius and the Thomists, that they had
complained hereof to Cardinal Barberin; and that he desired me to testify to
his Eminence that it was not so.

Thursday the 24th. I entreated the Ambassador to tell the Pope at his audience
next day, that F. Des-mares, and M. Manassier desired to salute him in private
before we appeared publicly before his Holiness, as we expected every day a
summons. The Ambassador very courteously promised to do it. The next day we
accompanied him to the Pope's Palace, and when he came forth from audience, he
told us that he had not forgotten us, but we could not have our desire at this
time, and therefore he recommended it to the Pope's Maistre de Chamber to get
us admission on Sunday next.

On which day we accordingly all went to the Pope; but the Count de Rochefort
being first introduced took up all the time, and when he came forth the Pope
would give no more audience, because he intended to go to take the air
presently after Dinner. Whilst this Count was at his audience, Monsignor
Senzasono told us; that he wondered at the strange familiarity wherewith F.
Mulard had demeaned himself that morning toward the Count; and indeed had we
not known that Father we had wondered at it the more; for that when the Count
came forth, he asked us who that Cordelier was who was with him that morning,
and told him that he was come to M. Hallier's assistance. We answered him, that
he must not be surprised at what he observed in his carriage; for to tell him
all in a word, it was F. Mulard. The Count replied, that the Father had been in
so very ill an humor that day that he quarreled with a French Gentleman who
sat between them.

Monday 28. M. de Valcroissant and M. Angran stayed at home to finish the
Writings which we were preparing, and I accompanied F. Des-mares and F.
Manassier to the Pope's Palace to endeavor to get audience for them; but we
could not succeed. We observed one pleasant thing of F. Mulard, who caused
himself to be set down in the list of those who desired it, with the style of
Preacher to the most Christian King. Whilst we stayed there, we fell into
discourse with a man who was come post to the Pope from the Archbishop of
Avignon about some urgent and important affair; and after much talk concerning
the doctrine which we defended, and the persecutions and calumnies employed to
decry it, he comforted us by saying, That it was a great favor of God to be of
the number of those who know his Truth, and endure something for its defense.

Tuesday the 29th. we went again to the Pope's Antichambre. As I was speaking
about the matters of our Contest, and the Jesuits exorbitances with the
General of the Discalceated Carmelites; who was skilled enough in them, in
presence of the Resident of Modena, and two or three other Roman Prelates; the
Gallicane Prince came to us; and having heard us peaceably to the end, when the
General was called away to audience, to confirm what the General had said, he
spoke a very handsome and remarkable word. The very name (said he) of the thing
you speak of evidences all that you have said; because justice is due to all
the world, but Grace to none; it is done only to whom we please. I
congratulated the Prince for his conceit, and told him, there needed no more to
decide all our Controversies. As Soon as the General of the Carmelites was
entered to audience, the door was shut, and all the Suitors dismissed for that
day.

In the afternoon I accompanied F. Des-mares and M. Manassier in a visit to M.
Gueffier, they laid open to him the necessity of hearing our Adversaries and us
contradictorily viva voce and by writing; and what a shame it was to those on
whom it depended, to be so long in granting it to us.

To the same purpose I discoursed to Monsignor Fagnani in a particular visit,
and told him it was not otherwise possible to put an end to our contests. He
answered me that these disputes had no end. I replied, that we did not desire
those kind of Scholastic disputes, which are endless; and as he perceived my
drift, he prevented me and said, but those conferences ( Congressi ne i quali
si portano Canoni de Consigli, luoghi de' santi Padre, principalmente di sant
Agostino, decisioni de' Pontefici, etc.) In which are produced the Canons of
Councils, the testimonies of the H. Fathers especially S. Augustine, decisions
of Popes, and other proofs of that nature, as the Scripture etc. He added that
if the Pope spoke to him about our affair, he would persuade his Holiness as
much as he could to make such conferences, simili Congressi.

But 'twas these very Conferences which our Adversaries endeavored to hinder.
All their business was done. They demanded nothing but to depart and return
into France. This information I received from two Abbots, the one of France,
who told us that he heard the Postmaster who conducted M. Hallier and his
Colleagues to Rome, say, that they made account to depart by Whitsund^y if they
could. The other of Italy, who was told by Cardinal Ghiggi's Secretary that
these Doctors desired that the affair might be dispatched speedily, che si
sbrighi; that we would weary them by our subterfuges; that they had business
which required their return into France; that M. Joysel alleged for his
particular reasons, that he was obliged to preach in Lent the next year, and
had not yet begun his Sermons.

The same day being the last of April, I visited a very intelligent person, who
told me that we must not think that either the instances of the Ambassador, or
the remonstances of our Memorials had put the Pope in the mind to hear us; that
he had declared as much all the Lent; That M. Albizzi conceiving it requisite
to follow the ordinary forms of his Tribunal, the Inquisition, and to have the
same course held before the Pope as before the Cardinals in the Congregation at
Cardinal Spada's house, had told the Pope, that being M. Hallier and his
Colleagues had been heard there it was fit likewise that they should be heard
before his Holiness. That the Pope being-urg'd thus by M. Albizzi, said at
length, that he would do it, but he would hear both the one side and the other,
Vogliamo sentire gli uni e gli altri. That hereupon M. Albizzi fearing that
this might occasion the Conferences which we demanded, and doubting the force
of what we had to allege; ceased to press the Pope to hear M. Hallier and his
Colleagues; and that hence it was that we were forgotten by his Holiness and
left in quiet since the Festivals, whereas during Lent we expected to be called
before his Holiness as soon as they were past.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Letters written to me from Paris during the whole month of April,
concerning the state of our affair at Rome.

ALthough all the Letters written to me from Paris during this month contain
nothing considerably different from what passed at Rome; but are only
reflections upon the course held there in our affair, and testimonies both of
the triumphs which our A dersaries made already every where for the Censure of
the Propositions, whereof they were confident; and of the Christian moderation
and constancy wherewith we continued to pursue the examen of it, and to hope in
the divine protection: nevertheless they seem to me so fit to justify to the
Public and Posterity the innocence both of our Doctrine and Deportment; that I
cannot forbear to insert some of the principal here.

I received some from M. de Saint Beuve every Post, and in regard of his
quality and ability so well known in the world, and because he always spoke
directly to the substance of the affair with great sincerity, I shall produce
his first and almost alone. This he writ to me April 4.

SIR.
YOur concise style tells me more things then when you are diffuse. Even your
silence speaks, and inasmuch as you sent me no intelligence, you thereby
informed me that you were much employed and were not without fear. For my part,
Sir, I forthwith regretted your dejection, yet could not apprehend that the
event of the Congregation to be held before his Holiness would be
disadvantagious to us. The power of Truth, the assistance of the H. Ghost upon
the Pope, his Holiness's greatness of mind, the learning and the generosity of
the principal Consultors, the interest which the Dominicans have in ours, and
the multitude of knowing persons of our opinion, keep me from fearing any
thing; and put me in great hope in case they proceed to a definition. You
cannot imagine how much our Adversaries dread the intervention of the
Dominicans. They tell some, that they are sure the General of the Jacobines
will not enter into the Cause, but will be contented if he be promised that an
insertion shall be put into the Bull, that the Pope pretends not to prejudice
the Doctrine of S. Thomas by it. Which discourse was made by a Jesuit named F.
le Cointes, Companion of F. Paulin the Kings Confessor. But whilst they speak
thus, their Predicators preach in disparagement of effectual Grace, as one F.
Mimbourg at S. German del' Auxerrois, and F. Lingendes at S. Gervais. They tell
others that the Dominicans do not accord with us; and this is talked in
Sorbonne, and comes from Rome. M. Lagault writes to M. Duval as one high in
hopes, and that which makes them considerable is, that it is said that generally
what he sends word is to come to pass by a set time, comes to pass
accordingly; witness the prayers appointed by his Holiness. M. Duval above a
fortnight before the last, informed us that the Pope would appoint prayers, and
then pronounce without hearing parties, and that in France he should be obeyed.
But all this does not much trouble me. Let his Holiness pronounce if he please;
he must distinguish the senses, unless he means to add Oil to the fire; for
'twill be a new contest more violent then the first, in what sense the
Propositions are condemned. If he does distinguish them, our Adversaries must
of necessity fall. For our sense cannot receive any impeachment, being no other
but that of effectual Grace. What I am charged to accquaint you with Sir, is
this, that if it comes to pass that a Bull be passed in condemnation of the
Propositions without distinguishing and securing the sense of effectual Grace,
you must make all possible instances and suit to get the Pope to explain
himself and leave no seed of division in the affair, M. LL. the Bishops
command me to write this to you earnestly, and particularly that you join your
selves as much as may be withal the disciples of S. Thomas. For it shall not
be said that we are injustly opress'd, that after the malicious contrivance of
Propositions to blacken us, this imposture is Crowned with an ambiguous Bull,
and that we hold our peace.

I am etc.

The same day M. Brousse Writ to me that which follows.

Paris, April 4. 1653. SIR, My dear friend,
I Did not writ to you on Friday last, because I had nothing new to tell you,
and was so engaged in business that I did not think of the Post day till it was
too late. Our Adversaries are more insolent then ever, and those words of the
Scripture may be liberally applied to them; superbia little qui te oderunt
ascendit semper.

You will see by a Letter written to me from Lions what they preach in that
City; in these parts it is worse yet. F. Mimbourg made at S. Germain de l'
Auxerrois a continued Satyr against S. Augustine and his disciples, who are
always those new Heretics. He draws the world after him by his insolences,
as F. Nouel sometimes did against the Book of Frequent Communion. Last week he
was all about the Oeconomie of Grace and Predestination; he speaks such things
as Pelagius never thought of; so that he laid for a foundation and principle in
matter of Religion and Faith, that we ought to stick firm to what our senses
and reason demonstrate to us; because they are the two Lights which God has
given us for our direction. The Concierge of the Hostel de Villeroy who
receives and distributes M. Hallier's letters, told a friend of mine lately
that M. Hallier's servant sent him word that these Jansenists were worse then
ever Calvin was, that they put them to so many troubles and shifts, was not
credible. The Sieur Lagault writes to a Kinsman of his that he shall return
very speedily, having no more to do in that Country. I salute all our dear
Brethren and good friends, and am with all my heart, etc.

The person who freequently writ to me in Latin sent me this of April 4.
touching the state of things at Rome.

QUid ex posterioribus tuis colligere debeam non certe scio. Quamquam enim
causam hanc seminari optandum est, tamen ut, de aliorum relatione audio, non
finiendae controversiae ratio initur quae omnino aequa videri possit. In
consilium admittuntur (si quibusdam credimus) solum ii qui cum Palavicino
sentiunt and Albisio; caeteri jubentur ex scripto sententiam dicere. Brevitas
imperatur ne omnia dicere liceat. Tui non audisti, Dominicani non admittuntur,
qui tarde tandem rebus suis and doctrinae providere in animum induxerunt. Forte
istis satisfactum putabunt qui maxim illorum odere sententiam, si declarent
nolle se quicquam praejudicare Thomistarum opinionibus, and hac clausula and
ambiguitate verborum se tegent. Dum Jesuitae in omnes adversarios gratiae
Molinisticae pronuntiatum esse contendent: at certe nihil est ejusmodi
aequivocatione iis indignius, iis qui se doctrinae and fidei Moderatores
supremos apud omnes haberi velint. Clare pronuntiandum est, Veritas lucem amat,
neque unquam apud majores nostros and primos Ecclesiae fundatores in more
positum fuit, ut verborum circuitu hominibus illuderent, ne quisquam damnatus
videretur, dum utraque pars diversa sentientium, tanquam damnata accusatur ab
adversariis. Hac art si prudentiam humanam olim Ecclesia sequi voluisset,
Arrianorum querelas sedavisset; sed non Arrianum solum dogma respuit, sed
evellere radices ipsas sollicita, ambigua distinxit, probavit bona, mala clare
condemnavit. Olim quod de una vel pluribus in Christo voluntatibus silere
jubetur, a Constantinopolitano Concilio legitur damnatus Honorius, and
experientia manifestum factum est, Molinistarum deliria, quiae omnino praecisa
non sunt, jam nobis obtrudi tanquam doctrinam Ecclesiae, quorum impudenti
audaciae resisti diu non poterit, nisi qua merentur censura notentur;
timendumque est ne dum pacem quaerimus, veritatem amittamus, brevique quod de
Arrianismo dixit Hieronymus, stupeat orbis se factum esse Pelagianum: sed ista
curent, quibus inest mali praecidendi auctoritas; nos Deum obsecremus.

The following dated April 11. was likewise sent me from the above commended M.
de Saint Beauve.

SIR,
It Is this day a year since I spoke to M. Hallier in presence of M. Duval
concerning his voyage to Rome, and told him all my thoughts of it as his
friend; but he was then too much engaged, to follow my advice. By this time, I
hope he is upon the point to acknowledge that what I said to him proceeded from
a lover of truth, and a person allied to him by an ancient friendship. For if
the Pope pronounce, and secure our sense, what will remain to him of all his
pains but confusion? besides that he will be esteemed by all intelligent men a
perfect Boutefeu. But if his Holiness do not pronounce, I see not with what
face he can return into France. For that the Pope will pronounce without
securing the sense of Effectual Grace, is a thing altogether improbable. Such a
blow is not to be feared from so wise, so prudent, so accomplished a man, and so
great a lover of peace. For my part, Sir, I hold for certain that his Holiness
will pronounce, he ought to do it in the present conjuncture, in which the
whole Clery of France is at his feet demanding a decision of him with
extraordinary submission. Rome ought not to lose this occasion, which never had
its like. Yet I conceive his Definition will be so prudent, that no person will
have cause to complain of it; otherwise the advantage which we offer him will
be lost. And as we say that the Propositions are not ours, that they are
equivocal, that they have very bad senses, but yet have a very good one too,
which is that of S. Augustine and S. Thomas; so I persuade my self the Pope will
pronounce that they cannot be maintained but that in that sense, and with
explication, not wholly naked, because as such, they have a very evil sense: If
he does this, the Jesuits will think they have their market, and not dare to
say any thing; and we having ours shall have all reason to be contented and
strongly to maintain the Pope's definition. I see not how he can pronounce
after any other manner, without wronging the authority of the H. See, Truth and
himself. I hope much from the continual prayers which are made in all the
Churches of Rome for this purpose. I fear nothing from the opposition of the
Cardinals. I expect all under God from the strength of his Holinesses 's mind,
from the learning of the Consultors S. Augustin's Disciples, and from their
care. There Is but one thing to do, which is, to let the Pope know that when
nothing could be found to gainsay our doctrine, their Equivocal Propositions
were contrived to blacken us; that the same design will be endeavored to be
carried on by the Bull which shall be passed; and therefore beseech his
Holiness that some other then M. Hallier our greatest enemy may be appointed to
draw it, that it may be reviewed and examined diligently before it come forth,
as well by his Holiness as by the Augustines and Jacobines, since he declared
in the first Congregation, that he intended not that any thing should be done
in the whole course of this affair to the prejudice of the Doctrine of S.
Augustine and S. Thomas. But if God should permit that there be obscurity in
the Bull which shall be passed, which our Adversaries may abuse; I am charged
by my Lords to bid you insist in their name to his Holiness, that all may be
pronounced and explained with such perspicuity, that his Holiness 's judgment
may produce peace amongst us.

I am with all my heart, etc

Another follows of the same M. de Saint Beuve dated April 18.

SIR,
IF M. Hallier and his Colleagues have stayed longer at Rome then they purposed,
their mishap has been the cause of it. M. Lagault writes to M. le Moyne, that
his employment being to sing the Salve, he was obliged to stay at Rome, to sing
that of Jansenism. I confess to you, that when this was reported to me, I
could could not but say that it was a conceit worthy of a Molinist, and that
they must be pardoned a sally of imaginary hope, since they have no ground for
a true. Let us leave these Doctors to their boasting, whilst we labor
vigorously in defense of the Truth. They are good friends of those who are in
error, because they have been adorers of their own nature. Let us bear with
them while they are vain in their own conceit, and desire God in their behalf
that the spirit of Error rule no longer in them; You amaze me when you tell me,
that the Consultors have not seen their first Writings; but I expect from your
vigilance, that they will hereafter be all particularly informed of the merit
of our cause. Let our Adversaries decline to appear contradictorily at Rome,
it is an argument of the weakness of their cause: but when they boast of
examples to justify that persons decry'd for teaching false doctrine, ought
not to be heard, it can be construed nothing but either gross ignorance, or
unmeasurable malice. It will not be necessary to take much pains to convince
them; the Congregation de Auxiliis, and the Councils are peremptory proofs of
the falsehood of what they allege so boldly. I should be troubled at the
slowness of the Dominicans, did not the last inform me that the General were
the same day you writ it, to desire audience,

I am, etc.

Moeeover, the same person begins another of April 25. in this manner
concerning the intervention of the Dominicans.

SIR,
GIve me leave to ask you, why you send me no word concerning the Dominicans?
Do they abandon our cause, or is it a mystery that must be concealed from us?
speak freely, Sir, and know, that if we are glad of their union, we shall not
be discouraged by their coldness. They may be so serviceable to the cause,
that yet the cause has need of them; for it is the cause of truth, and God is
sruth, when needs not either our goods or care -- I read their Letter to M. de
Chaalory, but I see not that it is requisite to think of what you propose, till
his Holiness have granted a Congregation like that de Auxiliis; if I flatter
not my self, methinks what is hitherto done is a perfect preparation to it. We
are threatened here with a Censure within eight days, and it is bruited, that
the Pope is to pass it in coena Domini; but we are very undaunted,

I am, etc.

Another Doctor of my friends writ to me on the 15th. of the same Month in
these terms.

The Molinists affirm that we are condemned, and that all which is done with so
great solemnity, is done only to make the Judgment more notorious and powerful
against us. I never heard them speak to us so as they have done since the
arrival of the last Post. I have sure conjectures that their three Antagonists
have written hither.

The same person making a general reflection in another Letter upon the manner
of proceeding in our affair at Rome, after many complaints and regrets
wherewith he affirmed his heart was full, spoke thus to me; Is it possible for
Truth to be so ill treated in the place where it ought to be as in its Throne,
and where its enemies ought not to behold it but with trembling? It must be
hoped that God will confound all those who so oppress it, and that one day it
will be like a mighty Rock to overwhelm them, if not in this world, at least in
that wherein all the most hidden things shall be revealed.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the first certain intelligence which I received May 4. that the
Constitution was made against the Propositions. And of the Audience which F.
Des-mares and M. Manessier had of the Pope the same day.

THe first of May being come, I understood that the feast of the two Apostles
solemnis'd that Day did not hinder the Assembly of the H. Office before the
Pope. Also that M. Hallier and his Colleagues went not only to Cardinal Spada's
Palace to wait upon him to Monte Cavallo, but also waited his return and
reconducted him home; after which they went to le Giefu to visit some
Jesuits. All which implies the most intimate correspondence and dependence
between them that can be imagined.

Sunday ^he 4th. I received a visit in the morning from a well informed person,
who assut'd me that there was a Bull or Constitution prepared, by which the
Propositions were condemned; and I cannot doubt but it was the same which was
since published. F. Des-mares and M. Manessier, and I were ready to go to the
Pope's audience. I took with me the Bishops Letter of Febr. 24. which we had
forborne to deliver for fear of exasperating minds, and I resolved alone to
present it to his Holiness, if we were admitted, seeing there was no more time
to solicit for any thing. I would not dismay my new Colleagues with the bad
news which I had lately received. But saying nothing to them about the same,
desired them to go before to the Pope's Presence Chamber, where I should be as
soon as they, intending to make a short visit by the way. The person whom I
visited, was one who had dissuaded us from delivering the said Letter for fear
of producing ill blood. I told him that I was going to deliver it, seeing the
Condemnation was already made, and nothing was likely to avert it but such an
earnest and powerful Remonstrance as this Letter. My friend was amazed at my
confident asserting the notice which I gave him; and supposing it true, as I
assured him, he consented to the delivering of it, since it could do no hurt.

Immediately I came to F. Des-mares and M. Manessier in the Pope's
Presence Chamber and the Maistre de Chamber to go back to the Pope, and to tell
him that I desired to be admitted with them; and so I retired into the common
Antichamber with the Letter in my hand (which I had delivered to the Pope if I
had been admitted to audience) and let F. Des-mares and M. Manessier go alone;
they were there three quarters of an hour. I cannot better relate what passed
in this audience then the following Letter does, which they writ concerning it
the next day to our Bishops.

My Lords,
SInce our coming to this City, we have been employed chiefly in two things.
First, To peruse the Writings prepared by our Colleagues, that we might sign the
same jointly with them, and have them in readiness to present to the Pope when
it should please him to hear us. And secondly, to obtain audience of his
Holiness. Whereunto being admitted yesterday morning, we told our H. Father,
that our Colleagues having represented to you, my Lords, that in hope that his
Holiness would establish a solemn Congregation wherein they might
contradictorily defend the true sense of the Five famous Propositions according
to S. Augustin's doctrine, in presence of their Adversaries, and before the
Apostolical Tribunal of his Holiness, they foresaw, that in the progress of
the Conferences they might have need of some assistance for the more easy and
speedy discharging of the duties of their Commission; and you had sent us not
only for that purpose, but also to make new instances in your name to his
Holiness for the establishment of such a Congregation as you had caused our
Colleagues to demand several months before.

Our H. Father answered us, that to satisfy the desires of the Bishops of
France, who demanded his judgment touching the Five Propositions, he had
assembled his Divines, and heard them sundry times with great care and patience
upon the senses of those Propositions; and that not contented herewith, he had
appointed public prayers, to obtain such light from God as was necessary for
passing his judgment upon them. That moreover, he hoped to restore peace to
the Church by other ways then Disputes. We replied, that we had recourse to
the H. See, to obtain the same peace; but that these Bishops of France who sent
us to procure it, desired with all good men that it might be a true, sound and
permanent peace; which was not to be hoped in the present circumstances without
the establishment of the solemn Congregation which we most humbly demanded of
his Holiness. He answered, that the prime and supreme Vicar of Jesus Christ
was not obliged to examine all things by Disputation. That 'twas sufficient
that he took such means as he judged fitting to form his judgment upon the
controversies propounded to him, and that after this we ought to believe that
the inspiration of God would not be wanting to him for understanding the
bottom thereof and deciding the same infallibly; and the truth of those
Decrees depended only, salamente, upon that Divine inspiration.

Our reply was, my Lords, that our demand agreed very well with our belief
that God watches particularly over the H. See, since we accounted it a visible
effect of the divine vigilance, that it pleased God to inspire the Bishops of
France with the thought and care to advertise his Holiness of the conspiracy
which was made against the Doctrine of S. Augustine and the Church; which we
undertook to justify before his Holiness in presence of our adversaries by
unreproachable witnesses and invincible proofs. That if it pleased his
Holiness to bring it to the trial, we hoped he should understand our
sincerity and their foul dealing; that this might be known by the sole reading
of the sixty passages of S. Augustine which they produced against the first
Proposition, whereof there was not one but was a proof either of their
ignorance or unfaithfulness; some being alleged impertinently, others
misconstructed, and some mutilated and corrupted, as we were ready to
demonstrate in presence of our Adversaries, and to convince them thereof before
the H. See.

You always suppose (said the Pope) that you have adversaries to encounter;
it is not so. The other Doctors who are here to have judgment upon the five
Propositions, call not themselves your parties, nor desire to be heard
contradictorily. We answered, they must needs be our parties; because they
produce objections against the Doctrine which we maintain to be Catholic. But
besides, your Holiness will give us leave to say that we account all such our
Adversaries and parties who impugn S. Augustin's authority and Doctrine. Now
these are visibly impugn'd, and that by the Doctors who forged the five
Propositions, by those who prosecute their Censure with them; but principally
by the Jesuits, whose books printed with the approbation of superiors and
public declamations, tend utterly to ruin the Established authority and
Orthodox Doctrine of that great Saint. It Is no wonder if our adversaries demand
not of your Holiness to be heard contradictorily in presence of S. Augustin's
disciples; they fear to be convinced of subverting a Doctrine whose defenders
have so often found a sanctuary in the H. See which has Canonis'd it by its
Decrees. Hence it is than employ at this day all their artifices and intrigues
to keep your Holiness from obliging them to defend themselves before you from
the just accusations which we have to charge upon them and their pernicious
Doctrine.

But (replied the H. F.) there is no need of entering into disputation with those
you call your parties; it is no Law-Processe that is in debate, but the
determining of Propositions. This suffices to produce peace to the Church; and
we hope the Contests raised about these five, will cease as soon as the H. See
shall have spoken, as it hapened in the Controvesie touching the authority of
S. Peter, and S. Paul. Should I appoint such a conference as you ask, disputes
would be infinite; Divines would come here from all parts: I will speedily end
this business without noise. After using all the diligences I think necessary
to understand it thoroughly, it is not to be doubted but the H. Ghost will
communicate such light to me as I shall need to judge thereof according to
truth.

Here we took the Liberty to say, We most humbly beseech your Holiness to add
one diligence to all those which you have used, namely the establishment of a a
solemn Congregation, wherein the important truths in question may be cleared
and confirmed. The Orthodox doctrine of S. Augustine is at this day in contest;
our adversaries imagine the same by the bad sense which they put upon the five
Propositions, whose Censure they press and solicit, to the end to disparage,
by the conseqences which they shall draw from thence, the authority and
Catholic sentiments of that H. Doctor of grace. We have many things to
represent to your Holiness against our Adversaries, both matters of fact, and
upon the several senses of the Propositions. This cannot be well done but in
their presence, when they may contradict us, and reflect the falsehood, if we
allege any, and we also make good exactly and without exception all that we
have to produce against them. We shall show in that Congregation that the
belief of the Jesuits touching the five Propositions, tends to overthrow the
foundations of Christian Religion. The demand which we reiterate to your
Holiness in the name of our L. L. the Bishops to be heard contradictorily, is
legal, conformable to the practice of the Church, authorized by the H. Fathers,
and allowed by the Predecessors of your Holiness. What will the Faithful say
when they see the H. Father deny the Sons of the Church, all S. Augustin's
disciples, a thing most just, not wont to be denied to any person, not even to
Heretics? And what will Posterity say when it shall know that Bishops of
France could not obtain of the H. See after long and urgent solicitations,
that which ordinary Priests have obtained without difficulty?

The Pope answered, that all these considerations had been represented to him
already, and that 'twas to no purpose to repeat the same things; that 'twas our
part only to consider whether we would be heard before him without our
adversaries and without disputes, or no, that in case we would, he offered to
receive our writings, and hear us with patience and benignity as much as we
pleased, quanto vorrete. We replied, again that we were loath to be importune
to his Holiness; but the affair committed to us being of extreme importance,
obliged us to reiterate our most humble instances for obtaining a means which
we conceived necessary for the right treating of it. In fine, perceiving the
Pope pressed us to answer precisely, we, thought it our duty to say to him, H.
Father, we desire withal our hearts and most humbly demand the audiences which
your Holiness offers us; but we demand them always with the just and legal
conditions which we have expressed, and which are imported by our Commission,
the limits whereof we may not exceed. Whereupon finding our H. Father not
disposed to grant us a conference, and that nevertheless he pressed us to
appear before him to represent the things whereof we desired to inform him, we
insisted no further; but prayed him to permit us to report to our Colleagues
what it pleased his Holiness to propose to us, to the end we might all together
testify the submission and respect which had for his Orders.

In this disposition, my Lords, we left his Holiness. The same Evening we had
certain notice of the draught of a Bull upon the five Propositions; we know not
whether it be to condemn them in general or in particular, or whether it be
only to deprive the parties of Liberty to dispute of them by imposing silence
to both; yet it is most likely to be for condemning them in some manner. However
it be, all considered, we have conceived, my Lords, that we are obliged to
appear before the Pope when it should please his Holiness to send for us and
hear us in presence of our adversaries.

In the first place to the end to testify to his Holinsse that we reverence
his power, and are obedient to his pleasure. In the second place to oppose by
this last means now left us the enterprises and Cabals of the Jesuits against
the truth, and to take away the pretext which they might have to publish,
though very falsely, that your Deputies, my Lords, durst not appear before the
H. see. In the third place to free our selves from the blame which the
disciples of S. Augustine and S. Thomas might lay upon us, (as they would here
undoubtedly) of having left the truth in the oppression and obscurity whereinto
its enemies would reduce it, if we refused the defense and elucidation which it
requires here against those who endeavor to embroile it, and put upon it, if
possible, the resemblance of error, whereby to render it odious and worthy of
Anathema. Lastly we have taken this resolution as the sole means we have at
present to obtain the effect of the commission wherewith it has pleased you my
Lords, to honor us.

For we conceive the audiences promised us by the Pope may in some wise inform
him of the matters in contest; especially of the necessity of the Conference
which we solicit by your Orders; but they will not suffice to instruct him so
fully in the matter in question that he may give a clear and definitive
judgment of it with a perfect cognizance of the Cause. Many things which we
have to represent to his Holiness may convince him that the present
controversy is of highest importance, and cannot be clearly decided as things
now stand, unless the parties be obliged to declare their belief plainly, and
defend the same against their adversaries before the H. see in the manner which
has been proposed to our H. Father in your name. This is it which the Jesuits
fear and decline as the certain destruction of their Molinisme; and it is that
which we desire with all our hearts as the sure victory which the invincible
and H. defender of Grace will gain once more over the new Pelagians of our
age. God touch the heart of his Holiness and dispose him to grant us a thing
so just and necessary. It Is the usual subject of our prayers, the weakness
whereof has need, my Lords, to be strengthened with yours and all theirs who
have any love and gratitude for the grace which makes us Christians, and
obliges us to honor with sincere and true respect the prime Ministers of Jesus
Christ, in the love of whom we shall remain all our lives,

MY LORDS Your most humble and most obedient servants, F. Des-mares. N.
Manessier.

Rome, May 5. 1653.
Receiving this Letter I remember one thing, which these Gentlemen have not
mentioned, though they related it to us in the account they gave us of their
audience; namely that when M. Manessier urged in the name of the Bishops for a
Conference, and represented how necessary it was in this cause, the Pope
answered them in these terms, Tutto questo dipende dall' inspiratione del
spirito santo; all this depends upon the inspiration of the H. Ghost. Whereto
M. Manessier replying that the assistance of the H. Ghost which God had
promised to the Church in decisions of Faith, did not acquit Ecumenical
Councils from all reasonable means of instruction in the truth; and that 'twas
by these very means that such assistance was given them; the Pope said, Non
dite questo, questa opinione non e buona; You must not say so; that opinion is
not good. To which neither M. Manessier nor F. Des-mares durst reply any thing
furthet, though it appeared to them sufficiently strange; since those very
Divines who profess most adherence to Rome, (as the late M. Du Val) teach that
the Pope is not instructed in the truth by special revelations but by the
humane ways, wherewith God obliges him to seek it. Qui diceret (says that
Doctor in his book de autoritate Pontificis) Pontificem per immediatam and
expressam revelationem suas definitiones habere, nonnihil ad haeresin quorundam
saeculi nostri Novatorum, quise a spiritu particulari de rebus fidei edoceri
and confirmari jactant, propenderet; quorum haeresis tanquam certissima ad
errores via ab omnibus Orthodoxis reprobatur.

CHAP. XIX.
The discourse of Card. Ghiggi with another Cardinal in the Consistory, May 5.
touching the new Bull. The reasons which moved us to go and tell the Pope that
we should be ready to appear before him when and in what manner his Holiness
pleased.

TUesday, May 6. I heard that a certain Cardinal being advertised on Sunday
last that the Bull was prepared, instantly resolved to make his complaints and
Remonstrances against it to the Pope on Monday morning May 5. in the Consistory
which was to be held that day: but fearing that what he should represent to the
Pope would not be well received by his Holiness, he conceived it would be best
to speak first to Cardinal Ghiggi who was likely to hear with more attention
what he should say, to receive it better, and with more facility render the
Pope susceptible of it. He intended also to discover by Cardinal Ghiggi's
answers how the Popes mind stood, and whether or no it would be fit to speak
to his Holiness afterward. But Cardinal Ghiggi replied so sharply to all
that the other Cardinal said (though his elder and a most venerable person both
for his endowments and his age,) and seemed so violently prepossessed and
strongly bent to the purpose of Condemning, that he conceived the Pope was
affected in the same manner, and therefore resolved to say nothing to him for
fear he should do it in vain, but to practice that counsel of the Scripture,
Non effundas Sermonem ubi non est auditus. And he saw that thenceforward all
was desperate, and no more to be done in the matter but to have recourse to
prayers and patience.

I was informed exactly enough of the particulars of the discourse of these two
Cardinals, and shall insert some principal fragments of it which I penned down
at that time.

Upon the friendly and familiar complaint made to Cardinal Ghiggi about the new
compiled Bull, Cardinal Ghiggi answered the other roughly and as being
surpised that the mine was discovered, seeming also in some sort to deny that
it was true. He asked him Chive l' ha detto? who told you this? The other
answered calmely, I do not think I am obliged to tell you whence I had this
intelligence; but I am advertised of it by a good hand. Your Eminence must not
believe, but in such an affair as this, wherein all the world is interessed,
every one endeavors to look about him and discover what is acted; I conjecture
that in the first draught of the Bull there were some words in commendation of
S. Augustine, because besides what I otherwise heard, the discourse of these two
Cardinals came to this point, that Cardinal Ghiggi acknowledging that the Bull
was made, yet undertook to justify the reasonableness of it, telling the
other that no dangerous consequence could be feared from it, in regard of the
praises attributed therein to that H. Doctor, by which (he said) his Doctrine
was secured. The other Cardinal replied, that those praises were of little
advantage to S. Augustine if his doctrine was really condemned; adding that the
Propositions in question were his very doctrine, and, till their condemnation,
maintained as so many articles of Faith. Cardinal Ghiggi answered, that they
were equivocal; and contained evil sense: The other replied that they also
contained Capital truths of the Catholic faith in the good senses wherein they
might be understood. For proof whereof he began to explain them with admirable
facility and clearness; but Cardinal Ghiggi excused himself from hearing him,
saying that he had not studied them. Whereupon the other said, Alas! how then
can you consent to their condemnation; if you have not studied them? Cardinal
Ghiggi answered, I should have studied them, had I been (da volare,) obliged to
give my opinion, and Vote concerning them. The other demanded, if you have not
given your opinion, how will it be true which the Pope shall say in his Bull,
that he condemns them by advice of the Cardinals, de Consilio fratrum
nostrorum? Cardinal Ghiggi answered, that it would be true by a Council of
prudence; per un Consiglio prudentiale, or otherwise, by a Political advice of
what was expedient to ordain, regard being had to all the circumstances of the
affair. The other excepted again, How can one give a prudential Counsel
touching an affair which he has not studied, and sees not to the bottom? If
this Bull be published, 'twill be a Bull of the Consultors, not of the
Cardinals; and of Consultors picked and culled by ways which all the world
knows and the French Doctors are not ignorant of; they keep a register of
them; and if an unfitting Judgment come forth we shall soon see the H. See
charged with confusion by printed Books in all parts. Besides if any obscurity
be in the Bull, every one will draw it to his own side, and this will cause
horrible combustions and contest. But for all this, in summa (said my Relator)
this Cardinal got nothing at all in his conference with Cardinal Ghiggi, but
very sharp answers from him; Non fu guadagnato niente, ma sempre acertissima
risposta.

Returning home from the Visit wherein I learnt these passages, we deliberated
concerning our going altogether that morning to the Pope, to deliver him the
Letter of Febr. 24. and declare to him, that we had been, and should be always
ready to appear before him whenever he should appoint us. Besides, the general
respect due to the Head of the Church from all the Faithful, we considered what
particular reasons we had for it in the present conjuncture; and that the Pope
was absolutely determined not to hear us at all in a contradictory Conference,
having so declared to our new Colleagues; that he conceived he had used all
moral diligences necessary for clearing the Truth; that he was persuaded that
after those diligences, the H. Ghost's assistance of him was infallible; and
that he was resolved to pronounce a Judgment.

We considered the persons who informed him, and from whom he took counsel,
most of them prejudiced against S. Augustin's doctrine and against us: offended
with the difficulties we had made to appear before them, unless on the
conditions we demanded, and accounting they did us a favor to hear us in the
manner which they offered, (seeing that most of the World was become
disaffected to us through the contrivances of the Jesuits throughout all
Europe, especially in France) not likely to neglect so favorable an occasion
of promoting the dominion which they affect over the conscience and liberty of
the Faithful.

We considered that the Bull, which was already compiled against the
Propositions, could not but give great advantages to our Adversaries, and be in
their hands like a sword in those of a mad man, when once it came forth; that
having assuredly not been made but by the ministry of M. Albizzi, and the
assistance of the Jesuits, they might easily have slipped into it words of very
great consequence, beside the Pope's intention, from whence the Jesuits might
pretend the cause gained for their Molina, and whose sequels his Holiness, not
being sufficiently instructed in these matters, could not foresee no more being
necessary: for his satisfaction, saving that it appeared in general that his
intentions were followed; wherefore we accounted it highly important to stop
its publication.

We considered that in one of the Writings prepared for us, we had our selves
done what we beseecht the Pope might be done before all things, namely,
distinguished the Propositions into the several senses whereof they were
capable, and clearly explicated them both in the one and the other without
equivocation or obscurity; Which Writing was necessary to be read and publicly
declared to the Pope before the Bull came forth; to the end that if it
absolutely condemned the Propositions, we might have this authentic proof
further that we had not maintained them absolutely, but only in the Catholic
senses whereof they were susceptible.

We considered that we could not have the advantage of making such declaration
and protestation before the Pope, nor hindering the publishing of the Bull, if
we still insisted upon being heard in the forms which we had dnmanded; because
'twas evidently dangerous that the Pope would persist to deny the same to us,
and without regard to what we had represented to him, cause the Bull to be
published forthwith. Which would be of no other advantage to us, then that we
might complain of being condemned after an unheard of manner in defending the
best cause of the World. But nevertheless such condemnation would cause great
disorder and scandal in the Church.

We considered that the Pope might have good intentions; That our Writings were
very home; that if he gave us time to explicate the same to him, and add
thereunto viva voce what we pleased as he promised us, the truths which we had
to represent to him might make some impression upon his mind, stop his purpose
against us whereto our Adversaries had drawn him, convince him of the necessity
of a Conference, and consequently move him to appoint one of his own accord
without our further demanding it.

We considered that should we be deceived in our hopes, this new fashioned
Audience which he would give us, not being according to Ecclesiastical laws
and customs, and we not accepting it but in regard of the present conjuncture
and circumstances above mentioned, there would be no great difference between
having been heard in this manner, and not being heard at all.

Lastly, We considered that we accepted not this Audience, but only to have the
means of representing to the Pope that it was not such as we demanded; that
the accustomed forms of the Church were not observed in it; that Ecclesiastical
liberty was infringed by it, and that we resolved not to begin to treat our
affair after a manner opposite to their forms and liberty, but because we now
saw no other way to preserve them, that we would slip no occasion, either in
this Congregation or the following of making instances for the same; that
whatever informations we gave of things, we should still conclude, that the
Pope might see thereby the necessity of having Adversares to object against
whatever falsehood or mistake might be in what we should represent against both
their proceedings and doctrine, and in behalf of our own.

All these considerations confirmed us in the resolution of going altogether
that day to the Pope, to testify to him that we were ready to appear before
his Holiness, when he pleased and how he pleased, and in the mean time to
deliver him the Letter of February 24. as a testimony of our desires, and those
of our Bishops; and moreover to get ready a Memorial to present to him when we
should appear before his Holiness, wherein to desire that both our first, and
the new Writings which we should present to him, might be communicated to our
Adversaries.

Having briefly reduced our common resolutions into Writing before we went out
of our Lodging, we repaired to the Pope's Presence Chamber to desire Audience;
but it being already somewhat late, we could not obtain it.

CHAP. XX.
Our resolution declared to the Ambassador. His care to signify it to the
Pope; and desire a set day of him. His Advertisement to M. Hallier and his
Colleagues to be ready to appear likewise before the Pope a day or two after us.
Visites hereupon to the Cardinals of our Congregation. The Bull prepared and
reviewed by these Cardinals severally.

THursday May 8. being in the Pope's Presence Chamber, and seeing the
Cardinals, Barbarin, S. Clement and Lugo come from the Congregation of the H.
Office, but Spada, Ginetti and Ghiggi stay behind with the Pope; I left one to
observe how long they continued there, who told me about an hour and a quarter
after; and almost at the same time a Laquay came to me from Cardinal Barberin,
to tell me that his Eminence desired to speak with me at what time I would set,
I asked the Laquay when he conceived his Eminence would be at leisure? he told
me, Between four and five; and I sent word that I would not fail to be there at
that time.

By the way I made another Visit, wherein I heard, that the General of the
Dominicans visiting Cardinal de Medicis the Uncle, complained very much to him
of M. Albizzi, especially concerning this new Bull, and the practices used to
gain suffrages in the Congregation: they talked of money given, and Bishoprics
and other employments promised. They judged it the interest of Spain, as well
as of the Order of Dominicans, to take heed of what passed in this affair; but
Cardinal Pimentel's arrival was thought fit to be expected, that he might join
with them in the common interest; In the mean time Cardinal de Medicis would
use his endeavors with the Pope.

Cardinal Barberin's business was not great; he told me, he invited me to come
to him, believing I had something to say to him. I made our excuses to him,
that our new Colleagues had not yet visited his Eminence. I told him the cause
of their coming, which was, to assist us in our negotiation, and to make new
instances to the Pope for such a Congregation as we had hitherto demanded. He
answered, that it was not to be urged too much; that perhaps the Pope will
ordain it of his own accord. I acquainted him with their audience of the Pope,
and our resolution to appear before his Holiness, when and how he pleased. He
said, it would be fit to represent that the Propositions could not be touched,
without entering into the matter de Auxiliis. I answered, that this matter ought
to be taken in hand, in order to root out the evil Opinions slipped into the
Church touching the same. And that we had no other intentions nor course to
take, then what was necessary for maintaining the belief of Grace aginst the
late enterprises to ruin it. He said, there were some who persuaded the Pope
that we would oppose Bulls; that we must take heed of that, and endeavor to
remove that ill suggestion against us. I answered, that our carriage was full
of sincerity; That we did nothing out of affectation; That 'twould be time
enough to speak of this when occasion should be offered. That nevertheless
seeing he mentioned it, I could assure him that we should not transgress any
Bull; and as for that of Urban VIII. his Eminence knew how F. Hilarion and my
self had spoken to him of it, That it might have its full and entire effect,
and yet all that was in Jansenius's Book be true even to the least line; that
this was my opinion; but in the present Controversy we had nothing to say,
either of that Book or Bull. This Declaration seemed to be well taken by the
Cardinal, who being called aside for a little space into the next room, brought
in with him F. Marinaris a Carmelite and his Chaplain, one of quick parts and a
scholastic Genius. We discoursed long together before his Eminence, and
afterward went to see some Books in his Library, whereof we had spoken. The
Cardinal told me of a Heretic, who said that they should gain all, if things
were defined as we demanded. I answered him, that that Heretic might be
mistaken in his pretention, and that no heed was to be given to what he said.
Yet (said his Eminence) it is good to conform to the time and the manner of
speech used by all the Thomists who have written since the Council of Trent. I
assented that it was so, when the manners of speech tended to the clearing and
establishing of Truths; but not when they might be prejudicial to, and ruin
them. That if there were some Thomists whose sentiments were a very little
different from ours in some slight circumstances, there were others who were
conformable thereunto; But all agreed with us in the manner. And besides, 'twas
not by them that the same ought to be regulated, but by the Saints and the
Councils; and above all, by the Truth. The Candle was lighted; I exhorted his
Eminence to read the Apology of the H. Fathers, and gave the Good night to him
and his Divines.

As I came back, I made another Visit, wherein I learnt that the Bull whereof
the Cardinal abovementioned had complained to Cardinal Ghiggi was no more
talked of. That this Cardinal acquainted the Pope with it the same day for fear
complaints of it might come to the Pope by other hands then his own. That
another person speaking of it to the same Cardinal Ghiggi, he disowned it, as
not having been ordained by the Pope. That in fine, 'twas no more talked of, but
seemed suppressed; whether it were stopped upon the abovementioned Discourse, or
whether the noise of it was only smothered, the better to bring us to the
Audience which was offered us.

In the same Visit I likewise learned that the Cardinals Spada, Ginetti and
Ghiggi, who stayed with the Pope in the morning after the general Congregation
of the H. Office, did not speak about our affair, but about the Bishops of
Flanders, whose resistance extremely displeased the Pope. That he desired
Cardinal de Medicis to obtain of the Archduke that these Bishops might be
obliged to come to Rome to purge themselves; that the only thing which kept
them from being cited, was the doubt and incertainty of execution; and that
Cardinal de Medicis would not consent to it, in regard Jansenius was persecuted
by the French for considerations and interests of State.

Whilst I made these Visites, my four Colleagues went to give the Ambassador an
account of the audience which the Pope had given F. Des-mares and M. Manassier;
they told him that we made no difficulty to appear before his Holiness
whenever he pleased to call us; that we intended to seek an audience of him
on Sunday next, to make this Declaration, and were glad of this occasion to
give him a preliminary instruction concerning our affair, because it was very
likely that the Pope would afterward see the necessity of a Conference.

M. Hallier brought a servant to Rome, who understood Latin, and there took the
Order of Priesthood; He told one of our Domestics, that his Master said, if he
were sent for before the Pope, all that he had to say, was, that he had no more
to say after what he had said in the Congregation: and that if this affair
lasted yet beyond October, he must go at that time into France in regard of his
Cure.

Friday the 9th. I accompanied the Ambassador to the Pope's Palace. In the
Presence Chamber I spoke with Signor -- Advocate of Malta, who said, that
Cardinal Spada told him the day before, that the Pope desired to be quit of
these Congregations before his going to S. Peter's for the solemnity of Easter.
That his Eminence designed to the Pope the days in which the Congregations
would be dispatched; and that when Lent was ended, Non si farebbe per un pezzo
Congregatione nianzi al Papa, there should be no more Congregations before the
Pope.

Saturday the 10. the Ambassador sent for us to come to him about ten a clock
in the forenoon. The Messenger told one of our Domestics, that he was going to
desire M. Hallier and his Colleagues to be there likewise about half an hour
after. We went to the Ambassador at the hour appointed. He told us, that the
Pope speaking to him concerning us the day before, he signified to his Holiness
our resolution to appear before him when he pleased, and that he (the
Ambassador) had obliged us to conform to whatever his Holiness should ordain
in this matter, by the hopes which he gave us, that this ingenuous and absolute
remitting our affair to his Holiness was the right course to obtain a
Conference, if it were necessary as we pretended. The Ambassador added, that we
should do well to comply thus, and that the Pope would by degrees incline to
the Conference which we demanded. That if we needed a few days to get our
selves ready, he would procure time for us. In fine, he told us that he had
sent to M. Hallier and his Colleagues, in order to make the same Declaration to
them, that they should be ready to appear before the Pope a day or two after
us. We answered the Ambassador no more, but that we were sorry we could not
forthwith enter into Conference with all our Adversaries, because till we did
so, it would be but so much time lost and superfluous pains; but seeing the
Pope would have it thus, and there was no hope of obtaining such a Conference,
we willingly took this resolution.

The Ambassador accompanied us in ceremony through all his Antichambres to the
door of the outer room; and as he was ready to leave us, M. Hallier and M.
Lagault arrived there, and the Ambassador told me that he was going to make the
same Declaration to them which he made to us, that they should be ready to
appear and be heard before the Pope, after we had appeared; and having asked
them pleasantly, whether they were ready to exchange a Pistol-shot; M. Hallier
answered, that we were too many, Ne quidem, said he, Hercules contra duos.

In the afternoon I went again to the Ambassador; He propounded the Rogation
week for the time of our appearance, which I accepted. He told me, that M.
Hallier and Lagault were not well pleased with his Declaration, and said, that
all this tended only to retard; and that he answered them, that they ought to
consider that all persons were desirous to be heard, and to speak their
reasons, which advantage would be common to themselves with us, etc. I told the
Ambassador, that we were willing that they should be heard as well as our
selves; but all this was but little, till we were in presence one of the other;
That we had purposed to seek for audience of the Pope the next day, and
acquaint his Holiness with our readiness to appear before him, but were now
very well contented that he should be the depositary and witness of our
Sentiments in that matter.

Instead of going to the Pope as we had proposed, on Sunday the 11th. we went
to Cardinal Spada, with whom we found M. Hallier and M. Joysel. We waited their
departure a long time in the Gallery. When they were gone, we were introduced
into his Eminence's Chamber. F. Des-mares told him in very few and smooth words
the ground upon which our Bishops had sent him and M. Manassier. The Cardinal
answered some civil terms, which not being heard by the Father, the Discourse
became a little interrupted. But to recruit it, M. Valcroissant told him, that
we desired to know three or four days beforehand what day the Pope would set to
hear us the first time, to the end we might be the better prepared for it. The
Cardinal answered, that the day could not be far off now. That the Pope had
held Congregations with great diligence, that the affair might be ended before
Summer; and that if we desired to be heard we should be ready as soon as we
could. The Cardinal seemed to speak, as if, according to our Adversaries
constant calumny, we still sought delays: Wherefore I told him that we were
ready, and demanded no delay, but only to be advertised three or four days
beforehand of that which the Pope should pitch upon, to the end we might have
time to recollect what we had to say, it being not possible to have it always
in mind without trouble. That we expected to have appeared immediately after
Easter; that four weeks were since passed; that the day we spoke of was not yet
determined. That we had purposed to go that morning and acquaint the Pope with
our readiness, but the Ambassador had freed us from that care by undertaking
to inform Cardinal Pamphilio of it. Cardinal Spada answered that it were good
that we repaired to the other Cardinals, and told them the same as we had done
his Eminence. We replied we should, and as we retired, F. Des-mares presented
the two following Letters to him written by the Bishop of Angers and the Bishop
of Chaalons.

My LORD.
I Know not whether it be an abuse of your Eminence's goodness, to recurre to
it so easily as I do, to demand the honor of your protection: but in this case
I can scarce believe you will account your self importuned by the most humble
supplication which I make to you, since it seems to concern the peace of the
Church in France. It is my Lord, to get the favor granted to the Doctors, who
deliver this Letter to your Eminence, which they demand of his Holiness to be
heard in presence of their Adversaries: which seems to be the more just, in
that a difference cannot be better understood or more certainly judged, then by
confronting the Parties, and hearing all the reasons which can be alleged on
either side. And being I have particular knowledge of the affair both in its
foundation and circumstances, I can also, my Lord, assure your Eminence, that
it is the best course to extinguish the troubles it causes in the Church of
France: because after every one has spoken with freedom in presence of their
adversaries, all that they have to set forth, they will be obliged to stand to
the Judgment which shall be pronounced, and have no cause at all to complain.
But not to interrupt your Eminence's other occasions by too long a letter, I
end this with renewed assurances of being with all imaginable passion and
respect,

My LORD, Your Eminence's most humble and most obedient servant, Henry B of
Angers.
Angers March 12. 1653.
My LORD,
I should not take the liberty to importune your Eminence, were not an interest
infinitely dear to me concerned, that of the Churches peace. The desire of
seeing it reestablish't here, causes us to recurre in the present contests to
the H. See with a true submission; to the end the most pure light flowing from
thence may dispel the darkness and trouble possessing many men's minds. It Is
out of this sentiment that the Doctors deputed by us cannot give over sueing to
your Eminence for a hearing in presence of those who have so frequently and in
so many places brought strange accusations against the doctrine which they
maintain. This Justice has always been granted by the Church to her Children,
and offered even in all Councils to such as had revolted from her. I dare
assure your Eminence, that all the dependances of this affairs render it more
necessary in this case then ever; and I hope the extraordinary prudence which
appears in all your Eminence's actons, will favorably hear so many most just
considerations upon which this most humble supplication is grounded. I am
withal due respect,

My LORD, Your Eminence's most humble and most obedient servant, F. Bp. and C.
of Chaalons.
Paris March 31. 1653.
Monday the 12th. we went to make our complements to Cardinal Pamphilio, who
was newly gone abroad: Thence we went to Cardinal Ghiggi, and waited a long
time for admittance. He received what F. Des-mares said to him, with much
gentleness. He asked us whether the Pope knew of our good purpose, because he
conceived that the Ambassador had not seen Cardinal Pamphilio on Sunday, in
regard he went with the Pope to take the air. He told us that if the Ambassador
had not seen that Cardinal, it would suffice if we acquainted his Holinesses
Maistre de Chamber with our resolution. We thanked the Cardinal for his good
advice, to have us tell the Popes Maistre de Chamber what the Ambassador had
undertaken for us to signify to the Cardinal Nephew. He asked us news from
France, and told us this considerable, namely that hopes were given them from
the Court of the enlargement of Cardinal de Retz.

Tuseday 13th. We left M. de Valecroissant at home to prepare his Oration
against our audience, and went to Cardinal Ginetti, to whom I gave an account
in Italian of the business of our visit. He answered us with his accustomed
civility, and told us that the affair was well examined (he accounted it
already done, as indeed it was) that the Pope was a very prudent person, (and
besides) had the assistance of the H. Ghost. He asked me news of M. Brousse's
health and offered us all the service in his power.

We went thence to Monte Cavallo, to speak with Cardinal Pamphilio, where after
we had waited till noon, he was visited by the Cardinals Altieri and Rondanini;
after their departure we were admitted, and having scarce touched the affair,
as soon as I named the Ambassador, he told us he had seen him, and that our
hearing it would be within four or five days, either Saturday, or Monday. In
the little discourse we had with him, he pronounced a sentence, the most
tedious that we could hear, yet the most pleasantly that he could, as if it had
been the most acceptable thing to us in the world, namely, Questa cosa non e
causa di contradettorio, This affair requires not the hearing of Parties. Being
he gave us not time to say any thing to him concerning the Book of our
writtings which we had prepared for him, we did not present it to him yet; and
indeed it would have been a superfluous thing, as appeared by the Event.

In the afternoon we went to visit the General of the Dominicans. Our
conference was long; but the most considerable thing he spoke was, that he had
done his utmost to intervene in this affair, but he could not be suffered. He
had been seventeen or eighteen times to present his Memorials, and papers to
the Pope, but could not obtain audience. He had procured Prince Giustiaainno
the Pope's kinsman and his own to undertake the delivery of them, but his
Holiness would not receive them. The secret of all which denyals, was, that
the Pope purposed to decide this affair without entering into the matter de
Auxilis. We concluded by telling him that he was however obliged to pray to God
for us when we appeared before the Pope, because we should be charged with his
cause as well as our own, and should carry our own interests no further then
his.

Thence we visited the General of the Augustines who made great caresses to us,
testifying much resolution and hope, and by all that he said to us he
manifested that he understood the particular design of hatching the
Propositions, and the fundamental matter of the controversy.

'Twas happy that M. de Valcroissant stayed at home; for the Ambassador going to
take the air had the goodness to pass that way himself, to advertise us that
the Pope had appointed Monday following, being that of the Rogations, for the
day of our appearance.

The complaint made by the Cardinal above mentioned in the Consistory May 5. to
Cardinal Ghiggi that the Bull was prepared, caused the report of it to be
smothered and made a greater secret; yet neither produced a total suppression
of it, nor an alteration of the positive and determinate resolution to publish
it. On Thursday the 15th. I was informed that since that Consistory, it had
passed severally through the hands of the Cardinals deputed for the
Congregation, who had viewed it and considered it, to see whether any thing
were fit to be added or retrenched; that Cardinal Ghiggi was the last in whose
hands it was, and that on Wednesday the 14th. he returned it to M. Albizzi
reviewed and apostil'd, with order to have it fairly transcribed against the
Congregation which was to be held on Thursday before the Pope, to the end it
might be shown and read to his Holiness at the end of that Assembly. I
understood that in obedience to this order, as soon as M. Albizzi received it he
set one to transcribe it, and that a great part of the night was spent in the
work; but I knew not whether it was fit for the purpose intended. For having
sent a man to Montecavallo as soon as I received this intelligence, to see
whether the Cardinals of the Congregation appointed for this affair stayed with
the Pope, after the others of the General assembly of the H. Office were
departed, he brought me word two hours and a quarter after noon, that those
Cardinals and S. Clement and Colonna, and M. Albizzi came forth with the
Consultors almost at the same time: but that Cardinal Barberin stayed with the
Pope almost an hour after the rest, and Cardinal Lugo an hour and three
quarters afterward.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Writtings which we prepared to present to the Pope at the end of our
intended audience.

AFter the Ambassador had advertised us that Monday May 19. was the appointed
day for our appearance before the Pope, we did not stir out of our Lodging
till that day, but labored to get our selves and our writings ready against
that audience. The first of five, was thus intitl'd, To our M. H. F. Pope
Innocent 10. for the Doctors subscribed, defenders of S. Augustine, against the
society of Jesuits; The first part of the second information upon Fact,
containing above a hundred Propositions extracted out of the books of the
Jesuits against S. Augustins authority. In the preface to this writing we
declared that we had produced the First information touching matter of Fact
against M. Hallier and his Colleagues, because they appeared first as parties in
this affair; that the little time we had to prepare our first writings, and the
extraordinary instances wherewith those Doctors pressed the dispatching of this
affair before it could be examined, constrained us to expose them with such
brevity and diligence, that we were forced to fall directly upon matter of
fact, and defer till another time all that had preceeded and given occasion
to this so unheard of and dangerous enterprise; which nevertheless was very
necessary for the perfect understanding of all its circumstances and
consequences, so that we were obliged only transiently to touch upon such
things as evinced the Jesuits the prime architects of this conspiracy, and to
defer to a more favorable time to present against them and their particular
misdemeanors a new Information. But because this Information was so vast and
important, that we could not yet wholly finish it, we had divided it into
sundry Parts; whereof this was the first and most necessary to the business in
hand, containing above a hundred Propositions drawn out of the Books of those
Fathers, by which the authority of S. Augustine, and that of the Popes, from
whence the same is derived, were unworthily outrag'd; and consequently served
to show that we complained not without cause that these very Fathers had
undertaken to ruin it, and that we justly demanded that they might be obliged
to acknowledge it after an authentic manner, namely by a solemn writing, which
might serve for an example to posterity, conduce to the glory and reputation to
the H. See, and to the edification of all the faithful.

Our design was, when we had before the H. See convinced the Jesuits of having
corrupted the faith of the Church in the matter of Grace, to complain also of
all the other corruptions which they had introduced in all the other points of
Faith and Christian Morality; and to desire the H. See to do justice to it self
and the whole Church against them for all their exhorbitances. But this
required time, and 'twas expedient to have this first question voided before
hand; And therefore we had entitled this Writing, The first Part of the second
information touching Fact against the society of Jesuits. The Propositions
which we related in it, were taken out of the Books of Molina, Vasquez,
Mariana, a decree of their General Aquaviva, F. Caussin, Theophile Renault, F.
Sirmond, F. Pelau, F. Adam, F. Annat, F. Martinon, F. l' Abbe, the Jesuits of
Lovain, and the other society who are condemned by the censure of Validolid.

And after the list of all these scandalous Propositions, we showed in the
Conclusion of the Writings, that it was not credible that the same had escaped
from them by chance, but that they had advanced them with deliberate purpose,
and by voluntarily renouncing the truth and the respect which formerly they
acknowledged due to S. Augustin's Doctrine. The proof we brought of this so
strange accusations, was that two years before the publishing of Molina's work
and doctrine, viz. anno. 1586. they caused a book eo be printed at Rome,
entitled Ratio atque institutio Studiorum per sex Patres ad id jussu R. P.
Praepositi Generalis deputatos conscripta Romae in Collegio Societatis Jesu.
'Twas a Book in Octavo about an ich thick, and sent as a Circular Letter to all
their Colleagues for the regulating the studies of all their Fathers. Now in
this book they acknowleged unanimously with sincerity and plainness, that the
Doctrine of S. Augustine touching the matter of Grace and Gratuitous
Predestination, was that which they ought to follow. Item, said they, p. 37.
under the title concerning the Choice of their studies in Divinity. It has
been resolved that the cause and manner of Predestination proceeds not from our
part. But some will say, (they objected so themselves,) that this doctrine is
not very proper for piety. And they answered, that it is a doctrine of S.
Augustine, which has been already received, not only by the most common
opinion of Divines, but also by the H. Fathers during twelve ages, who
undertook to prove it by the Holy Scriptures, General Councils, the Answers of
Popes, namely Zozimus, Sixtus, Celestine, Leo, Gelasius, all who, say they,
always had an ill esteem of the Priests of Marseille Castian, and Faustus, for
having been the opposers of this doctrine of Predestination. We observed that
the Jesuits spoke in this manner whilst they did not yet foresee that they
were to declare War against S. Augustine; but after the contest wherein they
were engaged for defense of Molina's book and doctrine, to the end it might be
free for all their Fathers to oppose that of S. Augustine and uphold their
Confrere Molina who attaqu'd him first, and in whose defense they unhappily
conceived the honor and reputation of their society concerned, they retrencht
out of the succeeding edition of the said Book all that I have cited out of the
first in favor of the doctrine of the gratuitous Predestination of S. Augustine
whom they acknowledged to have taught it.

We showed that their boldness had increased ever since, and that the latest
of their Authors were still more heinously injurous against S. Augustine; That
since this enterprise of the Propositions F. Adam, F. Annat, F. Martinon, and
F. Labbe, had rose up against that H. Doctor, and that these three last
appeared even since the complaints which we had made thereof to the H. See:
That none of of their Confreres had been displeased with them for this
enormity, but on the contrary seemed to esteem them the more, that they every
where cried up their rare merits and advanced them to the prime charges and
most considerable employments of their Order; That after this, it was not
possible to imagine a greater violence, a more obstinate contumacy, a more
audacious impudence, or a more offensive outrage against S. Augustine and the H.
See it self.

Wherefore we concluded that since it was requisite to judge rather by these
their exorbitances against S. Augustine, and their designs to ruin his
doctrine, then by vain words of respect toward him uttered with the lips; we
had reason and necessity to summon them as we did, and had already summoned M.
Hallier, and his Colleagues by our first writing de gestis, to acknowledge by an
authentic writing for true and indubitable, the six Propositions which are at
the end of that writing in favor of that H. Father's doctrine, and which were
again inserted at the end of this new one. After which we added also, that if
they made the least difficulty of doing it, we produced against them once more
that of S. Augustin's authority which we had pretended for the same effect
against M. Hallier and his Colleagues. The second of the Five was a Compendious
distinction of the several Catholic and Heretical senses whereof the
Propositions were capable; concerning which I shall speak no further here, as
well because it is already printed, as for that I shall insert it at length
hereafter for a reason which the Reader shall then understand.

The third was entitled, To our H. F. Pope Innocent 10. To my L. L. the most
Eminent Cardinals Spada, Ginetti, Pamphilio, Cechini and Ghiggi, and to the
other Divines deputed or to be deputed for the Congregation concerning the
affair of the five Propositions de gratia; For M. M. Noel de la Lane Doctor of
Paris, Toussaint Des-mares Priest of the Orators, Lewis de Saint Amor and
Nicolas Manessier, Doctors also of Paris, and Lewis Angran Licentiate in the
same Faculty. Against M. M. Francis Hallier, Francis Joysel, and Jerome
Lagault, Doctors of the same Faculty. The second information touching Right.

I shall also omit to speak any thing of the Preface to this Writing, in which
we set forth the reasons which obliged us to begin this Examen, and the proof
the Propositions as we understood them by examining and proving the necessity
of a Grace Effectual by it self generally for all the good motions and actions
of Christian piety; and in which we showed likewise in few words the evident
connection which every of those Propositions taken and understood in our sense
has with that capital point of the Churches doctrine: because I find it
requisite to insert the said Preface at length after the abovesaid distinction
of senses. Something I must say of the body of this Writing, not seeing any
fitter place then this; and it is the least I can do, to set down in gross what
they all contain, since their too great length and number rendering them capable
of making a just volume alone, they cannot be commodiously inserted into this
Journal.

Now this third was divided into four parts. The first contained sixteen
principal arguments, by every of which we proved, that Grace effectual by it
self necessary to all actions of Christian piety is the true Grace of Jesus
Christ, which the Catholic Faith obliges us to confess against the Errors of
the Pelagians and Semipelagians, if we will (as S. Augustine says) not only be
called and appear Christians, but be such indeed. When I say this Part
contained sixteen Arguments, each of which was capable to prove this Truth
invincibly, I do not mean sixteen Syllogisms or Demonstrations consisting of
three Propositions, but sixteen Sources or Places, fruitful of solid proofs,
upon which we established this Truth as upon so many unmovable foundations,
each of which was able alone to uphold it! All the prayers of the Church, all
the Truths which they discover to us, all the consequences which we can draw
from them, made together but the first of those sixteen Arguments. S.
Augustin's whole Book de gratia Jesu Christi, and all the Maxims spread
through it, made but the second. The third was taken from the difference which
there is between the Grace of simple Possibility, and that which gives the good
will and the good action. The fourth from the difference between the Grace of
the state of Innocence (such as Adam had) and that of Nature corrupted and
disordered by sin (such as we have at present) and so of the rest. The fifth
was taken from all the objections made by the Pelagians and Semipelagians
against the Grace which S. Austin defended. And the last, from all the answers
which S. Austin made to those objections.

The second part of this Writing was in a manner only a Table of the Popes,
Councils, H. Fathers and eminent Divines from S. Augustine's days to the
present, who had written of this matter; whom we maintained to have taught that
very Grace as the Faith of the Church; and we offered and undertook to convince
our Adversaries before the Pope, that the sentiments of all those Popes,
Councils, H. Fathers and Divines which we cited, and of every one in
particular, were such as we affirmed; and we gave them the choice to dispute
about that or those of these Popes, Councils, Fathers and Divines, whom they
believed less favorable to this Doctrine. Amongst those whom we cited were the
Master of the sentences, S. Thomas, S. Bernard, the Council of Trent, and
Clement VIII..

The third part contained nothing but the Judgments and Decisions which were
made against the Jesuits in the Congregation de Auxiliis under the Popes
Clement VIII. and Paul V. extracted out of the originals.

The fourth contained a very great number of Errors, blasphemies, or impieties,
which we deduced by necessary consequence from the doctrine opposite to the
Effectual Grace which we held; namely, from that which Molina and his Followers
hold to be subject to the use of free will. Of all which Consequences we
offered to convince them. And we concluded thas 'twas easy to see by all these
proofs how certain and unmovable the doctrine of Grace Effectual by it self
necessary to all acts of piety was, whose ruin the Architects of these
Propositions projected; and how greatly they had failed in the respect and
affection which they owed to the H. See, who endeavored to get such detestable
and impious Tenets, as these necessary sequels of the Molinistical Sufficient
Grace, approved by it. For since, as we said, and showed in the Preface of this
Writing, each of the Five Propositions reduced to the sense in which we
understood them, had an undissoluble connection with Effectual Grace, not any of
them could be condemned, but this Grace must be condemned too; neither could
this Grace be condemned, but the contrary opinion of Molinistical Grace subject
to Free Will must be established as a Doctrine of Faith; nor this Molinistical
Grace established as de fide, but all the other impious and abominable
Propositions which we had deduced from it by necessary consequence, must be
established too, as the Faith and Doctrine of the Church. So that, to take the
matter in its extent, the condemnation of each of these Propositions as we
maintained them, carried with it the establishment of all those pernicious
errors, and introduced them into the Church.

We said further, that we entreated such as said either that it was free or
either side to defend their respective sentiments in this Controversy, or that
they were enjoined silence therein for ever, or that it was requisite to make
such an injunction, and in the Popes power, to consider a little with attention
what they said. Because if it were lawful for either side to maintain their
respective opinions, then was it lawful to put the Doctrine of S. Augustine in
equal balance with that of Pelagius, the Catholic with the Heretical, the
true with the false, that which was the nurse of Christian piety with that
which was the mother of errors and heresies. That if silence had been imposed
in this matter for ever, or could be, then the Grace whereby we are Christians,
the Grace which the Christian Doctrine teaches and publishes for the proper
grace of Christians; the Grace which the Catholic Bishops were wont to read in
the books of God, and to preach to their people; the Grace which is undoubtedly
the true, Prophetical, Apostolical and Catholic Faith; the Grace which was
requisite for Pelagius to confess, if he would be a Christian indeed, and not
only in name: This Grace; I say, must be banished out of the hearts of the
Faithful, and out of the Catholic Church. We concluded, that none could enter
into these dismal thoughts, but such as had the boldness to anihilate the
mystery of the Cross of Jesus Christ; and abolish all the mysteries of
Christian Religion, and who could renounce all kind of respect and love to the
H. See, for securing the fantasm of the interests and vain glory of the
Jesuits.

The fourth of these Five Writings was alone as big as the four others. It was
intitl'd on the outside; To the B. F. Pope Innocent X. To my LL. the most
Eminent Cardinals Spada, Ginetti, Pamphilio, Cechini and Ghiggi. To the most
learned Divines of sundry orders appointed, and to be appointed for the
examination of the Five Propositions; for the Doctors subscribed defenders of
S. Augustine, Against the society of the Jesuits, and against M. Hallier,
Joysel and Lagault Doctors of Paris, acting in the affair of the said
Propositions in the name of the Jesuits, their own, or of any other whatever.
A third information touching Right, wherein the true and Catholic, sense of
the first Proposition is explicated and demonstated by the tradition of the
whole Church.

The title in the inside was, An Information of the first Proposition, or
rather upon the possibiliey of God's Commandments. It was divided into six
Chapters, each of which comprehended many Articles. I shall for brevity sake
only speak concerning the six Chapters in general.

The first Chapter was the shortest, wherein we declared the right and
legitimate sense in which we understood and maintained the first Proposition;
and related, distinguished and rejected the erroneous whereof it was capable. We
acknowledged the bad senses to be many. We instanced in some, but pretended not
to mention all. The first, we said, was, that it might be understood
universally, as if its sense were, That there are Commandments of God which are
impossible to all the just according to the greatest strength which they can
have during the whole course of this life. And we said, that thus understood it
was false, heretical, and condemned by the Council of Trent in Luther and
Calvin. Vniversalis haec est: Aliqua praecepta omnibus justis volentibus and
conantibus secundum praesentes quas habent vires, hoc est, secundum quaslibet
vires praesentis vitae, sunt impossibilia. Et ita detorta falsa and haereesset,
and a Luthero Calvino and Concilio Tridentino damnata

We said in the second place that there might be a bad sense in these words,
volentibus and conantibus; because if they were explicated of a will and
endeavor as great as they ought to be, then it would be false also (though
understood in particular of some just men) and contrary to the second Council
of Orange which defines in Canon 25. that after having received grace in
Baptism, all the baptized may and ought by the help and operation of Jesus
Christ, perform all things necessary to salvation, if they will labor
faithfully therein.

In the third place, we said, that if these words, secundum praesentes quas
habent vires, were understood by comparison of the strength of this life with
that of the life to come, the Proposition contained the heresy of Calvin, who
says, that Gods Commandments are not possible even with grace during this
life, but their performance is a thing reserved to the future life.

Fourthly, We said, that these words, sunt impossibilia, may be understood of
all kind of impossibility, de omni omnino impossibilitate; and that this was
heretical too, because it is certain, that Gods Commandments are always
possible to the just in many manners; cum semper omnibus justis praecepia
multis modis sint possibilia.

Lastly, We said, that these words (deest quoque illis gratia qua possibilia
fiant) might be understood, so as to extend to the whole duration of this life,
in which case and sense the Proposition was heretical. And we declared, that if
it were advanced or held in any one of these senses, we were so far from
defending it or hindering its condemnation, that on the contrary, we should be
the first to condemn it as freely as we condemned all their Errors. Wherefore
to take away all ambiguity and equivocation, we reduced and propounded it in
these clear terms in which alone we maintained it.

Aliqua Dei praecepta aliquibus justis volentibus and conantibus invalide and
imperfecte secundum praesentes quas habent vires, parvas scilicet and infirmas,
seu auxilio Dei efficaci ad plene volendum and operandum necessario destitutis,
impossibilia sunt proxime and complete, seu ab iis adimpleri proximo non
possunt. Deest quoque gratia actualis efficax, qua praecepta illis proxime
possibilia fiant: seu deest speciale illud auxilium, sine quo justificatus, ut
ait Concilium Tridentinum, in accepta justitia; id est in observatione
mandatorum Dei perseverare non potest.

This declared and presupposed, we proved this Proposition in the second
Chapter by several passages of the Gospel, by the prayers of the Church, and
those of the just for themselves; amongst others, by these words of that which
our Lord taught them, And lead us not into temptation, and by that passage of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. Fidelis est Deus qui non patietur vos tentari supra id
quod potestis, etc. by the suffrages of the Popes S. Innocent I. S. Celestine
and S. Zozimus; by the Councils of Carthage, of Milevis, of Africa, of two
hundred Bishops; by the second of Orange and that of Trent, and by many places
of S. Augustine.

In the third Chapter we proved the same Proposition by the authority of S.
Thomas, and showed by all his principles that he never thought of admitting an
actual sufficient Grace given universally to all the World.

In the fourth Chapter we proved the same Proposition by the doctrine of
Effectual Grace necessary to every pious action, and showed, that this grace
gives us the next and complete power for the action for which it is given, and
that without this Grace it might be said, That we cannot (or have not power)
according to the Language of the Fathers. This we made appear as well by the
Scripture, as by infinite passages of S. Augustine, by the Popes, S. Innocent I.
S. Celestine, S. Leo, S. Gregory; by the Councils of Africa, by that of Orange,
and that of Trent; by S. Prosper, S. Fulgentius, S. Isidore, S. Prudentius, S.
Reminigius, by the Church of Lions, by S. Thomas, by the Faculties of Doway and
Lovain, and by our Adversaries themselves. Whence we concluded this Chapter,
That as 'twas evident that we had no other design then to defend the Catholic
and Augustinian doctrine concerning this Grace, by which (according to S.
Augustine) we are able, and without whieh we are not; but 'twas no less certain
that our Adversaries, in demanding the condemnation of this Proposition, aimed
at nothing else but to ruin this doctrine, how carefully soever they might
dissemble: because agreeing with us in this true Principle; That when a man
has not, or is not master of a thing which is necessary to action, then he
cannot act; if they could get the H. See to declare that the just can act
without this Grace, then they would conclude and easily prove that the same is
not necessary to enable us to act.

The whole Fifth Chapter was only a Collection of the Objections, which may be
made against the doctrine proved in the preceding, and of the clear and
convincing answers which may be made to those Objections.

In the sixth Chapter we treated of the Grace of Prayer; we showed, that all
which we had said of Effectual Grace necessary to all other actions, agreed
also to this Grace; that it is no more common to all the just, then that of
action. That this Doctrine is one of the principal Foundations of Christian
piety; and that when it happens that the just being left to themselves become
lukewarm and negligent in prayer, and trusting too much in their own strength
fall into some sin; that God excites them by such falls to acknowledge their
weakness and the need of his assistance; which is his method to bring them to
solid humility, and to have his fear constantly before their eyes. In the end
of this Chapter, we propounded all the Objections which we thought could be
made against this holy and wholesome doctrine, and produced the answers
thereunto out of S. Augustine.

The fifth and last of these Writings was entitled, To the B. F. Pope Innocent
X. For the Doctors subscribed Defendors of S. Augustine, Against MM. Hallier,
Joysel and Lagault Doctors of Paris, acting in the affair of the five
Propositions, whether in the name of the Jesuits, their own, or any other: A
fourth Information upon Right, in which are explicated about sixty passages of
S. Augustine produced by the said Sieurs Hallier, Joysel, and Lagault in an
Anonymous Writing against the first Proposition; and all the said Passages
shown to be cited either impertinently or corruptly.

The Title of this Writing speaks its Contents. For to refute these sixty
Passages which those Doctors went about to distribute at the houses of the
Consultors, as one of the greatest supports of their cause; we apprehended no
better way then to recite their Writing entire, and subjoyn to every passage
our Answer, taken out of the very same places which they cited; and requiring
only the addition of the words which they retrencht, either from the beginning
or the end, and sometimes too from the middle of their passages, or but the
mentioning briefly what subject S. Augustine treated of of there, which was
almost always very remote from that for which they alleged it.

But I need speak no more of it here, intending to annex it to this Journal,
because it fully shows on one side the foul dealing or ignorance of our
Adversaries, and on the other what little light the Pope could receive from
such informations, whilst he refused to aford us the means to discover the
falsities thereof by mutual communication of Writings and a public Conference.

I shall only observe that in the Writing alone we spoke in favor of
Jansenius, being induced thereunto (contrary to our own resolution and the
Pope's order) for that the Writing to which we answered being grounded upon an
evident falsehood, whereby M. Hallier and his Colleagues accused Jansenius of
denying every sufficient Grace, as well that of the Thomists, as that of the
Molinists; we thought fit not to let this imposture pass without a reply, as
well to discover the malice or blindness of our Adversaries, as to justify our
selves by showing what sufficient Grace we disapproved, and what we admitted as
well as Jansenius. But though we spoke something here which might have served
to inform the Pope and the Congregation of the true sentiments of Jansenius
touching some point of his Doctrine; yet neither his Holiness, the Cardinals
nor the Consultors were the better informed by it, for they examined it no more
then all the rest.

When I reflect upon these five Writtings, the sincerity which I profess, will
not permit me to dissemble one thing, since I write these Memories rather in
the sight of God then of men. Not that I am convinced of having done amiss in
it, but being able neither to justify nor yet condemn my self, I shall relate
it sincerely and leave the judgment of it to God and intelligent men.

It Is certain and most true that we always considered the Propositions ever
since their first framing by M. Cornet, as a work of darkness, and as
contrived maliciously and purposely to decry S. Augustin's Doctrine and the
true effectual Grace of Jesus Christ.

It Is most certain also that we never owned them to have been written or
advanced by any Author; and that we always spoke of them in all our Writings
at Rome and at Paris, as equivocal, captious and fallacious Propositions in
regard of the bad senses whereof they were capable.

Lastly it is most certain that in this contest we never maintained but the H.
and Apostolic Doctrine of the Effectual Grace of Jesus Christ, not
necessitating, but necessary to all pious actions, that the defense of this
Grace was the only object of our labors and pains; that we never thought of
that ridiculous and extravagant Device of a Necessitating Grace, which wholly
destroys the indifference of the Will. But as we saw on one side that the
words of the positions might be reduced to the sense of Effectual Grace,
wherein our whole Doctrine was concontein'd, and that on the other the Jesuits
secret design (who set all these springs a work) was to subvert the Doctrine of
the same Effectual Grace, by getting the Propositions absolutely condemned by
reason of their other bad senses: we thought it our duty to oppose to the
utmost such an absolute condemnation of them without distinction or
explication, certainly seeing how the Jesuits would abuse the same.

But we were extremely at a loss in what manner to speak of them. Some of our
friends advised us to maintain them absolutely, and say that they had not the
bad senses charged upon them. Their reason was that the natural, proper and
rigorous sense of the words in a proposition is not to be considered when no
body holds them in that natural, proper and rigorous sense; but that the sense
generally understood in these words, is although the less proper of it self,
yet the literal, legitimate and true sense of them; as in infinite figurative
expressions of Scripture, we are not to take the proper sense of the words for
the true and legitimate, but only that which is meant and signified by the H.
Spirit. Now in the matter of these Propositions attributed to S. Augustin's
Disciples, it is visible that they hold them only in the less proper sense of
the words considered nakedly and in themselves, and that no person maintains
them in the peoper natural and rigorous sense of the same words; and
consequently that the improper sense is the true and legitimate sense of these
Propositions.

That thus it might truly be said that they are good, because under these terms
we maintained but a most excellent and holy doctrine, namely, that of Effectual
Grace; and none maintained a bad under them. That therefore this ought to be
freely declared at Rome, in order to hinder their condemnation; there being no
greater motive to condemn them, then that we did not assert them peremptorily,
but partly condemned them as well as their persecutors.

On the contrary, others conceived that the Propositions being bad according to
the words, and the natural proper sense included therein, although this sense
were not held by any, yet the Jesuits might have credit enough with the Pope
and Cardinals, to persuade them that they were held in France in those bad
senses, and so get them condemned; that if they should be absolutely maintained
under pretext of the sense of Effectual Grace, to which they were reducible,
the Jesuits might reflect the Censure upon this Catholic sense, and pretend
that that Grace is condemned by the Censure of these Propositions, or at least
would not fail to take occasion from thence to decry the defenders of this
grace, as persons condemned by the H. See. Wherefore it seemed the safest way
to reject them absolutely, yet maintaining at the same time the true Doctrine
of S. Augustine.

M. de Saint Beauve and most other of the Doctors our friends were of this
last opinion; and one very pious, wise and sagacious Doctor with whom I had
contracted great intimacie in the Assemblies of the Faculty, together with many
very intelligent persons at Rome, were of the former.

My Colleagues and I were divided in the business. They inclined more to the
latter course, that is, not to speak of the Propositions but as absolutely
condemnable. And I on the contrary strengthened with the advice of this Doctor
and other my knowing friends of Rome, was troubled to hear those discourses;
not that I held any thing in the Propositions but the Doctrine of Effectual
Grace, and condemned all that my Colleagues condemned in them; but I feared this
timorous proceeding would occasion a Censure, which would cause great mischief
by the abuse the Jesuits would make of it: and the knowledge I had of the
Court of Rome made me judge nothing more likely to prevent it then our firm
and confident speaking.

Wherefore I always urged that the Propositions might not be absolutely
disclaimed, nor their bad sense acknowledged to be the true and legitimate. And
I was the cause that in the Writing concerning the Distinction of senses, in
representing the bad sense of the Propositions, instead of saying only sensus
hereticus Propositionis, or sensus qui Propositioni affingi posset (as my
Colleagues would have it) was put, qui malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

It seems the Event was more favorable to them then to me; for this word
grave the Jesuits occasion to calumniate us, as if we had maintained at Rome
the proper natural condemned sense of the Propositions considered nakedly in
themselves, which is very false; and it would have been more advantageous to
have avoided in this place and some others all expressions which might afford
ground to this calumny; nevertheless I hope equitable persons perpending the
condition wherein we were then at Rome, will easily pardon this proceeding, and
consider that having in my mind the horrid mischiefs which an absolute
condemnation of the Propositions without distinction of senses might produce in
the Church without any good, I was led to say all that I thought likely to
hinder the same, provided it did not hurt the truth.

I hope also few will be found so little intelligent, as not to acknowledge
that though we affirmed that the Propositions legitimately construed had no bad
sense; yet we would not say that they were not bad in the natural, literal and
rigorous sense of the words, in which they have been since condemned, but that
we only pretended that not being held by any person in those bad senses, they
ought to be legitimately explicated in the sense whereunto we reduced them,
which was that of Effectual Grace, and that thus this sense of Effectual Grace
was their legitimate, though in it self less proper sense, considering
precisely the proper and natural signification of the words whereof they
consisted. And this sole reason caused that these holy truths which we
undertook to defend sometimes, were more apparent to us through the veil of
the equivocal words, obscurities and errors wherewith they were covered, then
the very errors which the words taken literally included, because we knew these
errors were no more held by any body in France then at Rome, and that only
those truths were aimed at. However if I committed a fault in engaging my
Colleagues to speak too advantageously of the Propositions taken absolutely, yet
I shall ever have this comfort with them, that in the same Writing wherein we
spoke some advantegeous words concerning them as relating to the Doctrine which
we maintained, we most clearly and Catholickly explained the same as well by
declaring expressly that we acknowledged no other Authors of them but those
very persons who prosecuted their condemnation, as by purging them from all
their errors and equivocations, and making other new ones of them, whose senses
were clear, Catholic and incapable of being rendered suspected of any error by
the most malicious interpretation, or receiving any impeachment by the most
violent attempts of Envy it self. For the sense and doctrine maitain'd by us,
and included in the Propositions of the second colume (a little below) is that
which ought only to be considered; and not whether or no we believe that the
condemned Propositions were either legitimately or else properly and naturally
capable of that sense, the Question not being, whether we too favorably
interpreted those captious and equivocal Propositions, but whether we
maintained any sense bad in it self, or any erroneous and censurable doctrine.
Wherefore if the Propositions of the second colume, to which we reduced all that
we held in this matter, contain only an Orthodox Doctrine, which the Pope has
not touched (as must needs be granted) and since it is no other then the pure
Doctrine of Grace Effectual by it self (as it is taught by S. Thomas and all his
School) it must also be acknowledged that how favorably soever we spoke of the
condemned Propositions, we cannot be charged with having maintained any error
in them. And thus though we used all our endeavors that the abovesaid
Propositions which the Pope has condemned, might not be absolutely condemned,
in regard of the reasons we had against it and the deplorable consequences
which we foresaw would ensue from it; yet restraining our selves as we did, to
the sole defense of Catholic truths no less opposite to the sentiments of the
Jesuits and their followers, then to the errors, heresies, impieties, and
blasphemies which the Pope has condemned in those Propositions taken rigorously
and in the bad signification of their terms (of which we never were idolaters)
we condemned as well as he, nay before he did, the same errors, heresies,
impieties and blasphemies which he condemned. All that we have done since the
constitution, which we did not before, has been to acquiesce freely in their
absolute condemnation as soon as it was once pronounced, without attributing to
them any good sense, or maintaining them in any manner under any pretext
whatsoever, and to cease soliciting his Holiness to do right in a solemn
Congregation upon the complaintt which we had made already and had further to
make against the Jesuits. But to proceed to the remainder of this Journal.

During the four days which we employed in reviewing our Writings I was in
great perplexity whether or no I should accquaint my Colleagues with the new
assurance I had that the Pope's Bull or Constitution was drawn against the five
Propositions. For one one side the person from whom I received this
intelligence had obliged me to secrecy: bur on the other, being I had
understood the same as certainly from other hands, to let our affair go on as
if we knew nothing thereof, and to plead against a prepared decree, without
advertising my Colleagues of so considerable circumstances, seemed a thing very
hazardous and daring. They had heard the report of this Constitution ever since
the fifth of May; but because it was quasht of a sudden upon the above
mentioned Conference of another Cardinal with Cardinal Ghiggi, they counted it
wholly false, or else grounded upon some imaginary Bull contrived by the
subtilty of the Jesuits. Now this fear being passed, and they preparing
themselves to appear before the Pope which joy, tranquillity and hope to make
impression upon his mind by the things which we should speak, I feared to cool
their courage and the ardor of the speakers, by telling them such dejecting
tidings. Wherefore to do nothing unadvisedly, I acquainted M. Manassier with it
on Sunday May 18 (having as much confidence in his secrecy as my own) without
letting him know from what hand I had it: and he was of the same opinion with
me, namely to let it pass as if we knew nothing of it, and leave M. de
Valecroissant and F. Des-mares entire liberty of spirit and action against the
next day, when we were to appear before the Pope. The Passages of which are in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Of the grand Audience which the Pope give us May 19. being the first and last
which we had of all that had been promised us.

THis morning we got our Writings ready and signed them. And according to the
order given us by the Ambassador, we went out of our Lodging to Monte Cavallo
about three a clock. Where when we came we found some of the Consultors in the
two outer Chambers, and amongst others, M. Hallier's servant, who was lately
made Priest, who came thither openly and without fear of our perceiving that he
came to spy what he could discover. But we were advertised, that one of M.
Hallier's Colleagues hid himself in some place under the stairs or came thither
a little after us; to assure himself whether we would be there; which he no
soonner understood, but went down immediately out of Monte Cavallo leaping
alone and clapping his hands and lifting them up to Heaven, for joy that we
should be heard before the Pope. A religious Augustine who saw him go down the
stairs in that transport, conceived that some disgrace had befallen us, and
went home sad, that he might not be witness of the disaster: but when he
afterward heard the great success wherewith our audience was followed, he
knew not whereunto to impute that joy. An length he understood the cause of it,
when he saw the Constitution came forth some days after this audience, judging
that our Adversaries must needs have then known that it was resolved upon and
determined, and that they conceived our appearing before the Pope would give
them ground to report that we were condemned after we had been heard.

We stayed in the first antichamber where the Consultors were, and doubted at
first whether we should enter into the second with them; but presently
considering that they were not to be accounted as our Judges, we entered into
the second Antichamber with them, and sat down by them. Here we stayed near
half an hour expecting the coming of the Cardinals, and in the mean time
doubting whether at our introduction to the Pope we should go to kiss his feet
(because we knew not in what posture we might find him) I proposed doubt to a
Chambelain of honor, who could not absolutely resolve it, but intimated that if
we had done it when we saluted the Pope first, he did not judge it necessary in
this case; nevertheless so further satisfaction he referred me to the Maistre
de Chamber, and he to M. Albizzi. But having no mind to consult the latter
about any thing, we resolved to do as we should see expedient.

A little while after the coming of the Cardinals, the Consultors were called,
and entered one after another according to their Seniority. Soon after we were
called, and advertised to leave our Hats behind us. We found the Assembly in
this order; being in the secret Antichamber, which is but a narrow place. The
Pope sat in a Chair like that in which he usually gives audience, but so placed
toward the door, that at our entrance, his Holiness's face was directly upon
us at the distance of about ten paces. One pace distant from his Holiness's
Chair were on each side two Benches with backs of carved and painted, wood
capable of three persons. In the midst, a Turquy Carpet was spread upon the
floor; and at a little distance from thence was a Table at which M. Albizzi
(who otherwise stood) kneeled down to write when he pleased. The four Cardinals
sat upon the Benches with their Caps on. Cardinal Spada sat first on the Pope's
right hand, Cardinal Ginetti next to him on the same side, Cardinal Ghiggi on
the other side right over Cardinal Spada, and Cardinal Pamphilio opposite to
Cardinal Ginetti. But their order was as in a Circle, beginning from the Pope's
right hand, Cardinal Spada being, the first, Cardinal Ginetti the second,
Cardinal Pamphilio the third, and Cardinal Ghiggi the fourth. The same order
was observed among the Consultors. They stood all successively according to
their degrees, beginning from the Pope's right hand round to his left, and F.
Tartaglia who was the last in degree stood nearest his Holinesse's left hand.
The square made by the benches and persons thus disposed, was open on the side
of the door right against the Pope, and was just large enough to receive my
Colleagues and me all five in a row. The Abbot of Valcroissant stood in the
middle of us in a direct line to the Pope, F. Des-mares on his right hand, I on
his left, M. Manessier on the right hand of F. Des-mares, and M. Angran on my
left.

Being thus ranked at the edge of the Foot-Carpet, we all made a Genuflexion,
and at the same instant the Pope made a sign with his hand to us to rise up,
and spoke this word to us, Proponele, say what ye have to say.

The Abbot of Valcroissant having taken breath, when he began his Oration, made
another genuflexion as he pronounced Beatissime Pater, and we all with him. We
rose up immediately, and he continued his Oration gravely and deliberately, and
animated it in a very sprightly and agreeable manner. I subjoin here a most
faithful and exact translation of it.

An Oration pronounced before the Pope by the Abbot of Valcroissant.
MOST HOLY FATHER,
THere is nothing more reasonable and just (as Possessor an African Bishop
sometimes said to Pope Hormisdas) then to have recourse to the Head when the
members are sick, to the end to draw from it the strength which they need in
their languishment. For who can have more care of the souls which are
subjected to him, or from whom can greater support be expected to confirm the
tottering Faith then from his successor, who having first sat upon the
Apostolical Thrones, heard Jesus Christ himself say to him with his own mouth,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church!

We are obliged M. H. F. to represent to Your Holiness, by how many Artifices
and secret Ambushes some persons employ certain obscure, equivocal, and
maliciously contrived Propositions to undermine the Church at this day, by
assaulting and endangering the doctrine of S. Augustine touching the Grace of
Jesus Christ so often approved by the H. See, and authorized without
discontinuance by the universal consent of the whole Church.

Upon which we shall speak M. H. F. with the now assurance and confidence, for
that we speak before the H. Apostolic See and before the Roman Church, which
being founded upon the immobility of a Rock, preserves with invincible
constancy, and entire purity the unshaken firmness of its Faith and Doctrine,
without ever suffering that to be violated which it has once confirmed by its
approbation, and whereof it has declared it self protectresse.

We have then the advantage of speaking before the Roman Church concerning the
doctrine and authority of him who has always had the supreme Pontifs for
approvers, admirers and defenders, and always found so powerful protetection
from them as often as complaint has been made to them of such as impugned,
wounded oor despised his authority and doctrine.

Now happily is never came to pass, that the authority and sentiments of that H.
Father were more dangerously invaded then at this day, but certainly never more
maliciously or with more artifice. Yet we praise God, M. H. F. for that the
danger is passed, since those ambushes are discovered. For to have given the
Roman Church knowledge of them, is to have dissipated them: and it being
advertised of the danger wherein S. Augustine's doctrine is, there remains no
doubt but the same will be secured and authorized as much as ever.

But this our confidence in the H. Apostolic See is further augmented, because
besides the authority of S. Augustine so powerfully established, the doctrine in
question carries a privilege with it which is wholly peculiar to it self. For
though there be none of the Truths of the Catholic Faith whereof this first
See of the World is not the illustrious Depository; nevertheless it attributes
to it self by proper right the care of preserving the Grace of Jesus Christ;
inasmuch (as according to what S. Augustine observes in his sixth Letter to
Sixtus) it is principally to this Church that the great Apostle S. Paul spoke
and taught the mysteries of the Grace of God, which is given us by Jesus Christ
our Lord. And the same S. Augustine in another Book, showing at the same time
both that the Grace of Jesus Christ ought to be preached throughout all the
earth, and that this Church is the head of all others, with these words, This
great Apostle has shown the power of Grace, principally in his Epistle to the
Romans, to the end that the preaching of the heavenly Doctrine, might pass
from this prime City of the World into all places of the Earth. Which
manifests, that the Faith concerning the grace of Christians may be said by a
special privilege to be the Faith of the Roman Church. It Is also for this
reason that S. Augustine, its greatest Doctor and Defender next the Apostle,
never was opposed concerning this matter, but the Roman Church ardently
undertook his defense, and attributed his doctrine to it self as its own, and
as its peculiar inheritance according as In a Discourse which this Pope made in
the first Congregation de Auxiliis, held before him in the Vatican, March 20.
1602.
S. Clement VIII. speaks.

And certainly, it is not without ground that the Apostle gave this first Church
of the World such sublime instructions of the mysteries of the Grace of Jesus
Christ, since it is the fruit of his blood, the bond of God with men, the
spirit of Jesus Christ and Christian Religion, and that which truly establishes
the new Law and the Gospel. This Grace is not that which is taught by those who
retain only its name, to avoid the indignation and scandal of the faithful,
should they deny it absolutely; but it is that which was in question between S.
Augustine on one side, fighting in the name of the Church, and Pelagius and his
followers on the other: that, as S. Augustine says, writing to Pope Innocent
the first. Epist. 95.
which the Christian faith teaches and publishes to be proper and peculiar to
Christians; that De gratia Christi cap. 10.
which the Catholic Bishops were wont to read in the books of God and to
preach to God's people: that Q. q. contra Jul. cap. 40.
which Pelagius ought to acknowledge, if he would not only be called a
Christian, but be truly one: and lastly, that (as he says in another place)
upon which are supported the principal fundamentals of Faith and Christian
Piety, which will subsist as long as it stands, and be in danger to be
overthrown when it is shaken.

Wherefore when in these last times, some have attempted to overthrow the true
Grace of Jesus Christ, they conceived nothing more expedient to advance their
design, then to dilacerate, as Contra collatere, and in Epist. ad Rssinum.
S. Prosper speaks, in dilacerating S. Augustine with outrageous words, the most
learned of all the Fathers in the Doctrine of the Church, and the most powerful
Defender of the grace of Jesus Christ; then to weaken the authority of his
Writings which impugn the error of the Pelagians, and to despoil him of the
belief which he has in the minds of the faithful: they who formed so unhapdy a
design, not doubting (as the same S. Prosper says again) to be able at length
to overthrow all the authorities Which uphold the purity of the doctrine of
Grace, if they could once beat down with all their Engines of Pelagianism this
strong and potent Tower which serves for defense to the truths of Faith.

This enterprise against the Grace of Jesus Christ has proceeded so far, that
in regard of the close union of S. Augustine with S. Paul in what concerns this
matter, we see that at this day the Enterprizers fear not to attaque them both
together, by daring to accuse them of having passed even into Excesses.

For at the same time that the five Propositions in question were contriving
for the overthrow of S. Augustin's doctrine, F. Adam a Jesuit printed a Book,
in which he flies out with no less fury against S. Paul himself then against S.
Augustine; having the boldness to maintain therein, that either of them leaving
themselves to the blind impetuosity of their temper, have gone beyond the
bounds of the Truth and Faith. Is it then to be wondered that this Jesuit who
treats Apostles and Prophets in this manner, has had the boldness to declare
S. Augustin's doctrine impious and heretical? But who can without horror see
pronounced against this great Saint without any palliation the most outrageous
Censure that can be imagined? This Book so injurious to S. Paul, and to other
Canonical Writers, and chiefly to S. Augustine, has been printed and published
with the approbation of their Provincial of Paris and three other Divines of
their Society, and received with a public joy of all the Jesuits in France.

What then ought not to be feared M. H. F. from the enterprises of this
Society? For if to discredit S. Augustine they dare assail S. Paul, because it is
from that Apostle that S. Augustine derived what he writ; what remains but that
they rise up against Jesus Christ himself, since it is from him that S. Paul
learnt what he teaches us of the mystery of Grace? Behold, M. H. F. whereunto
tends their design, who in reference to the belief which ought to be had in
Christian Religion touching Grace, follow not the traces which are showed us by
the Church, but measuring these mysteries by their own sense, judge of them
rather by conjectures and seeming reasons, then by the perpetual and most
certain authority of the tradition of the Church. It Is not M. H. F. by vain
Imaginations, but by invincible proofs that we shall manifest to Your H. this
public Conspiracy of the Jesuits formed against S. Augustine. Behold in my
hands above a hundred Propositions against that Saint drawn out of several
books made since 50 years by the Jesuits, which show, that the boldness
wherewith they assault him increases daily, in such sort that they incessantly
charge him with new and greater outrages.

We know, M. H. F. that though our Adversaries have and do still testify to
manifest an aversion against S. Augustine, yet they make semblance of
reverencing his authority, and dare commend him even in presence of your H. and
boast themselves to be his defenders and disciples. But this is only to put a
color of feigned respect upon their real disdain, and carry it more free from
blame. It Is only to avoid the punishment of the insolence wherewith they
outrage him. It Is only to hide their aversion of his Doctrine under the
Commendation of his person. It Is only to dimish the care which in these
contests ought to be taken for examining which are the true sentiments of that
H. Father, and to make it believed that the same are not concerned in the
Propositions which have been presented to your H. because they who oppose them
make profession of following the Doctrine and revering the authority of that
Father; that so avoiding the condemnation of their temerity by such feigned and
fallacious elogiums of S. Augustine, and the obligation of subscribing any thing
in this matter by your Holinesses order, they and their partisans may reject
his authority with more boldness then ever, condemn his Doctrine, and continue
to banish it out of their Schools as Calvinistical and dangerous; especially if
it happen that your H. be led under any pretext to condemn these Propositions;
because they will not fail afterward to reflect the censure of them upon S.
Augustine, as a Jesuit has plainly declared in a late published work, wherein
he has been so bold as to write, Have a little patience, dear Reader, Rome
will shortly tell you, what S. Augustin's sentiments are or ought to have been
in this matter. O most presumptuous word, yet fallen from this pen by a
wonderful judgment of God, who overrules by his Providence even the darkness
and disorders of men; since the Jesuits M. H. F. give you clearly to
understand thereby, that the Doctrine of S. Augustine is included in these five
Propositions, and that they expect not the condemnation of them from your H.
but that they may afterward condemn S. Augustine, which Christian ears cannot
hear without horror.

But though our Adversaries speak honorably too sometimes of S. Augustine, yet
in their Writings they cannot forbear to declare themselves his enemies, by
insinuating that his Doctrine is contrary to the sentiments of the H.
Apostolic See. We are not ignorant, M. H. F. with what boldness they dare
affirm that what S. Augustine teaches De Corr. and Great. c. 1.
constantly to be the principal Doctrine of the Grace of Jesus Christ, and a
certain, indubitable, Prophetical, Apostolical, and Catholic faith, is only
a dubious and uncertain opinion, and may consequently, say they, be rejected
without fear. For this end they strive to persuade that S. Augustine does not
agree with himself, that he contradicts himself, that there are some things in
his Writings which favor our sentiments, others on the contrary which favor
theirs.

In which M. H. F. it is not so much S. Augustine whom they so insolently
outrage, as the H. Apostolic See, and the Universal Church, since they would
thereby cause men to believe that being the H. See approves and ownes
contradictory sentiments, it is not regulated and governed by the H. Ghost who
is the spirit of unity and truth, but has chosen a blind guide to encounter
the enemies of Grace, and proposes him for a director to the Divines and the
Faithful, though contradicting himself he cannot make us know what we are
obliged to believe and follow.

The true Disciples of S. Augustine and the sincere venerators of the H.
Apostolic See are very far, M. H. F. from having a thought so rash and
unworthy of the respect which ought to be borne to that great Doctor of the
Church. Let our Adversaries choose either to take him wholly, or leave him to
us wholly. He is all theirs, or all ours; if he be not all ours, we do not envy
them with him, being so far from desiring to do him and the H. See so much
wrong as to wish him divided in pieces, that we might have a part.

Your H. sees that the present difference between our Adversaries and us has
great resemblance with that of the two mothers, upon which Solomon pronounced
so wise a judgment that it has been ever since and shall be to all ages in
admiration. Our contest concerns S. Augustine who is our Father and Master;
either part pretends him on their side, and our Adversaries perceiving they
cannot challenge him wholly to themselves, (being forced to confess that many
of his sentiments are contrary to them, and favor us) they say he must he
divided, in half, and either of us have a part. But we who are the true
children and disciples of that Father, cannot suffer this partition. We
maintain that he must either be all theirs, or all ours, inasmuch as to divide
him were to destroy him, because his authority would fall to the ground if he
were found contrary to himself; or rather, the H. See would be torn and pulled
in pieces by this division of S. Augustine, since it should have approved and
owned sentiments perfectly opposite between themselves.

Wherefore we conjure Your H. with all the power and tenderness of affection
which children can have for their Father, not to suffer that S. Augustine be
divided. And, if it be lawful for me to use the words of the Scripture in this
occasion, rather give him wholly to them and alive, then stay him by dividing
him between us. Can any other judgment be expected from your Holiness in this
contest then that of Solomon? Can you repute those S. Augustin's true disciples
who would have him divided, and not rather those who would sooner be deprived
of him altogether then that he were divded? your H. will undoubtedly pronounce
this sentence in our favor; Give S. Augustine alive without dividing and
slaying him to these latter, for they are his true disciples. By this means,
M. H. F. the whole Church will know that the wisdom of God directs Innocent
10. to render justice.

And indeed, M. H. F. it is so certain that S. Augustine is not in any place on
our Adversaries side; that they cannot produce one sole passage which is
favorable to their sentiments, unless they cut it in the middle, maime and
mulilate it, taking it out of its proper place, and putting another sense upon
it then it has of it self. Your H. will find it so, M. H. F. by the
confutation of the Writing which they presented to you, wherein having cited
sixty passages of S. Augustine against the first Proposition, we have related
them all in the answer which we have to present to your H. upon those passages,
wherein we show that scare one of them is truly and fairly alleged.

But our Adversaries would have not only S. Augustine, but also the Grace of
Jesus Christ divided, though neither the one nor the other can admit division
or partition; because Epist. ad Demetriadem.
S. Prosper says, they reject Grace wholly, who do not wholly confess it. And
elsewhere he uses these words, Cant. Collat. cap. 44.
We will not suffer that any member of the body of that so justly condemned
Doctrine rise up in the Church, because it is certain the disguisements and
artifices of that falsehood are so subtle that if under pretext of a feigned
recantation it may preserve the least root of opinions that favors it, that
root will like a quick-set cause it all to spring up again. For when there is
nothing else in the whole then in each part, it is not a sign of piety to reject
almost the whole; but to retain never so little portion thereof is an argument
of insincerity.

Hence it is M. H. F. that our Adversaries so vehemently wish that your H.
would pluck up some small part of True Grace, that is to say, of the Effectual
Grace of Jesus Christ, by giving them leave not to retain it all entire; in as
much by this means it will be easy for them to ruin it all, to abolish all
S. Augustine, and to revive the whole Pelagian Heresy by one of its parts.

You may judge hereby M. H. F. how important this affair is, in which S.
Augustin's Doctrine, and authority, and even the true Grace of Jesus Christ is
concerned; in which nothing can be decided in favor of one party but it will
have the whole advantage; and in which it is necessary that all things be first
exactly examined and discussed before any certainty can be pronounced or
established. Wherefore we cannot sufficiently admire, that in the midst of so
many occupations wherewith your H. is in a manner overwhelmed under the weight
of the Churches affairs, God through a singular providence has inspired you
with a purpose to examine this important question with so much care and
diligence that you may decide it fully, after having weighed, searched and
considered all things; and we cannot too much thank his divine goodness that
he has pleased to increase the strength and confirm the health of your H. and
together with this vigor of body and mind in so venerable an old age to inflame
you with the same zeal, wherewith through his most celestal favor, for the
deciding of this very cause he filled the Innocents, Zozimes, the Bonifaces,
the Celestines and other great Popes your Predecessors.

We confess, M. H. F. and your H. knows sufficiently that this matter is
spinose, and deserves a long and most attentive discussion. Nature which
flatters us, never ceases to oppose in us the mystery of the grace of Jesus
Christ. Our Reason seeks means on all sides to free it self from that
absolute submission which we are obliged to have for God; it forgets nothing to
induce ever our faith to embrace these opinions; it insinuates every thing that
favors this connatural pride in us. S. Augustine himself confesses that without
thinking of it he remained a long while in the error of the Semipelagians, and
got not perfectly out of it till after a deep meditation of the H. Scriptures,
particularly of S. Paul, and an exact reading of the H. Fathers which preceeded
him, which happened but a little after his being called to the Episcopacy. And
therefore it is no wonder that in all times there have been found so many
difficulties and repugnances to cure the minds of the faithful of the error of
Pelagianisme.

Besides all which, M. H. F. there is a determinate resolution for Molina's
defense of the whole Society of Jesuits, who by their Sermons, printed books,
public Lectures and many other ways have mightily endeavored to embroile,
obscure, alter and ruin the heavenly Doctrine of S. Augustine touching the
grace of Jesus Christ; and have perverted the minds of so great a number of
persons; and amongst so many clouds and obscurities it is difficult to discern
the truth and to get clear of the Jesuits Principles and Doctrines, which
many, even Divines too, have embraced and through custom remain insensibly
therein, either loath to take the pains which is necessary for their
undeceiving, or afraid of the shame of changing their judgment, or through
some other secret and hidden inclination. But this difficulty is further
increased by the malicious artifice wherewith the Propositions have been
contrived, only for the secret ruining of the true Grace of Jesus Christ by
their equivocal expressions.

The Pelagians; as Innocent 1. relates, made use of the same artifice when they
began to sow their heresy, as that H. Pope calls it, which was the first that
condemned it, and approved S. Augustin's Doctrine. Behold in what manner he
speaks of them. In the Epistle to the Bishops of Carthage which is the 91.
amongst those of S. Augustine.
Their words being full of dangerous subtleties, they took, for pretext of
their dispute, the defense of the Catholic faith, to the end to poison their
minds whose sentiments were Orthodox, by causing them to embrace the bad side;
and thus they endeavored to subvert the Catholic belief of the true Doctrine
of Grace. This is what the Event will show, and your H. will further find that
the Bishops who sent us were induced by consideration of the H. See, and the
defense of S. Augustin's authority and of the grace of Jesus Christ, to demand,
as they do, of your H. a Congregation in which the parties may he heard viva
voce and by writing in presence one of the other; and wherein, after reciprocal
communication of all their Writings, all the points of this controversy may be
fully and plainly cleared by resuming things from their original and examining
them a new one after ather.

But, M. H. F. though Nature and Reason are very unapt to comprehend what is
the grace of Jesus Christ; and though this Doctrine be invelop'd as with so
many clouds by the various new inventions of new Divines, and by the
equivocations and ambiguities of the Propositions in question; nevertheless we
dare boldly affirm that albeit this mystery is very profound, yet it is not so
difficult to understand, provided the means be used and the rules followed
which the Church has established for clearing and deciding the Doctrines of our
faith; and if (according to the Custom of the Church and the H. See, practiced
and confirmed lately in the Council of Trent) the H. Scriptures, the supreme
Pontifs, the Councils, and Fathers, particularly S. Augustine as the principal
minister and defender of the grace of Jesus Christ be consulted. If your H.
uses this course, we hope you will clearly know that the Doctrine of Grace
maintained by us is so certain and well grounded, that no doubt can remain
concerning it. For we shall show your H. so many passages and such clear
testimonies drawn out of these sources of Divine Wisdom, that we believe our
Adversaries cannot solidly refute so much as one of them; whereas on the
contrary we undertake by Gods assistance that among those which they shall
produce against our opinion and the sense wherein we defend these Propositions,
there shall scarce be one which we will not fully destroy. And we here again
maintain without fear in presence of your H. and this whole assembly, (what we
have subscribed with our own hands in the conclusion of the two writings in
form of Memorials which we have presented to your H.) that our Adversaries
with all their endeavors cannot form any objection against the Propositions
as we understand them, nor propose any argument drawn from the H. Scripture or
Reason, which we cannot manifest to have been used by the Pelagians or
Semipelagians against S. Augustine, either expressly or in words wholly
equivalent, and which he has not refuted by his answers, as we hope to destroy
theirs by the most powerful and solid reasons of that H. Doctor.

Whereunto we shall add, M. H. F. that of all the arguments which we shall
produce against them, there shall not be one, where to it may be said that S.
Augustine has answered in any wise; so consistent he is always with himself,
so manifest it is that he favors us, so wholly he is on our side, and so true
and evident it is that the controversy renewed at this day, is, not only the
same which was agitated under Clement VIII. between the Dominicans and the
Jesuits, but likewise the very same which was between S. Augustine and Pelagius
under your Predecessor Innocent 1. And your H. shall find, not without wonder,
that it is renewed in such manner, that our adversaries, both in their manner of
proceeding and writing, employ the same atifices and the same deceits of those
ancient enemies of Grace, of which S. Augustine and S. Prosper incessantly
complain.

The Writing alone which they presented to your H. consisting of sixty passages
of S. Augustine, fully proves with how great reason and justice we frame so
important an accusation against them, and your H. will become fully persuaded
hereof if you permit us to refute in your presence what they have advanced in
that Writing. Your H. shall see that they suppose therein what no body has
taught; that they refute what no body has disputed; that the passages alleged
out of S. Augustine are maimed or perverted; that they maliciously suppress
those which clearly explain his meaning; that they attribute to him a sense
wholly contrary to his own, as the same passages manifestly show. And lastly
your H. shall see that they are all either falsely, or maliciously or
impertinently alleged; that they act without shame or faith before you in this
matter of faith, that they approach your Apostolical Throne without any
reverence, and that no other reason leads them under color of a false respect
to reject and decline the Conference which we desired to have with them, but
because they well know that they cannot avoid being publicly convinced of foul
dealing and ignorance. And consequently we are assured that as much as your H.
loves sincerity, candor and justice, so much will you be moved with most just
indignation against them.

But this assurance, M. H. F. wherewith the truth, which we conceive we
maintain, causes us to speak before your H. diminishes nothing of the full and
entire submission which we shall always have to the judgment which you shall
pass: as the boldness and confidence wherewith they, who before us
encountered the errors sprung up or revived in the Church before the same were
condemned, attaqu'd their adversaries, did not hinder but that they were
perfectly submissive to the decisions of the H. See and Councils. Now being we
have no other aim in this affair but to seek the Truth, which alone causes us
to speak, and since we are deputed to your Holiness by some Bishops only out
of a design to serve the Truth and the H. See, as much as we shall be able our
desire shall be accomplished if your H. judge that the honor of Truth and the H.
See obliges you to correct or even condemn somethihg of what we maintain; and
we not only submit our selves to your judgment, but being glad of being
corrected, we shall publish the same everywhere with joy.

But if on the contrary your Holiness finds that we defend the faith of the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church; and that the Jesuits and Doctors who
contrived these Propositions, design by the obscurity of their equivocal
words, to subvert the true grace of Jesus Christ defended by S. Augustine in the
name of the whole Church, and to banish it out of the minds of all the
Faithful, and that they are engaged in pernicious errors; we expect from Your
Holiness's justice, and with as much humility as urgency desire, that you
condemn their errors, and establish the Catholic Faith. Neither they nor we
ought to be spared. Truth ought to be strongly upheld against us, if it appear
that it is we who injure it: it ought to be established against us in its whole
strength. This is that which we avoid not, but desire.

Now if our Adversaries have the same purpose of seeking truth and peace, they
will have no other wishes, nor make other demands, and Your Holiness will hear
the same words from their mouths as from ours. Let neither we, nor those
engaged in the same party with us be considered; but let regard be had only to
the Truth, the honor of the Church, and the dignity of the H. Apostolic See.

Thus M. H. F. after having implored the assistance of the Holy and Indivisible
Trinity, we are prepared to maintain in Your Holiness's presence this so
important point of the Catholic Faith, and trusting to that same Grace of
Jesus Christ our Savior, to the defense and glory whereof we consecrate all
our words and Writings; we implore his divine illumination, that we may be able
rightly to understand and explicate the matter in question. And it will be
great consolation to us, that in speaking before him who is the Oracle of
Truth, what we shall not be able to comprehend in such difficult questions,
will not (as S. Augustine speaks) be imputed to the truth which profitably
exercises pious souls even when it is hid from them, but to our little light
which hindered us from being able rightly to comprehend them, or well explicate
what we comprehended. And lastly M. H. F. We here make the protestation which
S. Augustine says is the token of a truly Catholic spirit; that if it should
be so that the sentiments hitherto held by us be not conformable to the Truth,
we are ready to renounce the same as soon as it shall be discovered to us, and
to submit our selves to your judgment, as being that of the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, and of S. Peter's successor.

Whilst this Harangue was pronouncing, the Pope and whole Assembly heard it
with great silence and attention; the Pope advancing himself a little out of
his Seat which was the ordinary manner of his greater attentiveness. Whenever
the Jesuits were mentioned by their names, he instantly turned his head and
cast his eyes upon F. Palavicini's, and held them fixed upon him, as often as
any thing a little more vehemently was spoken against them; as if he meant to
observe that Jesuits countenance, or ask him what he had to answer to the
charge. The Abbot of Valcroissant had his Oration in his hand, as the custom
is at Rome, to fix his memory the better, and though he looked upon his paper
sometimes to follow it, yet he pronounced it all without need of recurring to
it.

At the end of the Oration we all made a genuflexion together. M. Manessier and
Angran brought some books with them which they laid upon the end of the Benches
whereon the Cardinals sat; and I had with me the Writings which we had prepared
to present to the Pope. That which contained the hundred and six Propositions
extracted out of the books of the Jesuits against S. Augustin's authority, I
delivered into the hands of M. de Valcroissant; he also gave me his Oration.
As Soon as ever it was begun, M. Albizzi fell to writing, and did the like at
several passages, especially, by what I could observe, at such as mentioned
submission, respect and affection to the H. See. No doubt, he conceived this
Oration would not be seen, and feared lest those words of grandeur and esteem
for the H. See should escape him.

After M. de Valcroissant had made a little pause, he began a Discourse, not
prepared like his Oration, but only a sequel and proof of it. For he further
remonstrated that the design of this whole Affair, was nothing else but to
subvert S. Augustin's authority and doctrine. To which purpose he made a short
recapitulation of our Writings de Gestis; and laid open to the Pope's eyes the
chief projects of our Adversaries mentioned therein. Nevertheless that it
might not be said, that he declined the main matter by standing too long upon
one thing (which yet was very important to be known to his Holiness) and so
reserving himself to speak more largely both of his Writing, and that
concerning the authority of S. Augustin's doctrine, in another Consideration
wherein this matter should be further considered, he began to give the Pope a
General Idea of the five Writings abovementioned, which we were to present to
his Holiness at this time.

Then returning in particular to the first of those Writings which is the first
part of the second Information touching Fact, containing a hundred and six
Propositions extracted out of the Jesuits Books against S. Augustine, he read a
great number of them, and amongst the rest those out of F. Adam's book, in
which S. Augustin's doctrine is termed heretical and Calvinistical, and S. Paul
and other Canonical Writers accused together with S. Augustine, of being
transported in their Writings bryond the bounds of Truth. During this reading,
M Angran and I observed how at every Proposition that was read F. Palavicini
hearkened attentively, and shook his head, either as approving it, or
intimating that it was not worth speaking of. When M. de Valcroissant had done
reading, he represented the circumstances of the time at which this book of F.
Adam was printed, namely, at the breaking open of M. Cornet's enterprise, of
whom he also related with what confidence he had blotted out this Proposition
out of a Thesis whilst he was Syndic, That S. Augustin's doctrine in the matter
of Grace may safely be followed. But for that I observed that this book of F.
Adam made great impression upon the minds of some in the Assembly; and that M.
de Valcroissant for compendiousnesse sake, considering the multitude of things
which he had to say, did not, to my conceit, sufficiently set forth the
circumstances of that book's coming forth; I first offered to suggest something
to him which he had not observed; which not taking effect, because he could not
mind it and speak to, I desired him to permit me to speak whilst he took a
little breath. Having made a genuflexion to the Pope, I said, that I conceived
his Holiness would not be displeased to hear me tell him that this book of F.
Adam's, whence all those horrible Propositions were extracted, was printed in
the vulgar tongue, and very common to be had; that its Author preached the same
Maxims in one of the most eminent Parishes of Paris near the professed House
of the Jesuits before a numerous Congregation, the whole Society knowing and
approving it. I also beseecht his Holiness to remember the prodigious
boldness of their Father Labbe, (mentioned by M. de Valcroissant) who dared to
write, that Rome would suddenly pronounce of what opinion S. Augustine was, and
ought to have been; not dissembling that their design was to get him condemned
by the Constitution which they aimed to extort from his Holiness, and holding
themselves as sure not to miss of it, as if they were the masters of his Pen
and Tongue, or had the supreme disposal of those whose ministry they knew his
Holiness used in his deliberations and decisions. This I pressed with such
indignation as the knowledge of the prepared Bull animated me to, and a sudden
design to give the Pope some diffidence of those who were about him, and
counseled him to so sad a resolution. All was heard as the rest, neither the
Pope or any else replying ought thereunto. I made a second genuflexion and M.
de Valcroissant resumed his discourse: In which he further urged to the Pope,
how great reason we had to summon our Adversaries to acknowledge S. Augustin's
authority solemnly, by signing the six Propositions at the end of our Writings
de Gestis, to which he summoned them again, and beseecht the Pope to oblige
them to declare themselves thereupon.

But, To enter further into the main of the matter in question, M. de
Valcroissant left this Writing, and passed to that of the Distinction of the
senses of the Propositions. He spoke largely upon the substance of the Preface,
in which we with all the Bishops of France beseecht his Holiness to pronounce
upon the Controversy between the Molinists and us. We read the words of the
Letters of either side to show the Pope, that the question was not about any
Calvinistical or Lutheran opinions which we condemned, and had always
condemned, nor against these Propositions as they were couched under ambiguous
terms which rendered them capable of different senses, (since we were not the
authors of them, and knew no other authors of them but our Adversaries
themselves, who contrived them thus to involve the Catholic Faith with Error
in one condemnation, and to put all things in the Church by this means into a
general confusion) but only about the Propositions reduced to the Catholic
senses which we defended, and which were those alone that our Adversaries
impugned. Hereupon M. de Valcroissant read the explication of those senses and
the declaration of our sentiments upon each of them, as they follow a little
below in three columes. Which when he had done, and declared at every
Proposition, that it was that alone to whose defense we adhered, he made an
evident reduction of them to the point of Grace Effectual by it self, showing
as clear as the day that nothing but the connection which these Propositions
rightly understood, and purged from their bad senses, had with that capital
point of the Churches faith and S. Augustin's doctrine in this matter, induced
us to endeavor to prevent an absolute and confused condemnation of them, in
regard of the consequences. When he was at the conclusion, he spoke something
concerning our declaration and protestation to the Pope always to maintain the
Propositions reduced to the Catholic senses which we defended, or rather those
senses and Catholic Truths which lay hid under the terms of these
Propositions, whilst it appeared not to us that these truths had been expressly
condemned by a positive and solemn judgment, whatever condemnation might
otherwise befall the Propositions considered in themselves as M. Cornet
proposed them to the Faculty, and as they were presented the Pope by the
Bishops of France who first writ to him.

Being this distinction of Senses was read throughout and word for word before
the Pope, it will be expedient to insert the same here, though it was printed
since apart as it follows, as well in respect of the Titles, as Contents and
Subscriptions.

Beatissimo Patri Innocentio Papae X. brevissima quinque propositionum in
varios sensus distinctio, apertaque de iis tum Calvinistarum ac Lutheranorum,
tum Pelagianorum ac Molinistarum, tum S. Augustini ejusque discipulorum
sententia.
BEATISSIME PATER,
EPiscopi Galliarum quorum votis atque expectationi Vestra Sanctitas
satisfacere se velle testatur, circa quinque propositiones controversas
judicium ab ipsa postulant, quod and veritatem dilucidare ac confirmare and
controversias componere, and pacem Ecclesiae restituere idoneum sit. Petunt
ergo ut de iis quae in controversiam inter nos and adversarios vocata sunt,
expressam sententiam ferat, non de iis de quibus nulla contentio, nulla
quaestio, nulla difficultas exorta est. Hoc ex variis omnium Episcoporum qui ad
Vestram Sanctitatem scripserunt, litteris manifestum est. Quapropter primum
officii nostri est Sanctitatis Vestrae oculis id aperte exponere de quo hinc
and inde contendimus, ut de re quae inter nos and adversarios in controversiam
vertitur, ipsi constet. De propositionibus autem non in sensu alieno ad quem
trahi possent, quique a nobis respuitur, sed in sensu legitimo qui a nobis
defenditur, atque adeo de fide Catholica in iis contenta controversia est;
DEQUE IIS SIC SUMPTIS distinctum ac perspicuum judicium expectatur.

Ne igitur in toto hoc negotio ullus pateat aequivocationi, calumniae,
malignitati, dubitationi locus, veros and germanos propositionum sensus quos
sustinemus, quosque impugnant adversarii, si aliquid agunt, ante omnia vestrae
Sanctitati quam brevissime ac dilucidissime fieri potest, exponimus, atque ex
una part errores illis contrarios, quos adversarii tuentur, and ex alia
haereses illis similiter contrarias, quas impugnare se jactitant cum
propositiones impugnant, subjicimus: Ut Sanctitati vestrae innotescat nos neque
d dexteram neque ad sinistram declinare, sed doctrinae Ecclesiae unice
adhaerere, and inde Calvinistarum eorumque sequacium, hinc Pelagianorum
eorumque reliquiarum haereses ac errores ex aequo detestari.

De utrorumque sententia circa has quinque propositiones, and de nostra quae
inter hanc and illam est media, aperte and sincere id quod profitemur
Sanctitati vestrae aperimus, praetermissis atque in suum tempus ac ordinem
dilatis eorum omnium quae asserimus, invictis, ut putamus, probationibus, nunc
nihil aliud intendentes quam ut primo aspectu ac veluti in compendio
exihibeamus, tum id de quo judicium fieri postulent expectentque universi
Galliae, Episcopi, tum etiam quam Catholice sentiamus.

PRIMA PROPOSITIO, a loco suo dolose avulsa and exhibita.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia; Deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
Sensus haereticus. Qui primae propositioni malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

Justis omnibus quantumlibet volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes
quantascunque vires quae a gratia magna and efficace habentur, mandata Dei sunt
impossibilia. Deest quoque illis semper and quamdiu vivunt gratia qua possint
vel unum ex mandatis Dei sine peccato adimplere.

Haec propositio est haeretica, Calviniana aut Lutherana, and a Concilio
Tridentino damnata.

PRIMA PROPOSITIO, ut a nobis intelligitur ac defenditur.

Aliqua Dei praecepta aliquibus justis volentibus and conantibus invalide and
imperfecte secundum praesentes quas habent vires, parvas scilicet, and
infirmas, seu auxilio efficaci ad plene volendum and operandum necessario
destitutis impossibilia sunt proxime and complete, seu ab iis adimpleri proxime
non possunt. Deest quoque illis gratia efficax qua praecepta illis proxime
possibilia fiant, seu deest illis speciale illud auxilium sine quo
justificatus, ut ait Concilium Tridentinum, in accepta justitia, id est, in
observatione mandatorum Dei, perseverare non potest.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem ad fidem Ecclesiae
pertine re and in Sancti Augustini doctrina indubitatam esse, atque a Concilio
Tridentino definitam.

PROPOSITIO primae contraria ut ab adversariis defenditur.

Omnia Dei praecepta justis volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas
habent vires, sunt semper possibilia per gratiam eorum libero arbitrio
subjectam. Nec unquam ipsis deest gratia ad operandum vel saltem ad orandum
proxime necessaria, qua possibilia fiant.

Sustinemus ac demostrare parati sumus hanc propositionem, quae est Molinae and
adversariorum, esse Pelagianam vel Semipelagianam, quia gratiae ex se efficacis
ad singulos actus necessitatem destruit. Atque ita declaratum est in
Congregatione Romana de Auxiliis sub Clemente Octavo and Paulo Quinto.



SECUNDA PROPOSITIO, fabricata and exhibita.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.
SENSUS HAERETICUS. Qui primae propositioni malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

Interiori gratiae efficaci in statu naturae lapsae eatenus nunquam resistitur,
quatenus voluntas hominis respectu gratiae efficacis mere passive se habet, and
velut inanime quoddam nihil omnino agit, nec cooperatur nec libere assentitur.

Haec propositio est haeretica, Calviniana, Lutherana, and a Concilio
Tridentino damnata.

Alius sensus erroneous.

Interiori gratiae sumptae pro simplici quadam illuminatione intellectus and
suasione voluntatis in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

Haec propositio est falsa and erronea, quia talis gratia non est vera gratia
Christi, ut docet S. August. in libro de gratia Christi.

Alius sensus erroneus.

Interiori gratiae Christi, cum adhuc parva est, and dat tantum voluntatem
inchoatam, in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur, quantum ad effectum
interiorem ad quem disponit.

Haec propositio est falsa and erronea.

Secunda PROPOSITIO, ut a nobis intelligitur, ac defenditur.

Gratiae Christi ad singulos pietatis actus proxime necessariae nunquam
resistitur, hoc est, nunquam illa frustratur eo effectu ad quem a Deo proxime
datur.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem ad fidem Ecclesiae
pertinere and in Sancti Augustini doctrina indubitatam esse.

PROPOSITIO secunda contraria, ut ab adversariis defenditur.

Gratiae Christi ad singulos pietatis actus, seu operandi seu saltem orandi,
necessariae, in statu naturae lapsae aliquando resistitur, hoc est, illa
aliquando frustratur eo effectu ad quem a Deo proxime datur.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem, quae est Molinae
and adversariorum, esse Pelagianam vel Semipelagianam, quia gratia Christi ad
singulos actus necessariae vim and efficaciam destruit. Atque ita declaratum
est in Congregatione Romana de Auxiliis.



TERTIA PROPOSITIO, fabricata and exhibita.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
Sensus haereticus. Qui tertiae propositioni malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate naturali, qualis etiam reperitur in motibus
indeliberatis, sed sufficit mera libertas a coactione.

Haec propositio haeretica est, Calviniana aut Lutherana.

TERTIA PROPOSITIO, ut a nobis intelligitur ac defenditur.

Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate infallibilitatis, sed sufficit libertas a coactione cum
judicio rationis, si consideretur praecise essentia libertatis and meriti,
quamquam ex ratione status semper reperiatur indifferentia potentiae qua
voluntas etiam sub gratia proxime necessaria and ex se efficace potest non
velle, non tamen ut nunquam simul cum eadem gratia non velit.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem esse Catholicam and
Augustinianam.

PROPOSITIO TERTIAE contraria, ut ab adversariis defenditur.

Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate infallibilitatis, seu necessaria est indifferentia
proxima agendi and non agendi, qua voluntas instructa omnibus ad agendum
Praerequisitis pro suo nutu modo se flectit in unam partem, modo in oppositam.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc proposisionem, quae est Molinae
adversariorum, Pelagianam esse, quia gratia ex se efficacis ad singulos
pietatis actus necessaria possibilitatem destruit. Atque ita declaratum est in
Congregatione Romana de Auxiliis.



QUARTA PROPOSITIO, fabricata and exhibita.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei. Et in hoc erant haeretici quod vellent
eam gratiam talem esse cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare.
Sensus haereticus. Qui quartae propositioni malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

Gratia Christi praeveniens talis est ut liberum arbitrium hominis ab ea motum
and excitatum non possit dissentire si velit. Aliter dicere, Semipelagianum est.

Haec propositio est haeretica, Calviniana, aut Lutherana, and a Concilio
Tridentino damnata.

QVARTA PROPOSITIO, ut a nobis intelligitur ac defenditur.

Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus imperfectos, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc haeretice
sentiebant, quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse ut voluntas illi pro nutu suo
obtemperaret vel eam respueret, seu ut ex se efficax non esset.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem quoad primam partem
quae spectat quastionem facti, esse veram: quoad secundam vero ad fidem
Ecclesiae pertinere, and in Sancti Augustini doctrina indubitatam esse.

PROPOSITIO QVARTAE contraria, ut ab adversariis defenditur.

Semipelagiani non admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus imperfectos nec ad initium fidei; nec in hoc errabant quod
vellent eam gratiam talem esse, ut ex se efficax non esset.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem, quae est Molinae
and adversariorum, Pelagianam aut Semipelagianam esse, quia gratiae efficacis
ad singulos actus necessariae Catholicam fidem and simul omnem Sancti Augustini
auctoritatem destruit. Atque ita declaratum est in Congregatione Romana de
Auxiliis.



QVINTA PROPOSITIO, fabricata and exhibita.
Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse
aut sanguinem fudisse.
Sensus haereticus. Qui quintae propositioni malign affingi posset, quem tamen
legitime sumpta non habet.

Christus mortuus est tantummodo pro praedestinatis, ita ut ii soli per meritum
mortis Christi veram fidem ac justitiam accipiant.

Haec propositio est haeretica, Calviniana, aut Lutherana, and a Concilio
Tri^entino damnata.

QVINTA PROPOSITIO, ut a nobis intelligitur ac defenditur.

Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus, seu nemine
excepto, mortuum esse, eo sensu ut omnibus nemine excepto, per mortem ejus
oblata sit gratia ad salutem necessaria, quam consequi in nutu arbitrii sit
positum sine gratiae ex se efficacis adjutorio.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc propositionem ad fidem Ecclesiae
pertinere and in S. Augustini doctrina indubitatam esse.

PROPOSITIO QVINTAE contraria, ut ab advesariis defenditur.

Non est Semipelagianum, sed Catholicum, dicere Christum morte sua omnibus
omnino hominibus seu nemine excepto communicasse gratiam proxime necessariam ad
operandum, aut saltem ad incipiendum and ad orandum.

Sustinemus ac demonstrare parati sumus hanc Propositionem, quae est Molinae
and adversariorum, continere doctrinam Concilio Tridentino contrariam, atque
etiam esse Pelagianam aut Semipelagianam, quia gratiae Christi ex se efficacis
ad singulos actus necessitatem destruit. Atque ita declaratum est in
Congregatione Romana de Auxiliis.



Haec sunt Beatissime Pater, ad quorum omnium plenam explanationem,
probationem, confirmationem a Vestra Sanctitate and verbo and scripto audiri
postulavimus, and ad quorum discussionem pergere parati sumus quam brevissime
feret rei gravitas and amplitudo, and quam diligentissime patientur Sanctitatis
Vestrae curae and occupationes. Interea jam videt ex supra positis nullam de
Calvinianis Lutheranisve haeresibus inter nos atque adversarios esse aut fuisse
quaestionem. Si illas ipsi anathematizant, ex animo eas pariter ipsi
anathematizamus semperque anathematizavimus, neque cum de his hodie quaestio
non sit, eorum impugnationem contra nos suscipere possunt nisi ut nos
calumnientur, atque sub illorum pretextu and involucris sensum Catholicum quem
sustinemus, condemnationis periculo exponant, suumque nostro contrarium,
Pelagianum scilicet aut Semipelagianum, and cum eo sexaginta and amplius
nefandos errores ex illo ut ostendemus necessario consequentes, pro fide
Catholica obtrudant. Iterum atque iterum, Beatissime Pater, Sanctitati Vestrae
cum omnibus Gall^ae Episcopis, humillime supplicamus ut de re proposita and
controversa claram firmamque proferat sententiam; profitemurque coram ipsa, nos
and universos Sancti Augustini discipulos ac defensoros (qui, ut olim aiebat
Sanctus Prosper ad Ruffinum cap. 2. nunc etiam in ipsis his locis, in quibus
adversus eum querimonia concitatur, propitio Deo ad perceptionem Evangelicae
Apostolicaeque doctrinae saluberrimis ejus disputationibus imbuuntur; and
quotidie in membris corporis Christi in quantum ea ipse multiplicat dilatantur)
pro indubitata tanti Doctoris atque adeo Ecclesiae doctrina praedictas
propositiones ut a nobis superius expositae sunt, perpetuo defensuros, quandiu
de illis express ut supra expositae sunt, intellectis prolatum non erit (quod
a Sanctitate Vestra postulamus) solenne definitivumque judicium, quo nobis
aperte constet eas in sensu quem asserimus Catholicum, esse damnatas.

Quod quidem nunquam fore Deo adjuvante confidimus; ut vel ex eo conjicere
licet, quod jam pridem omnium sermonibus percrebuerit, Vestram Sanctitatem ita
sibi proposuisse de praedictis propositionibus agere ut ante omnia statuerit
suo loco stare and illibatam servari debere Sancti Augustini auctoritatem,
cujus doctrinae potissima pars and quasi summa est gratia ex se efficax, cum
qua praedictae propositiones inviolabili insolubilique nexu conjunctae sunt.
Quemadmodum videre, est in ipso limine scripti sequentis, in quo ejusdem
gratiae ex se efficacis ad singulos actus necessitas solidissimis
apertissimisque demonstrationibus comprobatur.

Quae omnia Sanctitatis Vestrae correctioni ac judicio subjicimus. Subscriptum
Romae die Lunae 19 Maii anno 1653. Sic subscriptum. Natalis de la Lane Doctor
Facultatis Parisiensis, Abbas B. M. de Valle Crescente. Tussanus Desmares
Presbyter Congregationis Oratorii Domini Jesu. Ludovicus de Saint-Amour, in
sacra Facultate Parisiensi Doctor ac Socius Sorbonicus. Nicolaus Manessier, in
sacra Facultare Parisiensi Doctor ac Socius Sorbonicus. Ludovicus Angran,
ejusdem sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Licentiatus ac insignis Ecclesiae
Trecensis Canonicus.


A COMPENDIOUS DISTINCTION of the Five Propositions touching Grace; Presented
to the Pope by the Parisian Doctors defenders of S. Augustine, and clearly
showing in three Columes the several senses whereof the said Propositions are
capable, and the Sentiments of the Calvinists and Lutherans, of the Pelagians
and Molinists, of S. Augustine and his Disciples; MDCLIII.
To our most H. F. Pope Innocent. X
MOST HOLY FATHER,
THe Bishops of France, whose wishes and expectation Your Holiness professes
an intent to satisfy, beseech you to pass a judgment upon the Five
controverted Propositions, which may suffice both to clear and confirm the
Truth, extinguish differences, and restore peace in the Church. These Prelates
supplicate Your Holiness therefore to make an express decision only upon the
things in contest between our Adversaries and us, and not upon such whereof
there is no dispute, question or difficulty. The same desire is manifestly set
forth in sundry Letters written by all the abovesaid Bishops to Your Holiness.
Wherefore it is the chief duty of our Commission to lay before your eyes what
things are disputed on either side, to the end you may have perfect cognizance
of the present Controversy. It is certain that the Contest at this day in the
Church touching the Five Propositions, is not in regard of a remote and evil
sense which may be put upon them, and is rejected by us, but in regard of a
legitimate sense, and which we defend, and of the Catholic Faith, which is
found contained therein. It Is of the Propositions taken thus in the legitimate
and Catholic sense, that we expect a clear and decisive Judgment.

To the end therefore that in all this important Affair there may be no place
for equivocation, or calumny, or the artifices of evil minds, or any doubts; We
first lay open to Your Holiness as briefly and clearly as may be, the true and
legitimate senses of those Propositions which we maintain, and which must be
impugned by our Adversaries, if they will act against us. On one side we
represent the errors contrary to the Orthodox senses of the Propositions, which
are defended by our Adversaries; and on the other side, the Heresies in like
manner contrary to those Catholic interpretations, which our Adversaries boast
that they impugn, whilst they impugn the Propositions without distinction.
Whence Your Holiness may behold, that we decline neither to the right hand nor
to the left, but solely adhere to the doctrine of the Church, and by
consequence equally detest on one side the Heresies and Errors of the
Calvinists and their followers; and on the other the Heresies and Errors of the
Pelagians, and those who have succeeded them.

We openly and sincerely declare to Your Holiness our judgment touching the
opinions of those two Sects in reference to the Five Propositions, and nakedly
represent our own belief which is placed in the middle between the said
Erroneous opinions, Reserving to their due time and order the proofs of what we
assert, which shall be, as we believe invincible; we pretend nothing further at
present, then to give a clear and compendious draught of the things upon which
all the Bishops of France expect and demand the H. See's judgment, and to show
how Catholic our sentiments are.

THE FIRST PROPOSITION, maliciously pulled out of its place and exposed to
Censure.
Some of God's Commandments are impossible to just men, even when they are
willing and endeavor (to perform the same) according to the present strength
which they have. And the Grace which should render the same possible to them,
is wanting to them.
The Heretical sense, which may be maliciously fastened upon this Proposition;
which yet it has not, when taken as it ought to be.

Gods Commandments are impossible to all the just, whatever will they have, and
whatever endeavors they use, even although they are induced with all the
strength that the greatest and most effectual Grace affords. Also they always
during their lives want such Grace whereby they might accomplish without
sinning, so much as one of God's Commandments.

This proposition is heretical, Calvinistical, and Lutheran; and has been
condemned by the Council of Trent.

THE FIRST PROPSITION, in the sense wherein we understand and defend it.

Some Commandments of God are impossible to some just persons, who will and
endeavor weakly and imperfectly according to the extent of strength that they
have in themselves, which is small and weak. That is to say, being destitute of
the effectual aid which is necessary to the full willing and acting, these
Commandments are impossible to them according to this next and complete
possibility, the privation whereof puts them in a state of not being able
effectively to perform these Commandments. And they want the Effectual Grace,
which is needful that those Commandments may become proximately and totally
possible to them. Or, they are unprovided of that special assistance, without
which a justified man, as the Council of Trent says, cannot persevere in the
righteousness which he has received, that is, in the observation of God's
Commandments.

We maintain, and are ready to demonstrate, that this Proposition is consonant
to the Faith of the Church, indubitable in S. Augustin's doctrine, and defined
by the Council of Trent.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the first, as it is defended by our Adversaries.

All Gods Commandments are always possible to the just through Grace which is
subject to their Free Will, when they are willing and endeavor according to
their present strength. And Grace proximately necessary to render the
Commandments possible, is never wanting to them to act, or at least to pray.

We maintain, and are ready to demonstrate, that this Proposition which belongs
to Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it
destroys the necessity of Grace effectual by it self to all good works. And so
it was declared in the Congregation de Auxiliis held at Rome under Clement
VIII. and Paulo V.



THE SECOND PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
In the state of corrupted Nature, Internal Grace is never resisted.
THE HERETICAL SENSE, which may be maliciously put upon this second
Proposition; which nevertheless it' has not, when taken as it ought to be.

In the state of corrupted nature, Internal and Effectual Grace is never
resisted, because Man's Will is purely passive in respect of such Effectual
Grace, and being as a thing inanimate acts nothing at all, it neither
cooperates nor consents freely.

This Proposition is Heretical, Calvinistical Lutheran, and condemned by the
Council of Trent.

Another Erroneous sense, which the Proposition may receive.

In the state of corrupted Nature, Internal Grace taken for a mere illumination
of the Understanding, and a persuasion of the Will, is never resisted.

This proposition is false and erroneous, because such Grace is not the true
Grace of Jesus Christ, as S. Augustine teaches in his Book de Gratia Christi.

Another Erroneous sense, which may be imputed to the same proposition.

In the state of corrupted Nature, the internal Grace of Jesus Christ, whilst
it is yet weak, and gives only -- is never resisted as to the effect whereunto
it disposes.

This proposition is false and erroneous.

THE SECOND PROPOSITION, as it is understood and defended by us.

The Grace of Jesus Christ proximately necessary to every act of piety, is
never resisted. That is to say, it is never frustrated of the effect, for which
it is effectually given by God.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition pertains to
the Faith of the Church, and is indubitable in S. Augustin's Doctrine.

THE PROPOSITION. contrary to the second, defendded by our Adversaries.

The Grace of Jesus Christ which is necessary to every act of piety, whether of
operating, or at least of praying, is sometimes resisted in the state of
corrupted Nature. That is to say, This grace is sometimes frustrated of the
effect for which it was directly given by God.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition, which is
owned by Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it
evacuates the power and efficacy of the Grace of Jesus Christ, which is
necessary to every good action. And so it was declared in the Congregation de
Auxiliis held at Rome.



THE THIRD PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
To merit and demerit in the state of lapsed Nature, it is not requisite that
there be in Man a freedom from Necessity, but a freedom from constraint (or
coaction) is sufficient.
The Heretical sense, which may maliciously be attributed to this third
Proposition, which nevertheless taken in a right manner it has not.

To merit and demerit in the state of corrupted Nature, there is not required
in man a freedom from Necessity natural, such as is found even in indeliberate
motions; but it is sufficient that be be only free from coaction.

This proposition is Heretical, Calvinistical, and Lutheran.

THE THIRD PROPOSITION, as understood and defended by us.

To merit and demerit in the state of corrupted Nature, there is not required
in man a freedom from the Necessity of Infallibility; but it is sufficient that
he have a liberty from coaction accompanied with the judgment and exercise of
Reason, if the essence of liberty and merit be precisely considered. Although
in regard of the state wherein we are in this life, our soul has always such
an indifference, whereby the will can, even when it is guided and governed by
Grace proximately necessary, and effectual by it self, not will, yet it is in
such sort that it never wills not when it is actually assisted by such Grace.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition is Catholic
and taught be S. Augustine.

THE PROPOSITION, contrary to the third, and defended by our Adversaries.

To merit and demerit in the state of corrupted Nature, there is required in
Man a freedom from the necessity of infallibility, or it is necessary that he
have a proximate indifference to act or not act, where be the Will being
furnished with all things prerequisity to act or not act, inclines sometimes to
one side, sometimes to the other as it pleases.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate that this proposition which is taught
by Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian, because it destroys the power of
that Grace effectual by it self, which is necessary to every act of piety. It
has also been declared in the Congregation de Auxiliis.



THE FOVRTH PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
The semipelagians admitted the necessity of internal preventing Grace to all
good works, even to the beginning of Faith. And they were Heretics in this,
that they held that Grace to be such as the Will of man might either resist, or
obey.
The heretical sense; which may maliciously be put upon the fourth proposition,
although taken in a right manner it admits not the same.

The preventing grace of Jesus Christ is such, that Man's Free Will, being moved
and excited by it, cannot resist the same if it would do so. To affirm
otherwise, is Semipelagian.

This proposition is heretical, Calvinistical or Lutheran, and has been
condemned by the Council of Trent.

THE FOURTH PROPOSITION, as by us understood and defended.

The Semipelgians admitted the necessity of preventing and internal grace to
begin all actions, even to the beginning of Faith; and their sentiments were
heretical in this respect, that they held that Grace to be such as the Will
might obey or reject at pleasure, that is to say, that the said Grace is not
Effectual.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition is true as to
the former part, which concerns matter of Fact; and that as to the latter, it
pertains to the faith of the Church, and is indubitable in the doctrine of
Saint Augustine.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the fourth, and defended by our Adversaries.

The Semipelagians did not admit the necessity of internal preventing Grace to
begin every action, nor yer to the beginning of Faith; and they did not err in
holding that Grace to be such, as that it was not Effectual by it self.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition which it held
by Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it
destroys the Catholic belief of Effectual Grace necessary to every good work,
and likewise all S. Augustin's authority. And so it has been declared in the
Congregations de Auxiliis held at Rome.



THE FIFTH PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
It Is a Semipelagian Error to affirm, that Jesus Christ died, or shed his blood
for all men, without exception of any one.
The heretical sense, which may be maliciously put upon this fifth proposition,
which yet it has not, if it be taken as it ought to be.

Jesus Christ died only for the predestinate, so that they alone receive true
Faith and Righteousness by the merit of Christ's death.

This proposition is Heretical, Calvinistical or Lutheran, and has been
condemned by the Council of Trent.

THE FIFTH PROPOSITION, as understood and defended by us.

It Is a Semipelagian error, to say, that Christ died for all men in particular,
none excepted, so that by his death saving Grace is offered to all, none
excepted; and that it depends on the motion and power of the Will to obtain
salvation by such a general Grace without the help of any other grace effectual
by it self.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition pertains to
the faith of the Church, and is indubitable in the doctrine of S. Augustine.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the fifth, and defended by our Adversaries.

It Is not an error of the Semipelagians, but a Catholic Proposition, to say,
that Jesus Christ has by his death communicated to all men in particular, none
excepted, the Grace proximately and precisely necessary to work, or at least to
begin salvation and to pray.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition which is
taught by Molina and our Adversaries, contains a doctrine contrary to the
Council of Trent, and likewise is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it
destroys the necessity of Grace effectual by itself to every good work. And it
has been declared thus in the Roman Congregations de Auxiliis.



These, M. H. F. are the Propositions, for the full explication, proof and
confirmation whereof we have demanded of Your Holiness to be heard both viva
voce and by Writing. These are the points of Doctrine, for the discussion of
which we are ready to labor, and plead with as much brevity as the importance
and amplitude of the matter, and with as much diligence as the cares and
affairs of Your Holiness will permit. In the mean time Your Holiness by what
we have here set forth, that there neither is, nor ever was any Contest between
us and our Adversaries touching the heresies of Calvin and Luther. If they
anathematize them, we do, and have always done the same; and the question not
being now about those heresies, they cannot undertake to impugn the same by
acting against us, unless it be to calumniate us; to expose the Catholic
sense maintained by us to the danger of condemnation under pretext and color
of these Errors; to substitute in place of the Catholic Faith their Pelagian
or Semipelagian sentiments which are contrary to ours; and lastly, to make
current above sixty detestable Errors which we shall show follow by necessary
consequence from the doctrine which they would establish.

M. H. F. We still earnestly reiterate to Your Holiness the most humble
request formerly made bv us with all the Bishops of France, that you will pass
a clear and decisive sentence upon the matter now in controversy. And we
protest before your Holiness that we, and all the disciples and defenders of
S. Augustine (who, as S. Prosper sometimes writ to Ruffinus, In the several
Countries where complaints and accusations are raised against that H. Father,
receive by Gods assistance the Evangelical and Apostolical doctrine, being
filled with his holy and wholesome instructions, and grow and spread every day,
according as it pleases our Lord Jesus Christ to multiply them and increase the
members of his body) we all protest, that remaining firm to the undoubted
Doctrine of that great Doctor, which is owned by the Church, we shall always
defend the controverted Propositions in the sense wherein we have explained
them, if in the solemn and definitive judgment (which we demand of Your
Holiness) there be nothing expressly pronounced concernig them in that sense,
whereby it may be openly declared to us, that they are condemned in the sense
which we maintain to be Catholic.

Which we trust, with Gods help shall never come to pass, and we have ground
to hope so, since it is already diffused through the whole world, that Your
Holiness has resolved so to act in reference to these Propositions, that you
have in the first place established as indubitable, that S. Augustin's authority
ought always to have the same esteem it ever had, and to be preserved in its
integrity; and also that the principal part of his doctrine and the sum and
substance of what that Father has taught, consists in the proposition of Grace
effectual by it self, with which the abovesaid Propositions are conjoined and
united by an inviolable and indissoluble bond, as plainly appears by the
following Writing, in which the necessity of such Grace effectual by it self to
every good work is proved by very solid and clear demonstrations.

We submit all these things to Your Holinesse's Correction and Judgment.
Written at Rome, Monday May 19. 1653. Noel de la Lane Doctor of the Faculty of
Paris, etc. Toussaint Des-mares Priest of the Congregation of the Oratory our
Lord Jesus Christ. Louis de Saint Amor Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, etc.
Nicolas Manessier Doctor of the same Faculty. etc. Louis Angran Licenciate of
the same Faculty, etc.


As M. de Valcroissant read this Writing, as soon as he had ended one of the
Propositions, he went to the third of our Writings, which demonstrated the
indissoluble connection of each of them understood our way with Grace Effectual
by it self, and he extended himself more or less in this demonstration
according as the matter required, and it seemed requisite for convincing the
hearers thereof. Although the said demonstration might reasonably have been
included in the foregoing Writing as it was in reading; yet we thought more fit
to make it an Introduction to the Writing of Effectual Grace, that so we might
avoid the blame laid upon us of entering into the examination of that matter
contrary to the Pope's will, and therein justify our selves for so doing;
considering the necessity there was for it, and to show that it was not
possible to judge well of these Propositions till that point were decided.

Now being all that preface was read to the Pope, and the connection of the
Propositions demonstrated in his presence, it seems fitting to insert a
faithful translation thereof in this place.

AN INFORMATION touching Grace Effectual by it self, or predeterminating Grace,
which is necessary to every action.
THE PREFACE. In which the necessity of handling this Doctrine is set forth,
and the connection of the Five Propositions, as understood by us, with the same
briefly manifested.
THere are two principal foundations which comprize the whole Controversy and
Doctrine of Grace; whereof the first is S. Augustin's authority and doctrine
touching the matter of Grace; and the second whereunto all his doctrine is
reduced, is the necessity of Grace Effectual by it self, and predeterminating
to every good action. We have already made good the first of these foundations
in the Writing which we have presented touching S. Augustin's authority, which
is proved by the Tradition of the whole Church. The second is now to be
established, to proceed orderly in this Dispute concerning the contested
Propositions. But lest it should be objected, that we come not to the point in
question, we have thought fit to make some remarks first, to show most clearly
how necessary it is to examine that doctrine before all things.

1. It Is impossible to terminate the great Contest raised among Catholics
touching the matter of Grace, without examining the Opinion which is the
capital principle and original of all difference. Now this Principle consists,
in that there are some who call in doubt and impugn the doctrine of Grace
effectual by it self necessary to every action. All the difference between our
Adversaries and us, as to doctrine, has no other source but this; here it
begins, here it ends; and all the combustions and stirs raised about this
matter come only from this diversity.

We agree in many things; and the first ground of division is, that our
Adversaries ascribe the using of Christ's grace to Free Will, whereas we
attribute it to the efficacy and virtue of the Grace it self. Upon this depend
all the other questions in dispute; and there is now no other considerable
controversy among Divines, saving that some hold Grace effectual by it self
necessary to every action, and others deny it. Wherefore this Point ought first
to be handled, since after it is once judged, there will be no more ground of
dispute; and till it be, none can be removed.

2. Our Adversaries had no other aim in forging these equivocal Propositions,
but covertly to overthrow the doctrine of Grace effectual by it self necessary
to every action, as it is held by S. Augustine; and for a full discovery of
their design, it suffices to consider that there is not any of the Propositions
exposed to Censure, but has a most manifest connection with Effectual Grace,
according as we explicate and defend them. That of all the arguments which they
produce, there is not one whose force consists not in destroying Effectual
grace (if there be such as have really any force): and lastly, that of all the
works which have been published in defense of the Propositions as we understand
them, there is not any whose principal scope is not the defense of the same
Effectual Grace.

3. Moreover, There is so visible and necessary a connection of that Grace with
the Propositions thus understood, that so long as that shall subsist, they will
subsist also, as its destruction would be their ruin: so that we defend not any
of them, but so far forth as it has a necessary connection with Effectual, nor
do our Adversaries impugn any of them but to destroy the same Grace, as for
proof we are now going compendiously to demonstrate.

The Connection of the Five Propositions (as the same are defended by us) with
Grace effectual by it self, succinctly demonstrated.
THE FIRST PROPOSITION, as it is maliciously taken out of its true place, and
presented to Censure
Some of Gods Commandments are impossible to just men, even when they will, and
endeavor according to their present strength; and the Grace which should render
the same possible is wanting to them.
THE FIRST PROPOSITION, in the sense wherein we hold and defend it.

Some of Gods Commandments are impossible to some just men who will and
endeavor weakly and imperfectly according to what strength they have, which is
small and weak; That is to say, being destitute of the effectual aid which is
necessary to will fully and to do; these Commandments are impossible to them
according to that next and complete possibility, the privation whereof puts
them in a state of inability to perform those Commandments effectively. And
they want the Grace whereby it is needful that those Commandments become
proximately and perfectly possible to them: or, they are unprovided of that
special assistance, without which, as the Council of Trent says, A justified
man cannot persevere in the Righteousness which he has received, that is, in
the observation of Gods Commandments.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition pertains to
the faith of the Church, is indubitable in S. Augustin's doctrine, and has
been defined by the Council of Trent.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the first, and defended by our Adversaries.

All Gods Commandments are always possible to the just by the grace which is
subject to Free Will, when they will and labor according to their present
strength. And the Grace which is proximately necessary to render the
Commandments effectively possible, is never wanting to them to act, or at least
to pray.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition taught by
Molina and our Adversaries is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it destroys
the necessity of Grace effectual by it self to all good works. And thus it has
been declared in the Congregation de Auxiliis held at Rome under Clement VIII.
and Paul V.



The Connection of our Proposition with Effectual Grace.
THe Grace of Jesus Christ effectual by it self is necessary to every action of
piety. Therefore the first Proposition is true in the sense wherein we present
and maintain it; because if Grace effectual by it self is necessary to an
action of piety, as a principle requisite before the same be performed, then
when it is present to us, we do the thing for which it is given; and when we do
it not, it is not present to us, otherwise it would not be effectual by it
self; and not only we act with it, but also without it we cannot act
proximately and with all accomplishment necessary to action. For whoever has
not all that which is previously necessary to another thing as a principle,
cannot do that thing proximately and with the utmost accomplishment necessary
to do it. And hence the first Proposition which we have presented and defended,
necessarily follows. For it happens sometimes that some just men being pressed
with a great temptation, make weak and imperfect attempts to perform some
Commandment, and yet perform it not. Therefore in these cases they have not
that great and effectual Grace which is necessary to the performance of it: or
as S. Augustine faith, They have not a Grace so great as to be sufficient for
performing that Commandment; they have not the strength most effectual for
overcoming the temptation, otherwise they would surmount the temptation and
perform the Commandment; and consequently, according to their present strength
they have not that next power, to which nothing is wanting for performing that
Commandment; and they want that great and effectual Grace by which the
Commandment may become possible to them with a next and complete power, to
which nothing is deficient to proceed to action: or, they want that special
help, without which, as the Council of Trent says, He who is justified cannot
persevere in Righteousness, i. e. in the observance of Gods Commandments.

It Is in this sense only that we defend the first Proposition.

On the contrary our Adversaries have an heretical sense in impugning this
Proposition, because they destroy the necessity of Grace effectual by it self
to every action of piety. For they hold, that every just man is always able to
perform any Commandment whatsoever, because he has always grace to perform it
according as it pleases his Will. Now since he does not always perform it, it
follows, that they believe that the Grace which is necessary for performing
it, is not effectual by it self. Which opinion is heretical and contrary to the
true grace of Jesus Christ. Therefore our Adversaries hold an heretical sense
in opposing the first Proposition, that is, they defend in an heretical sense
the Proposition which is contrary to it.

THE SECOND PROPOSITION framed and presented to Censure.
In the state of corrupted Nature, Internal Grace is never resisted.
THE SECOND PROPOSITION. as we understand and defend it.

The Grace of Jesus Christ proximately necessary to every act of piety, is
never resisted, i. e. is never frustrated of the effect for which it is
effectually given by God.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition pertains to
the faith of the Church, and is indubitable in the doctrine of S. Augustine.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the second, and defended by our Adversaries.

The Grace of Jesus Christ which is necessary to every act of piety, whether of
operating, or at least of praying, is sometimes resisted in the state of
corrupted Nature, i. e. This Grace is sometimes frustrated of the Effect for
which it is proximately given by God.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition whish is held
by Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it
destroys the power and efficacy of the grace of Jesus Christ which is
necessary to every good action. And thus it was declared in the Roman
Congregation de Auxiliis.



The Connection of our Proposition with Effectual Grace.
THe Grace which is necessary to every pious action is effectual by it self.
Therefore in the state of corrupted Nature the Grace which is necessary to
every pious action is never resisted; that is, it never fails to do the effect
whereunto it is given by God proximately, either for a weak and imperfect
action of the Will, and it produces the same effectively by it self; or it is
given for a great and perfect action, and produces the same likewise by it
self, otherwise it would not be effectual. For though small graces are
resisted, as to the utmost and perfect action whereunto they dispose, yet they
are never resisted or rejected as to the imperfect action for which they are
given, and ought to operate proximately.

It Is in this sense alone that we defend the second Proposition.

On the contrary our Adversaries hold an heretical sense whilst they impugn
this Proposition, because they destroy the power and efficacy of the Grace of
Jesus Christ necessary to every pious action. For they maintain that in the
state of corrupted Nature, the internal Grace proximately necessary to every
action of piety is sometimes resisted, i. e. it is rejected and deprived of the
effect for which God gives it proximately, because they say, it is not
effectual by it self, but is subject to Free Will, which rejects or submits
thereunto as it lists.

THE THIRD PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
To merit and demerit in the state of lapsed Nature, it is not requisite that
there be in Man a freedom from Necessity of willing or acting, but a freedom
from constraint (or coaction) is sufficient.
THE THIRD PROPOSITION as we understand and defend it.

To merit and demerit in the state of lapsed Nature, there is not requisite in
Man a freedom from the Necessity of Infallibility and necessary certainty; but
it is sufficient that he have a freedom from coaction accompanied with the
judgment and exercise of Reason, if the essence of liberty and merit be
precisely considered. Although by reason of the state wherein we are in this
life, our soul has always such an Indifference, whereby the Will can, even
when it is guided and governed by Grace, proximately necessary and effectual by
it self, not will; yet it is in such sort that it never wills not, when it is
actually assisted by such Grace.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the third, and defended by our Adversaries.

To merit and demerit in the state of corrupted Nature there is required in Man
a freedom from the necessity of Infallibility and necessary certainty. Or it is
necessary that he have a proximate indifference of acting or not acting,
whereby the Will being furnished with all things necessary to act, inclines it
self sometimes to one side, sometimes to the other as it lists.



The Connection of our Proposition with Effectual Grace.
IF Grace necessary to every action be effectual by it self, it by its own
strength predetermines the Will after an indeclinable, insuperable, infallible
and perfectly victorious manner, to do an action of piety. Therefore in all
free and meritorious actions there is found a necessity of infallibility, which
comes from the promotion of Grace, and is a consequence of Grace effectual by
it self; and if this kind of Necessity destroyed Liberty and Merit, it would
follow, that Grace which is given to perform all free and meritorious actions
were not effectual by it self. As for those words: It Is sufficient that he have
a freedom from coaction, they do not signify that there is not an indifference
of power in the merit and demerit of this state; for this would be heretical,
and was never held by any Catholic: and therefore this opinion cannot be
attributed to us without imposture and calumny; but it is to be understood by
these words, that this kind of indifference of power in the state of fallen
Nature, is not that which precisely, essentially and formally makes the act
which tends to a good end, free and meritorious; although this kind of
indifference be always found; -- as the power to sin in the state of fallen
Nature is not the essence of liberty nor part of it; and nevertheless by
reason of the state of this life, it is always found therein as a sequel of
liberty.

It Is in this sense only that we defend the third Proposition.

On the contrary our Adversaries hold an Heretical sense in opposing it,
because they destroy Grace effectual by it self. For they say, it is necessary
to liberty and merit to have this proximate indifference of acting, whereby the
Will having all pre-requisite strength to act, turns it self as it pleases,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another: and consequently they pretend at
liberty from the necessity of Infallibility; which arises from the virtue of
Effectual Grace infallibly predeterminating the Will by its own strength, is
requisite in this state to act freely: whence it follows, that they destroy the
necessity of Grace effectual by it self to every action of piety; and thus they
hold an Heretical opinion whilst they oppose the third Proposition.

THE FOURTH PROPOSITION, framed and exposed to Censure.
The Semipelagians admitted the necessity of internal preventing Grace to all
good works, even to the beginning of Faith. And they were Heretics in that
they held that Grace to be such as the humane Will of man might either resist,
or obey.
THE FOURTH PROPOSITION, as we understand and defended it.

The Semipelgians admitted the necessity of preventing and internal Grace to
begin all actions, even for the beginning of Faith; and their opinion was
heretical, in that they held that Grace to be such as the Will obeys or rejects
as it lists, i. e. that it is not Effectual Grace.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition as to the
first part which concerns matter of Fact, is true; and that as to the second it
pertains to the faith of the Church, and is indubitable in S. Augustin's
doctrine.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the fourth, and defended by our Adversaries.

The Semipelagians admitted not the necessity of internal preventing Grace to
begin every action, nor yer to the beginning of Faith; nor did they err in
holding that Grace to be such as is not Effectual by it self.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition, held by
Molina and our Adversaries, is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it destroys
the belief of Effectual Grace necessary to every good work, and likewise all S.
Augustin's authority. And thus it has been declared in the Congregations de
Auxiliis held at Rome.



The Connection of this Proposition with Effectual Grace.
GRace Effectual by it self necessary to every pious action, is the true
medicinal Grace of Jesus Christ, which is proper to fallen and weak men, to the
end they may will and operate all that belongs to piety. This faith is without
doubt the true Prophetical, Apostolical and Catholic faith, as S. Augustine
says in Chap. 2. de Cor. and Great. Therefore the Error or Heresy of the
Semipelagians consisted, in their denying Grace Effectual by it self to be
necessary to the beginning of faith, and to other imperfect acts of piety.

It Is to be observed that by these words, And they were Heretics in holding
that Grace to be such as Humane will may either resist or obey; nothing else is
meant (as it is expressed in the Proposition which we maintain) saving that the
Semipelagians erred, in holding the Grace necessary to the beginning of faith
and other acts of inchoated piety, to be such, as is not effectual by it self,
or which the Will sometimes resists, sometimes obeys at pleasure.

There is in the fourth Proposition a question of Fact, namely, whether the
Semipelagians admitted an internal Grace subject to Free Will for the beginning
of Faith. We shall show that it is so; but if once it be evident that they
erred, in denying Grace Effectual by it self for the beginning of Faith, that
question of Fact will be of little importance.

It Is in this sense only that we defend the fourth Proposition.

On the contrary, our Adversaries hold an Heretical sense whilst they impugn
this Proposition, because they deny, that the true Grace of Jesus Christ
consists in Grace Effectual by it self necessary to every action. They deny
this to be the Catholic Faith; They pretend that the Semipelagians never erred
in this point; but on the contrary held the Catholic Faith, although they
denied the necessity of Grace Effectual by it self to the beginning of faith
and other imperfect actions of piety. Which is impossible to admit without
overthrowing the belief of the true Grace of Jesus Christ, and destroying S.
Augustin's whole Authority and Doctrine.

THE FIFTH PROPOSITION, offered to Censure.
It Is a Semipelagian Error to say, that Christ died, or shed his blood for all
men, none excepted.
THE FIFTH PROPOSITION, as we understand and defend it.

It Is a Semipelagian error to say, that Christ died for all men in particular,
none excepted, so that Grace necessary to salvation is offered to all, none
excepted, by his death; and that it depends upon the motion and power of the
will to obtain salvation by that general grace, without help of other grace
effectual by it self.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition pertains to
the faith of the Church, and is indubitable in S. Augustin's doctrine.

THE PROPOSITION contrary to the fifth, and defended by our Adversaries.

It Is not an error of the Semipelagians, but a Catholic Proposition, to say,
that Christ by his death communicated to all men in particular, none excepted,
the Grace proximately and precisely necessary to operate, or at least to begin
salvation and to pray.

We maintain and are ready to demonstrate, that this proposition, held by
Molina and our Adversaries, contains a doctrine contrary to the Council of
Trent, and that it is Pelagian or Semipelagian, because it destroys the
necessity of the Grace of Jesus Christ effectual by it self to every good work.
And it has been so declared in the Congregations de Auxiliis.



The Connection of our Proposition with Effectual Grace.
GRace Effectual by it self necessary to every action, is the true Grace of
Jesus Christ, and the Catholic Faith. Therefore it is a Semipelagian error to
say, that Christ died for all men generally, none excepted, in such sense that
grace necessary for Salvation is offered, by the merit of his death to all,
none excepted; and that it is at the disposal of Free Will to receive it without
the help of Grace effectual by it self. Now this, we affirm, cannot be held
without incurring Semipelagianism, because it manifestly infers, that Grace
effectual by it self is not necessary to every pious action.

It Is in this sense alone that we defend the fifth Proposition.

On the contrary our Adversaries hold an Heretical sense whilst they impugn
this Proposition, because they say, that Jesus Christ died for all men
generally; in this sense, that he has communicated to them all, none excepted,
the means necessary for their salvation, either giving them all the Graces
subject to Free Will, as well to begin and to pray, as to act (which is
Pelagian, since this opinion excludes the necessity of Grace Effectual by it
self for all actions of of piety) or at least giving them all the graces
subject to Free Will for the beginning of faith and for prayer, so that every
man who makes use of these graces, obtains when he pleases, and as often as he
lists. Graces effectual for acting, which is Semipelagian, because it excludes
the necessity of Grace Effectual by it self for the beginning of faith, and
other imperfect actions of piety. Moreover, it is contrary to the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. Cap. 3. where we read these very words, Although he died for
all, yet all receive not the benefit of his death, but only they to whom the
merit of his passion is communicated. Which shows, that the true grace of Jesus
Christ, which is the fruit or benefit of his death, is not communicated to all
by the merit of his passion.

Whilst M. de Valcroissant was speaking all that I have related, which took up
about two hours and a half, he twice or thrice took occasion to tell the Pope,
that his Holiness should be much otherwise convinced and enlightened in the
things which we alleged, when they came to be treated more leisurely and
thoroughly before him in the presence of our Adversaries, and that when he saw
them obliged to answer plainly and directly to the things which we should say
against them, then his Holiness would know more evidently then by all our
present Remonstrances, how necessary it was to hear both the one and the other
contradictorily. M. de Valcroissant spoke this according to agreement between
us, to intimate that we had still much more to say; that the presence of our
Adversaries was requisite, and that we yielded to this Audience, only that we
might obtain such a one as we demanded.

He added further, That the Connection which he had most clearly demonstrated of
the Propositions reduced to our sense with the point of Grace Effectual by it
self, evidently showed the necessity of beginning the discussion of this
Affair, by the Examen and proof of the Efficacy of Grace by it self, both
because all the rest depended upon it, and the proof of it served for a general
proof of the Propositions, till we alleged the particular proofs of each of
them.

When the Abbot of Valcroissant had done, F. Des-mares began, and continued the
series of his Discourse, (as we had agreed together) and undertook the proof of
the Efficacy of Grace. His first argument was taken from the prayers of the
Church, and lasted three quarters of an hour. But his vivacity and eloquence so
roused the Hearers; particularly Cardinal Pamphilio, that they showed by their
countenances what delight they took in hearing such excellent things so well
urged and delivered. I cannot forbear to say, that I never heard F. Des-mares
preach better at Paris then he spoke at this time. Which is as much as can be
said to such as have been happy enough to hear some of his Sermons. When he
cited any passages, as, e. g. of Innocent X. he read the same out of our
Writing of Effectual Grace, and then drew so clear and strong arguments from
them in a Scholastic way, that nothing could be imagined more convincing. The
day began to fail him at the end of this Argument, and fearing he should want
light to read his Quotation, he doubted whether he should proceed to the
second; but the Pope and Assembly remaining in great silence, we whispered to
F. Des-mares to proceed, partly out of respect to his Holiness, and partly to
take from our Adversaries the pretext of alleging that we held our peace
because we had no more to say. This second Argument being begun so late, the
Father was obliged to leave his place once or twice, and go to the window to
read some passages out of S. Augustin's book de gratia Christi, and then
returned to his station, and drew his consequences and inductions from the
same. But at length it became so dark that the Father could read no longer at
the window, and therefore intimated his want thereof, that they might cause a
light to be brought if they would have him to continue. In stead of which, M.
Albizzi said, it was sufficient, and the Father stopped.

His whole Discourse as he pronounced it before the Pope in pure Latin, I have
thought fit to insert in a faithful Translation.

A Discourse pronounced before the Pope by F. Des-mares.
MOST HOLY FATHER,
I Could wish that the worthy Doctor who has spoken before me in Your
Holiness's presence, had made an end of handling the point of Christ's
Effectual and victorious Grace, with the same strength of judgment and
eloquence as he began to explicate it. But since it would have been too
laborious to him, I shall continue where he ended (having first most humbly
asked Your Holinesse's permission) and endeavor to acquit my self of the
Obligation incumbent upon me, to prove that it is a Catholic and invincible
Truth, that Grace Effectual by it self is absolutely necessary to all actions
of piety. For what has been newly represented to Your Holiness, showing
clearly that the Necessity of that Grace and our sense of the Propositions are
so perfectly united, that the one cannot be granted or denied, without granting
or denying the other; Where should I begin, M. H. F. and whereunto ought all my
endeavors to tend, but to prove by invincible arguments the necessity of such
Effectual Grace for all actions of piety; since this Necessity being once
granted and established; the whole Controversy which agitates and troubles the
Church touching the Five Propositions; will forthwith perfectly cease? and Your
Holiness will clearly see, that the whole question being reduced to that
single point; If the Effectual Grace which we hold be necessary, we shall
become victorious; and if it be not, we shall be overcome.

The probation of this Necessity is reduced chiefly to four Heads:

The first contains sixteen proofs or arguments of S. Augustine, which Fathers
authority I principally use, because he is the first who by many excellent
works proved against the Pelagians with no less strength then success, the
Necessity of Effectual Grace.

The second Head contains all the Decrees of Popes upon this matter, the
definitions of Councils, and the opinions of all Fathers and Divines who have
been in greatest reputation from S. Augustin's days to the present. Of all
which; to avoid being tedious to Your Holiness, I shall treat succinctly.

The third Head contains the Doctrine which ought to be held, to avoid falling
into the errors of the Pelagians and Semipelagians, according to the judgments
which were always passed thereupon in the Congregation de Auxiliis held at
Rome.

And the fourth contains sixty signal Errors or Heresies, drawn by necessary
consequence from the doctrine contrary to that of S. Augustine, and from the
grace held by the Molinists; which totally subvert the principal foundations of
Christian Faith.

But to eschew all equivocations and ambiguities, I conceive it necessary to
represent briefly to Your Holiness what is to be understood by the words,
Grace Effectual by it self, and by the sufficient Grace of the Molinists.

By Grace Effectual by it self, we understand a Grace which by its internal
strength and virtue, and (to use the Apostles words) by its Energy, not only
makes a man able if he will, but makes him most certainly and invincibly to
will. Now this strength and virtue of Grace is nothing else, (according as S.
Augustine shows and teaches in many places against the Pelagians) but a certain
celestial sweetness and delectation of love, or an infusion of charity into
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, causing us to perform with a holy love the good,
which we know.

For as our own experience teaches us as well as S. Augustine, that which
hinders us from doing an action of piety, is either our not knowing good, or
not being affected with and delighted in it, at least not so much as we ought.
So that to accomplish a pious action, it is requisite that what is hid from us
be discovered to us, and what does not please us be made agreeable to us.

The first is effected by the Law and instructions, which dispel the darkness
of our ignorance; Lib. de Great. Christi.
and the second by Grace which cures our weakness, or, to speak better, both
the one and the other are given by Grace, which for this reason S. Augustine
terms an Aid added to Nature, and to instruction by the inspiration of a most
pure and fervent Charity.

Thus, when Ged will have us love and do some good work, what does he in us? He
inspires into our heart (says S. Augustine) an ardor of love and charity, the
pleasure whereof surpasses the delight of sin, and its Celestial sweetness
causes that what he commands us, pleases us more then what withdrawes us from
obeying him. And it is called Effectual Grace, inasmuch as the delight and
spiritual allurement wherewith it is accompanied surpassing the pleasures of
the flesh and the World, infallibly and invincibly causes us to will, because,
In Ep. ad Gal.
says S. Augustine, It Is impossible for us not to act according to that which
pleases us most.

Your Holiness may judge by what I have newly said, how excellent, clear and
true this way of S. Augustin's reasoning is, since among all the advantages
which make truth esteemed, the principal is, that it is no sooner explicated
then acknowledged, and needs no other proof but a plain and naked Exposition.

On the contrary, They who maintain the Indifferent and Molinistical Grace,
say, It Is a certain illumination of the Understanding, and a pious motion in
the Will, indeliberate and not free, by means whereof a man may will and do
some good; but Effectual willing depends upon his Free Will, which according as
it lists sometimes wills, and sometimes wills not, turning now one way and
anon anothet. Thus according to their sentiments, this kind of Grace never
produces Effectually by it self the free consent of the Will, but is termed
Effectual or ineffectual by a certain external denomination, according as it
pleases Man's Will to use, or not use it. Whence it sufficiently appears that
the Question between us, is, Whether Grace rules over the will, or the will
over Grace: whether Grace subdue Free Will to it self, or Free Will Grace. Now
we affirm, that Grace is victorious over Free Will, and is necessary to every
pious action; to prove which, we draw our first Argument from the prayers of
the Church, as S. Augustine always did. And truly M. H. F. it cannot be but an
admirable Providence of God, that the first day of Rogations, in which the
Church offers public prayers to God for obtaining his Grace, is the day
whereon we begin to prove the necessity of the same Grace by those very prayers
which the Church uses to obtain it, they being not only a powerful means for
obtaining, but also a most clear proof for evincing the same. Now the Argument
is this.

The Grace which the Church begs of God for all actions of piety, is simply and
absolutely necessary for performing the same. But Grace Effectual by it self,
is that which the Church begs of God for every action of piety. Therefore Grace
Effectual by it self, is simply and absolutely necessary to the doing of them.

The Major of this Argument cannot be denied without wounding the Faith. For
one of these three things must be said: Either, that the Grace which the Church
begs for all actions of Piety, is no ways necessary toward the doing of them;
or, that it is only necessary for their more easy and certain performance; or
lastly, that it is absolutely necessary, so that no man can do good without it.
He that should affirm the first, mocks God, as S. Augustine says, By asking of
him what he has no need of. For what is more ridiculous, then to pray for that
to be granted to us which is in our own power? He that maintains the second,
falls into Pelagianism, For no other reason made Pelagius pass for an heretic
in the present Question, but that he affirmed, That Men pray for the grace of
God through Jesus Christ, and God gives it to them only that they may the more
easily do that by Grace which they are able to do by their own Free Will.
Whereupon S. Augustine tells Pelagius, Blot out the Word, more easily, and your
sense will be Catholic. It remains therefore that the third be granted, which
is, That the grace which the Church desires of God for all sort of pious
actions, is absolutely necessary toward the performance of the same.

Now to prove the Minor (in which lies all the difficulty and all the strength
of my Argument) namely, But Grace Effectual by it self is that which the Church
begs for all pious actions: I prove it thus. We do not only pray for a Grace
which gives the power to do well, but for a Grace which besides giving that
power, causes also by its effectual virtue that the action is accomplished, and
that in every pious action; Or, to speak better, we pray to God to give us the
very will and the very action; as for example, To give us faith it self,
repentance, continence, perseverance and other Gifts belonging to piety and
salvation. For see how S. Augustine speaks to Vitalis, who denied that God works
all these things in us; Turn all your disputes against the prayers of the
Church; and when you hear the Priest at the Altar exhort the people of God to
pray for unbelievers that he would convert them to the faith; for the
Catechumeni, that he would inspire into them the desire of regeneration; and
for the faithful, that they may persevere as they have begun: then scoff at so
holy an exhortation, and say, that for your part, you do not do that whereunto
he exhorts you, that you do not pray God to make the Infidels believers,
because you conceive the coversion of Infidels is not a benefit of God's mercy,
but an effect of man's will.

Now what is this Perseverance which we ask of God (that I may not insist upon
the other graces which we receive from him, or rather that we may judge of them
by this) See how S. Augustine explicates it in the book De Cor. and Great. cap.
12. The Saints who are predestined to the kingdom of God by Grace, do not
only receive that help of perseverance (such as that which was given to Adam)
but that which they receive is such, that perseverance it self is given to
them, so that they not only could not persevere without that help, but with
that help they cannot but persevere.

Now what S. Augustine speaks of Perseverance, it is manifest that he everywhere
speaks the same of Faith, Repentance and Continence: Whence this Argument may
be formed, In the same manner that the Church prays to God for Perseverance,
it prays also for Faith, Repentance, etc. But when the Church prays for
Perseverance, it prays for the assistance of Effectual Grace, without which we
cannot persevere, and with which we cannot but persevere. Therefore, when it
prays for Faith, Repentance, etc. it prays for the assistance of Effectual
Grace, without which we can neither be Believers, nor Penitent, etc, and with
which we cannot but be so.

Pope Celestine in his Letter to the French Bishops, confirms the same thing so
clearly, that the whole eleventh Chapter, shows by the prayers mentioned in it,
what is the faith of the whole Church touching the true and Effectual Grace of
God. His words are these: Besides the inviolable Decrees of the most Holy
Apostolic See, by which those most Holy Fathers rejected this detestable
Innovation, (whose source is Pride) have taught us, that we ought to refer to
the grace of Jesus Christ, both the beginning of a right will in Man, and his
increasing in holy life, and his perseverance to the end: Let us consider also
the solemn prayers made by the Priests, which having been left us by
Apostolical Tradition, are uniformly celebrated in the whole Catholic Church
throughout the World, to the end that the form of our prayers may be the rule
of our faith. For Bishops acting as Ambassadors to God in the name of the
faithful committed to their charge, plead the cause of mankind in his divine
presence, and all the Church accompanying their words with sighs and tears
prays to God with them to give faith to Infidels; to deliver Idolaters from the
impiety of their Errors; to make known his Truth to the Jews by removing the
vail which is upon their hearts; to enlighten the minds of Heretics, by
causing them to embrace the Catholic faith; to diffuse a spirit of charity
into the breasts of Schismatics; to grant repentance to such as are fallen,
and to open to the Catechumeni the door of the mercy of Heaven in the holy
regeneration of the Sacrament of Baptism. And the effects show that it is not in
vain, and only for form that we beg all these things of God, since he
vouchsafes by his goodness to draw many persons out of all kind of errors and
wanderings, to deliver them out of the power of darkness, and bring them into
the kingdom of his beloved Son; and thus to change those into vessels of mercy
who were at first vessels of his wrath. Which the Church in such sort
acknowledges to be wholly God's work, that it does not fail to give him thanks
for it, and offer to him a song of praises, confessing him the author thereof,
and that it is he that enlightened the Infidels, and converted the sinners.

But M. H. F. This will appear more clearly, by considering the very
expressions of the prayers which the Church offers to God throughout all the
World by perpetual custom, in which it prays not only for the power to act,
but also for the will and action it self. In this manner it speaks on the sixth
Sunday after Pentecost; God of all power and might, who art the only author of
all true good, graffe in our hearts the love of thy H. Name, cause us to grow
more and more in religious piety, to the end that thy self cherishing the seeds
of virtue which thou have planted in us, the same may be preserved by the pious
and faithful care which thou shall cause us to have thereof. And on the eighth
Sunday; Grant, Lord, by thy mercy, that thy Spirit may inspire holy thoughts
into us, and cause us to produce holy actions, that we who cannot live without
thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy Will. And on the twelfth
Sunday; Almighty and merciful God, through whose grace alone it comes that thy
faithful people do unto thee true and laudable service, be pleased so to uphold
ue, that without falling through our weakness we may constantly run toward
those good things which thou have promised. And on the sixteenth Sunday; Lord,
we pray thee, that thy grace may always prevent and follow us; and mako us
continually to be given to all good works. And on the Eve of Pentecost; Grant,
Lord, that we may be able to subdue our depraved will, and accomplish in all
things the Righteousness of thy holy Commandments. And in the secret Orison of
the Mass on the fourteenth Sunday; Lord, convert and draw unto thee our
rebellious wills.

Nothing can more clearly evince, that the Grace which moves our rebellious
will to return unto God is not subject to Free Will, or of such a nature as
that it sometimes fails of its effect through the resistance of the will. But
what motion is that whereby the Church prays that it may be turned to God?
Certainly, it is not such an inconsiderate and blind motion, as that wherewith
an insensible Instrument is moved, but it is that motion of divine Love, and
that bond of most sweet and heavenly charity, by which God pulls and draws to
himself him whom he pleases to render virtuous. In which respect there is no
fear of our liberty being violated by that attraction and motion how victorious
soever it may be. For being nothing is done in us more freely then that which
is done by Love (according to that saying of S. Augustine, He who does any thing
willingly, always does it freely;) How can it ever happen that Liberty should
be destroyed by the cause which produces it in its whole plenitude? But I
return to the prayers of the Church.

Now the Church speaks thus in the secret Orison which it makes to God for the
gift of tears; Cause us to shed tears of compunction for the hardness of our
hearts, to the end we may bewail our sins. And in the Post-Communion, Lord,
through thy goodness infuse into our hearts the grace of thy Holy Spirit,
which may enable us to blot out the stains of our sins by sighs and tears.

Moreover, The Church implores the gift of Charity; O God which can cause
things to work together for the good of those that love thee, stir up in our
hearts an ardent sense of thy love, that no temptation may be able to alter the
holy desires which thou have inspired into ut by thy goodness. And on H.
Friday; Let us pray also for the Catechumeni, that the Lord our God may open
the ears of their hearts. And a Little after, Let us pray also for the
perfidious Jews, that the Lord our God may remove the vail which lies upon
their hearts. And in the Orison following; Hear the prayers which we offer unto
thee, to take away the blindness of that people, that knowing Jesus Christ the
light of thy Truth, they may come out of their darkness. And in the next; Let
us pray also for the Heathen, that the Almighty God may root out the iniquity
which is in their hearts. And on Holy Saturday after the first Prophecy, Grant
that our hearts and minds may remain steadfast against the allurements of sin.
And after the tenth Prophecy; Give us both to be willing, and to be able to
perform that which thou command us. And in the Orison which is said at the
Altar, taken out of S. Basil's Liturgy, of which almost the whole Eastern
Church makes use, as Petrus Diaconus witnesses in the eighth Chapter of his
Treatise De Incarnatione and Gratia; Lord, give us virtue, and enable us to
keep it. Cause that the wicked may become good, and continue the good in their
goodness. For thou art able to do all things, and none can withstand thee. Thou
savest when it pleases thee, and no man resists thy Will.

This made S. Augustine say in cap. 7. De Praedest. Sanctorum; Let not the
Church expect long Disputes from us, but consider the prayers which she offers
daily to God; she prays to him that the incredulous may believe; therefore
it is God that converts them to the Faith, She prays that they who believe may
persevere, and consequently it is God that gives them perseverance to the end of
their lives. And he concludes in these words: What man having a sound and
vigilant Faith, can listen to humane Reasonings against what is taught him by
this loud Trumpet of Truth?

Many other like prayers there are made by Saints, and dispersed everywhere in
the Holy Scriptures; such as this; Create a new heart in me, O God. And this;
God open your heart to understand his holy Law, and make you walk according to
his Commandments. And this other; God give you all such hearts that you may
serve him, and perform his will with affection and zeal. And this other of S.
Paul; God incline you to every good thing, by working in you that which is
well-pleasing to himself. And we beseech him, not only that you may not do
evil, but that you may do good.

From all which passages this Argument may be formed; He who prays to God for
all the things abovementioned, namely, to graffe his love in our hearts, to
reduce our rebellious will to himself by his goodness, to give us the will and
the power to perform what he commands, to create a new heart in us, to make
us walk in the way of his Commandments, to take out of us the heart of stone
which hinders us from performing thereof, and to give us a heart of flesh which
may cause us to perform the same, to cause that no temptations may be able to
alter the holy desires which he inspires into us, and not only that we may not
do evil, but do good; He, I say, who prays for all these things, does not pray
for a sufficient Grace whereby we may be able if we will, which leaves it at
the disposal of our Free Will, to will or not will: but he asks an effectual
and victorious grace, which causes us to will invincibly, and as far as is
needful to perform that which we will. But the Church asks all these things of
God in its ordinary prayers. Therefore, etc.

On the contrary it cannot be said, that the Church ever thought of praying to
God for such Grace as the Molinists fancy. For supposing that God has given a
just man the Grace to persevere, but such a Grace as does not make him
persevere, though he might persevere; can any one be so senseless as to say,
that such Grace is the Grace of perseverance which the Church asks of God in
its prayers, and whereof the Apostle says, We pray God that you do not evil,
but that on the contrary you may do good?

Hence therefore we may argue against them in this manner; The Grace which the
Church never asks of God, is not the true grace of Jesus Christ necessary and
sufficient to every action of piety, Now the sufficient Grace of the Molinists,
by which most frequently we neither will nor do good, can neither be that Grace
which the Church implores of God. Therefore this kind of grace is not the true
Grace of Jesus Christ necessary and sufficient to every action of piety; but a
false, fictitious, and illegitimate grace.

Wherefore, M. H. F. If this Grace be ever acknowledged to be the true Grace of
Jesus Christ, all the prayers of the Church must be changed; those holy prayers
which having been left to it by the Apostle, are repeated every day in the same
manner upon Altars consecrated to God over all the World. For God, according to
the opinion of Molina and his Disciples, giving us by his grace to be able if
we will, or rather ability to will, and leaving it to our own Free Will to
will, it is evident that we should have nothing to ask further of God, and that
no other Grace is to be expected from him.

Whence every Christian will for the future be obliged to speak to God in this
manner; Lord, give me a Grace whereby I may will that which thou command me.
For as for to will and to do it, that I ask not of thee, because it depends
upon my self. Leave that to my Free Will; let not the power and efficacy of thy
celestial Grace extend further; for then the liberty of my will would be
violated. I desire a grace which may give me a possibility and the progress of
that possibility, which may invite me, call me, and solicit me to good; but I
desire not such a grace as should give me the affection of the will and the
effect of cooperation. I desire not such grace as should determine me to will,
apply me to action, lead me to act by its invincible force, and operate in me
both to will and to do. On the contrary, I would have a grace which I may
apply, or not apply according as I please.

Good God' Can any Christian endure to hear such language as this? What is more
unworthy of the School of Jesus Christ, more remote from all sort of piety, and
more insupportable to the ears of the faithful, then this manner of praying;
since sinners would never be converted to God, if they waited till they had the
will to be converted, and if by the omnipotence of his grace he did not work in
their hearts that good will and that conversion? Moreover, the Church does not
beg for them a grace whereby they may be converted if they will, but a Grace
which may make them willing, which may soften their hardness, and take away
their heart of stone to give them one of flesh. We pray, says S. Augustine, not
only for those wbo are unwilling, hut also for those who resist and oppose.
What do we ask then, but that they may be so changed as to will that which they
were unwilling to, to approve that which they disapproved, and to love that
which they withstood? Because, as the Eastern Church speaks, He saves when it
pleases him, and none resists his will. Because, as S. Augustine says, Lib. de
Cor. and Great. cap. 14. He has an omnipotent power to lead the hearts of men
whether he pleases; and because as he says in another place, Who is he that
can resist God to hinder him from doing what pleases him?

After so many proofs, M. H. F. who sees not that this manner of praying
(consecrated by the universal consent of the Church, and confirmed by the
authentic testimony of S. Augustine) can in no wise consist with the doctrine
of Molina and his indifferent Grace? Whatever his Partisans can say or do, and
whatever subtilties thy may have recourse to, they will never avoid the just
reproach of having endeavored to overthrow all the prayers of the Church.
Whereof the reason is evident; The Church asks nothing of God but what he does
effect. Now by their principles, God operates nothing in us but the possibility
of willng and acting, and the increasing of that possibility. But according to
the same principles of theirs, God operates not in us the very being willing,
the very determination and application of the will to will, faith it self,
repentance and the effect of love toward God, inasmuch as all these are other
things then power. For accordding to them God works not willingness in us, but
so far as he gives the power, and sollicites this power in such sort that we
perform all these things by using, as seems good to us, the grace which is once
given us. Whence it clearly follows that they wholly destroy the Churches
prayers, whereby she asks of God not only the Faculty, and the power of willing
and doing good; but besides this, she precisely asks of him the will to do it,
and the action it self which is the effect thereof.

Will the Molinists say, that besides this grace of possibility we have need of
some supernatural concourse, by which God acting with us, operates all actions
of piety; and that it is this singular grace which the Church prays for, when
she demands power and willingness to accomplish what God commands us? But
being that according to their opinion this concourse, how supernatural soever
it may be, is wholly in our own power by means of that sufficient grace
abovementioned, just as natural concourse is in our own power in using our
natural strength, which has all that is necessary to it to render us capable
of doing good; What can be more extravagant, as S. Augustine speaks, that to
pray that we may be caused to do that which we have already pawer to do, and to
ask for that to be given us which we possess already. This concourse therefore
is not the grace which the Apostle so highly esteems, and which the Church so
importunately implores in its prayers. Which may be invincibly proved by this
one Argument: That grace, which by the means of sufficient grace, is entirely
in our own power, so that we may, as we list, use or not use it, and and which
can never be withheld from us by God; is not the Grace which the Church
implores, when she prays God to take away this heart of stone and give us one
of flesh in its stead; and to cause that we may will that which we will not,
consent to what we reject, and love what we formerly opposed. But this
concourse of the Molinists, how supernatural soever it may be, is such as may
be made use of or not, at pleasure. Therefore it cannot be taken for the Grace
so ardently prayed for by the Church.

Perhaps our Adversaries will say, That that which the Church asks of God in
her prayers is not the ability to do good, or that supernatural concourse which
is in our power by means thereof, but that she prays him to grant her that
ability in times, places, temper of the body and other circumstances of second
causes, by means of which he foresees that we will freely consent to his Grace.
And it is in this temper that they ordinarily place the efficacy of that grace
which they hold.

But if by this manner of speaking they meant nothing else but that the
efficacy of Gods grace consists in a certain degree of love toward God, that
is to say, in a charity greater then cupidity, by means of which God begins to
appear to us desirable, and good works for his sake, so that we take more
pleasure in doing what he commands us, then in not doing what he forbids us;
they would agree with us, and there would be no longer dispute between us
touching this matter. For what else is the effectual and medicinal grace of
Jesus Christ according to S. Augustine, but a victorious pleasure, a sweetness
and ravishment of divine love which surmounts all the allurements of the flesh;
and an ardor of charity over-mastering and subduing cupidity? But because our
Adversaries place not the efficacy of Gods grace in the victory of charity over
cupidity, but in a certain temperament accompanied with the circumstances
abovementioned, whence it follows, that such efficacy is still subject to
Free Will, and that it is necessary for God first to sound the heart of his
creature that he may see what it will do in such circumstances before he ordain
any thing of its conversion; This is that which we reject and condemn as
profane, and maintain it to be in no wise that Grace which the Church prays
for. For she prays God to shed into our hearts such charity, the delectation
whereof surmounts the delectati-of sin; she prays him to fortify our souls by
his H. Spirit, and to ground and root us in charity; she begs of him such
medicinal grace as may heal our infirmities and give us inward strength; she
prays him to co convert us to him in whatever estate we be, either of
prosperity or adversity, joy or sadness; she desires of him to give us the
strength never to consent to sin by leaving our selves to be overcome by
afflictions, allurements or threatenings; and lastly, she prays to be enaled
with great charity and patience, to surmount bll the difficulties and accidents
which occur in the acourse of our lives. What relation M. H. F. have all these
things to the Temper or Constitution whereof we speak? Does he who prays to
God in the manner I have set forth, believe that his omnipotent virtue and
charity cannot operate conversion in man's heart, unless by causing those
circumstances of times and places to meet with the will of man? Let them who
are of this mind hear what S. Augustine says, Who is so void of sense and so
impious as to say, that God cannot change the perverse wills of men, and
convert those to good which he pleases, when he pleases and where he pleases?
Because, as he says elsewhere, God has the will's of men more in his power
then they have themselves. Let them hear S. Prosper in his Poem of Grace, chap.
16. where he has this sense; But the Grace of Christ, being through Christ
all-powerful, heals a languishing soul after another manner; it is the spirit
and hand of God himself, both beginning and accomplishing his divine work. Let
a man, be young or old, rich or poor, yet when that exerts its activity, any
time is favorable; Nothing withstands its powerful assistance; hardness of
heart does not stop its course. And all the vain power of the second cause
yields to his high designs purposed before the foundations of the world.
Whence this Argument may be framed. The grace of God, which is of such a nature
that it can change the most opposite wills of men, and convert to good those
whom he pleases, when he pleases, and where he pleases, (he having always in
his power the means of doing that which pleases him, without ever being liable
to any retardment from the contrary manners or inclinations of men by any cause
or obstacle whatsoever) is perfectly free and independent, as to its efficacy,
or any natural disposition whatsoever. But the Grace by which God converts the
wills of men, and which the Church asks of him in her prayers, is such,
according to S. Augustine and S. Prosper, and the contrary opinion cannot be
held without folly or impiety. Therefore the Grace by which God turns the wills
of men, and which the Church desires in her prayers, is perfectly free, and
independent upon any natural disposition whatsoever; and the contrary opinion
is impious.

But moreover we see that the Churches prayers are grounded not only upon God's
prescience but upon his virtue and energy which acts upon our will as it
pleases him. For as is above shown, the Church prays thus in the Collect of
the Holy Altar, used almost throughout the whole East; Lord, give us virtue and
the means to preserve it, cause the wicked to become good, and uphold the good
in their goodness. For thou art able to do all things, and none can withstand
thee. Thou savest when thou please, and no person resists thy pleasure.
Whereas on the contrary by this Answer of the Molinists, the prayers of the
Church should not be grounded upon the power but the prescience of God; and
'twould not be needful to pray for a Grace whereby he may turn our will to
himself and fill us with his love, but only for a Grace whereby he may know by
his prescience that we will turn our selves to him, not by the power of a
determining and applying grace, but by the motion of our own Free Will. Whence
it would follow, that God gives only a grace of Possibility, whereof he
foresees our will will make good use in such and such circumstances, and not
the grace to will and to do, that is, which operates both the will and the
action, which is the most impious opinion that can be imagined.

Again, it is indubitable that God by his prescience knows all the good works
which we are to perform. But the ground of his knowing them beforehand, is,
that it is himself who will do them; he sees them before they are done, because
he has prepared and predestined the good works in which he will have us
walk. See how S. Augustine speaks touching this matter in the book De Praedest.
Sanctorum, cap. 10. That which the Apostle says, speaking of good works: That
God has prepared them to cause us to walk therein, denotes Predestination,
which cannot be without Prescience, as Prescience may be without
Predestination. For God by his predestination has foreseen the things which
himself is to do: Whence it it is said by the Scripture, That God does the
things which are not yet come to pass; but he can also know these by his
Prescience which himself effects not, as all sins. After which he proves,
that the good works which we perform are not those which God has barely
foreseen, but which he has promised, and consequently works in us. For he
promises, says he, what he is to effect himself, and not what men are to
effect; because though men perform holy actions pertaining to the Worship of
God, yet it is God himself who causes them to perform what he has commanded
them; and it is not they who cause God to accomplish what he has promised;
otherwise it would follow, that the accomplishment of Gods promises depended
upon men, and not upon God himself, and that 'twas they who acquitted God
toward Abraham of what he had promised to Abraham. Now that H. Patriarch had
no such belief, but giving glory to God, he steadfastly believed that God was
able to do what he had promised. The Scripture says not, that God could
foretell or foresee it. For he can foretell and foresee what others will do and
not himself; but it says, that he could do it; denoting thereby that what he
promised, was not what others were to do, but what he would do himself.

From which words of S. Augustine, I shall with Your favor M. H. F. form this
Argument. The prayers which the Church makes to God, have no other foundation
but Gods very promises. But Gods promises are founded only upon his power and
not upon his prescience. Therefore the Churches prayers are likewise founded
only upon God's power. This Argument may be propounded after another manner and
more convincingly. God acts in the hearts of men to work out their salvation in
such manner as he has promised to act therein. But God promised Abraham the
faith and conversion of Idolatrous Nations, not because he foresaw that they
would believe, but because he had power to cause them to believe. Therefote he
daily acts after the same manner in the heart of man in reference to faith and
conversion, not because he foresees that man will turn by his grace, but
because he is able and has resolved to work such consent in his heart.

But I will concede to our Adversaries that the Church prays to God for no
other grace in order to all actions of piety, then that which they call
Congruous in the sense before explicated, and to which he foresees that man
will freely consent if he give him the same. Yet this very thing is more then
sufficient to refute their doctrine and convince their errors. For, as it is
evident by what I have already said, the Church asks no other grace of God for
a pious action, then that which it believes wholly and absolutely necessary to
the doing thereof. But the Church for every pious action desires that grace
which they term Congruous. And consequently believes absolutely and wholly
necessary to every pious action. Thus they who have not this Grace for a
certain action of piety, suppose Repentance, have not all the grace which is
necessary to repent. But all whom the Church prays God to turn to himself by
repentance, have not this congruous grace of repentance; for if they had, they
would be effectively turned, and 'twere superfluous to desire God to give it
them. Therefore all those for whose conversion to God by repentance the Church
prays, have not all the grace which is necessary to repent. How then can it be
said that they have a grace perfectly sufficient thereunto?

Is it not therefore, M. H. F. more clear then the day, the points of the
Molinists doctrine are wholly opposite either to the Catholic faith, or to
themselves? For they must necessarily grant one of these two things, either
that the Grace which the Church implores for the conversion of sinners is not
absolutely necessary for their conversion, which is undoubtedly impious and
heretical; or that sinners have not all the grace which is sufficient for
repenting, since they have not that which is necessary thereunto.

In the second place another argument may be drawn from the Churches prayers,
to show that she implores of God no other grace then that which by its
invincible power works in the hearts of men, the motion, the consent, and an
actual conversion, and which she believes absolutely necessary for producing so
saving an effect. For when Infidels or sinners withstand God's word, she prays
for them that they may not resist but consent. She prays, as S. Augustine says,
in the place before alleged, that they may be so changed as to will that which
they willed not, to approve that which they disapproved, to love that which
they opposed. Thence she belives that when they consent not but resist, they
have not from God the grace which is necessary to consenting: which shows that
she believes that the necessary Grace is that which surmounts resistance and
produces consent: which is no other thing then to say that Grace effectual by
it self is absolutely necessary.

Let any Molinist now come to maintain, (what he cannot deny, unless he will
disclaim all his own principles) that an unbeliever and opposer of the Gospel,
suppose some Jew of this City, has all the grace necessary to believing;
nevertheless he must acknowledge that the Church prays for him to the end he
may believe. What does she implore for him? What grace does she pray God to
grant to, this Infidel? It cannot be that which is necessary to believing,
since if it were, he should not have all the grace necessary to believing;
which is contrary to the Hypothesis, there being a manifest contradiction
between these two contradictories, namely that this man has all the grace
necessary to believing, and that he wants some grace necessary thereunto. Thus
it follows from the principles of the Molinists that the Grace which the
Church implores for this man is not necessary for him, unless perhaps to lead
him more easily and surely to believeing.

Whence this argument may be formed. If an Unbeliever who resists the Gospel,
has all the Grace which is necessary for him to believe; it follows that when
the Church prays for him to the end he may be converted to the faith, she asks
not of God to grant him a Grace which is absolutely necessary for his
believing. But according to the Molinists, an unbeliever who resists the
Gospel, has all Grace necessary to his believing. Therefore when the Church
prays for him that he may be converted to the faith, she asks not a grace which
is absolutely necessary to his believing.

You see, M. H. F. how the prayers of the Church are destroyed by this means.
For these two things are perfectly opposite, namely, that an Infidel who
resists the Gospel has all the grace from God which is necessary for his
believing; and that nevertheless the Church desires some grace for him which
is necessary thereunto. Whence it follows that if an Infidel who resists the
Gospel, has all necessary Grace, it is in vain that the Church prays for him;
or if it is not in vain, then he has not all the grace necessary to his
believing. Whereby Y. H. clearly sees that what Molina holds herein is
contradictorily opposite to the prayers of the Church, and that we have right
to say with S. Augustine; It Is then in vain and most unprofitably rather then
truly that we address prayers to God for them, to the end that by believing
they may assent to the doctrine which they oppose, if it is not the proper
effect of his grace to convert to the faith of his Gospel the wills of men who
oppose the same faith. But because the Church prays not vainly and
unprofitably, it follows that the Infidel who resists the Gospel, has not all
the Grace which is necessary for him to believe, because he has not the
effectual Grace which might cause him to believe. Wherefore Grace effectual by
it self is that which the Church asks of God, and which she believes and
maintains to be absolutely necessary to every pious action.

In the third place, M. H. F. this invincible argument may be drawn from the
Churches perseverance in prayer. When the Church prays for the conversion of
an Infidel to the faith, or of a sinner to repentance; what ever grace of
possibility he may have received whereby he is able to turn himself, but does
not; yet the Church never ceases to continue praying to God to convert him and
make him embrace repentance, and free him from the bonds of the devil till he
be converted to God by faith and repentance. Therefore what ever Grace of
possibility can be fancied, yet there is another grace besides which subdues
free will to it self, and which the Church implores of God, which gives
possibility with effect so as to work consent, and which as S. Austin speaks,
constraines the unbeliever to embrace the faith. But it is this grace which is
effectual by it self, which who so has, is undoubtedly converted, and who so
wants is not converted. Therefore the grace of faith of repentance which the
Church prays for, is effectual by it self. And because, as I have often said
already, the Church asks no grace of God but what she confesses to be
necessary; it follows that the Grace which she asks is necessary and effectual
by it self. This appears clearly by S. Augustin's words in the end of the 107th
letter. Do you not go about to hinder the Church from praying for Unbelievers
to the end they may become believers? from praying for such as will not believe
to the end they may be willing to believe? from praying for those who
contradict her law and doctrine, that the may consent to the same, and that God
would give them as he has promised by the Prophet a heart to know God and ears
to hear, the receiving of which is denoted by our Savior when he says, He that
has an ear to hear let him hear? And when the Lord's Priest being at the
Altar, you hear him exhort the people to pray to God, or pray aloud himself
that he would so constrain the Infidels as to make them embrace his H. faith,
will you not answer, So be it?

This being supposed, M. H. F. I demand whether or no an Infidel who resists
the Gospel has a heart to know God? whether or no he has ears to hear?
whether or no he has grace which compels him to the faith? If he has all
these things, to what purpose does the Church pray for him that he may receive
what he already possesses? If he has not, then he has not all the grace which
is necessary to him for believing, since (besides what I have frequently
evinced, that the Church implores no grace of God which is not necessary) it is
certain that none can know God unless he have received a heart to know him,
nor hear his word unless he have received ears to hear. Moreover, this Grace
being effectual by self, since as it is impossible for a man to know God unless
he have received a heart to know him, so neither if he have received such a
heart, can he but know him; having received a heart to repent, he cannot but
repent; having received ears to hear, he cannot but hear; being impelled by
that motion which causes to embrace the faith, he cannot but embrace the same:
It follows clearly, that the grace which the Church implores of God as
necessary every action of piety, is effectual by it self.

In the fourth place the same truth is invincibly manifested by the refutation
of the Molinistical grace, even in S. Austin's own words, speaking in this
manner to Vitalis a Semipelagian; You say, that God as much as lies in him,
causes us to Will, since he gives us the knowledge of his pleasure, but if we
will not obey the same, it is we who are the cause that God's operation is
fruitless to us. Which if you affirm, you contradict the prayers of the
Church.

Which reasoning of S. Augustine utterly refutes any grace what ever that is
subject (in its usse) to Free Will, as being utterly contrary to the prayers of
the faithful. This Argument will evince it. Whosoever establishes a doctrine,
from which it follows that he is of an opinion contrary to the prayers of the
Church (as S. Augustine here judges that of Vitalis) he is in an error and
alienated from the orthodox belief of the Catholic faith. But he who maintains
a sufficient Grace subject to Freewill establishes a doctrine from which it
follows that he holds an opinion contrary to the prayers of the Church. Which
is proved by S. Augustine in this manner; Whosoever says that we through our
resistance and unwillingnesse to obey, cause God's operation upon us to become
unprofitable, manifestly contradicts the Churches prayers. But he who
maintains a sufficient Grace subject to Freewill, says that we by resisting
such sufficient Grace and by not willing to submit thereunto, cause God's
operation to become unprofitable. Therefore he is in an opinion contrary to
that of the Churches prayers, and consequently erres, and is not in the belief
of the Catholic faith.

Moreover all the thanks rendered to God by the Church prove the same thing; or
as S. Augustine speaks in his 107. Epistle to Vitalis, This truth appears no
less clearly in thanksgiving then in prayer. It appears in the prayer which
we put up to God for such as are still unbelievers; and it appears in the
thanks which we render to him in behalf of those who are become believers. For
as we ought to pray to him to the end he may accomplish that for which we pray,
so we ought to render him thanks when he has accomplished the same. Wherefore
from the duty of thanksgiving I draw the 3. following arguments.

First, We render thanks to God, not only for what we have been able to do, but
for what we have been willing to do with piety, and accordingly performed. Thus
S. Augustine teaches us in his Epistle to Vitalis, where he says, Whence it is
that the Apostle requires the same thing of the Ephesians, when he says,
Moreover having understood what your faith is toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
and your love to all the Saints, I continually give thanks in your behalf: but
we speak now only of the first beginning of faith, when men who were remote
and even averse from God, are converted to God, and begin to will that which
they willed not, and to have the faith which they had not; for the effecting of
which alteration in them, it is, that we pray for them, although themselves
pray not, because they cannot call upon him in whom they do not believe. And
when God has wrought that in them for which we prayed (i. e. when he has
turned their hearts) we give him thanks in their behalf, and themselves do the
same. But as for the prayers which they make when they are already believers
both for themselves and for the other faithful, that God would cause them to
proceed in his way; and as for the thanks which they render to him, when they
do accordingly proceed therein, I conceive there needs no dispute concerning
the same.

From which words of S. Augustine, I most humbly beseech Y. H. to give me leave
to form this argument against the Molinists. We give thanks to God for what he
has already wrought in us: But there is no pious motion of our will nor any
pious action, for which we do not give him thanks. Therefore there is no pious
motion in our will nor any pious action which God does not work in us. And
consequently the grace of God necessary to every action of piety is effectual
by it self of every pious motion of the will and of every pious action.

It Is therefore unprofitably, says S. Augustine in the same Epistle to Vitalis,
and merely for fashion, rather then really, that we render thanks to God with
joy when any unbelievers are converted, if it be not he who works that in
them for which we thank him. Let us not deceive men, I beseech you, for as for
God we know that we cannot deceive him.

The second Argument is this. The Church does not give thanks to God for the
conversion of any one to faith or repentance, unless when the is persuaded
that he really believes or repents in his heart for his offenses, The Church
therefore does not believe, that God has wrought the conversion of the sinner,
and afforded all necessary assistance thereunto when he has only granted the
grace which gives only the power, as the Molinists hold; but then only when he
has inspired the grace by virtue whereof the first conversion undoubtedly
followed, as I said when I spoke concerning prayer. This is proved evidently by
that passage of S. Augustine, The Apostle having said that the Law is the
strength of sin, subjoynes immediately, But we give thanks to God who has
caused its to overcome through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus the victory
whereby we surmount sin, is nothing else but a gift of God, who in this combat
assists our Freewill. Upon which account Christ himself says, Watch and pray,
that ye fall not into temptation; and thus all who stir against their
concupiscence-ought to pray that they enter not into temptation, that is, that
it may not captivate and prevail over them. But we fall not into temptation,
when by a right will we surmount an evil lust. These last words of S. Augustine
are very much to be observed, as whereby he clearly teaches that he who does
not overcome temptation, but on the contrary is overcome by it, has not had
that grace which the faithful implore of God, when they pray him not to suffer
them to enter into temptation, Whence it evidently follows, that the grace
necessary for overcomming all kind of temptations, which the faithful beg of
God in their prayers, and for which they thank him when they have received it,
is not only a grace of possibility dependant upon Free Will, but a grace of
possibilty, of will and of action, and consequently effectual by it self.

The third Argument is this, If God's grace affords only a possibility and
works not the very consent, that is a right or good will, by its own
strength, then we ought to thank God for giving us the faculty to will aright
or do well, but not for what we have done well and co-operated with his grace.
According to Molina's principles, we ought to thank him for giving us a grace
which he foresaw we would use well and cooperate therewith. But to speak
according to truth; we could not thank him for that we had used that grace well
and co-operated therewith, since this use and cooperation would not be given
us by God, but left to our Free Will: which cannot be so much as thought of
without impiety.

I conceive, M. H. F. that Y. H. clearly sees how strong and invincible this
Argument drawn from the prayers and thanksgiving of the Church, is, to prove
that Grace effectual by it self is necessary to all actions of piety. Which
caused S. Augustine to say with so great reason in the seventh chapter de Dono
Perseverantie; Had we no other instructions but this, the Lord Prayer were more
then sufficient to uphold the cause of Grace which we defend. And in the 23d.
Chapter; As the Church was from its first rise instructed in those Prayers, so
she has been instructed and educated in this faith, and is every day more and
more confirmed therein. And in the 95. Epistle to Pope Innocent I. Prayer it
self is a most clear proof of Grace. And Pope Celestine in the 10. Chap. of his
Epistle to the Bishops of France, The manner according to which we ought to
pray, teaches us also what we ought to believe. Wherefore it is no wonder if S.
Augustine in all his Works and all the H. Fathers, who together with him so
stoutly maintained the true grace of Jesus Christ against the Pelagians, have
shown the tradition and constant and perpetual doctrine of this grace effectual
by it self in the prayers which the Church has offered to God from the
beginning of her establishment, and which she will continue to offer to him
till the end of the world. For the Church has always daily implored of God
the actual believing and conversion of the hearts of all Infidels, whose wills
are remote from, and contrary to him; and in behalf of the faithful, who
believe in him with the heart and confess him with the mouth, perseverance and
victory in temptations: and for all there gifts the incessantly renders thanks
to him.

Having therefore most clearly proved, M. H. F. that there two principles are
of the Catholic faith; first, that the Grace which the Church asks of God in
her prayers, is necessary; and secondly, that it is effectual by it self, and
that we cannot imagine that the Church prays for any other. Wherefore it
irrefragably follows from those prayers of the Church, that Grace effectual by
it self is necessary to all actions of piety, and that consequently whosoever
denies, manifestly subverts all the Churches prayers.

Your Holiness, M. H. F. may hence very easily judge what opinion you ought to
have of this new doctrine, of a Grace subject to our Free Will; and I dare
boldly affirm in your presence, for a conclusion of this first point of our
dispute, that this doctrine of Molina is no less pernicious and sacrilegious
then the very doctrine of Pelagius. For the Fathers of the Council of Carthage
in their Epistle to Pope Innocent, (which is the 90th amongst those of S.
Augustine) declare that the opinions of the Pelagians are sacrilegious and
pernicious, to as much as it necessarily follows from their doctrine, that we
ought not to pray to God not to leave us to fall into temptation; and that it
seems a vain thing that the Church implores of him in behalf of his people what
the prays for, to the end they may please him by living in his love and fear.

Now he who maintains an opinion from whence such things follow, however his
words be different from those of Pelagius, and whatever other grace he admit,
yet he also embraces a pernicious, deadly and sacrilegious doctrine; and what
he adds concerning the necessity of a sufficient Grace subject to Free Will,
hinders nor but that he is in an error; because they who hold this Grace, can
as little as the Pelagians, avoid contradicting the prayers and thanksgivings
of the Church (as I have proved) and declaring themselves enemies of that Grace
of God, which the prayers of the Saints prove so evidently, that is to say,
Grace effectual by it self.

All this Doctrine of the Fathers of the Carthaginian Council, confirmed also
by that of Milevis, was approved by Pope Innocent I. in the Epistle he writ to
them (which is the 91. amongst those of S. Augustine) We see not (says he) any
thing to be added to what you have done, because we see not that you have
omitted or forgotten any thing fur the perfect refutation of those Errors, and
the convincing of such as maintain them.

It appears also by the whole Epistle that the principal cause why that great
Pope detested the Pelagian Error, was, for that it takes away the necessity of
Prayer. Pelagius (says he) and Celestius are so presumptuous as to endeavor
to persuade us that we ought to implore God's aid, and have no need of it,
although all the Saints affirm that without it we can do nothing. And
afterward; there being nothing whereunto our profession more obliges us, and
all our daily prayers tending only to implore Gods mercy, how can we endure
them who teach these Errors? But see the thundering words wherewith that most H.
Pope strikes the Pelagians; Being armed, says he, in their discourses with
false subtilties, they cover themselves with the vail of the Catholic and
Orthodox faith, and exhaling a mortal poison to infect the hearts of those who
hold the sound doctrine and cause them to embrace error, they endeavor to
overthrow the whole belief of the true faith. Wherefore the course of so
dangerous a poison requires to be checked, to the end it may spread no further;
it is requisite to apply the Iron and the Fire to this sore. For what can be
more wicked and heathenish, more remote from our holy Religion, and more
opposite to the first of Christianity? Is there any thing more deadly to souls,
more apt to thrust them into a precipice, and more likely to expose them to all
kind of dangers? They thereby highly declare themselves themselves enemies of
the Catholic faith; they publish their ingratitude for the benefits which they
have received from God, and care not to be worthy of our Communion, since they
have polluted it by publishing such errors. They have absolutely abandoned our
Religion. For there is nothing whereunto our profession more obliges us, and
all our daily prayers to God tending only to implore his mercy, how can we
endure them who teach such errors? What strange error is that which blinds
them? Do not they deserve to be plunged as they are in such gross darknesses?
It Is fit to root them out of the midst of us; they are to be driven far from
the Church, that the evil may be kept from taking more root in our bowels, and
by spreading further become incurable. What this Gangrene has corrupted, is to
be cut off from what remains sound in the body of the Church, to the end the
strength of so dangerous a poison reach not to the parts which are not yet
sick, and that the flock may remain sound by the separation of the sheep
infected with this cruel pestilence.

Now wherefore, M. H. F. does this great Pope speak with so much heat against
those Heretics, unless because they dared to affirm, that men have no need of
Effectual Grace for the performing of Righteousness, overcoming of sin, and
observing of Gods Commandments? For he accuses them throughout the said Letter
of denying that assistance of God which we pray for; and consequently of taking
away the necessity of prayer. But the succor which we ask and obtain by
prayer, is effectual by it self and cannot be understood after any other
manner, as I have most clearly proved. Consequently, the cause of his
condemning them as Heretics, and declared enemies of the faith and Christian
piety, is, because they affirmed, that we have no need of the grace of God
effectual by it self for the accomplishing the Commandments and surmounting
temptations. Now this is the very same which the Molinists teach and maintain
at this day, whilst they hold their sufficient Grace subject to Free Will; and
I shall further press them with this Argument, which shall be the conclusion
of all that I have hitherto spoken.

The cause why S. Augustine, the Fathers of the Council of Carthage, Pope
Innocent I. and the whole Church condemned the doctrine of the Pelagians, as
impious, heretical and sacrilegious, is, for that it follows from thence, that
the Grace which the Church begs of God by her prayers, is not necessary in
order to doing good. Whence it appears, that every Doctrine from whence the
same consequence may be drawn, is likewise heretical, sacrilegious, and worthy
to be stricken with Anathema. But it follows from the Molinistical doctrine of
sufficient Grace subject to Free Will as to its use, that the grace which the
Church asks of God by her prayers is not necessary in order to doing good,
since, as I have shown by invincible proofs, the Grace implored by the Churches
prayers, is effectual by it self, and it follows from the doctrine of
sufficient Grace subject to Free Will is not necessary to doing good. Therefore
it follows from the doctrine of Molinistical grace, that the Grace implored by
the Churches prayers is, not necessary to doing good; and thus by manifest
consequence the doctrine of Molinistical grace subject to Free Will ought
according to the judgment of S. Augustine, all the other Bishops of Africa,
Pope Innocent I. and the universal Church, to be accounted heretical,
sacrilegious, and worthy to be struck with Anathema.

I purposed M. H. F. here to end this so long Dispute at this time, for fear of
being tedious to Your Holiness, but judging by the gentleness and extreme
goodness wherewith You do me the honor to hear me, that You give me full
liberty of speaking, and will not be displeased that I employ what remains of
this day in bringing new proofs; I shall endeavor to show by a second testimony
of S. Augustine the truth of the same Proposition which I have undertaken to
prove, and which is the subject of all the present Contest; namely, that Grace
effectual by it self is necessary to all actions of piety. It Is the subject
which that great Saint handles in the book De Gratia Christi, wherein he
represents so clearly and with such lively colors what is the true Grace of
Jesus Christ, to the end that the same may be distinguished from that false
Grace, which Pelagius endeavored to establish by his disguisements and
artifices. But that the testimony of this great Light of the Church may have as
much weight and authority upon Your Holiness's mind as it deserves; I conceive
requisite to give Your Holiness a brief account of the occasion of S.
Augustin's writing that Book. It Is therefore to be observed, as Ecclesiastical
History and that Book it self teach us, that Albinus, Pinianus and Melanius, so
Illustrious among the Romans for their birth, quality and piety, that none
surpassed them in Nobility, Dignity and Riches, going out of devotion into
Palestine, and there finding Pelagius, exhorted him to condemn in writing the
evil opinions whereof he was accused; whereunto he scrupled not to condescend,
in hope that by pronouncing a false Anathema upon them, and making a disguised
and artificial profession of faith, he might attract to himself persons of so
great authority, and cause all the world to judge him innocent, not only of the
crime, but likewise of the suspicion of Heresy. See the words which he writ; I
anathematise those who affirm or believe, that the grace whereby Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners is not necessary, not only in all places of
the earth, but also in every moment and in all our actions: And I acknowledge,
that all they who endeavor to abolish or oppose it, fall into eternal
condemnation.

As Soon as Albinus and Pinianus had this confession of Pelagius's faith in
their hands, they sent it to S. Augustine, and desired him to send them his
judgment upon it. He answered them, that Pelagius spoke like a Catholic, and
yet was much to be distrusted, because he hid his poison under the ambiguity of
the word Grace, thereby the more easily to deceive such as took not the more
heed thereunto. And upon this occasion he expressly writ a whole Book concerning
the grace of Jesus Christ, and sent the same to them; wherein he descries all
Pelagius's artifices, unfolds all the ambiguities of his words, teaches what is
to be understood by the words [Jesus Christ's Grace] and what Grace that is
which Pelagius ought to confess necessary to every pious action, if he would
not be barely a nominal, but also a real Christian.

Now before I engage further in this discourse, I humbly beseech Your Holiness
to give me leave to observe two things by the way: First, That the
understanding of the true Grace of Jesus Christ and its efficacy upon the will
of men, does not concern only Doctors, Bishops, Priests and Monasticks, but
also the Laics of what sex and condition soever; for S. Augustine has
addressed his principal works against the Pelagians to Lay-persons, to the end
they might not be drawn into their Error by their subtilties and vain
Philosophy. For we see that he has written a Book intitl'd De Spiritu and
Litera to Marcellinus, and that De meritis and remissione peccatorum to the
same; that De natura and Gratia to Jacobus and Fimasus; that De Gratia Jesu
Christi, (of which I make use for the framing of this Argument) to Albinus,
Pinianus and Melanius; that De gratia and libero arbitrio to the Monks of
Adrumetum, (for in those days Monks were reputed amongst the Laics) and
afterward to the same that De-Correctione and Gratia. Wherefore it is no wonder
if the same S. Augustine in his 120 Epistle reckons those in the number of the
foolish virgins that are excluded from the Kingdom of heaven; who bear not in
their hearts the understanding and love of Grace; and who are ignorant, as he
says, in chap. 37. that none can be continent unless God give him continence.

The second thing which I draw and observe from thence, is, that this single
book is more then sufficient to decide all the controversies that can arise
touching the grace of Jesus Christ. For Pelagius, ever after the Council of
Diospolis, where he was constrained to renounce his error, constantly
acknowledged with the Catholics, that the grace of God by Jesus Christ is
necessary to every action of piety. But the difficulty was, what is to be
understood by the term Grace. Which was the cause that S. Augustine continually
repeates the sense thereof in his book. When Pelagius says, that Free Will
has always need to be aided by the grace and assistance of God, the question
is what grace and assistance he means: wherefore it is not sufficient to
denominate a man a Catholic, that he acknowledges a Grace of God necessary to
every act of piety, since heretics themselves believe, or make semblance of
believing as much, but we must moreover agree upon the true Grace of Jesus
Christ, without contriving another in stead of it. Now being S. Augustine
composed that book of the Grace of Jesus Christ, to take away all ambiguity
which might be found in the word Grace, we have nothing else to do but to weigh
and consider with great care what he understood by the word Grace when he
disputed against Pelagius in the name of the whole Church, and what that Grace
is which he would oblige that heretic to confess necessary to every act of
piety, that he might be held a Catholic. In which we cannot be mistaken, being
S. Augustine has unfolded the meaning of it in a great multitude of
definitions, whereof I shall briefly recite some of the principal to Y. H.

It Is that, says he, whereby God inspires a holy delectation, to the end to
cause us to do all that which we know we ought to do. chap. 3. It Is that,
whereby God operates in us not only the power but the will and the action,
chap. 3. It Is that, whereby God inspires the ardour of love into the will.
chap. 6. It Is that, whereby every good thing is not only enjoined but persuaded
to us. chap. 10. It Is that, which is not common to all because, all have not
faith, and swasion is not always accompanied with persuasion. Ibid. It Is that,
which is intimated in those words; No man can come unto me unless he be drawn
by my Father who sent me. Ibid. It Is that, which we ought to believe God
diffuses from above into the soul with ineffable sweetness, not only by
causing it to know the truth, but by inspiring charity into it. chap. 13. It Is
that, whereby God together gives to such whom he calls according to his
purpose, both to know what they ought to do, and to do what they know their
duty. Ibid. It Is that, whereby God's commandments seem not terrible but easy.
Ibid. It Is that, whereby all who are drawn and taught by the Father come to the
Son: according to those words of the Gospel, whosoever has heard and learned
of my Father, comes to me, chap. 14. It Is that, whereby God teaches men
inwardly, insuch a manner, that not only their mind knows what they have learnt
of him, but their will desires it and their actions perform it. Ibid. It Is
that, whereby not only the natural possibility of willing and operating is
assisted, but also the will and operation it self. Ibid. It Is that, which
together gives the advancement of the possibility, and the affection of the
will and the effect of the action. Ibid. It Is that, whereby God with an
internal, hidden, admirable and ineffable power works in the hearts of men not
only a true knowledge but also a right will. chap. 24. It Is that, which the
Apostle prayed for in these words; we pray God not only that you may not commit
evil, but that you may do good. chap. 25. It Is that, whereby the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the H. Spirit which is given us, so that without
it we cannot do any good relating to piety and true righteousness. chap. 26.
It Is that, whereby God gives us, not the spirit of fear, but that of virtue,
charity and continence. chap. 33. It Is that, whose assistance gives the will
and the action by the infusion of the H. Spirit. chap. 34. And lastly, it is
that which by the inspiration of a most ardent and pure love is a help and
furtherance to do well, added to nature and instruction. chap. 35.
These are the conditions and properties of the true grace of Jesus Christ, by
which it distinguishes it from whatever other grace can be feigned or imagined,
and which it is evident cannot quadrate but to grace effectual by it self. From
whence I draw this argument,

The Grace whereunto S. Augustine attributes all these Properties is the true
Grace of Jesus Christ necessary to every action of piety. But Grace Effectual
by it self is that whereunto S. Augustine attributes all these Properties.
Therefore Grace effectual by it self is necessary to every action of piety.

The same Argument which establishes the Effectual Grace of Jesus Christ,
overthrowes the Molinistical Grace subject to Free Will, as I am going to make
good by four several proofs. First, the Grace necessary to every act of piety,
is, according to S. Augustine, a help to doing well, added to nature and
instruction by the inspiration of a most ardent and pure love. But Molinistical
Grace is not such. And by consequence, etc, The Minor I prove thus. The Will
cannot receive the inspiration of a most ardent and pure love, without it begin
to be good. But Molinistical grace may subsist without, the will's being good
in any sort: but the same may always remain bad; because this Grace leaves it
still in a state to be good or bad. Therefore Molinistical grace is not by an
inspiration of a most ardent and pure love. Hence being S. Augustine affirms in
the 31. Chap. de Great. Christi, that he never found Pelagius acknowledge in any
of his Writings such help added to Nature and Instruction by the inspiration of
a most ardent and pure love; And being Molina acknowledges the same no more
then he did; it follows that he agrees with Pelagius to overthrow the true
Grace of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The Grace of Jesus Christ is an heavenly teaching, whereby God so
instructs the heart of man with such inexpressible sweetness, that he who
receives that instruction, has not the knowledge only of what he sees, but
also the will wherewith he desires it, and the action whereby he performs it,
Chap. 14. But the Grace whose use is left to Free Will, is not such: Therefore,
etc.

Thirdly, We cannot say of the Grace of Jesus Christ, that by it man learns of
God what he ought to do, but that he will not do what it teaches him. Now this
may be affirmed of the Molinistical grace; Therefore the Molinistical grace is
not the Grace of Jesus Christ, Chap. 14.

My fourth proof is this; Whosoever receives from God the Grace of Jesus
Christ, comes to the Son of God; and whosoever comes not to him, has not that
Grace. Ibid. chap. 14. But many have the Molinistical grace who come not to the
Son of God: Therefore the Molinistical grace is not the Grace of Jesus Christ;
and consequently is not that Grace which S. Augustine says was necessary to be
acknowledged by Pelagius, if he would be a real and not a nominal Catholic.

Now let any one of the upholders of such Molinistical grace appear in presence
of Your Holiness; let him vaunt as much as he pleases that he holds not the
opinions of Pelagius; let him say, I am not a Pelagian, because Pelagius
acknowledged no other grace, but an external aid of the Law and Doctrine, or
Instruction; But I moreover confess an internal and supernatural Grace,
whereby God enlightens the Understanding and moves the Will, but whose use is
left to Free Will. Certes, I should answer him, It Is very brave; I am extremely
glad you are not altogether a Pelagian. But what are you the better, if you
depart from Pelagius, but cloze not with the sentiments of the Church? And what
advantage is it to you, to reject the Pelagian grace, if you do not admit the
Christian? For how remote soever you are from Pelagius, whatever Grace you
admit, whatever colors you paint it withal, and whatever Title you give it of
internal and supernatural, if this Grace be not the same which S. Augustine
says Pelagius must confess, to the end he may be not only in name, but in
Truth a Catholic; the Confession which you make of such other grace, may
perhaps keep you from being wholly a Pelagian, but it can never make you pass
for a Christian. For I grant it true as you say, (and this is no place to
dispute it) that Pelagius denied, that there is any internal and supernatural
Grace contrary to what S. Augustine maintained, viz. That there is an internal
and supernatural Grace; But S. Augustine moreover maintained, That this Grace is
Effectual and subdues the Free Will to it self. While you hold against Pelagius
that there is an internal and supernatural Grace, you hold at the same time
against S. Augustine, that the same Grace is subject to Free Will. So that by
your acknowledging an internal and supernatural Grace, perhaps you are not a
Pelagian therein; but inasmuch as you acknowledge not that the same is
Effectual, you are not yet a Catholic. You are as yet neither Pelagian nor
Catholic; or rather, you are not at all a Catholic, but you are a Pelagian,
in that you agree with Pelagius to oppose that Effectual Grace, which you will
not acknowledge to be the true Grace of Jesus Christ.

Whereunto I add, That your sentiment in the confession of this internal and
supernatural Grace is not far from that of Pelagius, which I prove by Chap. 13.
of the same Book of S. Augustine. He who knows what he ought to do, and does it
not, is not yet instructed of God by Grace, but only by the Law; he has not
been taught by the Spirit, but only by the Letter. And in Chap. 14. Jesus
Christ speaking of this manner of teaching, says, Whosoever has heard the
words of my Father, and has been taught by him, comes to me. And it cannot
with truth be said of him that comes not to Christ, He has known and learnt
that he ought to come, but he will not do what he has learnt he ought to do.
No certainly, this cannot be said of that manner of instruction according to
which God teaches us by his Grace. Now he who has only the Molinistical
grace, has not been taught of God by grace and by the Spirit, but only by the
Law and by the Letter; and consequently, the Molinistical grace is no other
then the Pelagian, which consists only in the Law and Instruction. Whereby it
appears, that the terms of internal and supernatural Grace, are only simple
words made use of by the Molinists to cover and hide their Pelagian grace, to
the end to avoid the indignation which the same would excite against them, and
by this difference of words to obscure the Truth, and to keep themselves from
being so easily convinced of their Error.

After this Argument, I shall proceed to S. Augustin's third proof taken out of
the same book, de Great. Christi; where he thoroughly treats of the assistance of
the possibility of the will and of the action; which he maintains to be the
true Grace of the Redeemer, and which was the subject of the whole Dispute
between him and Pelagius. For see how that great Saint speaks of this Heretic.
Pelagius establishing three several things, whereby he says Gods Commandments
may be fulfilled, viz. Possibility, Will and Action. Possibility, whereby a man
is able to become Righteous; Will, whereby he is willing to become Righteous;
and Action, whereby he is actually Righteous. He confesses that the first, viz.
Possibility, is given by the Creator of our Nature, and depends not upon our
selves, since we cannot but have it whether we will or no. But as for the two
others, namely, Will and Action, He holds that they are in our power, and that
we have so much the dominion of them that they depend only upon our selves.
Whence Pelagius concluded, that a man deserves to be commended for his good
will and his good actions; or rather that God and man deserves to be commended
for the same, because God gives him the possibility of that good will, and of
that good work, and always assists that possibility by the succor of his
Grace. And a little after, That we can do, speak and think any kind of good, it
is from God who gives us that power. But that we act, speak, or think well,
this is from our selves, because we can turn into evil the power which we have
to do all such things.

Now, said Pelagius, Can he who speaks in this manner be taken to deny Grace?
And truly, M. H. F. who would not have taken the confession of that Heretic to
be wholly Catholic? For to judge thereof by our natural Spirit, what else can
the Grace of Jesus Christ be imagined to be, but that succor whereby our
natural possibility is assisted. Yet if Your Holiness pleases we will see what
S. Augustine answers to this. After a long and exact Dispute which tends to show
that the Grace of Jesus Christ, gives us together both the advancement of
possibility, and the affection of the will, and the effect of operation, he
ends the 47 Chapter with these words: If Pelagius agreed with us, that God
assists us, not only by giving us the possibility which may be in man, though
he neither will nor do good, but by giving us the very will and action it self;
that is, by causing that we both will and do the good, which is not in man
except when he wills good and does it, and if he further confesses that
succor to be such, as without which we neither will nor do any good; and that
it is the Grace given us by Jesus Christ our Lord, according to which he makes
us Righteous with his Righteousness, and not by our own; so that true
Righteousness is that which is derived to us from him; I think there would be
no more ground of Dispute between us touching the help of Gods grace.

In which words of S. Augustine, there are many things carefully to be observed.

1. That the assistance of Possibility, and that of that of the possibility of
the Will and of Action joined together, are two different assistances. 2. That
a man have the assistance of possibility, although he will not do good, and do
it not. 3. That the assistance of Possibility, of the Will and of Action, is
never found in a man, but it causes him to will and to do good. 4. That this
last sort of assistance is so necessary, that we never either will or do any
good without it. 5. That this assistance is the true Grace of God, which is
given us by Jesus Christ our Lord. 6. That it follows from this assistance that
the Righteousness of good works, by which we are Righteous, is not a
Righteousness which proceeds from the Law and from Free Will, but a
Righteousness which comes from God.
These things being premised, I argue thus in favor of Effectual Grace. The
Grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord is absolutely necessary to all sort of
pious Actions. But the Grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord is nothing else
but the assistance of Possibility, of Will and of Action, as S. Augustine
teaches when he explaineth the faith of the Church against Pelagius. Therefore
the assistance of Possibility, of Will and of Action, is absolutely necessary
to every pious action. Now this Assistance is Grace Effectual by it self, since
it is by this assistance that man wills and always does good. And
consequently, Grace Effectual by it self is necessary to all actions of piety.

Which Argument against the Molinists I thus manage. Whatsoever name be given
to Grace, and although it be styled internal and supernatural, yet if it be
such as is found in a man sometimes who neither wills nor does good, it may
be said to be always included within the bounds of the assistance of
Possibility, or rather (to speak more clearly) it is only an assistance of
possibility, not the true Grace of Jesus Christ. Whosoever therefore says,
that this Grace is that which is necessary to all actions of piety, without
need of a Grace Effectual by it self, he does, (as Pelagius) acknowledge only a
grace of possibility, and deny the true grace of Jesus Christ, which is the
assistance of Will and Action.

Now I demand of a Molinist, whether or no he believes that the grace of Will
and Action is necessary to all acts of piety; if he does not, he cannot,
according to S. Augustine be accounted a Christian; if he does, and yet hold
that such a Grace is not Effectual by it self, he cannot deny but it follows
from thence that a man may have it, and yet neither will nor do good. Which
being supposed, I answer thus.

According to S. Augustine, The Grace of Possibility is that which is found in a
man, although he neither wills nor does good. And the grace of Will and
Action is that which is never in a man but when he wills and does good. Now
Molinistical grace is in a man, although he neither wills nor does good.
Therefore this grace is only a grace of possibility, and not a grace of will
and action. Whence it appears clearer then the day, that although the Molinists
acknowledge that there is a grace of will and action, yet they affirm it only
with the mouth, for avoiding the Odium and Indignation which the denying
thereof would draw upon them; but in reality they deny and oppose it in the
sense wherein S. Augustine maintained it against Pelagius.

But M. H. F. There follows one thing further, which is more detestable, and no
doubt will more move Your Holiness. When S. Augustine disputing against
Pelagius, asked him, whether a right will and a good action proceeds from man
or from God? This Heretic answered him, that the same proceeds from both; from
man because he wills and acts; and from God (although he durst not express it
so clearly) because he gives (said he) that power to man, and assists him
always with the help of his Grace. Whence S. Augustine argued against him, that
according to this opinion a bad action proceeds from God, since he gives man
power to do it. See his words in Chap. 17.

Here F. Des-mares was going to read the said passage, but the light failed
him, so that he was constrained to leave this Argument before he had finished
it, and to do as is above related.

When F. Des-mares had done speaking, we all five advanced into the middle of
the void square, the Assembly remaining as at the first. And approaching near
the Pope, we kneeled down and presented to him the five new Writings which we
had prepared for that purpose, with a Memorial in which mention was briefly
made of them, and by which we requested the Pope, that both these and the
former might be presented to our Adversaries. The Abbot of Valcroissant asked
him, when it pleased his Holiness to have us appear again in order to proceed.
The Pope answered, that he had not yet thought of it, but he would consider
upon it. The Abbot replied, that it should be when his Holiness pleased, but we
conceived it our duty to testify to him that we should be always ready to
appear as often as it pleased his Holiness to summon us. As I presented our
Writings to the Pope, which contained between five and six quires of paper, he
offered to take them with his own hand, and Cardinal Spada arose from his seat,
and came to ease the Pope of that trouble; but at the same time I laid them
upon a little seat on the Pope's right hand, and Cardinal Spada only helped me
to place them better: yet by this advance he got a more commodious situation
for hearing what we said to the Pope; for being very near him, we spoke
sufficiently low. In giving him these Writings, I told his Holiness, it would
be needful to let them be seen by my Lords the Cardinals, the Divines then
present and such other as his Holiness pleased; that several Copies of them
were requisite, which it was impossible to supply by the help of Scribes, who
committed a thousand faults, that to prevent all these inconveniences, we had
presented a Memorial to the Master of the sacred Palace, to desire his
permission for their printing only ad hunc effectum, that our Request seemed to
him equitable enough; but that it being an Affair wherein his Holiness himself
was employed; the Master of the sacred Palace thought not fit to do any thing
in it, unless his Holiness were first consulted, and that it were done by his
privity and order; that the Master of the sacred Palace was there present; that
if it pleased his Holiness to signify his allowance thereof, and tell him
that it might be done with the conditions proposed by us which we conceived
just, we should be much bound to his Holiness for the favor: The Pope answered
us that he would think upon it, and let us know what he should judge expedient.
We replied that we should attend his orders, and be ready to obey him in this
and all other things. We kissed his feet, he gave us his benediction, and we
withdrew.

The Copy of this last Memorial which we presented to the Pope with our five
new Writings here follows, together with that which we presented to the Master
of the sacred Palace.

To our H. Father Pope Innocent X.
A Catalogue of all the Writings which were hitherto presented here in the
Affair of the five Propositions by the Doctors defenders of S. Augustine.
MOST HOLY FATHER,
It Is some months ago that we presented to Your Holiness two Writings with
their Abridgement. The first of which is the first Information in reference to
fact against M. Hallier and his Colleagues; and it concerns what passed touching
the business of the Five Propositions, from July 1. 1649. to July 11. 1652.
where we discover a great multitude of the foul dealings and ambushes of our
Adversaries.

The second Writing is the first Information touching matter of Right against
the same Adversaries; and it concerns the authority of S. Augustine, which we
prove by the whole Tradition of the Church.

At this day M. H. F. we present five other Writings to Your Holiness.

The first is the first part of the second Information as to matter of fact
against the Jesuits, and it contains above a hundred Propositions against the
authority of S. Augustine, drawn out of their books.

The second comprizes in few words the distinction of the several senses
whereof the Five Propositions are capable, and the clear and true sentiment of
our Adversaries, of the Calvinists and Lutherans, and also our own touching the
same matter.

The third contains the second Information as to matter of Right, namely, that
which concerns Grace Effectual by it self, which is the point whereunto this
whole Controversy is reduced; and we show that Catholics can in no wise
question this grace, principally upon this sole consideration, that it is
impossible to deny it without establishing at the same time that which is
contradictorily opposite to it, to wit, the Molinistical Grace subject to
Free Will, and without approving by consequence sixty either Errors or Heresies
which necessarily follow from it.

The fourth contains the third Information, as to matter of Right, and concerns
the first Proposition now in contest; which we show is firmly established upon
the holy Scripture, the Councils and Fathers, and particularly upon S. Augustine
and S. Thomas.

The fifth contains the fourth Information, as to matter of Right, and the
explication of about sixty testimonies of S. Augustine, which we found to have
been employed in a namelesse Writing by M. Hallier and his Colleagues against
the first Proposition. And in the refutation of the said Writing we convince
them of having advanced nothing at all that makes against us, but many things
unfaithfully and without ground.

We heartily submit all these Writings, M. H. F. to the correction of the H.
Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, and to the judgment of Your Holiness;
and we most humbly beseech Your Holiness that they may be communicated to our
Adversaries when you shall think fit; namely to the Society of Jesuits, and to
MM. Hallier, Lagault and Joysel, as also to the most learned Divines, when Your
Holiness has already heard us speak touching the five Propositions, and to all
others to whom Your Holiness shall think good to show them; to the end that if
the one or the other conceive that there is in our words or writings any thing
either worthy of correction, or false, or obscure, or dubious, it may be showed
to us in presence of your Holiness; and that it may be permitted us either to
explicate the same, or prove it by competent reasons, or else amend it
according as Your Holiness shall think fit, that so Your Holiness may be fully
assured of the truth or falsehood of the thing and of its importance. We most
heartily wish to Your Holiness all kind of prosperity, and that God may
prolong the course of your years, by giving you even some of ours.

Signed, Noel de la Lane Doctor of Paris, etc. and Abbot of Valcroissant.
Toussaint Des-mares, Priest of the Congregation of the Oratory. Louis de S.
Amor, Doctor of Sorbon. Nicolas Manessier, Doctor of Sorbon. Louis Angran,
Licentiate of the same sacred Faculty of Paris, etc.


The Memorial presented by us to the Master of the sacred Palace for obtaining
permission to print our Writings, speaks thus in the Translation.

THe most R. F. Master of the sacred Palace is most humbly petitioned by the
French Doctors defenders of S. Augustine, to consider that the prohibitions of
printing any thing touching the matter de Auxiliis concern books and other
works intended to be exposed to sale, and published indifferently to all the
world, but they extend not to Writings which are to be presented in private to
the Pope, Cardinals, and other Divines to whom his Holiness shall think fit to
have them communicated for their instruction, in an Affair which is to be
examined before his presence, which being considered, and regard had to the
great number of faults inevitable in Manuscript Copies by the ill shaping of
Letters, omission of words, and false placing of Distinctions, to the great
trouble of the Readers, by perverting the sense and interrupting attention; as
also that it is impossible to have that great variety of Characters in
Manuscripts, which may be had in printing, and serve so well for the Emphatical
denoting of things, especially in a matter so embroiled, as that of the Five
Propositions. Moreover considering the great number of persons who will be
obliged to peruse the Informations made upon the said Propositions, the
excessive pains and great time otherwise required to get them copied out,
revised and corrected, which alone, whatever diligence were used, would swallow
up the whole time of the Petitioners, and besides not satisfy them or any body
else; and supposing it objected that there needs not so great a number of
Copies, because the same Writings may be seen by many persons, by being
transmitted from hand to hand, yet they cannot be so leasurely and exactly
examined that way, as if every one have a Copy of his own.

For these Reasons the said R. F. Master of the sacred Palace it most humbly
petitition'd to grant License to print the informations abovementioned which
are to be presented to the Pope touching the Five Propositions, and this upon
the condition following: First, That only a limited number of each sheet be
wrought off; as two or three quire of paper. Secondly, That it be declared upon
the first page that the License of printing is granted only for the convenience
of examination, and not any wise in approbation of what is contained in the
said Informations. Thirdly, That the Doctors who make this request, give no
Copy thereof to any person but what shall be subscribed with their own hands,
as if it were a Manuscript. For so, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Letter which we writ May 26. to the Bishops who sent us, touching the
grand Audience given by the Pope upon the 19th.

WE departed from this Audience full of satisfaction, and went to give the
Ambassador the first relation of it, to the end that if he pleased he might
write into France about it the same day which was the Post-day. Our return home
was so late that we had little time left to write into France before the going
of the Post more then two words, and were forced to defer sending the
particularities of our Audience till that day sevennight. The Letter which I am
going to insert here, will not be a bare repetition of the foregoing account,
for the Letter was drawn before I made that relation, in which my design was to
insert such particularities as were omitted in the Letter and not necessary to
be mentioned in it at that time, in regard we stood in expectation to send more
considerable matters every day. But indeed it seems to me expedient not to omit
any thing which may contribute to give the public and posterity as full and
perfect a view as possible, of all that came to my knowledge in reference to
this Affair.

MY LORDS,
BY the last Post you received the first news of the public Audience given us
by his Holiness eight days ago; we shall now give you the particular account
of it. And since we act by your authority, we doubt not but you will be glad to
hear a relation of all that passed in this occasion by the special assistance
which God afforded us therein, for the maintaining of the true Grace of his Son
before the sovereign Pontiff, and the visible Head of the Church.

By the Letter which F. Des-mares and M. Manessier did themselves the honor to
write to you, you understood our purpose to speak before the Pope when it
should please his Holiness to call us. We mention not here the reasons which
obliged us thereunto, since they were represented to you by that last Letter.
After the said resolution was agreed upon amongst us, we thought fit to go and
testify the same to his Holiness, according as F. Des-mares and M. Manessier
had promised him. There having been no Audience during the whole week, we hoped
to have had it on Sunday the 11th, of this month. In the mean time the
Ambassador came from Tivoli to his Audience on Friday. We went and gave him an
account of the Audience which F. Des-mares and M. Manessier had had, and
signified to him that being his Holiness desired to hear us apart from our
Adversaries, we were ready to do all that he pleased, and intended to declare
so much to the Pope on Sunday next. The Ambassador much approved our
resolution, and told us, that it was the fittest means to obtain a
contradictory Conference afterward, in case the Pope were convinced of the
necessity thereof by what reasons we alleged. After his Friday's Audience, he
sent for us to come to him on Saturday morning. We understood that he had
likewise sent for M. Hallier and his Colleagues. We all five repaired
accordingly to him. He told us, that the Pope having spoken to him concerning
us, he had signified to his Holiness that we were determined to appear before
him in what manner he should desire. Whereupon the Pope said it should be very
speedily, and that he would hear us one after another, perhaps within a week.
He also told us, that he would wait upon Cardinal Pamphilio to know the Pope's
day, to whom therefore it was not necessery for us to address, since he
understood our resolution. After our expression of thanks to the Ambassador for
his care and our assurance that we would be ready against the time, we desired
him to procure us two or three days notice beforehand, which he promised us to
do. He told us, that M. Hallier and his Colleagues were to come to him
presently, and he should advertise them also to prepare themselves to speak
before the Pope at the first convenient day after our audience. That afterward
possibly we should obtain a conference with M. Hallier, because we might desire
of his Holiness, that some person might answer to what we should say
concerning the Propositions, and convince us of what was reprehensible in our
Writings; and then either M. Hallier must be the man, or his Holiness must
depute some other Divine; but M. Hallier being here concerning this Affair, and
having presented Writings against us, 'twas more likely that he would be
appointed to answer us then any other. We answered the Ambassador that this was
what we hoped, and that we had such important and convincing things to speak
upon the points in question, that his Holiness would see that necessity alone
had induced us to demand a Conference with so great instance, MM. Hallier and
Lagault came to the Ambassador's house just as we were taking leave of him.

F. Des-mares and M. Manessier, having not yet had leisure since their arrival
to go to salute the Cardinals nominated for the Congregation, we accompanied
them to that purpose in the days following. We declared to their Eminences our
purpose to appear before the Pope, and that the Pope had given us order by the
Ambassador to be in readiness by the first days of the week ensuing. Tuesday
evening the Ambassador passing by our lodging, advertised us that the Monday
next was the day appointed, and that we must be at the Pope's Palace by 20 a
clock, that is, about three after noon.

Accordingly we repaired on Monday to the Pope's Palace in Mont Quirinal, and
were called for a little after three a clock, and introduced into the Pope's
presence. On each side of his Holinesse's Chair were two Benches upon which the
Cardinals sat, Spada and Ginetti on the right hand, and Pamphilio and Ghiggi on
the other. The thirteen Divines of several Orders, whose names M. de S. Amor
signified to you by his Letter January 27. stood bare-headed on each side
behind the Benches. M. Albizzi Assessor of the H. Office was there also to
perform the Office of Secretary. Besides these, no other persons were present
at this Assembly. At our entrance we made our accustomed genuflexions to his
Holiness, who gave us his benediction, and made a sign to us to rise and
begin. We stood in the space between the two Benches, right against the Pope,
it being just capable of us all five afront. The Abbot of Valcroissant began,
and showed in general the importance of this Affair in a speech of about three
quarters of an hour. We speak nothing of what it contained, because we send
you, My Lords, a Copy of it as it was pronounced. After his speech was ended,
he spoke of the two first Writings which we had presented the last year, the
former whereof is concerning what has been acted about the affair of the Five
Propositions, and the other is touching S. Augustine authority. He spoke
succinctly some principal things of the former Writing, to let his Holiness
understand the foul dealings, frauds, and the conspiracy of our Adversaries
against S. Augustine, by contriving and presenting to our Faculty those captious
and equivocal Propositions. But conceiving it more material to say something
concerning the main business of doctrine in this first Audience, he did not
think fit to be particular in laying matters of fact open to his Holiness, and
therefore proceeded to the Writing concerning S. Augustin's authority; wherein
we showed, that nothing is so much established in the Church as this Authority,
since we justify it by above two hundred Testimonies of twenty Popes, fifteen
Councils, threescore and ten Fathers of the Church, or illustrious Divines of
all Ages, and the reception of the whole Church with unanimous and universal
consent. He laid forth the reasons which obliged us to deliver this Writing
first, in imitation of S. Prosper and Hilary of France, when they came to Rome
against the Priests of Marseille, and to tread in the steps which we saw marked
out in the first judgment which was made touching S. Augustine under Pope
Celestine the first, and in the last examen which was made under Clement VIII.
He added, that we did not insist upon proving more largely this authority of S.
Augustine, being persuaded that his Holiness was willing that the doctrine of
this Saint should serve for a Rule in this whole Dispute of Grace according to
the Ordinances of his Predecessors.

Reserving therefore to speak more at length of what had been done in France
upon occasion of the Five Propositions when it should be expedient in the
progress of things, and supposing the authority. of S. Augustine received and
established, as we had agreed together, M. de Valcroissant proceeded to the
Writings then to be presented, and told his Holiness, that to let him see that
we complained not unnecessarily of the Jesuits outrages against S, Augustin's
authority, we had one Writing to present to him, into which we had collected
above a hundred Propositions against S. Augustine, drawn out of the books of
Jesuitical Writers since Molina; that above fifty of them were published within
these last four years; and that 'twas a great evidence of a conspiracy against
S. Augustine in the contrivance of the five Pelagious Propositions; that F. Adam
a Jesuit at the same time was preparing a bloody work against S. Augustine,
which came forth on the first of January 1650. with the permission of the
Provincial of Paris, and with the approbation of three Jesuits Divines. M. de
Valcroissant read to his Holiness those Propositions of F. Adam, wherein the
express doctrine of S. Augustine is plainly handled as Heretical and
Calvinistical, and S. Paul and other Canonical Writers accused of having been
exorbitant in their Writings, and gone beyond the bounds of Truth through
humane weakness, from which, as that Jesuit says, They were nor free. You
may judge, My Lords, with what astonishment his Holiness and their Eminences
heard these horrible injuries of that Jesuit against S. Augustine, which
carried to reprehend S. Paul himself and the Prophets. He also read this
Proposition which is in a book printed at Paris three months ago; Expecta
tantisper, Lector; brevi loquetur Roma quid senserit Augustinus aut quid
sentire debuerit. Which, as you see, My Lords, implies that the Jesuits expect
shortly at Rome the condemnation of S. Augustin's Doctrine.

In the next place, M. de Valcroissant explicated the Distinction of Senses and
caused his Holiness to observe with how much sincerity the proceeded in this
Affair, by declaring plainly what we rejected, and what we held touching all
the Propositions. He remonstrated first that they were framed by the Molinists
in equivocal terms capable of heretical senses, thereby to expose them to
Censure, and afterward reflect the same Censure upon Grace Effectual by it
self, and upon S. Augustin's Doctrine, to which the Propositions are reducible
by being explicated in the particular senses which they may admit, as we had
done; that we were not the authors of those ambiguous Propositions; That they
could not be shown in any book in the direct terms wherein they are conceived,
excepting the first which is mutilated and maliciously separated from the words
that precede and follow it, which being added to the Proposition. as it is
found in the Author from whom it is taken, is not only not capable of any evil
sense, but is the Catholic and Apostolic doctrine of S. Augustine and the
Church. That it cannot be found in any works, Latin or French, published in
France within these four years, that they have been defended purely as they
are expressed; but that on the contrary it has always been declared that in
the generality of their terms, they are susceptible of heretical senses, and
may according to those senses be condemned generally as heretical; and that
never any other sense but the Catholic alone which they admit has been
maintained; that is to say, none ever absolutely maintained these five general
Propositions, but the particular Propositions expressing the Catholic sense of
them, which we presented and maintained in our Writing. Whence he concluded
that the Controversy was not about the five Propositions as they appeared;
That we do not defend them in their universality and ambiguity (which he
repeated twice or thrice at several times) That therefore to follow the steps
which S. Augustin's disciples had always trodden since this Dispute, according
to the first Memorial presented by us to his Holiness at our first coming to
Rome, and the demands which we had made eight months ago in our first
Information de facto, we presented to his Holiness a Writing, wherein were
contained on one side in clear terms the Catholic senses, or particular
Propositions which we and all S. Augustin's Disciples maintained and had
always maintained; and on the other side the sentiments, both of the
Calvinists and Molinists touching the matter of these Propositions. That we
desired of his Holiness an examination and judgment of these sentiments. That
Calvin's opinion was not the thing in controversy between us, that we held him
for a Heretic as well as our Adversaries do. That the two others were those
alone in contest. That we were ready to demonstrate viva voce and by writing in
presence of our Adversaries that our sentiment is most Catholic, most
agreeable to S. Augustine, and altogether indubitable in the faith. That on the
contrary that of the Molinists is Pelagian or Semipelagian, as it has been
already judged contradictorily in the Congregation de Auxiliis held by the
Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. of holy and glorious memory. He added, That to
judge of the Propositions as they are contested between Catholics, it is
necessary to distinguish the senses and make an express and particular
judgment thereof. This he justified by the words of the Letter of the Prelates
by whom M. Hallier pretends himself commissioned, because those Prelates demand
a clear and express judgment upon the Propositions, such as may clear the
Truth, regulate the present contests amongst Catholics touching this matter,
and produce peace in the Church. And therefore that although by occasion of
these Propositions there is a dispute between Catholics, yet seeing the
controversy is not about the ambiguous Propositions as they are framed by the
Molinists; but about the different senses which we presented and are alone in
question, the Truth cannot be cleared, nor the Controversy terminated, but by
an express judgment upon these several particular senses, or rather upon the
Propositions exempted from all equivocation, as we presented them, and upon the
contradictories of them, which needed to be solemnly and fully examined in
order to a judgment thereof by a solemn and express Decree, as was done by the
two Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. in their Congregation touching the same
matter. He said, that whereas M. Hallier and his Colleagues give out that they
are sent by Prelates to solicit a Censure of the Sentiments or Propositions
maintained by us, they abuse their Letter and intention. That those Prelates
are as much for us as for M. Hallier, since by occasion of the Propositions we
demanded in your name, as well as they, a clear and express judgment, such as
may regulate our Contests, and produce a full and lasting peace in the Church.
It was not hard to justify, My Lords, that you demanded likewise an express
judgment upon the distinction of senses, and upon the particular Propositions;
for it appears sufficiently by your Letters and by our first Memorial. Then he
showed the justice of this demand, inasmuch as the matter in controversy could
neither be judged of, nor the differences touching these points of Doctrine
terminated any other way. Secondly, Because it is necessary to judge of the
sense according to which our Adversaries impugn these Propositions, since it is
that of Molina's sufficient Grace which is a source of impieties, errors and
heresies, as it is easy to make good by the sixty three Errors or Heresies
which we deduced from it by necessary consequence, and placed at the end of our
Writing of Effectual Grace.

He demonstrated that the controverted sense of the Propositions, is that of
Grace Effectual by it self necessary to every good action, since all the
impugners of the Propositions, either by Writing or Teaching impugn them in
the sense of Effectual Grace, as on the contrary all the disciples of S.
Augustine, who have writ or taught before or since the contrivance of these
Propositions, maintain only the pure sense of Effectual Grace; nor can other
doctrine then that, touching the said Propositions be found in any book. Here
he read the different senses of the Propositions which you have seen in the
Writing which we sent to you the last week; and pronounced word for word all
that is contained in the three Columes, both the different Propositions, and
our qualifications or judgments of them. After the reading of each Proposition
which we defended, he succinctly showed the connection of it with Grace
effectual by it self; as it is in the Preface of our Writing of Effectual
Grace, which we likewise send you.

He concluded with our most humble instances to his Holiness, that he would
please to judge of those controverted senses, and said, (as it is contained in
the end of our Writing or Declaration) that being persuaded that the senses or
particular Propositions which we presented and defended, contained the
principal grounds of the Christian faith and piety, we should always believe
and maintain that sense or those Propositions to be Catholic, till his
Holiness by a solemn judgment condemned that particular sense, i. e. those
particular propositions which were framed and defended by us; which we
conceived he would never do. He spoke a full hour upon the writing of the
distinction of senses; and about an hour and half upon all the rest.

When he had done, F. Desmares, according as we had agreed together, began to
speak, and after a short Exordium he said, that having clearly reduced the
Propositions, as we defended them, to the sense of Effectual Grace necessary to
every good action; that having showed that the Propositions contrary according
to the sense of our Adversaries contained the sufficient Grace of Molina; and
that having affirmed that our senses are Catholic and indubitable in the
doctrine of S. Augustine, and on the contrary those of our Adversaries Pelagian
or Semipelagian; 'twas necessary in the first place to justify to his
Holiness, that Grace Effectual by it self is the true Grace of Jesus Christ and
the certain belief of the Church. This he began to prove; and first succinctly
set forth the order and senses of writing of Effectual Grace, together with the
contents of the four Articles. In the first whereof, he said, we demonstrated
by sixteen principal arguments drawn out of S. Augustin's works, against the
enemies of the grace of Jesus Christ, that Grace effectual by it self,
necessary to every good action, is, according to that H. Father, the certain
belief of the Church opposed to the heresy of the Pelagians, and Semipelagians;
That in the second we summarily laid open the tradition of the whole Church, or
the sentiment of all the Councils, H. Fathers and principal Divines since S.
Augustine to the present age for confirmation of the same truth: That in the
third were contained the Decisions passed contradictorily by the Congregation
de Auxiliis in presence of the Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. by whom Molina's
doctrine of sufficient Grace was declared heretical and Pelagian, and the
contrary sentiment of Grace effectual by it self judged the constant doctrine
of S. Augustine and the certain faith of the whole Church. That we were ready to
make good this truth by the acts of the Congregation, whereof we had seen the
Originals, and extracted from them what we alleged: Lastly, that in the fourth
Article were contained sixty and three heresies or impieties deduced by
necessary consequence from Molina's sufficient Grace, whereby it appeared that
this new novel opinion overthrows the principal grounds of faith and Christian
piety, the authority of the H. See and the Council of Trent, the validity of
Tradition; and the perpetual subsistence of one and the same faith in the
Church, and is fit only to supply advantages to heretics to oppose the Roman
Church. After this, the Father explicated what we understand by Grace effectual
by it self, and by sufficient Grace subject to Free Will. Then he began the
first argument drawn from the prayers of Church, and told his Holiness it was
a great Providence of God which had caused him to choose the day of Rogations,
a day consecrated by the Church particularly to prayer, for our justifying
before him the faith of effectual Grace or the truth of Jesus Christ, by the
prayers of the Church. He handled this argument with as great plainness and
force as could be wished, and concluded with a necessary consequence drawn from
what he had proved, that according to the express words of the Council of
Carthage and Pope Innocent I. the dogma of Molina's suffcient grace is
sacrilegious, impious, pestiferous, execrable and worthy of all kinds of
anathema, Sacrilegum, impium, pestiferum, exitiale, and omni anathemate dignum;
as you will see, my Lords, by reading that argument in the Writing of Effectual
Grace.

Moreover he more forceably encountered the common opinion of the Jesuits. For
after the reciting of those terrible words of Innocent I. against the Pelagians
out of his Epistle to the Council of Carthage, he applied them by a necessary
consequence, which he had before demonstrated by several invincible arguments,
to the defenders of Molina's sufficient Grace. And it is a thing, my Lords, very
worthy of remark, that, before his Holiness, in a public Congregation, and a
Jesuit being present, the doctrine of that society was so vigorously and
resolutely impeached, and so plainly accused of so many heresies, and that
after this was done viva voce we left the same with his Holiness in writing,
persisting to require that those Fathers might be obliged to appear and answer;
and that yet after all this they remained without reply, and silent. We doubt
not, my Lords, but these Fathers would immediately have sought to purge
themselves to the Pope of so capital an accusation, and pursued against us the
reparation of this extreme injury, were they not conscious to themselves of
holding a new doctrine which they cannot justify if they should be obliged to
acknowledge S. Augustine for their Judge, as they cannot refuse him before the
H. See; and were they not persuaded that all which we spoke against them is
very true and easy to be made good, they ought for the sake of injured truth,
and their Societie's reputation, of which they are so jealous, to have made
some defense, were it not that they feared to be publicly convinced, and to
draw upon themselves a new condemnation of their errors after that of the
Congregation de Auxiliis. But however, so long as they appear not to defend
themselves, it will be a great blame upon their Molinistical opinions, and an
ignominy which they will never wipe off before intelligent and equitable
persons.

From this argument drawn from the prayers of the Church, the Fathers proceeded
to the second taken out of S. Augustin's book De Gratia Christi, and especially
from these words in chap. 10. Hanc debet Pelagius gratiam confiteri, si vult
non solum vocari, verum etiam esse Christianus. He showed by sundry passages of
that book, that by this Grace no other can be understood, besides that which is
effectual by it self. Whence he concluded that Molina and our Adversaries
impugn that Grace which is necessary according to S. Augustine, to be confessed
by him that would be truly a Christian. Night came, and constrained him to
break off. He spoke about an hour and half; so that this audience lasted about
four hours. His Holiness was so extremely attentive all the while, that
certainly God increased his strength in so great an age and enabled him to
preserve so great a presence of mind for so long together. And indeed we were
much encouraged thereby to represent to him what we had to say. Their Eminences
were likewise very attentive. The Divines seemed all to take careful notice of
every thing. All the while we were speaking, his Holiness said not a word to
us, but suffered us to proceed without asking any question, or any wise
gainsaying what we alleged.

Having ended, we went to kiss the Pope's feet, and present our five Writings
to him. The first contained a hundred Propositions of the Jesuits against S.
Augustine. The second is that of the Distinction of senses. The third is that of
Effectual Grace. The fourth is touching the first Proposition. The fifth is an
answer to sixty Testimonies of S. Augustine, which M. Hallier and his Colleagues
presented in reference to the first Proposition. By this answer we convinced
them of having alleged all those Testimonies, either falsely and unfaithfully,
or impertinently and perversely; and we draw all our answers from the same
places whence the Testimonies themselves are taken. We send you, My Lords, a
Copy of all these Writings. In the last place we desired his Holiness's
permission for printing a limited number of them here only for the convenience
of examination. His Holiness answered us that he would consider of this
Request, and see whether it were expedient. After which we asked his Holiness,
when it pleased him that we should appear again to continue the handling of
what we had entered upon in this first Audience. He answered us that he had not
yet thought of it, but he would consider upon it. We replied, that however we
beseecht his Holiness to remember the assurance we gave him, that we were
ready to continue what we had begun, and to do any thing that he should appoint
in order thereunto; and after receiving his benediction, we withdrew half an
hour within night.

You see, My Lords, how we have managed the matter in this first Audience, and
with what sincerity we have acted in beginning with the Distinction of the
senses of the five general Propositions, and presenting to the Pope in words
clear and free from all danger of evil sense the five particular Propositions
which we maintain, and which are set down in the second colume of our Writing,
and the contrary ones of our Adversaries which we oppose, and upon which we
desired of his Holiness an express judgment. We conceived it necessary to
leave the whole Writing upon the first Proposition with his Holiness, to the
end he might see that we decline not to enter upon the discussion of the
Propositions, and that all the Writings which we have presented, are in order
to establish the necessary foundations according to the order which has been
always observed by the H. See in the controversies of Grace, and not to avoid
the matter in question, or giving Informations upon the Propositions, as our
Adversaries accused us when we presented our first Writings, touching what has
been acted in relation to the Propositions, and concerning S. Augustin's
authority. We shall hereafter present Writings upon the other four Propositions
according as we come to treat of them. We have proved the first (not in its
general terms, but reduced to the sense which we maintain) by so many
authorities of the Scriptures, Councils, Popes, H. Fathers of the Church, and
particularly of S. Augustine and S. Thomas; and we have so fully and exactly
satisfied every contrary objection, that it is impossible, as we conceive, but
they which read the said Writing will be perfectly convinced therewith.

We have prepared a considerable Writing touching Sufficient Grace held by some
Thomists of later times, for the clearer explication of what we and all other
Disciples of S. Augustine held concerning that kind of Grace, and in what sense
we admit or reject the Sufficient; and for answer to a Writing entitled
Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus, published at Paris under F. Annat's name, and
here presented by M. Hallier and his Colleagues to the Cardinals and Consultors.
But because we have sufficiently cleared this matter so far as it concerns the
Propositions in our writing upon the First, and have justified in a peculiar
Chapter by above a hundred express passages of S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and all
the Popes and H. Fathers, who writ concerning Grace, and of the Councils who
have determined it against heretics, and by the very confession of all the
Jesuits and other Molinists of these latter Times, That Grace Effectual by it
self necessary to an action, gives the next Power to perform it, and that
without the same we cannot proximately perform it, which is the sole Point
wherein the whole difficulty consists; we have reserved this particular Writing
of Sufficient Grace to present to his Holiness, after that upon the first
Proposition has been examined; in case there should yet remain any difficulty
about such Sufficient Grace, to which the new Thomists have had recourse for
the satisfying of Pelagian objections, which may be more loudly refuted by the
constant and indubitable Doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas, without
supposing a Grace and terming it Sufficient, which suffices not to produce the
Effect in question, and which for that cause we account not Sufficient in the
sense controverted between us and our Adversaries; although otherwise we
acknowledge it in its substance, and rejected it nor after S. Augustine and S.
Thomas, but in certain manners which are controverted amongst the Thomist's
themselves, as we demonstrate in the said Writing.

After this public action we went to thank their Eminences for the favorable
hearing they had given us; and they testified to us very great satisfaction. We
see by the blessing of God the Affair in a very good condition, and we hope in
the following Congregations so fully to justify all that we have alleged,
that his Holiness shall more and more find, even before he hear us in presence
of our Adversaries, that we have no other doctrine then that of S. Augustine and
the whole Church; that on the contrary our Adversaries impugn the same, and
all their design has been to destroy it by the artifice of these captious
Propositions, that so Molina may triumph over that H. Doctor of Grace and all
Antiquity. We conceive, My Lords, they are at present sufficiently fallen from
that hope, and will be the further from it according as things shall proceed
forward and be more nearly examined; since after our declaring to the Pope that
we are not the Authors of these captious and ambiguous Propositions, contrived
by the Molinists and presented at their solicitation, that we never defended
them absolutely as they are; that no Catholic holds, or ever held other sense
or other Propositions then those which we presented to him our selves, which
are of a middle nature between the two extremes of Calvin's heresy and
Molina's new opinion; that we shall always hold the same for most Catholic
till they be expressly and particularly condemned by a solemn judgment (which
by Gods help will never be) It Is certain, that so long as the H. Father shall
not expressly judge of our Propositions in their proper terms and their
contraries, the Molinists will not have any advantage; and that if he judge of
them, as we hope, no doubt he will approve ours which are wholly Augustinian,
and condemn those of our Adversaries, conformably to the decisions of the
famous Congregation de Auxiliis.

Having thus began to state the Question, and to lay down our sentiments and
the matter in controversy plainly by the Distinction of senses in this first
Audience, we shall labor more and more by Gods assistance to clear the whole
Controversy with all the care and diligence unto which we conceive our selves
obliged in an Affair so sacred and important.

We are, My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servants, De la Lane, Abbot of
Valcroissant. Des-mares, Priest of the Oratory. De Saint Amor. Manessier.
Angran.


CHAP. XXIV.
Solicitations for permission to print our Writings. Visites to the Cardinals
of the Congregation to present them our Writing of the Distinction of senses,
and thank them for being present at our grand Audience. Congratulations
received thereupon from their Eminences and others. Calumnies made by M.
Hallier and his Colleagues against our Doctrine, and signified to us by Cardinal
Rapaccioli.

WE made no Journal when we writ the foregoing Letter, and therefore only
mentioned in general our principal Visits from the day of our audience to that
of our writing it; but now to continue the same order to the end which I have
hitherto held in this Narration, I must give a more particular account of those
Visits and the principal things which passed therein.

Tuesday May 20. being the next day after our audience, we went in the morning
to Cardinal Spada. We tendered to him our thank and our excuses for the time
which the favorable hearing he gave us the day before had cost him. He answered
us very civilly that that time was well employed, and that 'twas not possible
to be weary of hearing people speak so well as we did. The Abbot of
Valcroissant made him a brief Account of all the Writings which we had
presented to the Pope, and told his Eminence, that were the connection of all
these Propositions with Effectual Grace to be demonstrated of each in
particular as copiously and clearly as we could do it, had we but one to handle
at a time, it would be far more conspicuous and appear with greater luster and
evidence then it could the day preceding, when we were obliged to speak of all
at the same time in haste and few words, and only to give a general Idea of all
our thoughts and pretensious in this Affair. The Cardinal asked whether we had
presented all our Writings? We answered him that we had presented all as far as
the first Proposition inclusively, and should present others according as we
should be heard, and could proceed in the explication which we were to make
viva voce of those already presented, and in the discussion of the whole
Affair. We told him also, that we wished we could have had Copies ready of all
those which we had presented to the Pope, to present to their Eminences; that
we had endeavored it as much as possible; but the most we could do, was to
provide Transcripts of the Distinction of senses, as that which was to be
presupposed to all the rest, and fit to give the first Model of our thoughts
upon all the Propositions (and at the same time we presented one to Cardinal
Spada) till we could bring the rest to his Eminence, as we hoped to do shortly,
and in a manner much more commodious to him and every one else then Manuscript
Copies, if we could obtain permission to print them upon the conditions
mentioned in our memorial to the Master of the sacred Palace, which we related
to his Eminence. The Cardinal answered, that 'twas not the custom to print
Writings touching affairs which pass in the H. Office. But presently recalling
what he bad said of the H. Office; It Is true, said he, this cause is nor there,
but it comes near the matters which are transacted there. We insisted upon the
necessity of this Impression, and the better to inform him of the conditions
whereunto we restrained our selves in this demand, I read to him our Memorial
to the Master of the sacred Palace. After he had heard it, we took leave of his
Eminence, who spoke nothing further about our Impression, although he
accompanied us with a countenance more free and pleasant then ordinary.

The Ambassador had desired us the foregoing Evening to dine with him this day,
that we might discourse more at leisure of the passages of our Audience. We
went accordingly, and in the afternoon had a very conference. I read to him the
last Memorial presented to the Pope, and the other to the Master of the sacred
Palace. He offered to take the latter, and speak to the Pope about it on
Friday. We thankt him for his obliging Proposal, and being I had only a foul
draught of it, I told him I would bring him a Copy on Thursday.

When we were returned home, we understood that the General of the Augustines
had been there to see us, and that he was accompanied with three or four
principal Fathers of his Order, to congratulate us for the great success we
had had in our Audience, whereof he had been a witness; to thank us for all
that we had spoken in defense of S. Augustine and his Doctrine; and to testify
to us how greatly he and his whole Order accounted themselves beholden to us
for it. But though he found us not at home, yet the extreme satisfaction which
he received from our Audience, and his impatience to express the same to us,
caused him to come again accompanied with the same Fathers on Wednesday the 21.
in the morning. I was gone abroad, but my Colleagues were still in their lodging
and received this obliging and agreeable Visit. I doubt not that many
remarkable things were spoken in it; but being I was not there, and writ down
nothing which they then told me, I cannot remember any particular besides the
great satisfaction they all four had in having seen this General and his
Fathers so well pleased with us, and animated for our cause.

I was gone in the mean time to Cardinal Barberin, to tell him something of our
Audience upon the way to la Minerve whether I designed to accompany him. At la
Minerve I found nothing but congratulations for the good success of our
Audience. F. Reginald among others told me, that having inquired news thereof
of the Master of the sacred Palace, this good Father told him that we had
spoken audacter, modeste, docte, pie, Confidently, modestly, learnedly, and
piously. My Colleagues, as we had agreed, met me at S. Louis whether we went to
visit Cardinal S. Clement together, partly to acquaint him with what had passed
before the Pope, and partly to give him a Copy of the Distinction of senses,
whereby he might see how conformable our Sentiments were as well to those of
his Order, as to those of the Church. We did so, and this Cardinal looked upon
us, (as he told us expressly) as the sole persons who had the means and liberty
to defend the Catholic faith at this time, so unworthily distressed by such a
multitude of people who ought to interesse themselves in its behalf as well as
we. When we left him we went to Montecavallo, from whence M. Manessier being
indisposed, was forced to repair home. Nevertheless we visited Cardinal
Pamphilio without him, and gave his Eminence thanks for the favorable hearing
he had given us, and for his attention to what we spoke. He answered us, That
'twas a very delightful thing to hear people who spoke so well as we did. We
presented him a Copy of the Distinction of senses; and as we were going to tell
him of the other Writings which we had presented to his Holiness, he told us
that he had seen them all (Perhaps 'twas at the moment of their delivery to the
Pope) We signified to him our design to print them, what reasons obliged us
thereunto, and upon what conditions we had requested permission for it from the
Master of the sacred Palace. He answered us, he would speak to the Pope about
it in the Evening; whereupon I told him, I would bring him a Copy of our
Memorial touching that matter, to the end himself and his Holiness also might
therein more distinctly see the reasons and conditions of our demands. At the
end of Vespers I carried him a Copy, which he received with great courtesy, and
assured me again that he would not fail to speak of it to his Holiness in the
Evening.

But before we went to Vespers, we had time to visit F. Luca Vadingo, who made
us a compendious recital of all that we had spoken before the Pope. He
professed great approbation of it, and told us, he believed we had changed his
Holiness's thoughts, cogitationes sanctitatis suae. He said, The report of the
great success of our audience was already spread throughout Rome; That in the
morning he had seen two or three Cardinals, amongst others Pimentel, who told
him that the business was related to them very much to our advantage; That this
last said he should have been glad to have heard us; That it was affirmed to
him by some, speaking of us, that egregie se gesserunt, and that he answered
his Eminence, that it might be said, maxim egregie. That he wished he were
acquainted with the Ambassador, that he might go to congratulate with him for
the glory of this action, because indeed we had done honor to France.

From F. Vadingo we went to accompany the Ambassador to the Vespers of the
Ascension. As we were going before him into the Chapel, F. Celestin was coming
forth, and told me, as he passed by and saluted me with a pleasant countenance,
Monsu De la Lane mi diede la l' altro giorno, mi rapi il cuore, Monsieur de la
Lane put life into me the other day, he ravished my heart. Having heard Vespers,
I carried Cardinal Pamphilio a Copy of our Memorial to the Master of the sacred
Palace, as I said above. And afterward, M. de Valcroissant, F. Des-mares and
my self went to visit Cardinal Barberin, with whom we spent about half an hour.

Upon Ascension day, after Mass, I went to Cardinal Pamphilio, to know whether
the Pope allowed of our Impression, to the end we might set about it the next
day. The Cardinal was already retired; ann I desired his Maistre de Chamber to
tell him the business of my coming to him. He went and spoke to his Eminence,
and came back and told me, che nero haveva altra riposta. I inquired the
meaning of this word: He told me, that either his Eminence had not yet spoken
to the Pope, or the Pope had resolved upon nothing. Coming from Montecavallo, I
met Monsignor d' Ornano, who took me up into his Coach and carried me to my
Lodging. By the way, he told me, that un tal signor mineti told him, that the
Pope was marvailously satisfied with our Audience, especially with the Abbot of
Valcroissant's Speech.

In the Evening I carried the Ambassador a Copy of our Memorial to the Master
of the sacred Palace, as I had promised him, and I told him what Cardinal
Pamphilio had undertaken to do for us in this Affair, and therefore desired him
to speak to him about it the next day when he saw him. As for the Pope, I left
it to the Ambassador to speak what he thought fit to his Holiness, since
Cardinal Pamphilio had promised to speak to him about it himself. But I desired
the Ambassador, that whatever he pleased to do, he would procure us License for
our Impression by the next day, that we might set the Printer to work
forthwith; and also that he would assure the Pope, that in the ensuing
Congregations we would abridge all things as much as possible, and be as little
tedious to his Holiness, the Cardinals and Consultors as could be, as we had
done in some measure in our first audience, of the length of which no body
complained; but on the contrary, every one testified extraordinary
satisfaction. The Ambassador seemed well pleased with this great success, and
asked me, whether it was not good counsel which he gave us to appear and be
heard; because, had we persisted in refusing to be heard except in presence of
our Adversaries, this had never happened: whereas appearing as we had done, they
who heard us knew what we said to them, and moreover saw what necessity there
was of hearing us contradictorily. I told the Ambassador that we expected this
from Gods mercy and the Pope's justice; and that when it came to pass, the
things which we had to say would become more apparent; and that if our
Adversaries had been present at those which we had already spoken, they would
have been more evident then they were; because had we spoken any one thing
untrue, our Adversaries might have accepted against it; and withal been obliged
to assent to such as they could not contradict. That in like manner were we
present at their audience, designed to be within few days, they would be
obliged to abstain from many calumnies and falsities which otherwise they would
take the liberty to utter; or in case they ventured to speak the same in our
presence, we should be able to make them and the whole Assembly sensible of
their injuriousnesse in speaking so. The Ambassador told me, he would take
occasion to tell the Pope all this, and that if his Holiness thought good, he
might cause both sides to appear in this manner

M. Manessier's indisposition continued still, and we continued our Visits
without him. After we had accompanied the Ambassador to his ordinary audience
on Friday May 23. we went to Cardinal Ginggi's appartment. We thankt him for
the time and patience which he had afforded to our audience, and after an
obliging and affable answer, he fell to speak of F. Adam's book, whose
exorbitances he could not sufficiently comprehend. He asked us, whether the
Ordinaries of places did not provide against such disorders? That their duty
obliged them to remedy the same. We answered him that it happened so sometimes;
as when F. Brisacier's book against the purity of the Doctrine and Manners of
the Abbey of Port Royal was condemned, and when the scandalous Chronicle of the
Fueillant was suppressed; but we also mentioned the difficulties and obstacles
which sometimes obstructed this course of justice. We spoke concerning the
Impression of our Writings; the Cardinal understood the thing as if we desired
the same liberty wherewith other books are ordinarily printed; but to undeceive
him in that conceit, I read to him the conditions of our Request mentioned in
our Memorial to the Master of the sacred Palace.

From thence I returned to the Pope's Presence Chamber; the Ambassador stayed
with his Holiness till half an hour after twelve. I accompanied him to
Cardinal Pamphilio; and as I returned with him in his Coach, he told me that
the Pope said, we had spoken to his Holiness about our Impressi^, but the word
Impression sounded somewhat ^h; that it was a thing of consequence; that h^
^ould consult with the Cardinals about it; that t^ Festivals must first be
over, and then it should (...) taken into consideration. As for Cardinal
^mphilio, the Ambassador told me, that his Emine^ ^e would readily have
consented to it, had it depe^ ^ed on himself.

Car^al Cechini, one of the five deputed for our Co^regation, could not be
present at that which (...) held before the Pope; by reason of his
misund^tanding with his Holiness, which still continu^ We visited him this day
in the afternoon, ^ounted to him all that had passed, and gave hi^ copy of the
Distinction of Senses, as we had ^e to the rest. I shall mention here by the
way, that to the end these Copies might be as authenti^as so many Originals, we
subscribed them all and ratified them with our accustomed Seals. C^dinal
Cechini told us, he was sorry that he could (...) be present at our audience;
and in reference the Propositions which had been advanced ag^ist S. Augustine,
concerning which we spoke to ^m, he told us, that that was it which touched hi^
and gave him the greatest trouble; Est id, sa^he, quod me auget and me urget
maxim. We ^nswer'd him, that we hoped shortly to present hi^ all our Writings,
having demanded I permission (...) print them; but as for M, de Velcroissant's
spe^h, being it was not to be printed with our Writi^ is, we presented him a
copy of it; which he r^eiv'd with many expressions of satisfaction.

From this Visit we went to Cardinal Rapaccioli, to whom we ^elated the
passages of our audience; he thankt us and told us that his being at Rome was
only acc^ental, that he had studied there matters only so (...) as to satisfy
his curiosity, and not to judge of them; and nevertheless to tell us what he
thought of ^he Propositions, he said, he accounted them he those pictures which
represented on one side an ^ngel, and on the other a Devil; which are lovely if
b^eld one way, and affrighting if considered anot^er. That the same might be
said of these Propo^ions, by reason of their good and bad senses; That we had
the unhappiness, that although we h^d not their bad senses, yet people that
held them ^ere joined with us; and in case those people pr^v'd the cause that
the Propositions were condemned by reason of such bad senses, yet we, who
dis^en'd the holding of them, should not be condemned I diverted this Cardinal
as much as I could from th^s belief, and assured him that what he newly spoke
was a mere calumny and an artifice employed by our adversaries for the more
easy obtaining of the condemnation of the Propositions, to the end they might
make what use thereof they pleased; that in truth no Catholic in France held
the Propositions otherwise then we did. He told us our Adversaries having been
lately with him, complained to him, that Women began to allege in confession
that they had not power to resist a temptation. We answered him that this was
another calumny contrived to render a holy doctrine odious and ridiculous; that
yet were this abuse of it as true as it was false, nevertheless the doctrine
and the truth ought not and could not receive any prejudice from it. Whence we
took occasion to tell him that all these ^ings evinced the necessity of
establishing such Congregation as we demanded, wherein the a^ ^gations of
either party against the other in pre^ce of them both might be carefully
examined, a^ neither of them venture to speak things in ^e air, which could
turn only to their own co^sion, when the other had full liberty to defer^
themselves according to the ordinary way of ^stice; and nothing might be
admitted upon will and calumnious suggestions, but only what s^uld be justified
by good proofs. The Cardinal^ ^d, such a Congregation was a thing much to be
v^t, but he fell still upon his first conceit, namely the bad senses of the
Propositions procured their ^ondemnation, the same would in no wise hu^us who
maintained them not. Whereupon we ^ere fain to reiterate to him three or four
several ^nes, that there was no ground to speak of a con^mnation in this affair
by reason of the bad senses ^not only because the Propositions were advan^ by
the Prosecutors of their condemnation pu^osely to make advantage thereof
against the t^th, and for that these bad senses were not held I (...) any
Catholic; but also because it was requisit^ to consider the truths whereof
they were ca^ble, and which were hidden, obscured and im^gned under them. He
also mentioned a proje^ for the H. See to find out a medium in which ^e parties
might agree. Whereunto we answe^d that indeed 'twas a good thing to bring parts
to a just temper and to reduce them thereunto ^om vicious extremes; but when
but one of them (...) in such vicious extreme, and the other is alread^ in the
middle, the latter must be left in its pl^e, and only the other reduced. For
example, if ^here be two men, the one covetous and the other prodigal; they
ought both of them to be redu^ to the moderation and middle management o^ the
Liberal; but when one is liberal and the other covetous, we must not talk of
reclaiming both of them to a medium, but leave the liberal in his station,
since he is already in the middle, and r^uce the covetous to it who is remote
from it. That thus since by God's mercy we have been so ^ppy as to hold the
middle, wherein the Catholici^ faith is found, which we defend against declared
h^reticks as well as against the Jesuits, it is a goo^ work to compare the one
with the one with the other, and endevor to reduce each of them to the middle
wherein we are; but if we be compa^d with either of them, a medium between us
cannot in justice be propounded. Upon which occasion we did not forget that
excellent passage of S. Augustine in his second book ad Bonifacium, cap. 2.
touching the reproaches which the Pelagians o^ ^st upon the Catholics of being
Manichees, which we applied to the Jesuits and the Calvinists by changing the
names: Desinant itaque Pelagiani Catholicis objectare, good non sunt, nec ideo
si velint h^beri amabiles, quia odioso Manichaeorum alversantur errori, sed
merito se agnoscant odibiles, quia suum non aversantur ererrorem. Possunt enim
duo errores inter se esse contrarii, sed ambo sunt detestandi quia sunt ambo
contrarii veritati. Nam si propterea sunt diligendi Pelagiani, quia oderunt
Manichaeos, diligendi sunt and Manichaei, quia oderunt Pelagianos. Sed absit ut
Catholica matter Ecclesia propter alterorum odium, alteros eligat amare, cum
monente at que adjuvante Domino debeat utrosque vitare, and cupiat utrosque
sanare.

In the course of the Visites which we made since our audience, we had been
twice or thrice to wait upon Card. Ginetti without effect. On Sunday May 25. we
went again, and found him with Card. Colonia. He was to go abroad as soon as he
had reconducted this Cardinal; and therefore when he departed, we presented our
selves below to Cardinal Ginetti to give him our thanks. But he would not speak
with us till we were gone up and sealed in the ordinary way. We had no sooner
begun our thanks, but he told us it was his part to thank us; That he should be
glad to hear us a hundred times; that we spoke with vivacity, ingenuity,
clearness and freedom. Li sentirci volentieri cento volte; hanno parlato con
vivacita con spirito, con chiarezza, con franchezza. Whereto he added some
other obliging terms which I did not remember. We presented him a Copy of the
Writing of Distinction of senses, and told him we hoped to present him all the
rest printed.

Leaving him, we went to the General of the Dominicans, and gave him likewise a
Copy of the above said Writing; by which we told him he should see, that if
after that explication we were in any danger of being condemned, the doctrine
of S. Thomas, which was that of his Order, would run the same fortune, as well
as that of S. Augustine. He said, he had done his utmost to intervene in our
affair, but the Pope had absolutely hindered him, because he would not meddle
with the controversy which Clement VIII. had left undecided; that he omitted
nothing that lay in his power to further our cause, but having been interdicted
to intervene in it, they could not appear in it, and durst not speak. He told
us Cardinal de Medicis spoke to him for a Copy of our Writings to send to the
Duke of Florence. To which we answered that when they were printed, we would
give him one both for that use and for any other he pleased. He said it was a
strange thing how extraordinarily well pleased the Pope was with the
Congregations held before him; and that when Prince Justinian acquainted him
with what the Pope Paid at Signora Olympia's Palace upon the day of the
Annuntiation, he said his Holiness used these words; Non potete credere il
gusto ch' halbiamo in questo Congregationi. Le faremmo durare tree o quattro
altre hoar, se non, etc. You cannot believe, (said the Pope) what pleasure we
take in these Congregations. We would have them last three, or four hours
longer, were it not for the sake of the good old men who are standing all the
while.

CHAP. XXV.
New rumors of the Bull against the Propositions. A considerable word of
Cardinal Ghiggi in our favor concerning the same. Cardinal Pimentel's public
entrance into Rome; he takes this occasion to divert the Pope from the design
of his Bull, but in vain. M. Hallier and his Colleagues are not heard before the
Pope, and the reason. My last conference with Cardinal Ghiggi. F. Modeste's
pretension to the Generalship of his Order frustrated.

THere was a Consistory on Monday May 26. in which two things passed worthy of
remark: One, that a man unknown to M. de Vertamont, a Counselor of the
Parliament, who was then at Rome, addres'd himself to him, and asked him,
whether, when I spoke to him on Friday before in the Pope's Presence Chamber, I
did not say to him, that after his Holines's judgment, it would be requisite to
have that of a general Council. Whereunto M. de Vertamont said, that I never
spoke any such thing to him or like it. The other, that the same Cardinal who
discoursed so largely with Cardinal Ghiggi in the Consistory of the fifth of
this month touching the Bull, of which a report was spread and afterward
smothered, discoursed with him again upon the reviving of the same, as a most
certain and resolved thing. Cardinal Ghiggi fairly acknowledged it; but to
justify it, he added that the Propositions had no relation to S. Augustine or
S. Thomas. The other Cardinal finding it in vain to oppose it further, began to
speak of it as a thing concluded, and asked Cardinal Ghiggi with what
solemnities the Bull was to be published; particularly whether we should be
required to subscribe to the condemnation of the Propositions, Cardinal Ghiggi
wondered at this question, and told him none were required to subscribe to the
condemnation of any doctrine whatsoever, but such as maintained it; and
therefore there was no thought of causing us to subscribe to that of the
Propositions, since we never maintained them.

Tuesday the 27 M. de Valcroissant, M. Angran and I went in the morning to see
the General of the Augustines, and thank him for his courteous and obliging
visit the week before: He received ours with extreme kindness, and showed us
the Original VVriting of of Clement VIII's. hand wherein was written half in
Italian and half Latin, the famous speech which he made at the opening of the
Congregation de Auxiliis held under his Pontificate, in which that Pope most
solidly, establishes the authority of S. Augustin's doctrine; and as far as I
could observe by what this General read of it to us, the expressions of that
great Pope were more emphatical and vehement for the said doctrine then what I
have seen thereof in several books wherein it is mentioned. He showed us also
diverse other original pieces upon the same matter, and gave us hope of copies
of them in time, but durst not give us any yet. We knew not that that which was
found among Cardinal Roma's Papers had been given to him; but he showed us the
Informations upon the three first Propositions which were made for that
Cardinal by the excellent Divines above spoken of, and asked us whether we knew
how he might recover what was written by the same hand upon the two others.
As Soon as I saw them, I intimated to him, that I knew whence he had them, and I
told him, that it was in vain to seek after what the same Divine had written
upon the two last Propositions, because he writ only upon the three first,
having been obliged to depart from Rome as soon as he had done with them, to a
considerable employment given him by the Pope.

As we were returning home, we met an Abbot a friend of ours, who told us that
he came from the Pope's Presence Chamber, and that we had hindered him from
having audience that day, by reason of a Congregation which his Holiness held
about our affair with the four Cardinals who were present at our grand
audience. I asked him whether none were there but they. He answered me that M.
Albizzi was there too, but as for Consultors, he had not seen any. He added
that a friend of M. Hallier's told him the day before, that this Doctor said
this Congregation was to be held, but it would be the last that should be held
about our affair. As Soon as this Abbot spoke of this Congregation, I no longer
doubted but it was the last, and that our business was absolutely at an end,
as I testified to him and my Colleagues immediately.

Nevertheless we went in the afternoon to carry Cardinal Cechini M. de
Valcroissants Oration as we had promised him; but not finding him at home, we
made some other visites, in the course having seen M. Hallier and his Colleagues
going, as we conceived, to M. Albizzi to understand the news of the
Congregation held in the morning. I caused one to follow them, and accordingly
found that we were not mistaken in our Conjecture, because they went first to
the Penitentiary Jesuits of S. Peter, and from thence to M. Aldizzi.

Wednesday the 28th. we went again to carry Cardinal Cechini the Oration.
When he had received it and thankt us for it, he told us that after our
departure, the last time we visited him, he fell to read our writing of the
distinction of senses, and liked it vety well, because we explained our
sentiments very sincerely and clearly. He said also that he was very well
pleased with two particularities which he took notice of in the last
entertainment. One, that we had showed him that the Bishops who subscribed the
letter of M. de Vabres, desired only a Decision upon the Propositions, and not
a declaration against them. What he spoke upon this matter obliged us to
answer him, and the discourse fell insensibly to other reflections, so that he
mentioned not the other particularity wherewith he said he was well pleased.
After we left this Cardinal, I went to see F. Vbaldino, and told him how
inclined we heard the Pope was to publish a condemnation, notwithstanding his
contrary judgment of his Holines's intentions; but none of these rumors
startled this person who well understood his Holines's temper, and conceived
him so very circumspect and prudent, that he could not believe it possible for
him ever to be brought to it, because, said he, the least difficulty is enough
to stop him, Ogni picciola cost a basta per fermare il Papa.

Cardinal Pimentel, who arrived at Rome a while before, remained there hitherto
incognito. On Thursday the 29. he made his entrance and cavalcade. And having
been exactly informed of what passed in our affair, since his arrival, he
resolved not to let the opportunity of this ceremony pass, without speaking to
the Pope of it, and beseeching his Holiness not to precipitate any thing, but
to give him time to represent what important things he had to acquaint him with
concerning it, in regard of the dangerous consequences which were to be feared
from it. Accordingly he spoke to the Pope of it privately upon occasion of this
ceremony, and particularly asked him what a thing it would be if the doctrine of
S. Augustine and S. Thomas came to receive any impeachment by this condemnation?
The Pope answered him that the matter had been carefully examined in his own
presence, that he had caused prayers to be purposely made for it, that the
question was found to be neither concerning S. Augustine, nor S. Thomas, nor
their doctrine; and it was necessary to do something against Jansenius's book.

The same morning in the course of this ceremony I met a person very well
informed of things, who told me that the Pope would give no more audience, but
had given order to prepare the Bull. I asked him, since when? He answered me,
since the last Congregation which was held on the Tuesday preceding. I learned
afterward that M. Albizzi coming to Cardinal Pamphilio in the Consistory,
presented his Eminence a paper folded up, upon which these words were written,
Expediatur pro festo Pentecostes. I apprehended that it was the order which
himself had given for it since the Congregation of Tuesday, and the Expedition
of it rendered to him, which he delivered to this Cardinal. But I knew several
days before, when the Votes of the Consultors were writ down in the house of
the Inquisition that it was fully resolved upon to expedite this affair in the
feast of Pentecost, no doubt to make the more show in the solemnity of the
descent of the H. Ghost upon the Faithful, and to insult the more highly over
such as gloried in the intention which Clement VIII. had, the year of his death
(which happened in March) to publish his Bull against the Jesuits after the
Vespers of this day in presence of the sacred College, and to create F. Lemos
a Cardinal; as also to give those Fathers more ground to be quit with such as
should upbraid them with it, and gloriously to abolish the memory of it by a
contrary most favorable success upon the same day. See the Copy of a short
letter sent to me by an eminent Dominican, whilst those Votes were transcribing
in the H. Office, wherein he gave me notice of M. Albizzi's urgency for haste's
which moved him angerly to tell the Father of that Order who were employed
therein, but made not speed enough according to his fancy, That they were as
stubborn as Mules, and would be the cause that the business could not be ready
against Pentecost.

Si scrivono (said he) li voti al Saint' Officio, and non sono in ordine
ancora. Albici in colera proruppe and disse, Questi frati di San Dominico sono
ostinati come muli: sono causa che non si spedira questa facenda ne anco alla
pentecost.

I was the more amazed to see these preparations, for that I certainly knew M.
Hallier and his Colleagues had not been once heard yet before the Pope, and I
had not forgot that the Ambassador said they should be heard after us. They
should indeed, though it were but for ceremony; and it was so designed when we
were heard; but they who managed their interests, remembering what those Doctors
had done in the Congregation held at Cardinal Spada's palace January 27.
wherewith nevertheless they were it that time satisfied, and whereby they
perceived of what they were capable, foreseeing the great disproportion there
would be between what they could do before the Pope, and what we had done; and
it would be such as would perhaps render them ridiculous and despicable to the
Pope and a great part of the Congregation; conceived it the safest way for
those Doctors and for the accomplishment of their design of extorting a
condemnation from the Pope, not to stand upon this formality, but to dispense
with them from appearing before the Pope. Wherefore reflecting afterward upon
what F. Guerin had told me in a Visit upon Thursday in the afternoon, I did not
wonder so much as I had done at the first notice of such shameful
unworthiness, namely, their beginning to publish at Rome wherever they came,
that they did not desire to speak before the Pope, nor account it necessary;
that should they appear, they had nothing else to say but what they had said
before the Congregation at Cardinal Spada's house January 27. and that his
Holiness was sufficiently informed thereof by the relations of such as heard
them. Nevertheless, for the better coloring of this tergiversation, they
added that should the Pope desire to hear them and send for them, then they
would appear; but whilst they spoke this, they knew they should never be
summoned.

In the evening I acquainted my Colleagues with what I had learned concerning
the preparatious of the Bull which was talked of, to the end I might consult
with them whether any thing could be done by us to stop the blow; but we all
consented that after what we had done, there was no more to be done on our
part, saving to redouble our prayers and sighs before God.

Yet, to omit nothing of what we ought to do before men, but to continue acting
to the last according as we were obliged, I went to Card Ghiggi on Friday the
30th. in the afternoon, I carried to him the several Title pages and beginnings
of F. Annat's book entitled Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus, etc. according to
my promise the last time we visited his Eminence altogether. I told him this
Jesuits deceitful way of writing, so full of impostures and disguises, that
the same were not to be unridled and discovered, but by one that was thoroughly
informed of the matter. I did not dissemble the purity and clearness of his
style; but withal I presented his Eminence the Preface of that work, in which I
assured him, he would of himself discover many lies touching things which his
Eminence understood, and this Writer advanced with as much confidence and
boldness as if they had been most certain truths. The Cardinal neglected what I
said to him concerning this subject, and did not deign to read the Preface,
though it was but of two little pages. I told him also, that the body of this
book was full of the like falsities, and yet it was one of the Writings of M.
Hallier, and his Colleagues, presented to the Congregation. How? (said the
Cardinal) have they presented it to the Cardinals? I answered, that I did not
affirm so much of my own knowledge; though I could not doubt but they did,
being I knew that they gave it to a Consultor, who lent it to a friend of mine,
from whom I had it; and (for fear of never seeing it again) copied it out. The
Cardinal replied hereunto with a careless accent, as telling me, 'twas a thing
sufficiently superfluous to present Writings to the Consultors, because the
Pope never intended to admit of a contestation between the Parties in this
Affair; nevertheless, (as 'twere) correcting what he had said, he added, that
yet 'twas good that they saw what both the one and the other had to say; which
I interpreting, as if he meant that we had presented two Writings to the
Consultors, I answered, that for our part we had not given to any (pas mesme un
seul morceau de papier) not so much as one scrap of Paper; Nor any thing upon
the Propositions to any one but the Pope at the end of our grand Audience. The
Cardinal said, we presented some at the beginning. I answered him, that we gave
none then but that de Gestis, and another concerning S. Augustin's authority;
nor these to any but the Cardinals, and that upon a certain presumption, that
the same would forthwith be communicated to our Adversaries. The Card. said,
that Cardinal Spada had showed them to the Consultors. I answered nothing to
this, but told him, that we had not yet presented to Cardinal Pamphilio the
copy which we got ready for him, because 'twas a long time ere we knew of his
being of the Congregation; and when we knew it, some time was requisite for
preparing a copy; and since it was ready, we had gone several times to present
it to him, but could not find him at convenience to receive it, till the time
of doing it was insensibly passed; that it remained still in our hands, and we
kept it to present to him in case a fitting time returned. Whereupon I took
occasion to ask this Cardinal, whether he knew that any thing was appointed
concerning the permission to print our Writings which we requested. He
answered, that he accounted it a difficult thing. I told him what Offices the
Ambassador and Cardinal Pamphilio had done for us to the Pope about it, and
that his Holiness answered, He would consult with their Eminences concerning
it during the Festivals. I reminded him of the conditions and restrictions of
our Request, and beseecht him to be favorable to us therein; whereof he gave
me some hopes. Then I showed him F. Brisacier's Book, the Archbishop of Paris
his censure upon it, and the Letter which the Jesuits published against this
censure. I told him that these Fathers said of those of the Faculty of Paris,
Non transeant Sequanam; of those of Rome, Quid Romanae Censurae cum Gallia?
That they termed Rome a foreign Power, even in matters of Doctrine, as I
showed him that M. Hallier had complained in the Defense of this Doctrine which
he published against them Anno 1644. in which work also this Doctor complained
that the Jesuits decry'd him as a Calumniator, a Heretic and an enemy of
Religious life. I likewise showed him that passage of F. l' Abbe, Brevi
loquetur Roma quid senserit Augustinus aut quid sentire debuerit. Whereunto the
Cardinal answered that the Jesuits might say, that by Augustinus they meant
Jansenius, in regard of his Book entitled Jansenii Augustinus. I showed him
clearly by the reading of some words both at the end and beginning, that this
was spoken of the true S. Augustine of Hippo, that great Doctor of Grace. He
read over F. l' Abbe's Advertisement to the Reader, and persisted in his
ingenuous subtilty and put-off, that the Jesuits might say, it was meant of
the Augustine of Ipre; after which I gave his Eminence the good night.

When I was returned to our Lodging, M. Angran told me, that F. Reginald had
sent to acquaint him, that he understood by two or three hands that the Bull
was printing, and would come forth the next day.

Saturday May 31. I learnt in a Visit, that the report of the Bull was renewed
on Thursday morning, and come to the ears of the Procurator General of the
Dominicans, by whom his General was advertised thereof, who seeing Cardinal
Pimentel already engaged in the ceremony of his entrance, yet forbore not to go
to Monte Cavallo, to acquaint him therewith in two words at the end of the
Ceremony, to the end he might speak to the Pope about it. That this General
having afterward sent F. de Terrasanta to his Eminence to know the success,
the Cardinal gave him the account above related, namely, that he had
remonstrated to the Pope the danger of this Affair, and the sad consequences to
be apprehended from it; and that the Pope answered him, that every thing had
been carefully examined in Congregations before himself; That 'twas certain the
Propositions had no relation to S. Augustine and S. Thomas, their Doctrine, or
the matter de Auxiliis; That the Cardinal offered to reiterate and press his
Remonstrances; but found the Pope so fixed in this mind and resolution, that he
saw not how to proceed; and that his Holiness was absolutely persuaded that it
was requisite to do something against Jansenius. The same Friend told me
further, tdat he had newly sent to the Apostolical Printing House, to discover
whether the Bull was at the Press, but the doors were all shut, and he
believed it was a printing; That therefore he had some suspicion that it would
be published after Vespers or in the Chamber of Presence. I went to Vespers in
the afternoon, and to the Presence Chamber both before and after Vespers, to be
a witness of all that passed there, in case any thing were done about
publishing the Bull; but I saw nothing there more then usual, saying that all
the Conventual Cordeliers who had chosen their General in the morning came with
him in great number to salute the Pope and kiss his Holinesse's feet.

F. Modeste was of this Order and pretended to this Generalship. There was a
Statute of the Order which rendered him incapable of being nominated. For the
removing of which obstacle he obtained an express Brief of the Pope. Cardinal
Pamphilio was Protector of this Order (that is, in plain terms according as
things are transacted, the Master and Sovereign of it) and on Friday he went in
person purposely to solicit the suffrages of the Friars in favor of F.
Modeste. Now this Cardinal having conferred with the said Fathers about the
matter, held himself so assured of this Election, that on Friday he told the
Pope, who concerned himself therein, that the business was as good as done. On
Saturday very early he returned to speak to those Fathers again that he might
keep them in the same mind: but several of the Fathers looking upon this
proceeding as having some show of violence, there arose a loud cry amongst the
multitude, Liberta, Liberta, Liberte, Liberte, which cry was begun by certain
French. Hereupon Cardinal Pamphilio, who before accounted the thing most
certain, withdrawing himself, that he might avoid giving occasion to those
complaints, and leave them to make their Election in peace, the Friars chose an
other then F. Modeste: which being reported to Cardinal Pamphilio, he conceived
himself obliged to give the Pope notice thereof forthwith. The Pope seeing this
so sudden change of the state wherein this Cardinal told him things were the
day before, said these words to him, perhaps partly in jest and partly
otherwise, Veramente nuscirete been in un Conclave, It Is likely you would speed
well in a Conclave.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Letters writ to me from Paris during the month of May and June
concerning my relation of what passed at Rome during May.

SCarce any thing considerable was writ to me by the two first Posts that
returned in May, but what was at least reiterated and spoken more expressly by
those Letters of the three last. Wherefore; to abridge and retrench unnecessary
repetitions, I shall here give an account only of those of the 16th. 23d. and
30th. of this month.

Those of the 16th. spoke of a ridiculous Libel which the Molinists caused to
be cried up and down the streets, whereof they were afterward ashamed. See
what M. de S. Beuve writ to me about it; Since the prank which those of this
City had the boldness to play last week, they have published nothing; they
blush when they are reproacht with the insolence of causing a ridiculous piece
to be cried about entitled, A CATALOGVE INSTRVCTION SENT BY OUR H. F. THE POPE
AGAINST THE JANSENISTS. They turn the fault from themselves upon the Hawkers
and Pamphlet-venters.

And nevertheless it is certain, that M. le Moine was the Approbator of it, as
I found by a Letter wrii to me by M. Taignier, May 9. touching the same. The
Libel, says he, whereof I spoke to M. Valcroissant, is published under the
License of M. le Moine, who has written with his own hand at the bottom of the
Frontispiece; THERE IS NOTHING IN THIS WRITING WHICH MAY HINDER IT FROM BEING
PRINTED. LE MOINE. I have this Writing with le Moine's Original Signature.

The Molinists absolutely affirm, that the Condemnation of the Propositions is
most assured, and will undoubtedly be received at the end of this month.

You will receive F. Annat's book de Ecclesia praesentis temporis, by the
Messenger who sets forth on Tuesday.

In his Letter of the 23d. M. de S. Beuve speaks thus: Sir, I understand by
your last Letter that nothing has been done since Easter, but the reasons
thereof are unknown to me; only people spend their judgments much concerning
this delay. I leave policy to the Italians, and tell you, that you must still
act vigorously and pursue the destruction of Molinism. It makes me somewhat
impatient that the Dominicans have not yet presented their Memorial. I know all
arts are practiced to make them desist. M. de Marguerie, a known disciple of
the Jesuits, though an ancient Counselor of State, proclaims the General of
the Dominicans Pragmatical and ignorant, and takes this liberty even in
speaking to Dominicans, from whom I heard it. Judge whence such language has
its original. M. le Moine lately discoursing in our Court with the Abbot de
Bourzeys and my self, and blaming the Abbot for imposing upon him in his last
book, by accusing him of denying Scientia Media, after some pleasant discourse,
amongst the rest, the Abbot telling, that he did not declare himself for
Scientia Media openly till after the printing, or (at least) writing of this
book, having till the last year avoided the Question, but that he saw how he
drew near Molina every day, inasmuch as he affirmed, that the Grace of Action
cannot be explicated but by Scientia Media; at length the Discourse fell upon
the Declaration of the Dominicans for S. Augustin's Doctrine, and M. le Moine
let slip this word, that only two or three poultry Jacobin's declared
themselves at Rome. I could not suffer this language, but took him up, and told
him that he was mistaken; that the whole Order was of that mind; that I knew it
most perfectly; to all which he was silent. M. Annat said lately, that he
conceived M. Hallier would return speedily. I know not whether it be, because
he is to be at the Council of Tours appointed on the first of July; but I know
certainly that Pass-ports have been sent for him and his Colleagues. Perhaps
they will substitute F. Mulard in their place as a most worthy Deputy, an
exemplary Monastic, and a man of great probity. I wish I may be mistaken
concerning M. N. but I fear I am not. The new-chang'd Propositions are in my
opinion a testimony of the weakness of our Adversaries. Good use must be made
of this opportunity, and two things inculcated to every one. First, That they
endeavor to put the change upon us; and secondly, That they have no order from
the Bishops to demand the Examen of these Propositions. After which they must
be urged to allege the Authors of them, and his Holiness convinced that they
abuse the H. See, by going about to delude it with their malicious and
envenomn'd imaginations. For my part, I confess, I know not with what
conscience M. Cornet contrived the first Propositions, or our Adversaries there
substituted the second. Fail not to demand the condemnation of the Propositions
injurious to S. Augustin's authority at their first Audience. It Is left to your
prudence to propound other Propositions, according as you shall judge expedient.

I think no day in the course of these two years afforded me more Letters
worthy of inserting in this Journal then this thirtieth of May; I have half a
dozen in my hands, whereof the first was from my Lord the Bishop of Chaalons
Sur Marne, and follows in these terms,

Sir,
YOur last gave us some trouble, whereof the Impression would be more grievous,
did not confidence uphold us. I have used all means possible to get these
discoveries from the Nuntio which you desire, and it is very credible he has
not received those orders from Rome which you apprehend. Every thing shall be
particularly signified to you. But I see nothing to fear, upon two grounds;
first, in that there can be nothing disadvantageous to the truth, provided
Effectual Grace be expressly secured, and that sense of the five Propositions
justified; and seeondly, in that, being a thing most just and reasonable, it
seems not possible to be denied you, inasmuch as it is the only undoubted means
to quiet men's minds, and maintain the honor of the H. See. Many considerable
persons intend to write to this effect to Rome, and the Dominicans are as much
concerned to do it, as any. If they do not, they lose their ancient advantages,
and the new Doctrine will prevail by intrigues against that of S. Augustine and
S. Thomas. It is purposed to write largely hereupon to the Fathers Nolano and
Reginald; I doubt not but together within it they will employ all possible care
and zeal therein, and am for ever,

Sir, Your most humble and affectionate servant, F. Bishop, and C. de Chaalons.

The second is from the Abbot de Villars, then Agent General of the Clergy of
France to M. de Valcroissant;, and contained these terms.

Sir,
I Received your Letter of the 18th. of the last month. I was surpised at the
news you have pleased to tell me, that some Doctors of Sorbonne have presented
a Memorial to his Holiness in the name of the Clergy of France, and take upon
themselves the quality of its Deputies. I believe you so intelligent of the
manner of proceeding used by the Clergy of France, as not to be ignorant that
such Commissions are never given but in Assemblies which we convoke our selves.
I can assure you that within these two years that I have been in office, no
power has been granted to treat of these kind of matters with his Holiness;
it was never propounded; There goes forth no act of these Assemblies but what I
sign, and therefore it will not be difficult for you to undeceive those that
have credited this pretense; I wish, Sir, I could render you some other
service, which might further assure you that I am,

Sir, Your most humble and obedient servant, De Villars, Agent General of the
Clergy of France.

The third is from M. de Brousse, to this effect.

Sir,
THis week has been sufficiently peaceable among us, at least so far as things
are come to my knowledge. All that I have learnt, is, that the other day M.
Amiot's Vicar told a friend of mine, that M. Hallier had rent word to his
Master, that the contests of the Jansenists were ended at Rome, and that the
Bull for their condemnation was ready to be published. Moreover, I ha^ seen your
last piece presented to the Pope, touching (...) two false suggestions of the
Jesuits, viz. that our contests have no affinity with those which were handled
in the Congregation de Auxiliis, and a Perpetual Silence has been imposed upon
both parties. I truly say, I never saw any thing more solid, clear and
generous; so that I make no difficulty to believe that it is the H. Ghost, the
bestower of the Victorious grace of Jesus Christ, who guided your Hand and your
Pen for its defense. M. Taignier sent it to me the other day, to translate into
French by order from the Bishop of Chaalons. I have returned it to him this
day, and am only sorry that my French has not the life and gracefulness of
your Italian. I doubt not but he will be ravished with it as well as he has
been with your other Memorials, of which I have writ to them formerly, and
shall tell your further tidings by the next Post.

The fourth is from M. Taignier, as follows.

THe denial to grant F. Des-mares and M. Manessier to be heard contradictorily
with M. Hallier and the Jesuits, is a certain sign of what the Pope intends
to do without hearing Parties. I conceive his Holiness has some particular
design to pass a judgment; but I am persuaded 'twill rather be a judgment
intricate and full of equivocations then a certain judgment, and such as might
be received without any contradiction of the parties.

My LL. the Bishops of Chaalon, Grass and Valence, have spoken to the Nuntio
in such manner as we desired, but could not discover that he had heard any
thing like that you conjectured; nevertheless he has always appeared to have a
prodigious aversion to S. Augustin's Disciples.

Your Memorial was put into French yesterday. My L. of Chaalons showed it to my
other Lords, who accounted it admirable.

The Molinists have confirmed to us this week, that the Pope has given command
for the preparation of the Bull. They hold for certain that it is in hand, and
will speedily come forth. For my part I cannot believe that it is so, both in
regard of what the Pope said to F. Des-mares, and what you have written to me
hitherto; nor shall I ever believe it till I see it here.

The fifth is from M. de Sainte-Beuve, and contains what follows.

YOu signify to us, that F. Des-mares and M. Manessier have had a favorable
Audience from his Holiness, who has promised them to hear you voce and
scripto, and only made a difficulty to grant you a contradictory Conference.
This news does not perfectly satisfy us, since it is of moment that the Pope
understand the deceits of our Adversaries and that truth which we defend, which
cannot be unless he hear you in presence. But the news published here by the
Molinists is much more surprising. They say, that the Pope is going to
pronounce, that the thing is resolved upon, that the Bull is almost made, etc.

This allarmes many persons here, some of whom are of opinion; that you must be
very cautious of appearing, becau^ the Audience granted you will be made use of
only the more to oppress Truth and its defenders, for it will infallibly be
mentioned in the Bull, that in it the parties were heard. Others conceive it
requisite that you appear only to request the Pope to cause our Adversaries to
declare who are the Authors of these Propositions; and to declare that they are
not ours; and that we defend them not saving in the sense of the necessity of
Effectual Grace. I cannot deny, Sir, that there is great reason for either
opinion; and I certainly know, that if that whereof the Molinists boast be
true, it will be a most disadvantageous thing to the H. See, and much abate the
respect and submission which most men have always kept for Rome, and make many
incline to the sentiments of the Richerists. But for my part, whatever others
say, I am of advice, that you appear and speak resolutely; Lay open the
fraudulent practices of our Adversaries, prove them the Authors of the
Propositions which they have obtruded upon us, require an act thereof; declare,
that although they be not ours, yet we conceive that they way have a very
Catholic sense, in which we undertake to defend them. Demand, that judgment be
passed upon this sense. Accuse our Adversaries of Impostures and delusions,
accusing them of troubling the Churches peace, by prosecuting tho condemnation
of the Propositions in the sense of Effectual Grace; and add, that if it
pleases the Pope to receive them as accusers, it may be permitted you to
impeach their doctrine as pernicious and erroneous. This is requisite, Sir, if
you expect to have justice done you. Men may speak high when they demand
nothing beyond the Rules of sincerity and Truth, etc.

However, Sir, Supposing the Pope resolved to pass such a Bull as the Molinists
speak off, yet if you be heard, he cannot but grant you two things: whereof one
concerns our Persons, and the other the Doctrine. As to our Persons, We are
obliged to let the whole Church and posterity know, that we are not the Authors
of the Propositions, but they were maliciously forged by our Adversaries to
make us odious by being charged with them. Your first Memorial presented to his
Holiness is to this effect. And concerning the Doctrine; That the sense, of the
Necessity of Grace effectual by it self, is a Catholic sense, free from all
Censure, and that alone wherein we defend the Propositions. If these two
conditions be added, I shall be contented, and the Church will have peace. Upon
any others, we shall be so far from enjoying a calm, that on the contrary, we
shall fall into a higher storm of dissension then before. We shall be obliged
to make known the sincerity of our intentions, we shall complain of the wrong
done us, and Posterity shall be informed of the truth of things. Be pleased to
consider upon all this; and remember that I have long ago told you, that upnn
this decision will depend the reviving of Richerism in France, whereof I am
greatly afraid, etc.

An other Doctor of Sorbon, a very able and moderate person (to whom I had
often writ during the time that we desired our Lords to send us two or three
persons more to help us in the managing of the matters, especially in the
conferences which we expected to have before the Pope and the Congregations, to
desire him to be one of the number, because I judged him very fit for it)
returned the following answer to my invitation, May 31.

Sir,
I Have received three Letters from you almost altogether, though they be of
very distant dates. One is of the 30th. of September. The supply you have
received by the arrival of the persons who are gone to join with you, may
serve for answer to a good part of what you writ to me, and expect from me. If
I perform not to you, or rather to Truth, the same service which they are going
to do, it is neither through want of zeal or affection, or else I understand not
my self. Proportionably to my knowledge of Truth increases the honor and
esteem I have of it, and I learn to know my self in it; which renders me
always more backward to speak or treat of it, for fear of hurting it whilst I
think to defend it, especially when I see not my self plainly engaged therein.
Although to defend it, that is to withstand the violences and stratagems of
those who go about to oppress it, showing openly their unfaithful dealing,
their calumnies, and the injustice of their proceeding, seems to me more easy
and less hazardous; because this consists more in matters of fact then in
Questions and Controversies. But to pretend to examine it, to clear it, to
commit it to the dispute and censure of its enemies, and to submit it to the
judgment and determination of persons whom you hold suspected, and who in
their best construction, never had the light and knowledge which is necessary
for the comprehension of the matters in question, which are very difficult, and
for the most part very remote from humane sense and reason, as the same is
corrupted by sin; and to distinguish them from the apparences of Truth, under
which Errors are oft-times hid; all which is necessary in order to pronounce
upon, and fully determine the questions at this day in controversy, so that
there remain no seed of future combustion: This is that which I find most
difficult, dangerous, and much above my abilities. It Is neither expedient nor
necessary to define these questions in the Church; they are already
sufficiently defined for such as seek the Truth without passion and interest;
And others will not stand to what shall be now determined, in case it be
conformable to Tradition, and contrary to their new opinions. Believe me, Sir,
if you please, it is neither timorousness nor indifference that detains me; it is
rather the respect and love which I have for the Truth. Had I less knowledge
and experience of the state of the present affairs, perhaps I should be more
bold, and I know not whether I should do better. However, should I fail in
something, I hope God will not impute it, or else easily pardon it, whilst I
keep to keep to his Laws, the guidance of the Church, and the common rules of
prudence humane and divine; Adoring always with all submission his
extraordinary ways, by which he absolutely effects whatever he pleases, and
how he pleases, sometimes even by means and ways wholly contrary to those
which he has established. If it be a kind of little miracle, as you say, that
he on whom the judgment of your affairs depends, has at present an
inclination to be informed thereof, whereas formerly he was troubled to hear
the same mentioned; no doubt you will confess, that there needs another much
greater miracle, whereby he may in a little time have the understanding and
conduct which is necessary for pronouncing certainly, and conformably to the
Truth and Tradition upon Questions so difficult and embroiled by the mixture of
humane reasonings, as those are whereof you seem to demand the decision. I have
formerly told you my mind upon this Point, and the occasion leads me to tell it
you again here, I could not solicit and demand the definition of the affairs
which you manage, and of the Propositions whereunto your conference is reduced.
If God has thought fit to make use of you to hinder the truths of Grace and S.
Augustin's Authority from receiving any prejudice or disparagement, I account
you very happy, and cannot but honor your zeal and fidelity in upholding them
against the attempts and artifices of their enemies; but I believe, 'twere the
best you could do for the present, if you could stop affairs at that point;
not to be overcome, is to triumph in these occasions, and the confusion which
your enemies would have in seeing themselves fallen from their pretensions and
all their cabals without effect, add their calumnies and foul dealing
discovered and known, without having been able to lay any blemish upon the
truths which they aimed to get condemned with so great temerity and
presumption, as that they proclaimed beforehand and affirmed publicly in many
places that they were condemned, would be a signal victory for you, or rather
for the Truth; and such as, in my judgment, may be wished for in the present
disposition of minds and affairs. If any thing is to be desired further,
'twould be to get it declared, that S. Augustin's doctrine touching the matters
of Grace and Predestination is the doctrine of the Church; and to obtain a
prohibition, or rather to renew the Churches ancient prohibitions of condemning
any dogmatical points of that doctrine taught by that H. Doctor. I might add
further, to demand the approbation of the same Doctrine in the book of M. d'
Ipre, who does no more but rehearse it as it is in that of S. Augustine; but I
think this last will be more contested and more difficult to obtain then the
former, which is very easy, if the H. See has any good will for that great
Saint, and for the doctrine of Grace; and whereof there is no fear of missing,
the same having been done already many times by several Popes. It Is a question
of fact, about which there needs no great instruction. The decision thereof
will be glorious to the Pope, and no person of whatever party can be offended
with it, without making himself odious to all the world by declaring himself an
enemy to S. Augustine, who is approved by the whole Church. To conclude, assure
your self of me as a person wholly yours, and believe that I do not forget you
before God, but daily represent to him your necessities and affairs as my own.

Now follow those of the month of June.

The first is from M Taignier, written June 5.

Some Molinists with whom I have had conference the second of this month, told
me, that I had bad intelligence, since I did not agree with them that the Pope
had ordained the passing of a Censure; they assured me that it was perfectly
ready, and that the Pope would undoubtedly publish it at the feast of
Pentecost. I asked them whether the Propositions were censured? They answered,
that some of them were condemned as heretical; that others had the more gentle
modifications, though such as blemished and overthrew them. I told them, I
wondered that after what they had said, that it was almost impossilbe to learn
the particular circumstances of things transacted in any Congregation at Rome;
yet themselves seemed so well informed of things relating to the Examen and
discussion of the Five Propositions, that they must undoubtedly hold
correspondence with those who penned the Bull. They made no Reply, etc.

You cannot imagine what good effect the Letters by this Post have produced;
yet the most advised of our friends are in great anxiety for that the Pope will
not grant you a Conference, because they conceive that the cause now under
debate at Rome, is one of the most important causes that ever were treated in
the Church. Were there no parties in it, as his Holiness admits none, yet he
ought to take the Doctors there of different opinions, and hear them upon the
questions intended to be examined and pronounced upon, since it is the course
always used by the Church in it is decisions. Truth becomes more illustrious
when it is discussed in this manner. Thus were Decisions made in the Council of
Trent, after matters had been disputed by the Doctors, as may be seen in the
Acts of that Council, in which there were no parties, they refusing to appear.

You must make great complaints about the Bull wherewith you are threatened, and
you may vigorously represent to his Holiness, how little respect some have for
him, since at the same time that he in goodness promised F. Des-mares and M.
Manessier, and their Colleagues to hear them, a report is spread abroad, that
his Holiness caused a Bull to be prepared against the Propositions, which is a
thing of great terror. This circumstance well exaggerated with great sweetness
and respect, may make some reasonable impression upon the mind of his Holiness.

I am, etc.

The second being from M. de Saint Beuve, dated the same 5th of June,
contained the following lines, amongst others.

The news of the composition of a Bull continues still, to the great delight
of the Molinists. They threaten us with it, upon the notice which they have
received of it from our Confreres their good friends. The report of it is much
divulged, etc. Satisfy me concerning the present state of the Dominicans, and
in exchange I shall tell you, that the draught of a Bull has been made at the
College of Navarre, and in order to be sent to Rome. See, whether the rumor
vented by the Molinists be not founded upon that piece.

The third is from M. Brousse, June 13. Take what of it concerns our common
Affair.

Saturday last, I went to see M. Prignon, and carried him your last Memorial,
as I had promised him. After the presentation of your commendations to him, and
the return of his to you and all your company, we had not much discourse
together by reason M. de Launoy superven'd and interrupted us. M. Prignon
thanked him for the Present he had made him a few days before of his book
entitled, De varia Aristotelis in Academia Parisiensi fortuna; in which he
derides all the world. We went out together, and being in the street, he asked
me whether I knew that M. Hallier was coming back from Rome? I told him, I did
not. He replied, that he heard so from a Bishop the day before, who said, that
he was bringing a great Pancart, by which word he meant the Bull. I answered,
that this was a thing more unknown to me then the former. Yesterday after
Vespers I visited M. Prignon again, who received me with extraordinary
courtesy, and returning your Memorial, told me, he had read it twice with
extreme pleasure, and admired both the solidity of the matter, and the pureness
of your Italian style. I told him of the Audience which you had had of the
Pope, and showed him your Letter concerning it. He was joyful beyond what I can
express, and yet sorry too that his Holiness appoints not the Conference,
being unable to imagine any reasonable ground of pretext to deny it to you, by
saying that you have no Parties or Adversaries. He charged me to present his
commendations to you, and to those Messieurs who (he said) have spoken with so
much zeal for defense of the Truth. -- A few days ago an honest Father
well-affected to S. Augustine, went amongst the Jesuits to enquire news from
Rome, feigning to be of their Party. F. Celot (to whom he spoke) told him the
Jansenists were condemned, and the Bull ready, and upon the point to be
published, when the Sieur Des-mares arriving there, by the help of 40000 Crowns,
which he gave the Ambassador to procure him Audience, deferred the publication
of it; but they expected it by the next Post. This has some correspondence
with the Pancart, whereof M. de Luanoy told me, and shows the spirit of those
forgers of news.

As I was ending this Letter, seven or eight persons of quality came to see me,
among whom was that good Carthusian a great disciple of S. Augustine, and who
has suffered persecution for being so; he told us, that he was the person that
had been with the Jesuits to enquire news from Rome, and received the
abovementioned answer from a Jesuit, namely, that The coming of P. Des-mares,
and 40000 Crowns given to the Ambassador to procure a hearing, had deferred the
publishing of the Bull of condemnation, and that 'twas a very notable sum for
an Ambassador only to obtain so short a respite. You may make what use of this
intelligence you please; at least, you may assure your self it is true.

And it was so indeed, this ridiculous and calumnious discourse having been
made by a Jesuit to the abovesaid Carthusian; but the ground thereof, namely
that we sought that short respite, or gave 40000 Crowns to the Ambassador to
obtain it, was as little true as infinite other stories invented and published
by those Fathers every day. We never had the least thought of making any sort
of Present, either to the Ambassador or others for the defense of the Truth
which we held. We were always, God be praised, too well persuaded of its
perfectly divine and invincible strength, to have recourse to such carnal and
shameful Remedies in order to uphold it. And I am very confident, that had we
been of such mean, servile spirits to have admitted such unworthy thoughts, the
Ambassador had too much generosity and magnanimity to comply therewith. If he
did us some good Offices, as I acknowledge he did in the manner above related,
he did them upon the account of the justice which he found in what we demanded,
whereunto there needed no other motive to oblige him then his ordinary
principles of equity and goodness.

The fourth of the Letters of this Month was from M. de Saint Beuve, dated
June 13. in these words.

We are very glad to understand that the Pope has given you a favorable
Audience, but our joy will not be complete till we hear that this Audience has
produced a Conference. For till then we have great reason to fear that the
design in hearing you is only that it may be said, that we are condemned
according to form. The Discourses of the Molinists increase this fear; they
say, that this Audience must be judged of by its sequels, and they assured it
will have none to our advantage. Another reason of our fear is, the denying
Audience to the General of the Dominicans so long together. Another, that the
Letters which we see here, intimate, that the Pope will shortly decide the
Affair. And the last, That hitherto all the civilities have been shown to our
Adversaries, but to us all the severities (to say no worse) Albizzi,
Palavicini, Modeste, Tartaglia, are plain proofs of this. That which I writ, is
not mine own only, but the sense of many others. -- I cannot but attribute the
Voyage of F. Des-mares and M. Manessier to a particular providence of God in
behalf of his Truth, since that Father has spoken so nervously, and defended
the cause of Jesus Christ's Grace with so great vigor and majesty. The Effects
are in Gods hands, the resolution thereof must be expected from him; but
whatever they be, we shall always have this comfort, that the Truth could not
be better defended then it was. Acquaint him with this our joy, and assure him
that M. and M. de Liencour have more then they yet express. The little Writing
presented to the Pope on the 19th. of the last Month was very necessary. The
Impression shall shortly be taken in hand. I could have wished it had been
thought sufficient to set this Title over the heretical Senses: Sensus
haereticus qui malign affingi potest, without the rest.

The rest he means was, quem tamen legitime sumpta non habet: and his reason
was, because the Propositions were not ours; and inasmuch as in the rigor of
their terms taken literally, they were capable of being condemned for their bad
senses, it seemed to him that by these words, legitime sumpta, etc. taken
legitimately, we affirmed that the Propositions had not these bad senses in
their proper and natural sense, making no difference between their proper and
natural sense, and taken legitimately. But this was not our meaning. For as is
noted before, we signified by the sense which the Propositions have, being
taken legitimately, not their proper and natural sense according to the bare
terms, but that which they have upon their relation either to Jansenius, to
whom we knew our Adversaries attributed them in all their secret Writings, or
in reference to our selves, who interposed to hinder their condemnation,
because we conceived Equity required them to be taken after this manner in this
Contest.

This was one of the reasons which I represented to my Colleagues, to incline
them to add the abovesaid words in this Writing, but there was another which
seemed to me very important, namely, that we might upon occasion give the Pope
and Cardinals the most advantageous impression of the Propositions that we
could, to the end to put the more obstacles to the inclinations and engagements
which they might have to condemn them; and also to avoid the ill sequels which
such condemnation might have, and the abuse that might be made of it. And
indeed, had they been such as we could have maintained absolutely and
undertaken their defense only and without restriction, there is all reason to
believe, (so far as I can judge) that the Pope would have never resolved to
condemn them, since being even such as they were; I hold for certain that if we
had defended them in this sort, he would not have undertaken to condemn them,
and that the thing which gave him the greatest confidence to do it, was, that
we our selves who endeavored to hinder their condemnation, by reason of the ill
consequences we foresaw it would have, always spoke of them in our Writings and
Discourses as of Equivocal Propositions, framed purposely to surprise him, and
capable of bad senses. But it behoov'd us to speak of them as they were really;
and besides it, we conceived that all that we spoke ought to have sufficed for
obtaining a thing so just and profitable, as that which we demanded seemed to
us.

The fifth Letter was from M. Taignier, June 13. whereof take one clause.

The Molinists affirm everywhere, that the Censure passed, and that nothing
else was staid for but their Audience, that so the judgment might be
contradictory.

This, Of all the Letters writ to me from Paris during these two Months; These
are they which I conceived most fit to acquaint the Reader with the true state
wherein the matters hitherto related were at Paris, as well as at Rome. But
because the passages of the latter place were diffused likewise into other
Cities of Italy, I shall here produce one of those which I received from thence
touching the business of our so feigned Audience; after which Cardinal de
Este, to whom I had given account of it, hoped with great reason (which is a
reflection worthy of remark) that the relations of things which passed at Rome,
would every day become more considerable, and therefore commanded me to
continue my begun intelligence to his Highness. I did so, and the satisfaction
he testified therewith by his Answers was a great engagement unto me to do it;
See the Copy of his courteous Letter.

Sir,
UNderstanding by your last that I was to expect another, together with a viz.
The little Volume of S. Augustine.
Book, touching the matters which you negotiate, I deferred my answer thereunto
till this present, that I might thank you at the same time for your Present, of
which indeed I make great esteem, as of a thing which upon several accounts and
motives ought to be highly valued. It Is a new proof of your extraordinary
courtesies which you cease not to exercise in favoring me as you do, with the
continuation of the exquisite knowledge which you give me of your management,
and how exceeding well you acquitted your selves in your Discourse at the feet
of his Holiness, which no doubt you accompanied with your perfect eloquence
and excellent learning, besides the ardor which you have for the issue of an
Affair of so great importance, and which by all right and reason requires the
diligence which we hear is employed therein by our H. Father. Henceforward your
Relations will from day to day be more considerable, which I hope you will not
cease, still to confirm to me your most particular affection, in consideration
whereof I am obliged to be eternally,

Sir, Your affectionate friend to serve you, Card. d' Este.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the things we learned, and the Visites we made from the first of June to
the thirteenth. Of the manner how the Constitution against the Five
Proposittons was published. With what restriction and circumspection we resolved
to subscribe to their condemnation, in case the Pope had required it of us.

CArdinal Pimentel having not been at the Chapel of the Papal Mass on the day
of Pentecost, and the affairs whereof we were to speak with him, being
sufficiently sacred and urgent, we went to wait upon him in the forenoon after
Mass. When we had given him an ample account of our business, we told him,
that the Authors of this black enterprise had still subtilty and credit enough
to persuade the Pope, that the matter de Auxiliis was not at all concerned
therein. It Is true, said the Cardinal, the Pope believes it is not; he
professed as much to me; and thereupon he informed us himself of his
above-related conference with the Pope. We replied, that the whole aim of our
Adversaries was to embroyl this Affair as much as possible under the name of
Jansenius, which was become extremely odious. The Cardinal said that the Pope
was possessed with this resolution, that it was requisite to destroy and
abolish the work of that Prelate. His words were, That according to the Pope's
resolution, Jansenius est revocandus, est rejiciendus. We discoursed largely to
him concerning the necessity of Effectual Grace to every action of piety;
whereunto he assented; and we assured his Eminence, that 'twas the only Point
which we endeavored to defend against the Machinations of all those who sought
its subversion. Although we were with him more then an hour in this Conference,
yet we did not remember to reco^mend^ one thing to him, which I took care to
get signified to him the next day by one of his most intimate friends; namely,
that although he had found the Pope inflexible by what he had represented to
him, and there was no more encouragement for him to speak again to his
Holiness, yet that he would not altogether neglect the Affair; but in the
Visites which he should render to the Cardinals Spada, Ginetti, Pamphilio and
Ghiggi, remember to tell them, and that with some earnestness, that he could
not prevail with the Pope by what he had represented to him.

Tuesday the 3d: I went to S. Augustin's Church to say Mass. By the way I met
F. Mulard, who told me two things: One was, that M. Hallier and his Colleagues
began to be very weary of Rome. The other, that he had a contest with them,
wherein he maintained, That it imported their interest and their honor to
speak before the Pope; and that they on the contrary would not demand it, but
expect till they should be called upon, in which case they said, they would
take but a quarter of an hour to prepare themselves. The General of the
Augustines said Mass almost at the same time with me, and coming to me
afterward in the Vestry, he exhorted me to continue acting as we had begun;
and said, he hoped God would give his blessing to our labor. F. Reginald came
to see us this day, and informed us of three things which the Pope had said to
Cardinal Pimentel. First, That it was needful to do something against
Jansenius. Secondly, That the Propositions did not concern S. Augustin's
Doctrine, which was upheld by unmovable foundations, and ought to remain in
its integrity. Thirdly, That the same Propositions did not relate at all to the
matter of Grace, and that all this had been well and duly examined.

The same F. Reginald told me when I visited him the next day at la Minerva,
that some Persons assured him that all that had been spoken concerning the
Bull, was nothing but ayrie discourse, delle forfenterie, etc.

The same day F. Guerin advertised me, that M. Gueffier bid him tell me that he
heard from diverse persons, that I said there needed a General Council to judge
of these Propositions, which was a thing whereof I never spoke the least word.

Thursday the 5th. the Sacristan of the Minimes told me, that M. Hallier and
his Colleagues had gotten M. de Valcroissant's Oration to the Pope; which indeed
we had neither from them nor any other person; no more then any thing else. And
another person told me the same day, that M. Albizzi had revoked the Order
which he had given to the Apostolical Printing House for dispatching the
printing of the Bull.

After we had accompanied the Ambassador to his ordinary Audience on Friday the
sixth, we went to see the Master of the sacred Palace, who congratulated us for
the vigorousnesse and modesty wherewith this good Ecclesiastic said we spoke.
He discoursed with great devotion and humility, and being persuaded of the holy
Truths which we defended, and of the justice of the rest of our demands, he
regretted that we could not obtain all that we demanded. Upon all which he said
several times, not daring to open himself further, captivantes intellectum,
captivantes intellectum; That it behooved us to adore the Providence of God, who
permitted by his secret judgment and for his hidden ends, that we suffered
such treatment.

After a long entertainment, as soon as we were risen up to depart, he did an
action of extraordinary endearment toward us. He kneeled down with both knees
to embrace ours, saying, that he acknowledged us for his Masters, and fot the
true defenders of the Catholic faith. F. Des-mares whom he went to embrace
first, fell upon his knees at the same time, and another of our Colleagues in
like manner. Whereat being surpised, I prostrated my self too, both to embrace
and to lift up this good Father; and those of my Colleagues who had kneeled
down, as he did, rose also at the same time. In fine, after some other words of
cordial affection and civility added standing, we departed.

About Evening F. Des-mares and I went to the Ambassador. After the Father had
delivered him a Letter which he received for him from M. de Liencourt, I told
him that the Festivals were passed, intimating thereby that we had awaited this
term, to know what the Pope had ordained touching the permission to print our
Writings. The Ambassador answered that the Festivals were not yet passed, but
would continue a fortnight longer. That the Pope spoke nothing to him in the
morning about our affairs neither good nor bad, though he much expected it;
that M. Hallier and M. Lagault had been with him in the morning before his
Audience, to desire him to ask the Pope, whether his Holiness pleased not to
make some Decree for putting an end to this Affair before the hot season; that
the heat was drawing very near; that they were desirous to return before its
coming: but he answered them, that it would be in vain to speak to the Pope
this day concerning this Affair, and accordingly he did not speak of it. F.
Des-mares remained astonished at the demand which these Doctors had the face
and confidence to desire the Ambassador to make to the Pope for them, to end an
Affair before the first entrance into its examination were dispatched; and he
very earnestly represented to the Ambassador how senseless and irrational it
was. The Ambassador answered him, that those Doctors were not obliged to do our
business, nor to speak according to our designs and desires. I told the
Ambassador that indeed they were not; but if they had any that were
extravagant, perfectly unjust and ridiculous, it was lawful for us to show how
unsufferable they were, and how unworthy of persons of honor and probity. We
discoursed very largely concerning the main Affair, and the falsities and
vanities of their Writings; and at length came to speak of the permission we
had demanded to print ours. The Ambassador said, he found the Pope so little
disposed to grant us such permission, that he conceived we must resolve to get
transcribed whatever we meant to present to them. But I answered, that if they
put us to this, 'twould be another piece of rigor toward us, but to little
purpose, because though they should not be printed at Rome, yet they would not
fail to be printed in France, in regard of our obligation to send them to the
Bishops who deputed us, the curiosity of many other persons interessed in this
cause to see them, and the sufficient easiness for people there to print what
they please. The Ambassador replied to all this, that the Pope was very averse
from the thing, and had long ago forbidden to print the first decisions of the
Rota, because sometimes there came forth such as were contrary one to another,
which rendered that Tribunal ridiculous. I answered that the reason was good in
that case, but of no moment at all to our Affair, because all things differed:
and besides, that I believed no other could be alleged to obstruct the
allowance of our demand. We fell again upon the falsities in the Writings of
our Adversaries, and the sincerity of ours. The Ambassador said, that we should
look upon them together at Tivoli, where he intended to retain us two or three
days, after he had received the news of Cardinal Mazarin, who were preparing
to go into France within a few days.

The Ambassadors reason why he did not think fit to speak to the Pope about our
Affair in his Audience, was, because his Holiness had for above a fortnight
together employed all his thoughts about a very weighty Affair relating to his
own family, to wit, the marriage of Prince Justinian's Daughter with M. the
Abbot Barberin. The day before the Ambassador's Audience, Cardinal Barberin
stayed with the Pope after the Congregation of the H. Office, to confer with
his Holiness further about it; and 'twas a business, which besides the
importance whereof the Pope always accounted it in it self, as to his own
interests, and those of his house, having been long under consideration, the
nearer its conclusion approacht, the more it filled his mind; so that there was
no room for other discourses with his Holiness, but of congratulation for the
happy posture of so great an Affair.

I learnt from another person the Articles of this Marriage, which he sent me in
a Note, whereof I have inserted the following Transcript.

1. La dobe di cento incla scudi. The Lady's portion to be a hundred thousand
Crowns.

2. La restitutione delle mulcte 180. M. The Fines unto which the Signori
Barberini had been condemned, to be repaid to them, amounting to one hundred
and eighty thousand Crowns.

3. La restitutione de' cazali e frutti decorsi. 200. M. Their Lands and the
Rents that proceed out of the same to be restored, valued at two hundred
thousand Crowns.

4. La Translatione delle abbadie. All the Abbacies possessed by this Abbot, to
be conferred upon his elder Brother the Prince Prefect, who by this means
yielded to him his right of primogeniture.

5. La Convalidatione delle gratie dubie concesseli da Vrbano and suspeceli.
The confirmation of all the dubious Graces granted to them by Pope Urban, and
from the enjoyment and possession of which Pope Innocent had suspended them.

6. La restitutione della Prefettura. The Prefecture of Rome, which the Pope
had taken from them, to be restored.

7. Il Cardinalato. And that with his Abbeys he should give his Abbot's elder
Brother a Cardinals Hat.


On Saturday the 7th. we went in the afternoon to see Cardinal Barberin, partly
that M. Manessier might salute him, he having not hitherto seen his Eminence.

On Sunday the 8th. in the morning, the Sub-Bibliothecary of the Vatican
desired us to lend him a Copy of all our Writings, that he might cause one to
be transcribed and put into that Library. I went to see F. Vbaldino, on purpose
to talk with him concerning the various rumors about the Bull, from which he
always had believed the Pope extremely averse. He told me that he had heard it
spoken of, but believed it would all come to nothing, because ogni piccola cosa
bastava per fermare il Papa, the least thing was sufficient to restrain the
Pope. I lent him a Copy of M. de Valcroissant's Oration.

I know not well what we did this afternoon and the next morning, but I know
that I neglected to set it down, because as we acted but very little this week,
and writ but little into France, on Monday the 9th after noon, in comparison of
what we did by the foregoing Posts; so the publication of the Bull against the
Propositions (whereof we learnt the first news in the evening, after all our
Letters were written, and wholly unexpectedly) giving us to understand that
this Affair was at an end, made me neglect to set down what was observable from
the foregoing day to the noon of this, and in stead of the Letters written that
afternoon send but one, whereby we signified this so surprising and unforeseen
news. I cannot better represent how the matter was carried in respect of us,
then by inserting the said Letter here.

My LORDS,
AFter all our Letters were written, about three quarters after seven in the
evening, notice was given us that there was a Bull set up whereby the
Propositions were condemned. We sent a man with all speed to see whether it was
so, and soon after went our selves that our own eyes might be witnesses of it.
At the end of our street we met an Ecclesiastic a friend of ours, who told us,
that he saw this Bull in writing posted upon the Chancery, and that the
Propositions were condemned in it as impious and heretical, without any
distinction of senses, or mention of S. Augustine. We continued our way with
this friend, that we might be witnesses of what he told us, and by the way we
met the Messenger whom we had sent, who confirmed the relation of this friend,
and rehearsed to us the condemnations, qualifications of every Proposition, as
they were in the Bull. We caused him to return back. to the end that if it were
possible, our friend and this man might take a Copy of it to send to your
Lordships this night, without our being seen our selves. For which end we
carried Ink and Paper, and Wax-candle with us. When we came near the Chancery,
we sent our friend and the other man thither, and stayed in the Coach at a
place a little distant. They returned immediately to tell us, that the Writing
which they had seen was torn down. We went therefore to S. Peter's, where it
was still fixed up. But just as we came there, two men arrived there also, who
would not suffer it to be read, but betook themselves to pull it down. There
was no body near but our friend and our man, and a Laquay who brought the
Candle and had newly lighted it in a neighboring shop. Our friend came and
told us that the two men who tore down the Writing, were Sbirri or Sergeants,
because he had seen a Stiletto in the pocket of the one, and the other had a
prohibited dark Lanthorn, which things it is not permitted to any to carry in
this City, but such kind of priviledg'd persons. We asked our Laquay whether he
knew them? he told us that one was a Sergeant, and the other a Notary of the H.
Office. We asked him, whether he knew their names? He answered us, that he knew
them only by sight; having seen them several times in the house of the H.
Office, as being Officers thereof. In this manner, My Lords, the matter passed
this night. We thought fit to send you a punctual account of it, that you may
consider of it as you shall think good. We know not whether or no this Writing
was posted up by the Pope's Order, but we cannot doubt but that it was fixed up
by the Officers of the H. Office. The Affair will become more clear betwixt
this and the next Post. In the mean time we remain,

My LORDS, Your most humble and obedient servants, De Saint Amor. M. Manessier.

From Rome, Monday June 9. 1653. half an hour after eleven a clock at night.
All Tuesday we employed in visiting as many friends as we could, to enform our
selves of the truth of this Bull, and to find some one that had a Copy of it
and could show us what it was. Many told us that the thing was true, there was
no doubt of it; but we met with none that could give us a Copy, nor that had
seen it exactly enough to give us a certain account of it. In the evening we
judged that whatever it were, our Affair was at an end, and we had no other
resolution to take in this case, but to depart as soon as possible before the
hot weather, and in order thereunto to take leave of such persons as we owed
this civility unto.

On Wednesday the 11th. we went in the forenoon to discharge the same to the
Cardinals, Barberin and Pamphilio; and in the afternoon we went for the same
purpose to the Ambassador, and to desire him to tell the Pope at the first
Vespers of Corpus Christi day whether we were going to accompany him, or else
at Mass the next day, that we purposed to return speedily into France before
the hot weather, and desired to receive his Holiness's benediction before our
departure. The Ambassador approved our Request, and promised us that he would
not fail to acquaint the Pope with our intention at some opportunity of one of
those two Ceremonies.

He did not do it at that of Vespers, but when we went to him the next morning
to accompany him to S. Peter's to Mass, he told us he would not return home
till he had done our business, and I might come to him in the afternoon with
assurance to know what the Pope should say to him. I did so, and the Ambassador
told me with an extraordinary cheerful air, that so soon as he mentioned to the
Pope our intention to return speedily into France, and to take leave first of
his Holiness, the Pope was glad of it, and told him that we should not fail to
be in his Presence Chamber the next day, and whatever other business might
supervene, he would cause us to be called first, and give us Audience presently
after the end of his Mass. I gave the Ambassador most humble thanks for his
care of us, and told him we would not fail to obey the Pope's order.

I returned home to relate the Ambassadors obliging answer to my Colleagues: but
the Pope's excessive demonstration of kindness after the condemnation newly
pronounced, notwithstanding all our Remonstrances to him to hinder it, gave
them suspicion and mistrust, that these extraordinary Caresses and Civilities
were affected to draw us fairly bfore the Pope, to the end that when we came
there, we might be obliged to subscribe the said Condemnation.

But for that I remembered what was spoken in the Consistory of the 26th. of May
between Cardinal Ghiggi and that other Cardinal, who asked him, whether we
should be required to subscribe the Condemnation? to which Cardinal Ghiggi
answered, that those were never obliged thereunto who had not maintained the
condemned Propositions, and that we had not maintained those which were
condemned by this Bull. I told my Colleagues that they needed not entertain such
a mistrust and apprehension, because I was certain, that nothing was less
thought of then what they feared. They asked me how I could be certain of it?
but the secrecy whereunto I was obliged, and which I should not have violated
though my life had been concerned, permitted me not to satisfy this Question,
and therefore I only told them that I was certain of it, but being I could not
tell them how, I did not hinder them from acting and taking their resolutions
the same manner as if I had no knowledge nor certainty thereof at all.

Besides the reason of secrecy which obliged me to speak in this fashion, I
considered with my self what dissimulations and disguisements men sometimes use
in occasions where it is thought they speak most plainly, and also what changes
happen in the most firm resolutions. Wherefore I was willing that they should
debate, and debated together with them, what was fit for us to do, as if I had
understood nothing of what had passed between those two Cardinals, and making
no account at all of it.

Having therefore put the case at the worst, as if subscription to the
condemnation of the Propositions would be required of us the next day; We
resolved with as unanimous consent as ever was, to do nothing unworthy of the
quality whereof we were by Gods mercy, of S. Augustin's true Disciples, and of
the humble sons of the Church.

As yet no Copy of the Bull appeared in Rome, at least that came to our view,
and we neither knew the terror of it, whether the equivocal Propositions of M
Cornet, or those which we presented to the Pope, to remove their equivocal and
bad senses, were condemned by it; but supposing M. Cornet's, and not ours to be
so, we resolved to subscribe to their condemnation, but with the conditions and
cautions here subjoined; by which the Reader may judge what we would have done,
had they been ours that were condemned.

We resolved in the first place, that if we were required to subscribe the
condemnation of M. Cornet's, we would excuse our selves, by pleading that being
deputed by Bishops of France, we could do nothing but in conformity to the
power wherewith they entrusted us, and that they had indeed given us a power to
solicit the establishment of a solemn Congregation for discussion of the
Controversies between Catholics touching these matters, and this by all
equitable means which we should judge most expedient; but they had given us
none to make any such subscription. 2. That in case it were answered, that were
those Bishops themselves at Rome, they should be obliged to subscribe; and so
'twas fit to oblige us thereunto because we were their Deputies, and
represented them: We would answer, That if they were there, they might do as
seemed good to themselves; but we being only their Deputies, could not go
beyond their orders, nor do any thing whereunto they had not given us power. 3.
That if it were required of us, not as their Deputies, but upon the account of
our particular persons, we would answer, that we had no other quality at Rome
besides that of Deputies; that the same could not be separated or abstracted
from our persons, nor consequently our persons considered otherwise. 4. That if
it were positively told us, That the Pope would be obeyed, and could no longer
suffer these scruples and distinctions, being violations and infringements of
the respect which was due to him: We would answer, That the respect and
affection which we confessed we owed him, could not take from us the right of
keeping within the bounds of the Commission which had been given us. But in the
fifth place, If after all this we saw our most humble Remonstrances
ineffectual, and it were absolutely determined we should subscribe; or in case
we refused there were any intention to use violence to us, then we would
resolve to subscribe to the condemnation of M. Cornet's Propositions, with a
proviso, expressly excepting and securing by our subscription the Grace of Jesus
Christ Effectual by it self, necessary to all actions of piety, and the
doctrine of S. Augustine, to both which they had frequently assured us he would
do no prejudice.

We drew up and signed this Resolution on Friday June 13. about eight a clock
in the morning before we stirred abroad to go to the Pope's Presence Chamber:
And because we considered that possibly our subscription with this clause would
not be satisfactory, but a pure and absolute one would be required, we resolved
rather to suffer the utmost extremities then not to annex that caution,
conceiving it not only just but necessary as well, as becoming the fidelity
and Charity which we owed to the Head of the Church, in order to uphold him,
and hinder those to whom he had granted the condemnation of these Propositions
from abusing it and saying that he was thereby fallen into error by condemning
either the abovesaid Effectual Grace or the doctrine of that H. Father touching
the same.

But because we were not certain either that our reasons would be taken
according to this fair candid construction, or that we should return to lie at
our lodging in case they were taken otherwise, we added to our writing a Letter
whereby we sent word into France, that if we were delayed by the Pope's
Officers, it was only upon this cause. We entrusted this writing and Letter to
an Abbot, a friend of ours, whom we entreated to send them both into France
upon Monday following, if he had no further news of us by that time.

The Letter is lost, but the Original writing which I brought with me from
Rome, is still in my hands, and this is the copy of it.

A writing signed by us before we went to take leave of the Pope.
AFter the publication of the Pope's Decree against the Five Propositions,
there being no more hope to obtain of his Holiness (as we now see things) the
solemn and regular Congregation which we demanded and solicited for the space
of two years as most necessary in this conjuncture, in order to a full
clearing of the matters controverted between S. Augustin's Disciples on the one
part, and those of Molina on the other, and a formal perspicuous decision of
the capital points of the controversy between them; we conceived that we had
nothing more left us to do but to prepare our selves to return into France: And
before all things we thought our selves obliged to take leave of the Pope and
receive his benediction. But considering that his Holiness might possibly be
lead to require us to subscribe his new Decree, of which we have not understood
any thing since the day that it was posted up in writing about seven a clock in
the evening, and plucked down an hour after or thereabouts by the Officers of
the H. Office, saving that it condemns the five equivocal and general
Propositions maliciously contrived and set a foot by the Molinists purposely to
destroy S. Augustin's doctrine touching Grace effectual by it self: We have
judged in the presence of God that we ought not to subscribe the condemnation
of those Propositions without excepting the sense of Grace effectual by it
self, and S. Augustin's doctrine which the enemies of both have designed in
obtaining this condemnation to overthrow. Wherefore to take away all ground of
saying that these Propositions have been judged false and erroneous in the
particular sense which includes the Orthodox sense of that H. Father, according
whereunto we explicated and defended them before the Pope, we have resolved not
to subscribe that condemnation though the Pope require it of us, but with this
clause; Propositiones ab Innocentio Papa X. damnatas, nos iterum damnamus, ut
semper antea damnavimus, salva tum gratia Christi per seipsam efficace ad
singulos pietatis actus necessaria, tum doctrina Sancti Augustini; quibus nolle
se praejudicium ullum afferre summus Pontifex multoties testatus est.



We writ and signed this Resolution before we stirred out of our lodging to go
and take leave of the Pope. We hope from the goodness of our Savior who by his
death merited this effectual and victorious grace for us, in defense whereof we
are bound to spend our cares, pains and lives, that he will by the same grace
give us such strength as is necessary for bearing sincerely the testimony
thereunto which we ought to do in this occasion.

Done at Rome, June 13. 1653. at 8. a clock in the morning, signed; Dela-Lane,
Abbot of Valcroissant; Desmares, Priest of the Oratory; De Saint-Amour,
Manassier, Angran.

With this mind we set forward to the Pope's Presence Chamber; where we found
all things otherwise then we feared, and my Colleagues acknowledged at length,
that what I said to them at first was very true.

I had made an exact relation of the particular passages of the audience which
the Pope gave us this day, in which we were extraordinarily well received by
his Holiness, and satisfied with the things which he said to us in great
kindness and confidence. The principal of them are still fresh in my memory:
but till I find my Relation which is mislay'd, I shall only here set down what
we writ concerning it to my LL. our Bishops in two letters; in the former
whereof we could not through the shortness of time fully lay open the reasons
which evinced that the Constitution did not at all infringe the doctrine of S.
Augustine and of grace effectual by it self, and therefore we deduced the same
more largely in another letter which we sent to the same Bishops when we were
now gone out of Rome. Which advertisement may serve to satisfy such as have
seen those two letters, which were in effect but one. The latter is this which
follows.

My LORDS,
WE writ to you on Monday last what we had learnt concerning the publication of
a Decree upon the five Propositions. We understood on Tuesday that the same was
posted up by the Popes order; and thereupon perceiving no likelihood, that his
Holiness would after this pass any solemn judgment upon the contested senses
of the Propositions, we resolved to return into France without delay, to the
end to prevent the immoderate heat of the Summer. On Wednesday we took leave of
the Cardinals Barberin and Pamphilio. On Friday we went to the Popes audience
to receive his benediction. His Holiness caused us to be called first
immediately after Mass. We told him that having understood that there was a
Decree published upon the Propositions concerning which we were sent hither, we
came to receive his benediction before our departure.

His Holiness answered us, that having caused the Propositions to be examined
by the Divines whom he had assembled, and used other diligences therein, he
judged it expedient to decide them in the manner as he had done: That as to the
rest, he was very well pleased with our deportment and manner of proceeding;
That he had had great satisfaction in hearing us at the public audience which
he gave us; and honored us with this particular approbation, that we spoke
with vigor, modesty, prudence and learning, these were the Popes own words, ho
haruto gran sodisfattione del vigore, della modestia, prudenza e dottrina colla
quale havete parlato.

His Holiness then spoke of the sentiments he had for France, of his Esteem of
that Kingdom, and particularly of the Clergy; of the sorrow he resented for the
wars and troubles which had agitated it these late years, and he professed
great desire to see all pacified both within and without the state.

This discourse having lasted a good while, his Holiness spoke again
concerning the examination of the Five Propositions, and told us, That he had
caused sundry Congregations to be held in his own presence, wherein he had used
great attention without being wearied by the length of time that they lasted:
That, as for ours, he had not let one word of it fall to the ground, but been
so attentive, that he could repeat to us from point to point, what we had
represented to him: In brief that we had spoken very learnedly and elegantly,
and urged what we said with good reasons. His Holines's words were, Direi cosa
per cosa tutto cio che havete proposito, voi (directing his speech to M. de
Valcroissant) cosi dottamente, and voi (add^essing to F. Desmares) cosi
elegantemente, e non si buona ragione persuaso.

We took occasion to tell his Holiness that we conceived he did not intend by
the Decree which came forth to do any prejudice to Grace effectual by it self
necessary to every action of piety, nor to S. Augustin's doctrine. His
Holiness, my Lords, was so far from such intention, that he answered us with
astonishment, that there was no doubt of this; his words were, O questo e
certo: That the doctrine of S. Augustine had been too well approved in the
Church to be capable of impeachment: That as to the matter of Grace which was
agitated for the space of ten years under Clement VIII. and Paul V. he had
determined not to examine or discuss it in this cause. After which his Holiness
asked us whether we had seen the Decree upon the Five Propositions. We answered
him that we had not. Whereupon he told us the substance of what it contained,
and remarkt to us that he had not put at the end these usual words, De
plenitudine potestatis; And indignationem Beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli
se noverit incursurum, and other like words wherewith Bulls are wont to be
concluded. He added also that he had sent a Copy of it to the King and to the
Bishops of France. We asked his Holiness for Indulgences, which he gave us with
extraordinary bounty, -- telling us among other reasons, That being we were
come to Rome about a sacred and important affair, he willingly granted us all
the Indulgences which we desired of him. And thus we retired, wishing to our H.
Father all kind of prosperity; and we declared to him that we would by the
grace of God live always most firmly addicted to the H. See and the doctrine of
S. Augustine, as being that of the H. See, and which should ever be as dear to
us as the apple of our eyes. These were the terms wherewith we took leave of
his Holiness, who honored us with his approbation and testimonies of his good
will.

You have, my Lords, a compendious account of what his Holiness said to us in
this audience which lasted an hour and half, and in which his Holiness left us
not upon our knees, but caused us to rise up immediately after we had begun to
speak to him, and treated us in all the rest with a particular goodness. This
his Holines's declaration seemed to us so important, and so contrary to the
design of our adversaries, that to use precaution against the attempts which we
feared they might happily employ one day to call it in doubt, we took care to
make exact report thereof to all persons of whom we took leave afterward, that
so the thing might become public before our departure, and our adversaries
likewise might be convinced of the truth of all that we affirmed to have passed
in this audience, since we would not have been so rash or impudent as to
publish here in the sight of his Holiness so considerable a declaration if it
had not been most certain. And indeed, my Lords, there is no person in this
city who has heard of our affair, but knows at present this declaration of his
Holiness, it has been as notorious as the Decree, and given as much joy to
all S. Augustin's disciples, who are here in great number, as our Adversaries
testified for the passing of the Constitution. When we took leave of the
Ambassador yesterday, he told us that he knew already all that had passed in
our Audience, and related the particulars which we here send you: adding, That
his Holiness upon all occasions wherein he had spoken to him about this
Affair, always declared to him, that he would not meddle with the matter of
Effectual Grace, nor do any prejudice to the Doctrine of S. Augustine or S.
Thomas, and he had written to this purpose to the Court by this Post.

You see, My Lords, by the things which the Pope said to us in this Audience,
and by the Relation which we sent you of what we spoke to him when we were
heard publicly, that the Five Propositions are not condemned but by reason of
their had senses wherein we our selves always condemned them; and that the
sense in which we said we understood and defended them, or rather that the
particular Propositions which we presented to his Holiness and maintained
before him as most Catholic, not only receive no prejudice, but also ought to
be accounted as approved by his Holiness, as appears by the following Reasons.

The first Reason is, My Lords, because we declared to his Holiness publicly,
both by Speech and Writing, That we and all the other disciples and defenders
of S. Augustine would always defend the Catholic sense of the Propositions
which we presented to him, as containing the indubitable Doctrine of that great
Doctor of Grace, (being also that of the Church) till his Holiness should
pronounce an express and definitive judgment upon the particular sense which
we held to be Catholic, by which it might evidently appear and be indisputable
that they were condemned in this sense. These are the express words of our
Declaration which we sent you almost a month ago; Prositemur coram ipsa nos and
universos Sancti Augustini discipulos ac defensores pro indubitata tanti
Doctoris atque adeo Ecclesiae doctrina, praedictas propositiones ut a nobis
superius expositae sunt, perpetuo defensuros, quamdiu de illis express ut
supra expositae sunt intellectis probatum non erit (quod a Sanctitate vestra p
stulamus) solenne definitivumque judicium, quo nobis aperte constet eas in
sensu quem asserimus Catholicum, esse damnatas.

Having therefore explicated to his Holiness how we understood and defended
these Propositions, having made this declaration to him by speech in the
public Audience which it pleased him to give us, and by the Writing which we
presented to him at that Audience; and his Holiness having not given his
judgment but upon these Propositions in general, which are recited in the
Constitution only in the general terms wherein they were framed in France by
our Adversaries; and having neither expressed nor noted in any manner
whatsoever, the particular and sole sense to which alone we reduced and
defended them; namely, that of Grace Effectual by it self, which we declared to
him at taking our leave, should be ever as dear to us as the apple of our eyes:
It Is a certain proof that he has approved that we always maintained that
sense, or rather the Propositions which we reduced to that sense, as containing
the formal and express Doctrine of S. Augustine.

The second reason, My Lords, is, because when we mentioned and explicated
these Propositions to the Pope in the terms and senses which we held, his
Holiness not only reprehended nothing therein when we had the honor to speak
to him in the public Audience which he gave us before the Decree, and in the
last since the Decree, but also gave extraordinary approbations to every thing
which we had spoken. It Is therefore a positive sign, that his Holiness
intended not to do any prejudice to these Propositions taken as we explained
them; or to speak better, to those which we presented clear from all
equivocation and danger of bad sense; but on the contrary, judges the same most
Catholic.

The third reason, My Lords, which, as we conceive, takes away all doubt, is,
that his Holiness expressly declared to us, that he intended not by this Decree
to do any prejudice to Grace effectual by it self necessary to every action of
piety, nor to the doctrine of S. Augustine received and approved in that whole
Church. Now the Propositions, as we explicated them, contain purely the sense
of Effectual Grace necessary to every action of piety, and the indubitable
doctrine of S. Augustine. Therefore his Holiness has not done any prejudice,
nor laid any blemish by his Constitution upon the Propositions reduced to this
sense.

The fourth reason, My Lords, is, That the Pope has been so persuaded, as his
Holiness vouchsafed to testify to us, that we maintained before him only
Grace Effectual by it self, and the pure doctrine of S. Augustine, as we
justified to him in the discourse which we made in his presence, that he has
not since caused his Consultors to examine, whether what we maintained and
explicated in our discourse, and declared by our Writing to be formally the
doctrine of S. Augustine, were true or no: as he would not fail to have done, if
he had doubted of it, since 'twas the particular point of the Contest which we
managed against Molina's disciples. For in the same Audience, we granted, as it
has been always declared in all the French Writings published and printed at
Paris upon this subject before the Affair was brought to Rome, that if the
Propositions were considered only in general and without applying any
distinction to them, they were susceptible of heretical senses, and might
accordingly be condemned of heresy in this universality as they were censured
by all S. Augustin's disciples who writ upon them. And being his Holiness gave
us this Audience that he might understand the truth of our Sentiments from our
own mouths, and by the writing of Distinction of Senses which we presented to
him afterward, he found that they were so different from the heretical senses
which the Propositions generally taken might receive, and that they were so
reduced to Grace Effectual by it self, which is the Catholic truth maintained
invincibly by S. Augustine in the name of the whole Church, that he thought not
fit to assemble the Consultors again, because he intended to pronounce only
upon the Propositions as taken generally, and not upon this particular point of
Grace Effectual by it self, in which all the Catholic explications of the
Propositions meet as in their Center, and which would need a long Examen, and
many Assemblies and Conferences like those which were held under the two great
Popes Clement VIII. and Paul V. who undertook to discuss them thoroughly, and
for this purpose caused them all to be particularly examined in the public
disputations of both parties, and in their own presence, after having declared
That S. Augustin's doctrine was the Rule by which they would decide this
Controversy and regulate their judgments. And therefore, since the Pope has
declared his Constitution that he has caused these Five Propositions to be
examined by the Consultors, the Censure falls only upon the Propositions in
general, which the Consultors examined in general, and which we acknowledged in
our first and only Audience to be susceptible of heretical senses, and cannot
fall upon the particular explications which we proposed and established in
presence of his Holiness by our Discourse and our Writing, since his Holiness
has judged them so Catholic that he made no scruple at all about them, nor
assembled the Consultors so much as once to have their advice concerning the
same as an obscure and dubious thing (as he did in reference to the
Propositions in general) but found by his own judgment that they were free
from all Censure, which he also testified to us in the last Audience which it
pleased him to give us since his Decree, inasmuch as he not only reprehended
nothing of all that we said and maintained in his presence, but also declared
to us, as we have already related, that he had present in memory all that we
had argued, and approved the same in as advantageous and honorable terms as we
could hope for. And which is yet more, he made to us this so favorable
declaration, not before his Decree, when it might be said that his Holiness was
not yet fully informed and convinced of every thing, and was not to discover
the secret of his Sentiments and intentions (which all Judges usually suppress
before their sentences) but even after his Judgment and his Decree, which was
the time wherein he was perfectly free, and conceived himself obliged to
declare the same to us with all the sincerity of a successor of S. Peter, and
of a Vicar of Jesus Christ who is Truth it self.

You see, My Lords, by all these eonsiderations that his Holinesse's Censure
falls not upon the Five Propositions, but inasmuch as they are considered
according to the bad sense which may be put upon them, according to which S.
Augustin's disciples rejected them three or four years ago as vehemently as we
did in the writing which we presented to the Pope, and distributed in this City
the next day after our Audience, to diverse Cardinals and other persons of Note.

It remains now to observe to you, My Lords, whence it came to pass that these
Five Propositions were considered according to the heretical sense, that so
they might be condemned in general; which we take one of the most important
points, and a kind of secret of the Affair. 'Twas because the Consultors and
Cardinals were made to believe that we spoke otherwise at Rome then they did in
France, where there were persons who held the Propositions in their bad sense,
and therein published a new Heresy condemned by the Council of Trent, with the
errors of Luther and Calvin. Cardinal Rapaccioli, whom we visited after our
public Audience, and carried him the Distinction of Senses presented to his
Holiness, told us among other things concerning this matter; That our thoughts
and intentions were good and commendable, but we had this unhappiness that
many of those who were united with us, held the Propositions in the bad senses
wherein we professed to condemn them; that instead of receiving help from those
persons, they did us great ^hurt, and would be the cause of the condemnation of
the Propositions; but should have this advantage, that that condemnation would
fall only upon those persons, and not upon us

We knew, My Lords, that the Doctors who came hither against us, had visited
this Cardinal one or two days before, and so we had cause to believe that they
had infused this falsity into him as a most certain truth. Wherefore we
answered him, that it was a most malicious fiction and device of our
Adversaries the better to obtain their designed Censure; and that we could
assure him there was no Catholic in France who held the Propositions in any
other sense then we do. But this conceit was so far imprinted upon his mind, as
if it had been a certain truth, that we cannot think that we have removed it;
although in our Conference we twice or thrice made him the abovesaid answer.
Whereupon we had proposed to our selves to undeceive this illustrious Cardinal,
and with him many other persons according as occasion should have been
presented, if this Affair had had a longer course, as we and almost all Rome
besides believed it would. We hoped also, My Lords, to evidence clearly to the
Pope the falsehood of this conceit in the following Audiences which we expected,
not being longer sollicitous to dissuade him from it in reference to our selves
after our first public Audience, at the end of which, we have understood
since, that his Holiness said, These Doctors are not Heretecks as I was
informed. But our Adversaries, who feared nothing more then these Audiences,
and durst not appear in our presence to declare their Sentiments plainly, as we
did ours with the greatest sincerity and clearness, and to maintain in public
before the Pope the falsehoods and fictions which they dispersed in secret, set
all their Engines on work and redouble their pursuits after that first
audience, to deprive us of time and power to dispell all those shadows by the
Light of Truth.

This is the particular reason, My Lords, which caused them to urge the speedy
publishing of the Decree; and they were not contented to allege this reason in
their visits to the Consultors and Cardinals, but they mentioned it also in
their Writings, which by good hap came to our hands, though communication of
them could never be obtained. They endeavor in these Writings to insinuate this
wicked and false conceit to all such as shall read them, they impute such
opinions to S. Augustine's disciples, as are held neither by us nor any
Catholic in the Church, and they labor to confute what no body ever
controverted. Thus, My Lords, having suggested this false conceit, both in
their Writings and secret Solicitations, they easily prevailed, that to
prevent the holding of the Propositions in the Heretical and Calvinistical
senses, in which they said many held them in France, and to extinguish this new
pretended heresy, which was nothing but a vain fantasm of which they raised a
fear in the Court of Rome, it was necessary for the good of the Church to
condemn them.

But you know, My Lords, that no Catholic Doctor or Divine of S. Augustin's
disciples in France ever accounted these Propositions other then ambiguous,
equivocal and captious, framed about four years ago by one of Molina's
subtilest Partisans; as also that the two first of them were censured by S.
Augustin's disciples in the Tract entitled Considerations, and in the Book Of
Victorious Grace, as admitting three senses, all three heretical; and each of
the other, one heretical sense. You know, My Lords, that we never held the
condemned Propositions in the formal terms whereof they consist; That in the
first Memorial which we presented to the Pope when he gave us Audience upon our
coming to this City, we demanded of his Holiness that the senses which were in
controversy might be distinguished, and that the examination and judgment
which was solicited to be made upon the Propositions, might be made upon the
said senses: That in our first Information in facto representing to his
Holiness and their Eminences the state of the Controversy, we declared that
the Dispute was not at all concerning the Propositions as they were presented:
And lastly, that in the public Audience we had before the Decree was made, we
renewed the same Declarations to his Holiness, and professed sudry times, that
without insisting upon the Propositions which our Adversarries had maliciously
contrived, we defended only the Catholic senses, or the particular
Propositions framed by our selves in perspicuous terms, and reduced to the pure
doctrine of Grace Effectual by it self, as S. Augustine has defended the same
in all his works against the Pelagians and Semipelagians. Whereby you see, My
Lords, most evidently, that not only the Pope's Constitution which pronounces
upon the Propositions in their general ambiguity purposely affected to make
them obnoxious to Censure, and his Holinesse's formal Declarations that he had
no intention to prejudice S. Augustin's doctrine, which is no wise different
from the particular and most Catholic sense which they admit, and we defended
alone in France and at Rome; but also the Writings of our Adversaries who have
imputed to S. Augustin's Disciples errors and heresies which they never held,
justify that those Censures cannot fall but upon those heresies and errors,
and that the Catholic sense explicated by us to the Pope in such express and
formal terms, remains without impeachment and as Catholic as ever it was.

For it is beyond all doubt that this sense of Grace Effectual by it self is
that of S. Augustine; which if there were ground to question, our Adversaries
needed only to desire a public Audience of the Pope, to demonstrate to his
Holiness in our presence, either that this sense in which we maintain the
Propositions is not that of S. Augustine, or else that S. Augustin's doctrine is
not that of the Church: but the light and evidence of so many express passages
of this great Doctor, and the secret force of Truth which is terrible to all
its opposers, has made them fear to enter into Conference with us touching
thts subject in presence of his Holiness or the Cardinals. They were
contented, My Lords, as we have before observed, to tell them in their secret
solicitations, as we discovered they did at first in their secret Writings,
that we who were deputed to Rome by Catholic Archbishops and Bishops, defended
S. Augustine at Rome, but others defended Calvin in France; which you know they
published formerly in France by many Libels and false reports against all S.
Augustin's Disciples in general. And therefore this calumnious Accusation which
they framed at Rome before the Decree, is at this day our justification after
the Decree, and his Holiness's formal Declaration.

It remains then, My Lords, That they can be no other then the public Enemies
of S. Augustine and the H. See, who dare pretend that the Propositions are
condemned of heresy in the proper and particular sense defended by us before
his Holiness, and explicated in our Writings; since the Pope by the Oracle of
his Speech, vivae vocis oraculo, as they speak in this Court, vouchsafed to
declare to our selves, That he intended not to prejudice S. Augustine, whose
Doctrine having been approved by so many Popes, cannot be condemned of heresy
without overthrowing the Authority of the H. See, Ecclesiastical Tradition, and
the perpetual succession of one and the same doctrine in the Church, nor
without violating the Respect which is due to his Holiness, who would hereby
be accused of contradicting himself, since he has declared in sundry
occasions, and particularly to us since the publication of this Decree, That he
meant not to touch Grace Effectual by it self, nor the Doctrine of that great
Saint; and we have already noted, that his Holiness made the same express
Declaration to the Ambassador sundry times, who, as we have before said, writ
this very day to the Court, to inform their Majesty's thereof.

All these considerations, My Lords, have caused us to bless God since this
Decree, That his Holy Providence brought us into this City, to the end that by
the Distinction we made, in presence of the Head of the Church, of Truth from
Error, when we had the honor to speak publicly to him before the
Constitution, and by so true and important a Declaration as he was pleased to
make to us since the same in our last Audience, the Censure of Error might be
hindered from falling upon the Truth, and it might not be attributed to
Innocent X. contrary to his express intention that he designed to condemn by
his Decree, or at least by his silence, the Catholic Apostolic and Roman
Doctrine of the grand Master of Grace, which his Predecessors for twelve
hundred years together have admitted, approved, commended and Canonized by
their formal words and most solemn Decrees; and that he rejected as impious and
heretical the most Catholic and Augustinian sense included in the first of
those Five Propositions, which you know, My Lords, was so fully and clearly
defined by the Council of Trent, Can. 22. Sess. 6. where it says, That the
Righteous eannot persevere in the Righteousness which he has received without
special assistance; And before by Innocent I. when writing to the Council of
Carthage, he pronounces these excellent words recited in the Letter of S.
Celestin, to the Bishops of France Caelestinus Epist. ad Episcop. Galliae, cap.
6.
As we are victorious in temptations when God succors us, so we must
necessarily be overcome when he ceases to help us. Necesse est ut quo
auxiliante vincimus, eo iterum non adjuvante vincimur. For were it thus, My
Lords, should we not have cause to cry out with Saint Prosper, who defended the
same Doctrine of S. Augustine, which we defend at this day; Then Innocent the
first who so worthily filled Saint Peter's Chair, is fallen into Error, ERRAVIT
ergo Innocentius Petri sede dignissimus!

But we hold our selves more happy, My Lords, in that it has pleased God to
make us instrumental to hinder the victorious Grace of his Son and the
invincible Doctrine of his Church from being overthrown by the attempts of
humane presumption; and we acknowledge, that if our weak interposition has
contributed any thing toward the diverting so great an evil, this effect is
due only to the generosity of your zeal, the Authority of your Orders, and the
uprightness of your Directions.

Not but that we believe, My Lords, that Molina's Disciples (who by above a
hundred Propositions, which we extracted out of their Books and presented to
the Pope, declared, even before the Constitution, open War against S.
Augustine, although they disclaim this boldness in Companies where they are
reproacht with it at Paris and in this City) will publish their false Victory
everywhere, and put a false construction upon the words of the Decree, which
speaks not of S. Augustine and upon the express intention of the Pope, who has
so often declared the esteem he has of the admirable and divine Doctrine of
that great Saint.

It Is fit, My Lords, That as this whole Affair has had no other original on
their part, but an unworthy Artifice, in prosecution whereof they have for
these four years thought in the Censure of certain several and equivocal
Propositions a suppott of their new Doctrine of Molina, first hatched in the
Church but about seventy years ago; so it should be terminated with impostures
and delusions unworthy of Divines and Catholics, and with imaginary triumphs.
But we hope, My Lords, that all intelligent persons and well-affected to the
divine interests of Jesus Christ's Effectual Grace, and to the true honor of
the H. See and the Church, which ought to be precious to us, will easily
discern the general and equivocal sense from the certain and particular; that
which we have rejected as heretical from that which we maintained as Catholic;
that which is expressed in the Constitution from that which is not expressed in
it; and lastly, the false and most unjust pretensions of passionate men, from
the true and most commendable intention of his Holiness.

It remains, My Lords, That we prepare our selves to depart from hence to
morrow morning, and we beseech you in the mean time to continue to us the
honor of your good will, and to believe, that as the sole love of Truth and
the defense of S. Augustin's sacred Doctrine, which our adversaries have
endeavored to involve amongst errors, that they might also involve it in a
Censure, caused us to undertake this long voyage, so it will render us more and
more submissive to your Orders and Authority which we shall always respect
most heartily, and as much as they ought, who are,

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servants, De la Lane, Abbot of
Valcroissant. Des-mares, Priest of the Oratory. De Saint Amor. Manessier.
Angran.

Rome, June 16. 1653.
CHAP. XXVIII.
M. Hallier and his Colleagues desire an audience of the Pope to complain of
the public joy we testified in Rome for the Declaration made to us by the Pope
at our taking leave of him, which his Holiness again confirms to them. The
General of the Augustines gives us Letters of Association to his Order. The
Ambassador in a letter to the Count de Brienne Secretary of State gives the
same account of the manner wherein we spoke of the Propositions and the Pope
condemned them, that is declared in this whole Relation.

IT would be hard for me to express what comfort we received from the so
advantageous declaration in favor of S. Augustin's doctrine and effectual
Grace, which the Pope made to us in this audience.

The joy which appeared in our countenances testified the same to all that saw
us go abroad; and 'twas a remarkable accident that M. Hallier, who was in the
Pope's Presence Chamber when we came forth from his Holiness, received at that
very moment the first mortification by it. But he received more by the noise
which this declaration of the Pope made immediately in Rome, as well through
our care to publish it, as through the satisfaction with which those who loved
our cause and persons, (the number of whom was very great) communicated so
agreeable news one to another. Being there remained very few days before our
departure which we determined to be on Monday or Tuesday following, we took
occasion to tell it to all those friends and persons of greatest respect, of
whom we were obliged to take leave before our going away; and we did it as
particularly as the scantnesse of time permitted, to the end we might have them
as witnesses in case of need to certify that they heard us publicly and openly
proclaim it before our departure, and that when the abovementioned letter
which we intended to write to the Bishops should be seen in France, our
ordinary calumniators might not allege that it was a feigned thing invented at
pleasure to delude the world and secure us in some measure from the
condemnation of our opinions which they boasted to have obtained. We related it
not only to those whom we went to visit, but to many others of our
acquaintance, who occasionally meeting us congratulated us for what they had
heard others speak advantageously of it, and desired us to confirm to them our
selves, and particularly relate to them what had been told them but in gross.

The report of the applauses which we received and the public joy which we
testified hereupon to all the world, so vehemently confounded M. Hallier and
his Colleagues, that they thought themselves obliged to go and complain thereof
to the Pope on Monday following, to the end it might please his Holiness
before our departure, by some mortification to quash the advantages which we
took from the said Declaration already, and might afterward take (they said)
to the prejudice of the Bull. I believe they did not speak thus moderately; but
being I could not know this passage otherwise then confusedly, and by the
report of those to whom they opened themselves and spoke nothing of it but what
they pleased, I choose rather to speak the less of it. The sum of all was
this, that all that they could say to the Pope made no impression upon him, but
he answered them that being he had told us his mind and what he really thought,
he could not dislike our relating it upon all occasions we pleased.

Besides the Ambassador whom we acquainted with it, we told it also amongst
other Frenchmen, to M. Du-Noiset and M. Gueffier, as well in regard of the
civilities for which we were obliged to them, as because they were two public
and unexceptionable persons, and might witness it to such of their friends in
France as should have the curiosity to write to them about it.

Moreover we went to tell it to the Generals of the Dominicans and the
Augustines, and by the same means to all such Fathers as we knew, of those two
Order in the Covent of S Augustine and in that of la Minerve. It so augmented
the kindness and esteem which the General of the Augustines had conceived for
us ever since our grand Audience on Rogation Monday, that seeing us upon the
point of our departure, he was pleased to give every one of us a pledge of his
good will and esteem of our persons. It was Letters of filiation and
Association to his Order, which he sent to our lodging by two of his Fathers,
as I remember, on the Sunday before our departure; They were all dated on
Saturday the 14th of June; the copy of that which was for me, is here
subjoyned, whereunto those for my Colleagues were perfectly like.

Mag. Fr. Philippus Vicecomes Mediolanen. Ordinis Eremit. S. Augustini Prior
Generalis licet indignus: Admodum illustri D. D. Ludovico de Saint-Amour in
sac. Facultate Parisiensi Doctori ac socio Sorbonico.
EOs qui de nostra sodalitate been meriti sunt, vel in eam ipsam sunt optime
animati, sive pia devotione propensi, facere non possumus, quin juxta nostram
facultatem pietate prosequamur, eosdemque in optima erga familiam nostram
voluntate, quantum maxim cum Domino possumus, confirmatos reddamus. Quare nos
multiformis gratiae Dei bonos dispensatores imitantes, harum serie ac vi
litterarum and nostri officii authoritate, Te and Consanguineos tuos in primo
gradu in benefactores nostri Ordinis assumimus, and inter spiritualia nostrae
Religionis castra annumeramus. Vobisque omnium Orationum, Missarum, Officiorum,
Praedicatiorum, Contemplationum, Jejuniorum, Vigiliarum, Disciplinarum,
Obedientiarum, Peregrinationum, Caeterorumque laborum ac bonorum omnium quae
per Fratres and Sorores nostri Ordinis universo Orb Christiano constitutos,
divina open fiunt, tam in vita quam in morte, participationem ex Apostolicae
sedis indulto concedimus and impartimur. In nomine Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Addentes insuper de nostra gratia speciali, ut cum
obitus vester in nostris Comitiis generalibus, per Provincialem aut per alios
fuerit nuntiatus, ea pro vobis fiant suffragia, quae pro nostris defunctis
Fratribus ac Sororibus facienda nostri Ordinis Constitutiones decernunt. In
cujus rei fidem ac testimonium hasce litteras manu nostra subscripsimus, and
sigillo nostri Officii muniendas curavimus.

Datum Romae in aedibus nostris die decima quarta mense Junio anno 1653.
Signed, F. PHIL. VICECOMES GENESIS IND.
and sealed with the seal of the Order, which is a Crucifix, at the foot
whereof S. Augustine is upon his knees, with these words round about; Augustinus
lux Doctorum, malleus Haereticorum; Augustine the light of Doctors and the maul
of Heretics.
On Sunday the 15th we went to take leave of the Ambassador, and give him our
humble thanks for the many testimonies of good will which he had given us in
sundry occasions during our residence at Rome. We intended to give him an
account of what passed in our last audience of the Pope, but he prevented us
and told us the particularities thereof, as they are mentioned in the foregoing
letter. There were some of greater importance concerning a particular matter,
which we durst neither tell him openly nor wholly be silent of, and which might
not be set down in the Narrative letter, as neither, may they in this Journal.
And therefore we only intimated some thing of them in general to the
Ambassador, who dispens't with us from further explication by telling us that
he understood the same sufficiently.

But what ever good offices we could receive from his courtesy, he never more
obliged us and the Church with us, even when he exposed his life so often for
its service against the Infidels, or when he groaned under their tyranny in a
long captivity, then by writing a letter to the Count de Brienne Secretary of
State upon the same 16th. of June that we writ to the Bishops; by which letter,
(without thinking at all, as I believe, that it would ever come to our sight,
or should be serviceable to ours and the Pope's justification in reference to
what aims his Holiness had in making his Constitution) he so clearly and
briefly lays open the Pope's intentions, what we maintained in the
Propositions, and what the Pope pretended to condemn in them; That I cannot
better conclude this sixth Part then by adjoyn^g the subsequent copy of that
letter.

A Copy of a Letter written June 16. 1653. by Monsieur le Bailly de Valency the
King's Ambassador at Rome to Monsieur the Count de Brienne Secretary of State.
ON Thursday last I told the Pope that the Doctors who bear the title of S.
Augustin's defenders were desirous to kiss his feet before their departure,
being ready to return into France. His Holiness answered me that whatever
business he might have, he would admit them to audience on Friday morning;
which he did and caressed the Doctors extremely, and told them that he had not
condemned the doctrine of S. Augustine or of S. Thomas, or the point of Grace
effectual by it self, leaving this point and this controversy in the same
posture as Clement VIII. and Paul V. left it; but that, being themselves had
declared that the Five Propositions have three senses, one Calvinistical, one
Pelagian, and one true and Catholic, they ought to be pronounced erroneous and
temerarious, inasmuch as in a certain manner and intent they were heretical;
and that indeed no Proposition which may have poison hidden under it ought to
be propounded to the people, (as pastures where venomous plants grow, ought not
to be tendered to sheep although the same contain abundance of wholesome herbs)
for fear lest the poison be swallowed unawares, the sheep not being able many
times to discern the good from the bad. Then the H. Father commended them and
thanked them, etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
A Relation of what passed in the Assembly of the Curees of Paris on Monday
June 9. 1653. and before the King on the Wednesday following by occasion of
that Assembly.

It Was a Coincidence sufficiently pleasant that the same afternoon on which the
Pope's Constitution was fixed up and published at Rome in the manner
abovementioned, the Curees of Paris in their monthly Assembly complained of
another Bull which the Jesuits had obtained by surprise; dated Febr. 5. 1649.
and had kept concealed for four years; by which Bull the Curees cried out that
the Hierarchical Order was perverted, the Parochial Churches and Masses
deserted, and the Parishioners drawn away from their lawful pastors. Moreover
they concluded that they would write to Rome, to beseech the Pope to revoke it,
and that in case no remedy were granted by his Holiness, then they would
appeal to the Parliament, and preach publicly against the abuses and
pernicious consequences which they foresaw from it. But because they
incidentally spoke concerning the confinement of Cardinal de Rets, occasion was
thence taken to spread heinous falsehoods at the Court against them, and to
accuse them to the King of things, by which themselves confessed in his
presence they should have been guilty of high Treason, had they been true; but
they cleared themselves thereof at the same time with perfect candor and
generosity.

The Cure of S. Roch their ancient Syndic, who was more active in all the
circumstances of this affair then any other, penned a Relation of it, which an
ancient doctor, his intimate friend and mine, copied from his manuscript, and
sent to Rome to me, thinking it would find me there still, with design not
only that I should understand what had passed at Paris touching that matter,
but also that I should in name of the Curees make all the complaints and
solicitations which they should find necessary in process of time in order to
the vacating of this Bull. But we were gone from Rome before the said Relation
got thither, and I received hereafter. Nevertheless I shall insert the
Relation here, that Posterity and after Ages may see to what enormity Calumny
proceeded in ours, since even in things so public and whose truth was so easy
to be cleared and known, it did not spare a Company composed of so many eminent
and venerable persons in Paris both for their hierarchical functions, and for
their piety and learning.

A Relation of what passed in the Assembly of the Curees of Paris on Monday
June 9. 1653. and at the King's Council on Wednesday following concerning the
same.
THe Curees of the City and suburbs of Paris, both by Custom and the Statutes
of their Company assemble by permission of the Archbishop at the house of the
Senior the first Monday of every month which is not taken up by any Festival,
to consult first about the discharging of their functions which relate to the
salvation of the souls committed to them, and afterward of civil and temporal
affairs if there be any that concern their Company.

According to this custom an Assembly was held on Monday the 9th. of June 1653.
in which after sundry spiritual affairs, two things were treated of in
reference to the present Relation. The first was touching a certain Bull of
Febr. 5. 1649. obtained without doubt by surprise, and kept concealed for four
years; being granted to the Churches of the Jesuits and all other Churches
whom they pleased, concerning a certain Communion which they call General, to
be celebrated in their and other Churches by them appointed, and not elsewhere
on the third Sunday of every month, in which the Communicants should gain a
plenary Indulgence, and apply the same to souls in Purgatory. By which Bull,
usage, clauses and consequences thereof the Hierarchical Order is perverted,
and especially the Parochial Churches and Masses are deserted, and the
Parishioners drawn away from their own lawful Pastors, contrary to the Holy
Decrees and Synodal Constitutions of the Archbishop of Paris.

Against which Bull it was concluded that the Curees should write to Rome, as
many others have done, and that our H. Father the Pope should be supplicated to
revoke the same; as also the Nuntio desired to assist their complaint with his
Holiness. And to this effect four Curees were deputed to speak to the Nuntio.
And it was added, that in case his Holiness granted no redress in the
business, an Appeal should be put into the Parliament against the execution of
the said Bull, and the Curees be enjoined to preach publicly against the
abuses and consequences of it. And that in order hereunto the Syndics of the
Company should examine it, and take counsel of Advocates concerning what
inconveniences and abuses might be found therein.

The second thing taken into deliberation was touching the Collects and Prayers
appointed by the Archbishop, and published more solemnly at the last Jubilee for
the liberty of Cardinal de Rets, his Nephew and Coadjutor; which some of the
Company complained to have been left off in many Parishes.

Whereupon it was concluded that the said Prayers should be renewed, and the
Collects inserted in all the Missals of the Vestries of Parishes, and added by
the Priests in all convenient Masses public and private. And that amongst the
ordinary recommendations after service the people should be exhorted to make
prayers likewise to God for the consolations of the said Lords, the Archbishop
and Cardinal, in their present affliction.

And forasmuch as it was reported in the Company that the Nuntio had said not
long ago that he had solicited the King in his Holines's name for the
deliverance of the said Cardinal de Rets, and that as often as he had order he
would do it with all his heart; and that although affairs were not disposed for
the same at present, yet he hoped the King would shortly restore him to his
Holiness. The Company thought fit that the persons deputed to go to the Nuntio
concerning the Bull, should take the occasion to thank the said Nuntio in the
name of the Curees of Paris for his negotiation, and beseech him to continue it
upon all opportunities, and testify to him the great joy and consolation which
the Company received from the hope which he gave that the King would shortly
restore the said Lord Cardinal to his Holiness.

In pursuance of which conclusions, the next day, Tuesday the 10th. the deputed
persons visited the Nuncio, and did according to the order prescribed to them
by the Company.

Whereupon they conceived their intentions being pure, and their conclusion
consisting in terms and ways wholly spiritual, Calumny it self could find
nothing to gain say therein. Nevertheless some ill-willer to their Company or
some flatterer having reported these things to the King and Queen otherwise
then they were transacted, to the great prejudice and injury of the Company,
the next day, Wednesday the 11th. all the Curees of Paris were summond from the
King by M. Saintot to meet at the house of the Curee of S. Germain de l'
Auxerrois, where they should receive the King's orders.

To the appointed place they obediently repaire'd to the number of thirty, from
whence they were conducted to the Louvre by the said Sieur Saintot. Where being
carried into the Queen's Presence Chamber M. le Tellier came to them and asked
who were the Syndics, and the Sieur de Saint Roch senior Syndic stepping forth,
M. le Tellier told him, both now and at several goings to and from the King and
his Counsil, that the King was not well-pleased with the Assembly of Curees of
Monday last, that his Majesty complained of their treating and deliberating
therein concerning some affair of State, and of their concluding yea and
executing their conclusion to have recourse to the Nuntio. That it was a crime
to treat of such an affair and to give a visit to foreign Ambassadors without
the King's leave: That the Curees and others might indeed recurre to the Nuncio
in reference to the spiritual part of his charge and the Court of Rome, but in
affairs temporal and of State he was no other then the Ambassador of a foreign
Prince. That therefore the Curees had incurred a great fault in deputing
persons to him, and were asked what reason they would give for it to the King.

For answer whereunto the said Sieur de Saint Roch, having first made a
Narration of what passed in the Assembly, and followed thereupon in reference
to the Nuntio, said, That in regard of the complaint and opposition they
intended to make against the Bull, 'twas a thing purely spiritual and belonging
to their charges and functions, for which they believed his Majesty would not
be offended, since it was lawful to address to the Nuntio about a spiritual
Affair, and such as concerns the Ecclesiastical Court of Rome.

As for the confinement and enlargement of the Card. de Rets, That the Curees
having spoken only concerning the public and private Prayers in the form, and
according to the appointment of the Archbishop, well known to the Kings Court
and everywhere else without any offense taken thereat before, they conceived
hitherto that their Conclusion for renewing and recommending the said Prayers
to the people, was a piece of administration purely spiritual, and that to
exercise the same was not to treat or meddle with affairs of State.

That as to the having given charge to their Deputies, after they should have
spoken to the Bull, to congratulate the Nuntio occasionally, and thank him for
his Negotiation for the liberty of Cardinal de Rets, and testify to him the
joy they received from the hope he gave, that his Majesty would shortly restore
the said Cardinal to his Holiness, they conceived this Congratulation and
Consolation not to concern affairs of State, or cause any prejudice to his
Majesty's services.

As for M. le Tellier's question, what reason they would give for it to the
King, the said Sieur De S. Roch told him, That if after the foregoing relation
according to the Truth and for justification of their Innocence, his Majesty
desired any other reason, they should return their Answer with all respect when
they understood what he desired; which Answer the said Sieur le Tellier
accounted reasonable. After he had understood from the King in his Council what
was desired of the Curees, he came back; He told them, that the King required
them to ask pardon of him for their Assembly, and depute some persons to tell
the Nuntio, that it was not their intention to have recourse to him, nor by him
to his Holiness for the enlargement of Cardinal de Rets. Whereunto the said M.
de S. Roch answered, That forasmuch as his Office of Syndic empowered him only
to propound things in their Company, to whom it pertain'd to conclude what
answer was fit to be returned to his Majesty, they most humbly beseecht him to
give them time to consider about it. Which Reply being again found reasonable,
M. le Tellier went to know the Kings pleasure concerning it, and returning to
the said Curees, told them, That his Majesty required their answer presently,
and that in order to consult thereof among themselves, they might retire either
to S. Germani de l' Auxerrois, or into the Chamber of Marshal de Villeroy near
the Queens Presence Chamber. According to which order for time and place, the
said Curees withdrew into M. de Villeroy's Chamber. M. le Tellier came thither
to tell them worse news, to wit, that his Majesty was just then informed that
the Curees had signinify'd to the Nuntio, that they would write to the Pope for
the liberty of Cardinal de Rets, and complain to his Holiness for not sending
forth Excommunications by reason of the confinement of the said Cardinal, as
some Popes his Predecessors had done in like case. That they desired the Nuntio
to further their complaint with his Holiness; but the Nuntio much disliked
these Propositions; and said, That more gentle courses were to be taken; That
instead of taking this counsel the Curees answered, That if the Pope would not
do them reason upon their complaint of the Cardinals confinement, they would
address to the Parliament and preach vehemently and loudly against it.
Whereupon the Nuntio thrust the Deputies out of his Chamber by head and
shoulders. To all this it was answered by the Cure of S. Bartholmew, who was
the Spokesman to the Nuntio, that these Reports were nothing but absolute
calumny, as they could make good to his Majesty. The Sieur de Tellier said, he
would go and give this account to the King.

In the mean time it being taken into consideration what answer to return to
his Majesty, especially concerning the last Relation, as also who should be the
Speaker; it was agreed that an Account should be given to the King, as well of
the Assembly of Monday last, as of the Deputation to the Nuntio, and M. de S.
Roch was pitched upon for Speaker.

At length M. le Tellier returned to the Chamber, and understanding the
conclusion of the Company to go to the King, and that the said Sieur de S. Roch
was deputed to be Speaker, He asked the Sieur de S. Roch what he had to say to
the King. Whereunto being answered; That the Company would give his Majesty
contentment, they were introduced by M. Saintat into the Queens Chamber where
either of their Majesty's were seated in Chaires, the Dukes of Anjou, Guise,
the Chancellor, the Keeper of the Seals, M. de l' Hospital, and le Tellier and
some others of the Privy Council standing by. The Curees made a low Reverence
to them, and the Chancellor told them, that the King was not well pleased with
their Assembly of Monday last. Whereupon the said Sieur de S. Roch, after a
reverence to their Majesty's, spoke as follows, or very near; (for his Speech
being not premeditated nor written beforehand it, would be hard to make a
relation of it word for word.) Sir, The Curees of your good City of Paris, your
Majesty's most faithful Subjects, most humble and obedient Servants and
perpetual Orators, conceived that their past services and obediences even
during the late commotions, had secured their fidelity as to what concerns your
Majesty's service from the reach of calumny. But since it is their unhappiness
to have their Assembly of Monday last traduced to your Majesty, and your
Majesty commands to give an Account of it, I shall report the whole
transactions thereof to Y. M. with all truth and simlpicity.

Sir,
OF Ancient custom with the permission of the Archbishop of Paris our Superior,
and according to the Statutes of our Company, we hold our Assemblies the first
Monday of every Month, and therein treat and confer together of spiritual
things which concern our Charges, and the salvation of souls committed to us.
According to this Custom we held our Assembly of Monday last, in the place,
time and manner accustomed, where two things especially were spoken of, and of
those your Majesty demands an Account.

The first was touching a certain Bull of February 5. 1649. obtained of the
Pope by surprise, and destructive to the Hierarchical State, especially of
Parishes. Against which it was concluded to write to Rome to get the same
revoked, and also to beseech the Nuntio to assist our Complaint by his
recommendation; Moreover, in case his Holiness would grant no redress
therein, it was resolved to provide against it by legal ways permitted in your
Kingdom, and to appeal against its being put in execution; Which is an Act
purely spiritual, concerning the charge of souls, and touches not affairs of
State in any wise.

The second thing spoken of, was touching the public Prayers for Cardinal de
Rets, upon which it was concluded that they should be ^new'd. And whereas the
Nuntio had told one of the Company, that in his Negotiation in the Pope's Name
with your Majesty for the liberty of Cardinal de Rets, your Majesty had given
hopes that you would shortly restore him to his Holiness; the persons deputed
to the Nuntio about the Bull were enjoined upon this occasion to give the said
Nuntio thanks in the name of the Curees of Paris for his Negotiation, and to
desire him to continue the same upon all opportunities, and to testify to him
the joy which the Company received from the hope which he had given of the
speedy enlargement of their afflicted Prelate. Wherein likewise, Sir, the
Curees of Paris conceive they have not meddled with Affairs of State, nor
treated with a foreign Ambassador, nor done any thing against the service of
your Majesty.

As for the last Relation made to us by M. le Tellier, That it was newly
reported to your Majesty, how we had said to the Nuntio, that we would write to
the Pope for Cardinal de Rets's liberty, and complain to his Holiness, and
that he did not send forth an Excommunication as some of his Predecessors have
done in case of like detentions; and that he desired the Nuntio to assist our
complaint herein to the Pope, with protestation that if he did us not reason,
we would have recourse to the Parliament, and preach openly against the
Cardinals restraint; and that the Nuntio being offended with the violence of
the Deputies, thrust them out by the shoulders.

We confess, Sir, That if we had used those expressions, or propounded those
means of Cardinal de Rets's deliverance, not only to a foreign Ambassador, but
even to any one else, in the Pulpit, in public, in private, or otherwise, we
should be guilty of high Treason. But since we are very innocent thereof, Your
Majesty will permit us to say, that it is a mere Calumny, and to humbly beseech
you that we may know who are the Authors of it, to the end we may justify our
selves face to face, and demand your Majesty's justice for this false
Accusation. However to justify our selves to our power, we shall readily
depute some Persons to the Nuntio, to beseech him to give testimony to your
Majesty of our innocence, and that we used those expressions and ways only
against the Bull, and not in what concerns the detention of the Cardinal, and
that he received and reconducted the Deputies of our Company with honor, so
far he was from thrusting them out of his Chamber by the shoulders. By which
testimony of the Nuntio, the Curees hope Sir, that your Majesty will see the
occasion and artifice of our Calumniators, who have endeavored to attribute to
the detention of the Cardinal, what was spoken against the surreptitious and
abusive Bull.

As to the main, Sir, As we never expected Cardinal de Rets's liberty but from
God and your Majesty's goodness; from God, by our Prayers; and from your
Majesty, by our most humble Remonstrances and supplications; so we protest that
we never intended to make use of any other way then this to obtain the same.
And as for the prayers to God, we have made the same hitherto, and resolved to
renew and continue them with perseverance, not only upon the injunction and
command of the Archbishop, our Superiors, but also upon our Obligation to the
service of our afflicted Prelate, and by reason of the sorrow which we resent
from his confinement. As for our most humble supplications to your Majesty for
that end we have frequently desired Audience of your Majesty that we might
remonstrate the same, but could not obtain it. But since an unhappy calumny
laid upon us has proved the occasion of this Audience which your Majesty with
great goodness affords us, we most humbly beseech your Majesty to grant liberty
to Cardinal de Rets.

After which account given to the King, the Chancellor told the Curees briefly,
that the King knew well enough that they assembled every Month by permission
of the Archbishop of Paris; and although the Curees of the City were not a
Body, yet his Majesty was pleased with their assembling so, provided that in
their Assemblies they meddled only with the spiritual or civil matters of their
Charges, if any were. But they had committed a fault on Monday last, by taking
into deliberation the Affair of Cardinal de Rets's detention, being an Affair
of State, and by deputing persons to the Nuntio about it: That as soon as the
Kings Affairs permitted the setting at liberty of Cardinal de Rets, his
Majesty would do it; but it did not belong to Curees to meddle therewith nor
with affairs of State; that for the future they must abstain from the same,
otherwise the King would be constrained to use the Authority which God has put
into his hand. That nevertheless his Majesty was satisfied with the account^
which they gave him of their assemblies and of their good intentions; but
withal enjoined them to depute some persons to the Nuncio, to tell him that
they had no intention to make use of other means then the King's goodness for
Cardinal de Ret's liberty.

An Addition to this Relation.
TO satisfy the Reader what became of the affair of the Communion for the Dead
every third Sunday, after the complaints which the Curees of Paris had resolved
to make of it, I shall add here by the way, that the Jesuits have put the
Bull in execution, and cause it to be practiced by their Priests not only in
Cities where they bear sway and do it with the greatest show and ceremony, but
also in Paris, though with less magnificence and concourse; as I observed both
at Paris and in some other Cities where I happened to be upon occasion during
this present year. 1662.

THE SEVENTH PART.
Containing what passed at our departure from Rome, and afterward till our
arrival at Paris; and what particularities I have observed since our return
till the Conclusion of this Journal.

CHAP. I.
Containing the Popes Constitution against the Five Propositions; Our departure
from Rome; our Arrival at Florence; a Letter which we writ from thence to our
Bishops; some Reflection upon our departure from Rome; our departure from
Florence; our arrival at Venice and stay there.

I Cannot precisely affirm when the Popes Constitution was exposed to sale in
Rome, nor when we saw the first copy of it; but I know that neither the one nor
the other was sooner then the Eve before, or the very day of our departure.
Wherefore I think I cannot insert it in a more proper and natural place then
this, after which I have nothing more observable concerning it to mention,
saving what concerns the point of our departure or what I understood by the
letters which I received afterward. The Constitution follows.

Sanctissimi in Christo Patris ac D. N. D. INNOCENTII Divina Providentia Papae
X. Constitutio, qua declarantur and definiuntur quinque Propositiones in
materia fidei. Romae ex Typographia Rever. Camerae Apost. 1653.
INNOCENTIVS Episcopus servus servorum Dei; Universis CHRISTI Fidelibus salutem
and Benedictionem Apostolicam.
CVm occasion impressionis libri, cui titulus, Augustinus Cornelii Jansenii
Episcopi Iprensis, inter alias ejus opiniones orta fuerit, praesertim in
Galliis, controversia super quinque ex illis, complures Galliarum Episcopi apud
nos institerunt, ut easdem Propositiones nobis oblatas expenderemus, ac de
unaquaque earum certam ac perspicuam ferremus sententiam.

Tenor vero praefatarum Propositionum est prout sequitur.

Prima. Aliqua Dei praecept^ hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus,
secundum praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia; deest quoque illis
gratia, qua possibilia fiant.

Secunda. Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

Tertia. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in
homine libertas a Necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a Coactione.

Quarta. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris
necessitatem ad singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant
Haeretici, quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas
resistere vel obtemperare.

Quinta. Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse.

Nos, quibus inter multiplices Curas, quae animum nostrum assidue pulsant, illa
in primis cordi est, ut Ecclesia Dei nobis ex alto commissa, purgatis pravarum
opinionum erroribus, tuto militare, and tanquam navis in tranquillo mari,
sedatis omnium tempestatum fluctibus ac procellis, secure navigare, and ad
optatum salutis portum pervenire possit;

Pro rei gravitate, coram aliquibus S. R. E. Cardinalibus ad id specialiter
saepius congregatis, a pluribus in sacra Theologia Magistris, easdem quinque
Propositiones ut supra nobis oblatas, fecimus singillatim diligenter examinari,
eorumque suffragia, tum voce, tum scripto relata mature consideravimus,
eosdemque Magistros variis coram Nobis actis Congregationibus, prolixe super
eisdem ac super earum qualibet disserentes audivimus.

Cum autem abinitio hujuscemodi discussionis ad Divinum implorandum Auxilium
multorum Christi fidelium preces tum privatim tum public indixissemus,
postmodum iteratis eisdem ferventius, ac per nos implorata Sancti Spiritus
assistentia, tandem Divino Numine favente, ad infrascriptam devenimus
declarationem and definitionem.

Primam Praedictarum Propositionum; Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis
volentibus and conantibus, secundum praesentes quas habent vires, sunt
impossibilia; deest quoque illis gratia, qua possibilia fiant; Temerariam,
Impiam, Blasphemam, Anathemate damnatam and Haereticam, declaramus, and uti
talem damnamus.

Secundam. Interiori Gratiae in statu Naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur;
Haereticam declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

Tertiam. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu Naturae lapsae non requiritur in
Homine libertas a Necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a Coactione; Haereticam
declaramus and uti talem damnamus.

Quartam. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis Gratiae Interioris
necessitatem ad singulos actus, etiam ad initium Fidei, and in hoc erant
haeretici, quod vellent eam Gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas
resistere vel obtemperare; Falsam and Haereticam declaramus, and uti talem
damnamus.

Quintam. Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse; Falsam, Temerariam, Scandalosam; and
Intellectam eo sensu, ut Christus pro salute duntaxat Praedestinatorum mortuus
sit, Impiam, Blasphemam, Contumeliosam, Divinae Pietati Derogantem and
Haereticam declaramus and uti talem damnamus.

Mandamus igitur omnibus Christi fidelibus utriusque sexus, ne de dictis
Propositionibus sentire, docere, praedicare aliter praesumant, quam in hac
praesenti nostra Declaratione and Definitione continetur, sub Censuris and
poenis contra Haereticorum and eorum fautores in jure expressis.

Praecipimus pariter omnibus Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, aliisque
locorum Ordinariis, nec non Haereticae pravitatis Inquisitoribus, ut
Contradictores and Rebels quoscunque per censuras and poenas praedictas,
caeteraque juris and facti remedia opportuna, invocato etiam ad hoc (si opus
fuerit) Auxilio Brachii Saecularis, omnino coerceant and compescant.

Non intendentes tamen per hanc Declarationem and Definitionem super praedictis
Quinque Propositionibus factam, approbare ullatenus alias opiniones, quae
continentur in praedicto libro Cornelii Jansenii. Datum Romae apud sanctam
Mariam Majorem, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae millesimo sexcentesimo
quinquagesimo tertio, pridie Kal. Junii, Pontificatus Nostri Anno Nono.

Hi. Datarius. G. Gualterius. P. Ciampinus.

Anno a Nativitate D. N. Jesu Christi Millesimo Sexcentesimo Quinquagesimo
tertio, Indictione sexta, Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris and D. N.
D. JNNOCENTII Divina Providentiae Papae X. Anno ejus Nono, die vero nona mensis
Junii, supradicta Constitutio affixa and publicata fuit in Ecclesia Lateran. ac
Basilicae Principis Apostolorum de Vrbe, nec non Cancellariae Apostolicae
valvis, ac in acie Carupi Florae per me Hieronymum Mascellam Sanctissimi D. N.
Papae Cursorem. Pro D. Mag. Cursorum P. Paulus Desiderius Cursor.

When we had bidden Adieu to as many of our Friends as we could in the short
time appointed for our departure, which was to be on Tuesday June 17. diverse of
them came to us that morning to wish us a good journey. And in the afternoon by
the hour that we were to set forth, there met so many who would accompany us to
Ponte-mele, where our Horses expected us, that they filled six Coaches. So that
when we went out of Rome about the hour that the Promenade begins, through the
street which goes from the College de propaganda fide to the Gate del Popolo,
our Equipage seemed something Triumphant, and if I mistake not, the Count de
Rochfort was one of those that saw us pass by in this manner, out of their
windows. I mention these particularities because our departure being sudden, in
regard of the approaching hot weather, some persons took occasion thence to
vent this falsehood, that we were constrained to fly and make our escape as soon
as the Pope's Constitution was published. I know not, as I said before, whether
we saw it on the day before or the very day of our departure, because it was
not sooner printed and exposed to sale at the Apostolical Printing House, and
none of our friends had a Copy of it before. But after we knew of it, both by
the public voice and in the following Audience which the Pope gave us, we
resolved to depart, whether we saw it first or not.

We took Horse at Ponte-mole, and there parted with our friends who accompanied
us thither. That night we lay at Monte-rose, from whence we went to Siena. We
traveled according to the usual stages, and had a very favorable time to
begin our Voyage, considering the season and the Country. For the intermixture
of Rain and a cool Wind, made this time resemble an Autumn of France, rather
then a Summer of Italy. Nevertheless, F. Des-mares found some indisposition
upon himself at Siene, which obliged us to stay one day there in attending him.
And yet he could not continue the Journey with us to Florence but in a Litter,
which we hired at Siena for that purpose. M. Manessier also was indisposed when
he came to Florence, in which place while we staid there three or four days in
expectation of his amendment, the reflections we made upon the Popes
Constitutions, which decided nothing of the matters, whose decision we had so
importunately demanded of his Holiness, gave us a little scruple that we had
departed from Rome without first receiving order from the Bishops who sent us
thither, and induced us to write the ensuing Letter to them.

My LORDS,
WE departed from Rome the 17th. of this Month, as we signified to you by our
Letter of the 16th. that we purposed to do. We intended to return with what
speed we could, being very desirous to inform your Lordships personally of many
things which cannot be so exactly written, and that those of us who are Doctors
of the Faculty of Paris might be present at its Assembly, when the registring
of the Decree passed upon the Five Propositions should be propounded, to the
end we might at the same time acquaint the Faculty with the Popes intentions,
as we signified the same to you. So that our Report being likewise entered into
the Register, no person might presume, either now or hereafter, that S.
Augustin's doctrine and Grace Effectual by it self were prejudiced by that
Decree.

We designed, My Lords, according to the computation we made of our Journeys,
to have been in this City on Saturday. But we were not strong enough to undergo
such speedy travel, and could not reach hither before Monday; besides, that the
indisposition of some of our Company has constrained us to repose here at the
present, and will oblige us to make but short Journeys during the rest of our
Voyage. This slowness, My Lords, has induced us to write to the Faculty for the
purposes abovementioned; and the exact account we owe to you of all that we do
in this Affair, obliges us also to acquaint you with it and send you a copy of
it. We hope, My Lords, you will approve our procedure and intentions, which aim
at nothing but the peace of our body, the honor of the H. See, and the defense
of Truth; and we conceive that when you shall have joined his reason to the
others, which obliged us to depart from Rome without your express orders, you
will not dislike our presuming that herein we did nothing but what you would
approve. For although during all our stay we could not obtain of the H. Father
what we demanded of him by your order, to wit the establishment of a solemn
Congregation, wherein the matters which are the sole Contests in the Church,
might be thoroughly examined, and with the conditions you appointed us to insist
upon: Nevertheless, we conceived there was no reason to continue our
solicitations for the same, after what is come to pass; since if the Pope had
been disposed to enter into the Examen and discussion of these matters, there
was no more justice, reason and appearance to do it before pronouncing any thing
upon the Five Propositions, then after such a Judgment as that which is
published. Indeed, My Lords, when the Pope declared to us that he meant not to
meddle with the matter of Effectual Grace, or do any prejudice to S. Augustin's
doctrine, and consequently, that he had not passed his judgment upon the
Propositions which we presented to him in explication of those which were
framed by our Adversaries, (since those propositions are necessarily linked
with Effectual Grace, and express the doctrine of it without any equivocation
according to the indubitable sense of S. Augustine;) it may seem that we might
reasonably have represented to the H. Father, that his Decision did not clear
what was in dispute, nor establish peace; and therefore we might still have
demanded his Holiness's judgment upon the controverted senses. We might have
beseecht him with all sort of respect, that (the Five Propositions remaining
condemned by his Decree, so far as they are considered according to the evil,
impious and heretical senses which may be given them, and according to which we
our selves condemned them first in his presence,) at least he would please to
consider the controverted senses, to examine in a solemn Congregation the clear
Propositions which we had presented to him, and their contraries which our
Adversaries maintained against us; to hear us fully upon those senses in
presence of such as impugned them, to peruse the Writings which we had
presented concerning this cause, and to make such a distinct Decision of those
Propositions as might appease the troubles of the Church. And we had the more
occasion to renew so equitable a suit to his Holiness, inasmuch as he treated
us with singular courtesy and esteem; But at the same time he seemed so averse
from condescending to this Motion; we found during the whole course of this
Affair, that he had so great a repugnance to it, partly through his own
dispositions, and partly through the false suggestions of persons about him,
and in whom he has confidence; and we perceived so many reasons which your
Lordships know of, and so many others which we have still to tell you, that we
had no hope left of any effect (notwithstanding all the advantages and urgent
reasons we had to make it) and consequently none of us judged it expedient.
However, My Lords, since his Holiness has declined neither to examine or
define what is in contest between the Catholics, which was necessary to be
done for the glory of Truth, the peace of the Faithful, and the honor of the
Church, we cannot but tell you, that if you think it fit to renew your
instances upon this matter, we are still ready to go and represent them to the
Pope again. For the strengthening of of which, if the Body of the Clergy, or the
King himself, or both together, would interpose their Authority for obtaining a
solemn and regular Congregation, in which all things might be done according to
forms accustomed in the Church, We are prepared to maintaain again before the
H. See against any opposer whatever the indubitable truth of the Five
Propositions, conceived in the terms into which we reduced them and defended
them, which are free from all equivocation and obscurity, as soon as such a
Congregation shall be established with the conditions we demanded at first, so
just and necessary in the whole course of the Affair. But so far as we are able
to judge of things, we perceive not that it is easy to obtain such a
congregation of the Pope without new and earnest instances from the King and
the Clergy: Nevertheless, My Lords, being unwilling to omit any thing in our
power which may contribute to the good of peace between Catholics, and to the
clearing of Truth, we resolve, My Lords, not to stir out of Italy before we
receive your Orders in this business, that so in case you find any likelihood
in the proposal we make to you, we may be in readiness to put the same in
execution, and may further testify to you our obedience and zeal. We hope, My
Lords, to hear from you within five weeks according to the directions we send
to him who delivers you this Letter. We shall punctually obey you in whatever
you shall prescribe to us. In the mean time, we shall continue our Voyage by
little and little toward France in expectation of your Orders; which, whether
you will permit us to re-enter there, or command us back to Rome, we beseech
you to send us as speedily as may be, (especially if you recall us into France)
and to continue to us the honor of being esteemed,

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servants, De la Lane, Abbot of
Valcroissant. Des-mares, Priest of the Oratory. De Saint Amor. Manessier.
Angran.


F: Guerin did us the favor at Rome to take upon him the care of selling our
movables, (of which we could not have acquitted our selves in so short a time)
and to agree with the Owner of the House on what conditions he should take it
again. Therefore after the abovementioned Letter, I writ to F. Guerin, to
desire him to defer both those good Offices till he heard further from us.

We came to Florence on the 22d. of June, and the same day being S. John's
day, saw the great ceremony of that Festival: We departed from thence on the
27th. to Bologne, whether we reached the next day. VNe intended to have staid
and rested a little there, but the excessive heat which we found there on the
29th. caused us to go from thence toward evening, and we took boat at
Francolin upon the Poe, to go down to Venice the next day: but the rain and the
contrary winds forced us to lie one night in our boat upon the Channels which
are between the Poe and the Marshes of Venice; and having staid a day or two at
Chiosa till the fair weather returned again, we set forth for Venice, and
arrived there on Friday the fourth of July.

On Sunday the 6th. we went to pay our respects to M. d' Argenson, who was the
Ambassador for the King to this Republic. He did us the honor to send to
invite us to dinner with him on Tuesday following; as also to visit us himself
on Thursday; and during all our stay at Venice, he gave us upon all occasion
testimonies of singular goodness and courtesy. He saw also in several free
Converses which we had the honor to have with him, how frankly we acquiesc'd
in the condemnation made of the Propositions by the Popes Constitution, and in
what manner we were persuaded that this Constitution did not prejudice the
opinions which we maintained, and had maintained before the H. See. So that he
told us once that he had written as much to M. Coqueret, and assured him, that
we did in no wise take our selves to be condemned by it, nor yet the Doctrine
which we hid defended.

The day before he came to see us, we were visited by one M. Du Puy a Frenchman
of good age, who had dwelt at Venice almost all his life, after he had quitted
the employments he had had in the Affairs of France, a man of learning and
parts, but he had the unhappy engagement to make profession of the pretendedly
Reformed Religion. In this Visit we had much Discourse with him concerning the
unity of the Church, and the obligation never to break the same, what cause and
pretext soever a man may think he has to do it. F. Des-mares spoke so
vigorously of this matter, though with all the familiarity of a private Visit,
that the honest man was touched therewith, insomuch that tears were sundry
times seen in his eyes. Nevertheless he plausibly and stoutly defended himself
from the charitable reproach which we made to those of his Religion, agreeing
with us as to the strict Obligation to preserve that sacred Unity, but
maintaining that 'twas not themselves that broke it, but those who would not
receive them into their Communion upon conditions essential and sufficient
thereunto, but exacted others which were not requisite. To which F. Des-mares
replied, that although there might be abuses in the Church, yet most of the
things which the pretended Reformers of the Church had taken for causes of
their separation, were not abuses, but the ancient practice of the Church, as
Invocation of Saints, veneration of their Relics, and other like things. And
moreover, that without entering into these contests, it sufficed to tell them
generally, that all the pretexts that could be alleged for breaking the unity
of the Church, were not justifyable before God, since there is no just one for
it, according to the Fathers, Praescindendae Vnitatis nulla est necessitas; as
the Prophets never attempted to make a Body of Religion separate from that of
the Synagogue, how depraved soever it were, but were contented with preaching
against those Corruptions, even so far as to expose themselves to death for
their condemning the same from God; That the like ought to have been done by
those who pretended to reform the Church; If they found themselves called of
God for so great a work, they ought to have undertaken the same in the Church
it self, whatever should have befallen them; but if they knew themselves too
weak to venture martyrdom, they ought to have been contented with reforming and
correcting themselves, but not have meddled with the abuses which they could not
amend in others.

Upon occasion we told the Ambassador what was spoken concerning this matter on
either side between M. Du Puy and our selves. He was sorry that he was not
present at the Conference, and desired us to give him notice, in case we could
foresee a like occasion for another: But for that we staid at Venice only till
the great Heat was passed, and had received an answer to the Letter which we
writ from Florence to our Bishops, and were not certain of seeing this M. Du
Puy again before our departure (for he would not tell us his Lodging, although
we asked him to the intent to repay his Visit) we told the Ambassador, that it
would be great contentment to us to procure what we desired, but we saw no
great probability of it. Nor indeed had we any opportunity to do it during all
our stay at Venice, which lasted till about the middle of August.

In all which time nothing memorable occurred, but the Letters which I received,
both from Paris and from Rome touching the Popes new Constitution, which I
shall insert here, in regard of the further light which they give of the manner
how it was passed, of the Popes intentions in passing it, and of the sincerity
and humility wherewith we submitted thereunto. I shall begin with those of
Rome, because they were the first which were written to me, and appear to me
the most considerable.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Letters which I received from Rome during our residence at
Venice, touching the Popes new Constitution.

THe first of the 30th of June, written by a person of one of the most
considerable Orders in the Church, and one of our most intimate friends, whom I
had encharged at our departure to make our excuses to some of those of whom we
had not time to take leave, or did not meet withal. He told me in his Letter,
That the next day after our departure he began to acquit himself of what he had
promised us: That he had seen the F. Library Keeper of the Augustines, who
accounted himself much obliged for some books which we promised to send to him
for the service of the public in that Library: That he had seen F. Lezzana,
who was soliciting for the Permission formerly promised him to print a book
which he had made concerning Effectual Grace, and that upon telling him what
the Pope said to us in our last Audience, he answered him that Cardinal
Pimentel told him as much before, as having understood it from the Pope
himself. Il giorno dopo che V. S. si parti con gli altri suoi signori compagni
e miei padroni, comminciai ad esseguire i suoi ordini. Parlai co'l
Bibliotecario Di S. Agostino il quale resto appagatissimo del suo buon
desiderio di compiacerlo di qualche cosa per la sua libraria, perch puo
servire per util publico e far vedere qual cosa di buono e bello a chi vi va a
studiare, mastime contra inimicos gratiae Christi, etc.

Ho perlate co'l Padre Lezzana, e l' ho riscaldato a procurar la licenza di
stampare la sua prima secundae colla materie della Gratia efficace, e gl' ho
suggerito molti motivi per disponere, etc. Gl' ha appresi e gia ha duo to un
memoriale a Ghiggi and a nostro Signore. Lo riscaldero, etc. Li rigratia della
memoria, etc. Havendoli raccontato quel ch' e successo col Papa e Coro Signori,
mi ha replicato ch' altre tanto gl' ha detto il Card. Pimentelli, che gl' ha
detto nostro Signore.

The same friend sent me word also by the same Letter; that they could not
conceive at Rome that the Constitution could have good sequels; That one of the
Consultors, whom he named to me (but I conceal) told him, that the Jesuits
complained of F. Palavicini, conceiving that he had not succeeded in this
Affair as they expected; and that he gave thanks to God, that he had had no
hand in making this Constitution, though he had been invited to it. That M. N.
M. writ to him, that at his return he would tell him his thoughts of it, and
that he was very joyful to see that it did not at all touch the doctrine which
we defended. That Cardinal Pimentel told F. Nolano, that he would desire the
Pope to declare for which senses he had condemned the Propositions; That F.
Luca Vadingo said to F. Reginald, that he could not conceive how so rigorous a
Censure came to be passed upon the Propositions, since not any of the
Consultors censured them so vigorously in the Congregations, not even F.
Palavicini himself. He told me also that the same day he writ to me, the Nephew
of Barberini was made Cardinal. And lastly, he saluted us all heartily, and
made an humble reverence to the Bishops, the undaunted lovers of the perfect
Grace of Jesus Christ. Qua a nissun piace la Costitutione per piu capi; ne si
sa capire che posse apportar buon essito. Il P. D. N. N. mi diste che li Padri
della Compagnia si lamentano assai del P. Palavicinii parendoli che non sia
riuscito in questo negotio come pretendeano. Rigratia Dio di non esser stato a
part in stabilir la'Costitutione, come gl' era stato significato. Il signor M.
N. mi scrive che nel ritorno mi manifestare i suei sentimenti intorno la
Costitutione, il era tutto allegro perch li per che non tocchi, etc. Il Card.
Pimentelli ha detto hieri al Padre Nolano che vuol far instawza a nostro
signore che dictriari il senso delle Propositioni. Il Padre Vadringhi ha detto
al Padre Reginaldi che si sia fatta la Censura con tanto rigore, perch nelle
Congregationi niuno l' ha censurate con tanto rigore, ne meno il P. Palavicini,
etc. Questa matricas' e fatto Cardinale il nepote de' Barberini. Riverisco e
salato tutti ex toto cord e fo humilissima riverenza a i Vescovi intrepidis
perfectae gratiae amatoribus.

The second is of the same date, written by F. Petit Priest of the Oratory, who
likewise assured me that diverse of the Consultors affirmed, that in their
suffrages none of them, not even F. Palavicini himself, qualified the
Propositions with those rigorous terms which are in the Censure.

The third was dated June 28. and written by F. Guerin, who amongst a thousand
other good Offices which his inexhaustible charity and singular affection to
Monseigneur d' Angers and to us, induced him to do for us, both during our
residence at Rome and after our departure, acquainted me with some, which I
shall here relate in his own words.

I have presented your books (to wit, our little tomes of S. Augustine) to the
Cardinals Franciotti, Trivultio and Omodei, who received them with great joy
and expressions of acknowledgement, especially the first and the last. But the
two first, particularly Trivultio professed, that they were much surpised when
he saw the Popes Censure, forasmuch as there was great likelihood and reason
that you should be heard. Trivultio said, he did not think that it would any
wise conduce to the establishment of peace, but rather the contrary, because
though his Holiness seems in appearance not to have touched S. Augustine, yet he
has done it indirectly, and will cause much trouble. The two others earnestly
pressed the Oration and the Dictinction of the senses of the Propositions, which
all three judged should have been in the Censure. Franciotti has made them
already, and I shall carry them to Omodei afterward.

He had put off our House to Monsignor Caffaretti, and sold our furniture
presently after our departure; and therefore understanding our offer to the
Bishops to return to Rome if they pleased, he offered us his own in that case
till another could be provided, in this obliging manner; If you return to Rome,
be sure you alight nowhere else but at my house, if you will have me your
friend.

The fourth is of the same date, June 28. written by F. Petit Priest of the
Oratory, and superior of these which are at Rome in Saint Lewis's Covent.

Sir,
I Have received yours of the 21. of June with the enclosed which I have
distributed. I have seen as many of your friends as I could, and presented your
recommendations to them; they are all glad to hear of your health, and pray our
Lord Jesus Christ to continue strength and health to you till you come to the
end of your Voyage, where I doubt not but you will have great Encounters to
undergo for the cause of Truth. Now F. Dinet is grown so potent at Court by his
guidance of the Kings conscience, he will not fail to make use of that
Authority for persecuting the Truth and those who defend it.

As for news here, none is spoken of, saving that your Adversaries walk with
something more stateliness, and carry their heads higher then they did
formerly. The Jesuits proclaim openly, that you are condemned together with S.
Augustine and the whole School of the Thomists; and a Divine of the Roman
College has begun to argue from the Censure of the third Proposition, that
Jesus Christ had indifference in reference to his actions: to prove which, when
he alleged the Censure of the third Proposition, they say, a Student answered
him, Sed illa propositio est de natura lapsa, in qua non erat Christus: which
put him to a nonplus. Nevertheless, the intelligent sort of people have no
great respect for this Censure, they see so much partiality and passion, and so
little justice in it. It Is affirmed to me, that F. Aversa and some other
Consultors never saw your Writings, and was not called after your Audience, and
that this Censure is certainly the same which was made toward the beginning of
Lent. The same person assures me too, that the first beginning of the
Congregation, 'twas a fixed and determinate resolution to censure the
Propositions at what rate soever. And therefore it is no wonder that the
Jesuits spoke of it so confidently from the first. He tells me likewise, that
none of the Consultors, at least the Molinists, care not much for S.
Augustine's Authority; but I hope that God and his Church will uphold the same
above all those who go about to diminish it. At Rome this whole week has been
spent in Bonfires and public rejoycings, both for solemnity of the Marriage,
and alliance of the Pamphilian Family with that of Cardinal Barberin, and for
the Promotion made on Monday of the Prince Prefect, who took the Hat on
Thursday last, but with the public Panegyricks of the Pope and Cardinals. It Is
believed that Cardinal Barberin shall resume the Helm of Government. Cardinal
Antonio is certainly reported to be at Sea, and is expected every day. M.
Hallier and his Colleagues make no show of departing yet. It Is said, they stay
here to see how the Censure will be received at Paris and in your University,
that so they may solicit his Holiness for such course and means as shall be
necessary to enforce its reception.

The fifth was written to me on June 29. by that person, without whose counsel
I have said in one place of this Relation, that I did very few things. Both the
Original and the Translation are here subjoined.

Il pensiero di non uscire d' Italia fin che habbiano riposta di Francia, a me
and all' amico piace sommannente.

E la parterera Di Roma come fu' necessarea cosi non puo essere ripresa; ne il
fermarsi poteva pastorire niuno buon effetto, e nella present congiuntura si e
cavato della bacca ai Papa, quel pius che si puo sperare; e sara sempre
imprudenza tentare la cognitione d' una causa presso un giudice che non intend
li termini.

Si che non bisogna riguardare quello che ponno dire gli auversarie circa la
partenzi ma li sogna con prudenza ponderare li nostri disvantaggi and li loro
vantaggi altro che l' Aliero in tutti li circoli; dove si trova, predica che ei
tiene la gratia efficace de se, e la dottrina di sant' Agostino, e che la
decisione del Papa non effende ne l' una ne l' altra; e che li Molinisti sono
in errore, come ancora quei della predeterminatione physica; and si riscalda in
modo sopra di cio che piu non si puo dire, e chi l' ha sentito piu volte a me
lo riferisse and e persona a Giesuiti affectionata.

Che il Decreto sia per fape rumore in Francia non si creed, perch il Re
adoprea la forza and autorita, perch sia ricevuto con race, che cosi ha
promisso; e lo so io.

Che il campo sia aperto in Roma e meglio; perch sino che qui si stava, la
Corte perretrava tutto l' intemo di vosignoria, e sprezzava Memoriali, come se
berrissimo; ma estendo absenti, se sentiranno rumori, potranno forzi comparire
magiori e piu considerabili, e mi credache bisogna preoccupare qualche favore
ulla corte di Parigi, che questo paventara piu che altro, perch il brazzo
regio e stato quello che ha triato il Papa a quella risolutione a che non saria
may venuto.

In fatti l' amico conclude, che il partire sia stato prudente, il ritorno
infrutuoso, e senza un giudice ch' intenda la materia, ogni causa sara sempre
pienadi disorenie.

Roma li 29. Giugno.
Which sounds thus translated:

Your intention not to leave Italy till you receive an answer out of France, is
extremely approved by me and also by our friend. Nor can your departure from
Rome be reprehended, because it was necessary. To have stayed longer here,
could have been to no advantage; and in the present conjuncture, you have drawn
the utmost from the Popes mouth that could be hoped for. 'Twill ever be
imprudence to bring a cause to be examined before a Judge who understands not
the terms of the matter in question.

So that it need not be regarded what the Adversaries may say of your
departure, but our disadvantages and their advantages must be weighed with
prudence. Besides, M. Hallier in all Companies where he comes, preaches to all
the world, that he holds Grace Effectual by it self and S. Augustin's Doctrine,
and that the Popes Decision hurts neither the one nor the other; and that the
Molinists are in the error, as also those who hold Physical Predetermination. A
person who has heard him several times, and who is well affected to the
Jesuits, assures me of this.

As for the Constitution, it is not likely that it will cause any stir in
France, because the King will make use of force and authority to cause it to be
received; for so he has promised, I am certain of it.

Whereas your Adversaries at Rome are absolute masters of the Field, it is the
better; for all the while you stayed here, the Court penetrated into your
secret thoughts, and made mock of your Memorials, as you know full well. But
now you are absent, if any stir be heard from any place, it will appear to them
greater and more considerable. Have this persuasion, that you must endeavor to
find some favor and support in the Court of France, and this will frighten
them more then any thing else, because it is merely the Kings authority which
drew the Pope to this Decision; otherwise he would never have made it.

In a word, our friend concludes, that your departure was prudent, that your
return will be unprofitable, and so long as there wants a Judge that
understands the matter in contest, all will be in disorder.

From Rome June 29.
The sixth is of the 4th. of July, written by the same person who writ the
first. The sum of this was That the Jesuits made no great exultations of the
Constitution at Rome, either because no body applauded them upon it, or because
many, and particularly the more intelligent persons, said openly that it was
not any wise advantageous to them. Qua i Giesuiti non si vedono troppo
tripudiare, o perch non si applaudisce a loro per la Costitutione uscita, o
perch si dica che non e a lor favore per niun conto, e cosi dicono i dotti.

The seventh is of the fifth of July, written by F. Petit. Amongst other things
which he signified to me, he told me these.

Your differences are scarce any more spoken of here, so little care there is
of Truth and what concerns it. M. N. M. who salutes you, told me yesterday,
that the Jesuits are not very much pleased with this Decision, and that one of
the hottest of them in this contest before the Decision, with whom M. Hallier
had many conferences, having been with him two or three days ago, he found him
very cold and little pleased with this Decision, as conceiving that no great
advantage could be made of it in reference to the Controversies concerning
which you were here, nor against Effectual Grace. F. Annat's book De liberate
incoacta, is sold publicly. The Master of the sacred Palace made some scruple
to give him his Publicetur, but he was constrained to do it by his Holinesse's
Order. Cardinal Barberin grows every day to be of great power and consideration
with the Pope. The Marquis del Buffalo is fallen out of his Holiness's favor,
who it is believed intends to give his place of Captain of his Guard to the
Commander Colonna, because the Marquis followed the motions and inclinations of
the Cardinal of Florence, who would not make any rejoicing and Bonfires at the
promotion of the Cardinal Prefect Barberin, wherewith his Holiness was
extremely offended.

I fail not to receive every day new intelligence of threatenings by the
Jesuits and their adherents to send me to the H. Office. F. Richeosme related
a pleasant story the other day to some of his friends, which was, That in the
House of S. Louis a wench was found in man's clothes; and that upon examination
of the authors of this prank, they had no other excuse but to say, That they
had not the grace of chastity. And hereupon he said, You see what what an ill
effect this is of the Jansenian Doctrine in the Fathers of the Oratory; it is
fit they were expelled, least they infect others. One that was present and
heard this abominable fiction and calumny, came in kindness and charity to
advertise me of it. Now, after such a loud untruth, judge what they may not
attempt; since neither the Majesty of the place, nor the presence of the H.
Sacrament, and the bodies of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and the
Tribunal of Truth where he was sitting on the part of Jesus Christ to condemn
sinners and liars, hindered him from relating such a falsehood. But I neither
fear him nor all his adherents, God be thanked. I hope God and Truth will be
stronger then their lies and impostures. Nevertheless, I shall endeavor to make
my complaints hereof to the Cardinals Barberin and Ghiggi, and to the
Commissary of the H. Office, in order to prevent their malice.

The 8th has no date, but I believe it was about the same time with the
former. It was from a very able and prudent Dominican, who testified much
satisfaction in hearing of our welfare: and touching the Affair writ the
following words; Quanto al negocio, nel Collegio Romano si lege de merito
Christi, and subito si stabilisse la necessita della indifferenza con la terza
propositione. Quindi si deduce che niuno atto di Christo era meritorio se non
per quella circonstanze rispetto all quali era indifferente. S' e fatto
penetrare al Papa, e questo ha mandato ordine al Generale Giesuita che scriva
per tutta la Compania e faccia osservare nelli studii che niuno si vaglia della
Bolla sua per stabilire niuno punto Controverso fra le suole. Ma quest' ordine
essendo privato, non sodisfa. Noi habbiamo scritto per tutte l' Vniversita che
siano raccolte tutte le consequenze de Giesuti o d' altro, and siano mandata a
Roma, perch intendiamo movera la controversia se havremo in mano cosa che dia
motivo, come credo che havromo, and e impossible che il Giesuita si tratenga
fra termini della modestia, essendo Pedante pervicace. Cosi il fatto fara
conoscere a nostro signore quello che non ha voluto credere per le nostre
istanze. Del resto, la Corte passa con discorsi di marritaggi e con dissegni
che non passano i confini della famiglia Panfilia, de quali non voglio
inbrattare il folio; e li faccio riverenza con compagni.

That is in our language: As to the affair, in the Roman College (which
belongs to the Jesuits) there are readings concerning the merit of Christ; and
presently after the Censure of the third Proposition, they took occasion thence
to establish the necessity of Indifference, in order to merit; Concluding that
no action of Jesus Christ was meritorious, except upon account of the
circumstances in reference to which it was indifferent. The Pope was informed
of it, and he sent order to the General of the Jesuits to write to all the
Society and forbid all persons to make use of his Bull to the establishing of
any point controverted in the Schools; and to enjoin observation hereof in all
his Colleges. But this order being particular and secret, does not satisfy.
For our parts, we have written to all Universities to get a collection made of
all the consequences which the Jesuits or others can draw from this Bull, and
to have it sent to us at Rome; because our design is to renew the Controversy,
in case we can get any thing material, as no doubt we shall, it not being
possible for the Jesuits to keep themselves in the bounds of modesty,
considering what insolent Pedants they are. The result whereof will be to cause
the Pope to know that, which he would never believe upon our remonstrances.
Nothing is talked of at the Court, but maniages and designs pertaining to the
Pamphilian family, wherewith I will not fill my paper. I kiss your hands and
those of your Colleagues.

The Nineth is of the 12th. of July, written by F. Guerin, and amongst other
things contains these. The last Week M. Hallier came to seek me as himself
said, several times; and F. de Vertamont, one. But neither of them finding me,
they went severally to F. Placide to whom they made heavy complaints against
me, for all that I have done and continue to do for you, which is to uphold so
bad a cause, etc. But in particular for that I visited Cardinal Trivultio, and
told him, as they most falsely alleged, that the Bishops would never receive
the Bull, etc. Afterward I met F. de Vertamont, and told him the occasion of
my visiting the said Cardinal, which was, to present S. Augustin's book to him;
and that I had spoken nothing else of what was imputed to me; With which he
professed himself satisfied But seeing M. Hallier shortly after, he added that
I had confessed to this Father that I had said to Cardinal Trivultio that there
ought to be a Council for deciding these questions; which is as far from truth
as the other calumny. These two persons, viz. Vertamont and Hallier, told F.
Placide that I might perhaps receive a personal affront, unless I took heed to
my self. You see what this tends to. They say, I ought not to have presented
your books to the Cardinals. I have so much to tell you concerning this
business that the paper and the day would fail me, should I go about to tell
you all, and therefore I shall be silent.

The Tenth is also of the 12th of July, written by F. Petit; in which I find
these terms. The grace of Jesus Christ our Lord be with you for ever. I have
distributed all those which were in the packet, and particularly that of P. A.
to whom I delivered the same with my own hand. He brought me his answer to it
this morning, and I send it here enclosed. He bid me tell you something which
he purposely omitted in his letter, to wit, that his Cardinal was yesterday
informed by the Cardinal of Florence or Trivultio that he was assured by
letters out of Flanders that the Bishops of that Country would not receive his
Holinesses declaration upon the Five Propositions, saying, that they
acknowledged nothing for a Decision of Faith but what the Pope determined cum
suo Clero, and not what he determined with three or four Cardinals, and in such
a Congregation as that which made this Declaration. Were our Bishops of France
and your Doctors thus magnanimous, the Molinists would not have whereof to
glory. This would render this Court more circumspect in the making of such
decisions.

F. Reginald salutes you and your Colleagues, and desires me to tell you that in
a visit which he made this week to Cardinal Barberin, they discoursed
concerning his Holinesses declaration and the certainty that the Jesuits would
make use of it against Effectual Grace; but the Cardinal told him they would
not, and that he had signified his Holinesses order to the General of the
Jesuits, enjoining him to write to all their Fathers, Houses and Colleges
that the Pope forbad them to make advantage of this Censure against the
doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas, or against Grace effectual by it self.
The same Cardinal told me near the same thing yesterday in a conference of half
an hour which I had with him, upon occasion of my going to him to desire his
protection against the menaces of the Penitentiaries of S. Peter to put into
the H. Office, as a person disobedient to this Censure. I assured him that I
received the same as a Condemnation of the heretical senses of the
Propositions, but not as a condemnation of S. Augustin's doctrine touching
Grace effectual by it self necessary to every good work of Christian piety,
because his Holiness had solemnly assured you that he designed not to
prejudice this doctrine in any wise, etc. He acknow edged that this was most
true; but added, that we ought to keep as far as may be from the manner of
speaking used by heretics, and that although the thing expressed by such
manners of speech be true, yet because Heretics use the same manners of speech
in ill part, therefore we ought to abstain from them. The conclusion of all his
discourse was, that this Censure is rather a condemnation of terms and words,
then any thing else. That, as for the doctrine of our Congregation, so far as
we stuck to S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and the manner of speech of the ancient
Scholiastick Thomists, as Bannes, Alvarez, Lemos, etc. nothing could be said
against it or me; that therefore I need not be afraid of any rumors or menaces,
and of this I I might assure our General. Upon my mentioning the abuse which
the Jesuits made of this Declaration, he told me their General had written to
their Fathers to forbear doing so. That himself had written to F. Annat to that
purpose: whose printing of his book at Paris Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus he
did not approve, nor that which he printed de incoacta liberate with the
decree and approbation of the H. Office, that had no esteem at all of these
books; but that one of his, entitled Augustinus a Baianis vindicatus was a book
of great learning (whence you may judge how requisite it is to have an answer
made to it and seen here.) The day before, I was with Cardinal Ghiggi, to
complain to him of the threatenings of the Jesuits, and assure him that our
Congregation would be always obedient to follow the doctrine of the Church and
the H. Councils. And having also told him that because our Congregation adhered
to the doctrine of S. Augustine and Thomas, this gave occasion to the Jesuits
to calumniate our doctrine; He answered me that he had heard nothing of it;
that indeed he had heard a talk of some union of F. Bourgoing our General with
the Jesuits touching doctrine, but of nothing besides. To which I replied that
this union was only an union of charity and not of doctrine; that we adhered in
Divinity and doctrine to S. Augustine and S. Thomas, and should not recede from
them, in regard his Holiness had plainly declared to have a great respect for
this doctrine, and that he intended to do nothing against it. But the Cardinal
answered me with sufficient coldness, that his Holiness intended not to do
any thing against it, and that so long as we followed the Scholiastick authors
approved by the H. Church, we should never be blamed. By his discourse I judged
that he was one of those who had done most hurt to the truth, and contributed
most to this decision. I am informed that amongst many other praises which F.
Tartaglia gave this Cardinal in a certain company, for his wit, learning, and
piety, one was that he was the penman of this admirable Constitution, in which
he said nothing could be added, or whereof every word was as so many oracles of
the H. Ghost, etc. I must confess to you, I have been much mistaken in this
Cardinal, and the credit, respect, and esteem which I formerly had for him is
much abated. I forgot to tell you that I found M. Hallier with this Cardinal
before me, to whom himself and some others of his family made great caresses;
whereby I perceived that the Molinists were more welcome there then the
Augustinians. His Holiness gave M, Hallier this week a Priory of 800. Crowns
motu proprio; that is to say, this Priory, which is in Bretegne and known by
the name of the Priory de Rieux; having been desired of his Holiness by some
persons potent in credit, of which some were Cardinals; the Pope asked what it
was worth, and being answered that it was worth 800. or 1000. Crowns, his
Holiness said he would have it for M. Hallier, and accordingly commanded the
Datary to expedite the same for him. This will increase the number of his
Benefices but not of his merit. It Is said, He looks for a Mitre as the reward
of his glorious labors for defense of the Church. They lodge still at the
three Kings in a hired chamber, etc.

F. Reginald is talked of, to be Divine and Preceptor to the young Cardinal
Barberin. If his General stir in it, he may have this employment; otherwise
the Jesuits will obstruct him. I wish it him for the benefit which would
thereby arise here to Truth.

I shall add one reflection here which I hear was made upon the Censure by a
person of capacity; viz. he says he found in a Canonist that when ever his
Holiness used the word declaramus in his Bulls and Decrees, 'twas an
infallible token that his Holiness by such Bull or Decree non constituebat
novum jus and censuram, sed tantum confirmabat and stabiliebat jam factum and
stabilitum, licet adderentur ista verba, definimus, quae semper considerantur
ut habentia ordinem ad declaramus. And consequently in the Censure of the Five
Propositions, this word declaramus being repeated at every Censure of every one
of the said Propositions, it is an infallible sign that by it his Holiness has
not made a new Censure of these Propositions, but only declared or renewed
those which were formerly made against them in the Council of Trent, only in
the sense of the Calvinists and Lutherans, and no-wise in the sense of S.
Augustine, S. Thomas, or of him whom you follow.

The Eleventh was of July 18. and contained no other news, saving that the
Pope was much displeased with the Spaniards, and amongst other causes thereof,
complained that the Bishops of Flanders refused to obey him and contemned his
authority; which he threatened to revenge, and made great complaints of it to
Cardinal Trivultio in the last audience which his Holiness gave him. Non ho
cosa particolare di nuovo, salvo che il Papa si da per disgustatissimo da
spagnoli e fra l' alhe occasioni del suo disgusto si duole che li Vescovi di
Fiandra non obediscano e s' avanxano al dispreggio della sua autorita, onde
minaccia sissentimenti, e nell' ultima audienza data a Trivulsio fece longa
dolianza.

The twelfth is of the 19th of July written by F. Petit, wherein, after some
private affair he tells me thus; As for the Menaces of Jesuits, I care little
for them; by God's help I shall dissipate them, without their doing me any
mischief. Nevertheless I shall follow your counsel, and endevor not to fall
out with any person about these matters; although I shall have much ado to
forbear from quarrelling with those who take advantage of this Censure, to say
that the doctrine of S. Augustine and Thomas touching grace effectual by it self
is censured, and that you are condemned, considering that ever since your first
arrival, and since the Decision, the Pope plainly protested the contrary, and
that you never held these Propositions but with reference to Effectual Grace:
three days ago I had a brush about it with F. Marinari, who asking me news of
you, fell to tell me that you were condemned; I could not suffer it, but
answered him, that you never held these Propositions otherwise then in the
sense of S. Augustine and of S. Thomas, and of Grace effectual by it self, which
his Holiness professed he meant not to prejudice by this decision; but I could
get no more reply from him, saving that they were condemned absolutely and
without exception of Effectual Grace. And when I pressed him to tell me whether
S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and Effectual Grace were condemned, he answered me
plainly, that they are absolutely condemned. Yes, said I, in the bad and
heretical sense which they contain, but not in the Catholic. You see hereby
what evil consequence the enemies of the Grace of Jesus Christ draw from this
Censure -- Cardinal Antonio has been received here with the public
acclamations of Vivat le Card. Antonio. His Holiness received him with open
arms -- All your friends salute you, and desire me again to put you in mind
that it is necessary that you make a brief Narrative or History of all which
has passed and you have negotiated in your affair, of the Instances, Memorials
and writings which you presented to his Holiness, the audience which you had,
and all the rest of the transactions in the decision of the Consultors and
Cardinals, etc. also what your Adversaries both spoke and acted; and this
plainly, yet respectfully speaking of the H. See and this Court, though without
omission of any thing of the truth, and of the repulses which were given you.
The History may be concluded with the Decision and what the Pope said to you at
your taking leave of him; and as for the Decision it self, you must allow it in
the sense and meaning which his Holiness put upon it, which is against the
sense of Luther and Calvin, wherewith your adversaries and the malice of the
Jesuits have always falsely charged you.

The Thirteenth of the same date, in which F. Guerin tells me of some
calumnious extravagant discourses which M. Hallier and his Colleagues made
concerning us. The Molinists, (says he) still lodge at the three Kings, a
place of sufficiently ill note, but the good men know not so much, as I
believe, although in the little time that I was there, I was but ill pleased
with it. They have many untoward discourses of what (they say) the Pope said to
them concerning your behavior in Rome and theirs, your expense and theirs,
their poverty and your riches, by help whereof you have spent in Rome thirty
seven thousand Crowns, etc. That you endeavored to corrupt by presents one of
his Officers of the Palace, that you bribed one of the Consultors; That his
Holiness knew whom you frequented, and who came to you; That you were called
the rich Doctors, and they the poor Doctors, with a thousand other fopperies. I
cordially salute your Colleagues, and am, etc.

All that I learnt considerable out of the Fourteenth, which is of the 26th. of
July, is, that the face of Cardinal Antonio's affairs was already a little
changed, and that the kindred of the new bride fell very short in performance
of the conditions promised in reference to her marriage; That some persons,
being incensed at the excesses of F. Adam's book and that of F. Annat against
S. Augustine, indevor'd to get them Censured; and that the number of the
Disciples of this great Doctor of the Church increased every day in that first
City of Christendom. Non so che me der altro per fine, ch' i Discipoli di sant
Agostino non minuiscono ma crescona qua.

CHAP. III.
Containing the Letters which were written to me from Paris, as soon as the
certain intelligence of the Pope's Constitution arrived there; and the Answer
of F. Morin Priest of the Oratory to one of his Confreres who consulted him
concerning the said Constitution.

I Have four Letters dated the fourth of July. Neither my Lords, nor our
friends understood any thing concerning the Constitution at first but by the
rejoycings of the Molinists, which good people being wont to tell wonders of
their Affairs, the rumors which were spread abroad thereof were not believed,
because it did not appear how the same agreed with the state of ours and what
we had written; but as soon as the news became certain, I received these four
Letters.

The first of which was written by the order and command of my Lords, who
conceived us still at Rome, whereby they sent us word to return the most
speedily we could, and to testify their submission to the Bull in very general
terms, although they made no difficulty upon the condemnation of the
Propositions, because they sent us not to maintain them as they are condemned
in the Bull, but only to hinder least by occasion of the five equivocal and
maliciously contrived Propositions, the doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas
might be condemned chiefly in what concerns the necessity of Effectual Grace.

The second was from the most ancient and considerable Doctor of our Faculty;
and is here subjoined.

Sir my dear Friend,
AT length the thunder is fallen and has discharged its bolt. The allarmes
formerly given us have been followed with their effect, and the success shows
that our Adversaries have had more interest then you in the secret Counsel, and
made the better part of it, if at least they did not wholly model it by their
management and subtilty. We wait impatiently for Monday, to understand from
you the order and series of the whole Affair, whilst in the mean time we hear
in the streets, houses and Companies, no other noise but that of Molinistical
triumphs; and for my part I believe, artificial Fireworks will be made
thereupon in the Colleges of Sorbon and Navarre, as well as at S. Louis, not
to mention S. Germain, de l' Auxenois and S. Sulpitius. The Pamphleters have
not yet cried up and down the streets, but I look to hear them to day or to
morrow. You see I have been a Prophet, and that when I told you this
back-blow-would be given upon pretense that you were not parties, because you
were not accused by any body, and 'twas only about the Propositions in general
that his Holiness was consulted, who might answer by himself; it seems the H.
Ghost spoke by my mouth. Well, Sit nomen Domini benedictum. I know not in what
estate Rome is, but I desire to understand from you. I assure you that in this
Country, the news does not dismay us; on the contrary, it is an Antiperistasis
which redoubles strength in the true Defenders of Evangelical Truths, to defend
and maintain the same more vigorously then ever, both by speech and writing, in
spite of the intrigues of their enemies, and the persecutions wherewith they
threaten us from the temporal Powers. The Providence of God seems not to have
deserted us in this occasion. For before this news, we printed the Distinction
of the senses of the Propositions which you presented to the Pope in a full
Congregation; which made almost all the world judge of the effect of this Bull
before they saw it; and, as I am told, even M. the Penitentiary and Amiot have
been heard to say, that it was in such a manner as it did no hurt, saving among
the vulgar and ignorant. But, this is enough for them; and if they triumphed
upon a Decree of the Inquisition, no doubt they will make Bonefires with
invented squibs, when the Pope, as they think, has spoken so well in their
favor. All this moves not me, and I can truly tell you, that since our
contestations I never found my mind more calm, nor offered the H. Sacrifice
with more quiet and peace of spirit, then I have done since the Monday that
that news came hither. I believe the like of you and our friends, whom I salute
and embrace with all my heart, etc.

The third was from M. de Saint Beuve, as follows.

Sir,
We have had a copy of the Bull by the help of the Bankers. And upon good
consideration of it, we find that it contains nothing which is not agreeable
to our judgments. We shall receive it with all submission. It cannot be
expressed how greatly the Molinists rejoice; but I think their joy would be
greater then it is, if we were less submissive to the Popes Orders. That which
troubles them amidst their joy is, that we do not make lamentations for the
condemnation; that we say, his Holiness has done nothing but what we did long
ago; and that we protest to hold for true henceforth what the Pope has
declared such, not only because it is so in it self, and we accounted it so
before, but particularly because he has declared it, In brief, our joy is,
that we have so perfectly explained our minds, that none but the blackest
malice can accuse us of holding the condemned sense. I shall say nothing to you
of the Jacobins and the Augustines, saving, that it is time that they get the
Pope to declare, whether he had any intent to lay any blemish upon Effectual
Grace, S. Thomas, and S. Augustine. M. Gueffier writes to the Count de Brienne,
that the Jansenists said they would This is a calumny, of which M. Gueffier was
not the Author, but having heard it spoken, advertised me of it by a common
friend.
appeal to a Council. 'Twas fit this kindness should be done us, to make up the
other calumnies. Others have said, we intended to have recourse to the
Parliament; which is as false as the former. If we meant to recur any whither,
it should be to the Pope, to conjure him to define the Controversy, since
hitherto he has only pronounced upon a thing which was out of all contest. But
his not having done it, is a sign that he was unwilling to do it, and that it
would be in vain for you to solicit him to it. I see nothing therefore that
you have to do but to return with the most speed you can, and to rest confident
that our Lord will always preserve his Truth. In whom I am with all my heart,
etc.

The fourth was from a Doctor of our Society who always writ to me in Latin,
and contained these words.

De Bulla, cujus hic exempla quaedam vidimus, nihil habeo quod dicam donec a
vobis aliquid certi acceperim. Si vera est, optarem vos in Gallia esse. Timeo
versipelle and ferox adversariorum vestrorum ingenium; nihil est moderatum apud
ipsos; forte et Christianum nihil apud multos. SS. Oraculum veneramur; atque
ideo apertius doceri petebamus. Nec unquam dubitavimus, quia Propositiones
damnari deberent tam malitiose contextae, ut eum qui pessimus est, sensum per
se ferant. Itaque interpretatione egere ultro concessum est. Plura dicere
necesse non est. Videant Dominicani quo modo se tueantur; videant Episcopi qua
ratione compescant in posterum tumentes Jesuitas. Videant Christiani universi
quomodo a corruptissima morum doctrina caveant, quam certe Jesuitae eidem cum
Molinismo currui triumphali impositum populis ostentabunt. Hoc fulmen Romanum
adversus eos ipsos intentatum jam est, and torquebitur deinceps, qui etiam odio
habentes Jansenium, corruptelam morum and usurarium aut simoniacum palpum
execrabuntur. Accepi M. Nuncium Bullam Regi obtulisse hesterna die,etc.

After our sending word of our last Audience, and purpose to return as speedily
as we could, few Letters were written to us. Yet the same Doctor who usually
writ to me in Latin, by the next Post writ to me in French, which he conceived
would meet me at Lions, and it here follows.

The Bull is published here by the Kings Order with much eagerness. The
difficulty which long hindered the Bull of the Jubilee, did not obstruct this:
and although the Brief bears only Francorum Regi and not Francorum and
Navarrae, yet it was not considered for this time, that this omission was
prejudicial to the Kings Rights; but on the contrary it was said, That there
was nothing in it contrary to the Liberties, and I extremely desire your
return, etc.

By the next Post the same friend told me, That the Jesuits there made great
triumph, and their insolences were so excessive that their own friends blamed
them. That their Affiches (or Notes containing the Questions to be discussed)
were condemned by Councils and by Popes. It seems their joy put them out of
their wits, etc.

As Soon as the person who writ to us in the name of My Lords the Bishops had
received the Letter which we writ to them from Florence, and shown it to them,
he returned an answer upon the 14th. of this Month, continuing his instances to
hasten our return.

Upon the receipt of his Letter at Venice we resolved to depart from thence; but
the fear of him who writ it, least it should miscarry by the way, caused him to
write others to us every week, by which he continually pressed us to return. I
shall insert one here to conclude this Chapter:

You are desired to put your selves upon the way toward France, as soon as you
receive the present. Our friends are so impatient to see you that they suffer
very much during your absence. We have heard no news of you these five weeks,
as for this fortnight I have been in great anxiety, but God be thanked, your
Letters of the 12th. have given us ease. Have a great care of F. Desmares, and
tell him, his good friends wait to embrace him, and testify to him the
resentments they have of the good services he has done to Truth. Be not
melancholy during your Voyage. The Constitution has rather made more disciples
of S. Augustine then diminisht their number; all our enemies are extremely
crank, and will make the most they can of the Popes Declaration. You did well
in speaking to his Holiness as you did in the last Audience; and it is a
blessing of God that his Holiness explained his mind so, Had you been here, the
Prelates who deputed you, would before this time have written a Letter to the
Pope, to thank him for his Declaration; which advantage your delay makes us
look upon as afar off. Hasten, therefore, because it is almost the only
consolation which we expect in our present condition; although this condition
has not changed us, and we are undaunted as ever. I salute all our friends, and
embrace them a thousand times, etc.

Now what conceit the ablest persons even among those, who were not suspected
to favor Jansenius, had of the Constitution, may be seen by this Letter of F.
Morin Priest of the Oratory, and one of the most learned men that have been of
that Congregation. It Is inserted in the Letter of another Father of the
Oratory, who having consulted with F. Morin, communicated his answer to one of
his friends, by which means it became very public and fell into my hands since
my return. Take it at length.

The Letter of F. Souvigny to his Friend, July 24. 1653.
I am well satisfied with your perfect submission to the Decrees of the H. See.
I acquiesce therein with the same resignation. But having taken time to examine
Tradition concerning Grace, and seriously studied the Popes Constitution, I
have at length perceived that S. Augustin's Disciples are rather humbled before
the ignorant, then condemn'n before capable and dis-interessed persons.

Many reasons incline me to this belief, especially the Churches interest to
preserve to her self the Authority of S. Augustine, of his Disciples, S.
Prosper, etc. and not to abandon it to the Huguenots, and embrace the
protection of the upstart Contriver of Scientia Media. The Molinists, by what I
always perceived, make not so great account of verity as victory; but the Holy
Church neither loves nor deserves conquest but in regard of Truth. Yet I would
not make an Idol of my own conceit, nor espouse it rashly without consulting
more knowing persons then my self, for fear of mistaking in an Affair of such
importance, which consists in taking the true judgment of his Holiness, and
the right sense of the Propositions. Wherefore I writ to F. Morin, and desired
him to clear my doubt, either by approving or disabusing my apprehension. I
never preached concerning these knotty matters, and F. Morin has lately
published something against some Maxims of the Jansenists; in which regards we
are less to be suspected, he of engagement, and I of temerity; and I believe
his testimony ought to be more authentic, and my belief less culpable. Behold
therefore his answer to my question, and the copy of his Letter.

F. Morin's Letter.
As Soon as I had read the Popes Bull upon this famous Question, and having
understood eight days before how the Jansenists argued four hours together
before his Holiness, delivered Writings to him, and publicly and juridically
signified, that the Five Propositions contrived by their enemies were
ambiguous, and admitting diverse heretical senses; and one Catholic; that the
heretical senses were those of the Calvinists, the Semipelagians and the
Molinists [for F. Morin understood hereby the senses of the Semipelagians and
the Molinists in the Propositions] and that the Catholic sense was that of S.
Augustine and their own; and that not contented to have said and declared this,
they also distinguished and laid open those several senses to the Pope in
Writing. After, I say, I had considered all this, I concluded forthwith and
told all those who showed me the Bull, that the opinion of the Jansenists was
not condemned by it, but there was a strong presumption in it against the
opinion of the Jesuits, and one as great for approbation of that of the
Jansenists. For the Pope in condemning the Five Propositions of heresy, has
done no more but confirmed the Censure before made of them by the Jansenists
who are at Rome. They condemned the opinion of the Molinists of heresy in
presence of the Pope and the Consultors; and the Pope who heard it in a
judicial way, spoke not a word to the contrary. It Is therefore to be presumed,
that he approves the sentence which the Jansenists pronounced against the Five
Propositions to the prejudice of Molina. Moreover, they told the Pope
juridically, that the interpretation which they gave according to their own
sentiments is Catholic and S. Augustin's Doctrine; the Pope speaks not a word
hereupon, and derogates not expressly by his Constitution from their
interpretation: therefore he approves it; for in such case he is obliged to
speak concerning the same, and not leave us to mistake. Therefore his silence
is to be taken at least for a presumptive approbation. Add hereunto, that after
the publishing of the Bull at Rome, the Jansenists went to take leave of the
Pope, by whom they were well received and commended, and he assured them that
he had in no wise intended to condemn S. Augustine; that, Vbi est Augustinus,
ibi est Ecclesia, and that he had as little designed to prejudice Grace
Effectual by it self; and after a long Discourse he gave them his Benediction
and many Indulgences. All which has been written not only by themselves, but
also by the Ambassador, who testified the same in Letters to his Eminence
Cardinal Mazarin, and the Count of Brienne Secretary of State. This is my
judgment of this Bull, and I have declared it several times to such as have
spoken to me about it. Some allege that the Pope says, the Propositions are
taken out of Jansenius's book, but the words in the beginning of the Bull show,
that he only repeats things as they were presented to him. Now such relations
made by Princes are not conclusive according to either Law, as we are taught by
the Title of Concordat in the Pragmatick Sanction de sublatione Clementinae. C.
litteris. On the contrary it falls out many times, that a violent presumption
is equivalent to a definitive sentence; Extra de Praesumptione, cap. Offerte
mihi. Therefore this Bull being considered by any person versed in the Law,
will in my judgment appear more disadvantageous to the Jesuits then to the
Jansenists.

Hactenus. R. P. I. M.

You see here is a strange F. du Louvigny's Conclusion.
Cooling-Card for the Molinists, who triumph under the shroud of popular
ignorance, and dare not present themselves to the Popes face to justify
against the five Doctors that they wrongfully accused them of heresy before
the Throne of S. Peter; which they ought to do if they were as well skilled in
the knowledge of the Saints, as in the policy of the world, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Of our Voyage from Venice to Paris; and our passage through Suizzerland.

BEing the feast of the Assumption was near when we received the first Letter
at Venice, which obliged us to return into France, we resolved to pass this
Festival at Padua, and depart from thence in the afternoon. We prepared all our
Affairs accordingly. We thankt the Ambassador for his civilities; we bid adieu
to our other friends; and the above-mention.d M. du Pui coming to see us again,
desired me to take a Letter with me for Mr. Vbric, from whom I had brought him
one above three years before.

We departed from Venice two or three days before that of the Assumption, and
from Padua on that day at four a clock in the afternoon. We continued our
Voyage to Zuric without any interruption, and during the day of Rest which the
Venetian Messengers use to take there, I went to visit M. Vbric, as well upon
the account of former civilities which I had received from him, as of M.
Du-Puy's Letter. I could not prevail with my Colleagues to accompany me, and
therefore I went alone. M. Vbric made me new offers of his service, both to my
Colleagues and my self, and asked me, if they would not come at some hour of the
day to see the Library? I answered him, that I believed they would take a turn
about the Town to see the curiosities of it. He replied, that when they came to
the Library, he would give order that there should be some persons there to
receive them and to serve them. I thankt him for his courtesy, and returning
to our Lodging, I acquainted my Colleagues herewith.

I know not whether they went abroad in the forenoon or no, but in the
afternoon we all went to see the Library, where we found some of their
Professors ready to receive us. M. Vbric also came to us, and we discour'd for
some time with him of things purely civil and indifferent.

When we offered to take leave of them; M. Vbric accompanied us into the street
and went up again to the Library, but the rest accompanied us to show us the
Arsenal; after which they conducted us to their new Fortifications. We thankt
them for all their civilities, and took leave of them to return to our Inn:
but it was impossible for us to oblige them to suffer us to go thither alone;
and whatever resistance we made (which yet was not suitable to the civility of
the Country, but they excused it in strangers) we could not hinder them from
going along with us. They enter,d into our Inn with us, and continued to
entertain us till Supper, which being brought, they sat down at the Table with
us, intending, according to the custom in such cases, to pay their shot as well
as we. 'Twas an honor they would needs do us, and we could not hinder it, no
more then that which they did us during Supper, of sending wine to us from the
Seigneurie.

Amongst the indifferent things we talked of during the time they were with us,
something was interposed concerning the Controversies between their Religion
and ours, whereof every one spoke with civility according to their principles
and capacities. We disputed against them in an honest freedom and sincere
charity about Justification, the Popes Primacy and some other matters. F.
Desmares spoke the most on our side, and can remember the things which we said
on either side better then I. That which I remember best concerns the subject
of this Relation; they triumphed upon the Popes Constitution against the Five
Propositions; and we answered as much as was possible in defense of it. The
Declaration which his Holiness made to us of his intentions in our last
Audience, which we opened at length, was the best Argument we could use to this
purpose; but because nothing was set down in writing concerning it in his
Constitution, wherein the Propositions were condemned in writing, this Argument
did not seem to them available to justify the Popes proceeding.

We intended to enter France by Dijon, and so go to Paris the shortest way,
according to the counsel given us by M. du Plessis Presanzon at Venice; but we
turned half a days Journey out of the way to see the goodly and great City of
Basil; and being the Cantons were then assembled by their Deputies at Baden,
which was upon the Road, M. Vbric gave me Letters of recommendation to both
these places.

I have forgot to whom he recommended me at Baden, but I remember his
recommendation was much accounted of there, and was the cause that we were
invited to Supper with the Deputies of the Cantons (who did us great respect)
and lodged as friends for that night, which otherwise we had been but very
inconveniently, in regard all the Innes were full of people.

He gave me a Letter to Basil, directed to M. Buxtorf, that famous Author and
Professor in the Hebrew tongue. My Colleagues went to see the Town and visit the
Booksellers shops; but I would not lose the occasion of seeing a man so learned
in that Language. In a quarter of an hours time that I was with him at the
most, he made such rational reproaches to me of the vogue given in the Roman
Church to the novel opinions of Molina against Effectual Grace necessary to all
actions of piety, that I cannot but bear testimony thereof. He said, (and I
still wonder at it) that were the Doctrine of Grace solidly established, and
generally assented to by all the Faithful, it would alone be sufficient to
compose all differences, because then every one would contribute to recall
their brethren to the center of the Faith and of the Church, and employ all
their time therein, and sacrifice all their interests to that end. I answered
that I agreed with him, that this Capital Doctrine being one of the most
fruitful sources of Christian piety, humility and charity, it was certainly
capable to cause men to watch and pray one for another; and such as are already
in the true faith, to sigh sincerely for the return of their Brethren, without
imposing upon them the necessity of acknowledging any thing essential to the
Faith, which is not so indeed; but I still saw a great Chaos between them and
us which kept us asunder, and has no reference to this matter of Grace; to wit
the mystery of the Eucharist, and the reality of our Lords Body in the Holy
Sacrament of the Altar. He replied that was true, this appeared still a great
cause of separation and division; but yet if this Doctrine of Grace were well
established everywhere and unanimously acknowleg'd, means might be found to
regulate and overcome the difficulty which I mentioned. And me thought he spoke
with an accent, which showed in him a sincere and cordial desire of so great a
good.

He inquired of me concerning some of my Confreres of Sorbonne the Kings Hebrew
Professors, (who were not taken for Jansenists) and having some commerce with
them by Letters, desired me to deliver his to them: Which I readily promised,
as well that I might perform this office to so eminent a man and to my
Confreres, as be above the ridiculous difficulties and impertinent calumnies of
certain people in this Age, who take upon them to blame the best and most
sincere Catholics for the least duties of civil Society toward those who are
not of our communion, as if the same were heinous conspiracies against the
Faith and the Church.

We came from Basil by Franche-Compte to Dijon, where we left the Horses which
we had taken at Padua. At Dijon we took a Coach which brought us to Auxerre,
where we desired to see M. Percheron and M. Venier, and to go by water the rest
of our Voyage to Paris. M. Percheron told us news of what passed at Paris
according to a Letter of the 9th of August written to him by M. Brousse, which
he read to us, and I desired him to give me. It was directed to M. M. Percheron
Doctor in Theology of the Faculty of Paris, Archdeacon and Grand Vicar of
Auxerre. And within it contained the following words.

Paris, August 9. 1653. Sir,
I Have received great consolation by the Letter you pleased to write to me of
the 3d current, for which I thank you with all my heart. Touching our Messieurs
who are at Rome, I have had no news of them since their departure from thence,
but I believe by this time they are in France. I know not whether M. de la Lane
will go to his Abbey of Valcroissant before he come to Paris: for he has
business there, and he had so resolved when we passed that way. As for the
rest, I believe you have heard how neither the Jesuits nor M. Hallier would
enter into dispute; that their intrigues having obtained this Bull (which says
nothing but what we said ever since these goodly Propositions were first
contrived, as you will see in the book Of Victorious Grace) the Pope, before
their departure from Rome when they went to take leave of him, assured them
that he had no intention to touch S. Augustin's Doctrine, which is inviolable
in the Church, nor Grace Effectual by it self, which is the center of all the
difficulties; Whereupon our Friends answered, that they would all their lives
defend the same Doctrine, even to the shedding of their blood; and one of them
added, that it should be dearer to them then the apple of their eyes. The Pope
made the same Declaration to M. Hallier with a sensible testimony of the
learning, modesty and zeal of our Friends; insomuch that he said, he knew they
had lived at Rome like Saints. He made the same Declaration to the Generals of
the Augustins and the Jacobins, and also to the Ambassador who certify'd the
King of it; and likewise writ word of it to the Nuntio, and we saw the Original
of the Letter. So that we receive the Bull with joy, because the sense of Saint
Augustine not being condemned (as indeed it could not be) it is an evidence of
its confirmation, after all the intrigues of its enemies; and that which kept
the Pope from pronouncing upon the Distinction of senses, was, that he could
not do it without condemning Molina, which the faction of his Partisans
hindered. For these reasons, S. Augustine is more zealously adhered to then
ever; the Bull has only healed men's minds to defend him, and gained him many
disciples who before were indifferent. Many Philosophical Acts in the
University contain no other Doctrine touching Liberty, Predestination, the
state of pure Nature, the virtues of the Pagans; and nothing is heard but
Elogies of Saint Thomas and Saint Augustine his Master. The Chancellor of the
Arts goes every Sunday to give the Cap of Master in Arts to the Respondents,
and makes admirable Elogies of those two Angels of Divinity, Saint Augustine and
Saint Thomas. The Jesuits miss of their Markets there, and lately when in an
Act of Philosophy at their College, the Regent said Transeat to an authority
of Saint Augustine, he was hissed by the Company; whereupon some Bishops who
were present, told him he was an impertinent person, and rising up immediately,
went out and made great complaint hereof to their Rector. You see in what
condition we are; and we thank God this Bull has yet made no Molinists, nor is
it likely to make any. I believe you have seen the Distinction of the senses of
the Propositions which our Friends presented to the Pope. However I send you
two copies of it in French for your self and M. Verrier, because I have it not
in Latin, but I will endeavor to get one for you upon thr first occasion. It Is
a piece which deserves to be kept, and which stops the mouths of the most
obstinate Pelagians. I hope our modesty and restraint will obtain in time what
our zeal could not.

I am, etc.

The shallowness of the water in the River which goes from Auxerre to Paris,
and the contrariety of the wind kept us long from arriving at Paris; but we got
thither at length, thanks be to God, in good health toward the middle of
September. So many things have passed concerning the Constitution since our
return, that if I should undertake a Relation of them, I should engage my self
upon a new Work, or at least add a new Part to this, which would be larger then
any of the rest. Therefore I shall adjoin none of those things which are come
to public light, the Memory whereof may be preserved to Posterity by the
pains of other persons as fit or fitter to transmit the same then my self. I
should not have taken upon me to collect those which I have related in this
Journal, had I known any one so well informed of them and able to do it so
exactly. I attempted it because it seemed a Work reserved for me alone, and I
thought my self accountable for it to God and the Public. I shall keep the
same mind in those few things which I shall add of what passed since our return
to Paris, and setting aside all those which are already known to the world, and
of which it cannot be but some hand or other will one day give a Collection to
the Public. I shall speak only of such as are particular to me, and whose
remembrance might be lost, if I should not here briefly set down what I know
thereof.

CHAP. V.
Of the particular things which came to my knowledge after our return to Paris.
A Calumny spread at Rome that we had printed a book at Venice against the Popes
Constitution. The Pope gives notice to the Consistory of his Constitution, and
of the submission wherewith it was received. The imprisonment of F. Nolano,
falsely attributed to the Doctrine of Effectual Grace.

ONe of the first things that I learnt after our return to Paris was, that our
Adversaries, according to their old practice of calumniating, gave out at Rome
after our departure from Venice, that we staid there so long only to print a
Work, to which they gave this Title, Augustinus a Pelagianis condemnatus; in
which they feigned, that we termed the Pope and his Congregation Pelagians,
because he had condemned S. Augustine by his Constitution; whereas we took no
other care in all places where we found occasion to write or speak of it, but
to manifest the respect, which the Pope had always testified for S. Augustine,
and for his Doctrine of Grace Effectual by it self; and that the Pope had real
and positive intentions not to prejudice the same in any thing that he did.
However, the same of this Chimerical work was spread at Rome; it came even to
the Popes ears, who was greatly offended with it (as indeed he had reason, had
it been true, after the satisfaction which he told us he had received by all
that we defended in his presence, and after his so express and obliging
Declarations to us of his right intentions) but he was much offended, that he
gave order to one to collect the Titles of all Books lately written by those
Messieurs (whom they call Jansenists) saying, he would answer them all. This
word, a Father of the Oratory, who heard it from Rome, writ to me from Lions,
September 12. in which Letter he likewise tells me, that a Bookseller of Lions
told him that a certain person assured him, that he had seen some leaves of
this fantastical Book, which never was (not even in Idea) saving in the head of
those who invented this Calumny.

A few days after, viz. October. 4. the Pope held a Consistory, in which we
acquainted the whole sacred College with this new Constitution, and the
submission and reverence wherewith he heard it was received in all parts
(excepting Flanders) and particularly in France: and his Holiness testified
great satisfaction thereupon. All the Cardinals, excepting four or five who
spoke not a word, congratulated the Pope for the contentment which he took
therein, and gave great applauses to his Holiness.

A little while after, viz. October. 17. I heard some news from Rome which I
shall insert by the by. The Agent of the Bishop of Angelopolis desired me to
get the Brief which he had obtained against the Jesuits, printed in some work
wherein it might be inserted for public view, because these Fathers had bought
most of the Copies at the Apostolical Printing House, purposely to abolish the
memory of it. Moreover this Agent happened one day to walk in the vineyard of the
Augustines, where all those Fathers wished all sort of benedictions upon all the
defenders of S. Augustin's doctrine. And lastly, F. Campanella seeing diverse of
the Consultors, who had been of the Congregation for the Five Propositions,
rewarded with preferments for their pains, (as F. Celestin who was lately gone
to his Bishopric of Boiano, which the Pope had given him in the Kingdom of
Naples) presented a Memorial to his Holiness that he might have one likewise
in the same Kingdom.

F. Nolano, an able and ancient Dominican, was treated after another sort, Nov.
8. no doubt by the procurement of some persons who charged some great crime
upon him. M. Albizzi went to la Minerve about 8. a clock at night with other
Officers of the H. Office; and entered into this Father's Chamber, to seize
upon him and his Papers. There being a Writing upon his Table in the Portuguese
language, which some body intended to print, and this Father was perusing at
the request of the Master of the sacred Palace, M. Albizzi asked him whether
that were the Book which he had made against the Pope's authority? F. Nolano
answered him that he had been prisoner three several times amongst heretics
for defense of that authority, and he believed this would be the fourth: M.
Albizzi took away all his papers with those which he had of F. Lemos, and
carried him to the prison del Borgo. Whence some days after he was removed to
the prison of the Inquisition; and the good Priest who sent me this news by a
letter of Nov. 24. added that no body could imagine what might be the cause of
this imprisonment; that it could be attributed to nothing but an absolute
persecution of the enemies of Christ's Grace, who had cunningly suggested to
the Pope by the intervention of some Cardinals, that this Father talked and writ
against his authority; which not being found true, 'twas believed this falsehood
would be blown away, and the contrary manifested, since this Father in all his
discourses and writings testified greater respect then any other person to the
H. See and to the person who fills it: Which caused a Cardinal to tell F. Fani
that their Eminences already perceived that they had committed a great error;
which nevertheless would perhaps be continued upon reason of State; but it was
hoped God would protect the innocent, and make the authors of this surprisal
sensible of their fault.

Our common Adversaries failed not to impute this imprisonmen to the zeal of
this good Father in defense of our common doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas
touching the necessity of Grace effectual by it self to every act of Christian
piety (M. Hallier alleged that it was for that he had distributed some Copies
of our writing of the Distinction of senses) to discredit this heavenly
doctrine and all its defenders by terrifying simple spirits with what treatment
they saw we received at Rome. But besides the grounds that there are to hope
that the sequel will destroy the foundations of all these artificial calumnies,
and manifest that these were the sole causes of his consinement; Two or three
occurrences at Rome about the same time evidence, that it was not this doctrine
which drew this disgrace upon this Father; for the same person who writ this
news to me, tells me in the same letter of a Sermon which himself preached the
day before, viz. on Sunday the 23d. a fortnight after F. Nolano's imprisonment,
in which he spoke in defense of this Grace and against the opposite error as
openly and with as much vigor as it is possible to imagine.

His Letter run's thus, translated. Yesterday (says he immediately after the
foregoing news of F. Nolano) I preached at the Oratory, and upon that place of
the Gospel, Cum videritis Abominationem, etc. When you shall see the
Abomination of desolution in the midst of the holy place, etc. I showed that
this abomination is the pernicious and proud doctrine of Pelagius the
forerunner of Antichrist; for as when he shall sit in the temple of God, he
will have himself acknowledged as if he were God himself; so the Pelagian Dogma
would have it self acknowledged as if it were God, since it makes our Free Will
not only God of it self, but also God of God himself, in that it will have his
Divine Majesty and power subordinate to and dependant upon its pleasure; and
that to sow this error there are already come Antichrists and false Prophets,
who by the prodigious and surprising things which they do, endeavor to lead
even the Elect into error; for instead of teaching little children the
Catechism, they infuse into them the grounds of the Pelagian heresy, as they
have lately done at Spoleto. This Discourse (says he) pleased the auditory; I
know not whether it will be acceptable to the Molinists, and I fear least they
contrive and raise some greater persecution against me then that of F. Nolano;
but let his Divine Majesty dispose how he pleases of my person for his honor
and glory.

Now to satisfy the Reader what this Preacher meant by those false Prophets,
who instead of teaching Children the Catechism, infuse into them the grounds
of the Pelagian heresy, as they had done lately at Spolelo, I must advertise
him that it being the humor of the Jesuits to make ostentation to the people
of every thing they were not contented to give to children who^ they taught the
Catechism, the titles of the Emperor, but to do it with great pomp and
fantastical formality in this little City of Italy, at their giving this
charge to a Gentleman of this City named il Signor Paolo Bartiletti, they
bethought themselves toward the end of last Summer to turn the contents of the
Catechism into a kind of theses which were to be defended at the new election
of this Emperor, of the Catechism by one named Viginisio Campana a native also
of Spoleto, in which amongst the Maxims which these Fathers taught these
children for Christian, were found these two.

The first at the third article of these Theses, and the second at the fifth.

Benche sia necessario l' esser Catholico per salvarsi dopo la sufficient
promulgatio ne dell' Evangelio, e pero assai probabile che alcuni Eretici si
salvano. Although since the promulgation of the Gospel it be necessary to be a
Catholic, in order to salvation; Yet it is very probable that some Heretics
are saved.

Dopo la sufficient promulgatione dell' Evangelio, quantunque sia assai
probabile che sia necessario necessitate medii il credere di piu il misterio
della Trinita, Incarnatione, Morte, Risurrettione di Christo, etc. Nondimeno e
credibele che ancore tal uno si possa salvare credendo simplicemente solo, quod
Deus sit and remunerator sit. How probable soever it may be that since the
sufficient publication of the Gospel it is necessary necessitate medii to
believe moreover the mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation, death and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, etc. Nevertheless it is credible too that some
may be saved only by believing simply that there is a God, and he gives
recompenses.

These Theses of the Jesuits were censured by the Inquisitor of Spoleto the
31. of October last, according to the Pope's order for that purpose transmitted
to him by Cardinal Barberin. I know not whether this Preacher knew of this
Censure when he made his Sermon; but the Theses were come to his knowledge; and
'twas these horrible Maxims contrary to the first elements of Christianity,
that he complained the Antichrists and false Prophets taught children as their
Catechism.

The second of these things which I said were done at Rome in favor of the
doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas touching effectual Grace, is contained in
a letter which the General of the Dominicans writ to one of his Fathers, Prior
of the Covent of Caen, who sent the copy thereof to M. de Saint Beuve in a
letter of his own, Nov. 24. Both which are here subjoined.

SIR,
I Salute you most humbly in our Lord. Some days before my departure from
Paris I writ to our most R. F. General, beseeching him to let me know whether
it were true, that the Pope had declared that he intended not by his
Constitution to touch the doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas, or of our
Schole in the matter of Grace. I received his answer dated October. 6. and
according to my promise send you a copy of it. I must not publish it here, for
fear I be taken for a Jansenist; For the Molinists building upon that Maxim,
Qui non est mecum, contra me est, have declared and stigmatis'd all such for
Jansenists in this City who do not follow their opinions touching Grace and
Predestination. I beseech you, Sir, to command me if I can do any thing in this
country for your service; and to experiment how much I hold it an honor to be

SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant in Jesus Christ. N. N. Prior of the
F. F. Preachers.

Extractum ex Epistola Reverendissimi Patris Magistri Generalis Ordinis Fratrum
Praedicatorum.
QVod sparsos in Ordinem nostrum rumores malevolos occasion Constitutionis
summi Pontificis supra quinque vulgatis Propositionibus attinet, non est quod
ex iis Fratres nostri turbentur ceu arundines omnem ad ventum agitatae, sed ceu
columnae fidci immobiles fundatae supra firmam petram Orthodoxae and sanae
Doctrinae Sancti Augustini and D. Thomae Ecclesiae Doctorum, fluctus illos
proprio motu frangendos constanter sustineant, maxim cum tanti Doctores de
haeresi aut errore nunquam suspecti fuerint, secus vero qui eos impugnavere;
and ipse summus Pontifex saepe and coram personis omni exceptione majoribus,
vivae vocis Oraculo declaraverit, praefatarum Propositionum examine aut Censura
nusquam doctrinam D. Augustini aut D. Thomae, and nostram de gratia efficaci in
dubium revocari, vel minimum attingi velle aut debere. Quare non est quod
moveantur, sed si quid in praejudicium doctrinae Sancti Augustini aut nostrae
Scholae in lucem spargitur, si impressum est, ad nos erit mittendum ut jacebit;
si non impressum, authentice collatum, ut hic obstruantur ora loquentium
iniqua. Sed de his satis.

Lastly, the third of those things was, that the Pope recommended to another
Father of the same Order, viz. F. Reginald in presence of the French Ambassador
who introduced him at his usual audience, before he went from Rome to Guyenne,
(of which his General had made him Provincial) the Pope, I say, recommended to
him to maintain and defend the doctrine of S. Augustine and S. Thomas, as I was
informed by a letter of October. 23. written to me by a person who confirmed to
me how the Pope immediately after his Constitution gave order to Cardinal
Barberin to tell the General of the Jesuits in the name of his Holiness, that
he required all the Fathes of his society to beware of taking any advantage of
his Constitution against S. Augustine or against Effectual Grace; otherwise they
would constrain his Holiness to make some Resolution against them.

CHAP. VI.
The return of M. Hallier and his Colleagues. Calumnies which they spread
against me. News from Rome toward the end of the Year, 1653.

HAving thus exactly related the particularities of our departure from Rome and
of our voyage till our arrival at Paris, as well as the remarkable news which
I understood there after our return; it remains that I set down what came to
my knowledge concerning the departure of M. Hallier and his Colleagues from
Rome, and their voyage to Paris; it being no less my purpose in this Journal
to write what relates to them then to our selves in this affair.

One of the most eminent Bankers of Rome and my intimate friend, sent me word
by a letter of the 25th of August, that these Doctors kissed the Popes feet on
the Tuesday before in order to taking their leave; but his Holiness told them
he would see them again before their going; that they intended to have departed
on the Sunday following, but he believed they would scarce set forth within a
fortnight.

I understood by a letter from Lions dated October. 3. that the letters from Rome
of September 8. said, that they went from thence two days before; that their
Accomplices reported that they were highly caressed by the Pope, for their
service to the Church, in purging it by their care from the new doctrines
introduced into it; That M. Hallier had gotten a good Benefice, and his
Holinesses nomination for the Bishopric of Toul; and that his Colleagues were
entered in the Dataries grand Book for Benefices vacant within six Months.

There was a talk also of some Medals which his Holinsse presented to them as a
testimony of his good will toward them. Concerning which I shall acknowledge
it certain that the Pope's Medaller, in favor and upon occasion of the new
Constitution, made a new stamp in which the pourtrait of the Pope was on one
side, and on the other a H. Spirit with this Devise about, Replevit orbem
terrarum. But whether they received these Medals from his Holiness's hand, or
bought them of the Medaller, is a thing very uncertain, nor do the Letters
written to me concerning the same, clear the doubt.

However, were it so or no, they set forth for France and traveled by the
Country of the Grisons. M. Hallier and M. Lagault came both sick to Coire,
which is the chief City, in the beginning of October, and M. Lagault died there
in a very short time, for whom a service was performed as solemn as the place
permitted; the City being wholly possessed and governed by those of the P.
Reformed Religion; only the Church and the Bishops Palace and some few Houses
which stand like a Cloister, wherein dwell all the Catholics of either sex,
are built upon a Hill higher then the rest of the Town. There are Capucines
there who perfume the services of the Church. One of them made a Funeral
Oration in the service of M. Lagault. He took those words of the Prophet
Zachary for his Text, Vbi suut Patres Vestri? From which he said, he would take
occasion to treat of the state of souls separated from the body, not in
general, but particularly of that of this Doctor, who truly deserved the name
of Father, because he had beee a Father to the poor by the Alms which he gave
them, a Father to miserable persons condemned to death by his charitable
assistance of them in their sad extremity, and a Father of the Church too, as
he had testified during his life, both by his learning, writing and other
Talents, but especially in his last Legation to his Holiness, before whom he
had defended the cause of the Church with such zeal, that he triumphed over his
enemies the Jansenists. He said, it was to be inquired in what place this
Father might be; That there were but three into which Souls depart, Hell,
Paradise, and Purgatory; that the soul of this Father was not to be sought in
the first of these places, because he had not done the works which lead
thither; that then it should be sought in Paradise, to which his good works had
caused him to take the way. But considering that it was improbable, but that
during his life he had committed some small venial sins, he must be concluded
to be in Purgatory where he was a purifying, and from whence he exhorted every
one to help to deliver him by their prayers.

His Hearse was covered with black cloth, round about which were Death's-heads
painted in paper and fastened thereto, and on the top there was the figure of a
heart painted red in paper likewise. He was interred in the Episcopal Church
amongst the Canons, where he expects the Resurrection, which I pray God may be
as happy to him, as I wish it through his mercy to my self.

M. Hallier's indisposition detained him some days longer at Coire; but M.
Joysel continued his Journey toward Paris, with the rest of the Company that
came with them to Coire.

They all passed by Geneva and came to Lions; and when M. Hallier was there, I
was informed by a Letter, that he published such horrid calumnies there against
me and my Colleagues, but especially against me, that he who advertised me
thereof, not daring to mention the same in his Letter to my self, referred me to
another friend to whom he had written them. 'Twere to no purpose to extract
them out of the Letters, for I have hitherto slighted them, and am contented to
have suffered as notorious calumnies from his own mouth in December last when
he and I happened to meet at the house of M. de Souvre Knight of the Kings
Orders, and first Gentleman of his Chamber, to whom the next day I writ the
following Letter.

Sir,
HAd M. Hallier been contented yesterday in the Discourse we had together in
your presence, only to have given me the injurious and offensive words which
you heard he did, I should have already forgotten them, and had no displeasure
left for his having been so unmindful of the respect which is due to a person
of your quality, and so much exceeding the bounds of the moderation required in
all the Actions and words of a man of his age and profession. Had he added to
his injuries only the several falsehoods which he asserted with prodigious
confidence and affectation, I should have accounted him sufficiently punished
by being convinced, as I convinced him of part of those falsehoods, and by being
urged, as I urged him diverse times (though he would not hear it) to choose any
of those facts about which we disagreed, to be discussed and proved before you,
to the end that by what should be found true of that single one, it might
appear what judgment was to be made of the rest, and which of us spoke with
truth and good grounds. But the horridness of the calumny, which alone I
resented as soon as he uttered it, and told him I could not but challenge him
either to prove or retract, or else to pass for a bold and insolent
calumniatour, seems to me so important and touches me so to the quick, that I
cannot forbear to renew my resentments and complaints thereof to you by
writing. It constrains me, Sir, to beseech you again most earnestly, to suffer
me to press M. Hallier by the ways of honor, either to come and justify
before you so black an accusation as he had the boldness to charge upon me to
my face, or else to disown it as spoken in heat and without good information;
otherwise, in case he declines to satisfy this my just demand, he must remain
in the opinion of your self and all persons who shall hear of this Affair, a
person convicted of calumny. Could it be suffered as the rest in silence,
without prejudice to the estimation of my inviolable fidelity to the Kings
service, I should constrain my patience to the utmost, to bury it in oblivion.
But since M. Hallier has reproacht me in your presence to my face of having
dispersed Libels at Rome against the King, he would take my silence for
guiltiness, if I should not resent this heinous accusation and urge him either
to retract it or make it good. I have lately perceived by most certain reports
of what he has spoken of me upon several occasions, that he is so incensed
against me, that I have reason to fear that he seeks to decry and mischief me
by all ways that he can. Nor can I doubt but that in a hundred places where I
am not present to defend my self, he makes the same discourses which he dared
to make before me in your hearing, Sir, who might soon know by the long
experience you have had of my deportment and ancient engagements to the Kings
service, how little probability there is in this accusation. God grant the
distrust I have of M. Hallier's evil designs against me be as ill-grounded,
and that his charity toward me, of which he gave you so ample a testimony at
the beginning of our discourse, be true and solid; but the speeches which he
has uttered concerning me since his arrival at Paris, the leaven which remains
in his heart ever since I went about, as he says, to make him guilty of high
Treason, by accusing him of having approved Sanctaret's book, and a design
which perhaps he suspected I had at Rome, tending not so much to his advantage,
have given me great grounds to conceive this distrust. Wherefore, I hope, Sir,
you will approve my proceeding in this case, and add this new favor to the
many former for which I am obliged to you, that this business between M.
Hallier and me may be cleared before you, not so much in reference to my
justification in your opinion (for I conceive you are already persuaded of my
integrity) as to prevent him from venting the like calumnies in other places
against me: and I believe you will be ready to afford me the means to prove
before all the world hereafter (if M. Hallier gives me occasion for it by
continuing the like speeches) by the discussion of this fact, I am not only
clear from all fault in this kind, but that he has not the least ground to
charge me with any.

But least such as may see this Letter hereafter, should imagine that there is
some exaggeration in what I have spoken above in general of the other falsehoods
which M. Hallier vented before you, and I clearly refuted upon the place,
because they see none particularis'd; give me leave to remind you of half a
dozen of the principal, of which this good Doctor was convicted. 1. He affirmed
as a certain thing, that we have had great intelligence, familiarity and
conference with the Ministers of Geneva, and that he was informed hereof by the
Deputy Syndic of the City; but I cut him short, by telling him, that we came
not within three days Journey of the place, which I was ready to prove by the
Messenger who conducted us, and by the testimony of all the Innes at which we
lodged upon the Road that we came. 2. He called me a seditious person; and to
prove it, said, That I had raised sedition upon sedition, viz. by moving
sedition in our Faculty, when I saw Paris in combustion with the Barricadoes.
But to refute this, I alleged, that the day when I made my opposition to the
violation of the Statutes of our Faculty (the pretended sedition wherewith he
reproacht me) was the second of May 1648. and that the Barricadoes were not
made till four Months after, to wit, the 26th of August following. 3. He
contended most obstinately, that the Faculties Censure of the first of April
1626 against Sanctarel, was revoked by the Faculty: And I told him, I would put
it to the trial, and undertake that he could not show me any valid act of this
Chimerical revocation, but on my part, I would produce this Censure into the
day newly extracted out of our Registers 4. To lessen the shame which he
received by the opposition which was made to his Syndicship, because he had
given his approbation the same year to that pernicious Doctrine, which he also
solemny approved again in your presence, Sir, declaring, that though he
believed it false, he woule rather depart the Kingdom then subscribe to the
Censure which the Faculty had made of it, because it condemned the said
doctrine of heresy, which he said had been supposed, followed and practiced by
five general Councils: He affirmed, that he had the whole Faculty for him,
excepting seven young Doctors who opposed his Election. But I asked him, whether
he accounted the Cure de S. Roch and M. Brousse young Doctors; and I told him
that the five others who opposed him, were as old as himself, that is to say,
of the ancientest of the Faculty. 5. He said, he had right to send F. Mulard to
Rome as Deputy of the Faculty (though he added, that he did not send him)
because, the Faculty had given him and three other Doctors power to prosecute
the Affair before all sort of Tribunals. And I asked him whether the word
quomodolibet, which they had slipped into the Faculties Conclusion, purposely to
countenance this pretended power afterward, signified all sorts of Tribunals?
And I averred, that in the Faculties deliberation, the question was never other
then about joining in the appeal of the Irish to the Parliament, and that the
Faculty had not the least thought of all sorts of Tribunals, much less of
giving him power to send Deputies to Rome. 6. Lastly, Sir, As Soon as you were
gone out of the Room, he complained in presence of M. de Sablonniere, and
another person who I believe was one of your Officers, that I sent you word in
the Letters which I writ to you from Rome, that the Pope had repulsed him, and
that you told the King so; both which things as you know, are equally contrary
to the Truth. All the other injuries and Discourse I pass over in silence,
(though I penned an ample Relation thereof last night, to make use of when need
shall be) both because the rest may be judged of by those which things I have
here mentioned, and because I consider that I ought not to abuse the honor of
the Audience which you give me, especially since this Letter is only in order
to my justification against the most considerable of the calumnies whereof I
complain, in order to the clearing of which, I once more renew my humble
Requests to you with as much instance as the dearnesse of my Reputation and my
innocence require, with sentiments as full of sorrow and compassion for M.
Hallier as his were violent against me; and with as much respect to your person
as my obligation is to be,

Sir, Your most humble and obedient servant, De Saint-Amour.
December 16. 1651.
I sent this Letter to M. de Souvre the same day; but he not being at home, I
sent it again the next, and the next after went my self to reiterate my Request
to him, that he would oblige M. Hallier to this Conference. He advised me to
consider the Genius of the person with whom we had to deal, saying, that he was
a heady man, with whom there was no pleasure to contend because there was no
moderation in him. That therefore it was best to slight what he had said, and
the rather for that all who heard it observed that he spoke crosly and
perversely without reason or discretion.

M. de Mets came to see M. de Souvre whilst I was in this discourse with him,
and as soon as he was entered, M. de Souvre said to him, I wish, Sir, you had
been here two or three days ago instead of to day; You should have seen M. de
Saint Amor at a contest with M. Hallier, who assaulted him with a hundred
frivolous accusations; 'Twas a comfort and some sort of justification to me,
that all M. Hallier's unworthy discourses had made no other impression then
this. Yet I was troubled to hear this heinous Calumny, which concerned my
respect and fidelity to the King; and therefore I renewed my complaint of it to
M. de Mets. But he had the goodness also to comfort me, and tell me that I was
well enough known at Court from my infancy, and that none there would entertain
the least suspicion against me for any of M. Hallier's reproaches. So that
having the testimony of this Prince and of my own conscience in my favor,
besides that of M. de Souvre, and the company who were with him at his House
when I met M. Hallier there, I could not in reason but conform to their
sentiments.

But M. Hallier was not the only man from whom we suffered in this kind. There
were others who strove to equal him, accusing us particularly of intelligence,
and conformity of opinions and designs with the Calvinist Ministers whom we
had seen upon the way: Which Calumny became so common in sundry places of
France, that two Doctors, my Friends, residing far from Paris, writ to me
upon the same day to clear my self of it; I answered their Letters with a
sincere Account how things passed. And one of them was so satisfied therewith
that he sent me this following.

Sir,
YOur Letters afford me as great contentment by the justification of your
procedure with the Calvinists whom you met in your Voyage, as the calumny and
imposture of your, or rather S. Augustin's Adversaries, had caused trouble and
displeasure. They who have seen your Letter, are extremely satisfied with it,
not only for the plain narration of the Truth which is enough to stop the mouth
of Calumny, but for the delight it affords in the description of your Voyage,
and the several entertainments you had with the Heretics. I am most pleased
with the Christian moderation wherewith you treat your Calumniators. I pray God
give them the like spirit of Charity, and preserve the same in you. It Is, in my
opinion, the most effectual way to win them, and the best course to defend
Truth against those who fight against it with more heat then knowledge.

I am, Sir, Your most humble and obedient servant Percheron.
From Auxerre December 9. 1653.
But to end this Work, I shall add no more but the news which I received from
Rome by the two last Posts in December, 1653. by Letters of the 22th. signified
to me.

1. That F. Nolano was still in prison, though lately in a larger place, which
gave more hope of him. 2. That M. Albizzi published, that the Pope would not so
soon have made his Constitution, nor in the manner he did, if we had not
insisted so much for a Contradictory Audience. 3. That 'twas held for certain,
he would be made Cardinal at the first Promotion, and also F. Tartaglia, or he
of Saint Laurence in Lucina.
The same person writ me these words by another of the 29th.

F. Laurence the Augustine tells me, he heard one of the Consultors for the Five
Propositions say; That neither he nor his Companions ever saw the Writings
which you presented to his Holilinesse; that he knew not what they were. You
see how this matter has been examined, though it be the most difficult and
important in our Religion. Be not weary of defending the Truth; and though the
men of the earth persecute you, yet the Kingdom of Heaven will not fail you.

THE CONCLUSION.
THis is an Account of all that I understood to have passed at Rome in the
Affair of the Five Propositions: In which I know not any thing which is not
most true and exact: I do not mean as to the words (for it is impossible to
retain them so exactly, though I used the best care therein I could;) but as to
the substance of the things related. If I knew there were any one in it which
trespassed upon Truth never so little, I would expunge it; being not ignorant,
that if God judges for the least unprofitable words, he will judge me more
vigorously for the false which I knowingly mingle in so weighty a matter. And
truly I were very wretched, if having no other design in this Work then to
honor the God of Truth, I should think to acquit my self of this duty by
lying. I see not what interest could induce me to it, having by Gods Grace very
few pretensions in the world. But whatever those interests may be, I am well
persuaded none upon earth deserves to be much prized, because there is not any
but must end and consequently cannot last long, as I have learnt from S.
Augustine; Non est diu quod habet extremum. And according to the solidity of
this sublime and certain Maxim, I should much deceive my self if I should be so
unhappy as to speak the least falsehood in this Work for any temporal advantages
that I proposed to my self as the recompense of my Lying; since, should these
advantages last to the end of the world, I most clearly perceive that they
should pass away with incredible swiftness, and that consequently, that being
nothing can remain for me before God of this whole Work, but the falsehoods
which I may have uttered in it, or the Testimonies which I believe I have
rendered to the Truth, nothing but either of these can be of any importance to
me. And through Gods mercy this is all that I have aimed at; I consider nothing
else, but look upon all the rest as already passed.

And in witness of all the contents of this Journal, which I once again
acknowledge before God for true, I have signed and subscribed the same as such,
in my Chamber at Sorbonne this sixth day of August, one thousand six hundred
fifty four. L. DE SAINT AMOR.

AN ADDITION Made to this Journal on S. Peter's Day, 1661.
Containing, 1. An Answer of Cardinal Barberin to two Letters of mine. 2.
Sundry places of F. Annat's Book entitled Cavilli, which justify many points
of this Journal 3. A Decree of the Inquisition of Rome, touching the Popes
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Temporalties of Kings. 4. An Advertisement
touching several Acts of the Congregation de Auxiliis, which we caused to be
transcribed and compared at Rome.

WHen I made this Journal, I had no purpose to add any thing beyond the year
1651. but when I reviewed it for the Press, I found among my Papers Cardinal
Barberin's Letter of the twentieth of April, 1654. which contains an Answer to
two of mine; in which, after a most sincere Declaration, that I condemned the
Five Propositions condemned by Pope Innocent X. and that all our Friends did
the same, I declared to him no less clearly that I was persuaded Jansenius was
not the Author or Assertor of them, and that the reading of a little Tract made
against F. Aunat's Cavilli Jansenianorum had fully convinced me thereof. I sent
him two of those Books, and desired him to communicate them to Cardinal Spada
and Cardinal Ghiggi (now Pope Alexander VII.)

Cardinal Barberin's Answer was this.

Sir,
LAst week your letter of the 6. of March was delivered to me; and this week I
have received another of the 20 th. Both of them are so full of goodness and
civility toward me, and so lively express your remembrance and affection to
me, that I owe you a thousand thanks for them. As for the particularities in
the former, I cannot but much commend your pious sentiments touching our H. F.
and the resolutions which you take; highly esteeming the confidence which you
profess to have in truths deliberated with mature consideration. And I am glad
to understand by the other letter the issue of the last Assembly, remaining in
expectation to know the passages of the next. In the mean time I shall
willingly read one of the two copies which you pleased to send me, and show
them to the persons you desire. Moreover, I hope that as you are liberal to me
of your favors, you will be so likewise of your commands, which I entreat you
to be, assuring you that they will be most acceptable to me, since I
particularly desire to let you know how much I am,

Sir, Yours most affectionate, Cardinal Barberin.
Rome, April 20. 1654.
The mention of F. Annat's book entitled Cavilli Jansenianorum puts me in mind
of the witness which he renders to the truth of two or three considerable
passages in my Journal.

For he acknowledges, (1) That the Constitution was already drawn, when we had
our grand audience of the Pope, jam concepta definitione, p. 37. (2.) That
after that Audience no Congregation was held to examine either what we had
spoken, or the Writings which we had presented; nulla deinceps habita est
Congregatio, p. 37. (3.) That we only huddled over the matter, not speaking
directly to the Propositions, but altogether concerning Effectual Grace. Nam
cum dicturi essent de quinque Propositionibus, coeperunt dicere de Jesuitis.
Satyram illam excepit effusa in commendationem S. Augustini and gratiae per
seipsam efficacis oration, de quibus nulla erat controversia, and post longa
quatuor circiter horarum fastidia compertum est nondum coepisse dicere de
tribus capellis, p. 35.

Wherefore these important mattes of fact can no longer be questioned even by
the most injust adversaries, after so public an attestation by him who had the
best means to be informed of them, and the most interest not to acknowledge
them.

I had here ended this Addition, but that as I was closing up my papers, I cast
my eyes upon a Decree of the Inquisition of Rome touching the Pope's
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the temporal territory of Kings and other
Sovereigns. And finding that it was made about the same time of the preceding
letter, and seemed worthy of the public curiosity, and view, I thought fit to
insert the following translation of it.

A DECREE Of the sacred Congregation of the Supreme and universal Inquisition,
specially deputed by the H. See against Heresy in the whole Christian
Commonwealth.
Thursday 15. January 1654.
IN this City and perhaps in other places a Manuscript in Spanish has been
published beginning with these words, His Excellence has received a letter by
the hand of the Nuncio; and ends with this; which is most agreeable to the
service of God, the good of souls, and upright justice. The Author of which
according to public fame is BENOIST DE TREGLIES collateral of the Counsel, or
Regent of the Chancery of Naples. And amongst other temerarious and scandalous
Propositions it contains the following. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
belonging to his Holiness, as Pope, out of his own temporal territory,
concerns Causes and Persons, and is restrained to Determinate Causes and
Persons in whom alone it may be exercised. Wherefore the Territory belongs
only to the King; and as he who exercises jurisdiction in a strangers
territory is to demand the good leave of the Lord of the Jurisdiction of that
Territory; So when the Pope, having no Jurisdiction in a Territory, intends to
exercise any in that of the King over causes and Persons in what concerns him,
he ought to let his Writs be examined by the Temporal Prince, that so it may be
known whether the Causes and persons contained therein be of his Jurisdiction.

Which Proposition having been examined and weighed by the Qualificators of the
supreme and universal Inquisition according to the express command of our H.
F. Pope Innocent X. the said Qualificators with unanimous consent adjudge the
same Heretical and Schismatical.

Wherefore least the Faithful should be infected and corrupted with pernicious
opinions and heresies by the reading of the abovesaid Manuscript; The
Congregation of the supreme and Universal Inquisition absolutely forbids and
condemns the said Manuscript, whether it be dispersed in the Spanish or any
other language whatsoever, under the penalties and Censures contained in the
Table of prohibited books.

And let the Author know that he shall be punished with Censures and other
Ecclesiastic pains, unless he purge himself speedily.

John Ant. Thomasi Notary of the H. and Universal Inquisition of Rome.

One thing I forgot to mention in my Journal, which is, that during our
residence at Rome, one of my Colleagues got sundry original pieces of the
Congregation de Auxiliis (which are kept in the Library of the Augustines)
carefully transcribed and compared. He also recovered the Original writings of
F. Lemos touching the disputes of that Congregation, in which volume the same
writings are signed by the hands of Clement VIII. and Paul V.

A SECOND ADDITION Made to this Journal on S. Martins day, 1662.
THe Relation given to the Assembly of the Clergy anno 1655. by the Bishop of
Lodeve, (now of Montpellier) of what Pope Innocent X. told him was done at
Rome, in the affair of the five Propositions, deduces things with so little
clearness and exactness, as to order and time, that when it came to my view
first about a year ago, I thought it might serve in some sort to prove the
substance of what is related in my Journal, and in requital my Journal might
make it better understood. And this Relation having been so well approved by
the Assembly that they desired the said Bishop to give it them in writing to
the end it might be inserted in the Verbal Process which they caused to be
printed, I presume all those who have read that alone, will be more satisfied
with it by reading it after this Journal.

An Extract of the said Verbal Process: Friday 14. March 1656. The Archbishop
of Narbonne being President.
THe ancient Agents continued their report, and speaking of spiritual affairs,
related all that had passed in the reception of the Constitution of our H. F.
Pope Innocent X. touching the five Propositions condemned by his Holiness; as
also what order they had received from my L. L. the Prelates extraordinarily
assembled to this purpose, to write to the Bishop of Lodeve (then at Rome)
concerning it.

Whereupon the said M. de Lodeve said, That whilst he was at Rome, he was
commanded by the Assembly of Prelates held at Paris to present to the deceased
Pope Innocent X. the letters which they writ to his Holiness about the
publication of his Bull; which obliged him to represent to the Assembly what
passed at Rome concerning this matter during his being there; and that if the
Assembly thought good, he would begin with the things which preceded the
sending of that letter. The Assembly having approved this proposal, the said M.
de Lodeve proceeded and reported, That in the first audience which he had of
Pope Innocent X. of happy memory, 2. Jan. 1654. his Holiness did him the
honor to tell him, that he was obliged to the Bishops of France, and had them
written in his heart, for having been the first in acknowledging the authority
of the H. See in the affair of the Jansenists; That these were his Holinesses
very words; and that what he was about to speak further, was very near the same
language which he used to him, he having put it into writing at the end of his
audience.

That his Holiness further told him, That the Question of the five
Propositions being presented to the Bishops of France, they refused to take
cognizance of it, and said to the Presenters, Go to the Pope, to whom it
belongs to decide causes of Faith. That many Bishops had written to him; That
Doctors of either side came to Rome; That his Holiness having asked Doctor
Hallier whether he had any thing to say? he answered that he came to Rome only
to understand his Holinesses sentiments, and to know the truth from his own
mouth, touching the Five Propositions; and he would respectfully and
submissively receive what he should decide, as an Oracle of Faith. That the
other Doctors demanded a Hearing and liberty to answer to what the adverse
party would allege. At which word party, his Holiness told them there was no
party in this affair, and that the inquiry was only to find the truth. That
then one of these Doctors made a discourse full of Invectives against the
Jesuits, which his Holiness heard with patience and charity, though it was
nothing to the matter in question. That after this speech, another made a long
Predication, which he could not finish, because night superven'd, and he read
in a Paper; but he said that all which they had to offer was contained in eight
quires of paper which he presented to his Holiness, and desired permission to
print; to the end their adversaries might answer thereunto in print, and
themselves aftewards reply. That his Holiness received these papers, and put
them with all other Acts relating to this affair into the hands of some
Cardinals, of whom he named Pamphilio and Chisi. In the mean time his Holiness
made prayers to God to be illuminated with his H. Spirit, and appointed prayers
to be made in the City of Rome especially, by such persons as he knew to be of
great piety. And having afterward Assembled a Congregation of diverse
Cardinals, Prelates, Doctors and learned Priests, he heard them many several
times discourse and give their opinions upon the matter. That God gave him the
will and strength to be present at all the sittings with great patience,
without weariness or trouble. That himself, who before being Pope, had addicted
himself to the Law, to the judgment of Processes, and to the management of
public affairs, yet affirmed in truth and sincerity, that he received from
God so great an opening of mind, that aperuit sensum scripturarum, that he
understood all the subtleties and difficulties even to the most intricate
Schoole-termes; and he received so great pleasure in these Congregations, that
when night approacht he was sorry he could not attend them longer. The
Cardinals oftentimes told him that he took too much pains, and that this over
great assiduity would do his Holiness hurt; and he answered that it was no
trouble to him, but he pitied the good old Doctors who were standing all the
time.

That in fine, having thoroughly examined and recommended this affair diverse
times to God, he one day called Cardinal Chisi (then secretary to his
Holiness, and now Alexander VII. happily sitting in S. Peter's chair) and
having bidden him take paper and write, he dictated his Constitution to him in
the same words wherein it was published. That the matters were so present and
clear in his mind, that it was no trouble to him to dictate it, and that he
could repeat it word for word, (as accordingly his Holiness did part of it)
His Holiness also assured him that the matter was transacted in this manner,
and that he had added nothing since to his Constitution but the last Clause,
which says that his Holiness intends not by this condemnation to approve the
other opinions contained in the book of Jansenius. That the Pope had published
this Constitution, and caused all that had been done in this affair to be
compiled into one Volume, in the front whereof are placed The Letters of the
Bishops of France, to serve for a testimony to Posterity of their respect
toward the H. See. That he had caused this Volume to be deposited in the
Archives of S. Peter, after he had made an Act of Declaration in a Consistory
held for that purpose. That he had sent his Bull to the King of France, and to
other Princes and Bishops. That those of France had received it with honor, as
also those of other Kingdoms by their example. That even the Bishops of
Malines and Grant, who showed some tergiversation at the beginning, having
understood its reception by the French Bishops, received and subscribed it.
That this was an obligation which his Holiness had to the Bishops of France,
and should preserve as long as he lived. That he charged him, the Relator, to
acquaint them therewith at his return. Which injunction he, the Relator, now
discharges, by most punctually relating to this illustrious Assembly the
discourse which his Holiness held to him in this first Audience -- The
Assembly gave the Bishop of Lodeve thanks, and was so satisfied with his
Relation that they desired him to put it into writing, to the end it might be
inserted in the present Verbal Process. Which was done accordingly, as is
above mentioned.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE Of the Pieces contained in the Collection, according to the same
order wherein they are mentioned in the Journal.
THe Conditions presented to the Faculty of Divinity at Paris for examining the
Doctrine of Grace, (mentioned Part 1. Chap. 14.) are to be found in the
Collection at Page 3. The Letters of some of the Bishops of France to the Pope
concerning that of M. de Vabres about the Five Propositions translated into
French, Part 3. chap. 1. is in Latin in the Collection at p. 5. The Decree of
the Inquisition of Rome (mentioned Part. 3. chap. 6.) importing the suppression
of all books written on either side, upon occasion of the Contest between the
Bishop of Chalcedon and the Jesuits of England; and some other Pieces touching
the same matter, Coll. p. 27. A Writing made and published at Paris and Rome in
July 1651. almost two years before the Constitution of Innocent X. in form of
a Manifesto, in behalf of the Divines disciples of Saint Augustine; (mentioned
Part 3. chap. 7. and elsewhere in the Journal) is to be found, Coll. p. 35. A
Writing of F. Morel, one of the Order of the Augustines, and Doctor of the
Faculty of Divinity at Paris, full of impostures and calumnies against Saint
Augustin's disciples; (mentioned Part 3. chap. 8.) Coll. p. 139 Apologetical
Memoires, in behalf of the proceedings of the University of Paris against the
certain enterprise of the Irish, (mentioned Part 3. chap. 9.) Coll. p. 126. A
Manuscript containing diverse Resolutions of the Consultors in the Congregation
de Auxiliis, wherein the main difficulties concerning Grace are determined
against Molina, and according to the Sentiments of Saint Augustin's disciples,
(mentioned Part 3. chap. 10.) Coll. p 31. The Letter of M. de Godeau Bishop of
Vence to the Pope, (mentioned Part 3. chap. 12.) Coll. p. 6. The Letter of M.
de Menchal Archbishop of Toulouse (mentioned ibid.) Coll. p. 7. The Letter of
M. de Palafax Bishop of Angelopolis, (mentioned Part 3. chap. 13.) Coll. p. 11.
A Manuscript containing sundry Pieces about a great Contest touching absolute
Predestination determined by the Council of Trent, in the Affair of M. Grimani
Patriarch of Aquileia, (mentioned Part 4. chap. 9.) Coll. p. 237. Three
VVritings made by a learned Dominican for Cardinal Roma, (mentioned Part 5.
chap. 9.) Coll. p. 62. The Letter of two of the Bishops who sent us to Rome,
injoyning us not to depart from their order of soliciting the establishment of
a solemn Congregation, in which the Parties might be heard viva voce and
scripto, (mentioned Part 5. chap. 17.) Coll. p. 8. An Act passed before a
Notary, by M. Sinnigh Doctor of Lovaine February 22. 1647. concerning what has
been spoken of Jansenius's book in some Audiences, which he had of the Popes
Urban VIII. and Innocent X. and some Cardinals, (mentioned Part 6. chap. 1.)
Coll. p. 236. The VVriting made by the Dominicans to be presented to Pope
Innocent X. with their Memorial to intervene in this Affair, (mentioned Part 6.
chap. 9.] Coll. p. 44. The new Letter written to Pope Innocent X. toward the
beginning of March 1653. by two of our Bishops (then at Paris) to press his
Holiness for a solemn Congregation, (mentioned Part 6. chap. 11.) Coll. p. 9.
Our Answer to the LX. passages of Saint Augustine cited by M. Hallier, Lagault
and Joysel; wherein we show how all of them are either impertinently, or
perversely cited, (mentioned Part 6. chap. 21.) Coll. p. 89.
Pieces added to this Collection.
THe Speech of F. Mulard to the Pope, wherein this Vagabond Cordelier professes
himself deputed to his Holiness from the King and the Sorbonne, etc. Coll. p.
199. The Votes or Suffrages of the Consultors of the Congregation of Innocent
X. touching the Five Propositions, with short Notes of a Divine Saint Thomas's
disciple, Coll. p. 144. The six Disquisitions of Paulus Irenaeus, Coll. p. 157.
A COLLECTION OF SUNDRY TRACTS, LETTERS, etc. Thought fit to be subjoined to
the JOURNAL.
Reasons of my selection of these particular Pieces.
MY purpose not having been to annex to this JOURNAL all such Pieces as may
have reference thereunto (for they alone would form too great a Volume) I
therefore here offer the Reasons upon which I have made choice of the
following, and omitted some others which might seem to have right to a place
here likewise.

I. I have not doubted of the fitness of adjoining such rare and curious Pieces
as have not otherwise been public, and are hard to be procured; as the
Manuscript about the Dispute touching Gratuitous Predestination determined in
the Council of Trent; Some Decisions made by the Congregation de Auxiliis, and
other Pieces of like nature. II. I have also annexed the Writings of the
Dominicans mentioned Part. 6. Chap. 9. and elsewhere, because they show not
only the zeal which that Order had for the Cause we maintained; but also the
clearness wherewith those Divines comprehended all the Artifices of the
Molinists, and the perfect correspondency of their Sentiments with what we
argued both before and after the Constitution, having held the Propositions in
the same sense with us (viz. that of Effectual Grace) and justified Jansenius
much more openly than we, by the same Proofs and Principles that have since
been made use of for that purpose. III. I have not thought fit to augment this
Volume with the Writings of our Adversaries that have fallen into my hands,
because I conceived they might produce the same themselves if they judged it
meet, and that the Abridgements which I have made of them, seemed to me
sufficient to acquaint the Reader what they were. I have been content to set
down one of them at length, Part. 5. Chap. 8. which shows what sense they put
upon the Propositions; their other Writings proceeding upon the same
Principles. IV. But for that their chief Weapons were Impostures and Calumnies,
it has appeared to me necessary to insert at length into this Collection the
Writings of F. Morel, whereof I have spoke Part. 3. Chap. 8. because it sets
forth in what manner they decry'd us at Rome, and what Impostures they made use
of to render us odious to the Pope and Cardinals, as those that were Enemies to
the H. See. V. For the same reason I have added the Harangue of F. Mulard to
the Pope, whereof no mention is made in the JOURNAL, because I had no knowledge
of it whilst I was at Rome; but when I found that it was printed in the
Juridical Narration of M. Fileau, I conceived it requisite to be annexed to the
other Pieces as that which confirms all that I have spoken concerning the
impudence of that Cordelier, who falsely styling himself Deputy from the King of
the Sorbon, correspondently made a Speech to the Pope full of Lies and
Falsities. VI. For that the Suffrages of the Consultors have more essential
connection with the affair deduced in the Journal, than any of the other Pieces;
I have also thought meet to add to the same, though I have scarce spoken
thereof before, not having been able to discover any thing of them during my
residence at Rome. Yet finding them since become very common and authentic in
Copies dispersed abroad, perfectly agreeing with that published by the Bishop
of Montpellier, I conceived it requisite that they accompanied the Journal.
VII. I have not thought fit to insert all the Writings made by us at Rome,
because they would have too much swelled the Volume, they being many, and
diverse of them very prolix. VIII. Nevertheless I have inserted the Answer to
the Sixty passages of S. Augustine produced by M. Hallier in reference to the
First Proposition; because the said Answer may serve to show what would have
been the success of a Conference wherein those Passages might have been
cleared, and what reasons we had to desire it, and our Adversaries to decline
it. IX. Where Latin or Italian Pieces are found at length in the Journal
translated into French, as sundry Memorials are, and the Speeches of M. De la
Lane and F. Desmares in the audience which we had of the Pope, I have not
thought needful to repeat them in the Collection in their Original Language,
partly for the sake of Compendiousness, and partly because I considered that
the Journal might one day come to be translated into Latin, and then the said
Latin pieces might be set in their due Place and Language. X. Yet I have
inserted the Letters of my LL. the Bishops, having conceived my self obliged by
respect to them not to be contented with the Versions thereof, though most
faithfully made and placed in the Journal; but to represent the same in their
own words and form. XI. Mention having frequently been made in the Journal of a
Latin Explication of the Propositions made and published at Paris almost two
years before the Constitution, and styled by me (as often as I had occasion to
name it) our Latin Manifesto; I have thought the placing of it here expedient
for its Preservation to Posterity: because it admirably sets forth that the
same doctrine was held by us both before the Constitution and since, namely,
that Of Effectual Grace; and that the Propositions were never otherwise
accounted than as things maliciously contrived by the Adversaries of S.
Augustin's doctrine. XII. The same reason has induced me to annex the
Conditions which were presented to the Faculty in Order to examination both of
the Propositions produced by M. Cornet, and of others extracted out of Molina's
Book; And because this Writing is the first of all those that are mentioned in
the Journal, therefore it is likewise placed first in the Collection. It
follows with a short Preface, wherewith it was printed soon after M. Coppin had
presented it to the Faculty, as I have related, Part. 1. Chap. 14.
CONDITIONES Ad examen Doctrinae de Gratia oblatae Facultati Theologiae
Parisiensi, apud Sorbonam Kal. Decembris congregatae Anno 1649.
QUi Magistri Nicolai Cornet consiliis, and rogationi ab ipso latae prima Julii
restitere; eo ducti animo, ne quid veritas aut B. Augustini doctrina detrimenti
pateretur, ut palam esset quam non abhorrerent a legitimo de doctrina judicio,
saepius quaestionem aequis conditionibus de illa constitui postularunt. Sed
postquam adeo justam petitionem nullus recipiebat, visum ipsis est e re sua
fore si postulationis formulam conscriberent, quam deferrent ad Facultatem, si
forte de examine mentio fieret.

Igitur cum M. Jacobus Pereyret Kalendis Decembris frequentissima Facultate
sententiam dicens de pace inter Doctores revocanda, censuisset discutiendas
esse propositiones illas quae totius dissensionis caput ac origo essent; atque
ut ne quis minus mature tanta de causa statutum quereretur, totis mensibus
tribus quatuorve rem expendendam; tum denique Doctores in suffragium mittendos;
M. Petrus Coppin ne haec opinio valeret apud plurimos illius assectatores,
atque etiam ne de illa ante comitia convenissent, ejus orationem excipiens ita
locutus est. Si de propositionibus illis videretur constituendum judicium,
legem quamdam ferendam esse, ex qua tota haberetur quaestio and controversia
finiretur; illius se non solum auctorem, sed alios etiam sapientissimos
Doctores plurimos, quorum nomine loqueretur. Cum vero tabulas eduxisset e sinu
in quibus descripta erant rogationis capita, and jam legere inciperet, ut omnes
intelligerent in quas examinis conditiones decretum fieri vellet, repent per
vim a quodam e Doctoribus ereptae sunt. Statim de illa vi conquesti sunt M.
Petrus Coppin, aliique plures, eviceruntque tandem sibi reddi has tabulas, quas
cum M. Petrus Coppin a se per tumultum hunc legi non posse animadverteret, ad
Scribam detulit, ut eas ille publicis Commentariis consignaret.

Conditiones vero postulatae sunt quae nulli iniquae videri possint. Judicium
enim non defugiunt B. Augustini defensores, sed liberum postulant, grave,
prensationibus non obnoxium, cujusmodi videlicet ad causam adeo difficilem and
arduam dijudicandam requiritur.

POstquam ex scriptis quae circa Magistri Nicolai Cornet consilium edita sunt,
omnibus innotuit quam periculose propositiones quasdam de Gratia ambiguas,
aequivocas, a nullo auctore in sensu quem prae se far videntur assertas,
vocaverit in medium, and examinandas Facultati exhibuerit; postquam satis etiam
Senatus judicio comprobatum est, quam sapienter and just omnibus hac in re
actis, jam septuaginta Doctores Seculares intercesserimus and ad Senatum
provocaverimus, and quantum Ecclesiae ac Facultatis paci ab omni hoc examine
abstinere conduceret; totum hoc negotium alto silentio comprimendum, ab
inceptis cessandum, pacem reddendam spes fuerat. Neque vero his sic obstitimus,
ut examen aequum declinaremus, sed ut paci, and Ecclesiae, and B. Augustini
auctoritati and doctrinae, quas impeti nemo non videbat, consultum esset. Verum
cum quidam, quod semel aggressi sunt perficere omni conatu laborent, atque
iterum propositionum examen a Facultate postulent; et si hoc consilium toti
Ecclesiae ac summis Pontificibus, maxim vero Clementi Octavo ac Paulo Quinto
injuriosum putemus, ne quis tamen nos doctrinae examen ac judicium effugere
putet, examen and judicium, si facto opus esse videbitur, non respuimus, modo
cum omni aequitate fiant, atque his conditionibus a nobis propositis, sicut
tanti in Ecclesia and Fide momenti res exigit.

Cum M. Nicolaus Cornet propositiones de Gratia quas libuit and non nominato
auctore prima Julii Facultati obtulerit examinandas, atque tunc querentibus
nonnullis plura alia esse nou minus examine digna, responsum fuerit, licere
cuilibet alias etiam examinandas Facultati propositiones exhibere. Cum, si
examen aggredi placet, Christianae paci, quae non parum hac dissensione
violatur, maxim conducat, ut omnis hac in re controversia quantum fieri potest
finem accipiat. Cum querelis omnibus virorum eruditorum hinc and hinc
componendis, inquiri ac dijudicari necesse sit, quis in Ecclesiam novitatem
induxerit, quis ab antiqua Fidei doctrina recesserit. Cum doceantur multa, in
quibus veterum forte errorum reliquiae latent: his de causis adeo justis, si
exhibitas a M. Nicolao Cornet propositiones examinari placet, postulamus etiam
ut hae inter multas alias propositiones examini subjiciantur.

Propositiones ad examinandum oblatae.
I.
Molina in Concordia quaest. 14. art. 13. disput. 10.
HOminibus qui ad filiorum Dei dignitatem nondum pervenerunt, eatenus facta est
potestas, ut filii Dei fiant, quatenus, si quantum in se est, conentur, praesto
illis aderit Deus ut fidem and gratiam consequantur, neque desiderio suo
fraudentur, etc. Quod si conantibus ex suis naturalibus, facientibusque quod in
se est, vel ut fidem amplectantur vel ut de peccatis doleant, Deus non est
semper praesto per auxilia and gratiam suam praevenientem, ut actu sint quales
ad salutem oportet, quanam ratione verum erit Deum velle omnes homines salvos
fieri, eaque ratione acceptum coram eo esse, ut obsecrationes, orationes,
postulationes and gratiarum actiones pro omnibus hominibus fiant, ut eo loco
Paulus docet? -- Ibid. disp. sequenti seu 11.
Cum itaque Deus sua scientia praevideat quinam ex his qui audituri sunt
Evangelium, conaturi sint ex suis naturalibus ad assensum esiciendum ut
tenentur, and qui non; sane ut a peccato non excusentur, qui assensum fidei
supernaturalem non elicuerunt, satis est Deum suo auxilio and gratia praesto
esse ad praeveniendum in eodem instanti, quoscunque viderit ex suis naturalibus
ad assensum conaturos.

II.
Idem Molina in Concordia quaest. 14. art. 13. disp. 40. Sect. Antequam.
Divisio auxilii sufficientis in efficax and inefficax sumitur ab effectu, qui
simul ab arbitrii liberate pendet. -- Auxilia praevenientis atque adjuvantis
gratiae, quae lege ordinaria viatoribus conferuntur, quod efficacia aut
inefficacia ad conversionem seu justificationem sint, pendent a libero consensu
and cooperatione arbitrii nostri cum illis; a^que adeo in libera potestate
nostra est vel illa efficacia reddere consentiendo, and cooperando cum illis ad
actus, quibus ad justificationem disponimur, vel inefficacia illa reddere
continendo consensum and cooperationem nostram, aut etiam e^ciendo contrarium
dissensum. -- Idem quaest. -- art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. memb. 6. Sect. Nonnulli
hanc doctr. asserunt.
Dicere autem auxilium ex modo motionis Divinae and ex Deo ipso habere quod sit
efficax, ut quoties per illud Deus movet liberum arbitrium, consentiat and
cooperetur ad salutem, quoties per illud auxilium efficax non movet liberum
arbitrium, non consentiat, neque cooperetur ad salutem, certe non dubitarem
sententiam hanc, errorem in fide appellare. Ibid. Sect. Certe.
Si arbibitrium nostrum ab efficacia Divini auxilii habet quod consentiat vel
non consentiat Deo vocanti, and cooperetur aut non cooperetur ad salutem,
perseveret aut non perseveret in gratia; certe non ab innata and propria
liberate pendet, sed a qualitate auxilii and motionis divinae; non est quod
homini cedat in laudem and meritum, quin potius periit omnino libertas arbitrii
ad salutem.

III.
Idem quaest. 23. art. 4 and 5. disp. 1. memb. 6. Sect. Octava (...).
Sumpta in particulari praedestinatione cujusque adulti, quae reipsa jam ex
aeternitate fuit in Deo, ratio seu conditio sine qua in Deo non fuisset
praedicta praescientia, est quod adultus ipse pro sua liberate ita
cooperaturus est per suum arbitrium, ut ad vitam aeternam perveniat, sic etiam
ab hoc ipso simili modo fuit dependens, quod reliquum quod eadem praedestinatio
includit, vel sortiretur rationem praedestinationis, vel retineret solum
rationem providentiae circa illum in beatitudinem.

IV.
Idem quaest. 14. art. 13. disp. 19. memb. 6. Sect. Sexta ratio.
Auxilia in se non supernaturalia (per quae in quocunque eventu insurgenteque
quacunque difficili passione aut tentatione, in potestate arbitrii humani esset
non succumbere, legemque per id temporis implere) conferenda fuissent generi
h^mano instatu naturae lapsae, etiamsi per Christum non foret ^edimendum.

V.
Assertio 17. Censum Lovanientis.
Quod applicatio talis remedii (baptismi videlicet) his vel illis ob aliqua
impedimenta occurrentia fiat impossibilis, non est Deo imputandum, quia non
ordinat ut non possit applicari, vel ut talia impedimenta occurrant, sed tantum
permittit secundum communem cursum rerum, sicut permittit peccata.

VI.
Quaest. 14. art. 13. disp. 53. memb. 4. Sect. Ut ad argum.
Ratio viatoris simul and comprehensoris in Christo, a puncto conceptionis
ipsius in utero Virginis usque ad animae exaltationem in Cruce in eo fuit
posita, quod animae gloria ita contineretur, ut voluntas Christi perinde esset
libera ad praecepta implenda vel non implenda, ac si eam gloriam non haberet,
sed esset purus viator. -- Ibidem.
Nihil impedientibus capitibus aliis quae commemorata sunt, libertatem reipsa
habebat ad non faciendum ea quae facere ex praecepto tenebatur.

VII. Molinae de seipso and de B. Augustino judicium.
Molina in Concordia quaest. 23. art. 4 and 5. disp. 1. memb. ult. Sect. Nos
pro nostra.
Si quae nos pro nostra tenuitate ad conciliandam libertatem arbitrii cum
Divina gratia, praescientia and praedestinatione tradidimus, data explanataque
semper fuissent, forte neque Pelagiana haeresis fuisset exorta, neque Lutherani
tam impudenter arbitrii nostri libertatem fuissent ausi negare, obtendentes cum
Divina gratia, praescientia, and praedestinatione cohaerere non posse, neque ex
Augustini opinione, concertationibusque cum Pelagianis, tot fideles fuissent
turbati, ad Pelagianosque defecissent; facileque Reliquiae illae Pelagianorum
in Gallia, quarum in Epistolis Prosperi and Hilarii fit mentio, fuissent
extinctae, ut patet ex iis, in quibus homines illos cum Catholicis convenisse
and ab eis dissensisse eaedem Epistolae testantur. Concertationes denique inter
Catholicos facile fuissent compositae. -- Idem quaest. 23. art. 4 and 5. disp.
1. memb. 6. Sect. Quoad Angustinum.
Interim vero dum sub ea quasi caligine D. Augustinus ad hoc non attendit,
scilicet fuisse praedestinationem and reprobationem non sine praescientia
qualitatis usus liberi arbitrii. -- Idem quaest. 23. art. 4 and 5. disp. 1.
memb. ult. Sect. Longior.
Longior fui in hac disputatione, quam optaram, etc. Quia tamen res est magni
momenti ac valde lubrica, and haec nostra ratio conciliandi libertatem arbitrii
cum Divina praedestinatione a nemine quem viderim huc usque tradita:

VIII.
Ex scriptis Professoris Theologi Parisiensis.
Opiniones Sancti Augustini in Baio damnatae a Pio V and Gregorio XIII, and
opiniones Molinae declaratae a Clemente VIII contrariae doctrinae Sancti
Augustini. Ab iisdem Pio V and Gregorio XIII Propositiones contrariae doctrinae
Molinae damnatae judicio Pontificio, and a Clemente VIII and Paulo V opiniones
Molinae tantum declaratae sunt contrariae doctrinae Sancti Augustini, nec nisi
judicio doctrinali, sed nusquam damnatae. Molinae opiniones examinatae sunt
juxta loca quaedam Augustini, quibus visae sunt esse contrariae; si vero
expensae fuissent juxta alia loca Sancti Augustini, non ita causa cecidissent
Molinae propugnatores. Quomodo potuisset velle Clemens VIII damnare eas
opiniones contrarias doctrinae Sancti Augustini in materia de Auxiliis, qui
probe norat in Bulla Pii V contineri multas propositiones ex operibus Sancti
Augustini, quae quamquam aliquo pacto sustineri possent, tamen in vero sensu
damnatae fuerant.

Ex una part S. S, M. M. N. N. Chastellain and de Saintebeuve quatuor Doctores
ex qua placebit domo and familia seligant, ex altera part S. S. M. M. N. N.
Pereyret and le Moyne, vel si placet alii, seligant pariter quatuor, ut
selectihi duodecim propositiones omnes examinent; liceat vero duobus
seligentibus, vel sui, vel cujusvis e sua part absentis loco alium sufficere.

Illustrissimus D. Coadjutor Parisiensis Doctor Sorbonicus, etiam atque etiam
rogetur adesse ac praesse his collationibus, qui praesentia ac auctoritate sua
in his ordinem, concordiam, disputationum leges servari procuret. Duo and
Domino Coadjutori Praesules Facultatis Doctores adjungantur, sicut and nuper in
collatione facta cum Ludovico Cellotio observatum fuit, qui vel mutuo utriusque
partis consensu seligantur, vel suum utraque pars seligat.

Nulla his in collationibus, sententiis quae B. Augustini esse, vel cum illius
Doctrina necessario connexae demonstrabuntur, erroris, falsitatis, temeritatis
aut quaevis alia nota affigi possit, nec ulla testimonia nisi apertis libris
laudari.

Eorum quae ex utraque part dicta fuerint, processus verbales fiant per
Scribam Facultatis, qui in fine singularum collationum recognoscentur ac
subscribentur ab utraque part, atque etiam ab Illustrissimo D. Praeside, ac
typis mandabuntur, and singulis Doctoribus Facultatis exemplar concedetur,

His omnibus collationibus peractis a Doctoribus ex utraque part selectis,
referatur ad Facultatem praesentibus Illustrissimis D. D. Praesulibus quid in
iis actum fuerit: postea legantur coram Facultate universa processus verbales
collationum; tum de propositionibus examini subjectis judicium fiat. Nulli vero
Doctori liceat de his propositionibus deliberare ac decernere; nisi ante
affirmet se processus omnes verbales collationum attente and privatim extra
comitiorum aulam legisse atque mature ponderasse. Atque cum in nonnullis
Facultatis negotiis ad suffragiorum non pluralitatem, sed duas tertias parts,
concludi cautum usitatumque sit, sicut and nuper in dispensationum causa
renovatum est. Cum nulla antiqua Facultatis Censura proferri possit, quae
plurimis Doctoribus reclamantibus decreta fuerit, at semper unanimi vel quasi
unanimi consensu. Cum haec materia quae ad judicium vocatur, tam magni momenti
sit ad difficillimas and gravissimas de gratia, libero arbitrio, ac
praedestinatione Sanctorum quaestiones spectans, ad inscrutabilia Dei judicia
inquirenda revocans, Theologiam universam pervadens. Cum tot in Ecclesia
eruditissimi Theologi quaestiones has magna hinc and inde animorum contentione
exagitent. Cum tot Facultatis Doctores in parts divisi sint. Cum tale judicium
ferri necesse sit, quod omnes non difficulter admittant. Cum aequum minime
videatur alicujus doctrinae defensores, seu propositionem aliquam erroris vel
haereseos nota perstringi, si vel unius vel paucorum suffragio inter plurima
damnatio superet, quando a multis Doctoribus vel Theologis Orthodoxis maxim
Fidei rectae consentanea judicatur ac acerrime defenditur. Cum periculum sit ne
in hac Fidei causa a tot seculis agitata, etiam coram ipsis Summis
Pontificibus, qui perpetuo doctrinam B. Augustini comprobarunt ac sanxerunt,
oppositaque illi adversariorum sensa damnaverunt, alicujus sententiae
defensores damnati damnantibus non cedant, si se unius vel paucorum suffragio
victos vident, ubi forte ducenti judices stare debent, unde maximae and
perniciosae in Facultate and Ecclesia dissensionis periculum crearetur. Atque
etiam ut magis factioni, partium studio, artibus humanis non parum hac in causa
(fidei licet) metuendis locus eripiatur, proponimus ac postulamus, ut nulla vel
hinc, vel inde Propositio damnari possit, aut quavis censoria nota affici, nisi
damnatio duabus tertiis suffragiorum partibus excedat. Si quid examinari
placet, has conditiones proponimus and admitti postulamus. Si quid secus fiat,
deliberetur, examinetur, judicetur, intercedimus. Vt factione and partium
studio, non veritatem sincere inquirendi causa sicut Christianos Doctores
decet, sed opinionem suam praefracte ac pertinaciter (ut de fide) statuendi,
animo factum asserimus. Vt nullum, irritum, abusivum protestamur. Atque si
aliquas propositiones examinari placet, ac tam necessarias and legitimas leges
non admitti, provocamus ad Senatum, qui de illarum conditionum a nobis
propositarum aequitate and necessitate judicet ac decernat.

The Letters of my LL. the Bishops of France, the version whereof is inserted
in such places of the Journal, where they fall in by course.
A Letter of the Bishops to the Pope, which occurs translated into English,
Part. 3. Chap. 1.
It was thus directed;

Beatissimo in Christo Patri Innocentio Papae X. Romam.
The Contents follow:

Beatissime Pater,
COllegae quidam ac Fratres nostri Reverendissimi dederunt ad Te literas de re
gravissima difficillimaque, uti nobis compertum est. Orant videlicet
Sanctitatem Tuam, ut perspicuam and apertam sententiam ferat de iis maxim
positionibus, quae superiori anno Parisiensem Scholam ingenti contentione,
nullo fructu commoverunt. Nec vero secus evenire potuit, cum and ad libitum
fictae, and ex ambiguis vocibus concinnatae, aliud per se nihil quam animorum
jurgia, and pugnantium, ut fit in aequivocis, interpretationum dissidia natae
sint procreare. Porro quod spectat ad Fratrum nostrorum Reverendissimorum hac
in part consilium, minime id quidem (si dicendum est ipsorum cum bona venia)
probari nobis potuit. Praeterquam quod enim Divinae gratiae
praedestinationisque tractatio ardua est admodum, vehementique ingeniorum aestu
agitari solet, tum aliis quoque praecipuis de causis non satis tutum pro
tempore censuimus tantam litem definiri ni solemni sort (quae Collegarum
nostrorum men's esse non videtur) and ad Majorum norman instituto judicio, hoc
est vocatis and auditis ambabus partibus, ut non pridem sub oculis piae
memoriae Clementis VIII. and Pauli V. factitatum est, rem totam placeat a
fontibus and ex integro ventilare. Etenim aliter si agatur, utrivis demum
damnati sint, inauditos se and calumniam passos invidiose clamitabunt; quin and
forsitan causae cognitione^ nullo praeeunte concessu Synodali delatam ad Te
succensebunt; and aequitatem querimoniae suae antiqui moris praejudicio
exemploque defendentes, Alexandrinam Synodum adversus Arium,
Constantinopolitanam adversus Eutichem, Carthaginensem and Milevitanam adversus
Pelagium, and in hoc argumento Valentinam Lingonensemque nostras, and alias
pariter adversus alios memorabunt. Et revera, Beatissime pater, si
propositiones istas ad examen et judicium vocari expediret, judiciorum ordo
legitimus Ecclesiae totius, tum maxim Gallicanae nostrae consuetudo postulat,
ut primum a nobis majores ac difficiles, quae apud nos ortae sunt, questiones
dispiciantur. Aequum esset hic perpendere an istae, de quibus ad Sanctitatem
Tuam querimonia delata est, Propositiones pro libito fictae fuerint ad
excitandam invidiam, ciendosque tumultus; quibus in libris, quibus auctoribus,
quo sensu assertae, audire hinc et inde contendentes; inspice opera varia circa
easdem propositiones apud nos edita; sensus veros, falsos, ambiguos discernere;
quaecunque de his nostris in partibus gesta sunt, ex quo de istis assertionibus
controversum est, dignoscere; tum vero quae de hac fidei causa a nobis acta and
decreta essent, ad Sedis Tuae notitiam refer, ut tota hujus auctoritate justa
quae fuerit pronuntiatio firmaretur. At apud Sedem Tuam nullo nostro praeeunte
hac in causa examine ac judicio, quot potest artibus veritas opprimi? quot
calumniis Praesulum ac Doctorum existimatio pulsari? quibus insidiis Sanctitas
Tua in hoc maximo fidei negotio circumveniri? Ab iis quidem in quorum gratiam
Fratres nostri Reverendissimi ad Sanctitatem Tuam scripserunt, firmiter
pertinaciterque dicitur sibi plures ex recentioribus Scholasticis favere,
suamque doctrinam maximae esse Divinae bonitati and naturalis rationis
aequitati consentaneam. Ab iis vero qui se totos Augustino tradunt, non obscure
sed propalam jactitari notum est, rem de qua agitur non in medio positam,
finitam causam aiunt, confectum pridem negotium; veterem esse Synodorum,
Romanorumque Pontificum certissimum calculum; decretta obvia and aperta
Tridentinae maxim, quam totam asserunt pene ut Arausicanam, ex Augustini
conflatam vocibus ac sententiis; ut nostrum scilicet Tuumque judicium non
metuendum sed exoptandum sibi dicant, plane sperantes sanctitatem Tuam ductu
and afflatu Divini Spiritus, qui te and regere consulentem and orantem exaudire
dignatur, a Patrum placitis nec latum unguem discessuram, ne Apostolicae, quod
absit, and Romanae Sedis existimatio apud Haereticos dictis ejus and factis
insidiantes in contemptum abeat. Id porro nunquam fore tum praecipue confidimus
si videbitur Sanctitati Tuae Praecessorum Tuorum vestigiis insistenti, re tota
penitus inspecta, and auditis ut solet contendentibus partibus, omnem deinceps
altercandi segetem amovere. Age igitur, Beatissime Pater, gravissimam litem
quae a multis jam saeculis Catholicae unitatis nullo dispendio hucusque
perduravit, vel paulisper etiamnum patere ac sustine; vel causam hanc totam ex
solemni judiciorum more expende. Ac ne quid detrimenti capiat, quae Tibi
credita est Christiana Respublica, etiam atque etiam vide. Deus Te felicem and
incolumen servet in annos plurimos Sanctissime in Christo Pater.

Sanctitatis Vestrae Humillimi atque obsequentissimi Servi ac Filii. Sic
subscriptum in variis exemplaribus. In primo, Ludovicus Henricus de Gondrin A.
Senonensis. B. Delbene Ep. Aginnensis. Gilbertus Ep. Convenarum. Le Beron Ep.
Valentiensis and Diensis. A. Delbene Ep. Aurelianensis. Bernardus Episcopus
Sancti Papuli. I. Henr. de Saltette Ep. Lescariensis in Bearnia. Felix Ep. and
C. Catalaunensis.
In altero. Franciscus Ep. Ambianensis.
In tertio. Henricus Ep. Andegavensis.
In quarto. Nicolais Episcopus and C. Bellovacensis.



A Letter of my L. the Bishop of Grass, now of Vence to the Pope, which is
found translated into English, Part. 3. Chap. 12.
The Address was thus:

Sanctissimo Patri Innocentio Papae X. Roman.
The Letter it self contained these words.

Beatissime Pater,
NOn sine magno dolor nostro audivimus scriptum nuper ad Sanctitatem Vestram
de quibusdam Propositionibus, sollicitatumque judicium Vestrum de exortis inde
controversiis. Non quia doleamus adiri supremum tribunal, sed quia id ita
factum est privatim, and ab uno tantum e nostris Fratribus carissimis, qui
alios ad subscribendum impulit, non communicato invicem consilio, nec collatis
suffragiis, aut indicta Synodo, nedum re proposita in Comitiis Cleri Gallicani,
quae opportune per id temporis haberi contigerat. Optamus certe, Beatissime
Pater, and quidem ex medullis animae, extingui istarum controversiarum flammas
omnes, sed neque id dissimulare possumus Sanctitati Vestrae, vereri nos non
mediocriter ne minus frigida quam oleum quaeratur huic incendio, revocandaeque
pacis obtentu acrius etiam sententiarum bella ferveant. Quid enim nunc agitur?
proponuntur Sanctitati Vestrae propositiones quinque, eaedem prorsus^, quae
ante annos duos propositae sunt Facultati Theologiae Parisiensi. Et a quarum
judicio eadem Facultas abstinuit and pacis causa, and quod animadverteret eas
ut sunt singulae sensus ambigui and ancipitis, nullo ex certo auctore illis
ipsis quibus conceptae sunt verbis excerptas fuisse; ita ut de industia ab
adversae sententiae asseclis, ideo confictae viderentur, ut in perversum
aliquem sensum facilius torqueri possent. ^is de causis facile praevidit
Facultas rerum prudentissima, nihil nisi periculose admodum statui posse de
Propositionibus hujusmodi, ne scilicet in earum censuram non Cornelii Jansenii,
cujus nomen verbo tenus praetendi existimabat, sed quod calamito sius est,
ipsius Divi Augustini atque adeo totius Ecclesiae, quae Augustini judicio in
causa Gratiae constanter adhaesit, doctrina incurrisse videretur. Id vero
quanto malo fieret, and quam parum reverenter id postuletur a Sanctitate
Vestra, apud quam tantus est Augustinus, solus is nescit, qui Ecclesiae and
Christi gratiae hosts nescit uno victore Augustino triumphatos. Ne quid igitur
mali, harum propositionum ancipitibus verbis conceptarum obtentu, tanto Doctori
creetur, id efflagitamus summopere uti placeat Sanctitati Vestrae facere
dicendi potestatem utriusque sententiae patronis ac vindicibus, quemadmodum and
potestas eadem facta est in re eadem a Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. beatissimae
memoriae Pontificibus, ne quis in hac causa, qua non alia gravior, damnatus
esse putetur inauditus, latoque judicio omnium animi facilius and lubentius
acquiescant. Hoc a Te, Beatissime Pater, nos Sanctitatis vestrae
observantissimi, per eam charitatem qua Pater es, per eam aequitatem qua judex
es, per eam eruditionem qua Doctores, per Ecclesiae denique conjuncta cum tanto
Doctore pericula, atque in iis maxim controversiis communem utriusque semper
causam (ut docti omnes intelligunt) humillimi postulamus. Perge interim quod
pergis, Beatissime Pater, atque in eo rerum fastigio, ad quod Vestram
Sanctitatem evectam gaudemus boni omnes, pro Ecclesiae fideliumque omnium
salute semper and diu salvus ex^uba.

Sanctissime Pater, Obsequentissimus and devotissimus filius and servus
Antonius Ep. Grassensis and Venciensis.

A Letter of Monsigneur de Monchal Archbishop of Toulouse to the Pope, whereof
the Original remains in my hands, and mention is made Part 3. Chap. 12.
The Direction was thus,

Innocentio Papae X. summo Pontifici Roman.
And the Contents thus,

Beatissime Pater,
CUm excitatae olim de Divina gratia contentiones nuper renatae, in Scholis
nostris, maximeque Parisiensibus cum magno ingeniorum aestu incaluerint, atque
in dies magis magisque exardescant, partis alterius antesignani capitula
quinque concinnarunt, quae, si unum dempseris, nusquam extare pars altera
affirmat, quae tamen si Sanctitas Tua Censura notarit, non modo grande momentum
suae causae accessurum, sed etiam prava animorum certamina sisti posse
arbitrantur Quod ut facilius exequantur, literas nomine Episcoporum Galliae
composuerunt, quibus Te, Sanctissime Pater, ut de re omn^um gravissima
pronuncies etiam atque etiam rogant. Id si obtinuerint, rem a se strenue
gestam, confectumque negotium sibi persuadent. Caeterum illius epistolae
subscriptionem a multis Reverendissimis Episcopis impetrarunt illi; vel etiam
per amicorum aut Procerum gratiam expresserunt, ne dato quidem plurimis otio ad
quaestiones tanti momenti and ram reconditae eruditionis expendendas.
Inusitatum atque hactenus in Ecclesia inauditum id mihi v^sum, ut privatim
singuli tanquam habito consilio suffragia mitterent, cum maxim Ordinis nostri
concessus Parisus haberetur. Itaque rogatus recusavi nomen meum huic Epistolae
addere, non quidem me praestare caeteris ratus, verum exemplum sequutus
plurimorum Praesulum qui pietate and doctrina celebrantur, qui post fusas ad
Deum preces, and imploratum in negotio tanti momenti Divinum auxilium rem
maturius perpendendam, neque a Sanctitate Tua flagitandum existimarunt, ut in
praesentiarum de ea controversia apertam sententiam ferat, quam Praedecessores
tui, sapientissimi Pontifices in medio reliquerunt. Nempe intellexerunt
disputationum jurgia neglecta vanescere, coercitione exasperari, quemadmodum
quibusdam morbis contingit qui sponte solverentur, and adhibita curatione
graviores fiunt. Ego vero, Sanctissime Pater, mei esse muneris censui in re tam
ardua, and quae ambitiosa omnium studia excitavit, mentem meam, and quid e re
Christiana existimem, in medio partium constitutus, and utrinque rogatus
aperire. De abditis quaestionibus and multa difficultate implicatis inter pios,
doctos, Catholicosque homines quid vetat quaeri, salva Ecclesiae pace? Aut cum
eo loco posita sit Respublica Christiana, quis opportunum remedium ponat ad
sedanda animorum incendia in gravi censura and proscriptione ingeniorum?
Pleraeque omnes Facultates Theologiae sic affectae sunt, ut quam semel hausere
sententiam, mordicus retineant ac tueantur, aliis veteres, aliis recentes,
aliis simul omnes sive Romanos Pontifices, sive Synodos obtendentibus, suasque
in parts acerrime trahentibus, ut non immerito formidandum sit, ne si quid
Seeds Apostolica decreverit, id qui damnati fuerint, vel damnari visi, non ea
qua par est animi reverentia suscipiant. Quid? quod assertorem suae sententiae
laudant omnes Augustinum? cujus summa est in hoc argumento auctoritas, quam
illi cum tot encomiis Scholarum consensus, decreta Summorum Pontificum,
Concilia and Ecclesia universa tribuerunt. Ut si vel minimum imminuta fuerit,
verisimile sit defensores non ei defuturos, cum tot Ordines Religiosi sub
vexillis ejus militent, tot Scholae in ejus verba jurarint, quae in illius
placitis perseverabunt, and levibus distinctiunculis sententiae invidiam
eludent. Quod si forte contingeret, Religionis Romanae hosts, quasi de erepto
nobis, sibique parto tanti Doctoris suffragio, immane quantum gloriarentur.
Verendum etiam est ne antiquae Ecclesiae auctoritas novae decretis adversa
(quod Deus avertat) videatur. Addam denique minime monitam Sanctitatem Tuam
quemadmodum, vel quam in partem propugnari velint theses de quibus judicium
Apostolicum postulatur, illi qui eas asserere existimantur. Quod tamen ni
diserte notatum fuerit, quidquid illa edixerit, neminem feriet peculiariter,
and quo loco controversia est, ut prius suspensa atque indecisa perpetuo
remanebit. Nihil mihi igitur tutius videtur in hac controversia, Beatissime
Pater, quam si Sanctitas Tua Decessorum Tuorum vestigiis inhaereat, eorum
prudentiam and aequitatem aemuletur, concitata dissidia vel penitus indecisa
relinquat, vel si placet, in tempus opportunius differat, quo postquam ingenia
deferbuerint, vocatis and auditis partibus, ut a Clemente VIII. and Paulo V.
sapientissimis Pontificibus nuper est factum, tanti ponderis controversiam
excutere liceat ac definire, profundo interim utrique parti indicto silentio.
Meum hunc animi sensum aperio, unam habens (ut quidem aestimo) prae oculis
Divini Numinis gloriam, Ecclesiae pacem, and Apostolici Throni auctoritatem,
cujus Te honori Deus ad annos plurimos servet incolumem.

Tolosae 10. Call. Jul. Sanctissime in Christo Pater, Tuus humillimus and
obsequentissimus Servus, Carolus Archiepiscopus Tolosanus.

A Letter which my LL. the Bishops writ to us Nov. 28. 1652. and which is seen
translated into English, Part. 5. Chap. 17.
The Direction of it was,

Doctissimis Clarissimisque viris DD. de Lalane, de Saint Amor and Angram,
Sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Doctoribus, nostris ad Summum Pontificem
Innocentium X. Deputatis Romam.
The Contents follow.

ETsi novis quotidie testimoniis experimur^ (Viri Claririssimi) eos esse vos
quorum fidei, doctrinae, constantiae summa gravissimarum rerum momenta tuto
committi queant, neque vos aut nostro de vobis judicio aut publica fama
inferiores demonstretis, ipsa tamen totius Ecclesiae causa facile persuadet, ut
quos literis nostris instructos, commendatione munitos, auctoritate fretos ad
Apostolicam Sedem deputavimus, eosdem crebris adhortatibus incitemus. Accepimus
equidem, primisque vestris in hac controversia laboribus exploratum habemus,
quam vobis curae fuerit totam hanc pro communi fidelium pace institutam
concertationem a Sancti Augustini defensione auspicari, eamque auctoritatem
propugnare quam Romani Pontifices magno semper in loco posuerunt, nonnulli
homines incredibila audacia scandalique and publicae offensionis plena per
totam Galliam conculcare non verentur. Si enim Apostolica vigilantia prospexit
Coelestinus ne Sanctae recordationis Praesul inter Magistros optimos etiam a
suis Praecessoribus habitus in Massiliensium Presbytetorum contemptum
incideret, nunquid aequum est graviori discrimini idem adhiberi remedium,
dumque non pauci vel in Sacerdotali gradu vel sub religiosa vest adversus S.
Augustinum audacius debacchantur, qua^ in illum olim insurrexerint
Semipelagiani, nonne ab eadem Sede merito illi accersendum est patrocinium, a
qua praecipuum pondus auctoritatemque desumpsit? ut ergo id a vobis and
prudentissime susceptum, and eruditissimis scriptis assertum gratulamur; sic
fore confidimus ut non solum quod in mandatis habere recordamini, sed etiam
illo ipso ordine quem omnino necessarium sumus arbitrati, observare studeatis.
Neque vero esset quod vos in Officio constantes iterum moneremus, nisi public
apud nos gloriarentur quotquot Molinae causam agunt, eo se disputationis cursum
torquere, ut suam quisque sententiam Romae seorsim tueatur: nulla fiat inter
utramque partem coram nominatis consultoribus collatio, imo ne ulla quidem
scriptorum ultro citroque communicatio. Quod quidem licet nullis certis
disseminetur auctoribus, tanto tamen ardore per Lutetiam aliasque Galliarum
civitates ab illis spargitur, ut neglexisse prorsus Religionis causam
videremur, nisi vos ad illud idem praestandum adhortaremur, a vobis prudentia
summa parique studio geri non dubitamus. Et vero cum Memoriale Sanctissimo
Domino a vobis exhibitum accepimus, vidimus confestim constitutum vobis esse a
demandata provincia ne latum quidem unguem discedere, atque illud ipsum exequi,
quod fidei vestrae solertiaeque credideramus. Cum autem Beatissimus Pater,
nostram simul ac vestram petitionem vobis annuit, spem nobis immisit
certissimam, eam se sopiendi viam inire velle, quae Deo gloriam, Ecclesiae
tranquillitatem, fidelibus quietem esset facile paritura. Quid enim diversa
sentientibus and Apostolicae Sedis judicium implorantibus optatius debeat
utrimque contingere, quam si amica disputatione veritas extundatur, jamque
vagis rumoribus and humanis artibus nullus locus supersit, omnia ad veritatis
lucem and in ipso Romani culminis splendore explorentur? Quid vero persuadendis
illis opportunius excogitari queat, qui nullis partibus addicti vacuam ab omni
praejudicio mentem servant, and illam ipsam sententiam sese amplexuros
profitentur, quam post solenne judicium Summus Christi Vicarius Catholicam
declarabit, quis afflictae innocentiae perfugium obstruat, neque sinat
Catholicos Praesules, Presbyteros, Religiosos homines mill indignissimis
calumniis exagitatos fidem suam coram ipsis accusatoribus defendere, falsa quae
tueri finguntur dogmata diro anathemate detestari, ipsosque contradicentium
dolos retegere? At satis ipsa per se pocurabit Apostolica Seeds ut veritas ab
omnibus technis and ambagibus extricata elucescat? Quis id non speret? Scimus
profecto hanc hactenus fuisse Romanae Cathedrae vigilantiam, neque minorem in
posterum fore confidimus. Satis demonstravit Sanctissimus Pater Innocentius X.
nihil se vanis delatoribus tribuere, contra vero omnia ad maturi judicii
trutinam expendere velle. Sed amicam utriusque partis collationem and voce and
scripto coram fieri ut tutissimam eruendae veritattis viam and Ecclesiasticae
praxi conformem credidimus semper; sic quo longius in hoc negotio progredimur,
eo firmius in praeconcepta sententia constamus. Cum enim hinc certa sit and
conspicua mutuae hujus concertationis utilitas, inde vero nullum ab ea
instituenda deterrere debere videatur periculum, in id imprimis incumbendum
apparet, quod Pontisiciae, dignitatis splendori, aedificandae Ecclesiae,
publicae paci stabiliendae and arctissimo nexu strigendae cessurum est.
Quamquam enim ea sit Romanae Sedis praecellentia ut in ferendo de gravissimis
dogmatibus judicio ejusmodi consultatione absolute non indigeat, speramus tamen
Sanctissimum Dominum maximam habiturum esse praesentium circumstantiarum
rationem, nec tam de summo suo jure quam de totius Ecclesiae commodo
sedandisque in perpetuum procellis cogitaturum. Omnia mihi licent, aiebat
Paulus, sed non omnia expediunt. Sic quo tempore Clemens VIII. Sanctissimae
memoriae Pontifex Congregationem de Auxiliis instituit, nihil de auctoritate
sua, cujus assertor vixit fortissimus, decedere arbitratus est, si Dominicanos
Jesuitasque inter sese disceptantes non modo public audiri pateretur, sed
etiam latam a Consultoribus sententiam recognosci aliquando juberet, ne Molinae
fautores laedi se vel minimum ac pene inauditos damnari, quod peperam
clamabant, quererentur. Agnoscebat scilicet Beatissimus Papa auctoritatem illam
primariam quae Romanae Cathadrae affixa est, non non laedi mutuis Theologorum
collationibus, ut nulla ex part Oecumenicorum Conciliorum vis ac facultas
imminuitur, neque illum quem praesentissimum habent, S. Spiritus afflatus
vocatur in dubium, cum canonibus condendis publica Doctorum altercatio
praemittitur. Jam vero cum omnis Gallicanae Ecclesiae Praesules id unum in
votis habeant, ut nulli vel nutare in posterum liceat, vel de rebus gravissimis
ubi judicatae denuo fuerint contendere; neque alio quam parturiendae pacis
studio ad Romanum apicem per literas confugerint; non dubitamus viam illam ac
rationem omnibus acceptam fore qua publica tranquillitas apertissime
continetur. Quod si nonnulli homines qui Romae jam agunt, privatis affectibus
sic indulgent, ut propositionum mala fide confictarum qualemcumque censuram
ambiant, omne refugiant examen, quo pretiosum a vili, veritas ab errore, fides
a perfidia secernatur; si humanis artibus procurant ne scripta ultro citroque
partibus communicata ventilentur, si ad ipsum publicae disputationis nomen
expavescunt, eamque omnibus modis arcere satagunt: Quis ex illa tergiversatione
non videat quam parum sincere ad veritatis illustrandae propositum accesserint,
neque concludat causae suae aequitati merito illos diffidere quam coram
adversariis tueri refugiunt? Quis non sibi persuadeat arcano illos metu
percelli, ne in ipsa Congregationis luce patefaciant quantum abhorrent a S.
Augustini sententia, cum eorum congressum reformident qui non domestico solum
studio and privata solertia, sed longa ettam multorum annorum experientia
captiosas omnes Neotericorum fallacias didicerunt, parati eas extemporanea
confutatione retegere? Hoc ipsum est tamen quod Jesuitae ac Jesuitarum fautores
Parisiis jactitant, atque in eo sunt toti ut ore rotundo pronuncient, nullam se
Romae admissuros esse vel disputationem publicam vel scriptorum
communic^tionem. Quod quidem solo contemptu judicaremus dignum, nisi res esset
cum iis hominibus qui nullum non movent lapidem, nullas non agitant machinas,
ut votis potiantur. Hinc (...) (Viri Clarissimi) quod nos Lutetiae forte
agentes hanc Epistolam quasi novum fidei vestrae ac virtutis incitamentum
conscripsimus, a pluribus Eeclesiae Gallicanae Antistitibus consignandam si res
moram pateretur, sineretque Fratres nostros per varias Regni Provincias
dispersos admoneri. Facite illud ipsum ergo quod facitis, eam quam Vobis
praescripsimus viam insistite, opprimendis scilicet fraudibus pacique
comparandae opportunam. Eam Congregationem instantissimis precibus efflagitate;
quae voce and scripto peragatur, non seorsim sed mutua inter se collatione. Sic
vos mandatorum nostrorum memores ac sponsae suae causam agentes induat Dominus
virtute ex alto.

Parisiis 28. Nov. 1652.
I do not here place the Subscriptions of the Bishops who writ this Letter to
us, though the Original which has them remains in my hands, because they are
the same who writ the following Letter to the Pope, and for that I think it not
expedient to expose them without necessity to the censures of such as may
possibly be unsatisfi'd therewith.

A Letter of my LL. the Bishops of France to the Pope, which was not delivered
to him, but the translation of it is to be seen, Part. 6. Chap. 11.
It was thus inscribed;

Beatissimo Patri Innocentio Papae X. Romam.
The Contents follow.

Beatissime Pater,
AD Episcopos and de tuenda veritate solicitos and Ecclesiasticae pacis
amantissimos, nullus poterat jucundior nuncius pervenire, quam qui paternum
Sanctitatis Vestrae studium, and Apostolicam in ordinanda quam toties
optaveramus Congregatione providentiam certissimis auctoribus aestate superiori
referebat. Atque ubi primum id rescivimus ex Doctoribus Theologis qui nostro
nomine tam grave negotium Romae procurant, gavisi sumus ita feliciter imp^nsam
ab illis operam, ut restituendae publicae tranquillitatis viam propemodum
unicam Summa Seeds probare sese amplectique demonstraret. Hinc spes nobis
affulgere coepit non minima post discussas calumniarum nebulas, post dissipatam
humanarum artium caliginem, fore ut oppressa veritas and atrocissimis
adversariorum convitiis impetita, tot patronos tandem aliquando nancisceretur
quot judices: atque ubi constitutum esset de gravissimis quaestionibus
Ecclesiasticum judicium, and quale de rebus ad fidem ac doctrinam pertinentibus
haberi jam olim consuevit, in tranquilla hujus Congregationis expectatione
nobis acquiescendum esse duxmus. Cum enim famosas illas quinque propositiones,
structura ancipites, sensu aequivocas and subdolas, per homines sibi addictos
ideo tantum ad libitum suum procudissent Jesuitae, ut S. Augustini auctoritas
funditus convelleretur, neoterica Ludovici Molinae opinio de Romanae
Congregationis sententiis, de tot retro seculorum consensu, de Orthodoxa
veterum Theologiae Familiarum doctrina triumpharet, Sancti Divinae gratiae
Doctoris existimatio in tuto jam esse videbatur; postquam ad illud Tribunal
devoluta erat, ex cujus gloriosa commendatione publicam obtinet toto orb
celebritatem. Verum (Beatissime Pater) quanta fuerat hactenus ad hujus
Congregationis rumorem exultatio nostra, tanta nos repentinae mutationis
admiratio percellit, ex quo illi ipsi Doctores Theologi quibus ad Sanctitatem
Vestram Deputatis utimur, postremis literis significarunt alia long via tantum
negotium procedere coepisse, non haberi promissam Congregationem, in qua parts
oppositae mutuo congrederentur, viva voce coram inter se contenderent, and
scriptis ultro citroque communicatis omnem fraudis suspicionem amolirentur; sed
aliud jam penitus institui, quam quod annuente Sanctitate Vestra sese
consequutos rescripserant. Quod quidem ut a speratae pacis ratione alienum
videtur, sic a nobis sine intimo moeroris sensu disci non potuit, cum
attendimus quanta inde publicis S. Augustini adversariis accederet audacia,
quae malorum seges excresceret, quam opportuna inquietis hominibus praeberetur
occasio novos long lateque tumultus excitandi, quanta denique Romanae Sedi
adeoque ipsi Ecclesiae labes aspergeretur, si quod Molinae fautores tot
callidis m^litionibus ambiunt, de propositionibus quo sensu praecipue
contrevertuntur, aperta and expressa sententia non ferretur, ac de iis sine
sensuum distinctione ad capitalem controversiam accommodata judicium fieret,
quo deinde S. Augustini hosts non modo in illum ejusque discipulos, sed in
ipsius etiam Apostolicae Cathedrae auctoritatem ac famam audacius abuti possent
imposterum.

Patiatur Sanctitas Vestra (Beatissime Pater) non noc pietatis minus ac
reverentiae quam doloris ac gemituum plenam expostulationem. Exiguae scintillae
latum jam undique sparserunt incendium, mali vis improba non uno loco
grassatur, litigant filii, gemit Matter, in Patris providentia totius remedii
summa posita est. Magno aestu res geritur, sed quem Pontificia restinguat
auctoritas, s^ de sensibus in quibus omnis contentio posita est, judicium
disertis and perspicuis verbis expressum proferatur, ut eorum qui contrarias
hactenus sententias tanto ardore propugnarunt, dissensiones finiat ac
comprimat. Quod quidem ut fiat neque ulli super sit exceptionis aut
tergiversationis locus, quaedam imprimis quo in statu res positas agnoscimus,
necessaria videntur. Primum ut nostris ad Sanctitatem Vestram Delegatis
facultas fiat libere coram adversariis qui praesentes sunt, aperiendi quod
sentiunt, and omnes illorum technas retegendi. Deinde ut quae ultro citroque ad
sententiae defensionem prolata erunt, manu nemini suspecta in publicos
commentarios referantur, rerum in commentarios relatarum apographa concedantur
disceptantibus, ipsique inter sese mutuo ac bona fide communicent, quae vel ad
suam stabiliendam sententiam vel ad impugnandam oppositam exhibuerint.
Praeterea ut Jesuitae, quibus tanquam Molinianae novitatis assertoribus and
apertis Augustinianae doctrinae hostibus praecipua contentionis ineundae moles
incumbit, in judicium tanquam primariae parts accedant, praesertim cum scripta
jam Congregationi oblata fuerint, quae Franciscus Annatus ex hac Societate suo
nomine Parisiis palam edere ausus est. Demum ut D. Albizius a Congregatione
abstineat ob eas recusationis causas quarum aequitas ipsa per sese satis
superque elucescit. Denique ut Frater Modestus qui Francisci Annati Librum a
praelo recentem approbare veritus non est, ab eodem judicio semoveatur, nec
inter Consultores ferendae sententiae jus obtineat, qui tam evidenti
praejudicio mentem Molinae patronis and in Sancti etiam Augustini auctoritatem
declaravit.

Haec sunt (Beatissime Pater) non declinandi judicii consilia, sed subsidia
stabilienda pacis. Speramus Sanctitati Vestrae acceptas fore preces istas in
hoc rerum cardine necessarias, justitia commendabiles, pietatis ac venerationis
plenissimas, neque aliud spirantes quam creditarum nobis animarum salutem and
Cathedrae Vestrae judiciique auctoritatem. Novimus Episcopalis Sarcinae partem
esse non minimam providere diligentissime, ut subditorum conscientiae
Christiana pace ac tranquillitate sine offendiculo perfruantur, neque impune
nobis futurum, si dum superseminantur zizania, segniter dormiamus. Igitur ad
Sanctitatem Vestram iterum iterumque supplices accedimus, and post humillima
pedum oscula postulamus, ut non impar malo remedium adhibeat, eoque judicio lis
tanta dirimatur, quod praecipuum controversiae caput definiat, errorem
radicitus extirpet, pacemque certam and firmam stabiliat: Atque illud profecto
futurum est, si qualem Congregationem Clemens VIII. and Paulus V. instituerant,
talem Sanctitas Vestra nobis annuat, disceptaturis apertam and liberam, omni
carentem invidia, celebritate solennem. Ita Sanctitatem Vestram gratiae auctor
Christus publico Christiani orbis bono florentem semper and incolumem praestet.

Beatissime Pater, Sanctitatis Vestrae Humillimi and obsequeutissimi filii N.
and N.
Datum Par. 6. Kal. Martii, 1653.
I have still the Original of this Letter signed with the proper hands of two
Prelates, who were then at Paris, and who added these words after their
Subscriptions; De absentia Fratrum nostrorum.

The Letter of M. de la Palafox Bishop of Angelopolis to Pope Innocent X.
whereof mention is made, Part. 3. Chap. 13.
An Advertisement touching the Printing of the said Letter in this Collection.
THis Letter was sufficiently secret when I finished my Journal, and assigned
it to this Collection; but it has since become very public, being translated
into French, and published in the year 1658. which Translation the Curees of
Paris very solidly defended in their IX. Writing against the vain and pitiful
cavils of F. Annat. However, I conceive the insertion of the Original Latin,
not formerly printed, will not be unacceptable; besides, that it may be
preserved in this Collection to serve for a testimony to Posterity of the
patience and zeal of a holy Bishop of our time, as M. de Palafox was by the
consent of all Spain. I have already related in Part. 3. Chap. 13. how it fell
into my hands, and how the following title came to be indors'd upon it.

Natalibus, doctrina, virtute vere Christiana clarissimi and illustrissimi Viri
Domini Ioannis de Palafox and Mendoza Hispani and in America Episcopi Angelorum
Populi, ac Consilii Iudiarum Decani, Epistola Sanctissima, Gravissima.
Ad Summum Pontificem Innocentium X. de Jesuitarum Societate extinguenda, vel
stricte reformanda ob venerabilis Ecclesiae bonum.
Beatissime Pater,
I. SAcris Tuae Sanctitatis pedibus provolutus, Pater Beatissime, infinitas Deo
and Apostolicae Sedi gratias ago, quod tanta benignitate and humanitate
Doctorem Silverium de Pineda Procuratorem meum foveris, ut quam brevissimo
tempore ad te missu^, ad me remissum utroque mari Oceano and Mediterraneo,
Italia, Hispania, Americaque peragratis conspexerim, and ab eo literas
Apostolicas super dubia Oraculo sapientiae Tuae proposita, nostros intellectus
illuminantes, errores corrigentes, discordias sedantes non sine lachrymis prae
hilaritate gratiarumque action acceperim.

II. Cui enim non erit laetitiae stuporique videnti viginti and sex quaestiones
controversiasque Ecclesiasticas, auditis etiam prolixe partibus utrisque, and
visis actis per sacram Congregationem a Te particulariter assignatam etiam ab
occupatissimis Cardinalibus sapientia and virtutibus eminentissimis and Romanae
Curiae Praelatis, intra quatuor menses dissipatas, collatas, conclusas, decisas
and tandem expeditas fuisse? Ut jam deinde jure optimo, non sine magna animi
infirmitate si aliter fecerimus, sacras illas voces debeamus non tantum
attendere and audire, sed obedire Praelatis quibus Apostolica Seeds inclamat,
invitar, and suadet patribus animarum dicens, Venite filii, audite me, timorem
Domini docebo vos: Et iterum, Omnes sitientes venite ad me and ego reficiam
vos, Ego enim sum via, veritas and vita. Cujus causa, Pater Beatissime, exteris
hujus Americae nunciavi Pastoribus cum muliere quae convocavit amicas in
Evangelio exclamans, Congratulamini mihi quia inveni drachmam quam perdideram:
Ut omnibus pateat quanta brevitate, benignitate and humanitate Apostolica Seeds
and Tua Pastoralis vigilantia, and summa solicitudo and sapientia dubitantibus
respondeat, errantes dirigat, and moerentes consoletur.

III. Sed heu! Pater Beatissime, nunquam in hac mortali condition and miseria
hilaritas sine moestitia, nunquam sine novo discrimine tranquillitas, docente
Divino Spiritu, Extrema gaudii luctum occupare. Ea est enim humanae mentis and
naturae fragilitas, ut semper magis ac magis medicina indigeat, and nondum
vulneribus primis oleo charitatis sapientiaeque Tuae subsanatis, jam secunda
succedunt.

IV. Sacerdotes, Beatissime Pater, ad Te missi, and ad sacra Apostolorum limina
visitanda, me ab assertis Conservatoribus, Regularibus and Religiosis Jesuitis
praetextu suorum privilegiorum assignatis (non aliam ob causam quam quod in
animarum salutem and propugnationem Ecclesiasticae Jurisdictionis, and
decretorum sacri Concilii Tridentini incumberem, ut Congregationi sacrae super
hoc negotio a Tua Sanctitate assignatae patuit) de facto excommunicatum and
aliis innumeris injuriis impetitum fuisse. -- retulerunt, and ad alia scandala
devenisse nunciarunt.

V. Verum post eorum discessum Religiosi Jesuitae majores turbas contra me and
dignitatem meam excitarunt, acriores seditiones commoverunt, and in juriis
atrocioribus dehonestarunt, and Clerum meum ac gregem credulissime vexantes,
(liceat mihi ita enarrare cum ita eis fecisse libuerit) in majores angustias
redegerunt.

VI. Caeco enim quodam quasi furore perciti, Pater Beatissime, Religiosi isti
quos in Domino semper amavi ut amicos, and nunc ardentius ut inimicos diligo,
videntes meos subditos Conservatorum suorum invalidis excommunicationibus non
assentiri, sed suo amabili Pastori, vocem ejus in suis edictis agnoscentes,
inhaerere, se existimantes contemptos in maximam iracundiam exarserunt, and
nisi eorum libidini and arbitrio meam dignitatem and baculum Pastoralem
submitterem, de incarcerando Episcopo cogitarunt.

VII. Cum autem hoc non ea qua desiderabant facilitate consequi posse viderent,
quia horror ipse facinoris ad defensionem sui proprii Pastoris populos
excitabat, non tantum alios Regulares tanquam pro communi eorum causa contra me
convocarunt, sed quod gravius est, prophanum and secularem gladium (Comitis
scilicet de Salvatierra Viceregis qui mihi totius Regni visitatori generali in
protectionem miserabilium Indorum incumbenti, quos sui ministri maxim
exagitabant, infensissimus erat) etiam ingenti pecunia emptum, temeritate
maxima exemptum, digladiantes, dignitatem meam, personam, gregem armis,
incarcerationibus Ecclesiasticorum and Secularium, and aliis quamplurimis
injuriis vexarunt; etiam hominibus flagitiosissimis armatis, dieque destinato
(is autem fuit festum Corporis Christi, eodem enim die conveniens erat ut
traderetur Episcopus quo captus fuerat Episcoporum Episcopus) ut meam personam
caperent, dignitate expoliarent, gregem diriperent. Interim jurisdictione
Inquisitorum ad id per ipsos conducta praetextu quod excommunicationes nullas
Conservatorum mei subditi parvifacerent, incarcerante Clericos and Laicos, and
atrociora, nisi Conservatoribus obedirent, minitante.

VIII. Dum haec omnia a Religiosis Iesuitis, and Conservatoribus, and
Tribunalibus ad id convocatis geruntur, ego quantum adjuvante Domino potui pro
grege, pro fide, pro Jurisdiction, pro Concilio, pro Apostolicis
constitutionibus and regulis, quamvis solus laborare non destiti, non tantum
Regulares censuris severissimis terrendo, and Seculares eisdem fulminibus, and
ed^ctis, and epistolis, and voce, and sermon intra ordinem and obedientiam
continendo, sed etiam, cum parum hoc proficeret, contemnebant enim Iesuitae
censuras Ecclesiasticas, and vinculis earum innodati, suspensi and irregulares
public celebrabant, sacramenta ministrabant, invito Episcopo etiam in non suis
Ecclesiis praedicabant populo, Secularium confessiones audiebant, Viceregem and
auditores Regios exhortatus sum, ut aliqua congruenti moderatione and remedio,
missis ad id aliquibus de meo Capitulo Commissariis, differentiae istae and
discordiae sedarentur, salva tamen tuae Sanctitatis irrefragabili decisione;
and interim Respublica quieta, fidelium Ecclesia pacifica, and omnium suspensi
animi sententiam Apostolicam expectarent.

IX. Sed Religiofi Iesuitae, Pater Sanctissime, gladio seculari armati and
Archiepiscopo Mexicano Joanne de Munnozca non tantum fautore sed auctore
duceque freti, and omnibus pene Regni tribunalibus variis artibus in suam
potestatem redactis, nullam compositionem aut concordiam admittere vol^ntes,
Commissariis Ecclesiasticis ignominiose dimissis, imo expulsis, non pacem, non
inducias, sed bellum cruentissimum indicentes; nisi me meamque jurisdictionem
and baculum Pastoralem, arbitrio ipsorum and suorum Conservatorum, quos ego
tanquam auctores hujus miserabilis schismatis paulo ante anathemate
petcusseram, submisissem, caedes, carceres, exilia, proscriptiones, si aliter
facerem, comminantur.

X. Ruptis ab eis honestae concordiae articulis, a me ut tanta scandala
vitarentur propositis, acrius Religiosi Jesuitae bellum contra meam dignitatem
gregemque repetunt and instaurant, plures Clericos scilicet incarcerando, and
hos honestiores, electum Episcopum de Honduras Vicarium meum Generalem, Virum
doctissimum and honestissimum, manu seculari dirissime recludendo, and tandem
meum gregem crudelissime omnibus modis vexando, and iterum ardentiori affectu
meam incarcerationem, aut extra Provinciam relegationem, diversis
machinationibus disponendo.

XI. Ad hos sacrilegos conatus, Pater Sanctissime, iterum excitati populi,
Episcopum prope ante Vicegerem and Gubernatorem amantissimum, jam tot petitum
insidiis injuriisque exagitatum intuendo ad sui Pastoris and Ministrii Regii
propugnationem convolant, and mortem subire parati, and sua etiam vita Pastoris
vitam defendere contendunt. Et ita diviso Regno and in parts distracto,
brachio seculari, and Jesuitis, and Conservatoribus contra Episcopum and
Ecclesiasticam Iurisdictionem, populis autem et Clero pro Jurisdictione and
Episcopo contendentibus, in summum periculum redacta Respublica est.

XII. Has inter angustias fluctuabat men's mea, aestuabat animus and concilium
haerebat, exposcens a Deo etiam profusis lachrymis, ut viam mihi dignaretur
aperire, qua salva fieret pax publica, Iurisdictio oppugnata et vita petita.
Deserere enim Ecclesiam, Jurisdictionem, and baculum Pastoralem Religiosis
Iesuitis ignaviter tradere, vilissimum: armis autem and sanguine filiorum
spiritualium causam defendere, durissimum and dirissimum: nihil autem agere,
sed Conservatorum irae me meaque committere, nocentissimum and imprudentissimum
esse videbatur.

XIII. Quis enim, Pater Sanctissime, baculum Pastoralem, id est gladium Dei
sine crimine turpissime tradet? Aut quis suas oves ardentissime diligens, and
pro quibus seipsum impenderet, and mortem etiam subiret, prae dolor conspicere
posset sociali bello inter se digladiantes and se ad invicem occidentes? Pugnam
cruentissimam and tristissimam intuens pater utrorumque amantissimus, in qua
vinci infelicitas, vincere credulitas erit! aut quis tandem vel propugnatione
pacem, vel ignavia vitam disperderet?

XIV. Ideo utrinque angustias, utrinque pericula contuens, tanquam si in
auribus personarent voces illae Salvatoris suos Apostolos and Discipulos in
simili casu docentis, fuga Ecclesiastica victoriam, non bello mortem, aut
populorum jacturam praetendendam esse: dicebat enim, Cum persecuti vos fuerint
in una civitate, fugite in aliam: statui honestissima suga, non autem gladio
crudeli and filiorum sanguine defoedato vitam and dignitatem meam propugnare.

XV. Videbam enim adversariorum mentes in id maxim tendere, ut meam caperent
personam, aut in ipsa expugnatione perimerent, qua capta aut perempta, and de
mitra captiva triumphum, and de grege spolia, et de causa victoriam
reportarent; percusso enim Pastore quam facillime disperguntur et oves;
posteaque falsis probationibus et calumniis et criminationibus adversariorum,
veritas Pastoris indefensa et fama acquisita cum ipso corpore occiso
consepultae jacerent.

XVI. Considerabam itidem, Regulares Jesuitas ardenti furore agitatos in hos
actus adeo irregulares prosilire, and in praeceps dari non ratione sed affectu,
and quo major impetus, eo brevior, conatus enim irae cito cadunt, and si primi
illudant, secundi corruunt; nam etsi iracundia ab insania non nisi tempore
distet, brevisque sit furor; tamen quamvis mala, quia furor, tolerabilis tamen
quia brevis, ideoque furorem istum persecutionis quam citissime transitum
existimavi more quidem fulminis quod uno eodemque momento venit, percussit,
abscessit.

XVII. Fuga ergo Rempublicam salvam facere statuens, and meis poenis
adversariorum culpas, imo and iras aut eludere aut delinire constituens, ne
populus innocens nostris omnium erroribus plecteretur, commendato prius grege
aeterno Pastori, relictis etiam tribus Vicariis Generalibus, ut si forte
absentes, vel legitime impediti fuissent, unus pro alio Ecclesiasticam
Jurisdictionem defenderet; scripta etiam epistola Capitulo in qua causas meae
ad tempus discessionis narravi, and ad defensionem Ecclesiasticae
Jurisdictionis excitavi, duobus famulis tantum, Secretario scilicet, and eo qui
mihi erat a confessionibus, comitantibus; exteros familiares per diversas vias
mittens, ut confusione ipsa inimici mei distracti, ubi ego delitescerem
ignorarent; in montibus quaesivi refugium, and inter serpents, scorpionesque
and animalia pestifera, quorum haec regio feracissima est; securitatem and
societatem quam in hac Religiosorum implacabili societate invenire non potui.

XVIII. Ubi postquam per viginti dies non sine magno vitae periculo and
alimentorum penuria (aliquando enim solo pane tribulationis and aqua
lachrymarum pascebamur) tandem in quodam parvo tuguriolo per quatuor menses
delitui, exquisitissimis interim modis a Religiosis Jesuitis quaesitus, and
pecunia maxima expensa, ut inventus aut baculum Pastoralem traderem, aut me
vita exuerent and occiderent.

XIX. Hoc modo hisque periculis and angustiis salva Respublica fuit, and si non
pax spiritualis, saltem temporalis and publica reddita est Regno. Nam
spiritualis tranquillitas, Pater Beatissime, ubi cum Jesuitis res agitur, solum
a Jesu Christo, and a Tua Sanctitate ejus Vicario reddi stabilirique potest;
adeo enim terribilis est si non reformetur eorum in Ecclesia universali
potentia, adeo amplissimae facultates, honores, divitiae, ut omnibus
dignitatibus, legibus, Conciliis and Apostolicis constitutionibus potentiores
existant; ita ut necesse Episcopis sit (saltem in his partibus) aut in
concertatione mori, and pro causa cadere and succumbere, aut suis nutibus
obsecundare, aut ad minus summo discrimine, periculis, expensis,
incommoditatibus, falsisque eorum criminationibus illaqueatis dubium exitum de
sanctissima and justissima causa expectare.

XX. Cum ergo viri Jesuitae frustra Episcopum carceri quaesivissent, gregem
ipsius vexare and miserabiliter persequi and affligere statuerunt, ad hosque
sequentes actus non sine maximo populorum scandalo processere.

XXI. Primo enim suos assertos Conservatores Religiosos Dominicanos e Mexico in
civitatem Angelorum, ubi mea Cathedralis seeds praeeminet, maxima Fratrum
suorum and Jesuitarum comitante manu, incredibili pompa, plurimis curribus ad
eorum adventum congregatis adducunt, ignorantem etiam plebem Religiosis
Jesuitis monentibus, and per compita and plateas equitando clamantibus, ut
genua flecterent duobus illis Fratribus Dominicanis assertis Conservatoribus (a
me paulo ante excommunicationis fulmine and anathemate ut praedixi perculsis)
ipsos asserentibus esse Papas and Pontifices Summos, and ut plus haec
suaderent, postquam ipsos cum cruce processionaliter extra claustra Fratres sui
Ordinis suscipiunt, non tam suadent quam jubent Jesuitae, qui eos conduxerant,
erigere tribunal, creare Fiscales, and apparitores ac Notarios nominare.

XXII. Deinde per platens galeris sericis and violaceo color exornatis
incredibili fastu circumducunt, and etiam prope Episcopale palatium, ut majori
contemptu de dignitate Episcopali triumpharent, maxima comitante Regularium
caterva, cum suis apparitoribus and ministris, curribus pluribus vecti
circumambulant, et tandem omnia quae sanctum Concilium Tridentinum etiam
legitimis Conservatoribus prohibet, Conserservatores isti intrusi patraverunt.

XXIII. Deinde tribunali erecto, et his omnibus summa jactantia gestis, omnes
Ecclesiasticos et miseros seculares variis modis et molestiis vexant, alios
excommunicationibus, alios bonorum suorum distractionibus, alios seculari manu,
exilio, vinculis, et injuriis, alios aliis artibus dirissime persequuntur.

XXIV. Doctorem enim D. Manuelem Bravo de Sobremonte Cathedralis Ecclesiae
Thesaurarium, Doctorem D. Ludovicum de Vongora antiquiorem Canonicum, Doctorem
D. Nicolaum de Asperilla Portionarium, Sacerdotes honestos et doctos per manum
prophanam ab Ecclesia et Dioecesi relegant, Archidiaconum Ecclesiae
Cathedralis, Doctorem D. Ildefonsum de Cuevas et Avalos, Licentiatum D. Petrum
de Angulo, Doctorem D. Andream de Luci, Baccalaureum Franciscum de Requesia,
Capitulares et Sacerdotes, itidem viros eruditos et cordatos, fuga salutem
petere cogunt; alios etiam Sacerdotes et seculares partim incarcerant; partim
relegant, partim in angulis latere compellunt, et populum omnem suis defer
fidem invalidis censuris et edictis, minis suppliciisque intentant.

XXV. His actis ad causae sententiam illi Fratres Conservatores in hac causa
procedunt, declarantes et publico edicto pronunciantes, Episcopum, et suum
Provisorem Vicarium Generalem in juriis affecisse Religiosos Jesuitas in
exposcendo ab eis licentias praedicandi et audiendi secularium confessiones, et
in prohibendo ut usquequo eas exhiberent, a confessionibus abstinerent. Quamvis
mihi certissime constaret eos neque meas, neque meorum Antecessorum habere
licentias.

XXVI. Sententia ita lata, et in publicis Ecclesiarum suggestis publicata, ad
alia atrociora procedunt, minis, praemiis et aliis artibus suadendo
Capitularibus, imo et aliquos compellendo, ut Sedem vacantem publicarent,
brachio seculari ad id implorato, et hoc praesentibusimo et intra Dioecesim
existentibus Episcopo proprio, Provisore, Vicario Generali non tantum uno sed
tribus, et his non obstantibus declarat Capitulum populo Sedem vacantem esse.

XXVII. Jam hoc consecuti Jesuitae qui haec omnia machinati fuerant,
Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam invadunt, usurpant, dilacerant, adulterium
spirituale committunt, nefarium altar contra legitimum altar erigunt, alios
Ecclesiasticos Officiales, Provisorem, Vicarium Generalem, etiam Vicarium
Monialium nominant, et ab Episcopo nominatos amovent; Et huic Capitulo
Sede-vacante-Iesuitico praedicti Iesuitae licentias quasdam confitendi et
praedicandi ab alienis Episcopis obtentas (ex quibus quatuor tantum erant
meorum Antecessorum) et certa privilegia quae ad terras infidelium (quales hae
non sunt) et haec temporalia et suspensa et finita dicto Capitulo exhibent. Et
tandem documenta haec talia qualia, quae noluerunt legitimo Episcopo et suo
Vicario Generali exhibere, Capitulo per eos compacto et coadunato nulliter imo
et sacrilige, Dioecesim vivente Episcopo gubernante, exhibuerunt.

XXVIII. Hisce privilegiis, et aliarum Dioecesium Episcoporum licentiis visis a
Capitulo Pseudosede-vacante, edictum ab eo conficitur, secreto tamen ab ipsis
Iesuitis compositum, et per omnia Ecclesiarum suggesta divulgatum, in quo
omnibus fidelibus numatur, Iesuitas Religiosos non egere licentiis Episcoporum
propriae Diocoesis ad confessiones secularium audiendas, propter sua
privilegia, et si egerent, eas habere, and Capitulo exhibitas esse, et si non
haberent, et sufficientes non essent, eas Capitulum generaliter etiam sine
examine concedere libentissime, declarando adeo esse doctos Religiosos
Iesuitas, ut nunquam fuisset credendum, eos sine legitimo titulo confessiones
secularium audivisse. Alia etiam in hoc edicto subinferendo, Iurisdictioni
Episcopali, and auctoritati Ecclesiae and Tridentini Concilii and animarum
saluti nocentissima.

XXIX. Deinde censuras Ecclesiasticas ^a Vicario Generali Episcopi contra
Conservatores and Iesuitas qui cenfessiones secularium sine licentia proprii
Pastoris audiebant, latas delent, auferunt, public dilacerant; eas autem quae
contra Episcopum proprium ejusque Vicarium Generalem nulliter and indebite, ut
a Tua Sanctitate declaratum est, latae fuerant ab intrusis Conservatoribus,
parietibus fixas relinquunt, videntibus et gementibus non tantum omnibus
Ecclesiasticae disciplinae amatoribus, sed populis etiam clamantibus and
reclamantibus qui tot injurias Episcopo suo amantissimo inferri conspiciebant.

XXX. Deinde Capitulum hoc Pseudo-sede-vacante, contra Episcopum erectum, and a
Iesuitis tanquam si essent ipsi de corpore Capituli directum, omnia edicta quae
circa mores and Ecclesiasticorum and secularium reformationem fuerant
stabilita, in Episcopi odium abrogant.

XXXI. In Ecclesiis a quibus ego prophanos cibos and commessationes
prohibueram, iterum ipsi edere et sic eas polluere permittunt, Clericos,
Regularesque quos ego ab audiendis secularium confessionibus arcueram, ipsi
approbant; honestos Sacerdotes, modestos, spirituales, quos ego praemio
affeceram, ipsi supplicio afficiunt; Seminaristas, Collegiorumque meorum
cultores, quos ego tanquam Dei Ecclesiae maxim necessarios paterno educabam
and instruebam affectu, ipsi molestant; et etiam de ipsis extinguendis
conferunt.

XXXII. Claustralibus Virginibus quae meis monitis, edictis et exhortationibus
intra suae professionis septa libentissime continebantur, non tantum
permissione, quod nefarium est, sed publicis exhortationibus, quod
nefandissimum, ut ad suspectas collucutiones Secularium and Regularium et
Clericorum iterum redeant, suadent. Et tandem licentias innumerabiles
Religiosis adoloscentibus ad audiendas mulierum confessiones concedunt, et ut
de alieno thesauro, de mea Ecclesiastica Jurisdiction profusissime prodigunt
et impendunt.

XXXIII. Haec omnia me P. B. non latebant, imo ex tuguriolo meo in quo
prostratus coram Christo crucifixo Domino jacebam, et pro populo gregeque
miserabiliter afflicto profusis lachrymis efflagitabam, tanquam a specula oves
crudelissime diripi, sponsam meam amantissimam Ecclesiam dilacerari et
impiissime vexari conspiciens, fractum Postoralem baculum, mitram conculcatam
oculis dolentissimis intuens, suspiria, gemitus, lamentationes mearum ovium
irreparabiliter non minoribus gemitibus et suspiriis exaudiens, etiam sine
armis, etiam sine viribus, etiam prostratus, etiam solus, Divino tantum auxilio
fretus, meum gregem curare non destiti.

XXXIV. Illic enim tanquam ex carcere, si non eodem spiritu, saltem
primitivorum praesulum exemplo, literis, nunciis, manuscriptis Pastoralibus
Episcopis jurare, suadere, consulere, consolari studui, ut in fide et charitate
permanentes, fortitudine aerumnas, constantia tribulationes, patientia
persecutiones superarent, et a confessionibus et praedicationibus eorum, qui
Dioecesani Praelati licentias non habebant, abstinerent et fugerent, quod
pietate divina, non meae humilitatis et fragilitatis viribus maxima ex part
obtinui, ita ut paucissimi fuerint in hisce innumerabilis multitudinis populis,
qui etiam tot incarcerationibus et relegationibus comminati, Relegiosis
Iesuitis et assertis Conservatoribus fidem detulerint, et adhaeserint.

XXXV. Sed Religiosi isti, alias admodum docti et perfecti, potentia potentiam
defendentes et ex abysso ad abyssum praecipiti cursu prolapsi, tanto plus ira
excandescentes, quanto populos a suo pastore divellere non posse, imo ipsis
Iesuitis offensissimos esse conspiciebant, Iudices Seculares expensa maxima
pecuniarum quantitate conducunt, qui sub praetextu seditionis (antiquum enim
est, P. B. Ecclesiarum Praelatos qui in animarum salutem incumbunt, et
Ecclesiasticam Iurisdictionem propugnant, seditiosos vocare, et commovisse
turbas eis imputare, incipientes a Galilaea usque ad Jerusalem, et aliis
ejusdem farinae calumniis exemplo Salvatoris impetere) criminalissimum
processum contra me scribunt, testes violentissime cogunt, alios pecunia
corrumpunt, alios aliis artibus compellunt, alios attrahunt et alliciunt, ut
deponant et etiam jure jurando affirment, me contra Reip. salutem, quae mihi
charior semper vita extitit, machinatum esse; et uno eodemque tempore a septem
Iudicibus (tanta est, P. B. Iesuitarum potentia) in mea ipsa Dioecesi, imo et
Episcopali civitate simul cum grege amantissimo syndicatus fui, a tribus
scilicet secularibus a Vicerege missis, a duobus Regularibus, videlicet
Conservatoribus, et ab aliis duobus Ecclesiasticis Sacerdotibus, et ab ipsa
Societate expulsis, Inquisitionis Commissariis, et his septem judicibus, S. P.
talibus moribus defaedatis, quos modestia tacet, et zelus dolet.

XXXVI. Sed Deo infinitas gratias ago qui ut superbis resistit, humiles et
propter suam causam persecutionem patientes protegit et defendit; tot enim
judicibus, tot testibus inter se convenientibus and conspirantibus, imo et
ipsas depositiones et acta propalantibus inter se and ad eundem finem
dirigentibus, dignitate aliquid mea indignum Episcopali, etiam nulliter and
violenter probare minime potuerunt; sed declarationes vagas vilium hominum
coacevarunt, in quibus generaliter asserebatur, me maximam seditionem excitasse
and terribilibus in juriis Jesuitas affecisse, quod videlicet confessiones
audire sine licentia Episcopi prohibuissem, and ad ordinem Concilii Tridentini
and Gregorii XV. constitutionis decreta ipsos per legitimos tramites redegissem.

XXXVII. Elusa ergo processalis formae persecutione, P. B. quia Iesuitae nihil
probabant neque ^is sacinoribus obtinebant, imo populi magis ac magis ab eis
aversi, ipsisque infensi pro Pastore suo certabant, and ejus consiliis and
exhortationibus inhaerebant, jam ruptis verecundiae and religiosae modestiae
vinculis; ad aliam atrociorem formam, me meamque famam, dignitatem, personam
persequendi processere.

XXXVIII. Convocatis enim Scholasticis suis (quos alia certe doctrina imbuere
debuissent) praetextu solemnitatis S. P. Ignatii sui Fundatoris (cujus animam
sanctissimam maxim haec omnia abhorrere and abominari compertissimum est)
choreas scelestissimas ( mascaras Hispani vocant) constituerunt, in quibus in
contemptum meae personae, dignitatisque and omnium Sacerdotum qui inter
caeteros vita arctiori and honestiori fulgebant, and inter hos Procuratorem
meum Sylverium de Pineda, qui tunc Romae aderat, and Tua sanctissima praesentia
fruebatur, horribilibus larvis ac gesticulationibus and nefariis aliis modis,
Episcopum, Sacerdotes, sanctas and venerabiles Moniales, dignitatem
Episcopalem, imo and Catholicam Religionem infamarunt, irriserunt, illuserunt.

XXXIX. Larvati enim and has personas sacras infami habitu tanquam in statuis
per civitatem totam medio diei tempore circumgestantes, orationem sanctissimam
and devotissimam Dominicam simulque Angelicam aliis profanis verbis immixtis
turpissime decantantes, has infandas choreas per civitatem praedictam Iesuitici
scholares circumducentes, and a suis propriis domibus educentes, in solo
Christiano et Catholicissimo, gentilicia and haeretica theatralia facinora
contra Dei Ecclesiam, suosque Episcopos and Sacerdotes audacissime perpetrarunt.

XL. Aliqui enim eorum, P. B. infames cantilelenas supradictae orationi
Dominicae immiscentes, pro Libera nos a malo, quod in fine dicitur,
decantabant, Sed libera nos a Palafox, nempe quia ego a malo (quod est intra
limits suae professionis non contineri) Iesuitas liberare, et in ordinem
redigere conatus sum. Eodem pene modo salutationem Angelicam corrumpentes,
maledictis in eundem finem tendentibus deturpabant.

XLI. Quidam de ipsis, impuris bovis armis signando seipsum (quod Ethnicos
contra Christiaanos fecisse non traditur) cunctis videntibus clamando
pronunciabat: Haec sunt arma perfecti et very Christiani, cornua tauri pro
cruce sanctissima demonstrando.

XLII. Alius autem in altera manu dulcissimi pueri Jesus imaginem, in alia
impudicissimum instrumentum portabat, piissimi nominis et infantiae Jesus
devotioni illudendo.

XLIII. Alius equi cauda pendentem baculum Pastoralem portabat and in ipsis
stapedis depicta mitra Episcopali equitabat, ut conculcatam pedibus exprobraret.

XLIV. Deinde insolentissima carmina, and incredibiliter sacrilega et satyrica
contra Clerum et Episcopum in populo spargebant, gloriantes seipsos Iesuitas
Episcopum vicisse et de eo triumphasse, ipsi quidem victi, superati et
triumphati a sua ipsamet impotentissima potentia; Plurima etiam epigrammata
Hispano sermon spectatoribus tradiderunt famae Pastoris et Cleri existimationi
detrahentia, et inter alia sequens, quod quia maxim explicat quanto errore
teneantur Religiosi Iesuitae, qui repagula suarum constitutionum rumpentes
intra sua septa contineri non valent, hic inseri, P. B. non impertinens
judicavi.

Oy con gallardo denuedo
Se opone la Compannia
A la formal heregia.
XLV. Hucusque, P. B. potuit spiritualis ista obcaecatio mentis procedere; cum
enim ego defenderim S. Concilium Tridentinum, Constitutiones Apostolicas,
decreta Pontificia, salutem animarum, haec omnia, quia eos ligant et arctant,
haeretica esse populis Iesuitae suadent et suggerunt. Expugnare autem
Constitutiones Apostolicas, decreta Oecumenici Concilii Tridentini contemnere,
Pontificias decisiones evertere, Dioecesim invadere, Episcopum a sua Sede manu
seculari detrudere, non folum injuriis sed etiam armis impetere, irridendoque
et illudendo non tantum Episcopum sed etiam Clerum et Religionem Christianam
maledictis infamare, hoc Catholicum, sanctum, juridicum docent.

XLVI. Conservatores interim non aliis artibus, aut decentiori forma
Pontificiam dignitatem, qua se jactabant exornatos, deturpabant: cum enim
honestis moribus, cordatis verbis, incessu in omnibus religioso eam aliquo modo
repraesentare deberent, comoediis et publicis commessationibus, alearum ludis,
mulierum impudicarum choreis, et musicis interessendo et aliis luxuriae
inhonestis oblectamentis, qui se in edictis Apostolicam personam repraesentare
et Apostolica dignitate fulgere jactabant, non sanctissimorum Pontificum
virtutes, vitaeque candorem imitantes, sed perditorum hominum vitiis personatam
et fictam Pontificis Summi dignitatem et imaginem defoedarunt, hanc etiam non
contemnendam notam et injuriam Sedi Apostolicae subinferentes, ita ut de ea
talia possint existimari; dignitas enim sacra et Apostolica non solum vere sed
etiam ficte aut invalide aut nulliter repraesentata, cum decore et auctoritate,
et virtutibus, oculis fidelium, praecipue Neophytorum, in his partibus
remotissimis proponenda est.

XLVII. Transactis jam fere quatuor mensibus, quibus haec omnia Iesuitae
Religiosi non admodum religiose supra dorsum meum fabricavere: ecce in portu
Classis Regia ab Hispania adventaverat, et in ea mandata, quibus continebatur
ut Comes de Salvatierra Prorex (qui Religiosos Iesuitas caeco nutu fovebat, ab
eisque Regni Gubernator etiam in propria Iesuitarum causa gubernabatur) in
Americam Meridionalem transiret, Episcopo Lucatanensi a Rege Catholico
assignato successore, and hoc interim dum mittitur Iudex, qui de primis ad Tuam
Sanctitatem delatis facinoribus contra meam dignitatem cognosceret: haec enim
posteriora nondum Regi and suo Regali Indiarum Consilio propter temporis
angustias innotuerant.

XLVIII. Hoc nuncio allato, aliquo modo persecutionis hujus rabies temperata
est, and cum jam intra Regnum Episcopus Lucatanensis existeret: quamvis certis
de causis ei a Comite Prorege Regni gubernacula minime traderentur, mihi tamen
jam tempus adesse in meam amantissimam Ecclesiam iterum redeundi, and quos
filios absens Epistolis secretis consolabar, praesens exhilarandos existimavi.

XLIX. Quod cum statuissem, scribens prius Proregi and Auditoribus Regiis, qui
duabus diaetis a mea Diocoesi distant, and populum in me ingenti laetitia
affectum spectare cognoscens, and non ignorans ad versariorum meorum dilationes
and arts, quibus etiam sancta et perfecta sinistre admodum interpretantur, ne
laetitiam istam and hilaritatem populi honestissimam, tanquam seditionem
incusarent and in scandalum publicum verterent, in medio noctis silentio
Episcopale meum palatium intravi. Quod sentientes populi, qui suum conspicere
Pastorem tot lachrymis quaesitum et expectatum ardentissime desiderabant, ad me
summo mane convolant; fractis etiam portarum repagulis, Episcopum suum
amplexantur, lachrymis profusis proclamant, salutant, plaudunt, exosculantur,
and per quatuor dies continuos copiam mei faciens, plusquam sex millia hominum,
mulierum, infantium, qui ad me palatiumque meum concurrere, consolatus sum.

L. Patres vero Iesuitae, qui tam praecipl^ cursu ad me adventare populum
maximo animi dolor conspiciunt, videntes nihil proficere, quia totus mundus
vadit post eum, iterum atque iterum aliis et atrocioribus criminationibus in me
meamque dignitatem insurgunt.

LI. Iterum enim Viceregem Comitem adeunt, suadent, clamant, incendunt,
affirmantes hunc concursum populorum seditionem esse, Regnum omne mihi pacis
publicae inimico adhaerere, meo adventu exultare, and quid superest nisi solum
Regnum? Ideoque Cathedralem meam Sedem, Iurisdictionemque Ecclesiasticam, qua
me praesumpti Conservatores expoliaverunt, mihi tradere and restituere, Regi
Regnoque nocentissimum esse futurum.

LII. Hisce artibus and calumniis Epistolas a Comite Vicerege obtinent, quibus
intimatur Capitulo pseudo-sede-vacante a Iesuitis machinato, ut proprio Pastori
Iurisdictionem usurpatam minime concederent, nec restituerent. Quo non obstante
major and sanior Capitularium pars, quae jam ab exilio redierat, obedientiam
mihi debitam praebuit; alia minori, quae Iesuitis inhaerebat, proprio Episcopo
resistente.

LIII. Iterum ergo, P. B. angustiae, iterum schisma, iterum aquae tribulationum
intraverunt usque ad animam meam; populus enim pro Episcopo, Prorex Comes pro
Iesuitis stabat. Cum ergo viri isti religiosi semper instarent ne me Dioeccsim
meam gubernare Prorex permitteret, nisi porrecta manu de nihil innovando in
causa Iesuitarum; considerans ego et mecum perpendens, imo viros doctos and
cordatos consulens, aliquando necessarium esse membrum putridum pro toto
corpore offerre, and aliqua etiam alias non tolerabilia permitti, and tolerari
debere ut non scandalizemus, sicut Dominus Petro, cum tributum ab eo
posceretur, dixit, disciplinam etiam Ecclesiasticam dissipatam intuens,
Monialium conventus quos ego reformatos reliqueram, relaxatos, Clerum quem ego
tranquillissimum and virtutibus admodum praeditum, jam censura and
jurisdictione Ecclesiastica laxata, non eo quo decebat ordine et honor
florere, and tandem tali schismate gubernatam Dioecesim, ut neque legitime
Sacramenta ministrarentur, neque sententiae Ecclesiasticae rite ferrentur,
neque quidquam per suos tramites directum esse videretur, tandem pro publica
pace (certis factis prius juridice protestationibus super praemissa and a
Conservatoribus perpetrata) quousque a Tua Sanditate materia haec dirimenretur,
de non innovando promisi.

LIVE. Quo facto intra paucos menses iterum alia navis ab Hispania pervenit, in
qua literae regiae sunt delatae super hac causa, quibus express Comiti
Viceregi jubebatur, ut officium deponeret and provincia excederet, Episcopus
Lucatanensis gubernaret, gravissima etiam increpatione superaddita Proregi,
quod Iesuitis contra ipsas etiam leges Regias adeo impotenter and sine delectu
and judicio in causa injustissima pro eorum arbitrio auxiliatus fuisset,
mihique Ministro Regio, Consilii Indiarum Decano and Episcopo, and paulo ante
Proregi in salutem animarum incumbenti tot and tanta incommoda tribulationesque
intulisset. Eodem modo and majori severitate Rex Catholicissimus and
clementissimus meus Conservatores praesumptos and Provinciales Dominicanorum
and Iesuitarum, qui haec omnia fuerant machinati, increpavit, and nullitatem
omnium quae a Comite Prorege in favorem Iesuitarum facta sunt, declaravit, and
hoc nondum ei patentibus posterioribus eorum facinoribus.

LV. Sed Iesuitae, qui non pro fide aut veritate, sed pro sua in populis
existimatione decertabant, neque his decretis Regiis schedulisque assenserunt,
imo neque eas accepisse fateri voluerunt, sed contrarium divulgantes toto eo
tempore, quo Prorex Comes Regni gubernacula retinebat, haec omnia occultarunt,
populis suadentes, fictis etiam Epistolis evulgatis, sevicisse, s^per^s^,
triamphasse, and ita quos ipsi dece^nt, in suis erroribus conservabant.

LVI. Verum postquam Episcopus Lucatanensis Regni gubernationem suscepit, jam
aliquo modo clarior veritas (etsi aliquantulum a Iesuitis suppressa,)
fulgentior justitia, efficaciora mandata Regis omnibus extitere, and ego mea
jurisdictione Ecclesiastica jam in aliqualem libertatem vindicata, fragmenta
laceratae tunicae Petri, jurisdictionem disciplinamque relaxatam, fractum
Pastoralem baculum, mitram conculcatam, sponsalem annulum a digito evulsum, non
sine lacrymis and ingenti dolor talia videns conspiciensque, recuperavi,
recollegi, consolidavi, erexi, and vulneratae dignitatis plagas quomodo licuit,
curavi.

LVII. Plurimos enim subditos meos tam Ecclesiasticos quam Seculates, qui
constanter passi sunt, laudavi, imo and aliquos praemio affeci; qui autem animi
potius fragilitate quam malignitate deliquerant, in ipsis quidem mihi omnibus
fragiliori parcendo, eos absolvi, alios vero qui cupiditate vehementi, aut
ambitione inordinata, aut Pastoris odio, aut in secularem potestatem adulatione
and propensione agitati contra mittam conspiraverant, correctos, sed non sine
Ecclesiastica moderatione, emendatos dimisi.

LVIII. Quosdam vero, qui pecunia Iesuitica corrupti contumacissime suos
errores defendebant, and nocentissima hujus Ecclesiasticae seditionis and
schismatis capita, etiam se de hoc scelere gloriando, extitere, and neque ipsum
vocati, imo rogati a proprio Pastore ut in viam veritatis redirent,
recognoscere voluerunt, sed ex domibus Iesuitarum, quo refugerant, plutima
maledicta in in me and in meam dignitatem jaciebant (facto prius juridice per
absentiam processu and legitime concluso) canonicis constitutionibus and sacris
Apostolicis decretis, and eorum decisione subnixus, per meum Provisorem
Episcopum electum de Honduras eos paenis censurisque subjeci.

LIX. Deinde voce, epistolis, edictis, concionibus, quantum mea fragilitas
valuit, pristinos status animabus restituti procuravi, and hoc quantum attinet
ad subditos meos tam Ecclesiasticos quam seculares.

LX. Verum quoad Regulares exemptos, Conservatores scilicet and Iesuitas, and
qui eis adhaeserant nihil profui, imo and post Tuae Sanctitatis Breve 16. Maii
anno isto 1648. expeditum, mihi per Doctorem Silverium de Pineda delatum, ipsis
intimatum, post ipsas etiam Regales declarationes, quae in classi Regia per
mensem Septembris in portum appulere, notitificatas, semper, ut inserius dicam,
in suo errore Iesuitae versantur, and vinculis excommunicationis innodati,
irregulares, and suspensi public celebrant.

LXI. His enim Pontificiis Regalibusque decretis respondent Religiosi Iesuitae,
Breve videlicet Sanctitatis Tuae hac super causa expeditum Romae 16 die Maii,
anno 1648. viribus esse evacuatum. Primo quod ab Indiarum Consilio minime
approbatum sit, and haec allegant quamvis decretis schedulisque Regiis
contrarium statutum est. Brevia enim quae cum citatione partium, and in
contradictorio judicio in Romana Curia obtinentur, patefieri Indiarum Consilio
minime jubentur, sed tantum ea quae ad Patronatum pertinent, ut si quid
subreptitie contra concessa a Tua Pontificumque Antecessorum Tuorum
benignitate, beneficentissime Catholicae Hispaniae Coronae fuerit impetratum,
Catholicissimi and piissimi Regis and Ecclesiae Romanae primogeniti precibus
exauditis a Tua benevolentia reformetur.

LXII. Ideoque a Religiosis Iesuitis praesens interrogavi and interpellaviutrum
verba illa, Pasce oves meas, a Domino in Tiberiadis littore Petro pronunciata,
a Senatu Regio fuerint approbata? an oration Dominica? an Angelica salutatio? an
fidei articuli? an Apostolorum symbolum? an ipsa fides Catholica and Romana
talibus decretis in quocunque articulo indigeat?

LXIII. Ego enim qui per viginti annos Catholicissimo Domino meo in suis Regiis
Consiliis inservivi, ejus mentem religiosissimam callens, and miram in Sedem
Apostolicam observantiam, imo usque ad sanguinis effufionem contra Infideles,
Haereticos and Schismaticos pro Petri Cathedra defendenda constantiam expertus,
omnia ea quae ad fidem pertinent, and quae Religionem Catholicam augent, atquae
animos ad aeterna dirigunt, and quae Sacramenta statuunt, and quae optimum
administrandi ordinem introducunt; ac tuentur, and denique quae mala vitant,
aut bona juvant, a Rege piissimo and religiosissimo, and ab Indiarum
Senatoribus doctissimis and integerrimis non tantum approbari, sed etiam voce,
legibus, pecuniis, viribusque omnibus juvari and commendari compertissimum
habeo.

LXIV. Secundo contra idem Breve Tuae Sanctitatis affirmant Iesuitae sua
privilegia concessa esse a Sede Apostolica propter merita, and in contractus
transisse, and ideo pacta vocari potius quam privilegia, cujus causa a Tua
Beatitudine revocari non posse.

LXV. Tertio quod huic proximum est, quia clausulam habent ut quamvis de verbo
ad verbum de ogentur, non possint revocari, and ideo neque a Tua Sanctitate, ut
Paulus V. in suo privilegio statuit, quod incipit, Quantum Religio.

LXVI. Quarto tandem, quia Tuae Sanctitatis Apostolicae literae super hac causa
expeditae and Sanctissimorum Pontificum Gregorii XV. and Urbani VIII.
constitutiones, de quibus in eis mentio fit, non sunt ab Ecclesia admissae
neque consuetudini traditae, and leges quae non admittuntur, pro legibus non
computari. Et haec Iesuitae contra Tuas literas, S. P. proferunt, and totis
viribus defendere nituntur.

LXVII. Verum iste quidem constitutionum Apostolicarum and privilegiorum
interpretandi Iesuitarum modus non tantum negotio ipso ingratus and molestus
est, sed etiam doctrinae fidei and Apostolicae Sedis auctoritati and dignitati
molestissimus and nocentissimus. Nam hac interpretatione auctoritas and
potestas Pontificum infringitur, Ecclesiae gubernatio turbatur, and omne sacrae
Iurisdictionis robur and dignitas debilitatur, and quod nefarium est, omnes
pene a Sede Apostolica constitutiones quae quotidie magno Reipublicae
Christianae commodo statuuntur and divulgantur, ad manem and quandam vanam and
umbratilem legum formam reducuntur.

LXVIII. Pontificia siquidem potestas non tantum coarctatur, sed minuitur, si
Urbano VIII. minor sit auctoritas ad revocandum quod ipsi videbitur universalis
Ecclesiae commodo and Religionis augmento utile revocari, ea potestate quae
Paulo V. fuit ad statuendum.

LXIX. Nam si Pontificibus posterioribus non licet reformare, quae ab
Antecessoribus sanctissime constituta tractu temporis propter varias humanarum
rerum vicissitudines et causas reformatione vel mutatione indigeant, and quae
ipsi si viverent reformarent, posterior quidem Pontifex erit minor dignitate,
auctoritate et potestate anteriori, et orbata videbitur Ecclesia circa ea quae
remediis indigent, capite universali, et judice controversiarum supremo: et non
tam Pontifices fummi, fidei directores et judices quam Antecessorum legum
constitutionumque vocabuntur executores: quod asserere nefandissimum est.

LXX. Leges enim condere, revocare, edere, temperare, et ad suam observantiam
populos et Ecclesiasticos Ordines compellere, cuicunque Vicario Christi Domini
Romano Pontifici aequaliter competit sine limitatione aliqua (salva solum
natural lege et Divina) quod nemo Catholicus hucusque negavit. Et praecipue
hoc esse certissimum inconveniens constat, cum omnium fere sive Cleri, sive
Cathedrahum, sive prorum locorum, sive Regularium privilegia clausulis eisdem
Iesuitarum privilegiorum fulciantur, and propter propria merita concedantur, et
ita in nullo eorum Pontifices quid immutare posse dicendum esse.

LXXI. Quod quidem absurdissimum est; nam semper in omnibus Apostolicis
mandatis, constitutionibus et privilegis clausula haec tacita, secreta et
nunquam moritura viget, quae omnibus ahis fortius influere neminem etiam modice
eruditum, laet, videlicet, Salva semper in omnibussuprema Apostolicae Sedis
auctoritate, et majori Ecclesiae universalis utilitate, quae in statuendis,
erigendis, derogandis privilegiis et constitutionibus praeeminet.

LXXII. In ultimo autem Iesuitarum fundamento asserere acceptatas non esse ab
Ecclesia, id est ab eis, (ita ego intelligo) has Apostolicas constitutiones,
nempe quia ipsorum adversantur privilegiis (si enim non adversarentur, absque
dubio acceptarentur ab eis) audaciorem esse istam inprecandi methodum quam a
Tua Apostolica auctoritate tolerari possit, Innocenti Sanctissime, existimo.

LXXIII. Quamvis enim verum sit leges universales aliquorum populorum assensu
ut obligent indigere, praecipue quando superiorum praecepta non urgent, u^que
eorum secundis jussionibus repugnant, vel desidia corrigitur subditorum, tamen
hac juris regula omnes and singulas, and eas quae in contradictorio judicio
latae sunt, Apostolicas constitutiones, vel quae circa Sacramenta vel fidem a
Pontificibus Romany statuuntur, vel quae circa administrationem Sacramentorum
afferunt jurisdictionem vel auferunt, interpretari, and a subditorum voluntate,
aut ab eorum arbitrio Ecclesiasticarum legum firmitatem pendere, and si nolint
eas acceptare, minime obligare, asserere, Ecclesiae universali perniciosissimum
esse quis non videt?

LXXIV. Si enim a voluntate pendet subditorum, constitutionum robur and
validitas, vana est and nulla superiorum quidem potestas. Et si Iesuitae nobis
necessarii sunt, ut sua privilegia ab Apostolica Sede concessa vel declarentur,
vel moderentur, vel revocentur, and sine eis Apostolica auctoritas non tenet,
certe nunquam, Beatissime Pater, quietem habebimus, sed in his dissensionum
fluctibus jactabimur.

LXXV. Ideo haec Iesuitarum opinio, P. B. istaque inspiratio vel illuminatio,
and interpretandi Apostolicas constitutiones methodus, quia Apostolica quidem
non est, Apostolica indiget virga censoria; nihil enim Apostolicae Sedis
observantiae, obedientiae and reverentiae sapit, and hoc cum pluries dixerint
mihi Iesuitae in conferentiis super hac causa mecum habitis, pluries etiam, ut
debui, facie ad faciem restiti; ipsi tamen in eadem sententia opinionibusque
versantur, and quamvis scriptis and typis edere non audent, tamen eis Iesuitae
opinionibus vivunt, and sua privilegia jam emortua, etiam in ipsis funeribus
rediviva esse contendunt, and iis jam finitis and revocatis, cum maxima
animarum pernicie, in foro interiori utuntur.

LXXVI. Ergo Patres Iesuitae jam rejectis Sanctitatis Tuae decretis, non
reverentius Regias declarationes susceperunt; nam cum in eis religiosissimus
Rex, suusque amplissimus Senatus idem quod Tua Sanctitas nobis Episcopis, and
Regularibus, audientiae Mexicanae declarasset, scilicet Conservatores in hoc
casu creari non debere, neque praetextu injuriarum Episcopum ejusque
Provisorem, Cleros and Populos molestari potuisse, neque audientia Regali
recusata a Iesuitis Religiosis Proregi adeo impotenter et caeco nutu eis
auxiliari licuisse; intimatis schedulis responderunt Iesuitae, nihil hoc Regale
decretum causae suae obesse; laici enim cum sint tam Senatus quam Catholicus
Rex, de causis spiritualibus cognoscere non potuisse.

LXXVII. Itaque quando Prorex Comes de Salvatierra pro ipsis declaravit in
spiritualibus Conservatores Iesuiticos legitime procedere et valide
Ecclesiasticam Iurisdictionem invadere and opprimere, and Iesuitas ad
exhibendas licentias confitendi et praedicandi non teneri, and injuriis a
Provisore affectos, quia ab audiendis confessionibus abstinere eis jusserat:
Tunc licet laico Iudici Proregi tanquam si esset Pontifex, vel tanquam Legatus
Apostolicae Sedis, de Spiritualibus judicare, and Episcopos incarcerare, and
Sacerdotes relegare, and alia quae supra dicta sunt perpetrare. Quando autem
Rex Senatusque ejus ab ipsis Religiosis invocatus, contrarium declarat, and
perperam fecisse Ministros Seculares in auxiliando Conservatoribus pronunciat,
Laicus est Senatus, Laicus est Rex, Controversia est Spiritualis.

LXXVIII. Cum certissimum sit, Pater Beatissime, quod quamvis de spiritualibus
non liceat Laicis etiam supremis Consiliis secularibus judicare, imo si ipsi
sibi deferrat jus potestatemque declarandi Ecclesiasticas and spirituales
controversias tanquam judices earum legitimi and supremi, nefandissimum sit;
tamen declarare and interpretari Apostolicas constitutiones, id est, jubere and
imperare suis Ministris and Audientiis Regalibus ut constitutiones Apostolicas
protegant and defendant, auxilientur and coadjuvent, and secundum ipsas
judicent, and contra Ecclesiastica decreta Regulares agere non permittant, and
Episcopos adjuvent, non tantum Ecclesiae non nocens, imo Ecclesiae utilissimum
and necessarium esse, nemo est qui ignoret. Quis enim negabit brachio sinistro
seculari spirituale dexterum adjuvandum esse, and utroque connexo et in unum
tendente, Dei ordinationem, id est, Ecclesiasticam Iurisdictionem Pontificiam
and Episcopalem protegendam esse?

LXXIX. Soluti ergo jam in suo ipso judicio a Pontificia Jurisdiction and
Regia potestate Iesuitae, and omni sive spirituali sive temporali jurisdictione
superiores, nescio quo fine libellum mihi porrigunt, in quo protestantur, se
neque per Pontificia decreta, neque per Regia mandata, sed pro mea tantum
ordinaria Jurisdiction licentias confitendi, per duos pene annos a me
expostulatas, ab ipsis denegatas exhibere velle, et si istae non essent
sufficientes, a me expostulaturos confitendi facultatem, semper tamen
insistentes, etiam intimato Brevi Tuae Sanctitatis, quo contrarium cavetur,
licere sibi confessiones secularium audire sine licentia proprii Episcopi in
vim suorum privilegiorum.

LXXX. Libellum porrectum accepi non sine magna admiratione, Iesuitas
Iurisdictioni majori, id est, Pontificiae meam Iurisdictionem, quae illius
rivulus quidam est, anteferre: and post tot pericula, controversias,
difficultates, scandala, ad Tuam Sanctitatem recursus nunc tandem facere, quod
prima die ab ipsis faciendum fuerat: and adhuc intimato Brevi Sanctitatis Tuae,
non Tuae supremae Iurisdictioni sed meae submitti velle.

LXXXI. Verum cum mihi pateret, eos sine licentia praedicare and confessiones
secularium audire, enixe considerans, ut aliquo modo hoc Ecclesiasticum schisma
tolleretur, licentias accepi, et quas a meis Antecessoribus concessas inveni,
quae paucissimae erant, approbavi, and religiosis senioribus and doctioribus
facultatem audiendi confessiones secularium sine examine praebui, juvenes autem
and mihi non cognitos, ut a Synodalibus examinarentur, remisi.

LXXXII. Hoc facto, P. S. iterum aliam litem Religiosi Iesui^ae instaurant,
affirmantes grav^ssimum and durissimum esse, Religiosos suos quicunque sint,
sive juvenes, sive senes hi fuerint, sive a me cogniti sive non cognici, sive
docti sive indocti, examini Synodalium exponi, ideoque nolle ipsorum censurae
subjici, et in hoc hodie haeremus, imo et in isto inquieto discordiarum pelago
fluctuamus.

LXXXIII. Ita ergo jam prolixa admodum narratione Tuae Sanctitati patebit,
Pater Beatissime, impunita esse maxima Christianae Reipublicae scandala, tot
facinora contra Tuam Sanctitatem, Apostolicam dignitatem, et Ecclesiasticam
Iurisdictionem, et contra sacras censuras, leges, decreta, et alia ab his
Regularibus perpetrata, confitendo et praedicando per annum integrum non solum
invito sed contradicente Episcopo, suspensi et irregulares sacrum celebrando,
Episcopos duos, Dioecesanum scilicet et ejus Vicarium, nulliter et indebite
excommunicando, Sacerdotes, et Capitulares et Episcopum electum de Honduras
carceri mandando, Angelopolitanum a propria Sede praedictis sceleribus
detrudendo, et omnem potestatem, etiam Pontificiam, in hoc casu negando,
caeteraque quae supra scripta sunt suaviori quidem et leniori stylo quam
ipsamet.

LXXXIV. Sed quo mea haec oration tendit, Innocenti Sanctissime, Jesu Christi
Filii Dei Vicari universalis, Pastor supreme, controversiarum Ecclesiae Iudex
integerrime, communis omnium dulcissime Pater, number justitiam contra Jesuitas
exposcam? Absit, ut quod Ananiae and Saphirae, qui Pontificali spiritu Petri
and verbis tanquam gladio ancipiti percussi cecidere, Jesuitis exposcam:
fratres sunt, Religiosi sunt, viri de Ecclesia been meriti sunt; si plurimi
eorum peccaverunt, non pauci eorum peccata plorabant, aliorumque gesta
abhorrebant.

LXXXV. Number exposcam mihi aut de tribulatione laudem, aut de offensis
satisfactionem, aut de criminationibus calumniisque vindictam? absit, P. B. ut
temporalibus spiritualia compensari desiderem, and de eo quod pro Domino
Salvatore nostro Jesu Christo ejusque amore and pro animabus quas redemit, and
pro Jurisdiction Ecclesiastica quam proprio sanguine stabilivit, and pro meis
etiam sceleribus libentissime passus sum, aliquid humani commodi, aut honoris,
aut laudis aucupari velim.

LXXXVI. Utinam, P. B. pro tali causa Episcopali rocchetto proprio sanguine
purpurato contigisset occumbere, and non sudore sed cruore causam justissimam
ejus defendissem, qui meam totiusque generis humani defendit proprio cruore!
Quis enim vulnera illata non libentissime pro eo suscipiet, qui illius
sanctissima vulnera videt qui pro nobis in cruce pependit? Et si vita
necessario amittenda est, pro qua gloriosiori causa impendenda quam pro salute
commendatarum sibi animarum? quam pro constitutionibus Apostolicis, pro
Ecclesiae offibus, Sacramentis defendendis, eorum legitima administratione?

LXXXVII, Number ergo aliquorum qui mihi infensissimi fuerunt, and tot opprobria,
delationes, injurias, publicos libellos sparserunt and divulgarunt, imo etiam
vitam, honorem, famam meam pedibus conculcarunt, peto supplicium? minime, S. P.
imo illis libentissime parco; majora meis culpis debentur; si flagellum fuit
meis sceleribus illatum, a Divina justitia clementissime illatum fuisse
cognosco; si probatio aut tentatio fidei, aut Episcopalis constantiae and
integritatis, in cruce Domini mei glorior, hanc amplector, hanc in ipsis meis
tribulationibus adoro; ipsa quae mihi crux, ipsa mihi praemium est.

LXXXVIII. Solum ergo, B. P. dignitati, baculo, mitraeque condignam
satisfactionem, quae Tibi videbitur aequa and ipsis Religiosis Jesuitis, eorum
sanctissimae Societati sanctissimam, certe qua indigent, reformationem ab
integritate sapientiaque tua, Innocenti Beatissime, exposco.

LXXXIX. Utinam plura essem passus, dummodo eorum occasion and baculo
Pastorali integritas and auctoritas, and sanctissimae huic Religioni primitivus
caritatis ardor restitueretur. Ideo haec atrocissima in viris professione
spiritualibus permisisse Dominum pie credere debemus: neque enim, ut ait
Augustinus, omnipotens and misericors Deus, cum sum bonus sit, ullo modo
sineret mali esse aliquid in operibus suis, nisi usque adeo esset bonus, ut
been faceret etiam de malo.

XC. Oportet ut scandala veniant, P. B. dixit Dominus Jesus, ut scandalis ad
optimas leges Ecclesiasticas evulgandas, and optime jam editas promovendas,
fulciendas, defendendas, animus tuus zelo divino agitatus, Innocenti
Sanctissime, excitetur, and Ecclesia clarioribus Tuae doctrinae radiis
illustrata resplendeat: aliquando etiam ex horrido ore leonis favus elicitur
dulcissimus reformationis, and excommunicationes and pontificalia flagella a
Sede Apostolica jaculata and inflicta, quando alios feriunt, alios illuminant,
sicut calor solis illuminando urit and urendo splendet.

XCI. Quis enim, P. B. ea integritate qua decet and perfecta honestaque
disciplina proprias oves and Dioecesim moderari audebit, si etiam justissima
and sanctissima a Jesuitis in dubium revocentur, and si cum eis lis fuerit
exorta, aut vita fundenda, aut baculus Episcopalis dimittendus est?

XCII. Quis, P. B. dignitate mitraque conculcata virtutes erigere promovereque
potest? quis baculo fracto vitia compescere, lupos arcere, oves defendere,
pascere, servare, ad aeterna dirigere? illuditur enim praeceptum jubentis, si
evacuata sit viribus jurisdictio dominantis, and ab ovibus spernitur Pastor; si
baculus Pastoralis coram ipsis ovibus audacter confringitur, neque qualis
debeatur Pastori pas^orum honor and obedientia constabit, si pastores ipsos
irrisos, illusos, spretos grex ipse conspexerit. Imo contemptis membris and
caput despicitur, and tota corporis mystici militantis Ecclesiae disciplina
dissolvitur.

XCIII. Ideo necesse est, B. P. ut alter duorum Fratrum Conservatorum (alter
enim sine Sacramentis, sine absolutione, sine luce, sine duce, sine cruce, ut
accidit Schismaticis, sine vita in lecto ipso excommunicatus and irregularis
fuit intra annum misere inventus) and alii aliqui Religiosi qui dignitatem
Ecclesiasticam and Ecclesiae censuras admodum contempsere, public a proprio
Episcopo ubicunque is fuerit absolvantur, idque omnibus pateat.

XCIV. Et de caetero, S. P. a Tua summa prudentia and sapientia statuatur, ut
minime liceat Regularibus seipsos contra Episcopum Conservatores eligere, and
in propria aut communi causa sibi ipsis judicium agere and sententiam proferre,
praesertim cum in istis Indiis Occidentalibus tot sint dignitates
Ecclesiasticae seculares, quae ubi non sunt Synodales Iudices, hoc munus
poterunt exercere.

XCV. Neque liceat Conservatoribus, quicunque hi fuerint, etiam legitime
assignatis Episcopos excommunicare neque incarcerare, and plebes populosque
Christianos orphanos acephalosque relinquere. Nunquam enim in tot seculorum
curriculis qui ab Apostolorum temporibus processere, Episcopi incarcerati sunt,
nisi vel a Tua Sanctissima dignitate, quam veneramur superiorem Iudicem and
matrem, vel a manu thaeretica, vel gentilicia, vel schismatica Ecclesiam ipsam
in ipsis Ecclesiae ducibus and Episcopis tanquam membris suis persequente. Si
enim Episcopi a Religiosis Conservatoribus excommunicari and incarcerari
possunt, de tota Ecclesiastica disciplina, P. S. actum esse non dubito.

XCVI. Acriora aut duriora, P. S. contra ipsos minime exposco, imo pro eis
pedibus Tuae Sanctitatis provolutus quam humillime and instantissime deprecor.

XCVII. Quoad secundam autem postulationem, S. P. quam necessitate propriaeque
stimulo conscientiae compulsus Tuae Beatitudini propono, videlicet ut aliqua
moderatione non levi Societas Jesu mihi amantissima Religio intra terminos
contineatur.

XCVIII. Testor and protestor Sanctissimae and individuae Trinitati, Patri, and
Filio, et Spiritui Sancto, tribus in singularitate personis, uni in substantia
Deo, et Deiparae semper Virgini Mariae, and Beatissimo Petro Apostolorum
Principi et Coapostolo ejus Paulo, et omnibus Ecclesiae triumphantis
beatissimis Spiritibus, et Angelorum Ordinibus, et Tibi verae Jesu Christi
Domini nostri imagini, supremo Christi Vicario, Petri Successori, optime et
Sanctissime Innocenti, quicquid in hac epistola vel supplici libello hinc inde
usque ad finem ipsius a mea humilitate dictum fuerit et prolatum, non alio fine
vel intention proferre velle, nisi propter majus Christianae Religionis
augmentum, pu^orem fidei propagationem, Infidelium securiorem et efficaciorem
conversionem, Religiosorum Jesuitarum majorem profectum et utilitatem, et ut
quam plurima mala quae hodie in Ecclesia pullulant et deinde imminent, a Tua
Sanctitate et prudentia vitentur, aut praecaveantur. Et itidem protestor, quod
totis meis visceribus Dominum meum Jesum Christum deprecatus sum et iterum
deprecor, ut si haec epistola in his omnibus quae supra dicta sunt et infra
dicentur, ad gloriam Dei non tendat neque dirigatur, ad Tuas Beatissimas manus
non perveniat, et si pervenerit, parvifacias. Verum si haec omnia quae in his
literis continentur, Tuae sapientiae remedio indigere et maximum Reipublicae
Christianae non moderata nocumentum infer posse fuerit visum, Spiritus
Sanctus, cujus organum es, Innocenti Beatissime, illuminet, dirigat, and
suggerat Tibi quod Ecclesiasticae unitati, Religionis propagationi, Christianae
Reipublicae utilitati, and Jesuiticae Societatis spirituali incremento; sibi
cordium scrutatori, mentium illuminatori, fidei propagatori videbitur
efficacius.

XCIX. Ista, B. P. protestatione Christiana praemissa, ea ingenuitate and
sinceritate qua decet and licet filio qui Patrem, viro Christiano qui Christi
Vicarium universalem alloquitur, profiteor Religionem istam alias sanctissimam,
si intra cancellos justae and honestae reformationis a Tua integritate and
sapientia non arceatur, jam non tam utilem quam animarum regimini, quod nobis
Episcopis competit, nunc certe jam extare and magis tractu temporis noxiam esse
futuram.

C. Jesuitas Religiosos, P. B., per triginta annos satis intime tractavi,
clarissimis and doctissimis eorum amicitia conjunctissimus fui, and modo
equidem sum Antonio Velasquez qui de optimo Principe and ad Philipenses: Paulo
Sherloquio qui de Kanticis Cant. Joanni Eusebio Nieremberg. qui plurima
spiritualia scripsit: Francisco Pimentel Viro clarissimo and honestissimo, and
Augustino de Castro, Regiis Praedicatoribus and aliis. Qualem ipsi de me
existimationem habuerint, dicant eorum mihi dicati libri, and quos ego in lucem
edidi, ab eis approbati and laudati: nunquam enim ipsis Iesuitis malus fui,
nisi quando Ecclesiae meae bonus ab omnibus existimabar.

CI. Humanae conditionis est, P. B. ubi ad maximum devenitur, declinare;
Religio ista sua potentia laborat; sua magnitudine jactatur; sua existimatione
maxima ne minima omnibus aliis sit, a Tua admirabili sapientia and dexteritate
qua polles in gubernaculis Ecclesiae moderandis and dirigendis cavendum erit.

CII. Ego quidem fateor libentissime Societatem Jesu meritis and scriptis, voce
and exemplo Dei Ecclesiam illustrasse and plurimum profuisse, sed aliis etiam
incommodis, ne dicam imperfectionibus gravissimis Ecclesiae Dei nunc obesse and
postea plus verendum obfuturam, affirmare coactus sum, qnae utrum illis ista
majora sint vel minora, Tua ineffabili trutina and Apostolico calculo pensandum
and judicandum erit.

CIII. Nam sicut Praebenda vel beneficium quod plus pensionis and oneris quam
lucri and commodi possessori fructificat, ingrata cuicunque existimabitur, ita
etiam si Religio aliqua aut Ordo Regularis plus Reipublicae Christianae
incommodi quam utilitatis pariat, ingrata potius quam necessaria videbitur,
praecipue cum plurimi sint Ecclesiastici Ordines and Religiones quae sine tanta
Reipub. Christianae jactura non minorem Ecclesiae afferant utilitatem.

CIV. Quid enim interest, P. S. supponamus quod pro Ecclesia Societas Jesuitica
laboret, and ejus onere, pondere, and praesumpta auctoritate magnitudineque
Ecclesia Dei universalis laborat and gemit; quid interest, quod Episcopos in
ministerio adjuvet, si Episcopos non suis nutibus obsecundantes deprimit and
exagitat? quid interest quod populos doceat, si populos commovet and perturbat?
quid interest quod filios erudite patribus instruat, si filiis dulcissimis
patres orbat, and receptos i^erum and notatos a Societate pro levissimis
projicit and expellit?

CV. Quid interest quod Ministris aliquando Regiis Dynastisque and Principum
aulis cum utilitate se inserat, si plures non necessaria imo Republicae noxia
introductione and praesumptione, quae spiritualis ministerii existimationi
detrahit plurimum, and offensam secularibus reddit, manu directioneque
interiori de spiritualibus ad politica, de politicis ad prophana, de prophanis
ad nocentissima subintrando, and magno secularium scandalo and incommodo
interiora domorum secularium dirigendo and gubernando?

CVI. Quid interest quod inter Religiones floreat, si Religiones ipsas calamo,
potentia, livore, doctrina, apologiis etiam editis opibusque deprimit and
obscurat? quid interest quod tot scriptis Ecclesiam illustret, si tot
opinionibus Ecclesiam vexat, sapientiam divexat and scindit, veritatem tandem
reddit ambiguam? Nonne and scientia quis laborabit si plus sapiat quam oportet
sapere? nam ad sobrietatem sapere docendum and ediscendum est.

CVII. Quae alia Religio, Innocenti Sanctissime, Ecclesiae universali tanto
fuit impedimento, and discordiis adeo totum orbem Christianum implevit? Nec
mirum certe, B. P. liceat haec proferre; Religio enim ista singularitate sua
laborat potius quam lucet; neque enim Clerum in totum sapit, neque
regularitatem omnimodo amplectitur, sed utrorumque privilegiis gaudens, imo
excellere and excedere praerogativis ab Apostolica Sede irrevocabiliter
concessis existimans, utrosque contemnit, seseque supra omnes Ecclesiasticos
Ordines extollit.

CVIII. Quae alia Religio occultas proprias constitutiones habet, privilegia
reclusa, institutiones velatas, and omnia quae ad eorum pertinent directionem
tanquam mysterio aliquo obvoluta abscondit? Fateor quidem quicquid incognitum
est pro magnifico haberi, verum etiam pro suspecto, praecipue in Ecclesiasticis
Ordinibus, certissimum and evidentissimum existimo.

CIX. Omnibus omnia caeterorum Ordinum instituta patent, etiam Pontificum,
Cardinalium, Episcoporum, and totius Ecclesiastici Cleri docucumenta and
conciliares regulae; non odit lucem Ecclesia, imo tenebras odit, tanquam ab eo
perenni lucis font illuminata qui dixit, Ego sum lux mundi. Etiam caeterarum
Religionum privilegia, instructiones, directiones, statuta conspiciuntur, and
in publicis populorum Bibliothecis communiter dispenduntur; uno intuitu
Novitius Franciscanus videt quod, Generalis si ipse esset futurus, faciendum
esset sibi.

CX. In Jesuitica autem Societate plures sunt etiam professi qui ignorant
constitutiones proprias, privilegia, and institutiones, quibus nomen
adscribunt, quam quibus constat, ut Tuae Beatitudini poterit constare. Neque
manifestis Christianae Ecclesiae regulis, sed certa quadam ipsis Superioribus
solum patenti, interiori directione and aliquibus delationibus arcanis admodum
periculosis, and quae plurimos imo etiam innumeros expulsos pariunt aut
abortant, and tandem magis moribus quam legibus gubernant, quod humanae naturae
incongruum et contrarium esse quis non videt?

CXI. Quae alia Religio tantas aliis Religionibus, Clero, Episcopis and
secularibus potestatibus, and his Christianis and Catholicis turbas commovit,
aemulationes peperit, querelas concitavit, controversiis litibusque implicavit?
Aliqua aliquas, tantas nulla; de poenitentia and mortificatione cum
Discalceatis and Observantibus: de choro cum Monachalibus and Mendicantibus: de
clausura cum Coenobitis: de doctrina cum Dominicanis: de jurisdictione cum
Episcopis: de decimis cum Cathedralibus and Parochis: de Regnorum statu and
tranquillitate cum Principibus and Rebus publicis: de opibus and contractibus,
and commerciis, etiam non admodum justis, cum secularibus: tandem cum tota
universali Ecclesia contendit; etiam Tuam Apostolicam Sedem supra petram quae
Christus est, fundatam, si non verbis, factis tamen negant, ut in praesenti
negotio clarissime comprobatur.

CXII. Quae alia Religio doctrinam Sanctorum tanta liberate impugnavit? and
illis verae fidei antesignanis, Ecclesiae columnis, Theologiae micantissimis
and dignissimis praeceptoribus minus detulit reverentiae? fallitur D. Thom,
Bonavent. decipitur; non tantum dicit and scribit, sed etiam typis mandat
quicunque Iesuitarum modernus praeceptor.

CXIII. In suggestis sacris jam reticet Augustinus, Ambrosius; obmutescunt
Gregor. Hieron. Chrysostom. Cyrillus et caeteri Ecclesiae non quomodocunque
lumina, sed luminaria fulgentissima; quidam enim tantummodo neoterici Iesuitae
a suis discipulis laudati exaudiuntur, et eorum auctoritate, dictis,
scriptisque doctrinam Christianam fulcire nituntur. Quod non solum dignitati
verbi Dei maxim indecens, sed neque animarum saluti securum existimo. Si enim
cuicunque Doctori eadem quae Sanctis conceditur auctoritas, maxim vexare
potest Ecclesiam opinionum diversitas, et labefactari fidei puritas, et morum
integritas, quae ex auctoritate Patrum et Sanctorum veneratione dependet.

CXIV. Quae Religio etiam in suis incunabulis et primitivo fervore, et non a
sua fundatione 50. annis transactis a Pontifice aliquo Romano fuit gravissime
monita, et ut humilius procederet, circa tria superbiae capita animadversa,
sicut Religio sancta Iesuitarum a Clem. VIII. Pont. summo in sua Congreg. anni
1592. proprio oris oraculo, sapientissima oratione, and severa monitione
correpta? nondum pene natam, jam relaxatam prudentiss. and perspicaciss. Clem.
VIII. oculis conspicientibus. Aliamne Relig. hac censura in primitivo
institutionis fervore ab Apost. Sede notatam aut tali sigillo vidimus
obsignatam?

CXV. Quae alia Religio adeo integros and antiquos mores Ecclesiae laxavit
postquam a primitivo suo fervore discessit (scriptis intelligo et exemplo
aliquorum sui Ordinis professorum) circa usuras, circa praecepta Ecclesiastica
and Decalogi, circa omnem Christianum vivendi tenorem, praecipue quantum
attinet ad doctrinam? ita ut arbitraria pene videatur et probabilis omnis in
Ecclesia moralis Theologia. Cognovi quosdam Iesuitas praeceptores in hac mea
Dioecesi Angelopolitana satis adolescentes, siquidem aetatatis 30 annorum metam
nondum attigerant, sanos, fortes, robustos, qui etiam in vigiliis Deiparae et
Sanctorum, et in quadragesima sacra (ut mihi nunciatum est) neque lacticiniis,
neque ovis abstinebant neque jejunabant.

CXVI. Quia nimirum in puerorum instructione et verbi Dei praedicatione, in
quibus non minus Clerus et caeterae jejunantes laborant Religiones, plurimum
Iesuitae et intolerabiliter insudant. Quibus legibus, aut opinionibus, doctrina
aut exemplo instructi discipuli juvenes, non solum inermes et effeminati, et
spiritum sugientes, et carnis illecebris et voluptatibus procliviores et
indulgentiores educantur, sed quaecunque in Ecclesia aspera et quae ad
poenitentiam inducunt, et quae crucis mortificationem promovent, verendum est
ne metuant, respuaut, perhorrescant: et cum Regnum caelorum vim patiatur, et
violenti rapiant illud, mirum non eris si rapere ipsi non adeo faciliter queant.

CXVII. Hoc autem caeteros Ordines Religionesque sanctissimas, jejuniis,
flagellis, nocturnis excubationibus, choro, et clausurae arctiori assuetos,
neque scriptis, neque voce, neque exemplo docere hucusque vidimus? imo
poenitentiam praedicant quia agunt, paupertatem suadent quia colunt, cruem
Domini defendunt quia portant.

CXVIII. Et cum leniori et suaviori vita Religiosi Iesuitae, quamvis honesta et
sancta non nego and professione inter caeteras fulgeat Religiones, prae omnibus
aliis perfectiorem esse suam Societatem, Apologiis editis contendunt, arctamque
viam quae ducit ad vitam, id est, aeternam, ut ait Dominus, ampliori v^ae and
corporis illecebris suaviori postponunt: Non recta certe, meo quidem fragili
judicio, imo et periculosa et plurimum nocente Christianae reip. doctrina;
vivant enim ut velint, doceant ut debent.

CXIX. Durum enim est, imo and durissimum, lene rigido, suave aspero, dulce
amaro in spirituali and religiosa vita praeponere, and suam vivendi methodum
and tranquillum and communem professionis tenorem caeteris prefer, etiam
quibus d^rior lectus, quibus frequentior chorus, quibus perpetua oration, quibus
aeterna clausura, quibus amica poenitentia, quibus efficacior and non rarior,
saltem in his partibus, verbi Dei praedicatio, and quibus cum activa vita
ferventior contemplativa,, quibus majora erga Ecclesiam Dei merita, securiores
gressus, et antiquiores et feliciores progressus.

CXX. Quae alia Religio, P. B. a primis Monachalium seu Mendicantium, sive
quarumcunque Religionum initiis in Ecclesia Dei telonium exercuit, pecuniis
foeneravit, et in suis proprus domibus macella et alias impurissimas officinas
in propatulo habuit? quae alia Religio foro bonisque cessit? et prophanis
commerciis et contractibus maris terraeque totum fere orbem maximo secularium
scandalo et admiratione complevit? Certe haec omnia, et ista ad secularia
commercia propensio non ab eo videtur inspirata qui dixit, Nemo potest Deo
servire et Mammonae.

CXXI. Luget, S. P. Hispalensis populocissima civitas, complorant viduae
Baeaticae, pupilli, orphani, desertae virgins, honesti Sacerdotes and
seculares a Religiosis Iesuitis deceptos esse inclamando, qui plus quam quatuor
centum millibus ducatorum miserabilium istarum personarum dilapidatis et
expensis in proprios usus bonis foroque cessere. Et totius Hispaniae gravissimo
scandalo de hac fraud Religiosis Iesuitis conventis and convictis (quod in
quocunque non Religioso esset capitale) ipsis exemptione Ecclesiasticos gaudere
Ecclesiae contendentibus, et Conservatores assignantibus, tandem cum ad Regium
Castellae Senatum causa fuisset delata, decisum fuit, in ea Iesuitas tanquam
laicos coram Iudicibus laicis esse conveniendos, quia videlicet laicalia
exercent commercia and negotiationes. Et hodie grex ille pauperum suas
pecunias, alimenta, dotes, peculia, per secularia tribunalia contra Iesuitas
exposcentes eosdem fraud dolentissime incusant and infamant.

CXXII. Quid dicent Batavi Haeretici, P. B. in illa Provincia and littoribus
Gaditanis ubi hoc accidit frequentissime? Quid Britanni and Germani novatores
qui bonam fidem in contractibus servare, and integra and candida front mutuo
inter se contrahere praesumunt? Profecto Catholicam and Romanam fidem,
Ecclesiasticam disciplinam, Sacerdotalem Ordinem, Regulares, sanctissimas
professiones mordebunt, irridebunt, and contumaciores and duriores in suis
erroribus permanebunt.

CXXIII. Et nonne pudet, P. B. viros professione perfectos, sanctos,
Sacerdotes, Predicatores, communes, ut ipsi aiunt, Ecclesiae magistros de
talibus excessibus coram laicis incusari? and Ecclesiasticam immunitatem and
institutum suum etiam contractibus secularibus maculare disperdere, and
prophanare; and tandem exemptione, jure Divino Sacerdotibus concessa, sicut
bonis etiam foro cedere? Haec omnia laicalia and illicita quae alia Religio
egit? quis Ordo Ecclesiasticus exercuit? quae in Ecclesia Dei Sacerdotum
societas (praeter hanc sanctissimam Iesuiticam Societatem) Deo and temporalium
rerum contemptui dicata, patravit?

CXXIV. Et haec adeo omnibus patent, ut allegationes, accusationes,
declamationes hujus causae per omnium manus non tantum in Hispania sed et in
aliis orbis Christiani partibus et provinciis, ubi fama sive potius insamia,
scandali hujus pervenit, circumferantur, ut per Illustrissimum Hispaniarum
Nuncium Apostolicum poterit suae Sanctitati evidentissime constare.

CXXV. Quae alia Religio proprios filios tali facilitate expulsos et notatos a
seipsa projicit et etiam pro levissimis? quos caeterae Religiones uti matres
tolerant, fovent, et conniventia Christiana et sancta patientia ad vitae
spiritualis constantiam et perseverantiam suadent, erigunt et incendunt. Haec
sancta Religio materno quodammodo affectu deserta and oblita, statim expellit,
and sine titulo, sine Capellaneis, sine beneficio, sine congrua, sine
alimentis, jam Sacerdotes, Diacanos, and Subdiaconos innumeris periculis,
aerumnis and miseriis exponit, Clerum non necessariis and pauperrimis
Sacerdotibus gravat, saeculum notatis and ignominiose expulsis Clericis replet,
Regularem professionem, quae tot imperfectos creare existimatur, aliquo modo
offendit, and tandem tot expulsis filiis per Dioeceses Episcoporum vagant^bus
seipsam Societas Iesuitica notat. Nam si boni existimantur, ingrata; si mali,
suspecta videtur. Quomodo enim tot malos genuit doctrina perfecta and educatio
sancta?

CXXVI. Videmus hodie jam conjungatum, quem heri vidimus, nostro judicio,
observantissimum Iesuitam; hodie expulsum and notatum, quem heri Iesuitam
omnibus virtutibus condecoratum venerabamur, imo and ab ipsis Iesuitas
commendadatum. Et cum ipsa subita mutatione crescat existimatio in omnibus
majoris facinoris and atrocioris culpae, a videntibus supplicium and
ignorantibus delictum non tantum ipsis expulsis, sed etiam expellentibus non
minimum detrahitur.

CXXVII. Cognovi Provincialem in his partibus qui infra triennium triginta and
octo a sua Religione Sacerdotes and Religiosos expulit, cum tota Provincia
etiam latissima paulo plus quam trecentis Religiosis constet. Alius fuit etiam
Alphonsus de Castro qui plures expulit in eadem Provincia, scilicet octoginta:
quod quidem cum in aliis Religionibus rarissimum sit, in hac adeo faciliter
fieri, aut tantis delictis abundare, ut fieri necesse sit suspectissimum quidem
videtur, ita ut dici aliquo modo possit, P. B. neque de his quos dimittit
Societas diffidendum, neque de his quos retinet confidendum ut plurimum esse:
nam dimissos and expulsos communiter approbat in suis literis dimissoriis, and
retentos and approbatos quam frequenter expellit. Quod certe inter caeteros
Ecclesiasticos Ordines admodum singular est.

CXXVIII. Tot igitur singularia, P. B. in uno and singulari Ecclesiae Ordine
and membro (and singularia quidem, quae non tam a caeteris sacris Ordinibus
differunt aut distant, quam eis adversantur aut contrariantur) nonne
suspectissima sunt? sunt certe. Suspecto ergo tenore vivendi, praecipue inter
ipsos Religiosos Ordines, ad quid indiget Ecclesia? quae crystallo ipsa and
solari radio puriori doctrina moribusque fulget.

CXXIX. Vidi librum Compluti typis mandatum anno Domini 1605. qui inter
Jesuitas secretissime circumfertur, qui communiter vocatur El Porque, id est,
Quare, Iesuitae choro non exerceantur? quare poenitentia tantum voluntaria
teneantur? quare aliquando etiam post triginta annos professionem non emittant?
quare expelli post eorum curricula possint? Vidi and perlegi, inquam, librum
istum satis eruditum, R. Petro Ribadeneira Iesuita viro docto and spirituali
auctore, qui in hoc tractatu suae Societatis singularitates, and cum aliis
Religionibus antinomias totis viribus and eruditione Hispano sermon defendit.

CXXX. Et ex ipsamet causa defensa (hoc profero secundum meam fragilitatem
pusillumque ingenii acumen) and ex ipsismet singularitatibus confessis and
professis quicunque modice eruditus and Christianae simplicitatis amator
fuerit, contra ipsam causam concludet.

CXXXI. Et maxim observandum est, P. B. quod vir ille doctus S. Ignatii socius
fuit inseparabilis, and suae Religionis singularitates defendebat, quando
Primitivi fervoris florebat virtutibus, quod si modo defenderet, disciplina
Iesuitica collabente, and pullulantibus tot in ea imperfectionibus, de quibus
totus pene orbis conqueritur, multo minus quidem obtineret, and fortasse non
defenderet neque propugnaret viriste perfectus.

CXXXII, Ac tandem, B. P. quid interest quod Iesuitae Ethnicas nationes radiis
fidei illustrare videantur, si Echnicorum quamplurimos non recta sacrae legis
indictione catechizant? neque recte ab aliis Religionibus catechizari sinunt?
imo a Provinciis Gentilium religant and expellunt operarios sanctissimos and
doctissimos, manu etiam Gentilica and Ethnica arcent, recludunt, incarcerant,
flagellant. Quis Ordo Ecclesiasticus cum alio Ordine Ecclesiastico hoc egit? A
seculo non est auditum, tali aemulatione et imperfectissima zelotypia
Christianos propagatores, magistros etiam Christianos cum animarum pernicie et
jactura a vinea Domini inculta operarios relegare, ac ignominiose projicere et
expellere.

CXXXIII. Tota Ecclesia Chinica congemiscit, P. S. et se non tam edoctam quam
deceptam ab ipsis Iesuitis in fidei purissimae documentis et rudimentis
inclamat, et toto jure Ecclesiastico orbata, crucem Domini reclusam, Gentilicos
ritus permissos, et vere Christianos non tam introductos quam foedatos dolet,
Christianizantes Idololatras, Idololatrizantes Christianos in una eademque
mensa, templo, aris, sacrificiis, Deum et Belilial; et sub larva Christiana
Idola venerata, vel potius sub Gentilica larva fidem sanctissimam defoedatam
dolentissime conspicit.

CXXXIV. Nobis B. P. Episcopis qui ab illis minus distamus provinciis, et ab
earum Evangelieis ministris literas acccpimns, et qui etiam Apologeticarum
eorum controversiarum certiores sumus, et eas in nostris Bibliothecis habemus,
et qui cum simus Episcopi vocati regere Ecclesiam Dei, cavendum est nobis ne in
tremendo Dei judicio canes muti fuisse videamur, et labiis nefario silentio
pollutis de omissione gravissime judicemur. Nobis, inquam, Pastoribus
animamarum competit latrare, et clamare, et haec Tibi Pastorum maximo propalare
et proferre, et quanta scandala ab ista Iesuitarum doctrina in propaganda fide
suboriri possint, denunciare.

CXXXV. Nam si Episcopi publicam causam Ecclesiae non defendimus, caeteri
tacent, timent, and Iesuitarum potentiam perhorrescunt, and secretis tantummodo
suspiriis and lachrymis quae ad Tuae Sanctitatis aures and oculos pervenire
nequeunt, poterunt adjuvare.

CXXXVI. Volumen habeo integrum, P. S. Apologiis Iesuitarum refertum, in quibus
pene omnia a Religiosis Dominicanis and Franciscanis Apostolicae Sedi delata de
erroribus quibus Neophyti Chinarum magistrorum Iesuitarum incuria vel injuria
tenentur; non tantum fatentur ingenue Iesuitae, tenoremque illum pernitiosum
catechizandi Neophytos ab ipsis introductum esse fatentur; sed pene omnia quae
a Tua Beatitudine in Congregatione de propaganda fide postea per december and
septem decreta sanctissime declarata and condemnata sunt anno Domini 1645. die
12. Sept. Didacus de Morales Societ. Jesus Rector Collegii sub invocatione S.
Joseph in civitate Manilae quae Metropolis est Philippinarum, per trecenta
folia tenacissime impugnat et validissimis argumentis, imo cavillationibus
sanctissimam doctrinam nititur expugnare, cujus tractatus copiam dedi ego
Reverendo magistro Ioanni Baptistae de Morales Dominicano viro docto et
sollicito Chinicae fidei propagationis, et qui etiam pro ea dirissime
vapulavit, and primitivorum Martyrum exemplo plurima est passus, ut circa
factum praecipue veridice responderet: quod fecit satis succincte et erudite,
et utrumque apud me habeo.

CXXXVII. Quae Religio iterum dico, P. B. quis Ordo Ecclesiasticus a veris
Catholicae fidei rudimentis tantum aberravit, ut nationem numerosissimam, and
satis callentem and politicam, ideoque plus fidei radiis illuminari and
foecundari expositam, non ad fidei regulas magistri Neophytos, sed Neophyti ad
Idololatriae* parts and nefarios ritus and cultum magistros alliciant,
attrahant and deducant, ita ut non a piscatore piscis sed a pisce piscator capi
videatur, Revolvantur, Beatissime Pater, Ecclesiastici annals, conspiciantur
prima Christianae fidei monumenta, ptopagationis tenor, Religionis Catholicae
progressus, and quibus auctionibus and incrementis in omnem terram sonus
Apostolorum fuerit exauditus, examinetur.

CXXXVIII. Episcopi-ne et Clerus qui per totum orbem proprio etiam sanguine in
primitiva Ecclesia catechizarunt, forma ista Jesuitica Neophytos instruxerunt?
Benedictini and suae ipsis subjectae Congregationes, Dominicani, Franciscani,
Carmelitani, Augustiniani, caeteraeque Angelorum Ecclesiae militantis cohortes,
Religiones sanctissimae Gentiles-ne ista catechesi docuerunt?

CXXXIX. Christumne crucifixum ne una quidem die, hora, momentove temporis
prudentia humana subnixi occultarunt? Absit. Quinque-ne Ecclesiae praeceptis,
mortificatione, jejunio, poenitentia, and per singulos annos Eucharistia sacra
recipienda, and Sacramenti poenitentiae, and auricularis confessionis praecepto
Neophytos aut privarunt aut absolverunt? Minime.

CXL. Sacrificiis Idolorum nefariis templisque adesse, and in ipsis non solum
Neophytos convenire, sed pollui and consacrificare permiserunt? Nequaquam.
Nonne hoc est claudicare in duas parts? nonne est Deo inservire and Belial?
nonne videtur Deo inservire and Mammonae? and neque calidum neque frigidum
esse, sicut sacra pagina testatur.

CXLI. Nonne hoc est persecutionis metu, humanae prndentiae ductu, quae Divinae
adversatur, haec omnia nefandissima tolerare; Ecclesiamque illam decipere, and
animas innumerabiles in aeternum barathrum deducere?

CXLII. Maline Christiani, an vere Idololatrae condemnentur Chinae quid
interest, Pater Beatissime? fidem autem nostram, quae tota pulchra est and
formosa, falsis doctrinis non pollui, neque maculari, plurimum Ecclesiae
universalis interest.

CXLIII. Ideo ego quidem, Innocenti sanctissime, cum de Chinicae
Christianitatis statu tanquam aliis Europae Americaeque vicinior Episcopus
pluries mecum perpenderem tranquillitatem illam Ecclesiae primitivae
politicumque illum prorogandi tenorem, et illam interiorem pacem inter Gentiles
et Christianos ipsis jucundissimam, mihi tristissima et suspectissima semper
apparuit.

CXLIV. Et ut post sexaginta annorum curricula Dominicanos et Franciscanos
fidei optimos propagatores ab ipsis Chinis flagellatos, incarceratos, et
relegatos, literis etiam ab eis ad me missis audivi et perlegi, maxim laetatus
sum, et bonum illi Ecclesiae auspicatus. Quae enim pax Religionis verae cum
falsa? Christi Domini cum Belial? spiritus cum carne? Religionis Christianae
cum Idololatria? crucis Domini cum voluptate? Quae Ecclesia in toto terrarum
orb sine sanguine foecundata? sine tormentis angularium lapidum, id est,
Martyrum aedificata, aut sine cruce Domini culta fuit?

CXLV. Romana quidem civitas caput urbium et orbis, pro omnibus exemplo
sufficiat, quae non solum destinatione Divina sed sanguine Principum
Apostolorum et innumerabilium Martyrum necibus et cruciatibus, tanquam sacris
monilibus decorata, et triginta pene ac trium primorum summorum Pontificum
sacro cruore irrigata, foecundata, laureata, totius Religionis et Catholicae
fidei matrem Ecclesiam et Spiritus Sancti Cathedram et Apostolicam Sedem et
dignitatem Pontificiam prae omnibus meruit possidere.

CXLVI. Eodem sanguine, id est, fidei propagatoribus gaudet Hispania martyrum
praeliis sacrata victoriisque illustrata, Italia, Gallia, Germania, tota
denique Africa, Asia, ac Iaponia, et tandem ubicunque gladius temporalis
propagatores fidei non protexit et ab Idololatrarum furore non defendit (ut
accedit in America, dextera Catholicorum nostrorum Regum nostros defendente
fidei seminatores) nunquam sine sanguine Religio Christiana fructificavit.

CXLVII. Verum ubi sunt Chinici Martyrs? praecipue in primitivis fidei
gressibus et progressibus, in quibus semper gladius persecutionis atrocius
acuitur et ferocius saevit? ubi mortes? ubi verbera? ubi persecutiones? ubi
incarcerationes? ubi exilia? pauca aut nulla; neque vidimus, ncque audivimus,
neque legimus, sed tantum communes vitae labores et aerumnas, quarum et pax est
frequentissima et humana vita faecunda.

CXLVIII. Hoc, P. S. funestissimum and inauspicatissimum illi Ecclesiae
(quamvis non infallibile) signum existimo. Vereor enim ne quia ignoratur aut
non divulgatur satis crux Redemptoris, ideo ignoretur crux persecutionis; and
ea de causa Ecclesia illa Chinica martyrs non peperit, quia de vero verbi Dei
semine Redemptorisque nostri sanguine nondum fuerit gravidata; and diabolus
tolerat, quia nondum Dominus superat; and Belial rericet, quia suos filios
videt potius deceptos quam captos, illusos quam illustratos, and magis
perversos quam conversos. Silet diabolus, quia nondum Dominus loquitur; and
gladio persecutionis suos non defendit, quia gladius propagationis eos nondum
offendit; and adversarium se Satan non manifestat, quia adversarios fidei
propagatores non sentit.

CXLIX. Imo and ipse Satan laetabitu^, nisi sallor, cum in suis templis, aris,
sacrificiis non tantum antiquos discipulos, sed etiam baptizatos, Neophytos,
and aliquando fidei propagatores sacrificia offerre, genuflexiones,
protestationes, perfumationes, quae Idololatrae agunt, agere, and cum eis,
saltem externis actibus, convenire conspexerit, and Arcam foederis, id est,
crucem Domini cum Dagon in uno eodemque templo cohabitare laetabundus
respexerit. Quod nunquam ab Apostolicis temporibus toleratum in Ecclesia
Catholica fuit, neque actus interiores dirigendo cruci secretae, publico Idolo
and cacodaemoni offerre exteriores.

CL. Ubi enim fuerit interius, ibi erit exterius; ubi fuerit anima, ibi and
corpus; neque anima coelo fruitur, cujus corpus in inferno cruciabitur; and
sicut corpus and animam, and utrasque substantias Christo Filio debemus ut
Redemptori, Patri ut Creatori, Spiritui Sancto ut fidei nostrae Propagatori,
ita etiam non tantum actus interni ab Idolorum cultu, templis, aris,
sacrificiis, prostrationibus, genuflexionibus, tanquam ab ipso infernali
barathro arcendi and cavendi sunt inter verae fidei Christianos.

CLI. Et si gladius persecutionis ideo saeviat, fidei propagatio foecundabitur;
si propagatores persequitur Idololatria, persecutores vincet Religio
Christiana; Et quot Martyrs coelo mittet saevitia, tot and plures Christianos
Ecclesiae concedet Divina clementia; Et sicut in cruce Dominus morte
sacratissima sua vitam Ecclesiae praebuit, ita ejusdem meritis in propagatione
suae Ecclesiae, quam morte redemit and creavit, tot vitas creat and foecundat
occisorum Martyrum sanguis Religioni Catholicae (etiam Gentilium and
persecutorum) quot guttis sacrat terram sanguis propagatorum, sicut ex grano
emortuo in terram projecto procedit spica granorum referta.

CLII. Nam si vexillum crucis, P. S. non antecedit, quomodo Christiana Religio
vincet, and Apostolica doctrina triumphabit? aut quomodo victoria contra
Idololatras auspicabitur, si labarum crucis absconditur? and si vulnera Christi
reticent, quomodo Christianorum and Neophytorum vulnera curabunt? Et si
passionis Domini thesaurus recluditur, quomodo animarum egestas saturabitur?
and si fontes Redemptoris and vulnera claudimus Salvatoris, quomodo sitientes
bibemus peccatores? and si Neophyti and parvuli non de hoc lacte nutriuntur,
quomodo jam facti majores incrementa Religionis suscipient?

CLIII. Imo si modo eos Ecclesia vellet iterum docere and veris fidei regulis
instruere, se deceptos esse clamabunt Chinae, and repugnabunt; and non
jejunantem Religionem, aut fidem poenitentem, plorantem, naturae horridam,
carni inimicam, cruci, morti, periculis destinatam, non Salvatorem crucifixum
ipsis exposuisse magistros Jesuitas (quod Gentibus stulti^ia, Judaeis scandalum
esse videtur) non hominem Deum flagellatum, consputum, contemptum, vulneribus
sacris confossum, and in cruce pendentem, and mortuum eos amplexos esse
protestabuntur, sed Salvatorem solummodo pulchrum, gloriosum, formosum (sicut
ipsum Iesuitae Chinico habitu depingunt) and legem vitamque suavem, laetam,
lenem, placidam, tranquillam, hisque erroribus ignorantiisque, sp^etis
mysteriis Passionis, crucis and tribulationis, lumen and victoria contemnitur
Resurrectionis, and in dubium vertitur triumphus Ascensionis, and tandem
contempta cruce mortificationis, vita recta contemnitur Redemptionis and
Salvationis.

CLIV. Hoc modo, P. B. his erroribus Neophytos neque Episcopi, neque Clerus,
neque Religiones, neque aliq^is Ordo Ecclesiasticus vel secularis vel regularis
instruxit: sed proprio cruore Christi Domini cruorem, propria cruce and
tribulatione tribulationes and crucem Domini in cordibus Infidelium cum ipsa
Christiana Religione inseruere and infixere fidei nostrae primitivi
propagatores.

CLV. Et a fundamento crucis and Passionis omnis Ecclesiasticae fidei unitas
and compago in altitudinem tantam excrevit, and unde Dominus vitam finivit,
inde vitam sponsa sua dulcissima accepit: Ut de latere Christi Domini vulnerato
Ecclesia tanquam a thalamo sponsi sanguine purpurata procederet, and de ejus
spiritu in vulnere biberet and sugeret, quem paulo ante aeternus Filius aeterno
Patri pro illius redemptione tradiderat and emiserat.

CLVI. Ergo, B. P. haec and alia quae Tuae Sanctitati constabunt, and mea
humilitas, muneris and oneris Pastoralis obligatione compulsa, Tuo sanctissimo
zelo retulit moderanda, vel omnino reformanda, omissis etiam plurimis de hi^
sanctis Religiosis Iesuitis, quae ad Tuas aures minime fortasse pervenerunt:
nam ipsi enixe admodum curant (and ita cum meis istic Procuratoribus, quamvis
frustra, actum est) ut ea Tuae Beatitudini occultentur, and remedium exposcunt,
censura indigent, reformationem expetunt, Tuoque prudentissimo judicio
relinquendum erit, quibus mediis remediisque haec omnia si non sanari, saltem
moderari valiant, quod facillimum Tuae supremae potestati erit, praecipue
omnibus fere Ecclesiae Ordinibus in idipsum conspirantibus.

CLVII. Vel arctioribus legibus and institutis, choro, clausura, and communi
unius anni professione vel duorum ad terminos certos praefixa: Vel aliquibus
institutis quae ad mortificationem and poenitentiam tendant, sine quibus quam
facillime disciplina Regulatis communiter laxatur and solvitur: Vel ad Clerum
secularem Religionem Clericalem reducendo and cum eo incorporando, quod ipsis
Iesuitis jucundius, (perpaucis sui Ordinis decretoribus exceptis) Clero
utilius, and negotio ipsi facilius esse fortasse videbitur.

CLVIII. Nam si Clero seculari accresceret haec sancta Religio, permanente ea
semper in praecipuis suarum institutionum exercitiis, quae Cleri secularis
professioni minime contrariantur, imo maxim juvant, secularia ista Collegia ab
Episcopis tanquam ab Apostolicae Sedis Delegatis, legibus a Tua Sanctitate
assignatis, sine tanto Reip. Christianae incommodo gubernarentur. Quam primam
quidem eorum vocationem sui S. Fundatoris fuisse tradunt aliqui.

CLIX. Et hoc medio ipsis Iesuitis medicinam, Clero and Episcopis operarios
sine livore, and ministros spirituales sine aemulatione, exterisque
Religionibus tranquillitatem, sapientia Tua, Innocenti sanctissime, Spiritus
Sancti radiis illustrata, praeberet, and Ecclesia tota universalis tot
tantisque quaestionibus, controversiis, discordiis, difficultatibus, and
scandalis, and aliis eorum negotiis tanquam procellis implicata and agitata,
conquiesceret.

CLX. Omnia haec, Pontifex Beatissime, Tuae infallibili censurae submitto, and
si quid non congruum, vel indecens, vel quod aliquo modo reverentiae, quae Tibi
ab ovicula ista debetur, and quod offendiculum praestare possit, scripserim,
parcas clementer quaeso, and non meae propriae existimationi aut elationi, sed
zelo quo ardet animus meus, Pastoralis baculi auctoritatis, sacrarum
constitutionum observantiae, fideique purae, and rectae propagationis, and
universalis Ecclesiae felicitatis atque incolumitatis a Tua benignitate
imputandum esse confido.

Deus Opt. Max. gratia and benedictionibus, quibus tuas oves imples,
Sanctissime Pastor, Te repleat, Tuamque Sanctitatem protegat and gubernet.
Angelopoli, 8 Jan. Anno 1649. Episcopus Angelorum Populi.

The Decree of the Inquisition mentioned Part. 3. Chap. 6. importing the
suppression of all books written on either side, upon occasion of the Contest
between M. the Bishop of Chalcedon, and the Jesuits of England; Also some
other Pieces touching the same matter.
Decretum Sacrae Congregationis Eminentissimorum and Reverendissimorum
Dominorum S. R. E. Cardinalium a SS. D. N. Urbano Papa VIII. sanctaque Sede
Apostolica ad Indicem librorum, eorundemque permissionem, prohibitionem,
expurgationem, and impressionem in universa Rep. Christiana specialiter
deputatorum, ubique publicandum.
CUm inter Chalcedonensem and Regulares Angliae proximis hisce annis nonnullae
controversiae ortae sint, and harum occasion varii libri evulgati, in quibus
qui ut riusque partis opinionem sequuntur, plures contineri propositiones
contendunt Catholicae doctrinae repugnantes, non sine perturbatione publicae
quietis, and scissura fraternae charitatis: Propterea S. Congregatio Indicis ad
evellenda radicitus semina discordiarum, and Christianam pacem inter fideles
stabiliendam, literarum Apostolicarum tam quae a felicis recordationis Clemente
Papa VIII. sub 9 October. 1592. quam quae a S. D. N. Urbano Papa VIII. sub 5 Maii
1631. ad hujusmodi contentiones in Anglia incitatas, supprimendas, and libros
prohibendos emanarunt, and ad alias nationes nondum pervenerunt, auctoritatem
sequuta, decrevit, omnes ac singulos libros, tractatus, and alia quaecunqve
quovis idiomate and ubicunque impressa, sive manu duntaxat exarata, quae ad
praedictas controversias spectare, aut quacunque ratione direct vel indirecte
trahi possunt, sive praefatas contentiones principaliter and immediate, sive
occasionaliter and mediate quomodolibet attingunt, supprimenda, prout praesenti
Decreto omnino supprimit: Mandans omnibus and singulis toto orb fidelibus
cujuscunque status, conditionis, prae eminentiae and dignitatis sub poena
excommunicationis ipso facto absque alia declaratione incurrenda, a qua non
nisi a S. Sede Apostolica, praeter quam in mortis articulo absolvi possint, ne
ullus in posterum imprimere, manu scribere, aut quovis modo de iis rebus
tractare aut disputare, aut quaestiones movere audeat. Ne quis autem ex hoc
Decreto alios criminandi vel exprobrandi occasionem aliquam arripiat: Eadem S.
Congregatio express declarat, se in praesentia non intendere aliquid de
meritis causae statuere, vel ulli auctori aut operi ignominiam aliquam, aut
notam malae doctrinae infer, sed judicium horum omnium Apostolicae Sedi in
opportunum tempus reservans, nunc praecipit ne quis adversae partis libros,
tractatus, eorumve auctores haeresis, vel malae doctrinae nota, vel alia
quacunque ante Sedis Apostolicae definitionem verbo vel scripto deinceps
afficiat. In quorum omnium and singulorum fidem manu and sigillo Eminentissimi
and Reverendissimi D. Cardinalis Pii, S. Congregationis Praefecti, praesens
Decretum signatum and munitum fuit.

Romae die 19 Martii, 1633. C. Ep. Portuensis. C. Pius. Locus sigilli. F.
Joannes Baptista Morinus Ord. Praedicatorum S. C. Secretarius.
Romae ex Typographia Rev. Came. Apost. 1633.

The publication of this Decree, Anno 1633. caused great amazement in France;
for this General Suppression decreed by the Roman Inquisition, seemed to put
the books of the English Jesuits against the Bishop of Chalcedon, though full
of Errors and Heresy against the Hierarchy and the Sacrament of Confirmation,
in the same rank with the Censures of the Bishops and the Sorbonne, who had
condemned the said wicked books, and with all that had been written to justify
those Censures against the infamous and scandalous Libels of the said English
Jesuits. This gave occasion at that time for the framing and publishing of a
Latin Disquisition upon that Decree, which because it is very scarce to be had,
shall be here inserted.

Disquisitio Decreti S. Congregationis Eminentissim. and Reverendissim. S. R.
E. Cardinalium, a SS. D. N. Vrbano Papa VIII. sanctaque Sede Apostolica ad
Indicem librorum, eorundemque permissionem, prohibitionem, expurgationem and
impressionem in universa Repub. Christiana spectaliter deputatorum, die 19
Martii 1633.
Ad Eminentissimos and Reverendissimos Cardinales ipsi sacrae Congregationi
Praefectos, ac Deputatos.
CUm primum nobis allatum est Decretum die 19 mensis Martii, Eminentiss.
Cardinales, coeperunt de illo varii spargi rumores, aliis subdititium esse
contendentibus, aliis ob vestri nominis and auctoritatis Apostolicae
reverentiam, assensum cohibentibus. In hac opinionum diversitate, cum hi
indignarentur, illi tacerent; in eo tamen conveniebant, inquirendum prius, a
quibus and unde in Galliam perlatum esset, quam de illo quisquam ita ut
affectus erat pronunciaret. Nam si constaret ab ea auctoritate quam vobis
Summus Pontifex summam transdidit, esse profectum, rem esse arcani consilii:
Sin autem, quod plerique subsenserunt, eo venissent audaciae nonnulli, ut
objecto splendore vestri nominis bonis ac simplicibus illuderent, tam insolens
facinus dissimulari non oportere. Quae cum ultro citroque jactari and his
graviora paulatim addi viderem, nihil me temere sed pro magnitudine rei
sapienter and consulto factutum putavi, si vos in rei Christianae eminentissima
specula collocatos commonefacerem; non quid de illo decreto sentiam, cum ei
judicium meum nec interponere velim, nec debeam; sed quid de illo Episcopi,
quid Theologi nostrates, eruditi denique omnes vulgo jactitent. Qui acute
conjiciunt, Decretum istud aiunt vestrum non esse: aut si vestrum est, Episcopi
Chalcedonensis adversarios a vobis illud, quibus solent modis, abstulisse. Quod
enim vox Chalcedonensis initio sola ponitur, suppresso nomine Episcopi, cum est
per se indignum, tum certissimum indicium est, decretum illud ex eorum sentina
manare, unde tot probra and contumeliae in Episcopos Galliae and Facultatem
Theologorum Parisiensium nuperrime proruperunt. Cui enim jus ac potestatem
ordinariam negant, huic Episcopi quoque nomen adimunt. Quid porro causae est,
inquiunt, quod cum a die 19 Martii factum sit, nondum tamen in campo Florae
fuerit promulgatum? Cur Apostolicae Camerae typis impressum, and in exteras
orbis regiones transmissum, ante quam Romae, in illo Christianarum legum
domicilio, visum sit vel auditum? Quae ista rei tanta novitas? aut quid tam
arcanum latet, ut vos, qui ordine, momento and judicio cuncta disponitis and
agitis, ordinem and consuerudinem vestram hac in re neglexeritis? Nisi forte
experiundi causa factum dicitur, quam non iniquo animo illud accepturi essent
homines, Galli praesertim, apud quos decretoriis Episcoporum censuris tota illa
causa jugulata est. Nam si aequi boni scitum illud vestrum facerent, tum
Decreti tabulas in campo Florae figendas: sin repudiarent, pro nihilo habendas.
Iam si edictum ipsum totum ad rationem vestri Senatus and Ecclesiae disciplinam
perpendatur, insolitum reperietur, and in omni memoria inauditum. Quo enim
exemplo supprimitis, supprimendaque decernitis, quae Episcopi Galliae, quae
Parisiensis Archiepiscopus, quae Theologi Parisienses de Anglicanis libris pie
and religiose sanxerunt, censuerunt? Addunt, qui non dissimulanter loquuntur,
qua auctoritate? qui obscurius; quo consilio? Nam retractari quandoque fidei
causas a Summo Pontifice ersi nemo inficiabitur: supprimi tamen sine cognitione
and judicio quis feret? A Congregatione vero, quae nihil de meritis causae,
nihil de doctrina, mala sit an bona, statuere se profitetur, gravissimum and
sanctissimum Episcoporum judicium in maxima Ecclasiae causa supprimi, res est,
inquiunt, inauditi exempli, auctoritatis infinitae, consilii periculosi. Nam de
privatorum libris qui de controversiis Anglicanis editi sunt, verba tantum
fieri, nemo sibi persuasurus est, qui legerit supprimi non tantum libros illos,
and tractatus, sed and alia quaecunque quovis idiomate, and ubicunque impressa,
sive manu duntaxat exarata, quae ad praedictas controversias spectare, aut
quacunque ratione direct vel indirecte trahi possunt, sive occasionaliter and
mediate quomodo libet attingunt. Supprimendum est igitur quod nostri nos
Episcopi and Doctores docuerunt: Censur propositionum quaruadam ex Hibernia
delatarum per sacram Theolog. Facultatem Parisiens. page 12. propos. xi.
Privilegia Regularium a summo Pontifice posse revocari. Et Ibid. page 11.
propos. vii.
Superiores Regularium non esse digniores Episcopis* Aut si quis hanc esse
veram and constantem Ecclesiae disciplinam scripto posthac defenderit,
anathematis ei periculum continuo metuendum sit? Si vero iisdem auctorib^s ac
ducibus asse^imus, Censura propositionum co^lectarum ex libro Danielis a Jesu,
p. 40.
Necessarium esse in Ecclesia particulari Episcopatum: Ibid. page 42, 43, and
44.
Catholicos chrismate unctos in Baptismo, licet ab Episcopo non confirmatos,
non esse plene Christianos in sensu Patrum: adeoque Anglos Catholicos qui
baptizantur ritu Catholico, vel qui recipient ceremonias baptismi, confirmati
autem non fuerint ab Episcopo, non fuisse nec esse perfect Christianos omni
modo, nunc diris Pontificii; digni statim habebimur? Censuerunt iidem,
Chrismationem baptismalem institutam non fuisse ab Ecclesia ad supplendam
significationem Episcopalis chrismatis and ejus effectum: and posteaquam
instituta est, nihilominus chrismationem quae fit ab Episcopo in Sacramento
Confirmationis, tam esse necessariam quam fuit antea: Declararunt hanc
propositionem, Patet quod confidentia in Confirmationis virtute importare
possit magnum periculum animabus, absolute prolatam, falsam esse, piarum aurium
offensivam, blasphemam, Sacramento and providentiae Christi maxim
contumeliosam: Haec si loquimur, si defendimus, nos eodem loco ac numero quo
qui contraria scripserunt, habebimur? Dirum fulmen quod tam sacris quam
profanis intenditur! Sed, vae mihi si non Evangelizavero, inquit Apostolus.
Itaque non tam nobis Ecclesiae doctrinam scribentibus ac praedicantibus, quam
eam tacentibus ac supprimentibus poena metuenda. Haec and alia privatim ac
public, domi ac foris, de edicto illo jactantur. Quibus ut prospiciatis etsi
nullius egetis admonitu, Cardinales Eminentissimi, animum tamen laudabitis,
opinor, ejus qui saltem periculum de quo inaudiit, vobis ante denunciat. Nam si
adversae partis libros, tractatus, eorumve auctores, haeresis vel malae
doctrinae nota, seu alia quac unque afficere non licet, ejusque decreti
sequenda est auctoritas, ut de nobis triumphaturi sunt Haeretici, cum audient
Episcoporum and Theologorum nostrorum nomen contaminatissimis libellis
infamatum, non modo non vindicari ab illo dedecore, quae sunt parts Summi
Pontificis; sed a S. R. E Cardinalibus cautum esse, nequis interim eotum
libellorum auctores paulo durius appellet, aut illorum doctrinam malam esse
pronunciet? Cum in Page 41.
Querimonia Ecclesiae Anglicanae Illustriss. Galliae Episcopos Pilato impie
comparari, quod ii Anglicani libri, ut Pilato Christus Dominus, oblati fuerint,
aliaque istiusmodi legent adverius illos immanis petulantiae plenissima: Cum in
Spongia Loemelii Theologos nostros audient. Spong. 2. edit. p. 3. and p. 6.
Lupos dici ac Lupercos, p. 67.
Cerbero similes qui gutture trifauci inanes territat umbras, p. 69.
stupidos, p. 74.
ejusdemque cum Calvino palati, p. 99.
monstra, p. 185.
censores qui errores, scandala, haereses crepant: in Vindiciis Smithaei,
Vindic. Smithaei in Epistola Dedicatoria p. 3.
Sycophantas, In praesat. ad lect. p. 2.
discordiarum in Ecclesia Dei architectos, Ibid. p. 17
impie and ex malitia errantes, Ibid. p. 22
in quorum sinu foveantur schismata, and apud quos solos etiamnum vigeat
cathedra pestilentiae, In refutatione Censurae p. 45.
profanos and carnales homines, p. 53.
versipelles sophistas, p. 56.
spermologos, p. 62.
homines ad miraculum malevolos, p. 75.
nugatores, and p. 164.
falsarios more suo, p. 182.
veteratores, p. 267.
sensum plane haereticum habentes: p. 268.
tricatores, p. 278.
qui pro libito suo Conciliis quidlibet imponendi arroganter usurpant
potestatem: Cum, inquam, totam hanc male dictorum spurcissimam faecem audient,
quam tamen per Cardinalitium edictum, donec ea de re Summus Pontifex
pronunciarit, improbare non liceat: quid de nobis existimatuti sunt homines
alioquin Ecclesiae Romanae jamdudum infensi atque inimici? Quod si in eorum
manus pestifera and execrabilis illa censura pervenerit, qua Symbolum
Apostolorum, sanctissima regula nostrae fidei, in profanos and impios sensus
detortum est, qua Episcopi Galliae and Sorbonici Theologi perversi veritatis
and avitae pietatis hosts appellantur: constiteritque Romae decretum esse ne
quis ante Summi Pontificis definitionem inquinatissimum illud Scriptum malae
doctrinae nota afficere audeat: an non repent gestient, ac tam praeclaram sibi
datam esse criminandi nostri occasionem gaudebunt? Multa his acerbiora sibi
decreto isto parari sentiunt Ecclesiae nostrae Antistites, quae vos pro vestra
sapientia, ut speramus, amoliemini. Non enim patietur Summus Pontifex hanc
tantam Ecclesiae and Episcopatui labem inferri, aut Christi populum incerta
opinione confundi, falsitatem notabit edicti, subjectoris fraudem aperiet,
suamque veritati lucem restituet. Sin aliud comperietur, efficiet sane, ut
summam illam in moderanda re Christiana prudentiam magis magisque miremur, and
nos ejus potentissimo nutu a maledicorum hominum petulantia tutos esse
gratulemur.

This writing having been published at Paris, in the year 1633. the same Jesuit
John Floid, who under the name of a Canon of S. Omer called Hermannus
Loemelius, had composed two horrible books against the Bishops of France, and
the Sorbonne, one intitl'd, Querimonia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and the other
Spongia, and a third against M. the Archbishop of Paris, entitled, Appendix ad
Illustrissimum Dominum Episcopum Parisiensem; he added a fourth in defense of
this Decree of the Inquisition, entitled Defensio Decreti. But this last book
was censured at Paris with the three other, on November. 29. 1643. by a numerous
Assembly of Bishops, who renewed their first Censure against the books of
England, adding thereunto the true names of the Jesuits who composed them, for
that F. Alegambe had acknowledged in his Bibliotheca of the Writers of the
Society that F. Edward Knot, the English Jesuit, whose true name was Matthias
Wilson, was the Author of that which went under the name of Nicholas Smith; and
that F. John Floid, another English Jesuit, was the Author of that which bore
the name of Daniel a Jesu, as well as of the four other which had been put
forth under the name of Loemelius, in opposition to the Censures passed upon
them, and which Alegambe by strange impudence dares to affirm, were written
Contra Novatores. Behold the express words of what was then decreed thereupon
by the said Assembly of Prelates, and printed at Paris by M. Vitre in the year
1644.

A Process Verbal of the Assembly of my LL. the Cardinals, Archbishops and
Bishops, held at Paris on Sunday the 29th of November. 1643. at two a clock in
the afternoon, in the house of my L. Cardinal Mazarin, who was President of the
said Assembly, in which were my LL. the Archbishops of Ambrun, Sens, Bourdeaux,
Tours, Rheims, my LL. the Bishops of Amiens, Senlis, Valence, Chalon, Air,
Maillezais, Riez, Dol, Usez, Meaux, Nismes, Bazas, Utique Coadjutor of
Montauban, Grass, Lavaur, Toulon, Rennes, S. Brieu, du Puy, Chartres, the
nominated Coadjutor of Sens, the nominated Bishop of Boulogne.
IN the year 1632. notice was taken of two books brought out of England in the
English Language against my L. the Bishop of Chalcedon, sent by his Holiness
into England, with power to perform there all the Functions of Ordinaries: The
said books being come to the knowledge of our Lords the Prelates, who were then
at the Court about the important affairs of their Diocesses, they gave order
for the same to be translated into Latin and French, and afterward took the
pains to examine the same themselves, and caused them to be examined by many
persons of great intelligence and capacity. And after a very exact and faithful
examination, the said books were censured; one under the name of Discussio
modesta Nicolai Smithaei; and the other, Apologia Danielis a Jesu. My L. the
Archbishop of Paris could not then assemble his Provincial Council, for that
the Bishop of Meaux was not able to repair thither by reason of his old age,
and the Bishop of Orleans was yet but nominated to that Bishopric; and
therefore he summoned the Bishop of Chartres to his house, and Messieurs le
Blanc, and Guyard, his Grand Vicars, Charton his Penitentiary, Du Val,
Isambert, and Lescot, the Kings Professors of Divinity, Habert his Theologal,
Messier Commissary for the examination of the Priests of his Diocese, all
Doctors in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, and censured the said books. The
Faculty of Paris also gave their Doctrinal Sentence upon all the Articles in
particular, which were to be condemned in the said books, with qualification of
every Proposition: The said Censures were sent abroad by order of the said LL.
Prelates, together with a circular Letter. This gave occasion to the said
English to compose four other books in confirmation of the Doctrine of the
former; namely, 1. Hermanni Loemelii Spongia. 2. Querimonia Ecclesiae
Anglicanae. 3. Appendix ad Illustrissimum Dominum Archiepiscopum Parisiensem.
4. Defensio Decreti. All four under the name of Hermannus Loemelius, whose true
name is Floid. There is no injury or contumely which he does not vomit against
my LL. the Prelates, the Faculty, and the said Censures. Hereupon our said LL.
Prelates assembled again, to continue their condemnation against the said four
books, which they apprehended as well as the two first, to be composed by
Jesuits; whereof when the said Jesuits were advertised, they delivered a
Disavowry, wherein they declare the said books not to be composed by any of
their Society, being displeased that such questions had ever been propounded.
The said Disavowry was made at Paris the 23 of March, 1633. signed by De la
Salle, Superior of the Professed House, Stephen Binet, Rector of the College
of Clermont, Julian Haineufve, Rector of the Novitiate, and Claudius Maillan,
the Kings Confessor. Now though this Disavowry did not fully satisfy the said
Lords, yet for that they were lovers of peace, they were contented with it for
that time: But they were much astonished when they saw in a book entitled
Bibliotheca Scriptorum Societatis Jesu, Auctore Philippo Alegambe ex eadem
Societate Jesu, printed at Antwerp apud Joannem Meursium, Anno 1643. The
Authors of the said Tracts named by their right names, and acknowledged to be
Jesuits; and that in the said Bibliotheca they are named with Elogiums, and
that they speak contemptuously of our LL. the Prelates, and the rest who
censured the said two first books, and which is worse, that in the Index of the
Contents, they place under the head of books written against Heretics two of
Floid's books; namely, Querimonia and Spongia, though they are composed against
our LL. the Prelates, Messieurs of the Faculty of Paris, and against their
Censures. This gave occasion to our said LL. to assemble again, and after
several Conferences, they have thought meet to send again into the Provinces
the said Censures, under the names of their right Authors, who are Edward Knot
(whose true name is Matthias Wilson, who was formerly Censured under the name
of Nicholas Smith) and John Floid, who was likewise Censured under the name of
Daniel a Jesu, both Jesuits, if the said Alegambe in his Catalogue be not
mistaken in this particular, as it is said he is in other things; the Jesuits
of France still persisting at the present in the Disavowry which they
heretofore delivered, that the said Authors are not of their Society, and that
they cannot answer for the fact of the said Alegambe, who is the King of
Spain's Subject; and also to declare the said four books contumelious,
injurious against the Honor and Dignity of my LL. the Prelates in general, and
of the Archbishop of Paris in particular, and of the Doctors of the Faculty of
Paris; besides that, they contain the same Doctrine formerly Censured in the
two other, etc.

It is good to observe touching the abovementioned Disavowry of the Jesuits,
that some more intelligent persons found that they had made use of an
Equivocation, according to their custom: For having set down this Title, The
Disavowry of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus in France; they said in the
sequel, that the said books were not made by any of their Society, meaning [in
France] with reference to the Title, because they were made by English
Jesuits. Moreover, the Bishops had so little regard to the said Disavowry,
that in the same printed piece wherein they speak of it, they renew their
ancient Censure against the books of England, with this Title:

Epistola Archiepiscoporum and Episcoporum Parisiis nunc agentium, ad
Archiepiscopos and Episcopos Regni Galliae super animadversione duorum
libellorum quorum tituli sunt; Prioris quidem, Modesta and brevis discussio
aliquarum assertionum Doctoris Kellisoni in tractatu de Ecclesiastica
Hierarchia. Auctore Edvardo Knotto Jesuitarum Anglorum Viceprovinciali, sub
ementito nomine Nicolai Smithaei. Posterioris vero, Apologia pro modo
procedendi S. Sedis Apostolicae in regendis Angliae Catholicis tempore
persecutionis. Auctore Joanne Floido Jesuita Anglo sub falso nomine Danielis a
Jesu, Jussu Cleri denuo in lucem edita.
Universis per Galliam constitutis Reverendiss. Patribus Archiepiscopis and
Episcopis Dominis and Fratribus nostris Religiosi ssimis, Archiepiscopi and
Episcopi Parisiis variis de causis agentes, salutem in D.
Limits habet Jurisdictio Episcoporum, non habet charitas: omnes illud
Apostoli usurpare and possumus and debemus: Instantia mea quotidiana solicitudo
omnium Ecclesiarum; quis infirmatur and ego non infirmor? quis scandalizatur
and ego non uror? Itaque veteri atque Apostolico instituto, si qua in nostris
Paroeciis schismata oriuntur aut haereses, auctoritate compescimus; si alibi,
medemur amore, qui tum demum Christo dignus est animarum nostrarum Episcopo,
cum omnes complectitur, sicut pro omnibus ille mortuus est. Huc accedit quod
ubi de errore agitur, qui spectar Ecclesiam, sibi prospicit qui aliena curat:
serpit enim ut cancer error istiusmodi, and merito cum unum inficit, omnes
terret. His de causis factum est, Fratres Reverendissimi, ut nostra fuerimus
arbitrati quae essent Anglorum, nec minus miserandae istius Ecclesiae vulnera
sensetimus, quam si nobis ipsis essent inflicta. Cum enim accepissemus allatos
ex ea Insula libellos duos quos linguae periti dicerent pestilentis doctrinae
esse plenissimos, concurrimus velut ad sedandum domesticum incendium, quotquot
in hoc orbis theatro versabamur Episcopi, and donatos Latinitate excussimus
diligentissime ac recensuimus, iisque tandem inussimus stigmatis, quibus facile
a scriptis probae ac sanae doctrinae discernerentur. Atque hoc judicium nostrum
ad vos mittere visum est, Fratres Reverendiss. ut quorum una est causa, unus
spiritus, una charitas, unus quoque sermo sit ac sententia. Neque enim ullo
modo dubitamus, quin ea quae damnanda censuimus, sitis damnaturi, and eandem
fidem eadem doctrina totis animis professuri.

Primum autem in iis libellis finis ipse ac scopus summopere displicuit. Id
enim agunt potissimum, eoque collimant, ut quam Dominus auctoritatem Episcopis
attribuit, elevent quam maxim ac deprimant. Tum vero per Episcoporum latus,
non Divinum tantummodo confirmationis Sacramentum, sed and Ecclesiae
Hierarchiam, qua nihil sub coelo est augustius, and ipsum Petri Successorem
Apostolorum Coryphaei supremumque Christi in terris Vicarium non obscure
petunt. Innumeris denique propositionibus scatent quae infelici isti scopo
aptissime nimiumque respondeant. Nam in priore quidem libro falsae,
praesumptuosae, temerariae, antiquissimo Parochorum instituto contrariae,
Christianae plebis ac simpliciorum hominum saluti perniciosae leguntur
innumerae. Non paucae autem erroneae, in sacrum Episcoporum ordinem
contumeliosae, and quae in hoc videantur scriptae, ut institutam a Christo
Ecclesiae Hierarchiam aut evertant funditus, aut certe perturbent. Quaedam
etiam deprehenduntur quae sacrosancto Dei verbo, and Oecumenicorum Conciliorum
auctoritati sunt contrariae, imo quae haeresim si non aperte exponant legentium
oculis, certe innuant.

Posterior vero libellus crassiora habet omnia, and blasphemat simplicius. Nam
praeterquam quod eadem penitus in eo peccantur quae in superiore reprehendimus,
propositiones praeterea ejus long plurimas periculosas, seditiosas, impias,
and quae in anarchiam atque ordinis confusionem maxim propendeant, vel fautor
auctoris atque amicus dixerit, si modo honoris Christi ac Catholicae veritatis
fuerit studiosus. Ad haec non paucae leguntur schismaticae, blasphemae, in
Sacramentum confirmationis contumeliosissimae, ac summi ipsius Pontificis
supremi secundum Christum fidelium Patris auctoritatem convellentes. Nonnullas
etiam est animadvertere quae verbo Dei abutantur, idque ad impios sensus
detorqueant, imo quae aperte (quod non sine gemitu referimus) sint haereticae.

Atque haec hactenus, Fratres Reverendissimi, a nobis fuerint animadversa id
cogitantibus quo facti nostri rationem ipse Dei Spiritus videtur reddere, Super
muros tuos Jerusalem constitui custodes, tota die and tota nocte in perpetuum
non tacebunt. Ab iis enim quidem certe custodibus absunt quam longissime canes
muti non valentes latrare, atque host in Dei domum irrumpente dormientes. Jam
vero si (quod optandum quidem sit) erronei isti libelli ad vos non pervenerint,
quae potissimum damnanda judicavimus in iis, cum videbitur, legetis, quae nobis
jubentibus Ecclesiasticarum nostrarum rerum Agentes huic junxerunt Epistolae.
Incolumes felicesque vos Dei misericordia tueatur, Fratres Religiosissimi,
meritoque honorandi ac suspiciendi Domini. Datum Lutetiae decimo Februarii,
anno Incarnationis Domini millesimo sexcentesimo trigesimo primo. Ainsi sign,
Andreas Antiq. Arch. Bituricensis. Claudius Arch. Narbonensis. Octavius Arch.
Senonensis. Dominicus Arch. Auxitanensis. Joannes Episc. Vasatensis, and nom.
Arch. Arelatensis. Philippus Episc. Nannetensis. Alphonsus Episc. Albiensis.
Iacobus Episc. Sagiensis. Sebastianus Episc. Lingonensis. Guillelmus Episc.
Lexoviensis. Ioachimus Episc. Claromontanus. Aegidius Episc. Altissiodorensis.
Augustinus Ep. and Comes Bellovacensis. Raphael Episc. Digniensis. Henricus
Episc. Tarsensis, Coadj. Abrincensis. Franciscus Episc. Ambianensis. Leonorius
Ep. Carnotensis. Renatus Episc. Leonensis. Stephanus Episc. Dardaniensis.
Emericus Episc. Lucionensis. Simon Episc. Suessionensis. Henricus Episc.
Noviomensis. Aegidius Episc. Adurensis. Franciscus Episcopus Lemovicensis.
Silvester Episc. Mimatensis. Martinus Episc. Madaurensis, Suffr. Metensis. F.
Ludovicus Episc. Regiensis. Ioannes Episc. Gracensis. Leonorius nom. Episc.
Constantiensis. Nicolaus nom. Episc. Aurelianensis. Nicolaus nom. Episc.
Vasatensis. Gaspardus nom. Episc. A gennensis. Dominicus Episc. Bononiensis.
Iacobus nom. Episc. Xanctonensis.

De mandato Illustriss. and Reverendiss. DD. Antistitum. De Bertet Juris
utriusque Doctor, Protonot. S. Apost. Sedis, Prior Mosteriensis and S.
Saturaini. De Sariac Abbas de Paimpon and de Lescal-Dieu.
Agentes in rebus universis Cleri Gallicani.

In the same Collection printed by M. Vitre, by order of the Clergy, is seen
the Extract out of F. Alegambe, which clearly shows, that those wicked books of
England, and the others published in defense of them, were made by Jesuits. It
is subjoined here, as it was taken out of the said Collection. Page 65.

An Extract out of a Book entitled Bibliotheca Scriptorum Societatis Jesu,
Auctore Philippo Alegambe, ex eadem Societate, infolio, Antuerpiae apud Joannem
Meursium, 1643. Approved by the General, and other Divines of the Society.
Page 99.

EDvardus Knottus, vero nomine Matthias Wilsonus, natione Anglus, patria
Northumber, vir eximiae doctrinae and aptissimae ad gubernandum mansuetudinis,
diu Romae in Anglorum Collegio juventutem educavit, deinde Anglicanae
Provinciae nostrae extra Angliam egit Viceprovincialem, nunc Anglicanae
Provinciae praepositus est. Scripsit doctissimum libellum qui sub nomine
Nicolai Smithaei est editus hac epigraphe;

Modesta and brevis discussio aliquarum assertionum D. Doctoris K^llisoni quas
in suo de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia tractatu probare conatur. Ex Anglico in
Latinum a Georgio Wrigtho conversa; and plurimis Doctorum atque adeo
Catholicarum Universitatum suffragiis approbata. Impressa Antuerpiae in
Officina Plantiniana Balthazaris Moreti 1631. in 12.

Ejusdem sunt etiam

Qualificatio charitativa Inquisitionis brevis in Disquisitionem praedictam.

Defensio Nicolai Smithaei adversus Replicam contra eandem discussionem.

Charitas propugnata contra Doctorem Potterum. Audomari 1634. in 4.

Christianitas propugnata adversus Replicam Chiling Worthii. Audomari 1638. in
4.

Directio praevia ad eundem. Londini 1636. in 8.

In the same book page 242.

Ioannes Floidus, natione Anglus, patria Cantabrigiensis, post studia Romae in
Anglorum Collegio coepta, Societati se addixit anno salutis 1592. Missus
postmodum in Angliam, captus atque in exilium pulsus est. Docuit complutes
annos Theologiam in Lovaniensi Anglorum Collegio, jamque Audomari scribendis
libris intendit.

Sub nomine H. L scripsit

Opuscula aliquot quibus Regimen Catholicorum in Anglia a Sancta Sede
Apostolica institutum propugnat, and Decretum Sacrae Congregationis ad Indicem
librorum deputatae contra contumaces quosdam in Gallia defendit.

Et sub nomine Danielis a Jesus.

Apologiam Sanctae Sedis Apostolicae quoad modum procedendi circa Regimen
Catholicorum in Anglia, primum Anglice, dein Latin Rhotomagi 1631 in 8.

In the Table of the Contents of the same book, under the Head or Title,
Theologia Polemica, seu controversiae cum Haereticis.

Page 496.

Ioannis Floidi, Synopsis Apostasiae M. Antonii de Dominis.

And after the enumeration of some other Treatises against that Heretic, he
adds,

Ecclesiae Anglicanae Querimonia and Spongia pro Regimine Catholicorum in
Anglia; in hoc argumento alta opuscula contra Crashan: contra Hobby: contra
Novatores.

A Manuscript, whereof the Original is in the Library of the Augustines at
Rome, containing sundry Resolutions passed by the Consultors of the famous
Congregation de Auxiliis, wherein the principal difficulties concerning Grace
are determined against Molina, and according to the judgment of S. Augustin's
Disciples. It is mentioned Part. 3. Chap. 8.
THe Original of this Manuscript contained fourteen leafs of paper sowed
together, in each of which was set down one of the fourteen Resolutions
following, with the names and Subscriptions of the Consultors who signed them,
all the rest of each leaf remaining white. Upon the backside were written
these Italian words, Capia d' alcune propositioni giudicate erronee dalla
Congregatione ordinata da N. S. (i. e.) a Copy of certain Propositions judged
erroneous by the Congregation ordained by our H. Father. The Resolutions
themselves follow.

I.
DIcere Ex Ludovico Molina in concord. q. 14. a. 13. d. 3. Sect. Textis. d. 16.
Sect. Explicandae. d. 19 n. 3. Sect. Tertia.
quod in statu naturae lapsae vires naturales liberi arbitrii eaedem prorsus
seu tales secundum se in nobis manserint, quales illas essemus habituti si homo
fuisset conditus in statu mere naturali ad finem tantum naturalem, quasi
peccatum primi hominis non nisi in supernaturalibus nocuisset ejus posteris:
adversatur doctrinae in Ecclesia, In epistola Caelestini 1. c. 4. and in Conc.
Araus. c. 13. and 25.
cum olim contra Pelagianos cocumque reliquias definitae ac defensae, tum
novissime in Concilio Tridentino Sessione 6. cap. 1.
confirmatae, quando agendo de vi naturae express tracitur liberum arbitrium
viribus esse attenu^tum and inclinatum.

Est and hoc conform antiquis definitionibus, and doctrinae in Ecclesia semper
traditae, and creditae, quod in eodem Sess. 6. c. 1. and can. 5.
Concilio contra Haereticos hujus temporis declaratur atque definitur, liberum
arbitrium post Adae peccatum non esse extinctum aut amissum. Quod quia
similiter intelligitur quoad vires conditionis suae naturalis, ideo huic
definitioni non repugnat, quod liberum arbitrium spectando vires, quas ex
largitione gratiae accepit, dicatur amissum ac perditum: Quomodo non repugnat
quod retenta liberate naturali libertas gratiae dicatur periisse.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita est, Archiepiscopus
Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Fr. Julius Santuccius Episcopus
S. Agatha Gothorum. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita
sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Ita sentio D. Anastasius
a Brixia Abbas Farsensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Baptista de Plumbino Ord. S. Aug.
Prior Generalis. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel Secretar. Ita censco
Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Religiosus S. Dionysii in Francia and Doctor in Facult.
Theol. Parisiensi.


II.
DIcere Ex. Mol. q. 23 art. 4. and 5. d. 1. memb. 8. and in editione Antuerpiae
m. 9. Sect. His omnibus.
quod parvuli, cum post judicii diem resumpserint sua corpora, liberabuntur
supernaturaliter ab omnibus molestiis and aerumnis quibus in hac mortali vita
subjacemus, melioremque in naturalibus vitam vitio omni mentis and corporis
immunem in perpetuas aeternitates ducent, quam ullus unquam mortalium duxerit,
temerarium est, nimiumque accedens ad illum ab Ecclesia Dei errorem S. Aug. ep.
106 commemorat hunc errorem inter illos qui damnati fuerunt in Conc. Palaest.
and de eodem habet lib. de haer. c. 8. and alias saepe.
semper habitum, adeoque in Pelagiano and Caelestiano dogmate condemnatum, quo
dicebantur parvuli etiamsi non baptizentur, ideoque exclusi maneant a regno
caelorum, aeternam ac beatam quandam vitam, sed extra caelum habere.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita est, Archiepiscopus
Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Fr. Julius Sanctuccius
Episcopus S. Agathae Gothorum. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus
Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Ita
censeo D. Anastasius Abbas S. Mariae Farfensis Ord. S. Bened. Ita censeo Fr.
Io. Bapt. de Plumbino Ord. Eremit. S. Aug. Prior Generalis. Ita censeo
Gregorius Nunnius Coronel Secretarius. Ita censeo Fr. Iacobus le Bossu
Religiosus S. Dionysit in Francia, and Doctor in Facultate Theol. Parisiensi.


III.
DIcere Ex M^lina q. 14. a 13. d. 5. Sect. Ut ad. and Sect. Verum.
quod in statu naturae lapsae homo solo concursu Dei generali absque alio dono
vel auxilio gratiae possit efficere opus bonum morale quod fini naturali
hominis accommodatum atque comparatione illius sit vere bonum, veraeque
virtutis opus referendo illud in Deum naturaliter cognitum; id doctrinae illi
contradicit, qua contra reliquias Pelagianismi olim definitum, In Conc. Araus.
c. 25.
quod post peccatum primi hominis nullus operari propter Deum quod bonum est
possit, nisi gratia eum and misericordia Divina praevenerit. Ex qua tamen
doctrina nequaquam sequitur omne opus quod sine speciali gratia fit ab homine
etiam infideli esse peccatum.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Non placet censura seu
propositio, nisi intelligatur quoad opera ardua and difficilia. Archiepiscopus
Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis and C. Assero hanc propositionem verificari
nedum de opere arduo, sed etiam de bono ornato omnibus circumstantiis. Fr.
Julius Sanctuccius Episcopus S. Agathae Gothorum. Ita sentio ut in censura,
Laelius Landus Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio ut in censura, Fr. Hieron.
Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Placet mihi propositio ut jacet in censura,
Anastasius Abbas Farfensis. Placet propositio, modo addatur ly arduum cum
debitis circumstantiis and ab homine posse fieri opera praesentis vitae ex sola
facultate naturali. Fr. Io. Bapt. de Plumbino Ord. Etemit. S. Aug. Prior
Generalis. Approbo censuram propositionis, Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel
Secretarius. Approbo simpliciter censuram, imo dico esse duplicem malitiam
propositionis. Vnam quod possit homo sine gratia facere bonum opus; alteram
quod possit illud refer in Deum. Ego Fr. Jacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


IV.
QUi dixerit Ex Molina q. 14. a. 13. d. 10. Sect. Illud. d. 4. Sect. Post haec.
and Sect. Illud tamen. d. 19. m. 3. Sect. Ad quartum.
quod quotiescunque homo ex viribus naturalibus sui arbitrii cum solo concursu
generali Dei facit, seu conatu facere, praestove est ad faciendum seu conandum
totum id quod ex sese potest circa ea quae ad justificationem pertinent, Deus
ipsi conferat gratiam praevenientem auxiliave quibus id faciat ut oportet ad
salutem; errat, and supponendo posse hominem aliquid facere seu conari sine
gratia Dei quod ad justificationem consequendam pertinet, and humano operi seu
conatui ex negotio justificationis gratiam Dei reipsa subjiciendo.

Et qui quamvis verbo addat, quod homo, eo conatu, seu opere non efficiatur
dignus talibus auxiliis, ullaque ratione ea promereatur, attamen dixerit, quod
inter leges, quas Christus Dominus cum Patre aeterno constituit de auxiliis and
donis, quae nobis promeruit, mere gratis conferendis, una eaque rationi maxim
consentanea hominibus subveniendi fuerit, ut quoties ex nostris viribus
naturalibus conaremut facere quod in nobis est, praesto nobis essent auxilia
gratiae, quibus ea ut oportet ad salutem efficeremus, ut ea ratione dum essemus
in via, semper in manu liberi arbitrii nostri posita esset salus nostra; errat.

Item qui dixerit, quod Deus saepe etiam ob Christi merita liberum nostrum
arbitrium quasi sopitum and torpens omnino excitat, id ita exponendo, sive
intelligendo, tanquam non semper, sive non in omnibus gratia praeveniat conatum
liberi arbitrii, sed in aliquibus liberum arbitrium conatu suo praeveniat
gratiam circa ea quae ad justificationem consequendam pertinent; gravissime
errat contra doctrinam quae ex Scripturis sacris olim definita contra
Pelagianos eorumque reliquias, and hactenus tradita a probatis maxim in
Ecclesia Dei Doctoribus. Juxta quam doctrinam firmissime est tenendum et
docendum, quod omne opus, omnisque conatus liberi arbitrii ad justificationem
et salutem consequendam pertinens, a gratia Dei per Christi merita ad id
movente praevenitur. Quippe quae gratia ut definitum est Ex Conc. Araus. c. 6.
non operantibus seu conantibus sine ipsa, sed ut per ipsam operentur et
conentur homines quae oportet ad salutem, datur. E^ sic datur sine lege et
condition, q^a vel ullis detur Ex S. Prosp. lib. 1 de voc. gent. c. 9.
intuitu alicujus operis, seu conatus, cum nihil ex se operari seu conari
possint homines quod prosit ad gratiam obtinendam, vel qua nullis non detur qui
qualecunque sit quod ex se summum possunt, operantur, et conantur. S. Aug. lib.
de Pecc. merit. and rem. c. 22.
Verum Dei gratia et Spiritus, qui ubi vult spirat, ob hoc omne ingenii genus
in filiis misericordiae non praeterit. Item omne ingenii genus in gehennae
filiis praeterit, ut qui 2 Corinthians. c. 10. v. 17.
gloriatur, in Domino glorietur. Ac sicut generaliter omnes declinaverunt simul
inutiles facti sunt, Non est qui Ad Romans 3. v. 12. ex Conc. Araus. c. 8.
faciat bonum, non est usque ad unum: Sic et in omnibus omnino hominibus, qui
operantur seu conantur aliquid pertinens ad salutem, gratia praevenit omne
ejusmodi opus et conatum.

These Resolutions end at the bottom of the Page, and the Subscriptions are
folio verso.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Fr. Julius
Sanctuccius Episcopus S. Agathae Gothorum. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus
Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Ita
sentio Anastasius Abbas S. Mariae Farfensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Bapt. de
Plumbino Ord. Erem. S. Aug. Prior Generalis. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius
Coronel Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr. Jacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


V.
QUi dixerit hominem ex facultate liberi sui arbitrii cum solo concursu
generali Dei posse iis quae credenda sunt assentiti, tanquam a Deo revelatis,
and quia a Deo revelata sunt, quando proponuntur and explicantur adhibitis
argumentis quae afferri solent, ut homines merito sibi persuadeant ea revelata
esse a Deo, and jussa credi, and accedente externa vocatione ad fidem per
concionatores aliosque Ecclesiae ministros, errat.

Qui dixerit similiter posse praeexistente assensu hoc in intellectu elicere
actum sperandi a Deo, quae ab eo revelata ac promissa sunt nobis, errat.

Qui dixerit similiter posse elicere actum absolutum dilectionis Dei super
omnia, placendi Deo in omnibus, and propositum absolutum servandi mandata omnia
naturalia obligantia sub peccato letali, errat.

Qui dixerit similiter posse praeexistente maxim lumine fidei, qua Dei
beneficia cum naturae tum gratiae, praemia justis and supplicia impiis
proposita agnoscimus, elicere ex Dei timore actum attritionis cum spe veniae,
and ex Dei amore actum contritionis de peccatis commissis cum proposito non
peccandi amplius letaliter, errat, etiamsi dicat actus ejusmodi esse mere
naturales.

Qui dixerit hominem postquam edoctus fuerit auxilium gratiae supernaturale
sibi esse necessarium ad justificationem and salutem, similiter posse illud
optare, desiderare, petere sibi donari, and satagere se disponere ad illud
recipiendum, errat contra doctrinam qua constat revelatum esse in Scripturis
sacris actus illos, prout jam descripti sunt, esse dona Dei per Christi gratiam
and merita, idque ab ipsa prima in iis cogitatione, ideoque ab Ecclesia merito
definitum esse non posse eos fieri sine speciali Dei adjutorio. Quae and deinde
doctrina in Ecclesia Dei tam severe definita, and constanter asserta, ut si
quis affirmaret hominem per naturae vigorem sine praeveniente Spiritus Sancti
gratia posse aliquem ex iisdem actibus operari seu conari sicut oportet, sive
ut expedit, quod est operari seu conari secundum circumstantias omnes debitas
ab homine in ejusmodi actibus adhiberi ad misericordiam seu justificationem
consequendam, is and in antiquis definitionibus contra Pelagianos eorumque
reliquias haeretico falli spiritu pronunciatus fuerit, and novissime in
Concilio Tridentino contra calumnias Haereticorum hujus temporis eandem
doctrinam confirmando, anathemate feriatur.

In qua definitione cum dicitur hominem non posse per --

These nine words are the last legible at the bottom of this page, and probably
were the beginning of some Observation which Petrus Lombardus thought to have
added, for they are of his hand and besides these, there are two or three more
which cannot be read.

The Subscriptions following are on the backside of the same page.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Fr. Julius
Sanctuccius Episcopus S. Agathae Gothorum. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus
Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Ita
sentio Anastasius Abbas Farfensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Bapt. a Plumbino Ord.
Erem. S. Aug. Prior Generalis. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel.
Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr. Jacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


VI.
QUi dixerit in homine post lapsum talem esse libertatem ad quamcunque
tentationem seu difficultatem cum solo concursu generali Dei in quocunque
temporis momento superandum, quam pro servanda in quolibet ejusmodi instanti
lege naturali necesse sit vincere, etiamsi ea de causa mors sit toleranda, ut
si consentiat ideo peccet, quia secluso quocunque alio majori auxilio in
potestate ipsius positum est non transgredi tunc legem and non transgrediendo
victoriam comparare, errat.

Qui dixerit hominem posse, etsi non sine ingenti difficultate vincere ex solis
viribus naturalibus singulas tentationes, quantumvis graves and molestas,
dummodo non longo tempore durent, gratiam vero tantum esse necessariam ad
facilius, vel solum ad superandas omnes simul exsurgentes concupiscentias ne
decursu temporis vincamur, adversatur Ecclesiasticis definitionibus de
imbecillitate naturae humanae post lapsum ad tentationes superandas.

Juxta quas definitiones declaramus Ex S. Aug. l. 21. de Civitate Dei c. 16.
tenendum ac docendum, quia tunc victa vitia deputanda sunt cum Dei amore
vincuntur, quem nisi Deus ipse non donat, nec aliter nisi per mediatorem Dei
and hominum hominem Iesum Christum; id circo in vitiis and illicitis
concupiscen^iis evincendis, in diaboli infidiis superandis, and tam in
resistendo quam in succumbendo quibuscunque tentationibus; Ex S. Aug. ep. 106.
Ubi refert decretum hac de re Conc. Palaestini.
licet habeat homo libertatem, id est liberum usum propriae voluntatis, tamen
ad vincendam seu superandam quamcumque tentationem, ita nimirum, ut praeceptum
circa quod tentatur quispiam servetur propter Deum, id est, ne offendatur Deus,
non sufficient vires naturales liberi arbitrii, sed necessarium est
quotidianum, id est continuo seu contra tentationes singulas subministratum
adjutorium specialis gratiae Dei, idque non tantum ad facilius and melius
comparandam victoriam and servandum praeceptum, sed quoniam ad ejusmodi
observationem and victoriam adjutorium istud simpliciter est necessarium, juxta
id quod olim a Sede Apostolica Ab Innocentio 19 ep: ad Patres Conc: quae est 91
inter epistolas S: Augustini: Et a Caelest: I in ep: ad Episcopos Galliae pro
SS: Prospero and Hilario.
responsum est in hac causa, necesse est ut quo auxiliante vincamus, eo iterum
non adjuvante vincamur.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Archiepiscopus Fr. Io.
de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus Neritonensis.
Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus.


The four following Subscriptions are folio verso.

Ita sentio Anastasius Abbas Farfensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Bapt. de Plumbino,
Prior Ord. S. Aug. Ita censeo Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel. Secretarius. Ita
sentio Ego Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


VII.
QUi dixerit gratiam qua Deus operatur in nobis velle and perficere, non sic
movere nostram voluntatem, ut ex virtute motionis Dei per eam operantis sit
infallibile, quod actu consentiamus and operemur; errat.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Idem sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Laelius Landus
Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus
Bisontinus. Ita sentio Anastasius Abbas Farfensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Baptista
de Plumbino Ord. S. Aug. Prior Generalis. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius
Coronel. Secretarius. Ita censeo Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


VIII.
This Article is written by the hand of Coronel.
QUi dixerit gratiam istam ad volendum and operandum quae pertinent ad salutem,
aut non esse ita efficacem ut praeveniendo voluntatem nostram ipsam vera and
reali efficientia praemoveat and faciat velle atque operari, aut sine ea posse
aliquem actu velle and operari; errat.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis, etc. Ita sentio Laelius
Landus Episcopus Neritonensis. Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus
Ita sentio. Ita sentio Anastasius Abbas Farfensis. Ita sentio Fr. Io. Bapt. de
Plumbino Prior Ord. S. Aug. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel.
Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


IX.
So also is this.
QUi dixerit gratiam efficacem excitare, allicere, invitare, and suadere
voluntatem, non tantum ita ut Deus efficienter moveat voluntatem ipsam ad
consentiendum, sed ipsa jam consentiente and cooperance simul cum ea influat
tantum in actum; errat.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Laelius Landus
Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus
Bisontinus. Ita sentio D. Anastasius Abbas Farfensis Secretarius. Ita est, Fr.
Io. Bapt. a Plumbino Prior Ord. S. Aug. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius
Coronel. Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


X.
And this.
QUi dixerit Deum per auxilium gratiae suae, and liberum hominis arbitrium
tanquam duas causas partiales se habere in negotio nostrae justificationis, ita
ut una ab altera non praemoveatur nec ab ea virtutem agendi recipiat; errat.

Qui dixerit efficaciam gratiae Dei, seu hoc quod est auxilium gratiae, esse
efficax, pendere a consensu and cooperatione liberi arbitrii hominis: aut
liberum hominis arbitrium suo consensu and cooperatione efficere auxilium
gratiae efficax: adversatur doctrinae Ex Concilio Araus. can. 4 and 5. and S.
Aug. ep. 107. ex Petr. Diac. cap. 9. ex Fulg. c. 18, 28, 29, 30. de Incarn. and
gratia.
qua ab Ecclesia Dei definitum est, Deum etiam in illis, quos vocat gratis, non
expectare eorum voluntates, seu consensum ad ipsos gratia sua adjuvandum, quasi
ab ipsorum libero arbitrio sic penderet, quod consentiant vocationi, aut velint
id, ad quod sunt vocati, ut Deus hoc in iis non operetur efficaci sua gratia,
sed ab iis expectet pro innata ipsis liberate.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Io. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis, etc. Ita sentio Laelius
Landus Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus
Bisontinus. Ita sentio D. Anastasius Abbas Farfensis Secretarius. Ita sentio
Fr. Io. Bapt. de Plumbino Ord. S. Aug. Prior. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius
Coronel. Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


XI.
This Article is of Coronel's handwriting.
QUi dixerit perseverantiam in bono usque ad finem vitae non esse ex tali
singulari Dei dono quo non solum dat quod quis perseverare possit, si velit,
sed etiam quo opetatur efficaciter, ut ex virtute ipsius doni, velit, and
perseveret: aut dixerit cum hoc dono non cohaerere arbitrii creati libertatom;
errat.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Rada Episcopus Pactensis, etc. Ita sentio Laelius Landus
Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus
Bisontinus. Ita sentio D. Anastasius Abbas Farfensis Secretarius. Ita sentio
Fr. Io. Bapt. de Plumbino Prior Ord. S. Aug. Ita sentio Fr. Gregorius Nunnius
Coronel. Secretar. Ita sentio Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sorbonicus.


XII.
QUi dixerit Deum ab aeterno non ita constituisse, proposuisse, praedefinisse,
seu praedeterminasse illos omnes and singulos consensuros, credituros,
operaturos, and perseveraturos, quicunque in tempore Deo vocanti ad salutem
consentiunt, and consentientes credunt, operantur, and perseverant, ut decreto
absoluto, id est, quo absolute vult quod consentiant, credant, operentur, seu
perseverent, praeordinaverit unicuique eorum dare auxilium gratiae, cujus
virtutem seu motionem praescit tam esse efficacem ad subjiciendum sibi liberum
arbitrium ejus cui datur, ut ex ea certum sit, and infallibile, and
insuperabile, quod is consentiet, credet, operabitur, seu perseverabit, aut
ejusmodi decretum Dei absolutum seu efficacem motionem libertatem arbitrii
tollere vel ei adversari; errat.

These six lines were written by the hand of Petrus Lombardus.
Placet doctrina in propositione hac and sequentibus duabus comprehensa; sunt
tamen redigendae in breviorem formam, and paulo clarius exprimendum in quo
falsa sit ratio illius praescientiae conditionatorum, quam ante decretum Dei
ponit Molina.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Rada Episcopus Pactensis. Ita sentio Laelius Landus Episcopus
Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantus Episcopus Bisontinus. Ita
censeo D. Anastasius Abbas Farfensis Secretarius. Ita censeo Fr. Io. Bapt. de
Plumbino Prior Ord. S. Aug. Ita censeo Fr. Gregorius Nunnius Coronel. Secretar.
Ita censeo Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor Sosbonicus.


XIII.
QUi dixerit praescientiam Dei de hominum salute, seu quocunque illorum actu ad
salutem pertinente, fundari non in virtute auxilii, seu motionis efficacis ad
subdendum sibi arbitrium ejus cui datur, sed in praeviso usu humani arbitrii
pro sua liberate auxilio Dei utentis, vel non utentis, aut hujusmodi
praescientiam esse necessariam ad conciliandum inter se auxilium gratiae Dei,
and liberum usum humani arbitrii, errat, ponendo in Deo scientiam, quae nullum
prorsus habet, vel habere potest objectum.

XIV.
QUi dixerit praedestinationem electorum sic pendere ab ipsorum arbitrio, ut
non per efficaciam, seu virtutem auxiliorum, quae Deus sua praedestinatione
decrevit dare, fiat quod been iis utantur, sed quia Deus in praescientia sua
videns quibus auxiliis pro sua liberate been utentur electi, haec ipsis dare
decrevit; errat, in illud incidens, praedestinationem esse ex metitis hominum:
ita nimirum, ut gratia, qua adjuvantur homines ad consequendum effectum and
finem, ad quem sunt praedestinati, ideo iis detur, quia ipsi volunt usu illo
sui arbitrii, quem pro liberate sua adhibent, non autem ideo velint, quia per
gratiam adjuvantur.

A Writing made and published at Paris and Rome, in the year 1651. near two
years before the Popes Constitution came forth; showing, that the Propositions
were never absolutely maintained, but only in their reduction to the sense of
Effectual Grace; and that they were always considered as Propositions
maliciously contrived, to the end, that being condemned in their bad sense, the
Censure of them might be reflected upon S. Augustin's Doctrine.
THis Writing is spoken of in Part. 3. Chap. 7. and in diverse other places of
the Iournal, under the name of Our Latin Manifesto, and it is here subjoined.

Quinque propositionum de gratia quas Facultati Theologicae Parisiensi M.
Nicolaus Cornet subdole exhibuit prima Julii anni 1649. vera and Catholica
expositio juxta mentem Discipulorum Sancti Augustini.
BEati Augustini doctrina adversariorum suorum calumniis semper appetita est,
ac sub alienis and fictis ad libitum assertionibus ab iis reprehensa, quibus
hanc sub Augustini nomine ac veris sententiis aggredi temerarium and inane
visum est. Hinc test B. Prospero a Gallis, inde a quodam Vincentio contexta
Capitulorum prodigiosa mendacia, quae S. Augustino ejusque Discipulis inepte
affingerentur ad invidiam in eos excitandam.

Iansenius Episcopus nuper Iprensis illustrissimus B. Augustini Discipulus,
interpres, ac vindex, eandem cum Magistro suo sortem ab adversariis suis
expertus est, Praefatio D. Prosperi in responsione ad Capitula Gallor.
ut quae in ipsius libris damnabilia reperisse non obscure jactabant Molinae
patroni, brevium quinque propositionum indiculis praedicarent, talique commento
and detestationem ejus quem impeterent, obtinerent, and ab his quae infamassent
curam exterriti lectoris averterent.

Facultati primum Parisiensi in Sorbona prima Julii anno 1649. congregatae,
quinque hae propositiones sine ullius harum auctoris nomine ad examen adhibitae
sunt a M. Nicolao Cornet, nec auditae prius, quin statim S. Augustini Discipuli
eas prima duntaxat aliquatenus excepta pro libito fictas, nec ab Episcopo
sprensi, nec a quovis alio iisdem quibus conceptae sunt verbis assertas, atque
ex ambiguis and aequivocis vocibus callide concinnatas esse, and con^ra morem
omnem examini subjici conquesti sint. Non obscurum fuit nec ab ipsis Molinae
Patronis taceri potuit, non Iansenii modo opus, sed and Augustini doctrinam his
perversis and iniquis artibus ad judicium vocari, and paratam in utrumque licet
dissimulato nomine censuram, si quod animo magna futurorum fiducia conceperant
harum propositionum and molitionum architecti ad exitum perducerent. Atque haec
tam inique and fraudulenter, tam praeter morem omnem in Facultate Parisiensi
agi visa sunt, ut septuaginta Doctores intercesserint, provocaverineque ad
Sonatum; ut Senatusconsulto, partibus auditis die 5 Octobris anni 1649. cautum
fuerit, ne hae propositiones vocarentur ad examen, dum aliter provisum fuisset.
Ne tamen aequum examen and judicium effugisse putarentur S. Augustini
Discipuli, aequissimas and necessarias ad examen legitimum propositionum harum
doctrinaeque omnis de gratia conditiones positas ad calcem libri de gratia
Christi victrice, Facultati 1 Decembris ejusdem anni in Sorbona congregarae
exhibuerunt. Atque ita mala haec quorundam Consilia avertit Deus, actique
cuniculi dissilierunt in auctores suos. Ista in Facultate tempestas sedata est,
and causa omnis felicissimo tandem exitu communibus votis peracta finitaque
est: ipsoque Facultatis decreto unanimi Doctorum omnium suffragio 7 Decembris
ejusdem anni conclusum suit, non esse necesse procedere ad examen vel judicium
harum propositionum aliarumve de gratia and auxiliis divinis.

At ab iisdem Molinae patronis non abfuit nova audendi animus; itum est ad
alias arts; and Iesuitis praecipue procurantibus emendicatae sunt undique
subscriptiones hominum, eorumque maximam partem nullius auctoritatis, nullius
nominis, nullius doctrinae, quibus omnes and in Iansenii velut de haeresi
suspecti, and in quinque propositionum ut erronearum censuram consensisse
viderentur. Sed quod maxim dolendum est, auditur eos penes quos ipsius est
doctrinae arbitrium, iniquissimis calumniis compulsos esse ut de Episcopi
Iprensis opere apud sanctam Sedem conquerantur, ac ab ea quinque propositionum
judicium efflagitent, persuasi a Iesuitis, imo and a quibusdam e Doctoribus
Parisiensibus prae se ferentibus speciem scientiae and virtutis, quinque has
propositiones ab Episcopo Iprensi caeterisque Augustini Discipulis non modo in
terminis and ut jacent, verum and perverso sensu, and a B. Augustini
Conciliique Tridentini doctrina alieno propugnari, profitentibus iisdem eas ita
a se and summa fide depromptas ex ipso volumine Iansenii cujus nomini
pepercisse se dicerent. Atque cum hae propositiones ambiguis and aequivocis de
industria vocibus conceptae sententiam habeant ancipitem, atque hinc rectae and
sanae, inde perversae and erroneae doctrinae interpretationi subjaceant,
persuaderi se facile passi sunt quidam Episcopi Molinae defensorum calumniis
and artibus minus assueti, nec de re apud Sorbonam a biennio gesta satis
admoniti; and putarunt eum inesse sensum scriptis Doctoris Catholici, quem viri
minus simplices sub his quinque propositionibus fraudulenter exhibebant. Haec
sane opinio hos aliquos Episcopos pacis and veritatis zelo impulit, ut
Epistolae ad summum Pontificem subscriberent, qua harum quinque propositionum
judicium a Romana Sede exposcerent, quas ab Episcopo Iprensi assertas, in
Ecclesia subinde defensas, idque perverso and Tridentinis Patribus adverso
sensu non obscure praedicarent

Neminem latet syngrapham ab omnibus fere Galliae Episcopis omni art
quaesitam, negatam faisse a plurimis. Notum est in Cleri Gallicani Comitiis hac
in urbe cum Epistolam hanc Molinae defensores conscriberent, eidemque Episcopi
aliqui subscriberent, congregatis, nunquam hoc de negotio actum fuisse, cum
tamen id apud Clerum proponi, ventilati ac decerni causae ipsius ratio, ac
pondus, and consuetudo perpetua postularent. Compertum est etiam a multis magni
nominis Archiepiscopis and Episcopis cum in eam rem convenissent, voce apud
illustrissimum Sedis Apostolicae Nuncium, tum ab iisdem and multis aliis per
varias Epistolas apud Apostolicam Sedem expostulatum, and significatum minus
sibi placere subscriptionem illam Reverendissimorum suorum Fratrum. Demum
obscurum non est ab illis Episcopis nec communi judicio aut examine, nec
audito, ut par erat, ullo ex plutimis Doctoribus qui hac in causa adversus
Molinae patronos intercesserant, sed privatim a singulis quolibet in numero
sint, fuisse subscriptum. At quanto religiosior est apud S. Augustini
Discipulos reverentia universi Cleri Galliarum, tanto certe metuerunt impenhus
ne illius auctoritas vehementer iaederetur in hac causa, qua non alia gravior;
Catholicorumque Doctorum and Praesulum fama adversis rumoribus apud istos
Galliae Antistites afflaretur. Neque enim in unius caput haec faba cuditur, fed
in Doctores, sed in Ecclesiae Ptincipes omnes, sed in ipsius Augustini
proindeque in ipsius Apostolicae Sedis auctoritatem ac doctrinam, sed in ipsam
denique veritatem, in ipsam fidem, in ipsam Christi gratiam fraus ista
comparatur ab hominibus dolos and arts omnes quibus solis valent in unius
Molinae praesidium advocantibus. Rem itaque totam hanc Episcopis omnibus, vel
illis maxim qui ut iisdem Mosinistarum confiliis manum suam commodarent, dolis
and calumniis abducti sunt, Galliae toti, Romanae Sedi, Ecclesiae universae
retegere necessarium fuit.

Quam igitur perversa fide, quanta calumniandl libidine tentata sint haec ab
harum propositionum and molitionum auctoribus, facile comperient omnes cum duo
haec intelligent. Prius est, quinque has propositiones quarum judicium and
censura tam operose nunc exigitur, nusquam in terminis atque ut jacent, prima
duntaxat utcumque excepta, fuisse aut ab Episcopo Iprensi (cujus hac in part
and quod ad quinque illas propositiones spectat, tuendi necessitas modo
incumbit) aut a quoquam alio S. Augustini Discipulo assertas, sed fictas pro
nutu ab ipsis Molinae patronis, quales ad censuram facilius comparandam
excitandamque invidiam aptiores humana prudentia excogitavit. Atque has
propositiones fictas esse ad libitum tandiu constabit, quamdiu ubi and a quo ut
jacent assertae sint demonstratum non fuerit; Liber infamis cui titulus
Jansenius damnatus p. 162
quod a nemine hactenus, nisi mendaciter praestitum est nec praestari potest,
quam periculosum autem, quam iniquum, quam inusitatum est in Ecclesia,
propositiones a nullo auctore assertas, a nullo auditas, ad libi um fictas
examni subjicere?

Primam propositionem utcunque excipimus quae iisdem quidem verbis in Iprensis
Episcopi opere expressa, attamen a praecedentibus and consequentibus verbis
quae apud Iansenium planum and rectum Illius sensum declarant dolose avulsa,
sic exhibita est, ut obscura and ambigua penitus perversaeque interpretationi
obnoxia videatur, maxim vero Augustinianae doctrinae ignatis, proptereaque non
sine art and consilio dissimulatus locus est Iprensis Episcopi, ne scilicet,
quo sensu ibi asseritur ac exponitur, tota Augustiniana, hoc est, tota
Catholica, tota non alio sensu quam qui gratiae per se efficacis ad singulos
actus necessitatem exprimit, defensa deprehenderetur, ut non magis ab harum
propositionum auctoribus in veris quam in fictis fides desideran^a fit.

Posterius est quod spectat ad harum propositionum sensum, scilicet aequivocas
esse penitus and ambiguas omnes, proptereaque hinc rectae inde perversae, hinc
Catholicae inde erroneae and haereticae interpretationi obnoxias: possunt enim
ad gratiae victricis and per se efficacis ad singulos piae voluntatis motus
necessariae doctrinam singulae revocari: nec alio quam gratiae istius per se
efficacis sensu, aut ab Episcopo Iprensi quantum ex ejus operis lectione
innotescit, aut a quovis alio B. Augustini Discipulo defensae sunt, nusquam ab
iis ut jacent assertae, ut in libro de gratia Christi victrice in lucem nuper
emisso satis fuse and pespicue demonstratur. Atque ita necesse est ut harum
propositionum architecti cum has vocaverunt ad examen, vel de damnanda and
proscribenda gratia per se efficace ad singulos actus necessaria cogitaverint,
quod nemo consilium non exhorrescat: quis enim nisi impius ac profanus de
damnanda hae doctrina cogitet, quam S. Augustinus adversus Pelagianorum and
Semipelagianorum errores Ecclesia probante and applaudente universa certissime
constituit? Concilia definierunt, Seeds Apostolica confirmavit, quam S. Thomas
Scholae Dux ac Magister firmissime propugnavit: quam Schola illius universa,
totus Dominicanorum Ordo acerrime adversus Molinam defendit, Pelagiani erroris
aperte eos insimulans, qui necessitati gratiae per se efficacis adversantur:
quam Clemens VIII and Paulus V, ille scripto, uterque suffragio suo non semel
comprobavit: quam denique Congregatio de Auxiliis re totis december annis in
sessionibus amplius ducentis ventilata and expensa, partibus auditis;
praesentibus saepe Clemente VIII and Paulo V, frequentibus and censuris and
responsionibus sic asseruit, ut sententiam Molinae Jesuitae, qua gratia Christi
libero arbitrio subjicitur, and gratiae ex se efficacis ac praemoventis ad
singulos actus necessitas negatur, Semipelagianam and Pelagianam esse
saepissime pronunciaverit: atque erroris, Apostolico and solenni judicio
penitus damnandam esse and abolendam judicaverit, ut colligitur tum exactis
Congregationis de Auxiliis, tum ex historia Francisci de Pegna illustrissimi
Rotae Decani, cujus exemplum manu scriptum ex autographo quod habetur Romae,
certum and indubitatu^ apud clarissimum and eruditissimum virum Parisiis extat,
in libro de gratia Christi victrice aliqua ex part typis editum: sin vero
adversarii ab eo concilio and ea mente abesse purandi sunt (and absunt certe
Doctores omnes Parisienses quotquot sunt, ut ipsi palam and aperte profitentur)
necesse est ut perversos sensus ad quos hae propositiones torqueri possunt, nec
ab Episcopo Iprensi nec a quovis alio S. Augustini Discipulo assertos censurae
subjicere voluerint: quem conatum ut inanem and otiosum prorsus quis non
spernat? vel demum, quod credibile est, per aequivocarum assertionum censuram
ancipitem variis interpretationibus obnoxiam in animo habuerunt invidiam and
odium in Episcopum ^prensem and Sancti Augustini Discipulos concitare; vera
falsis involvere; Pelagianum errorem cum Catholica simul fide commiscere;
perturbare omnia; censuram ipsam ancipitem, hujus sibi judicium and
interpretationem arrogando, in quos libebit sensus inflectere, sibi hujus
censurae ancipitis tuendae praetextu quidvis audendi licentiam facere apud
imperitam multitudinem cui uni fallendae and deludendae student; totum Iprensis
Episcopi opus ut de errore vel de haeresi notatum conclamare; proscriptam si
Deo placet S. Augustini doctrinam, damnatos omnes illius desensores; sententiam
vero Molinae gratiam Divinam libero hominis lapsi arbitrio subjicientis, hoc
est, evacuantis gratiam and crucem Christi, comprobatam dicere. Quos in fidei
and gratiae Christianae causa dolos quis non detestetur? quae consilia in
Ecclesiae totius perturbationem and luctum, in fidei Catholicae perniciem, and
in haereticarum virium accessionem vergere quis non intelligat? Ita vero haec
in Sorbona res a^itur; ut Theologi aliqui Parisienses quos praecipous in ista
causa adversarios experti sunt S. Augustini Discipuli, and quos ab Apostolica
Sede harum propositionum censuram etiam flagitare non insertis rumoribus
jactatur, propositiones easdem quo sensu ab Episcopo Iprensi and a caeteris
Augustini Discipulis defendi possent, ab omni errore vacuas faterentur, si
principiis suis consentanea pronunciare vellent.

Ut igitur quid de his propositionibus cum Episcopo Iprensi sentiant, semperque
senserint Parisienses Theologi, caeterique qui S. Augustini doctrinam
profitentur ac tuentur, Episcopis omnibus, Ecclesiae toti, Romanae Sedi
innotescat, necessarium fuit apertam hanc brevem and sinceram expositionem
subnectere, uti ne si propositiones istas ambigua aliqua nota ob perversum
sensum quem admittere possunt perstringeret, Episcopus Iprensis caeterique S.
Augustini Difcipuli istius perversi sensus auctores and defensores
insimulentur. Atque ut sciant omnes, certi nihil de his quaestionibus quae in
Christi gratiae argumento inter S. Augustini and Molinae Discipulos in Ecclesia
agitantur definiri posse, nisi omni verborum dolo and ambiguitate semotis ad
examen vocetur haec de gratiae victricis necessitate doctrina, ad quam quinquae
istae propositiones recto sensu expositae revocantur.

PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
EXPOSITIO.
CUm aliquis justus gratiam per se efficacem ad orandum, ad tentationem
superandam, ad praeceptum aliquod observandum necessariam, a Deo aliquando non
accipiat judicio occulto sed justo; etsi habeat aliquam praecepti implendi
voluntatem, sed parvam, invalidam, and imperfectam, and ad praeceptum illud
plene and ut oportet observandum imparem, tunc and secundum has praesentes,
quas habet pro isto momento vires, ad orandum ut oportet, ad tentationem
superandam ut oportet, ad praeceptum observandum ut oporter, non est proxime
and complete potens. Atque impotentia haec, ea est quae a voluntatis
infirmitate seu ab auxilii ad agendum proxime necessarii carentia, hoc est a
gratiae per se efficacis, quam Deus tunc ilii non donat, absentia oritur. Cum
enim gratia haec per se efficax det and velle and posse proximum et
completissimum, quicunque gratiam hanc non habet, is non habet velle et posse
proximum quod illa largitur. Atque ita aliquando justus aliquis non habet
gratiam quae proximam et completissimam praecepti ut oportet, observandi
potentiam donat.

Hic genuinus et unicus est Episcopi Iprensis circa primam istam propositionem
sensus; aliud nihil docet et asserit, ubi propositionem hanc non nude profert,
sed ex jactis prius fundamentis necessario colligit, ut videre est in capite
toto e quo deprompta est, scilicet l. 3. de gratia Christi Salvatoris c. 13,
vide et cap. 14. et 15, in quibus justos omnes multis modis posse semper
praecepta observare asserit, nec aliam impotentiam aliquando inesse justo
alicui dicit, nisi eam quae a gratiae per se efficacis absentia oritur, quae
simul et posse proximum ac completissimum et velle donat.

Nullam ergo aliam doctrinam sic exposita propositio continet, quam doctrinam
gratiae ex se efficacis ad singulos piae voluntatis motus et actus necessariae,
necessariae justo ut oret, ut tentationem superet, ut praeceptum Dei observet
sicut oportet, seu ut haec operari proxime possit; proindeque prima haec
propositio ut est a Jansenio asserta, vel potius ex Augustini principiis
collecta, damnari non potest, nisi vel gratiae per se efficacis ad singulos
actus necessariae doctrina simul damnetur, vel damnetur Augustiniana haec
doctrina, qua asseritur quod gratia ex se efficax, ad aliquem actum necessaria,
potentiam proximam et completissimam ad hunc actum donat.

Quam vero sic exposita propositio conformis sit sacri Concilii Tridentini, S.
Augustini et Facultatis Lovaniensis doctrinae, sequentibus testimoniis
innotescit.

Conformitas propositionis expositae cum Consilii Tridentini, S. Augustini, and
Theologorum Lovaniensium doctrina.
CONCILIUM TRIDENTINUM.
SI quis dixerit justificatum vel sine speciali auxilio Dei in accpta justitia
perseverare POSSE, vel cum eo non posse, Anathema sit. Conc. Trid. sess. 6.
can. 22. Illud autem speciale Dei auxilium singulis justis, quovis momento a
Deo non datur, judicio Dei occulto sed justo; non datur justis cadentibus, et
in accepta justitia non perseverantibus. Quod speciale auxilium cum sit
necessarium justis ut perseverent, fateri profecto compellimur, absque
hujusmodi auxilio eosdem justos perseverare non post, unde and Concilium
Tridentinum justum hominem cui desit tale auxilium, non modo dixit non
perseverare, sed nec perseverate quidem posse.

S. AUGUSTINUS.
QVi ergo vult facere Dei mandatum and non POTEST, jam quidem habet voluntatem
bonam; sed adhuc parvam and invalidam. POTERIT autem cum magnam habuerit and
robustam.... Ipsam charitatem Apostolus Petrus uondum habuit quando timore
Dominum ter negavit.... and tamen quamvis parva and imperfecta non decrat,
quando dicebat Domino, Animam meam pro te ponam; putabat enim se POSSE quod se
velle sentiebat. St Augustinus libro de gratia and lib. arbit. cap. 16. Est
quippe in nobis per hanc Dei gratiam (scilicet per auxilium quo seu per se
efficax, de quo hic sermo est) non solum POSSE quod volumus, sed eoiam velle
quod possumus, S. Augustine. de corr. and great. cap. 11. Qui eis (justis
scilicet de quibus sermo hic est) non solum dat sine quo non possunt
perseverare si velint, sed in eis etiam operatur and velle, ut quoniam non
perseverabunt nisi and possint and velint, perseverandi eis possibilitas and
voluntas Divinae gratiae largitate donetur: tantum quippe Spiritu Sancto
accenditur voluntas eorum, ut ideo possint quia sic volunt, ideo sic velint
quia Deus operatur ut velint, De corr. and gratia cap. 11. Neque de ipsa
voluntate contendo cum s^nata and adjuta hominis voluntate possibilitas ipsa
simul cum effectu in Sanctis proveniat. De natura and gratia, cap. 42. DOCTORES
LOVANIENSES.
In justificatione censurae adversus Jesuitas Lovanienses ante sexaginta annos
latae.
POtentia credendi vel convertendi se potest aestimari dupliciter; semel ex
ipsa liberi arbitrii utramque in partem flexibili facultate; quomodo est
potentia in homine gratia destituto: Semel ex praecedentibus viribus satis
efficacibus ad fidem and conversionem, juxta quem modum quidam dicuntur non
posse credere aut sequi Dominium, sicut dictum est Petro, Non potes me sequi
modo; and aliis, Quomodo vos potestis credere qui gloriam ab invicem accipitis?
and iterum, Nou poterant credere, quiae dixit Isaias, Excaeca cor populi hujus.
Poterant ergo illi credere per flexibilem quidem liberi arbitrii in bonum
facultatem; non poterant autem per eas vires seu affectus quos habebant in
praesentia; poterant per remotam ut dici consuevit potentiam, non poterant per
propinquam. Justificatio censura; cap. 16. Aliud autem est posse, in quo tam
magnae insunt vires per sufficientem gratiae praeparationem, ut satis sit ad
agendum, per quam quidem gratiam, non jam solum ipsum posse, verum etiam agere
adjuvatur. Ibidem. Addimus and hoc qualecunque subsidium quod aliquando
subministrari dicitur in aliis qui neque credunt ueque convertuntur ad Dominum,
non fuisse sufficiens ad fidem aut conversionem; quippe gratia ad conversionem
sufficien ipsa convertit; quae vero non convertit non sufficit. Ibidem. SECUNDA
PROPOSITIO.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.
EXPOSITIO.
ESt propria et specialis Christi gratia ad singulos piae voluntatis affectus
et motus necessaria, quae est gratia per se efficax, quae semper in cordibus
nostris effectum ad quem a Deo datur producit; hanc gratiam voluntas nunquam
respuit quia semper velle donat, semper cordis duritiam aufert pro mensura doni
Divini majoris concupiscentia, seu quantum Deus misericorditer vult victricem
hanc delectationem et majorem concupiscentia sive ad incipiendam, sive ad
confirmandam, sive ad perficiendam animae curationem, in cordibus nostris
diffundere.

Etsi autem efficiat propria haec Christi gratia ut homo illi non dissentiat
nec dissentire velir, semper tamen dissentire potest si vult, ut sacro
Tridentino Concilio definitum est.

Atque homo hac Christi gratia quae cordis duritiam aufert motus, non semper
proinde vult aut agit efficaciter et perfect quod volendum et agendum est;
saepe enim contingit hominem peecatorem in solis inefficacibus desideriis quae
gratia efformavit haerere, nec ea ad operis effectum ob infirmitatem suam ac
vitium proprium perducere; abjicere etiam desideria ista, et reluctante ac
vincente concupiscentia non resipiscere a peecato, non agere poenitentiam ut
oportet et quantum oportet ut a peccato resutgat, illiusque veniam a Deo
consequatur; hoc tamen in homine gratia Christi proximum effectum quem Deus
intendit, boni scilicet et inchoati desiderii motum consequitur: quod autem
istud desiderium caruerit ultimo et perfecto effectu operis ad quod impellebat
et excitabat, hominis sollus vitium est, non Dei, et, ut ait Augustinus, De
pecc. mer. and rem. lib. 2^ cap. 17.
In homine causa est, non in Deo.

Si tamen Deus vellet tantam gratiam, tam victricem delectationem confer
quanta sufficit et quanta necessaria est ut homo iste poenitentiam agat ut
oportet, a peccato suo resurgat, et ad Dei gratiam justificantem perveniat,
homo ille certissime poenitentiam ageret ut oportet, a peccato suo resurgeret,
et ad Dei gratiam justificantem perveniret. At Deus ut vult, quantum vult, et
ubi vult, uniuscuj isque miseretur juxta illud Sancti Augustini de peccatorum
meritis et remissione lib 2. cap. 5. Cur autem illum adjuvet, illum nonadjuvet;
illum tantum, illum autem non tantum; istum illo, illum isto modo, penes ipsum
est and aequitatis tam secretae ratio and excellentia potestatis.

Non alio sensu quam isto propositio haec secunda ab Episcopo Iprensi docetur,
aut ab alio S. Augustini Discipulo, nec aliter in ejusdem Praesulis opere
defensa legitur, nullibi in terminis et ut jacet ah eo asserta.

Conformitas propositionis expositae cum doctrina S. Augustini ac Theologorum
Lovaniensium and Duacensium.
S. AUGUSTINUS.
HAec itaque gratia quae occulte humanis cordibus divina largitate tribui^ur, a
nullo duro cord RESPUITUR; a Deo quippe tribuitur ut cordis duritia primitus
aufer^tur. De praedest. SS. c. 8. Dat incrementum Deus, cui volenti salvum
facere nullum hominis RESISTIT arbitrium; sic enim velle and nolle in volentis
aut nolenter est potestate ut Divinam voluntatem non impediat, nec superet
potestatem. De corr. et gratia cap. 14. Qui credunt, intus a Patre audiunt
atque discunt; qui autem non credunt, FORIS audiunt, intus non audiunt neque
discunt, hoc est, illis datur ut credant, illis non datur. De praedest. SS. c.
8. Cum dat incrementum Deus, auditor sine dubio credit and proficit; ecce quod
interest inter legem and promissiomem, inter literam and spiritum. Lib. 2. op.
imp. n. 157. Qui novit quid est qu^d fierl debeut and n n facit, nondum a Deo
didicit secundum gratiam sed secundum legem; non secundum spiritum see secundum
literam, De gratia Christi cap. 13. Si Deus miseretur, etiam volumus; ad eandem
quippe misericordiam pertinet ut velimus. Lib. 1 ad Simpl. quaest. 2. Non
potest effectus misericordiae Dei esse in hominis potestate, ut frustraille
miseratur si homo nolit. Ibidem. LOVANIENSES.
NOn igitur specialis haec Chrictt est gratia, cui proprium id esse
evidentissimis verbis Augustinus scribit, ut non sit bonis malisque communis,
sed bonos discernat amalis; atque ut alibi ait, a duro nullo cord respuatur,
quoniam per eam ipsa cordis durities auferatur, in qua fideleter agnoscenda
quid a Pelagio idem olim postularit, operae pretium fuerit ex ejus hic verbis
subjicere. Lovan. in cens. 8 assert. DUCASESES.
EA enim proprie est gratia Christi and gratia novi Testamenti quae aufert cor
lapideum and tribuit cor carneum: quae operatur ipsum velle and perficere, per
quam scribitur lex Dei in cordibus nostris, quae facit ut faciamus, non tantum
ut possimus facere si velimus. Duac. in cens. 8 assert. TERTIA PROPSITIO.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
EXPGSITIO.
UT doctrina haec de hominis liberate ac indifferentia recte exponatur,
multiplex prius indifferentia constituenda est, et explananda. Est scilicet
indifferenti^ voluntatis circa rectum finem, et circa media; et est
indifferentia ex part potentiae et ex part actus. Indifferentia voluntatis
circa rectum finem ea est qua voluntas vel rectum finem appetere, vel a recto
fine aberrare potest, seu qua voluntas peccare potest et non peccare.
Indifferentia voluntatis circa media, ea est qua voluntas medium hoc vel illud
ac finem consequendum eligere potest vel non eligere. Indifferentia ex part
potentiae, ea est qua potentia licet ad hoc recte agendu^ a Deo determinetur,
potest tamen per se etiam sub actuali gratiae motione constituta hoc non agere
et contrarium eligere: licet nunquam accidat, ut a Deo praemota hoc recte non
agat, et contrarium eligat. Semper autem indifferentia haec quae se habet ex
part potentiae, remanet ad malum, cum subest ratio aliqua boni seu motivi in
objecto quod voluntas refugit and aversatur: Illud enim voluntas quavis
determinatione ad bonum posita amplecti et eligere potest, quod sub aliqua boni
et motivi ratione apparet, et ad quod eligendum homo potentiam habet. Denique
indifferentia ex part actus seu indifferentia proxima actionis ea est qualem
Molina constituit, qua scilicet voluntas proximam habet agendi vel non agendi,
agendi hoc vel illud indifferentiam; qua voluntas sic est in aequilibrio
posita, ut pro libito se ad istud vel illud moveat vel non moveat; qua voluntas
etiam posita motione Divinae gratiae, parem tamen habet in utrumlibet
indiffetentiam, ita ut bonum aliquando actu eligat, aliquando actu non eligat,
aliquando recte agat et gratiae divinae obsequatur, aliquando vero pro libito
peccet ac gratiae divinae motionem abjiciat. Atque hanc solum Molinae
indifferentiam utpote gratiae per se efficaci contrariam nec ad libertatem nec
ad meritum in hoc lapsae naturae statu requiri S. Augustini Discipuli
contendunt. Observandum etiam est, libertatem vel sumi secundum se et generatim
loquendo, prout Deo, Christo viatori, Angelis Beatis, hominibus in statu
naturae integrae vel lapsae convenit: vel sumi secundum varium statum in quo
libertas and merirum occurrunt, puta secundum statum hominis ante lapsum vel
post lapsum. His praenotatis facilis erit hujus tertiae propositionis per
quatuor sequentes propositiones exposito.

Prima propositio de liberate.
Indifferentia essentialis est libertata circa media, seu quoad libertatem
electionis quae circa media versatur, ubi plura sunt media ad fidem
consequendum.

Conformitas propositionibus hujus cum Doctrina S. Thomae.
VOlunras igitur Angeli se habet ad oppos^ta quantum ad multa facienda vel non
facienda; sed quantum ad ipsum Deum quem vident esse ipsam esseneiam bonitatis,
non se habent ad opposita, sed secundum ipsum ad omnia diriguntur quodcunque
oppositorum eligant, quod sine peccato est. 1 p. quaest. 68. a. 8. ad 3. Vnde
quod liberum arbitrium diversa eligere possit servato ordine finis, hoc
pertinet ad perfectionem libertatis ejus. Sed quod eligat aliquid divertendo ab
ordine finis, quod est ptccare, hoc pertinet ad defectum libertatis. Vnde major
libertas arbitrii est in Angelis qui peccare non possunt, quam in nobis qui
peccare possumus. 1 p. quaest. 62. art. 8. ad 3. Secunda propositio de
liberate.
Indifferentia ex part potentiae ad bonum and malum non est necessaria ad
agendum libere neque ad merendum, fi ratio libertatis and meriti generatim and
secundum se considerentur, ut patet ex merito and liberate Christi.

Conformitas propositionis bujus cum Doctrina S. Thamae and S. Augustini.
DIcendum quod etiamsi liberum arbitrium Christi esset determinatum ad unum
numero sicut ad diligendum Deum, quod non facere non potest, tamen ex hoc non
amittit libertatem aut rationem laudis sive meriti, quia in illud non coacte
sed sponte tendit, and ita est actus sui Dominus. In 3 sent. did. 18. art. 2.
ad 5. Nec tamen per charitatem Christus meruit in quantum erat charitas
comprehensoris, sed in quantum erat viatoris: nam ipse fuit simul viator and
comprehensor, ut supra habitum est. Et ideo quia nunc non est viator, non est
in statu merendi. 3 p. q. 19. a. 3. ad 1. Pro tanto dicitur quod velle malum
nec est libertas nec pars libertatis, quamvis sit quoddam libertatis signum.
Inter quaest. disputatas q. 22. de voluntate art. 6. Nunquid metuendum fuit ne
accedente aetate homo ille libero peccaret arbitrio? an ideo in illo non libera
voluntas erat, ac non tanto magis erat, quanto magis peccato servire non
poterat? S. Aug. de praed. Sanctorum cap. 15. Postea vero sic erit ut male
velle non possit, nec ideo libero carebit arbitrio; multo quippe liberius erit
arbitrium, quod omnino non poterit servire peccato. S. Aug. in Enchiridio c.
150. Tertia propositio de liberate.
Indifferentia proxima actionis qualem Molina statuit, nullo modo necessaria
est ad libere agendum, aut ad merendum in hoc naturae corruptae statu, cum
eadem indifferentia gratiae vi sua efficacis ac insuperabiliter ad bonnm
determinantis, and ad singulos pietatis actus necessariae, proprium agendi
modum destruat.

Seu, voluntatis ad aliquem pietatis actum per gratiam praevenientem vi sua
efficacem determinatio, nullo modo libertatem quae ad merendum in hoc naturae
corruptae statu requiritur, aufert, aut labefactat.

Conformitas propositionis hujus cum doctrina S. Augustini and S. Tbomae a
Duacensibus relata in censura assertionis decimae.
PRima, inquit S. Augustinus de corr. and great. c. 11. gratia est, qua fit ut
homo habeat justitiam, si velit; secunda vero plus potest, qua etiam fit ut
velit. Et infra, nec de ipsa perseverantia boni voluit Deus Sanctos suos in
viribus suis sed in ipso gloriari, qui iis non solum dat adjutorium quale primo
homini dedit, sine quo non possunt perseverare, si velint, sed in iis operatur
and velle, ut quoniam non perseverabunt, nisi etiam possint, and velint,
perseverandi iis possibilitas and voluntas Divinae gratiae largitate donetur;
Et iterum, subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut Divina
gratia indeclinabiliter and insuperabiliter ageretur, and ideo quamvis infirma,
non tamen deficeret, neque adversitate aliqua vinceretur. Et mox, Fortissimo
quippe dimisit atque permisit facere quod vellet: infirmis seravit, ut, ipso
donante, invictissime quod bonum est, vellent, and hoc deserere invictissime
nollent. Ex quibus aliisque Augustini locis patet, ita efficacem esse gratiam
Christi, ut voluntatem hominis infallibiliter, nullam tamen inferendo
necessitatem, ad bonum determinet, a qua quidem necessitate nimium metuit
assertor, quamquam nihil metuerit B. Augustinus, tametsi ei objiciente Pelagio,
quod libertatem tolleret. At neque metuit S. Thomas, dum part prima quaest.
105. art. 4. docet, Deum in nostra voluntate operari; pro fundamento illius
doctrinae collocans illud Apostoli, Deus operatur in nobis and velle and
perficere.

Quarta propositio de liberate.
In statu naturae lapsae ad merendum and demerendum and adest semper and etiam
requiritur in puris viatoribus indifferentia potentiae, non modo circa media,
verum and circarectum finem, non quidem ratione libertatis aut meriti secundum
se, sed ratione status hujus and conditionis; adeo ut licet in justis etiam cum
per divinam gratiam efficacissimam ad pie agendum moti pie agunt, peccandi seu
male agendi potentia semper perseveret, propter quam dissentire possunt Deo
moventi, hoc est peccare and a justitia excidere, nunquam tamen stet ut tunc
actu dissentiant, hoc est, ut peccent and a justitia excidant, cum Deus eos ut
non excidant and ut pie agant efficaciter praemovet.

Conformitas propositionis hujus cum doctrina S. Augustini, S. Prosperi, and S.
Thomae.
PLane illa possibilitas utriusque radicis est capax; quia non solum potest
homo habere charitatem qua sit arbor bona, sed potest etiam cupiditatem qua sit
arbor mala. De gratia Christi cap. 20. Natura humana quamvis mutabilis quantum
ad id pertinet quod condita est, bona est quae non solum sine vitio facta est,
verum etiam cum per vitium mala est, capax est boni quo bona sit: haec vera
sententia fallacem Manichaeorum evertit insaniam. Et infra; Nunc ergo non solum
potest peccare homo post baptismum, verum and quia been reluctans
concupiscentiae carnis, aliquando ab ea trahitur ad consensionem, and quamvis
venialia, tamen aliqua peccata committit, habet cur semper hic dicat Dimitre
nobis debita nostra, haec qucque Catholica veritas Joviniani redarguit
vanitatem. Lib. 2. op. Imp. numero 10. In caeteris hominibus, donec caro
concupiscit adversus spiritum and spiritus adversus carnem, and donec spiritus
quidem promptus est, caro autem infirma, incommutabilis animi fortitudo non
potest reperiri; cum non hujus sed alterius vitae sit vera, perfecta and secura
felicitas: in praesentis ergo agonis incerto, ubi tota vita tentatio est, and
ab insidianti superbia nee ipsa tuta est victoria, mutabilitatis periculo non
caretur: Et licet innumeris Sanctis suis donet virtutem perseverandi usque in
finem Divina protectio, nullis tamen aufert quod ipsis repugnat ex ipsis. Et
infra: Merito igitur ab incipientibus non solum, verum etiam a provectissimis
Sanctis uniformiter Domino supplicatur, and dicitur, Ne nos inducas in
tentationem, sed libera nos a malo. Univetsis enim qui in fide and dilectione
permanent, ab ipso donatur ne in tentatione superentur, ut qui gloriatur, in
Domino glorietur; ipsamque gloriam iisdem quibus eam impertit ascribit, ut
quamvis auxilio Dei steterint, tamen quia in se habebant unde caderent, ipsorum
sit meritum quod steterunt. Prosp. de voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 28. Posse eligere
malum non est de ratione liberi arbitrii, sed consequitur liberum arbitrium,
secundum quod est in natura creata possibile ad defectum. S. Thomas inter
quaestiones disputatas quaest. 23. art. 3. ad secundum. Ex quibus manifest
patet, indifferentiam qualemlibet in hoc lapsae naturae statu ab Augustini
Discipulis, in his quae ad salutem and ad finem supernaturalem pertinent
admitti, praeter Molinisticam quae gratiae ad singulos pios actus necessariae
efficaciam and vim propriam destruit; non tamen ad libertatem and meritum
secundum se, essentialem dici indifferentiam potentiae circa rectum finem, ne
Christus Dominus qui peccare, qui Dei praeceptis non obsequi, qui opera sua ad
Patris sui gloriam non refer non poterat, in actibus obedientiae, and
dilectionis Dei vel liber non fuisse vel non meruisse dicatur.

QUARTO PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici quod vellent
eam gratiam talem esse cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare.
Expositio primae partis propositionis.
SEmipelagiani admittebant gratiae praevenientis interioris qualis fuit in
primo homine ante peccatum, seu auxilii sine quo non fit, necessitatem ad
initium fidei.

Semipelagianorum ut a Patribus and a Theologis Lovaniensibus ac Duacensibus
refertur sententia.
HIs verbis Sanctitatis tuae ita moventur, ut dicant quandam desperationem
hominibus exhiberi. Si enim, aiunt, i^a Adam adjutus est ut and stare posset in
justitia and a justitia declinare, and nunc ita Sancti juvantur ut declinare
non possint (si quidem eam acceperunt volendi perseverantiam ut aliud velle non
possint;) vel sic quidam deferuntur, ut aut nec accedant, aut si accesserint
and recedant, ad illam voluntatem pertinuisse dicunt exhortationis vel
comminationis utilitatem quae and persistendi and desistendi obtinebat liberam
potestatem, non ad hanc cui nolle justitiam inevitabili necessitate conjunctum
est. Epist. Hill. ad Aug. En Massilienses in hominibus lapsis ad initium fidei
admittunt auxilium sine quo non fit, quale in Adamo innocente S. Augustinus
constituit, utpote correctioni and exhortationi non contrarium, and
desperationem non inducens, quod refugiebant tantummodo Semipelagiani. Illudque
solum auxilium ad initium fidei, ad desiderium sanitatis tanquam correctioni
inimicum respuunt, quo fit ut omne quod bonum est invictissime volumus and hoc
deserere invictissime nolumus, quo fit ut indeclinabiliter non solum operamur,
verum and in Deum credimus, nec solum in opere, verum and in fide and in
oratione insuperabiliter perseveramus; quo demum omnia bona hominis merita tam
quoad fidem inchoatam, orationem, and initium piae voluntatis, quam quoad
charitatem virtutumque omnium opera, Deo nobis vires efficacissimas donante,
praeveniuntur.

Nec quod saepe Massilienses initium fidei ex nobis esse, ex viribus liberi
arbitrii, and non ex gratia apud S. Augustinum asserant; inde eos auxilii sine
quo non fit necessitatem ad initium fidei non admisisse ullatenus sequitur,
quia juxta S. Augustinum quod agitur cum solo auxilio sine quo non fit, illud
libero arbitrio, viribus nostris, and non gratiae tribuitur, ut patet ex
Angelis quos ait de corr. and great. cap 10. and 11. Stetisse per liberum
arbitrium and non per gratiam; ut patet ex Adam, In cujus liberi arbitrii
viribus fuisse dicit de dono pers. cap. 7. ut staret antequam caderet: cum
tamen juxta S. Augustinum de corr. and gratia cap. 11. and Angeli and Adam ante
lapsum auxilio sine quo non fit, ad perseverandum indigerent.

Ut acquiescamus salutiferae inspirationi, nostrae potestatis est, inquit
Gennadius Semipelagianus de Eccles. dogm. c. 21. Haec sententia quae habet
sufficere nunc justis ad perseverandum eam gratiam, qualis fuit primis
parentibus data, and Massiliensium olim fuit, and direct ac ex professo Beati
Augustini doctrinae repugnat, cap. 12. de corr. and gratia, and Ecclesiae
orationes evertit. Lovan. in cens. 22. assert. Idem hoc volebant Massilienses
quibus non placuit discrimen illud gratiae quod inter hominem lapsum and
integrum posuerat Augustinus in lib. de corr. and gr. c. 12. ut est in ep. Hill.
ad Aug. Duac. in cens. 22. assert. Expositio alterius partis propositionis.
In hoc errabant Semipelagiani, quod vellent gratiam per se efficacem, non esse
ad singulos actus etiam fidei inchoatae and orationis necessariam.

In quo Pelagiani and Semipelagiani circa gratiam erraverint.
SEd nos eam gratiam volumus iste aliquando fateatur, qua futurae gloriae
magnitudo non solum permirtitur, verum etiam creditur and speratur; nec solum
revelatur sapientia, verum etiam and amatur; nec suadetur solum omne quod bonum
est, verum and persuadetur. Hanc debet Pelagius confiteri si vult non solum
vocari, verum etiam esse Christianus. De gratia Christi cap. 10. Certissimo
itaque S. Augustini judicio errat circa Christi gratiam, nec Christianus ille
est, qui docet quod gratia Christi non persuadet omne quod bonum est, hoc est,
qui asserit aliquod bonum ad salutem conducens fieri sine gratia per se
efficace, Pelagianusque est qui gratiam ex se efficacem ad nullum bonum actum
requiri affirmat: Semipelagianus vero qui hanc ad aliquem bonum actum requiri
and ad aliquem non requiri contendit.

Lovanienses and Duacenses docent gratiam hanc quae libero arbitrio subjicitur,
quam voluntas pro libito vel efficacem obsequendo, vel inefficacem respuendo
reddit, seu quae vi sua efficax non est, non esse specialem and propriam
Christi gratiam, non esse gratiam novi Testamenti. Ita Lovan. in cens. assert.
8. Non igitur specialis haec Christi est gratia cui proprium id esse
evidentissimis verbis Augustinus scribit, ut a duro nullo co^de respuatur,
quoniam per eam ipsa cordis durities auferatur. In qua fidelitet agnoscenda
quid a Pelagio idem olim postularit, etc. Lovan. in cens. 8. assert.

Ita Duacenses in cens. ejusdem assertionis. Ea enim proprie est gratia Christi
and gratia novi Testamenti quae aufert cor lapideum and tribuit cor carneum,
quae operatur ipsum velle and perficere, quae facit ut faciamus, non tantum ut
possimus facere si velimus. S. Augustini, Conciliorum, summorum Pontificum,
totiusque Ecclesiae doctrinam in hoc consistere, ut gratia per se efficax ad
singulos piae voluntatis motus and actus necessaria agnoscatur: In Pelagianorum
vel Semipelagianorum errores incidere, qui ejusdem gratiae vi sua efficacis ad
singulos motus and actus necessitatem negant, and qui Molinae hac in part
doctrinam sequuntur, docent summi Pontifices, Clemens VIII. and Paulus V. ille
scripto suo Congregationi de Auxiliis exhibito, uterque suffragio suo ut ex iis
Congregationibus in quibus praesentes adfuerunt facile intelligitur, and haec
sententia de gratiae per se efficacis ad singulos pios motus necessitate,
judicio ejusdem Pauli V. Apostolico public ac solenniter confirmata fuisset
nisi Venetorum motus obstitissent. Idem docent totus Dominicanorum Ordo, and
Congregatio de Auxiliis, ut patet ex actis ejusdem Congregationis and ex
historia Francisci de Pegna illustrissimi Rotae Decani; docent Lovanienses and
Duacenses Doctores passim in suis censuris. Docent demum celeberrimi hac aetate
Theologi, Bannes in D. Thomam 1 part quaest. 23. art. 3. conclus. ultima.
Alvarez lib. 1. de Auxiliis disp. 1. page 8. Navarreta controversia 21 de
praedeterminatione Physica in quaest. 19. 1. partis D. Thomae de voluntate Dei.
Ioannes a S. Thoma in 1. p. quaest. 19. disp. 3. a. 4. Item quaest. 14. disp.
20. art. 3. and 6. Martinez in 1. 2. quaest. 10. art. 4. dub. 1. Estius in 1
ep. ad Timoth. c. 2. Cumel. in 1 partem quaest. 23. art. 3. quaest. apud
auctorem 8. conclus. 5. Felisius did. 24. cap. 25. in 2 sent. Cabrera 3 p.
quaest. 18. art. 4. disp. 6. dubio 9. Aliique celeberrimi e Schola S. Thomae
Theologi, quorum omnium testimonia in libro de gratia Christi victrice express
continentur.

QUINTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipalagianum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse
aut sanguinem fudisse.
EXPOSITIO.
VEritas est ad finem Christianam pertinens, quod Christus pro omnibus
hominibus mortuus fuerit ac sanguinem fuderit.

Attamen certum est Semipelagianos dixisse perverso and erroneo sensu, quod
Christus pro omnibus omnino mortuus fuerit, ut patet ex testimoniis sequentibus.

Inquiunt Massilienses pro universo humano genere mortuum esse Dominum nostrum
Iesum Christum, and neminem prorsus a redemptione sanguinis ejus exceptum,
etiamsi omnem hanc vitam alienissima ab eo mente pertranseat, quia ad omnes
homines pertinet Divinae misericordiae sacramentum, quo ideo plurimi non
renovantur quia quod nec renovari velle habeant praenoscantur. Itaque quantum
ad Deum pertinet, paratam omnibus vitam aeternam. Ep. Prosp. ad S. Aug. Inde
est quod illius sententiae expositionem, non eam quae a te est deprompta,
suscipiant Massilienses, id est, ut nonnisi omnes homines salvos fieri velit,
and non eos tantum qui ad Sanctorum numerum pertinebunt, sed omnes omnino ut
nullus habeatur exceptus. Epist. Hill. ad August. Gratia, qua Christi populus
sumus, hoc cohibetur
Limite vobiscum, and formam hanc ascribitis illi,
Ut cunctos vocet illa quidem invitetque, nec ullum
Praeteriens, studeat communem afferre salutem
Omnibus, and totum peccato absolvere mundum.
Prosp. poem. l. 2. c. 10. Qui vero dicunt Christi mortem pro omnibus, in hoc
consistere, ut morte sua omnibus nemine excepto contulerit auxilia omnia quae
ad salutem sufficient, ac quae necessaria sunt, gratiae Christi vi sua
efficacis ad singulos pietatis actus necessitatem negant and evertunt. Si enim
Christus morte sua omnibus contulit auxilia omnia necessaria ad salutem, certe
auxilia ad salutem necessaria non sunt vi sua efficacia, cum omnes non
salventur, and auxilia vi sua efficacia ea sint quae effectum suum a Deo
intentum certissime consequuntur.

Recte autem Duacenses in censura assert. 14. colligunt ex Concilio Tridentino
generelem Christi pro omnibus redemptionem in hoc non consistere, ur omnes ex
part Dei habeant quod sufficit ad salutem; Quia si haberent, inquiunt, quomodo
e contrario testatur Synodus Tridentina sess. 6. can. 3. quod etsi pro omnibus
mortuus est Christus, non omnes tamen mortis ejus beneficium recipient, sed ii
duntaxat quibus meritum passionis communicatur?

Recte and iidem Duacenses ac Lovanienses juxta Patrum doctrinam exponunt in
censura assert. 7. in quo consistat generalis Christi pro omnibus redemptio.
Talis est assertio septima Iesuitatum Lovaniensium: Deus voluit dare Christum
in redemptionem pro omnibus, nullo excepto: Ergo omnibus praeparavit
sufficientia media per Christum. Probatur consequentia; Quia eatenus est
Christus omnium Redemptor, quatenus per ipsum donantur omnibus sufficientia
media quibus resurgant a peccatis. Si enim non darentur sufficientia, verus non
esset eorum Redemptor; quia neque quoad sufficientiam, neque quoad efficaciam.
Quam assertionem sic Duacenses in sua censura refellunt. Huic argumento
Massiliensium (quod idem and Fausti fuit) responsum est jam olim a Prospero in
hunc modum; quoad magnitudinem and potestatem pretii, and quod ad unam pertinet
causam generis humani, sanguis Christi redemptio est totius mundi. Sed qui hoc
seculum sine fide Christi, and sine regenerationis Sacramento pertranseunt,
redemptionis alieni sunt. Cum itaque propter unam omnium naturam, and unam
omnium causam, in veritate a Domino nostro susceptam, recte dicantur omnes
redempti, and tamen non omnes a captivitate sint eruti; Redemptionis proprietas
haud dubie penes illos est, de quibus Princeps mundi missus est for as, and jam
non vasa diaboli sed membra sunt Christi. Et mox, p^culum quippe
immortalitatis, quod confectum est de infirmitate nostra and virtute Divina,
habet quidem in se ut omnibus prosit; sed si non bibitur, non medetur. Sic
i^le. Sufficientia ergo quam postulat generalis redemptio, in pretio sanguinis
Christi est, non autem in auxilio omnibus collato ut praetendit objectio. Nam
alioquin etiam in parvulis quibus per Baptismum succurri non potuit, tale
auxilium tribuendum erit: aut certe dicere oportebit, non pro illis Christum se
dedisse in redemptionem, and ita non pro omnibus.

Non alio quam isto hic expresso gratiae per se efficacis ad singulos piae
voluntatis motus and actus necessariae sensu, propositiones istae quinque aut
ab Illustrissimo Iprensi, aut ab ullo quovis S. Augustini Discipulo sive in
libris editis, sive in lectionibus publicis sive in concionibus, Parisiis
defensae sunt, a nemine ut jacent assertae. Non prius in comitiis Facultatis
Parisiensis auditae sunt, quin professi confestim fuerint S. Augustini
Discipuli, eas a se nonnisi juxta hunc sensum propugnari. Has ita Dominus de
Saint Beuve Doctor ac Professor Regius in Sorbonicis Scholis hoc anno
explanavit, ut ex illius scriptis publicae dictatis manifestum est. Nec aliter
expositae sunt in eo libro qui de victrice Christi gratia nuperrime in eam rem
editus est, ut elucidarentur propositiones istae de quibus scriptum est ad
summum Pontificem; quem qui librum legerit, profecto jam cogatur calumniandi
libidinem omnem ponere, atque id fateri quod ad quinque illas propositiones
attinet nihil nisi recte sensisse Iprensem Episcopum, and caeteros Augustini
Discipulos, nisi perverse sentire putet qui gratiam per se efficacem ad
singulos pios motus and actus necessariam esse cum S. Augustino, cum antiquis
Patribus, cum Conciliis, cum summis Pontificibus, cum S. Thoma, cum universo
Dominicanorum Ordine, cum Theologis primi nominis, cum Congregatione tota de
Auxiliis, ipsisque adeo nuper Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. crediderit. Sancti
Augustini Discipuli suam sententiam hanc de quinque propositionibus istis
subdole concinnatis ad fraudem, omnibus Episcopis, Archiepiscopis, Romanae
Sedi, universae Ecclesiae palam faciunt, ne quid jam subsit calumniae,
triumphatisque malis artibus discat aliquando silere livor, and victricis
Christi gratiae vindicem Augustinum cum universa Ecclesia colere.

PARISIIS, Kal. Jul. Anno salutis per gratiam reparatae MDCLI.
Cette Date est de consequence and a observer. Elle estoit ainsi qu'elle est
cy-dessus imprimee au pied de cet Escrit, quand il fut publie and done a tout
le monde des ce temps-la.

The Writings of the Dominicans, mentioned Part. 6. Chap. 9. and in other
places of the Journal.
Advertisement touching these Writings.
I Cannot affirm (as I intimated in the Journal) whether or no I obtained all
the Writings of the Dominicans, or whether they were all in the same order
wherein they are here presented, together with the Memorial intended to be
presented to the Pope by the General of that Order, when the Prelate (mentioned
Part. 6. Chap. 10.) told me at la Minerve, where I met him, Febr. 25. 1652.
that the said General had newly shown them to him, and that they were in very
good order: But I know well, that if they be not all here, yet here is a good
part of them: I know well likewise, that each of them was purposely prepared to
be presented to the Pope by such of that Order as the said General had
appointed to apply themselves to this affair; and lastly, that it was by their
favor in giving me a Copy, that I obtained them.

The first Writing.
Entitled on the outside,

Connexio quinque propositionum quae nunc examinantur cum iis quae disputata
fuerunt coram felicis recordationis Clemente VIII. and Paulo V.
Voicy les terms qu'il contenoit:

Beatissimo P. Innocentio X. Eminentiss. S.R.E. Cardinalibus, and Doctiss.
Theologis Censoribus pro negotio quinque Propositionum ab Apostolica Sede
deputatis.
QUia nonnulli dicunt has quinque propositiones nullam habere connexionem cum
his quae disputata fuerunt sub sanctissimis felicis recordationis Clemente
VIII. and Paulo V. and in ipsorum praesentia, visum fuit nobis pro ea in qua
semper fuimus fide and reverentia erga sanctam Sedem, ex ipsis actis
disputationum sub praedictis summis Pontificibus habitarum fidelissime
extrahere, quae circa has quinque propositiones tunc agitata fuerunt.

PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus sunt
impossibilia secundum praesentes quas habent vires: deest quoque eis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.

Ex disputatione 41 habita coram sanctissimo felicis recordationis Paulo V. die
9. Novembris Anno 1605. ET eodem modo P. Bastida Societatis Jesu, defensor P.
Molinae ejusdem Societatis, inducebat aliud ex Concilio Tridentino cap. 2. Quod
Dei praecepta homini justo ad observandum impossibilia non sunt: si autem esset
necessarium illud auxilium efficax praedeterminans, sine illo (quod non omnibus
datur) essent praecepta homini impossibilia; quia sine illo non poterit homo
operari. Et in hoc puncto induxit conclusiones Fr. Thomae de Lemos, in quibus
habatur, quod secunda causa sine praevio concursu primae operati non potest:
Ergo nec operari poterit voluntas sine auxilio illo physice praedeterminante,
and sic reddentur praecepta Divina impossibilia. Nec hic oportet recurrere,
quod Deus neget illa auxilia propter praecedens peccatum, sive actuale, sive
originale, quia homo existens in gratia nullum tale habet impedimentum, and
tamen habens grariam habitualem, si non adsit illud auxilium physice
praedeterminans, non poterit operari: and ex consequenti impossibilia ei
reddentur Divina praecepta.

Quod autem sermo esset de homine justo etiam volente imperfecte, and conante,
atque habente auxilium sufficiens; patet, quia P. Thomas de Lemos and P.
Alvarez dicebant, Constat hoc ex P. Lemos opusculo de auxilio sufficienti and
efficaci, and ex Alvarez disp. 18. de Auxiliis.
omne auxilium sufficiens esse efficax respectu alicujus actus imperfecti: and
ultra hoc dicebant requiri auxilium aliud simpliciter and absolute efficax sine
quo homo non potest operari. Ex quo inferebat etiam P. Bastina, auxilium illud,
quod P. Lemos and P. Alvarez vocabant sufficiens, non esse vere sufficiens, non
dare verum posse, atque adeo praecepta esse impossibilia homini justo habenti
auxilium sufficiens, and per illlud auxilium sufficiens imperfecte volenti, and
conanti.

SECUNDA PROPOSITIO.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

Ex eadem disputatione 41. PAter Bastida objiciebat P. Thomae de Lemos:, quod
potest homo cuilibet auxilio gratiae praevenientis dissentire, ac resistere,
and quod de facto aliquando dissentit, ac resistit.

TERTIA PROPOSITIO.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur libertas a
necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

Ex disputatione 44. coram sanctissimo Paulo V habita die 10. Januarii 1606.
PAter Bastida pro tertia propositione ex his, quas proponebat; dicebat; ex hac
gratia physice praedeterminante, actus voluntatis sequitur necessario, non
suapte natura, sed ex suppositione decreti Divini, vel alterius antecedentis
causae; Et sic (inferebat) tollitur libertas; and consequenter meritum, ac
demeritum.

QUARTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagiani admiserunt gratiae interioris neceessitatem ad singulos actus,
etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc fuerunt haeretici, quod dicerent hanc
gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere, vel obtemperare.

Ex disputation 10 coram sanctissimo Clemente VIII habita die 19 Novembris.
anno 1602. REverendus P. Generalis Societatis asserebat Pelagianos (quo nomine
frequenter intelliguntur etiam Semipelagiani, and certum est) non fuisse
haereticos quia negarent gratiam ex se ipsa efficacem: unde dicebat, Multi
Doctores dicunt gratiam movere moraliter, qui damnandi non sunt tanquam
Pelagiani, Nunquid omnes erunt Pelagiani? Cui Generalis S. Dominici. Omnes qui
id tantum dicunt, sunt Pelagiani, and omnes sunt discipuli vestri.

QUITA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagianorum error est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse, aut sanguinem fudisse

Post disputationem octavam. SAnctissimus Clemens VIII. misit 14.
propositiones, ut disputaretur an Molina cum Cassiano and Semipelagianis
conveniret in illis: praecepitque ut antequam disputaretur de illis, utraque
pars scripto responderet. Itaque P. Thomas de Lemos ut ostenderet convenientiam
Molinae cum Cassiano and Semipelagianis in 14 propositione, quae erat de
praedestinatione, dedit in scriptis haec quae sequuntur.

Insuper haec de eodem Cassiano and Fausto Semipelagianorum ducibus refert S.
Prosper, sic dicens: Epistola ad Augustinum.
Haec ipsorum definitio ac professio est, omnem quidem hominem Adam peccante
peccasse, and neminem per opera sua, sed per Dei gratiam regeneratione salvari:
universis tamen hominibus propotiationem, quae est in Sacramento sanguinis
Christi, sine exceptione esse propositam, etc.

Et ut ostenderet P. Lemos, ipsum Molinam cum Cassiano and Semipelagianis in
hoc convenire, citavit locum Molinae quaest. 23 art. 4 et 5 disp. 2. memb. 2.
quo loco Molina docet, de universis omnino hominibus intelligendum esse, quod
D. Paulus ait, Vult omnes homines salvos fieri, et Christus pro omnibus mortuus
est.

Denique omnia testimonia et argumenta quae contra has quinque propositiones
objiciunt, objecerunt etiam in praefatis disputationibus.

Ex his ergo apparet, quod non est diversa causa quae modo agitur, ab illa quae
tunc agitata est, et consequenter, si quid definire sua Sanctitas voluerit,
necessarium foret revidere acta sub praedictis Pontificibus.

The secend Writing.
Quid intendant qui petunt quinque propositiones damnari?
Qui petunt a Sanctissimo damnari quinque Propositiones, tria potissimum
intendunt.
PRimum est ut tota doctrina Molinae definiatur. Hoc ipsos intendere ostenditur
primo, Hoc probatur ex scripto signato N. 2'
quia tota doctrina Molinae stabilitur ex damnatione harum quinque
propositionum; notum est autem quanto studio tota Societas illam Molinae
doctrinam amplexata ac tutata fuerit sub felicis recordationis Clemente VIII.
et Paulo V. ac deinceps. Unde eandem fere totam revocavit liber PseudoSuari Et
Liber P. Adami and P. Annati recenter impressus.
Lugduni anno superiori impressus. Satagentibus Jesuitis de Auxiliis contra
Pontificias sanciones, idemque de novo praestiterunt ex part P. Adam et P.
Annatus Jesuitae.

Quod autem Patres Societatis curent per hos Doctores Sorbonicos peti
damnationem harum propositionum, patet ex scedula Gallice scripta a quodam
Jesuita ad ipsos, quam exhibebimus, ex continuis colloquiis et conciliis quae
habent cum Jesuitis, et qu^a. iisdem argumentis ipsi et Jesuitae impugnant
propositiones. Noluerunt tamen PP. Societatis per se ipsos petere hanc
damnationem, ne Fratres Praedicatores moverentur, contenta sub his quinque
propositionibus innotesceret Eminentissimis DD. Cardinalibus et suae
Sanctitati; et valde notandum est quod eodem tempore Romae et in Hispania
excitarunt controversias de Conceptione lib. ult. sicut olim fecerant sub Paulo
V. ut hac ratione contra illos concitarent fideles.

Secundo. Patet haec illorum intentio quia plures aliae propositiones
continentur in Jansenio multo periculosiores istis, ut ipsi dicunt, et tamen
non petunt condemnationem nisi harum quinque tangentium materiam de Auxiliis,
ut constat ex sensu Catholico quem explicamus. Aliunde vero ex istis quinque
sola prima habetur formaliter in Jansenio Patent haec ex eodem scripto.
secunda and tertia express negantur ab illo, quarta and quinta non habentur
apud illum, quamvis possint aliquo modo ex i^lo colligi: Et omnes sunt
fraudulenter compositae; quare constat studio impugnandi non Jansenium sed
Fratres Praedicatores, has quinque tantum proponi.

Tertio. Patet haec illorum intentio quia petunt ut damnentur hae quinque
propositiones in sensu Jansenii: Nolumus quidem defendere Jansenium, quem in
multis scimus esse contrarium iis quae tanquam S. Augustini and S. Thomae Patet
hoc ex scriptis signatis N. 6 and 7.
semper Schola nostra defendit, maxim coram Clemente. VIII. and Paulo V. Sed
tamen ostendimus sensum Jansenii Hic sensus Jansenii ostenditur in scripto
signato N. 3.
in his propositionibus procedere de gratia efficaci: Et quamvis, ut ipsi
aiunt, procederet de gratia sufficienti, quam dicunt negari a Jansenio, non
potest attingi hoc punctum, quin and simul attingatur ob connexionem materia de
Auxiliis. Imo vero Jansenius vel sibi contradicit, and sic non est damnandus in
utraque contradictoria, alias S. Seeds contradictoria definiret, vel admittit
reipsa gratiam sufficientem Patet hoc ex scripto signato N 8.
non ad sensum Molinae and quorundam aliorum qui defenderunt doctrinam S.
Augustini coram Clemente VIII. and Paulo V.

Secunda illorum intentio.
ESt ut intra paucos menses evertantur omnia, quae fere per decennium gesta and
decreta sunt sub Clemente VIII and Paulo V. in trecentis pene Congregationibus.

Probatur primo. Quia stabilita Molinae doctrina, evertuntur omnia in illis
Congregationibus peracta, Constat hrc ex citationibus marginalibus in scripto
signato N. 2.
cum in illis doctrina Molinae qualificata sit a Censoribus depuratis ut
Pelagiana and Semipelagiana.

Secundo. Patet Ibidem.
quia has quinque propositiones non sic artificiose collectas, sed seorsim
objecerunt PP. Societatis, FF. Praedicatoribus in praefatis Congregationibus
tanquam absurda quae sequebantur ex ipsorum sententia.

Tertio. Quia omnia sere loca Scripturae, Conliorum, Sancti Augustini, and
Sancti Thomae, quae modo adducunt pro damnatione harum quinque propositionum,
fuerunt adducta a Patribus Societatis contra Fratres Praedicatores in
praedictis Congregationibus, ut ostendemus quando placuerit suae Sanctitati;
and quod caput est, sicut tunc aliqua truncabant and falsificabant, ita and
nunc, cujus rei specimen exhibemus.

Tertia illorum intentio.
ESt In scripto signato N. 4.
pessundare D. Augustini auctoritatem approbatam ab Ecclesia in materia de
gratia and praedestinatione.

Probatur primo. Quia Patet ex scripto N. 2.
hoc sequitur manifest ex damnatione quartae and quintae propositionis.

Secundo. Quia eadem intention quae olim Molina and alii dixerant
irreverenter, P. Annatus, P. Adam, and P. Pallavicinus ejusdem Societatis
renovarunt Et ex scriptio signato.
his temporibus.

Tertio. Quia iisdem locis Scripturae utuntur contra has propositiones, quibus
abutebantur Pelagiani and Semipelagiani contra D. Augustinum Patet hoc ex
scripto signato N. 4.
ut susius ostendetur, cum sua Sanctitas dignabitur audire.

The third Writing.
Propositiones quinque expsicatae ex verbis Jansenii.
PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque illis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
Istam dicit Jansenius colligi ex testimoniis D. Augustini. Ita lib. 3 de
gratie Christi c. 13 tom. 3. page 138. col. 2 lit. C in editione Parisiensi
1641.

Explicat autem mentem suam ibidem lit. D. dicens: Eo quod vires voluntatis
infirmae sunt propter concupiscentiam a volendo bono retrahentem, cujus renisu
fit, ut viret voluntatis distrahatur: atque ita homo uon plene velit, non
integre velit, non tota voluntate velit: Talem autem voluntatem non esse
idoneam ut superet aliam vetustate roboratam: quia per illam nondum potest homo
tantum velle quantum sufficit ut volendo faciat: Peterit autem cum habuerit
magnam and robustam; Hanc vero sibi tribuere non est potestatis humanae; sed
solius gratiae Divinae quam proprerea ex fide invocamus. Et postea, Plurimis
autem non dari istam faciendi possibilitatem quae precibus implorati solet.
Deinde quia multi fideles non convertuntur ad invocandam gratiam.

SECUNDA PROPOSITIO.
Gratiae interiori in natura lapsa nunquam resistitur.
HAnc negat Jansenius lib. 1 de gratia Christi c. 16 tom. 3 page 26 lit. C. ubi
admittit gratiam intellectus, and statim litera D explicat, Quod per hujusmodi
gratiam nihil aliud quam scientia praebetur intellectui, qua cognoscat quid
agendum cavendumque sit. Et haec cognitio, inquit, Page 27. col. 2 lit. B. non
minus esse potest in eo qui resistit quam qui obtemperat suae scientiae and
conscientiae. Vnde enim alioquin rebels lumini?

Docet quidem Jansenius lib. 3 de gratia Christi a cap. 2 usque ad cap. 12 non
dari ullum auxilium sufficiens: sed quod negat verbis, reipsa concedit; nam
imprimis admittit illustrationes, inspirationes, etc. lib. 1 de gratia Christi
cap. 16 tom. 3 page 26 lit. C. et sequentibus. Deinde admittit auxilium efficax
respectu alicujus actus imperfecti, quo disponitur homo ad perfectum, lib. 2 de
gratia Christi C. 27 tom. 3 page 86 col. 1 lit. D. Denique in hominibus justis
admittit gratiam habitualem, and virtutes quibus possint operari
supernaturaliter, lib. 3 de gratia Christi cap. 15 and passim alibi. In his
autem tribus plures Doctores Catholici dicunt consistere auxilium sufficiens:
Admittit ergo reipsa Iansenius quod verbis negat.

TERTIA PROPOSITIO.
Ad merendum and demerendum in natura lapsa non requiritur libertas a
necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
HAnc negat Jonsenius tom. 3 lib. 6 de gratia Christi cap. 36 page 308 col. 1
lit. C. dicens: Amplius ergo sine dubio requiritur quam esse voluntarium and
sine violentia, ut sit liberum. Et quid sit illud amplius ibidem explicat,
videlicet, quod sit in hominis potestate, quod simus Domini. Imo addit ibidem
col. 2 lit. A. in omnibus hujus vitae actionibus reperiri indifferentiam
contradictionis and contrarietatis, quamvis neget libertatem consistentem
essentialiter in hujusmodi indifferentia.

QUARTA PROPOSITIO.
Admiserunt Semipelagiani gratiae interioris necessitatem ad singulos actus,
and in hoc erant haeretici quod vellent hujusmodi gratiam talem esse cui posset
humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare.
HAEc sub his verbis non est Jansenii, sed solum colligitur ex illo lib. 8 de
haeresi Pelagiani c. 6, 7 and 8 tom. 1. praesertim page 193 col. 2 lit. D.
Semipelagianos fuisse haereticos, quod vellent hujusmodi gratiam non esse de se
efficacem, sed cujus usus in sua cuique voluntate relinqueretur.

QUINTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagianorum error est, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse
aut sanguinem fudisse.
JAnsenius lib. 3 de gratia Christi cap. 10 tom. 3 page 163 col. 1 lit. A.
admittit Christum pro omnibus mortuum esse, Sufficienter, quia sufficiens
pretium obtulit, non tamen efficienter, sive efficaciter; sed, inquit, hoc modo
mortuus est pro solis qui participant beneficium mortis ejus....

The fourth Writing.
PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentious, conantibus, secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque illis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
HAEc prima propositio non est Jansenii: quia solum dicit testimonia D.
Augustini demonstrare illam esse veram. Et sic debet explicari ex ipsomet
Jansenio,

Aliqaa Dei praecepta (scilicet difficiliora ob renisum concupiscentie)
hominibus justis volentibus, conantibus, (scilicet non plene and integre, non
tota voluntate) secundum praesentes quas hahent vires ( id est, secundum vires
voluntatis quae renisu vel resistentia concupiscentiae distrahuntur) sunt
impossibilia (id est, propter coucupiscentiam a volendo bono retrahentem,
voluntas non est idonea ut superet aliam voluntatem vetustate roboratam: quia
per illam nondum potest homo tantum velle quantum sufficit ut volendo faciat:
poterit autem cum magnam and robustam habuerit: hanc vero sibi tribuere non est
potestatis hamanae, sed solius gratiae Dei quam propterea ex fide invocamus,
hoc ipso clarissima voce profitentes deesse nobis sufficietem ad illa praecepta
facienda potestatem). Deest quoque illis gratia qua possibilia fiant (quia
multi fideles non convertuntur ad invocandam gratiam qua possint and
sufficiant, vel non ita petant, ut ad impetrandum necessarium est). Hanc
propositionem intelligit Jansenius de gratia efficaci quam vocat omnipotentem.
Haec omnia sunt ex Jansenio lib. 3 de gratia Christi c. 13.

SECUNDA PROPOSITIO.
Gratiae interiori in natura lapsa nunquam resistitur.
HAEc propositio non habetur in Jansenio, imo illam negat express quatenus
admittit gratiam interiorem, sive gratiam intellectus, quae solum intellectum
afficit, dat scire, non velle, quae cognitio est etiam in eo qui resistit, and
rebellis est lumini; ita lib. 1 de gratia Christi cap. 16. Si autem
intelligatur de gratia interiori, id est, efficaci, omnipotenti, quae intra
voluntatem peragit parts suas, efficiendo volitionem vel fortem vel infirmam:
tunc verum est quod ei nun quam resistitur etiam in omnium sententia, and
propositio est de fide.

TERTIA PROPSITIO.
Ad merendum and demerendum in naturae lapsa non requiritur libertas a
necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
HAEc proposito negarur express a Jansenio lib. 6 de g^atia Christi cap. 36,
ubi dicit, quod ut opu^ sit liberum, and consequenter meritorium vel ^e^
^itorium, aliquid amplus requiritur quam esse voluatarium and sine violentia:
et quid sit illud ampiu^ ^quisitum, explicat ibidem, quod videlicet actiones
sint in hominis potestate, quod simus illarum domini, cum sint cum plena
rationis adverientia. Imo ibidem dicit, semper esse in natura lapsa
indifferentiam contradictionis and contrariet. it is.

Si autem haec propositio intelligatur ut jacet, sic explicati debet, Ad
merendum and demerendum in natura lapsa non requiritur libertas a necessitate
(infallibilitatis consequentiae, etc.) sed sufficit libertas a coactione, id
est, a violentia et necessitate naturali, per quam fit actio sine pleua
rationis advertentia, ut colligitur ex Jansenio lib. 6 de gratia Christi cap.
6; et sic sumpta propositio est de fide.

QUARTA PROPOSITIO.
Admiserunt Semipelagiani gratiae interioris necessitatem ad singulos actus,
etiam ad initium fidei and in hoc erant haeretici quod vellent hujusmodi
gratiam talem esse cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare.
HAEc non habetur in Jansenio: colligitur tamen ex illo lib. 8. de haeresi
Pelagiana cap. 6, 7, 8, ex quibus locis colligitur solum Tom 1 page 293 col. 2
lit. D.
quod Semipelagiani in hoc erant haeretici quod vellent hujusmodi gratiam non
esse de se efficacem, sed cujus usus in sua cuique voluntate relinqueretur,
inquit Jansenius illo cap. 6.

Haec propositio tantum abest quod possit damnari, quin imo est ita certa, ut
oppositum dicere, sit favere Semipelagianis and damnare Augustinum.

QUINTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagianorum errrr est Christum pro omnibus omnino mortuum esse, aut
sanguinem fudisse.
CHristum pro omnibus mortuum esse sufficienter admittit Jansenius Tom. 3 page
163 col. 4 lit. A. Quia sufficiens pretium obtulit.
lib. 3. de gratia Christi cap. 21 ex D. Prospero, addens ex eodem quod quia
proprie redimere est de captivitate cum effectu eruere, Christum non pro
omnibus mortuum esse efficaciter sive efficienter, sed pro solis qui
parricipant beneficium mortis ejus. Quae propositio est de fide.

The fifsh Writing.
PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Hanc objecerunt tanquam inconveniens quod consequitur ex gratia efficaci in
Congregatione sive disputatione 37 and 38, 41 and 45. Et revera est S.
Augustini de gratia and libero arbitrio cap. 17 and Concilii Carthag. approbati
a. Caelestino I epistola ad EpiscopoS Galliae cap. 10 and Concilii Araus. 2.
can. 9.

Hanc eandem objectionem tanquam inconveniens ex gratia essicaci affert
Pseudo-Suarez Lugduni anno 1652, lib. 5 cap. 10, 11 16 and 24. and prosequitur
P. Annatus, qui hoc anno 1653. Parisiis mandavit typis librum, lib. 3 cap. 4
sect. 8. and P. Adam in libro Gallice scripto etiam de novo typis mandato, qui
PP sunt ex societate Jesu.


Aligua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus sunt
impossibilia secundum praesentes quas habent vires: deest quoque illis gratia
qua possibilia fiant.
SENSUS CATHOLICUS.
A Liqua Dei praecepta non possunt impleri ab hominibus justis, volentibus, and
conantibus affectu and conatu imperfecto proveniente a gratia sufficient per
solam gratiam habitualem and sufficientem sine gratia efficaci, sine qua non
possunt possibilitate cum effectu, ut loquitur Augustinus cap. 42. de natura
and gratia, sive in sensu composito ut aiunt Scholastici.

SECT. 1.
SI damnetur haec prima propositio in hoc sensu, definietur nullum gratiam de
se efficacem aut actualem esse necessariam, and tota Molinae doctrina de
viribus liberi arbitrii in natura lapsa stabiliretur de fide, quamvis judicata
sit Semipelagiana in Congregationibus de Auxiliis sub Clemence VIII. and Paulo
V. damnata una propositione contradictoria illius: haec autem, omnia Dei
praecepta hominibus justis sunt possibilia, secundum eas quas habent vires, nec
deest illis gratia qua possibilia fiant, est contradictoria illius quae
praemissa est; ergo, hac damnata, illa definitur: ex ista vero sequitur primo,
non esse necessariam gratiam de se efficacem hominibus justis ad implenda
praecepta, quae est etiam doctrina Molina in Concord. page 9, 14,, a. 13 disp.
37 and 38. De Novat. Pseudo-Suar. lib. 5 c. 6 and seq.
Molinae. Sequela probatur. Illud non est necessarium ad aliquid, sine quo
illud est possibile, vel potest fieri; atqui sine gratia de se efficaci
praecepta sunt hominibus justis possibilia; ergo haec gratia non est necessaria
ad implenda praecepta. Contra quod judicatum est a Congregatione Congregat. 9,
anno 1598. Congreg. 17 and 18 anno 1600. Congreg. 37, 38, 49. 1601. and in 16
Congreg. coram Paulo V. and in Congreg. 7 and 12, post disputationes 1607. and
in praeparatione Bullae prop. 28 and seqq.
de Auxiliis ad Divinum Aug. de corr. and great. cap. 12.
Augustinum.

Sequitur secundo. Nullam gratiam actualem esse necessariam justo ad implenda
aliqua praecepta, quod etiam docet Molina disp. 40. sect. occasion
Pseudo-Suar. lib. 3 c. 8 n. 17.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Ad illud quod est alicui possibile secundum
praesentes quas habet vires, non est aliud necessarium, alias non esset
possibile; Atqui justo sunt praecepta possibilia secundum praesentes quas habet
vires; Ergo non est aliud necessarium, nec consequenter gratia actualis contra
judicium consulentium in Congregatione 6. 1598. and in praeparatione Bullae
prop. 36.
Congregationibus, and contra easdem definitiones, Innocentius Iepistolis ad
Patres Concilii Cartbag. and Milev.
and contra D. Aug. de gratia Christi cap. 17.
Augustinum.

Sequitur tertio, Gratiam habitualem vel actualem esse duntaxat necessariam,
non ut impleantur praecepta, and ut vitetur peccatum, sed solum ut actus quibus
implentur, sint supernaturales. Quae est etiam doctrina Molina loco citato
disp. 83. porro and disp. 40. Sect. Occasion. Pseudo-Suar. lib. 4. c. 16. n.
12. and 14.
Molinae. Probatur sequela. Ad illud solum requi^i^ur gratia vel actualis vel
habitualis, quod praestat actibus nostris ut sint supernaturales; Ergo gratia
habitualis vel actualis solum requiritur ut actus quibus implentur praecepta
sint supernaturales. Contra quam doctrinam judicatum est in Congregationibus
Congregationes citatae in number. 5.
praedictis, and est contra D. D. Aug. ep. 94.
Augustinum.

Sequitur quarto, Vires hominis in natura lapsa in ordine ad bonum natural
esse aequales viribus quas habuisser, si fuisset condi^us in puris naturalibus,
quae est etiam sententia Molina in Concord. citat. disput. 3. 5. and
sequentibus.
Molinae. Probatur sequela. Si gratia non est necessaria nisi ad hoc ut actus
sint supernaturales, sine graria possumus elicere omnes actus naturales, ut est
evidens; sed ex dictis gratia non est necessaria nisi ut actus nostri sint
supernaturales. Ergo sine ipsa possumus elicere omnes actus naturales quos
potuissemus elicere in natura pura, atque adeo habemus easdem vires modo ut
tunc: quam doctrinam esse periculosam and destruere peccatum originale
judicarunt Consultores in citatis Congr. 7. an. 1598. Congr. 1. 2. and seq.
1600. Congr. 8. and 10. 1601. Congreg. 2. 14. and 16. 1602. Congreg. 1. post
disp. 1606. prop. 1. in praeparatione Buallae.
Congregationibus, quia revera est contra S. August. passim, praesertim cap.
12. de corr. and great.
D. Augustinum.

Sequitur quinto, Hominem in natura lapsa posse elicere actum bonum moraliter,
qui sit verae virtutis opus fini ultimo naturali accommodatum: quod etiam docet
Molina Concord. cit. disp. 5.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Homo in natura pura poterat elicere actum bonum
moraliter qui esset verae virtutis opus accommodatum fini ultimo naturali; sed
idem potest in natura lapsa quod tunc potuisset. Ergo potest hujusmodi actum
elicere, and consequenter eliciendo frequenter hujusmodi actus, potest sine
gratia acquirere veras virtutes; seque totum rectificare and ordinate in Deum
ut finem ultimum naturalem, atque adeo resurgere a peccato, ut demonstravit P.
Lemos, and judicarunt Consultores in Congreg. cit. n. 12.
Congregationibus de Auxiliis, in quibus censuerunt esse contra S. Aug. lib.
contra Julianum. c. 3.
D. Augustinum.

Sequitur sexto, Posse hominem solis viribus naturae lapsae assentiri revelatis
assensu firmo sed naturali: quod etiam infert Molina ibid. disp. 7.
Pseudo-Suar. supra cit.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Possumus in natura lapsa sola facultate naturae
elicere omnes actus naturales, ut ostensum est; sed iste assensus, quamvis
firmus, est mere naturalis ex Molina; ergo possumus illum ex naturalibus
elicere sine gratia: quae doctrina judicata est Pelagiana and Semipelagiana in
Congregationibus Congr. 7. an. 1558. Cong. 62. 3. 6. 1600. Congr. 10. 1601.
Congr. 2. 1602. and in praepar. Bullae prop. 9.
de Auxiliis, quia est contra D. Aug. cit. lib. de praedest. SS.
Beatum Augustinum.

Sequitur septimo, Posse hominem in natura lapsa absque gratia sperare,
diligere Deum super omnia, atteri and conteri de peccatis, resistere cuilibet
tentationi etiam gravissimae, and etiam si mori oporteat pro servanda lege
naturali: quae etiam sunt secundum sententiam Molin. concord. cit. disp. 13,
14. and 19.
Molinae. Prob. sequela. Quia isti omnes actus sunt mere naturales, ergo
possumus istos elicere. Quam doctrinam esse pure Pelagianam censuerunt Cong. 7.
an. 1598. Cong. 10, 11. and 12. 1606. Cong. 29, 30. and 31. 1601. Cong. 45, 46:
and 49. eodem anno. Cong. 3. and 6. 1606. in praeparatione Bullae prop. 10, 11.
and seq.
Consultores de Auxiliis, and est contra S. Augustinum.

Sequitur octavo, dari legem infallibilem, qua statutum sit a Deo auferendam
gratiam facienti quod in se est ex viribus naturae lapsae sine gratia: quod and
docet Molina in Concord. cit. disp. 10. Renovat Pseudo-Suar. lib. 4. cap. 13.
and seqq.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Debet dari illa lex sine qua sequeretur hominem
justificari per solas naturae vires; sed sine ista sequeretur quod homo
diligendo Deum super omnia actu mere naturali, averteret se a creatura quam
sibi constituerat ultimum finem per peccarum mortale, and converteret se ad
Deum ut finem ultimum naturalem, utpote quem super omnia diligeret: igitur
debet dari talis lex. Quae doctrina Molinae pluries notata est Pelagiana a
Congr. 7. an. 1598. Congr. 3. 1600. Congr. 13. and 42. 1601. Congr. 32. and 34.
1602. and 1603. Congr. 3. 1606. and in praepar. Bullae prop. 5. and 6.
Censoribus in Congreg. de Auxiliis, and revera repugnat S. Aug. lib. de gratia
and liber. arb. c. 21. and 22.
Augustino.

Et ecce totam Molinae doctrinam de viribus liberi arbitrii in natura lapsa
definitam, si damnetur prima propositio secundum sensum adductum: quare loco
illius proponemus sanctae Sedi judicandum de sequenti.

Molina in Concord. disp. 17. adjuncta disp. 40. and aliis citatis in hoc Sect.
Singula Dei praecepta in natura lapsa absque ulla gratia nedum justis sed
etiam infidelibus quantumcunque graviter tentatis, and quamvis oporteat mortem
subire, sunt possibilia secundum praesentes quas habent vires, ita ut de facto
non transgrediantur illa: quod si fecerint, actu mere naturali Deus dabit illis
gratiam qua justificationem consequantur.

SECUNDA PROPOSITIO.
Ester 13. Isaiae 46, 47. and 55. ad Philippenses 2.
Gratiae interiori in natura lapsa nunquam resistitur.
SENSUS CATHOLICUS.
Supposito quod S. Aug. in Euchirid. cap. 75, 76, 77, 83, 85. Et de gratia
Christi cap. 14.
D. Augustinus vocet gratiam efficacem interiorem, and omnem aliam rejiciat ad
legem atque doctrinam, sitque proposito Haec propositio fuit objecta disp. 10.
de Auxiliis coram Clemente VIII. and disp. 39, 41, 41. and 44. coram Paulo V.
Gratiae interiori, id est efficaci, in natura lapsa (in qua homo specialiter
indiget gratia) nunquam resistitur; debet admitti ab omnibus.

SECT. II.
SI damnetur secunda propositio in sensu explicato, de fide erit, non dari
gratiam de se efficacem; and tota doctrina Molinae de efficacia gratiae, de
dono perseverantiae and de praedestinatione definietur.

Item, si secunda propositio damnetur in sensu explicato, ejus contradictoria
erit de fide: contradictoria vero est ista, Gratiae interiori aliquando
resistitur; and cum propositiones indefinitae in materia de fide intelligantur
universaliter, nisi aliter explicentur, sensus illius prioris erit, Cuicunque
gratiae interiori in natura lapsa aliquando resistitur. Ex qua

Sequitur primo, nullam dati gratiam de se efficacem, quod etiam infert Molina
in Concord. cit. disp. 37. and 38. Renovat Pseudo-Suar. lib. 5. c. 4. n. 11.
etc. 37. and 38. and P. Annatus lib. 4. c. 8. page 361.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Gratia cui resistitur non est de se efficax, ut
probatur ex terminis: sed Cuicunque gratiae interiori aliquando resistitur, ex
dictis: ergo nulla datur gratia de se efficax, sed omnis gratia est efficax ex
eventu; quae sententia damnata est a In Congr. cit. Sect. praeced. number. 2.
Congregatione de Auxiliis tanquam erronea and contra D. Aug. praesertim c. 14.
and 15. de corr. and great.
S. Augustinum.

Sequitur secundo, donum perseverantiae in adultis esse entitative gratiam cui
aliquando resistitur, quod etiam docuit Molina in Concord. p. 1. q. 23. art. 4.
and 5. disp. 1. memb. ult. Sect. 2.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Cuicunque gratiae interiori aliquando resistitur:
sed donum perseverantiae in adultis est gratia interior: ergo dono
perseverantiae aliquando resistitur. Quam doctrinam judicarunt Congr. 8. an.
1598. Congr. 12. an. 1600. Congr. 32. and 46. an. 1601. Congr. 22. an. 1603.
Congr. 8. an. 1606. in praepar. Bullae prop. 38, 39, 40. and 41.
Consultores de Auxiliis adversari Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 16.
Concilio Tridentino and Aug. de corr. and gratia cap. 12.
Augustino.

Sequitur tertio, donum perseverantiae non habere effectum infallibilem, nisi
ea praevisione quod homo illi non resisteret, sed consentiret, ut etiam docet
Molina loc. cit. number. 4.
Molina. Prob. sequela. Gratia cui aliquando resistitur, non habet infallibilem
effectum, nisi praevideatur quod homo illi non resister, sed consentiet; quae
doctrina a Congr. 9. an. 1548. Congr. 13. an. 1600. Congr. 32, 33, 46. and 47.
an. 1601. Congr. 22, 60, 62. and 64. an. 1604. Congr. an. 7. 1606. in praepar.
Bullae prop. 42.
Consultoribus judicata est Semipelagiana and contra Aug. toto lib. de dono
persev. etc. 12. de corr. and gr.
S. Augustinum.

Sequitur quarto, praedestinationem non posse fieri nisi post praevisa opera
hominis, quod etiam docet Molina q. 23. a. 4. and 5. disp. 1.
Molina, Probatur sequela. Praeparatio mediorum quibus certissime aliqui
liberentur, non potest fieri nisi media sint infallibilia and certa, id est,
habeant infallibilem effictum; sed praedestinatio est praeparatio mediorum
quibus certissime aliqui liberantur, ut docent cum Aug. de praedest. SS. c. 8.
S. Augustino omnes, and media non sunt certa nisi praevideatur quod non
resistet, sed potius consentiet, ut patet ex dictis; Ergo praedestinatio fieri
non potest nisi praevideatur quod homo non resistet, sed consentiet. Quam
doctrinam Molinae Cong. 11. an. 1598. Cong. 40. and 50. an. 1601. Cong. 30. an.
1603. Congr. 8. an. 1606. in praepar. Bullae prop. 33.
Censores a S. Sede deputati arbitrati sunt periculosam in fide, and contra S.
Aug. toto lib. de praedest. SS. praesertim cap. 10.
Sanctum Augustinum.

Pro hac secunda propositione reponimus hanc examinandam: Gratiae cuicunque,
quamvis praevenienti ex intention Dei volentis salvum facere, aliquando
resistitur.

TERTIA PROPOSITIO.
Hanc objecerunt disp. 37, 38, and 39, 42, 43, 44, and 45.
Ad merendum and demerendum in natura lapsa non requiritur libertas a
necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
SENSUS CATHOLICUS.
HUjus propositionis sensus Catholicus est, quod ad meritum vel demeritum non
requiritur libertas a necessitate infallibilitatis quoad specificationem in
communi sententia, sed sufficit libertas a coactione quae in doctrina Sancti
Augustini sumitur and pro violentia and pro necessitate natura li and
simpliciter.

SECT. III.
SI damnetur tertia propositio in sensu explicato, de fide stabilietur
impossibilem esse gratiam de se efficacem, dari de facto scientiam mediam, and
Christum electum esse ex meritis.

Si semel definitum sit de fide, ad meritum and demeritum requiri libertatem ab
omni necessitate, de fide etiam erit impossibilem esse etiam gratiam de se
efficacem, quod etiam docet Molina p. 1. 23. a. 4. and 5. disp. 1. membro 6.
Sect. Certe non dubitatem. Renovat Pseudo-Suar. lib. 5. cap. 19. and P. Annatus
lib. 4. cap. 7.
Molina. Sequela ita probatur. Quod repugnat libertati necessariae ad meritum,
est impossible in homine viatore; sed gratia de se efficax repugnat libertati
ab omni necessitate necessariae ad meritum, nam gratia de se efficax spectat
necessitatem infallibilitatis; ergo gratia de se efficax erit impossibilis. Hoc
tamen censuerunt In Congr. cit. Sect. 1. n. 2.
Consultores de Auxiliis esse Semipelagianum and contra Aug. de praedest. SS.
cap. 10.
S. Augustinum.

Sequitur secundo, dati scientiam mediam quam docet Molina in Concord. q. 14.
art. 13. disp. 50. Pseudo-Suar. Prolog. and supponit P. Annatus.
Molina. Probatur sequela. Datur illud sine quo non potest salvari in nostris
operibus libertas ab omni necessitate, etiam infallibilitatis: sed sine
scientia media hoc non potest salvati, ut docet Molina: and ratio est quia si
decretum Dei antecedat praevisionem nostri consensus, consensus noster sequetur
necessario necessitate infallibilitatis; ergo debet dati scientia media, quam
censuerunt Congr. 10. an. 1598. Congr. 12. an. 1600. Congr. 13. and 46. an
1601. Congr. 60. and 62. an. 1604. Congr. 8. an. 1606. and inpraepar. Bullae
prop. 31.
Consultores sacrae Congregationis esse Pelagianam and contra D. Aug. toto
libro de praedest. SS.
S. Augustinum.

Sequitur tertio, Deum decrevisse offerre excellentiora dona animae Christi
quia praevidit eam pro sua innata liberate usuram esse illis, ut express
asserit Molina Concord. p. 1. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m. 9. Sect. Illud
autem.
Molina. Probatur sequela: quia alias usus ille donorum non fuisset in Christo
meritorius, utpote cum non esset liber ab omni necessitate. Si enim Deus
decernat aliquem actum ante praevisum consensum voluntatis creatae, actus ille
non est liber liberate sufficient ad meritum, ut dicit propositio. Ex quo
manifest infertur contra expressa verba D. Pauli Christum non meruisse sibi
vel nobis per actum quo voluit obedire, nisi ea ratione quod Deus praevidit eum
pro sua innata liberate usurum illis excellentioribus donis, quod quantum
faveat Arianis and Nestorianis, constare videtur ex S. Athan. orat. 2. contra
Arianos.
Athanasio, Alexander Episc. Alexandr. in epistolis.
Alexandro Episcopo Alexandrino, S. Aug. de praedest. SS. cap. 15.
Augustino, S. Prosper in epitaphio haeresis Pelagianae and Nestorianae.
Prospero and aliis, judicet sancta Seeds.

Pro hac ergo tertia propositione reponimus istam:

Vasquez 1 p. q. 19. art. 10. circa solutionem 1 argum.
Ad meritum requiritur potentia peccandi, quae est laudabilis, est a Deo, and
est pars libertatis.

QUARTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagiani admittebant gratiae interioris necessitatem ad singulos actus,
In scriptis datis Congregationi ann. 1601. ad 16. prop. in disp. 10. ann. 1602.
and 38. ann. 1605. and 39. and 44. ann. 1606. sustinuerunt Semipelagianos
nullam gratiam interiorem admisisse ad initium fidei vel perseverantiam.
etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici, quod dicebant voluntatem
illi gratiae posse resistere vel obtemperare.
SENSUS CATHOLICUS.
HUjus propositionis sensus Catholicus est, quod Semipelagiani fuerunt
haeretici quia negarunt Contra istam scribit P. Annatus and Pseudo-Suarez l. 5.
c. 47. n. 6.
gratiam de se efficacem, cum qua non potest conjungi dissensus vel
resistentia, cum semper voluntas etiam consentiendo retineat potentiam ad
dissensum.

SECT. IV.
SI damnetur haec quarta propositio sic explicita, sequitur nullam esse
auctoritatem S. Augustini, justas fuisse querelas Pelagianorum, and
Semipelagianorum and Molinae adversus S. Augustinum, cujus doctrina immerito
fuisset approbata, and illi injuste fuissent damnati.

Damnata hac quarta propositione in sensu allato, sequitur Semipelagianos non
errasse negando gratiam de se efficacem, sed solum negando ad initium fidei and
perseverantiam, gratiam interiorem determinabilem ex consensu vel dissensu
voluntatis posito vel praeviso. Sequela est evidens supposita legitima
explicatione propositionis. Oppositum judicatum est in Congregationibus de In
Congr. citatis Sect. 1. n. 2.
Auxiliis.

Sequitur secundo Pelagianos errasse non admittendo ad omnia opera gratiam
interiorem determinabilem. Probatur sequela: Eandem gratiam quam negarunt
Semipelagiani ad initium fidei and ad perseverantiam, negarunt Pelagiani ad
omnia opera, and in hoc tam hi quam illi fuerunt haeretici. Idcirco enim dicti
sunt Semipelagiani, quia mediam partem haeresis Pelagianae tuebantur. Sed ex
dictis Semipelagiani fuerunt haeretici negando gratiam solam interiorem
determinabilem. Ergo Pelagiani quoad hunc articulum suerunt haeretici negando
necessitatem gratiae interiotis determinabilis: quae est doctrina sequacium
Suarez proleg. 5. de great. c. 4. and 5.
Molinae proscripta in In eisdem Congregationibus.
Congregationibus de Auxiliis.

Sequitur tertio, quaestionem de adjutorio divino inter D. Augustinum ex una
part, and Pelagianos and Semipelagianos ex altera, solum fuisse de gratia illa
determinabili quam illi haeretici negabant, Augustinus vero probabat tanquam de
fide. Sequela probatur: quia intendebat Augustinus uti haeretici admitterent
gratiamillam quam negando erant haeretici: sed non erant haeretici nisi negando
gratiam illam determinabilem: ergo D. Augustinus intendebat ut illam
admitterent.

Sequitur quarto, gratiam illam determinabilem de qua erat quaestio, non
debuisse explicari nominibus express vel aequivalenter significantibus, quod
sit determinans vel determinativa, praesertim quae scandali, turbationis and
erroris possent esse causa. Probatur sequela: Doctor Catholicus debet exprimere
rem de fide sicut est, non autem verbis oppositis, praesertim quando est
admonitus quod hujusmodi nomina sunt causa scandali, turbationis and erroris.
Sed D. Augustinus fuit admonitus Constat ex epist. 46, 47. initio de corr. and
great. Et ex epist. B. Prosperi and D. Hilarii ad Augustinum.
quod verba quibus utebatur, quae exprimunt quod hujusmodi gratia sit
determinans, erant causa turbationis, scandali and erroris. Ergo non debuit
Augustinus uti hujusmodi verbis.

Sequitur quinto, D. Augustinum excessisse debitum modum explicandi gratiam de
qua erat controversia inter ipsum and praefatos haereticos, quod tamen est
contra expressam Caelestinus 1 ep. ad Episc. Galliae.
Caelestini I definitionem. Probatur sequela: Dicere quod per gratiam voluntas
S. Aug. de corr. and great. c. 12.
indeclinabiliter and insuperabiliter agitur and Idem ibidem.
inclinatur a Deo quo ipse voluerit and quando voluerit omnipotentissima
potestate, ita ut volenti Deo salvum facere nullum hominis resistat arbitrium,
nulla voluntas divinam impeciat voluntatem, vel superet potestatem, humanae
voluntates non poss^t resistere, Idem de praedest. SS. c. 8.
nemo veniat ad Christum nisi c^ illa gratia datur, at omnis cui datur veniat,
ut per iliam Idem de corr. and great. c. 12.
voluntas Dei semper justa faciat nos bonum invictissime velle, and hoc
deserete invictissim^ nolle, per quam non solum homines perseverare possint,
sed non nisi perseverantes sint, ratione cujus Idem de corr. and great. c. 14.
voluntates hominum Deus magis habeat in sua potestate quam ipsi suas. His,
inquam, similibus verbis exprimere gratiam, est aequivalenter dicere quod
gratia illa est determinans vel determinativa liberi arbitrii, ut omnes qui
Latinam linguam callent, satis intelligunt: and his omnibus utitur Augustinus:
sed ex jam dictis uti verbis aequivalenter significantibus, quod gratia illa de
qua erat quaestio, est determinans, est excedere: ergo S. Augustinus debitum
modum excessit.

Sequitur sexto, injuste fecisse Pontifices, imo errasse Caelestinus, 1 ep. ad
quosdam Galliae Episcopos, cap. 2.
Caelestinum, Gelasium, Hormisdas ad Possessorem.
Hormisdam and alios approbantes doctrinam Augustini, and justas fuisse
querelas Constat hanc fuisse querelam Massiliensium contra D. Augustinum, quod
sic explicaret gratiam; ex epist. B. Hilarii ad Aug. Sect. Deinde moleste
ferunt.
Massiliensium quantum ad hoc, atque adeo ipsos fuisse injuste damnatos.
Probatur sequela: injustum est approbare excessum, and justa est querela contra
excedentes: sed ex dictis S. Augustinus excessit in explicanda gratia: ergo
justae fuerunt querelae Massiliensium, and injuste and erronee praefati
Pontifices approbarunt doctrinam Augustini, quam cum Clemens VIII. approbaret,
and revocarunt in dubium an esset de fide quod ipse esset verus Christi
Vicarius.

Pro hac ergo quarta propositione reponimus istam.

Haec prima pars propositionis ex locis S. August. citatis:
D. Augustinus admisit gratiam per quam voluntas hominis insuperabiliter and
indeclinabiliter agit, and in hoc excessit praesertim dicendo quod voluntates
humanae non resistunt neque possunt resistere: Haec secunda Molinae in Concord.
p. 1. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m. ult.
quod si ab eo dogmata de gratia, perseverantia, and praedestinatione aliter
data explanataque fuissent, forte neque Pelagiana haeresis usquam exorta
fuisset, neque Lutherani tam impudenter liberi arbitrii nostri libertatem
fuissent ausi negare, neque ex Augustini opinione concertationibusque cum
Pelagianis tot fideles fuissent turbati, ad Pelagianosque defecissent,
facileque reliquiae Pelagianorum fuissent extinctae.

QUINTA PROPOSITIO.
Hoc argumento utehantur ad gratiam sufficientem determinabilem a libero
arbitrio; disp. 17. coram Clem. VIII. Contra istam scribit P. Annatus l. 4. c.
5.
Error Semipelagianorum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse.
SENSUS CATHOLICUS.
SEnsus Catholicus istius propositionis est, errasse Semipelagianos in hoc quod
asseruerint Christum ita pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse, ut
promeruerit de facto omnibus auxilia omnino necessaria ad hoc ut salutem
assequantur.

SECT. V.
SI damnetur quinta propositio in sensu allato, sequitur D. Augustinum male
interpretatum fuisse illum locum Ad Timot. 2. 2 ad Cor. 5.
D. Pauli, Vult omnes homines salvos fieri, and sua hac interpretatione fideles
turbasse, ejusque occasion salutem eorum fuisse periclitatam.

Haec omnia quae contra auctoritatem D. Augustini leguntur, renovat P. Annatus
toto lib. 8. and P. Adam, ut constabit ex alio scripto quod offertur.
Si damnetur quinta propositio in sensu praedicto, de fide erit non errasse
Semipelagianos, dum de omnibus universim hominibus interpretati sunt illud D.
Pauli, Christus pro omnibus mortuus est. Ex quo

Molina p. 1. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m. 9.
Sequitur primo, illos etiam non errasse dum eodem modo interpretati sunt illud
aliud ejusdem Apostoli, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri. Probatur sequela:
quia pro iis omnibus mortuus est Christus quos Deus vult salvos fieri, etc
contra. Adversarii vero noluerunt proponere hanc propositionem, Deus vult omnes
homines salvos fieri, quia cum sit notissimum illam limitatam esse a D.
Augustino, aperte judicati essent adversarii doctrinae D. Augustini.

Sequitur secundo, limitationem quam adhibet D. Augustinus huic loco, ut non
intelligatur nisi de praedestinatis, non sequi ex iis quae tanquam de fide
docuit D. Aug. in Enchir. c. 103. and de corr. and great. cap. 14. and 15.
Augustinus, and approbarunt summi Pontifices circa gratiam and
praedestinationem. Probatur sequela; error est dogma contrarium illius quod
sequitur ex certis de fide, nam in hoc differt haeresis ab errore, quod
haeresis est contraria iis quae sunt de fide, error vero est contrarius iis
quae sequuntur ex certis de fide: sed explicatio omnino universalis
praedictorum locorum D. Pauli non est error: ergo non est contraria
explicationi limitanti, ut patet: ergo explicatio illa limitans non sequitur ex
iis quae sunt de fide circa gratiam and praedestinationem.

Sequitur tertio, quod D. Augustinus credens ex iis quae de fide docuerat circa
gratiam and praedestinationem, sequi illam suam explicationem limitantem,
deceptus est, and sic Molina comment. ad 1 p. q. 23 art. 4 and 5 disp. 1. Et in
Concord. ibid. m. ult. Sect. Credens.
quasi sub caligine non attendit. Probatur sequela: quia credit aliquid esse
quod non est, decipitur and sub quasi caligine existens non attendit. Sed D.
Aug. de dono persev. c. 19. etc. 14. de corr. and gr.
S. Augustinus credidit illam suam explicationem limitantem sequi ex iis quae
de fide docuerat: ergo deceptus est and sub quasi caligine existens non
attendit.

Sequitur quarto, D. Augustinum hac sua falsa doctrina Molina loco proxime
citato.
turbasse imprudenter plurimos ex fidelibus, and illius occasion salutem eorum
esse periclatatam. Probatur sequela: Doctor Ecclesiae docens aliqua falsa quae
sunt occasio scandali, turbationis et ruinae spiritualis apud fideles,
imprudenter turbat illos, et illius occasion salus eorum periclitatur: sed D.
Augustinus docuit illam doctrinam falsam and malam quae fuit occasio
turbationis, scandali and ruinae spiritualis, ut asserit Molina: ergo D.
Augustinus imprudenter turbavit plurimos ex fidelibus, and illius occasion
salus eorum periclitata est, imo semel and iterum admonitus non correxit, sed
potius confirmavit.

Quare pro quinta propositione hanc reponimus.

D. Augustinus sua doctrina, qua ex certis de fide intulit Deum non velle omnes
omnino homines salvos fieri, and Christum non pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse, turbavit mirum in modum plurimos ex fidelibus, non solum
indoctos, sed etiam doctissimos viros atque in Episcopali dignitate
constitutos, ne dicam illius occasion salutem illorum fuisse periclitatam.

The sixth Writing.
De gratia sufficient.
VEI Jansenius sibi contradicit negando in quibusdam locis gratiam
sufficientem, and reipsa admittendo in aliis, vel non sibi contradicit: quia
quando illam negat, intelligit in uno sensu, and quando illam admittit,
intelligit in alio.

Si sibi contradicit affirmando and negando eandem gratiam sufficientem in
eodem sensu, oportet prius explicare quam damnare, ne petatur a Sede Apostolica
ut definiat contradictoria.

Si non contradicat sibi, sed solum in uno sensu affirmet gratiam sufficientem,
et in ailo neget, explicandum est quis sit sensus falsus et qui verus, ne
oriatur confusio in Ecclesia Dei, et ne simul cum Jansenio reputentur damnati
qui verum sensum defendunt: nam gratia sufficiens multis modis explicatur.

Aliqui enim Theologi arbitrantur in homine justo de quo est prima propositio,
non dari aliam gratiam sufficientem nisi gratiam habitualem, dona et virtutes
infusas, quasdam inspirationes et excitationes morales; et hoc modo explicant
gratiam sufficientem Academiae Salmanticensis, Lovaiensis et Duacensis in
censuris adversus Lessium et Molinam.

Gratiam vero habitualem, dona, virtutes, inspirationes et excitationes morales
admittit Jansenius lib. 3 de great. Christi. cap. 6 et cap. 15.

Alii dicunt quod gratia quae est efficax respectu actuum imperfectorum, et
quae efficaciter facit, ut homo eliciat libere quaedam imperfecta desideria et
velleitates, eadem est gratia sufficiens respectu actuum perfectiorum, quia
disponit ad illos, et dat homini ut possit illos elicere.

Hanc autem gratiam sufficientem hoc sensu admittit Jansenius, ut patet ex
prima propositione, et ex lib. 3. de great. Christi cap. 27, quamvis nolit eam
vocari sufficientem, quia ultra illam requirituralia: in quo dissentit a
Thomistis.

Quidam vero Theologi, quamvis pauci, admittunt dari gratiam pure sufficientem,
quae nullo modo sit efficax, etiam respectu actuum imperfectorum: sed addunt
ultra hanc gratiam sufficientem requiri aliam efficacem, ut homo de facto
eliciat actus quoscunque, etiam imperfectos; et hanc gratiam sufficientem
impugnat Jansenius lib. 3 de great. Christi cap. 1, 2 et 3.

Denique Theologi Societatis contendunt da^i gratiam sufficientem ultra quam ad
operandum non requiritur alia gratia praeveniens, sed illa sufficit er
determinatur a libero arbitrio; et hanc cum omnibus Theologis Ordinis
Praedicatorum impugnat Iansenius tanquam Pelagianam et Semipelagianam, ut patet
eodem libro 3 cap. 3 et seq.

Si ergo damnandus est Iansenius, debet explicari in quo sensu damnetur: nam si
damnetur quia negat gratiam sufficientem qualem explicant Patres Societatis,
definitur tota causa de Auxiliis, et damnantur cum Iansenio omnes qui admittunt
gratiam de se efficacem.

Si autem damnetur quia negat gratiam pure sufficientem, cum illo damnabuntur
plures et maximi Theologi.

Denique si damnetur quia eam gratiam quam nonnulli vocant sufficientem, ipse
non vult sic vocari, tunc damnabitur ob solum modum loquendi, et semper cavenda
erit fraus et aequivocatio.

The seventh Writing.
Brevis responsio ad objectiones.
Adversus primam propositionem.
1 OBjiciunt D. Thomam q. 24. de verit. a. 12, Nec liberum arbitrium tollimus,
cum dicimus quodlibet peccatum singulariter liberum arbitrium posse vitare.

Respondemus D. Thomam satis se explicare dum paulo post addit, Quamvis non
sine divino auxilio, quod hominem sua providentia ad bona agenda and mala
vitanda gubernat; quod non potest intelligi nisi de auxilio efficaci quo Deus
gubernat.

2. Objiciunt D. Thomam ibid. ad 7. Aliquis in mortali existens potest vitare
omnia peccata mortalia auxilio gratiae: potest etiam ex naturali virtute
singula vitare, quamvis non omnia; and ideo non sequitur, quod peccatum
committendo non peccet.

Respondemus verum hoc esse, sed cum auxilio divino, ut dixit in corpore; and
quia illud auxilium non solebat vocari gratia, ut express dicit D. Thomas ib.
art. 4. ideo naturali virtute dicitur posse, quomodo D. Paulus dicit, Gentes
quae legem non habent, naturaliter quae legis sunt faciunt.

3. Objiciunt D. Thomam art. 13. ejusdem quaest. Quia nullus motus liberi
arbitrii praecedit plenam deliberationem pertrahens ad peccatum quasi
inclinatione habitus, ideo potest omnia mortalia vitare.

Respondemus, in homine justo nullus motus inordinatus quo ad^aereat ultimo
fini inordinato praecedit, quia jam poenituit and justificatus est, ideo potest
omnia vitare, non tamen sine auxilio divino, ut dixit articulo praecedenti, and
iterum dicit articulo sequenti.

4. Objiciunt. art. 14 ad 12. Recte homo corripitur qui praeceptum non implet,
quia ex ejus negligentia est quod gratiam non habet, per quam potest servare
mandata quantum ad modum: cum possit nihilominus per liberum arbitrium ea
servare quantum ad substantiam.

Respondemus per gratiam habitualem hominem posse servare mandata quantum ad
modum meriti, and quantum ad substantiam posse illa servare, non tamen sine
mesericordia Dei, per quam interius motum mentis operatur, sine qua nullum
bonum homo potest facere, ut express dicit Divus Thomas ibid in corp. art.

5. Objiciunt D. Thomam 3 p. q. 86. art. 1. Dicere quod aliquod peccatum sit in
hac vita, de quo aliquis poenitere non possit, erroneum est, quia per hoc
tolleretur libertas arbitrii, and derogaretur virtuti gratiae cujuscunque
peccatoris ad poenitendum.

Respondemus locum hunc truncatum referri; si afferatur integer, affert
solutionem: sic ergo habet, and derogaretur virtuti gratiae per quam moveri
potest cor cujuscunque peccatoris ad poenitendum secundum istud Proverb. 21.
Cor Regis in manu Domini, quocunque voluerit vertet illud. Qui locus manifest
loquitur de gratia efficaci qua moveri potest cor peccatoris cujuscunque ad
poenitendum, and qua sola cor Regis Deus vertit.

6. Objiciunt Alvarem disp. 71 de Auxiliis n. 9. and n. 12. Gonzalem 1 p. q.
23. art. 8. n. 18, and n. 24. et q. 19. art. 8. disp. 58. sect. 2. n. 16. et
Cabreram 3 p. q. 18. art. 4. disp. 6. dub. 5. concl. 2 et Petrum de Ledesma de
Auxiliis quaest. unica, art. 16. concl. 3.

Respondemus, admissis illis omnibus quae dicunt hi Auctores, adhuc veram esse
propositionem, etiam apud illos. Apud Alvarem disp. 88. Gonzalem citatum in
objectione paulo post verba objecta, Cabreram ibid. dub. 3 ad 1 confirmat. 6
argum. et ad 1 confirmat. 8 argum. Ledesmam ibid. art. 14 ad 2 et 3.

Adversus secundam propositionem.
1. Objiciunt D. Thomam contra Gentes cap. 152. Cum in potestate, etc.

Respondemus D. Thomam statim initio capitis sequentis 160 solvere hoc
argumentum. Quod autem inquit, dictum est, in potestate liberi arbitrii esse ne
impedimentum gratiae praestet, competit his in quibus naturalis potentia
integra fuerit: si autem per inordinationem praecedentem declinaverit ad malum,
non erit omnino in potestate ejus, nullum impedimentum gratiae praestate. Et
cap. 161: Non est ratio inquirenda quare hos Deus convertat et non illos: hoc
enim ex simplici ejus voluntate dependet. Et cap. 94 ostendit non posse hominem
vel aliam quamcunque causam Deo resistere. Quaecunque rerum, inquit, aliquid
operantur, instrumentaliter agunt a Deo mota, et ei obtemperando ministrant ad
ordinem providentiae ab aeterno, ut ita dicam, excogitatum, explicandum in
rebus; si autem omnia quae agere possunt, necesse est ut in agendo ei
ministrent, impossible est, quod aliquod agens divinae providentiae
executionem impediat, sibi contrarium agendo: neque etiam possibile est divinam
providentiam impediri per defectum alicujus agentis vel patientis, etc.

2. Objiciunt Alvarem de Auxiliis disp. 71, n. 3. Respondemus ex eodem, disp.
32, 92, 93, posse resistere sumi dupliciter; proprie, et sic gratiae efficaci
non potest resisti; et imptoprie, et sic potest resisti, ut ipse locis citatis
fuse explicat.

Adversus tertiam propositionem.
1. Objiciunt D. Thomam q 3 de potentia, art. 7 ad 13. Voluntas dicitur habere
dominium sui actus non per exclusionem causae primae; sed quia causa prima non
ita agit in voluntate, ut eam de necessitate ad unum determinet, sicut
determinat naturam: et ideo determinatio voluntatis relinquitur in potestate
rationis et voluntatis.

Respondemus Deum non determinare voluntatem eo modo quo determinat naturam,
quem modum explicat D. Thomas ibidem ad 2: Quia natura per suam formam est
determinata ad unum: Voluntas autem per formamsuam non est determinata ad unum
bonum: unde fit quod non ex necessitate absoluta, sed ex necessitate tantum
secundum quid: et hanc necessitatem absolutam sicut et violentiam vocat Divus
Thomas coactionem: unde ibidem ad 14 ait, Non quaelibet causa excludit
libertatem, sed tantum causa cogens; sic autem Deus non est causa operationis
nostrae. Quare praecipui duces adversariorum, Molina, Suarez, Conimbricenses.
etc. admittunt Divum Thomam in hac quaest. 3 de potentia, art. 7, admisisse
praemotionem physicam, praecipue ad tertium,

Objiciunt Divum Thomam q. 6 de malo, art. unico. Quidam posuerunt quod
voluntas ex necessitate moveretur ad aliquid eligendum, nec tamen ponebant quod
voluntas cogeretur: non enim omne necessarium est violentum, sed solum illud
cujus principium est extra.... Haec opinio est haeretica: tollit enim rationem
meriti et demeriti in humanis actibus; non enim videtur esse meritorium aut
demeritorium quod aliquis sic ex necessitate agit, quod vitare non possit....
Non solum contrariatur fidei, sed subvertit omnia principia Philosophiae
Moralis.

Respondemus Divum Thomam impugnare illos qui admittebant voluntatem eligere ex
necessitate naturali, ut patet ex verbis quae adversarii ex consulto omiserunt.
Vnde, inquit, and motus naturales inveniuntur aliqui necessarii, non tamen
violenti: violentum enim repugnat naturali sicut and voluntario, quia utriusque
principium est intra: violenti autem principium est extra. Haec autem opinio
est haeretica, etc. Loquitur ergo de necessitate naturali: quod patet etiam ex
iis quae dixit infra, sect. Posuerunt autem quidam; et in solutione ad 24, ubi
dicit se loqui de necessitate simpliciter. Et ad 3 docet, Quod Deus movet
voluntatem immutabiliter propter efficaciam virtutis moventis, quae deficere
non potest, et infallibiliter: infallibilitas autem est quaedam necessitas, ut
express docet Divus Thomas 1. 2. q. 112, a. 3. Quare in illa quaest. 6 de
malo, art. unico, ut salvet libertatem in electione hominis in statu naturae
corruptae, recurrit ad libertatem a coactione, dicens: homo peccans liberum
arbitrium perdidit quantum ad libertatem quae est a culpa and miseria, non
autem quantum ad libertatem quae est a coactione.

4. Objiciunt Divum Thomam 1 p. q. 19. art. 10. Liberum arbitrium habemus
respectu eorum quae non necessari^ volumus.... Cum ergo Deus multa velit non ex
necessitate, respectu eorum quae non ex necessitate vult, liberum habet
arbitrium.

Respondemus adversarios consulto praetermisisse verba sequentia, quibus Divus
Thomas satis se explicat. Liberum, inquit, arbitrium habemus respectu eorum
quae non necessario volumus, vel ex naturali instinctu; non enim ad libertatem
arbitrii pertinet quod volumus esse felices, sed ad naturalem instinctum, etc.
Quo loco aperte ostendit Divus Thomas se per necessitatem intelligere naturalem
instinctum, qui facit naturalem necessitatem. Unde Divus Thomas in eadem
quaestione art. 8. inquirens utrum voluntas divina rebus volitis necessitatem
imponat, in solutione ad 1 and ad 3, concedit necessitatem non absolutam, sed
conditionalem stare cum liberate.

5. Objiciunt Divum Thomam q. 24. de verit. a. 2. In brutis est quaedam
similitudo liberi arbitrii in quantum possunt agere et non agere unum et idem
secundum suum judicium.... Sed quia judicium eorum est determinatum ad unum,
per consequens et appetitus et actio ad unum determinatur: unde necesse habent,
etc. Sed homo non necessario movetur ab iis quae sibi occurrunt, vel a
passionibus insurgentibus, quia potest ea accipere vel refugere; et ideo homo
est liberi arbitrii, non autem bruta. Et ad 7. Tam homines quam bruta
beneficiis inducuntur et flagellis prohibentur, vel praeceptis et
prohibitionibus, sed diversimode: quia in potestate hominum est ut eisdem rebus
similiter repraesentatis, sive sint praecepta sive prohibitiones, eligant vel
fugiant judicio rationis.

Respondemus Divum Thomam loqui de determinatione judicii ex part objecti: nam
quando homo appetit, judicium ejus, cum sit actus singularis, est determinatum
sicut et judicium bruti: sed est differentia, quia judicium bruti est
determinatum ad unum ex part objecti, non autem hominis, ut satis clare Divus
Thomas explicat ad 7. Quod autem Divus Thomas admittat hanc tertiam
propositionem; ibidem patet art. 1 ad ult. Habemus, inquit, respectu finis
liberam voluntatem, cum necessitas naturalis inclinationis libertati non
repugnet secundum Augustinum 5 de Civit.

6. Objiciunt Divum Thomam q. 22. de verit. art. 6. ubi dicit: Cum voluntas
dicatur libera in quantum necessitatem non habet, libertas voluntatis in tribus
considerabitur, scilicet quantum ad actum, in quantum potest velle et non
velle, et quantum ad objectum, in quantum potest hoc vel illud et ejus
oppositum, et quantum ad ordinem finis, in quantum potest velle bonum et malum.

Respondemus libertatem in viatoribus habere illa tria, nec tamen propterea
sunt de essentia libertatis: nam libertas quantum ad actum non reperitur in
Deo, qui tamen habet perfectissimam rationem libertatis, ut docet Divus Thomas
q. 4. ce verit. art. 3 ad 3. nec similiter libertas quantum ad ordinem finis,
qua potest velle bonum et malum, est essentialis; alias nec Christus, nec Beati
essent liberi; esse tamen liberos, imo libetiotes quam nos, docet S. Thomas
infra citandus. Sola ergo libertas quantum ad objectum est essentialis libero
arbitrio, et haec excludit necessitatem simpliciter, non autem secundum quid;
quare idem S. Thomas ibidem ait art. 5 ad 3. Libertas, inquit, secundum
Augustinum opponitur necessitati coactionis, non autem naturalis inclinationis.
Idemque dicit ad 1. 2 et 4. et q. 23. a. 4, q. 22. a. 8, 9, 10. docet Deum
operari opera nostra, immutare voluntatem non cogendo illam, et non stare quod
Deus velit aliquid quod illud non sit.

7. Objiciunt Divum Thomam 1. 2, q. 10, art. 4. Quia voluntas est activum
principium non determinatum ad unum, sed indifferenter se habens ad multa: sic
Deus ipsam movet, quod non ex necessitate ad unum determinat, sed remanet motus
ejus contingens et non necessarius.

Respondemus verissimum esse quod voluntas, cum non sit determinata ad unum,
Deus sic illam movet quod non determinat illam ex necessitate simpliciter, sed
tantum ex necessitate secundum quid. Unde ibid. ad 3 Divus Thomas ait: Si Deus
mo vet libertatem ad aliquid, impossible est huic positioni, quod voluntas ad
illud non moveatur, non tamen est impossible simpliciter: unde non sequitur
quod voluntas a Deo ex necessitate moveatur. Ex quo sic arguitur: Quod est
impossible non esse, necessarium est esse, ut ex terminis patet: sed ex D.
Thoma, hic supposiro quod Deus movet voluntatem ad aliquid, impossible est
quod voluntas non moveatur ad illud: eigo necessarium est quod voluntas
moveatur ad illud: movetur autem agendo; ergo actio illa est aliquo modo
necessaria: stat ergo quaedam necessitas cum liberate.

8. Objiciunt Divum Thomam 1. 2. q. 13. art. 6. Homo non ex necessitate eligit,
et hoc ideo, quia quod possibile est non esse, non necesse est esse: quod autem
possibile sit non eligere, hujus ratio ex duplici hominis potestate accipi
potest; potest enim velle et non velle, agere et non agere, et etiam potest hoc
aut illud; ideo homo non ex necessitate eligit, sed libere.

Respondemus hominem non eligere ex necessitate absoluta, sed ex necessitate
suppositionis, quam non tollere libertatem aperte colligitur ex Divo Thoma
ibidem ad 2; ubi si recte perpendatur, concedit eamdem necessitatem in
electione quam concedit in judicio dirigente electionem: atqui clarissime
admittit in illo judicio necessitatem ex suppositione: ergo eamdem admittit in
electione, quae tamen est libera, ut etiam concedit Bellarminus, ut ostensum
est in explicatione hujus tertiae propositionis.

9. Objiciunt D. Thomam 1 p. q. 62 art. 3 ad 2. Inclinatio gratiae non imponit
necessitatem, sed habens gratiam potest ea uti and peccare.

Respondemus Divum Thomam ibi loqui de gratia habituali, ut disertis verbis
explicat in corpore articuli: unde patet adversarlos voluisse imponere quasi
Divus Thomas loqueretur de gratia actuali: sed oportet illos comprehendere in
astutia sua: habens gratiam sanctificantem potest peccare, ut hic docet S.
Thomas, et est de fide, sess. 6. can. 23. Et nihilominus 1 Joan. 3. dicitur
quod qui natus est ex Deo, id est, justus, non potest peccare: potest ergo
peccare et non potest: potest, quia cum gratia habituali retinet habitualiter
potentiam ad peccandum: non potest peccare, quia non potest conjungere peccatum
cum gratia, and tamen retinet libere gratiam. Ita similiter qui habet gratiam
efficacem semper conjunctam cum actu bono, potest peccare, quia retinet
potentiam ad peccandum: non potest peccare, quia non potest conjungere peccatum
cum illa gratia efficaci, and tamen libere non peccat, and libere elicit actum:
stat ergo aliqua necessitas cum liberate. Unde Divus Thomas ibidem art. 2 ad
3, docet, quod ad hoc, ut quis se praeparet ad gratiam habitualem, requiritur
operatio Dei ad se animam converteu^is, juxta illud Threnorum ultimo, Converte
nos, Domine, ad te, and corvertemur, scilicet infallibiliter. Quare Divus
Thomas 1 2, q. 112, art. 3, docet, quod preparatio ad gratiam secundum quod est
a Deo movente, habet necessitatem ad id ad quod voluntas a Deo movetur, non
quidem coactionis sed infallibilitatis: ergo operatio Dei animam moventis ad
conversionem, sive convertentis animam, habet necessitatem ad hoc ut anima
seipsam libere convertat: stat ergo libert^s ^um aliqua necessitate. Quare D.
Thomas ibid. ^ 62, art. 8, dicit, quod major libertas est in Ange^ qui peccare
non possunt, quam in nobis qui possu^us: quia posse peccare pertinet ad
defectum libertatis.

10. Objiciunt Divum Thomam q. 22, de verit. a. 8. Et praeter hoc habet
appetere aliquid secundum propriam determinationem non ex necessita^e, quod ei
competit, in quantum voluntas est.

Respondemus voluntatem appetere aliquid non ex necessitate absoluta, quae
etiam dicitur necessitas coactionis, apud D. Thomam. Unde ibid. ad 3, cum sibi
opposuisset argumentum quod opponunt nobis adversarii, Libertas, inquiens,
opponitur necessitati: sed voluntas est libera: ergo non de necessitate aliquid
vult. Respondet, ad 3 dicendum quod libertas secundum Augustinum opponitur
necessitati coactionis, non autem naturalis inclinationis. Idem habet ad 1. 2
and 4.

11. Objiciunt D. Thomam 1 contra Gentes, c. 68. Dominium quod habet voluntas
supra suos actus per quod in ejus potestate est velle and nolle, excludit
determinationem virtutis ad unum.

Resp. adversarios data opera suppressisse verba sequentia, and violentiam
causae exterius agentis; non autem excludit influentiam superioris causae a qua
est ei esse and operari, and sic remanet causalitas in causa prima quae est
Deus respectu motuum voluntatis, ut sic Deus scipsum cognoscendo hujusmodi
cognoscere possit. Quae verba continent solutionem argumenti quarti quod
proposuerat cap. 63. quod etat hujusmodi: Quorumdam singularium causa est
voluntas: effectus autem antequam sit, non potest nisi in sua causa cognosci:
sic enim solum esse potest, antequam in se esse incipiat: motus autem
voluntatis a nullo possunt per certitndinem cognosci nisi a voluntate in cujus
potestate sunt. Impossible est igitur quod Deus de hujusmodi singularibus,
quae causam ex voluntate sumunt, notitiam certam habeat. Respondet D. Thomas:
dominium quod voluntas habet in suos actus non excludere influentiam Dei qua
habet voluntas etiam operari, and sic in hujusmodi influencia and causalitate
potest Deus seipsum cognoscendo certo cognoscere actus nostrae voluntatis
singulares and determinatos: atqui Deus non potest actus illos singulares and
determinatos cognoscere in sua illa influentia, nisi illa certo and
infallibiliter causet illos actus certos and determinatos: ergo debet illa eos
sic causare, atque adeo illi sunt certi certitudine causalitatis divinae and
infallibilitatis, and consequenter quodam modo necessarii, and tamen sunt
liberi: stat ergo libertas cum quadam necessitate.

12. Objiciunt Alvarem de Auxiliis disp. 117. n. 11. ad 3. Cumel. 1. 2. did.
11. assert. 4. Petrum de Cabrera 3. p. q. 18. art. 4.

Respondemus, admissis his quae isti auctores dicunt, adhuc verum esse quod
stat aliqua necessitas cum liberate, ut etiam ipsi idem auctores docent:
Alvarez disp. 22. n. 40. and 43. disp. 25. n. 2. disp. 83. n. 18. disp. 12. n.
1, 3, 4. and 5. and Cumel 1. p. q. 14. art. 13. disp. 3. and q. 41. art. 2.
disp. 4. and Cabrera eodem loco qui citatur in objectione, disp. 1.

Adversus quartam propositionem.
1. Objiciunt omnia loca objecta contra primam and secundam: sed jam soluta
haec sunt.

2. Objiciunt D. Thom. q. 6. de malo art. unico ad 3. ubi solvens illam
objectionem: Si ergo voluntas hominis infallibiliter movetur a Deo, sequitur
quod homo non habeat liberam electionem suorum actuum. Respondet: Deus movet
quidem voluntatem immutabiliter propter efficaciam virtutis moventis quae
deficere non potest, sed propter naturam voluntatis motae quae indifferenter se
habet ad diversa, non inducitur necessitas, sed remanet libertas, sicut etiam
in omnibus providentia divina infallibiliter operatur.

Respondemus adversarios noluisse impugnare propositionem, sed probare: nullus
enim locus est in Divo Thoma aptior ad probandam quartam propositionem; quod
sic ostenditur: Idem omnino est voluntatem agi insuperabiliter and
indeclinabiliter, ac voluntatem moveri immutabiliter, efficaciter, per virtutem
moventem quae deficere non potest: atqui Semipelagiani fuerunt haeretici quia
negarunt voluntatem agi divina gratia insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter:
fuerunt enim haeretici quia negarunt gratiam illam quam Divus Augustinus
admittebat toto libro de correptione and gratia, praesertim cap. 12. ut constat
ex Hilario epist. ad Divum Augustinum, Sect. Deinde moleste ferunt. Gratia
autem quam Divus Augustinus admittebat, est illa per quam voluntas
insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter agitur: haec enim sunt formalia verba Divi
Augustini. Ergo Semipelagiani fuerunt haeretici quia negarunt gratiam qua
voluntas humana movetur immutabiliter, infallibiliter, efficaciter, per
virtutem quae deficere non potest: quia tamen cum hac tanta gratiae efficacia
stat libertas, haec enim gratia facit utrumque, hoc est, facit ut agamus, and
ut libere agamus, idcirco Divus Thomas dicit, quod non inducitur necessitas,
scilicet absoluta, sed tantum necessitas infallibilis, immutabilis,
efficacitatis virtutis quae deficere non potest, and haec necessitas non tollit
libertatem. Et sic Divus Thomas duas simul haereses confutavit, scilicet
Pelagii and Semipelagianorum, and Calvini.

3. Objiciunt Alvarem disp, 3. de Auxiliis, n. 17. and 18. dicentem haeresim
Calvini and Lutheri fuisse, gratiam divinam ita inchoare and perficere, and ita
efficacem esse, ut homo solum spontanee and non libere, ultro and non coacte
cooperetur.

Respondemus and nos detestari and anathema dicere his haeresibus: sed hoc
ipsum argumentum fuse dissolvit Alvarez disp. 22. n. 30, and 31. and disp. 92.
n. 13. admittendo contra Pelagium and Semipelagianos, quod per divinam gratiam
indeclinabiliter and insuperabiliter voluntas agitur; and contra Calvinum
sustinendo, quod ita agitur, ut nihilominus ipsa libere agat.

Adversus quintam propositionem.
1. Objiciunt Divum Thomam 1. ad Timoth. 2. lect. 1. in fine: Homo Christus est
mediator Dei and hominum, non quorundam, sed inter Deum and hominem: and hoc
non fuisset nisi venisset omnes salvare. -- Ipse est propitiato pro peccatis
nostris, pro aliquibus efficaciter, pro omnibus sufficienter: quia pretium ejus
est sufficiens ad salutem omnium, sed non habet efficaciam nisi in electis
propter impedimentum.

Respondemus, nos admittere haec omnia: inde tamen non potest colligi quod Deus
det omnibus auxilia sufficientia interna, quibus possint ad libitum uti vel non
uti; sed colligitur quid sit Christum mortuum esse pro omnibus sufficienter,
videlicet quia pretium ejus est sufficiens pro omnibus: Dicit autem non habere
efficaciam nisi in electis propter impedimentum: sed quis possit non ponere
hujusmodi impedimentum, explicat S. Thomas 3. contra gentes cap. 163. ut supra
ostendimus. Addimus autem, quod, cum sanguis Christi esset sufficiens ad
tollenda omnia impedimenta quae proveniunt ex part hominis, cur noluit illa
tollere, non est al^a ratio inquirenda, nisi voluntas divina, ut docet ipse S.
Thomas ibid. cap. 162.

2. Objiciunt Divum Thomam q. 23. de verit. a. 2. Quia ergo Deus omnes homines
propter beatitudinem fecit, dicitur voluntate antecedente omnium salutem velle;
sed quia quidam suae saluti adversantur -- implet in eis alio modo quod ad suam
bonitatem pertinet, scilicet eos per justitiam damnans.

Respondemus, nihil hoc loco dici de morte Christi: quod autem Deus velit omnes
salvos fieri voluntate antecedente, concedimus, sed dicimus voluntatem illam
antecedentem nihil aliud esse in Deo quam voluntatem ordinandi homines ad
beatitudinem, hoc est, voluntatem qua voluit omnes homines facere and creare
propter beatitudinem: and ex consequenti Deus voluit toti generi humano media
quibus posset ad illam pervenire, quae quia voluntary amisimus, Deus dat alia
efficacissima electis: non dat autem aliis qui suae saluti adversantur
peccando, cum posset si vellet eis dare etiam efficacissima quibus possent and
vellent salvati, and de facto salvarentur. Unde Divus Thomas hoc satis insinuat
in verbis quae consulto omiserunt adversarii: ait enim, Sed quia quidam suae
saluti adversantur, quos or do suae sapientiae ad salutem venire non patitur
propter eorum defectum, implet in eis, etc. Ordo igitur divinae sapientiae
quosdam non patitur venire ad salutem ob eorum defectum vel actualem vel
originalem, quem Deus, si vellet, posset ab eis tollere. Quare autem nolit? O
altitudo divitiarum! o homo tu quis es qui respondeas Deo! Cui solutio ista
displicet, quaerat me doctiores, sed caveat ne inveniat praesumptores, inquit
Augustinus de spiritu and litera cap. 33. qui etiam se ignorare fatetur cum
Apostolo, cap. 8. lib. de correptione and gratia.

3. Objiciunt Divum Thomam in cap. 2. ad Heb. lect. 3. ad illa verba Divi
Pauli, Vt gratia Dei pro omnibus gustaret mortem. Pro omnibus autem, inquit
Divus Thomas, dupliciter potest intelligi, vel ut sit distributio accommoda
scilicet pro omnibus praedestinatis; pro istis enim tantum habet efficaciam:
vel absolute pro omnibus quantum ad sufficientiam; sufficiens enim quantum ad
se omnibus est.

Respondemus, quod cum Divus Thomas dicat locum illum Divi Pauli posse
intelligi per distributionem accommodam de solis praedestinatis, ut etiam
intellexit S. Augustinus, quomodo potest hinc elici propositionem hanc quintam
damnari a Divo Thoma? plane non videmus. Verum mirabilis est fraus
adversariorum, quia ve^ba sequentia suffurati sunt, ne intelligeretur quo sensu
dicat Divus Thomas, quod mors Ch isti sufficiens est pro omnibus: subjungit
haec verba 1. ad Timoth. 4. Qui est Salvator omnium, maxim fidelium.
Chrysostomus: Pro omnibus hominibus generaliter mortuus est, quia omnibus
pretium sufficit; etsi omnes non credunt, ipse tamen quod suum est implevit. Ex
illis ergo Divi Chrysostomi verbis, quae affert, Divus Thomas satis ostendit
quo sensu dixerit mortem Christi omnibus esse sufficientem, quia videlicet
omnibus pretium sufficit: quod admittunt omnes, etiam ipse Iansenius, in loco
ex quo desumpta est haec quinta propositio. Quod autem omnibus omnino Christus
promeruerit auxilia sufficientia, ne verbum quidem in Divo Thoma, multo minus
quod haec auxilia sint determinabilia a libero hominis arbitrio.

The eighth Writing.
It was entitled on the outside,

Indiculus falsitatum quae continentur in objectionibus.
The Contents within were thus:

Quae corrupt objiciunt in primo scripto D. Hallier and Collegae contra primam
propositionem.
1. OBjiciunt Divum Thomam q. 24. de verit. art. 12. Quodlibet peccatum
singulariter liberum arbitrium potest vitare.

Respondemus illos ex proposito omisisse verba paulo post sequentia, scilicet:
quamvis non sine divino auxilio, quo hominem sua providentia ad bona agenda and
mala vitanda gubernat.

5. Loco, Objiciunt Divum Thomam 3. p. q. 86. a. 1. dicentem: Erroneum est
dicere, quod sit aliquod peccatum de quo homo non potest poenitere in hac vita,
quia tolleretur libertas arbitrii, and derogaretur virtuti gratiae cujuscunque
peccatoris ad poenitendum.

Respondemus, valde notabiliter illos corrupisse hunc locum: sic enim habet:
Derogatur virtuti gratiae per quam moveri potest cor cujuscunque peccatoris ad
poenitendum, juxta illud Prove. 1. Cor Regis in manu Domini, quocunque voluerit,
vertet illud.

In secundo scripto contra primam.
12. Loco, Objiciunt Concilium Moguntinum anno 1549. cap. 9. Demonstrandum est
mandatorum Dei observationem renatis and justificatis esse possibilem, non
secundum naturae infirmitatem, sed secundum gratiam Christi, etc.

Respondemus, triplicem in hac citatione esse corruptionem, quia abstulerunt
duo aut tria verba ante, and totidem post, quia hic multum inserviebant ad
propositum. Sic ergo habet Concilium: Ex eadem causa demonstrandum erit,
mandatorum Dei observationem renatis ac justificatis esse possibilem, non
secundum naturae infirmitatem, sed secundum gratiam Christi and secundum opem
Spiritus Sancti: Sive ut paulo post dicit, opitulante Spiritu Sancto.
Subtractio hujus posterioris clausulae manifest indicat fraudem: subtractio
autem prioris, scilicet, ex eadem causa, non minus fraudulenter facta est, quia
illae particulae sunt relativae ad caput praecedens, in quo dixerat Concilium,
dignitatem operum quae eliciunt justificati, sumi ex duplici capite, videlicet
ex gratia Christi and ex Spiritu Sancto omnis boni operis motore and operatore;
and post pauca, cujus motum in nobis efficacem cogitare debemus. Ex eadem ergo
causa demonstrandum est, mandatorum Dei observationem, etc. nempe ex gratia
Christi and ex Spiritu Sancto omnis boni operis motore and operatore, cujus
motum in nobis efficacem cogitare debemus.

Omnia fere loca D. Thomae quae allegant, potius convincunt oppositum, si
antecedentia and consequentia expendantur. Et idem dicendum de locis
Conciliorum.

Omnia vero loca Scripturae sunt eadem quibus utebantur Pelagiani and
Semipelagiani.

Sic contra primam.
Objiciunt quinque loca Scripturae ex quibus quatuor abutebantur Caelestius and
Cassianus, ut constat ex S. Augustino de perfect. justitiae c. 10. and ex
Cassiano collat. 7. c. 8. and collat. 13. c. 14.

Contra secundam.
Objiciunt loca explicata a Diva Augustino de praedest. SS. c. 8. and 16. de
dono persev. cap. 14. In enchir. cap. 97. Lib. 1. imperf. oper. cont. Julian.
cap. 93. De great. and lib. arb. cap. 5. and iis abutebantur Faustus and alii
Semipelagiani.

Contra tertiam.
Utuntur locis citatis a Cassiano collat. 13. cap. 7. and a Fausto lib. 1. de
great. and lib. arb. cap. 19. quae omnia fere solvit D. Augustinus, de perf.
justit. c. 19.

Contra quartam.
Nulla loca Scripturae objiciunt.

Contra quintam.
Objiciunt quatuor, quae in se vel in similibus solvit Divus Augustinus de
corr. and great. cap. 14. and in enchir. c. 103.

Denique omnes objectiones quas faciunt, sunt argumenta quibus usi sunt Patres
Societatis in Congregationibus coram Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. and quibus
utitur Pseudo-Suarez noviter impressus Lugduni contra gratiam de se efficacem.

The ninth Writing.
It had this Title on the outside:

Irreverenter dicta contra D. Augustinum a Patribus Societatis Jesu.
And withinside contained these words:

Quae irreverenter dixerunt adversus D. Augustinum Patres Societatis, maxim
recentiores.
REnovant omnes querelas Massiliensium, and omnes injurias, sive parum
reverenter dicta contra D. Augustinum Patres Societatis.

Primo igitur subjiciemus 22. propositiones quas generalis Inquisitio Hispaniae
ex ipsorum libris decerpsit and damnavit.

Dionysius Petavius discept. priori de Trid. Conc. and Augustini doctrina.
I. Augustini quaedam dogmata ab Apostolica Sede in terminis sunt damnata.
Jesuitae Lovanienses in articulis censuratis.
II. Miseram fore Ecclesiam si S. Augustini placitis obstricta maneat. Iidem
ibidem.
III. Ecclesiam a tutela and paedagogia Augustini esse vindicandam. Iidem
ibidem.
IV. Augustini auctoritatem non plus valere, quam rations, quas allegat,
evincant. Iidem ibidem.
V. Augustinum fuisse Doctorem perinde ac alium quempiam, etiam modernorum.
Iidem ibidem.
VI. Augustini dotes, sive naturales, sive infusas, non fuisse altioris ordinis
quam aliorum Doctorum, etiam Scholasticorum. Joannes Roberti in opus de Natal.
c. 3.
VII. Si post Augustinum nihil Christianae eruditioni accesserit, Scholasticam
Theologiam penitus rejiciendam fore. Idem ibidem.
VIII. Augustini auctoritatem interponentibus respondendum fore, Ecclesiam in
suis filiis usque hodie crescere, etiam eruditione. Jesuita Logicus relatus a
Joanne Rivio in vitam S. Augustini l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 6.
IX. Augustinum etiam Iuliani Pelagiani argumentis non satisfecisse. Idem.
X. Si triumphus Ecclesiae de Pelagianis niteretur posterioribus Augustini
scriptis, immerito de eis illa triumphasset. Idem ibid. and Jesuitae in
articulis censuratis.
XI. Volentem sustinere parts Iuliani, non posse Augustini rationibus
convinci. Jesuitae ibidem.
XII. Augustini Theologiam de originalis peccati traduce esse rusticanam.
Vasquez 1. 2. disp. 132. cap. 3. resp. 14.
XIII. Ex Augustini opinione de peccato originali cogimur incidere in
sententiam Pelagii. Molina de opere sex dierum, disp. 1. Sect. postremo.
XIV. Augustinum sacrarum Scripturarum auctoritatem sua expositione evacuare
and ludibrio infidelium exponere. Molina 1 p. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m.
6.
XV. Augustinum quasi sub caligine constiturum ad veritatem a Patribus inventam
non attendisse. Molina in Concord. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m. ult. Sect.
Credens.
XVI. Augustini sententiam fidelium non paucos turbasse, ejusque auctoritate
perculsos in Pelagianismum declinasse. Idem 1 p. q. 23. disp. 1. m. 6. Sect. Ex
his patet.
XVII. Augustini sententiam a multis duram nimis indignamque divina bonitate ac
clementia judicari, non mirum. Vasquez.
XVIII. Ab Augustino aliisque idem sentientibus peti posse undenam suae
sententiae certitudinem hauserint. Vasquez in 1. 2. disp. 193. c. 4. n. 39.
XIX. Augustini vestigiis non esse insistendum, sed aliter philosophandum.
Jesuitae Lovanienses in articulis supra citatis.
XX. Augustini locutiones quamvis aliquo sensu veras, improprias tamen esse nec
frequentandas. Iidem ibidem.
XXI. Utrum Augustinus contra quod sentiamus sentiat, non admodum refer.
Iidem ibidem.
XXII. Non recte dici potest, illud saltem necessario ab omnibus esse tenendum
quod Augustinus tenuit nec retractavit.
P. Annatus hoc anno 1653. edidit Parisiis volumen, iu cujus libro octavo
integro collegit dicta quae aliis contra Divum Augustinum exciderunt, vel certe
non dicuntur de doctrina D. Augustini in materia de gratia in qua est
approbatus ab Ecclesia, and tamen ipse applicat huic materiae, and sunt ita
indigna, ut ipsemet erubescat cap. 3. and ad decretum Clementis VIII. quo in
principio disputationum de Auxiliis cavit sequendum esse D. Augustinum,
respondet solum jussiisse ut inquireretur sententia Augustini, nempe ut
retineretur, quod perspicuum esset, illud voluisse, non autem quidquid
constaret eum dixisse, atque ita saepe dixit D. Augustinum minus voluisse and
plus dixisse, quod est revera concedere quod D. Augustinus excessit, contra
expressam definitionem Caelestini in epistola ad Episcopos Galliae cap. 3. Unde
idem P. Annatus page 172. dicit D. Augustinum suavi interpretatione torquendum
in alteram partem.

Il Padre Adamo ^iesuita in un libro che egli fece stampare doi anni fa
intitolato, Il Calvino disfatto da se stesso; and per l'armi di S. Agostino,
dice le cose sequenti, il quale libro e in lingua Francese.

Page 614.
Che la luce delli libri di questo santo e grave Dottore e coperta di tenebre e
di nuvole; che la sua dottrina e intricatissima, come che da se stessa si
combatte esi distrugge.

Page 581.
S. Agostino none riuscito nell^ scelta delle sue opinioni ne delli fondamenti
con li quali si prova, talche ci ha lasciata l'assolutissima liberta de
seguitarli overo d'applicarci ad un altro partito, benche li sia contrario,
anzi che lui istesso dubita spesse volte intorno alla certezza dell' opinioni
che egli insegna.

Page 615.
Che non ha voluto parlar chiaro, overo che n'ha potuto spiegar li suoi
pensieri con tanta facilita, che non ci ha luogo di dubitare delle sue
intentioni.

Page 626.
Che nella guerra che egli ha fatto contra li Pelagiani ha datto in estremita
pericolose.

Page 639.
Certo e che S. Agostino ha parlato con errore in materia della gratia e cella
predestinatione, gia che bisogna addolcire e temperare le sue parole per non
trapassare della lor aspressa ad un errore contra^io, mi sara troppo lecito di
cercar un temperamento Catolico.

Page 644.
M'e permesso di revocare ad un giusto temperamento tutto quello che li Dottori
giudicano essere nell'eccesso.

Page 640.
Conform al suo parere and al consiglio de santi Padri apporto quello
temperamento convenevole col quale fuggendo l'error de Pelagiani non casco
nell'eccesso di S. Agostino. Perch io non caschi nell'error de Pelagiani con i
quali S. Agostino combatte e ci obligo di seguitar l'impeto e tutta la forza
delle parole delle quali eglisi serve per convincerli? Per questo io tengo il
meso tra Pelagio e Calvino: se con voler temperare le parole di S. Agostino
calassi io troppo in qui sa^ei subito Pelagiano; cosi se ancora volessi io
stare nella lor forza sarei Calvinista: mi tengo io dunque nel meso con la
Chiesa.

Page 635
L'opinioni di Calvino si trovano provate in certi luoghi delli libri di S.
Agostino, se vi applicate all apparenza sola delli termini.

Page 639.
Basta a me che io costringa il mio adversario a consessare che S. Agostino
secondo l'apparenza delli termini ha parlato a favore delli doi partiti, cioe
della Chiesa e di Calvino.

Page 661.
Benche li Pelagiani havessero predicato contra quest'opinioni, la Chiesa non
l'haveria may potuto metter nell'indice o catalogo de gl'Eretici.

Ibid.
L'opinioni di S. Agostino sono feroci.

Page 667.
E lecito detestare qu^ll' opinione 'laquale assevera il peccato originale
esser sondamento col quale viene giustificata la distintione che Dio ha fatto
delli salvati dalli dannati.

Page 662. L'istesse sostenne il Padre Hamelio Giesuita nell' istesso tempo nel
quale incomincio questa materia degli Aussilii.
Questo mancamento non e tanto colpevole che non l'habb ia Iddio suppotrato in
questi Autori che inspirava, che noi chiamamo canonici, che parlono conform
alla loro imaginatione nell'esprimere le cose che Iddio gli ha revelate, che il
foco e l'ardore che era natural a S. Paolo era bastevole a trasportarlo in
espressione di questa natura, e l'istesso afferma di David nel Psalm. 11.

Oltre le sopradette cose in tutto il suo libro dice piu cose dell'istesse
conditioni contra l'autorita di S. Agostino come si puo'l vedere.

Il Padre Caussino nel 2. tomo della sua Corte santa, massima 6. della
predestinatione, n. 2. composto in lingua Francese cosi dice.

Non e in raggione di spaventarsi dalle parole di S. Paulo e di S. Agostino che
senza fare nessuna riflessione sopra le nostre buone opere, pare che diano ogni
cosa alla semplice volonta di Dio, perch havemo da considerare questi doi gran
cervelli giusto come doi grandissimi mari quali si gonfiano con l'impeto del
lor genio, di tal maniera in una riva che paiono voler lasciar l'altra senza
aqua per un pezzo; ma come l'Oceano doppo di essersi largamente diffuso d'una
banda, torna poi a i limiti, che Dio li ha prescritti, cosi nell'istessa
maniera questi doppo di essersi inaspriti contro li rebelli della Chiesa, che
combattono la verita, tornano poi in un temperamento pacifico per
l'edificatione della Chiesa di Dio.

P. Pallavicinus Jesuita in Collegio Romano anno superiori 1652. in tractatu de
Deo uno and trino, quem legit suis discipulis, in unico Sect. disput. de
praedestinatione express docet,

1. S. Augustinum non recte interpretatum esse Scripturas circa
praedestinationem. 2. Doctrinam S. Augustini de praedestinatione favere haeresi
Calvini. 3. Recentes Jesuitas accuratiores esse antiquis Patribus, scilicet S.
Augustino, S. Thoma and aliis.
The tenth Writing.
Outwardly Inscribed,

Rations ob quas Patres Societatis adversus Jansenium commoventur.
And within containing these words:

Ratio propter quam tam acerbo Jansenium odio prosequuntur Patres Societatis
Jesu est, quia in fine sui operis quatuor capitulis and octuaginta nobis
ostendit maximam sententiae ipsorum cum Pelagianorum and Semipelagianorum
errore in re and in verbis convenientiam.
PAuca ex multis eligimus.

D. Prosp. in ep. ad Aug. Faustus l. 1. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 4.11, 12,
16. and ult. Et colligitur ex D. Aug. de corr. and great. cap. 1, 2, 3. and 4.
lib. de dono persev. c. 15. and 17. de praedest. SS. c. 1. and ex D. Prosp. ad
Capita Gallorum and ad objectiones Vincentianas.
Dicebant Pelagiani and Semipelagiani removeri omnem industriam, tollique
virtutes, si Dei constitutio humanas praeveniat voluntates, and sub hoc
praedestinationis nomine fatalem quandam induci necessitatem, tolli libertatem
arbitrii, afferri desperationem, induci socordiam, torporem and ignaviam,
studium virtutis retundi; incitari homines ad licentiam ac dissolutionem vitae,
laudem detrahi operibus bonis, orationes refrigescere, spem tolli, frustra
exhortationes and correptiones esse, zelum animorum extingui, Deum fore
acceptatorem personarum, peccata in Deum refundi, and homines condi ut peccent.

Idem in terminis fere dicunt Vasquez.
Vasquez, Lessius.
Lessius, Molina.
Molina and alii: sic enim express Lessius de praedestinatione sect. 6. n. 79.
Nihil videtur magis inducere torporem and desperationis metum, quam persua sio
illa, de omnibus and singulis absque ullo operum intuitu tam firmiter esse
statutum, and res omnes sic disponi ut omnia eveniant sicut absolutis illis and
inflexibilibus and plusquam adamantinis decretis est sancitum. Quae decreta
vocat alibi Lessius de gratia efficaci.
fatalem necessitatem, eodemque modo loquuntur Molina in Concord. q. 23. art.
4. and 5. disp. 1. m. 12. Vasquez 1 p. disp. 89. c. 10.
alii.

D. Prosper in ep. ad Aug. Faustus l. 2. de lib. arb. c. 6. and 8. and l. 1. c.
11.
Dicebant Pelagiani and Semipelagiani non dari gratiam quae humanam sibi
subjiciat voluntatem, quia destruit libertatem quando datur; quando vero non
datur, praeceptum est impossible, and hic frustra sunt praecepta,
exhortationes and correptiones, and sola opus est oratione: absurdum enim est
ut Deus petat ab homine sieri quae ipse per fatalem gratiam debet facere; unde
etiam totum tribuitur gratiae and nihil narurae.

Idem docent hi recentiores. Lessius.
Lessius de gratia efficaci cap. 9. n. 9. Antequam detur motio efficax, inquit,
est in hominis potestate eam habere. Et cap, 7. Sequitur, inquit, praecepta Dei
esse impossibilia. Et cap. 9. de gratia efficaci, Frustra erunt, inquit,
praecepta, consilia, exhortationes and correptiones. Et Molina.
Molina 1 p. q. 14. a. 13, disp. 53. m. 2. Datur, inquit, locus illorum
Monachorum opinioni qui dicebant hominem non corripiendum; sed solum orandum.
Et alii multa similia dicunt.

D. Prosp. in ep. ad Aug. Faustus l. 1. cap. 14. and 17. and l. 2. c. 9. and 6.
Pelagiani and Semipelagiani dicebant Deum quantum est de se, velle omnes
homines salvos fieri, si tamen ipsi velint, quod etiam ampliabant ad parvulos.
Ex qua voluntate statuunt beneficia omnibus ex aequo communia, Christi mortem,
gratiam sufficientem, etiam actualem internam, sine qua homo non potest, quae
dat posse, si homo velit, quam homo reddit efficacem vel inefficacem, qua
posita Deus expectat volunratem, quia pendet a nutu hominis; alias opus nullius
esset laudis aut meriti, and voluntas non laesa sed totaliter extincta
videretur, and alia his connexa.

Idem docent hi recentiores. Molina.
Molina 1 p. q. 23. disp. 1. m. 8. dicens Deum quantum in se est, velle omnium
salurem si homo velit. Lessius.
Lessius lib. de praedest. sect. 6. dicit omnes esse divini auxilii participes.
Et lib. de gratia efficaci c. 11. dicit omnes per illam posse si velint. Et c.
10. dicit esse in potestate nostra reddere gratiam praevenientem efficacem vel
inefficacem. Et c. 4. dicit Deum expectare ut homo consentiat and purgari
velit. Et c. 10. dicit influxum gratiae pendere a libero arbitrio, and alia his
similia dicit.

D. Prosp. and D. Hilarious in ep. ad Aug. and ipsemet Aug. de perf. justit. c.
10. and 19. and de not. and great. in pluribus capitibus: and alibi saepe.
Pelagiani and Semipelagiani citabant quaedam loca Scripturae, ut illud, Vult
omnes homines salvos fieri, Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, Hodie si vocem
ejus audieritis, etc. Quoties volui congregare filios tuos, etc. Vae tibi
Corozaim, vae tibi Bethsaida, quia si in Tyro and Sidone, etc. and alia plura,
quae ad suum errorem explicabant, utebantur auctoritatibus Patrum, maxim
Graecorum, imo and ipsius Augustini, in iis quae ante Episcopatum scripserat,
quem dicebant se in caeteris admirari, sed in hoc capite accusabant tanquam
turbarum auctorem; and tandem dicebant de his posse sine detrimento fidei
disputari.

Iisdem locis and eodem modo explicatis utuntur recentiores, ut patet ex
Lessius.
Lessio de praedest. sect. 3. and Molina.
Molina 1. p. q. 23. art. 4. and 5. disp. 1. m. 3. and m. ult. ubi etiam dicit
in caeteris magnam haberi reverentiam D. Augustino and D. Thomae: accusat tamen
D. Augustinum tanquam turbarum auctorem; and tandem dicunt nihil in hac re
definitum esse, ut patet ex praefatione Lessii ad opusculum de praedestinatione.

The eleventh Writing.
Quatuor a me quaeruntur.
PRimum est, Utrum in Jansenio habeatur locus aliquis in quo admittat,
aliquando gratiae interiori resisti?

Respondeo brevissime, haberi; and primo quidem quantum ad gratiam interiorem
intellectus, admittit express Jansenius illi aliquando resisti, ut patet ex
lib. 1. de great. Christi cap. 16. ubi explicans gratiam intellectus, dicit,
illius proprium effectum esse dare cognitionem, facere ut homo sciat and
cognoscat; and haec cognitio, inquit, aeque been potest in eo qui resistit quam
qui obtemperat suae scientiae and conscientiae. Unde enim alioquin dicerentur
aliqui rebels lumini?

2. Quantum ad gratiam ipsi voluntati internam, etiam admittit Iansenius, quod
illi aliquando resistatur. Patet primo ex lib. 2. de great. Christi c. 27. ex
lib. 4. de great. Christi c. 16, 17, and 18. Nam in c. 16. ait, quod gratia
excitans excitat voluntatem ad imperfecta desideria: gratia vero adjuvans
adjuvat infirmitatem ne in conatibus suis imperfectis cassa maneat and inanis.
Et infra, conatus, inquit ex D. Bernardo, liberi arbitrii cassi sunt ad bonum,
si non adjuventur; nulli, si non excitentur.

Lib. 8. c. 2. Delectatio victrix, quae Augustino est efficax adjutorium,
relativa est: tunc enim est victrix, quando alteram superat: quod si contingat
alteram ardentiorem esse, in solis inefficacibus desideriis haerebit animus,
nec efficaciter unquam volet quod volendum est. Lib. etiam 8. c. 16. admittit
cum Tridentino and S. Augustino, hominem posse dissentire, posse gratiam
abjicere.

Secundum quod a me quaeritur, est, Utrum Iansenius admiserit praeter gratiam
efficacem aliam sufficientem?

Respondeo: Vel quaestio est de re ipsa, vel de nomine; si de re, certum est
Iansenium admisisse quantum ad rem, totum illud in quo recentiores Thomistae
constituunt gratiam sufficientem: si de nomine, certum est ipsum noluisse illud
admittere.

De re igitur constat: nam Thomistae aliqui dicunt gratiam sufficientem in
hominibus justis esse ipsam gratiam habitualem, virtutes and dona; hanc
admittit passim Iansenius lib. 3. de gratia Christi c. 15.

Alii Thomistae constituunt gratiam sufficientem in quibusdam illustrationibus,
inspirationibus, etc. and ita Academia Salmanticensis in censura contra
Molinam, and alii viri docti constituunt gratiam sufficientem in his solis
illuminationibus: has admittit Iansenius lib. 1. de great. Christi, c. 16.

Denique alii Thomistae admittunt gratiam sufficientem, quae tamen est efficax
respectu alicujus actus imperfecti: quia enim per actus imperfectos homo
disponitur ad actus perfectos, gratia quae est efficax respectu actuum
imperfectorum, dicitur dare posse respectu perfectorum, and sic dicitur gratia
sufficiens respectu illorum; and hoc sensu Iansenius quantum ad rem admittit
gratiam sufficientem, ut patet lib. 2. de great. Christi, c. 27. in quo convenit
cum Alvarez disp. 72. n. 13. disp. 80. n. 2. ubi citat M. Medinam 1. 2. q. 109.
art. 10. Idem tenuit P. Thomas de Lemos in opusc. de gratia sufficient and
efficaci, and M. Herrera in tractaru de Auxiliis.

Quantum ad nomen, noluit admittere Iansenius gratiam sufficientem, primo
propter aequivocationem, quia nomine auxilii sufficientis intelligendum videtur
ultra quod non requiritur aliud, and quia ultra auxilium illud sufficiens modo
jam explicato requiritur aliud, idcirco Iansenius noluit vocare auxilium
sufficiens, ne sub hoc nomine male intellecto everteretur auxilium efficax. Nam
ipsi Thomistae qui vocant hoc auxilium sufficiens, dicunt illud esse sufficiens
in suo genere, hoc est, ad dandum posse, non autem ad dandum posse cum effectu.

2. Quia semper B. Augustinus and B. Thomas, quando loquuntur de auxilio
sufficienti, sumunt sufficiens pro efficaci. Patet hoc ex S. Augustino lib. de
great. and lib. atb. cap. 15. Qui voluerit and non potuerit, nondum se plaue
velle cognoscat, and oret ut habeat tantam voluntatem, quanta sufficit ad
implenda mandata: sic quippe adjuvatur ut faciat quod jubetur. Et cap. 16.
Certum est nos mandata servare si volumus; sed quia praeparatur voluntas a
Domino, ab illo petendum est ut tantum velimus, quantum sufficit ut volendo
faciamus. Et D. Thomas 1 p. q. 105. art. 4. docet voluntatem non posse moveti
sufficienter and efficaciter nisi a Deo, ubi clarissime pro eodem sumit
sufficienter and efficaciter.

Tertium quod a me quaeritur, est, Utrum ex Augustino possit adduci aliquid pro
gratia sufficient?

Respondeo, si nomine gratiae sufficientis intelligatur gratia efficax, quam D.
Augustinus vocat sufficientem, infinita sunt loca pro gratia hoc modo
sufficienti. Insignis locus ex cap. 12. lib. de corr. and great. ubi ait:
Subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina gratia
insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter ageretur. Et cap. 8. de praedest. Sanctor.
Haec gratia a nullo duro cord respuitur, etc.

Si autem nomine gratiae sufficientis intelligitur gratia quae est efficax
respectu voluntatis imperfectae, and quae dat posse respectu actus perfecti,
sic infinita sunt etiam loca cap. 17. de great. and lib. arb. Qui ergo vult
servare Dei mandata and non potest, habet quidem voluntatem bonam, sed adhuc
parvam and invalidam, etc. Et cap. 16. ibid. and cap. 12. de corr. and great.

Si vero nomine gratiae sufficientis intelligitur auxilium aliquod quod dat
posse, non tamen sit determinabile a voluntate, illud videtur admittere, cap.
11. de corr. and great. Nunc autem quibus deest tale adjutorium, poena peccati
est; quibus autem datur, secundum gratiam datur, and non secundum debitum. Et
in cap. 7. and cap. 16. de praedest. SS. distinguit duplicem vocationem;
alteram qua vocati sunt qui noluerunt venire Iudaei and Gentiles: alteram
secundum propositum, qua vocatione fit credens. Et in ep. 106. ad Paulinum; and
hoc ipsum satis clare ostendit Hilarious scribens S. Augustino, Sect. Deinde
moleste ferunt.

Denique si gratiae sufficientis nomine intelligatur gratia ultra quam nulla
est alia necessaria, sed quae a libero arbitrio determinetur, respondeo hujus
meminisse S. Augustinum non tanquam a se assertae, sed tanquam a se in
posterioribus scriptis impugnatae, ut patet ex cap. 3. de praedest. SS. and de
gratia Christi cap. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 20.

Quartum quaesitum est, an Congregationes quas in alio scripto citavi, sint
coram summis Pontificibus Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. vel inter ipsos
Consultores, and quibus verbis hae propositiones discussae, defensae and
approbatae fuerint?

Respondeo omnes Congregationes quas citavi cum nota anni 1602. and supra, esse
coram Summis Pontificibus. Propositiones vero hae quinque sub eisdem fere
terminis sunt discussae, ut patet ex alio brevi scripto; fuerunt autem defensae
in hoc sensu:

Prima, quod non sunt impossibilia praecepta, quia homo per gratiam
sufficientem habet posse, non tamen habet posse cum effectu.

Secunda vero, tertia, quarta, quinta in sensu allato defensae sunt and
approbatae, in quantum determinatum est dari gratiam de se efficacem sine qua
homo non potest facere.

Three Writings composed by a Learned Dominican upon the three first
Propositions, and made use of by Cardinal Roma for his instruction in these
matters, as is mentioned Part. 5. Chap. 9.
The first Writing.
Error cui non resistitur, approbatur; and veritas quae minime defensatur,
opprimitur. Felix Papa ad Accacium Episcopum Constantinopolit. in Baron. ann.
483.
INstat vehementius apud Sedem Apostolicam altercantium Sorbonicorum pars
altera pro censura aliquot propositionume Jansenio depromptarum: Altera pars
eas ut ab Augustino assertas, sic and bonas esse ac Theologicas asserit, neque
sine veritatis praejudicio damnari posse contendit. Incaluere in hac
contentione dissidentium animi; certaturque inter eos ingenti quodam (si
utrisque creditur) and Religionis, and in Sedem Apostolicam reverentiae
certamine, quo se illi causam hujus Sedis agere dicunt, dum suspecti jam and ab
ea proscripti Iansenii errores detegunt and damnari percupiunt. Hi vero and pro
eadem Petri Cathedra se stare profitentur, dum probati toties and a tot
Pontificibus consecrati Augustini oracula, vel pro ipsius Apostolicae
firmitatis nomine inconcussa manner volunt, inconcussa desiderant.

Esset utrorumque laudandus zelus, si (quod in tanta sententiarum repugnantia
nequit) in utriusque secundum scientiam nec aliunde posset praesumi, quod
alterutri hunc zelum mentiantur, aut quia fortassis decepti sunt, and veritatem
non vident quam videre se credunt, aut quia nimio partium studio and ardore
vincendi, and pudore cedendi agnitam fortassis veritatem sponte deserunt, and
consulto decipere volunt. Experiendi igitur eorum animi, and dicta solertius
expendenda: ne, si minus caute in hac causa proceditur, aut faveatur mendacio,
aut veritati detrahatur, and, quod utrumque foret intutum, vel sub pallio
Augustini effugiat Jansenius, vel sub Jansenii nomine vapulet Augustinus.

Itaque ambiguas propositiones, nec in ea sensuum aequivocatione, quam
continent, ullo modo definibiles, juxta Philosophi monitum, distinguendas prius
existimem, ne, si indistinctae definiantur, per falsitatis latus impetitam se
clamet veritas: Et (quod in damnatione articulorum Baii contigit) non paci and
tranquillitati Ecclesiae sat plane consultum sit, sed acriori disputationum and
turbarum flammae suggesta materies, dum alia and alia de damnati, nec clare
expositi in qualibet propositione sensus fiet interpretatio.

PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
CAPUT. I.
Assignantur sensus propositionis erronei and damnati.
VIdetur primo intuitu illegitimus esse and intolerabilis hujus propositionis
sensus. Primo quia affinis errori haereticorum nostri temporis, qui dicunt,
Praecepta Dei esse impossibilia etiam viris justis, nec per divinae gratiae
quantumcumque auxilium impleri posse. Secundo quia contrarius de creto Council.
Trid. sess. 6, can 18. Si quis dixerit Dei praecepta homini etiam justificato
and sub gratia constituto esse ad observandum impossibilia, anathema sit.
Tertio, quia adversans dicto B. Augustini lib. de natura and gratia cap. 49.
Firmissime creditur Deum justum and bonum impossibilia non potuisse praecipere.
Quarto, quia idem Augustinus lib. de haeres. Manich. cap. 3, dixit: Omnes
homines posse se convertere ad Dei praecepta observanda si velint, quia illud
lumen omnem hominem illuminat venientem in hunc mundum. Igitur si in eo sensu
sumatur propositio, ut absolutam praeceptorum impossibilitatem, nullo divinae
gratiae auxilio superandam importet: dubium non est quin haeretica sit and in
legislatorem Deum horrendo blasphema.

Rursum erronea erit and impertinens propositio, si a justis quamdiu manent
justi, removere intelligatur gratiam necessariam ad abstinendum a peccato
mortali, and implenda consequenter praecepta ex quorum transgressione peccarent
mortaliter: cum enim non sit justus quisquam, nisi quamdiu perseverat absque
culpa lethali; sequitur necessario necessitate suppositionis, quod quamdiu
manet justus, hoc habeat per gratiam perseverantiae, qua fiunt ei praecepta
possibilia, and movetur efficaciter pro loco and tempore ad ea implenda, and
declinandum a peccato. Unde erroneum foret, nedum contra fidem, sed and contra
ipsumrationis lumen, hanc gratiam possibilitatis praeceptorum a justo quamdiu
manet justus, removere voluisse.

Hi sunt sensus in hac propositione tam manifest falsi, and tam ad primam
propositionis superficiem cuique occurrentes, ut sperarint forsan qui censurae
propositionis insistunt, ex horum horrore mox eam damnandam. Et si eorum
subdolam mentem ex factis non sinceris liceat penetrare, hinc factum puto quod
praeter disciplinae regulas, sub vaga, indefinita and incircumscripta
terminorum expressione examinandam Sedi Apostolicae propositionem obtulerint,
quo sub ea illimitatione ob pravos quos continet sensus indistincte damnatam,
in iis quoque quos oppugnant sensibus Theologicis damnatam mentirentur, and
apud imperitos lo canerent, ac quasi pro magna quam sibi pepetissent victoria
insulse triumpharent: Distinctione igitur, ut dixi, opus est, ne quo ictu
religioso perimitur falsitas, putetur and eodem sacrilego cecidisse and veritas.

CAPUT. II.
Praemonitum necessarium ad investigandos sensus bonos and Theologicos
propositionis controversae, ac ferendum de ea judicium.
MAndatorum possibilitas, relativum quid est, and ordinem dicit ad potentiam
activam, quae in homine reperitur ad mandata implenda. Cum igitur mandata
dicantur homini possibilia non per naturam, sed per gratiae sufficientiam,
duplex distinguenda est gratiae sufficienta quam Scholae introduxerunt, moxque
attendendum quaenam illa sit quam Jansenius pernegat in propositione ab eo
asserta, and quae per propositionis proscriptionem consequenter adstruitur.

Asserunt and D. Thomae recentiores discipuli and Molinae defensores
sufficientem gratiam, sed non utrique eamdem, imo hi and illi diversissimam
toto caelo: quippe Thomistarum gratia sufficiens incompleta est ad opus:
Molinae vero sequacium completissima.

Gratia sufficiens Thomistarum non talis est per quam homo in natura lapsa
unquam de facto aut bonum operetur, aut fuerit operaturus, aut sit operaturus,
sed per quam constituatur potens ad bonum operandum, nunquam tamen de facto
operetur, nisi huic gratiae sufficienti supervenerit efficacis gratiae
auxilium. Didacus Alvarez de Auxil. l. 8. disp. 79. Cumel in 1. 2. disp. 4.
sect. 2. concl. 1. Sylvius in 1. 2. q. 111. quaesito 3. concl. 3. Navarretta
controvers. 19. ad q. 19. 1. p. Cajet. and Medina. 1. 2. q. 109. art. 10.
Ut enim, inquiunt, oculus sanus quamvis aut somno ligatus, aut in tenebricoso
constitutus loco, dicitur potens ad videndum, quamvis nec actu videat, nec
visurus actu sit, nisi superveniente lumine and concurrente auxilio primae
causae ad productionem actionis vitalis: ita and potens constituitur homo ad
opus bonum per auxilium gratiae sufficientis, quamvis nunquam bonum ipsum de
facto aut velit aut operetur, aut sit actu operaturus, nisi superveniente
gratia efficaci, quae, ut ait Apostolus, operatur in nobis and velle and
perficere. Hanc gratiam sufficientem nunquam vel ab Augustino vel a D. Thoma
express memoratam ab eorum, ut putant, principiis deduxere eorum discipuli.
Absque hoc tamen quod contendant, illum omni homini ad omne opus and pro omni
tempore ac momento adesse: siquidem Cardinalis Bellarminus, qui cum Thomistis
hanc gratiam sufficientem admittit, probat simul Bellarminus de great. and lib.
arb. l. 2. cap. 4.
nullam fore in Deo injustitiam, si om ibus eam denegaret; Et rursum per multa
argumenta efficacissima ostendit hujusmodi Idem ibid. c. 6.
auxilium Dei sufficiens and necessa ium ad resurgendum a peccato non adesse
omnibus momentis.

E contra gratia sufficiens quam Molina and ejus discipuli invexerunt,
cumulatissima est, and talis quod praeter illam, Bellarminus de great. and lib.
arb. l. 1. c. 12. ostendit quod haec sententia est omnino aliena a sententia B.
Augustini and a sensu sacrarum Scripturarum, quodque penitus evertit
praedestinationis fidem a Paulo praedicatam.
nihil aliud ex part Dei per modum principii necessarium sit, ut homo nedum
dicatur posse velle aut posse operari, sed de facto velit and opetetur absque
novo aliquo gratiae efficacis juvamine; cum ipsamet gratia ex sui natura
sufficiens a libero assensu and co-operatione voluntatis efficaciam and
efficacis gratiae sortiatur appellationem. Hanc asserunt and deberi and dari a
Deo omnibus hominibus quibus praecepta et leges imponit, ideoque iis sive
fidelibus, sive infidelibus, sive justis, sive peccatoribus etiam obcaecatis et
obduratis, omni loco et momento esse praesentissimam, nec nisi injutia
subtrahendam.

In hac explicandae sufficientis gratiae tam lata diversitate Cornelius
Jansenius Episcopus Iprensis sufficientem gratiam a Molina et ejus sequacibus
assertam, utpote jam in Pelagio damnatam, valide impugnat; illam vero quae a
Thomistis statuitur nec admittit, nec rejicit, aut Jansenius tomo 3. lib. 3. de
gratia Christi Salvatoris per totum.
ullam protestatur habere se de illa controversiam: imo censet and expressis
verbis fatetur, quod Idem ibid. c. 1.
tale auxilium sufficiens fortasse non difficulter S. Augustinus admitteret,
quamvis esse veram illam Christi gratiam, de qua cum Pelagio quaestio erat,
pernegaret, ut et pernegant ipsi Thomistae.

Igitur cum in odium Jansenii et ex occasion proscripti ejus operis delata
fuerit ad Sedem Apostolicam controversae propositionis querela and ipsius
exposita damnatio: delatorum men's ea est ut damnetur in sensu Jansenii, aut
saltem ut dum indistincte damnetur, in sensu Jansenii damnata fingi queat.
Parum illis est, ut damnetur in alio sensu, nisi damnetur, aut damnata credatur
in eo quern impugnant: impugnant vero illam, in quantum asserit justis
volentibus and conantibus non semper adesse praesentes vites, hoc est,
sufficientiam gratiae Molinisticae, qua eis praecepta quaecunque fiant omni
momento possibilia. Igitur et in hoc sensu eam proscribi volunt, aut posse
fingi proscriptam. Parum illis est quod per hujus propositionis censuram
deinceps dicendum sit, adesse justis volentibus and conantibus praesentissimam
omni momento gratiam sufficientem, assertam a Bellarmino et Thomistis, qua eis
fiant praecepta possibilia per potentiam, quae nunquam nisi rursum
obstetricante manu Domini et efficacis gratiae impulsu voluntates determinante
sit in actum exitura: hanc enim nec Thomistae semper adesse contendunt; nec si
praesens semper admitteretur, Molina collaudaret. Pedissequam igitur voluntatis
humanae gratiam quam do^t, and quam unicam Christi Salvatoris medicinalem
gratiam admittunt adstrui desiderant, eamque ex controver^ae propositionis
censura firmiter stabilitam, et in fidei Ecclesiasticae canonem jam relatam
posse celebrari peroptant.

Non hoc dicunt, non hoc fatentur, hoc tamen quaetunt, et eo certiori spe
obtinendi quod quaerunt, quo per cuniculos subreptionis apud Sedem Apostolicam
obrepentes se latere existimant, sicque delusa Pontificis vigilantia sub
propositionis universalissimae, indefinitae, ambiguae, et aequivocae, ac primo
auditu nescio quid intolerabile resonantis postulata censura, suae simul non
minus formidandae Molinisticae gratiae improvisam and incogitatam penitus Sedis
Apostolicae definitionem obtinere se posse arbitrantur. Versipelles Oratores!
Imo (quod invitus et dolens dico) sacrilegi omnino Sedis Apostolicae
deceptores, qui mentiri audent Spiritui Sancto, and a Cathedra Petri, dum unum
quid per speciem et apparentiam bonum petere se simulant, aliud non bonum, nec
unquam sciente et vidente Petro approbandum, per fraudis iniquissimae malas
arts non jam obtinere, sed furari moliuntur! Deponant semel larvam quam
gerunt, et liparium quo teguntur amoveant, et aperte dicant quaerere se a Sede
Apostolica, ut quod sub Clemente VIII. et Paulo V. post celebres septem supra
quadraginta Congregationes de Auxiliis habitas, adhibitis gravissimis
Consultoribus, auditis acerrimis disputationibus in eorum doctrina prope
damnatum fuit, modo sub unius larvatae propositionis proscriptione sine
strepitu, sine disputationibus, sine partium advocatione sanum, sanctum, et
Catholicum declaretur.

Hoc quaerunt, et hoc certissime obtinent, si quam postulant propositionis
damnationem reportant. Cum enim ex censura propositionis a Jansenio assertae,
in odium J^nsenii delatae, et consequenter non in alio quam Jansenii sensu
damnatae reputandae inevitabiliter resultet adesse omni tempore gratiam
sufficientem Molinisticam, hoc est, humanae voluntatis pedissequam (quam solam
et unicam Jansenius pernegat) qua justis volentibus et conantibus omni momento
suppetant vires praesentissimae ad implenda quaecunque praecepta quantumvis
difficilia; Jam certissime transiverit in rem judicatam tota lis, quae post tot
Congregationes consultissimas manserat indecisa; et felicissimo et inexpectato
olim rerum successu, nova Molinae doctrina (quam ejus assertores tum coram
summis Pontificibus protestabantur, non eo animo suscepisse defendendam ut
ostenderent esse Catholicam, sed solum ut probarent non esse aut haereticam aut
damnandam) nedum damnata extiterit, nedum haeretica declarata, deinceps ex
manifesta consequentia decreti Apostolici, quod contra propositionem
controversam tam astute quaeritur et tam instanter petitur, et sana et
Catholica manebit approbata, ideoque et in posterum inter Catholicos sola
docenda, unica profitenda.

Agitur itaque de summa rerum, et quod olim dicebat, in hostem conflicturus
Imperator, Hodie in uno orbis angulo de totius imperio dimicatur: agitur,
inquam, in uno articulo de totius corporis salute et vita; de tota dico fide
sacrosancta, quam in causa liberi hominis arbitrii, gratiae Christi medicinalis
et gratuitae Sanctorum praedestinationis a Paulo Gentium Doctore assertam, a
Pelagio et Massiliensibus impetitam, acies Ecclesiae per viginti et amplius
annos Augustino Doctore fortiter dimicans illaesam vindicavit. Delitescit enim
tota in hac una propositione quae Sedis Apostolicae judicium hodie
praestolatur, ut cum hac stante stet tota, cum hac cadente tota concidat. Si
enim damnatur propositio Jansenii, asseritur eo ipso gratia Molinae quam solam
propositio negat, et solam Jansenius impugnat; pro gratia Christi humanorum
cordium victrice and domina stabilitur gratia creatae voluntatis serva and
pedissequa; libero arbitrio humano bonorum operum gloria adscribitur; praedest
natio Sanctorum non jam ex vocante, sed ex operib^s praedicatur: electorum
salus aeterna non amplius miserenti Deo, sed volenti and currenti homini
plenissima deputatur; atque ut uno verbo concludam, pro solidissima and
sacratissima ac per omnes Ecclesiae aetates usque ad Molinam celebrata fidei
doctrina quae ab^i^itur, nova Massiliensis farinae molitura cum sui remolitoris
Molinae novis and pejoribus paraturis in Ecclesiae sanctuarium importatur.

Haec praemonuisse oportuit pro causae gravitate, pro veritatis munimine, pro
Religionis zelo, and pro gratiae Dei, qua Christiani sumus, debita defensione:
nec homines notasse velim, quos ut Ecclesiae filios impense veneror: sed facta
detexisse, quae parum sincera doleo, and doctrinae novae aut ex Massiliensium
antiquis ruderibus de novo erutae sensus noxios, aut pravas sequelas revelasse,
quas nec tam acriter quidem aut severe perstrinxissem pro reverentia judicis id
vetantis, nisi apud ipsum judicem ageretur, cui non aliter and judicii ipsius
momenta, and causae pericula, et structi laquei, et opertae fove ae, et paratae
insidiae poterant aperiri.

CAPUT. III.
Exponuntur sensus propositionis controversae boni and legitimi, ac supra omnem
censurae metum sua firmitate solidissimi.
Conc. Trident. sess. 6. can. 23. Si quis hominem semel justificatum dixerit
posse in tota vita peccata omnia etiam venialia vitare, nisi ex speciali Dei
privilegio, quemadmodum de beata Virgin tenet Ecclesia, anathema sit.
PRimum est, Justis quandiu manent justi, etiam si velint aut conentur, non
semper adesse gratiam necessariam, qua secundum praesentes quas habent vires,
ab omni peccato veniali abstineant, aut praeceptum omne, cujus transgressio sit
venialis, implere possint. Ratio hujus est: quia cum venialia non tollant
justitiam, imo de fide sit, nulli praeter Deiparae concessam gratiam qua ab
omni peccato veniali posset abstinere; dicente vel ipso Apostolo Joanne:
Quoniam si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, and veritas
in nobis non est: Consequens est justo, quamdiu manet justus, non semper adesse
gratiam necessariam, qua quodlibet virtutis opus aut praeceptum quodlibet,
cujus omissio vel transgressio sit venialis, fiat ei possibile.

Secund. est, Justis ut sic simpliciter sumptis, and absque illa reduplicatione
suppositae perseverantiae in eo statu, non semper adesse gratiam necessariam
qua possint implere, aut de facto impleant praecepta sub mortali culpa
obligantia. Ratio est: quia cum justus cadit a statu justitiae, cadit utique
per transgressionem mortalem alicujus praecepti. At in hanc non caderet, si
gratiam necessariam ad implendum praeceptum haberet, cum talis gratia sit
efficax, and ut loquitur Paulus, operetur velle and perficere. Ergo hoc ipsum
quod cadit, probatio est manifesta, non ipsi gratiam adfuisse qua staret. Ideo
dicere justos non semper posse secundum praesentes vires quas habent, implere
praecepta, non est aliud, quam impotentiam hujusmodi justis illis adscribere,
qui per peccatum aliquod a justitia decidunt, and negare quod hi a Deo
acceperint donum perseverantiae.

Propositio juxta utrumque hunc sensum intellecta, tam est certa and vera, quam
verum est, quod jugiter experimur, nec justum quemquam semper a peccatis
venialibus abstinere, nec omnes justos in statu justitiae semper perseverare.

CAPUT IV.
Probatur itaque sic explicata propositio, and ostenditur auctoritatibus and
rationibus, aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis, volentibus and conantibus
secundum praesentes quas habent vires esse impossibilia.
PRimo ex Concilio Tridentino Definit praeterea Conc. Trid. sess. 6. can. 22.
Si quis dixerit justificatum sine speciali Dei auxilio in accepta justitia
perseverare posse, anathema fit. Speciali, inquit, ergo non omnibus communi,
nec quod omnibus semper suppetat, and vires praesentes ad volendum, conandum,
and multo minns implendum mandatum and servandam perseverantem sanctitatem
jugiter subministret.
sess. 6. cap. 11. ubi mutuatis verbis ipsis Divi Augustini lib. de not. and
great. c. 43. loquens express Concilium de justificatis sic dicit: Deus
impossibilia non jubet, sed jubendo monet and facere quod possis, and petere
quod non possis. Ex quibus verbis manifestissimum est fateri Concilium, Non
adesse jugiter homini justo volenti and conanti vires praesentes, quibus possit
implere praecepta quaecunque Divina, quodque praeterea eas debeat a Deo
humiliter petere. Si enim jam haberet gratiam sufficientem and vires praesentes
(quales fingunt Molina ejusque discipuli) quibus posset praeceptum implere,
false diceretur non posse, and absque ratione moneretur orando satagere ut
posset; ut enim perite Augustinus lib. de not. and great. c. 18. Quid stultius
est quam orare ut facias quod in potestate habeas?

Secundo, ex Augustino Lib. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 17. Quiergo vult facere
Dei mandatum and non potest, jam quidem habet voluntatem bonam, sed adhuc
parvam and invalidam: poterit autem cum magnam habuerit and robustam. Ibid.
Parva and imperfecta charitas non deerat Petro, quando dicebat Domino, Animam
meam pro te ponam; putabat enim se posse, quod se velle sentiebat. Sermon. 106.
Promisit se moriturum pro illo; non potuit, nec cum illo. Sermon. 44. de diversis
cap. 2. Nondum poterat. quia infirmus erat. Tract. 36. in Joann. Mori pro
Christo nondum erant idonei Apostoli, quibus dicebat, Non potestis me sequi
modo. Unde primus eorum Petrus, qui hoc jam se posse praesumpserat, aliud
expertus est quam putabat. Lib. 2. de pecc. merit. cap. 19. Idcirco Sanctos and
fideles suos aliquibus vitiis tardius sanat, ut in his eos minus quam implendae
ex omni part justitiae sufficit, delectet bonum, sive cum latet, sive cum
etiam manifestum est: ut quantum pertinet ad integerrimam regulam veritoris
ejus, non justificetur in conspectu ejus omnis vivens, nec eo ipso vult nos
damnabiles esse sed humiles: commendans nobis eandem gratiam suam, ne
facilitatem in omnibus assecuti nostrum putemus esse quod ejus est.
qui hanc eandem doctrinam constantissime repetit in locis innumeris suorum
operum, and contra Pelagianos praeceptorum possibilitatem contumaciter
inculcantes, perpetuo docet praecepta esse possibilia ex viribus gratiae, quas
cum nec justus praesto semper habeat, orando mendicare debeat. Sic in lib. de
not. and great. cap. 15. Itaque praecepto facere commonemur quod conantes and
nostris viribus non valentes adjutorium divinum precemur. Et cap. 69. Eo ipso
quo firmissime creditur Deum justum and bonum impossibilia non potuisse
pracipere, hinc admonemur and in facilibus quid agamus, and in difficilibus
quid petamus. Et in lib. de spirit. and lit. cap. -- Ideo enim lex jubet, ut
admoneat quid faciat fides, ut cui jubetur, si nondum potest, sciat quid petat;
si autem continuo potest, and obedienter facit, debet etiam scire, quo donante
potest. Et lib. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 16. Magnum aliquid Pelagiani se
scire putant, quando dicunt, non juberet Deus, quod sciret non posse ab homine
fieri; quis hoc nesciat? sed ideo jubet aliqua quae non possumus, ut noverimus
quid ab illo petere debeamus. Ipsa enim est fides quae orando impetrat, quod
lex imperat. Haec and similia habet Augustinus lib. de perf. justit. cap. 3.
and 4. tract. de ovibus cap. 1. tract. in Joan. 34. 66. and 96. sermon. de
diverse. 44. cap. 2. and sermon. 77. cap. 4. and sermon. 106. cap. 1. and de verbis
Apost. sermon. 3. cap. 10. in Psalm 103. conc. 3. and in Psalm 106. and pluribus
aliis locis quibus adversus Pelagianos fuse disputat, and exemplis a Scriptura
adductis manifest ostendit, non posse interdum justos etiam volentes and
conantes ea implere quae volunt, and ad quae conantur praecepta implenda, quod
eis secundum praesentes vires desint auxilia gratiae iis implendis necessaria.

Tertio ostenditur ejusdem propositionis veritas ex orationis necessitate tam a
Christo non infidelibus ( quomodo enim invocabunt, in quem non crediderunt?
Romans 10.) sed fidelibus and in eum credentibus and justis Apostolis inculcata,
Oportet, inquit, orare semper and nunquam deficere. Luc. 18. and 11. Matt. 7.
Si enim viris justis semper suppetunt praesentes vires ad implenda mandata and
vitanda peccata, cur eis and a Christo and passim a toto Scripturarum canone
pradicatur jugis orandi necessitas and constans in oratione perseverantia? cur
jubentur dicere, Et ne nos inducas in tentationem? si eis superandae
tentationis potestas praesentissima, cur gemitus, cur lachrymae, cur suspiria
importuna quibus caelum tundant, ut quod jam habent petant? Abducit ergo justos
a studio Orationis qui eis hunc praesumptionis sensum iniquissimum suggerere
non formidat, quod mox ut in gratiam Dei admissi sunt, nequeunt unquam laborare
impotentia implendi quodvis mandatum quantumlibet difficile: hoc enim posito,
jam necessarium non est ut ostium misericordiae pulsent tanquam mendici, sed ut
pro acceptis bonis gratias agant tanquam Pharisaei. Quid, quaeso, magis impium,
aut doctrinae Christi magis adversans? Igitur ut vel monente Christo Orationis
perseverantia etiam justis est necessaria, utque aliunde perspicuum est eos qui
Deum pro impetranda gratia deprecantur, ut tentationes vincant, in bono
perseverent, and valiant facere quod jubentur, jam habere praecepti implendi
voluntatem, sed deesse potestatem. Ita and luce clarius est, Aliqua Dei
praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas
habent vires, esse impossibilia, de^sse quique iis gratiam qua possibilia
fiant, ex quo pro ea impetranda orare compelluntur.

Quarto probatur propositionis veritas ex everso alioquin totius Chri^i^ae
salutis fundamento solidissimo: humilitate, inquam, and casti ^in o^ and
virtutum omnium custode ^u^issima. Sierim existimas, quod ^emel justificatus
habes in te ipso sufficientem gratiam ill^m Molinisticam, hoc est,
praesentissimas vires quae plane sufficiant, and vitandis venialibus, and
exercendis virtutibus, and domandae concupiscentiae, and perseverandi in
gratia, and tentationibus evincendis, quae omnia ad implenda Dei mandata
requiruntur; jam non est quod timeas, nec quod in studio humilitatis te tam
solicit contineas. Quae enim fundamenta hujus sanctae humilitatis, quae est
totus and sincerissimus Evangelii spiritus?

Procul dubio haec sunt. Primum est, nosse and fateri, quod Non sumus
sufficientes cogitare aliquid, quasi a nobis, sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo
est. 2 ad Cor. 3.
quantumlibet justi nec passum movere possumus in via Dei sine continuo ejus
gratiae auxilio nobis prorsus indebito, nec nisi per meram misericordiam
concedendo. Secundum, quod Necesse est ut quo auxiliante vicimus, eo iterum non
adjuvante vincamur, S. innocentius Papa in ep. ad Presb. Conc. Carthag.
invalidi sumus vincendis tentationibus sine open Dei, qua deficiente nos cadere
statim ac vinci necesse est. Tertium, quod circumferimus nobis-metipsis legem
peccati, quae nos omni momento in scelus pertraheret, ni valida manu Dei
contineretur. Quartum, quod Scivi quoniam aliter non possum esse continens nisi
Deus det. Sap. c. 8.
debemus cum timore and tremore operari salutem nostram, quia Deus est qui
operatur in nobis velle and perficere pro bona voluntate sua. Quintum denique,
quod humiliati sub manu potenti Dei, debemus jugiter in eadem anxietate
palpitare, in qua olim sanctus David, qui quamvis and laetus and gratus pro
inspirata sibi pietate, In toto cord meo exquisivi te: nihilominus tamen and
deseri timebat, and ni desereretur orabat, Ne repellas me a mandatis tuis. Ecce
orat (ait Augustinus in Psalm 118.) ut adjuvetur ad custodienda mandata Dei.
Nam utique hoc est, Ne repellas me a mandatis tuis. Quid est enim a Deo
repelli, nisi non adjuvari? Assignat vero Augustinus egregiam rationem:
Mandatis quippe ejus rectis atque arduis humana non contemperatur infirmitas
(etiam in sancto and justo viro qualis erat David) nisi Philip. 2.
praeveniens ejus adjuvat charitas: quos autem non adjuvat, hoc merito
perhibetur repellere tanquam flammea framea prohibeantur indigni, ne manum
extendant ad arborem vitae. Quis est autem dignus, ex quo per unum hominem
peccatum intravit in mundum? sed indebita Dei misericordia sanatur debita
nostra miseria, etc.

Haec sunt igitur Christianae humilitatis solidissima fundamenta quae procul
dubio convelluntur, si justificato nunquam desunt vires praesentissimae, quibus
crescat in salutem, tentationum impetus frangat, concupiscentiae furores
coerceat, velle and perficere mandata Dei sibi ipsi operetur, nec expectato
novo eoque gratuito and indebito miserentis Dei adjutorio, pro volentis and
currentis proprii arbitrii nutu in justitia perseveret; cur enim timeat, qui
haec potest? Cur de se humiliter sen^iat, qui haec quae potest fortiter
praestat?

Ce^e non jam ipsi, aut pro ipso dixerit Apostolus, Q^is est qui te discernit?
1 Cor. 4. Cum enim quod omnibus est commune, non singulos discernat a singulis,
omnibus ve^o justis volentibus and conantibus adsint praesentes vires and
auxilia communia quibus (juxta Molinam) si volunt mandata impleant, quod pauci
impleant, multi non impleant, pauci stent, multi cadant, perseverent pauci, and
multi deficiant, non jam per gratiam quae communis est omnibus, pauci a multis
discernuntur, sed contra Apostolicum dictum, seipsos pauci a multis discrevisse
dicendi erunt, qui gratia omnibus justis communi singulariter usi sint; and his
cum eadem gratia pereuntibus, illi fortiter steterint, hoc est uno verbo, suae
salutis aeternae praecipui auctores extiterint.

Non ipsi nec pro ipso dixerit Apostolus, Quid habes quod non accepisti? aut
quid gloriaris quasi non acceperis? and qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur. 1
Cor. 1. and 4. Cum enim acceperit quod alii, habeat quod non alii, and munitus
unico possibilitatis praeceptorum communi dono, aliis non perseverantibus ipse
perseveravit, aliis pereuntibus ipse coronam assecutus sit, habet quod non
accepit, gloriari potest in quod non acceperit; and dum gloriatur, habet unde
non in Domino, sed in seipso valeat gloriari.

Non ipsi aut pro ipso dixerit Apostolus, Non est volentis neque currentis, sed
Dei miserentis. Romans 9. Cum, juxta Molinam, omnibus justis pari praeceptorum
facilitate a miserente Deo, per aequam gratiae dispensationem liberaliter
communitis, alii quidem quorum aequaliter misertus est Deus, a praeceptorum
observatione and justitiae statu exciderint, ipse vero quia voluit and
cucurrit, in iis servandis, perseveraverit, sic que non jam gratiae and
miserationi divinae debeat, sed suae ipsius voluntati and industriae adscribat,
quod in sanctitate perstiterit, quodque justitiae mercedem promeritus sit.

Haec and alia plura divinae veritatis oracula ab Epistolis Pauli delenda
erunt, aut si ea deleri non liceat, fateatur oportet cum humili David Psalm
119. Quisquis viam mandatorum cucurrit, cucurrisse se non quia voluit, sed quia
singulari auxilio gratiae dilatavit cor ejus misericors ille and miserator
Dominus qui operatur in nobis and velle and perficere, non pro volentis and
currentis industria, sed pro bona voluntate sua. Fateatur oportet quisquis
Domino suo stat, non in communi praeceptorum Molinistica illa possibilitate,
quae justis omnibus asseritut concessa, se stare; sed per gratiae donum
singular quo ei possibilia fiant, se a Deo discerni ab iis qui Domino suo
cadunt, nec quicquam habere se quod non singulariter acceperit, and de quo non
in se, sed in Domino Deo suo debeat gloriari. Fateatur demum oportet sibi
jugiter timendum, ut qui stat videat ne cadat, ex quo unde stet nequaquam
habet, nisi eo misericorditer largiente qui quem vult indurat and deserit, and
cui vult miseretur and tribuit, superbis resistens, humilibus autem dans
gratiam. Igitur verum est, and Apostolicis dictis optime consonans, Aliqua Dei
praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas
habent vires, esse impossibilia.

Quinto tandem and ultimo, ad hujus propositionis Catholicam veritatem
manifestandam adduci possent sequentes (utinam non sic esset) experientia and
quotidiani justorum gemitus, qui dum quae volunt bona non agunt, and quae
nolunt mala haec faciunt, exclamant cum Apostolo, Infelix ego homo, quis me
liberabit de corpore mortis hujus? Vires itaque ad faciendum quod praecipitur,
probant se non habere integras, sed ex ipsa tentatione divisas, and
concupiscentiis cordis sui pravisque consuetudinibus vulnerati, earumque
motibus distracti, bonum quod volunt non fortiter arque integre volunt, sed ut
Augustini verbo utar, semisauciam huc atque illuc versant jactantque
voluntatem, part assurgente cum alia part cadente colluctantem.

Quod que miserabilius est, nec Aug. lib. 1. qq. ad Simplician. q. 2. Nonne
aliquando ipsa oration nostra sic tepida est, vel potius frigida, pene nulla,
imo interdum ita nulla ut neque hoc in nobis cum dolor advertamus? Quia si hoc
vel dolemus, jam oram^. Quid ergo aliud ostenditur nobis, nisi quia and petere
and credere and pulsare ille concedit qui ut faciamus jubet?
ut plene velint and integre possint prae nimio devotionis tepore and spiritus
atiditate, Deum adjutorem suum invocare queunt and orare ut oportet, quo vel
sic confusi and ipsa confusione humilitati, in timore and tremore discant
operari salutem suam, and prudenter intelligant, quod salus justorum a Domino
nedum bonae voluntatis and boni operis vires tribuente; sed and ipsam quoque
orationis gratiam qua talia postulantur, misericorditer quibus voluerit
largiente, and just quamvis occulte quibus libuerit subtrahente. Quia, ut ait
Augustinus lib. de dono persev. c. 23. Et hoc ipsum est donum Dei, ut veraci
cord and spiritaliter clamemus ad Deum; and multum falluntur qui putant esse a
nobis, non autem dari nobis ut petamus, quaeramus, pulsemus: and hoc esse
dicunt quod gratia praeceditur merito nostro, ut sequatur illa, cum accepimus
petentes, and invenimus quaerentes, aperiturque pulsantibus. Nec volunt
intelligere etiam hoc divini muneris esse ut oremus, hoc est, petamus,
quaeramus atque pulsemus. Accepimus enim Spiritum adoptionis filiorum in quo
clamamus Abba Pater. Quod and vidit beatus Ambrosius; ait enim, Et orare Deum
gratiae spiritalis est, sicut scriptum est 1 Cor. 12. Nemo dicit Dominus Jesus
nisi in Spiritu sancto; ipse siquidem est Spiritus (ait Apostolicus Romans 8.)
qui interpellar pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus, sed veracibus, quoniam
veritas est Spiritus, and ipse est Spiritus qui spirat ubi vult, and ut spirat
spiritum gratiae ubi vult, sic and spiritum orationis and precum spirat ubi
vult, sicut scriptum est Zach. 12. Et effundam super domum David and super
habitatores Jerusalem Spiritum gratiae and precum.

Igitur ut certum est vel experientia test, justos non raro sub tentationum
pondere gemere, orare ut non inducantur, precari ut liberentur; imo nec quo hoc
ipsum petant, orationis spiritum interdum habere; Aug. lib. de not. and great.
cap. 17.
Sed si petunt, non sic aut tantum quantum res tanta petenda est petere.
Denique etiam in tempore tentationis recedere, and ab inchoato justitiae call
misere excidere, nec in bono perseverare. Ita and certum est, Aliqua Dei
praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas
habent vires esse impossibilia: deesse quoque iis gratiam qua possibilia fiant.
Siquidem si adesset, nec gemerent quasi nondum haberent, nec peterent quam jam
haberent; nec peccarent dum eam haberent: Haec enim gratia a nullo duro cord
respuitur: ideo quippe tribuitur, ut cordis duritia primitus auferatur. August.
de praedest. Sanct. cap. 8. Et ut ait veritas Ioinnis 6. Omnis qui audivit a
Patre and didicit, venit ad me; quid est hoc nisi quia nullus per Dei gratiam
excitatur qui non obediat? Quando ergo Pater intus loquitur, auferr cor
lapideum, and dat cor carneum; sic quippe facit filios promissionis and vasa
misericordiae quae praeparavit in gloriam. Cur ergo non omnes docet, nisi quia
omnes quos docet, misericordia doce? quos autem non docet, judicio non docet,
quoniam cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult indurat: sed misereturbonum
tribaens, obdurat digna retribuens. Aug. ibid.

Subscribat demum D. Thomas toti huic doctrinae in 2. 2. q. 2. a. 5. ad 1. sic
habet: Ad multa tenetur homo ad quae non potest sine gratia reparante, sicut ad
diligendum Deum and proximum (hoc est, ad praecepta Dei servanda quae in
dilectione Dei and proximi tenentur) etc. his enim duobus mandatis, aiebat
Christus, tota lex pendet, etc. Et similiter ad credendum articulos fidei; sed
tamen hoc potest cum auxilio gratiae, quod quidem auxilium quibuscunque
divinitus datur, misericorditer datur: quibus autem non datur, ex justitia non
datur in poenam praecedentis peccati, saltem originalis, ut dicit Augustinus in
lib. de corr. and great. cap. 11. Ergo ex mente D. Thomae ut praecepta non sunt
possibilia homini sine auxilio gratiae, utque hoc auxilium nulli debitum, non
omnibus misericorditer datur, sed aliquibus just subtrahitur; Sic nec iis
quibus subtrahitur aut non datur, erunt praecepta Dei possibilia secundum vires
praesentes quas habent, quamvis velint and quamvis conentur.

CAPUT V.
Solvuntur objectiones initio propositae.
OBjicitur primo affinitas propositionis controversae cum doctrina Calvini. Sed
ineptiam quidem objectionis video, affinitatem vero quam objicit nullam video.
Negat Calvinus praecepta Dei esse possibilia etiam cum gratiae divinae auxilio.
Negat propositio esse possibilia sine gratiae auxilio, quod non semper adest.
Quae in his affinitas?

Objicitur secundo canon 11. sess. 6. Conc. Trid. Si quis dixerit Dei praecepta
homini etiam justificato and sub gratia constituto esse ad observandum
impossibilia; anathema sit. Respondet Bellarminus lib. 4. de justificatione
cap. 10. damnari a Concilio praefatam haeresim Calvini and Lutheri, absolutam
praeceptorum impossibilitatem asserentium, quae nec per gratiae auxilium possit
superari. Ut ergo hujus pestiferae assertionis nulla cum propositione
controversa affinitas, sed recessus immensus; ita nec per damnationem illius
quidquam illo canone actum est contra propositionis controversae saluberrimam
veritatem.

Objicitur Assertio 4. Molinistica inter alias plures quas sub anno 1586. and
1588. Academiae Lovaniensis and Duacensis tanquam fidei Christianae adversas
celebri and docta censura expunxerunt, sic habet: Indurati and excaecati habent
sufficiens auxilium ex part Dei ut convertantur. Item omnes infideles semper
and ubique habent sufficiens auxilium ex part Dei.

Censura Duacensis sic habet: Rejicienda est penitus tota haec assertio, velut
plurimum detrahens beneficio singularis illius gratiae Christi quae non omnibus
est communis, and tamen omnibus ad conversionem and salutem est necessaria.
Quantum autem tota assertionis doctrina dissonet a sensu sacrae Scripturae,
ostendunt ea loca in quibus legitur quosdam non tantum deseri a Deo ac dimitti
secundum vias suas, and secundum desideria cordis sui, verum etiam obdurari and
obcaecari: ideoque quod ad praesentem eorum attinet dispositionem, credere and
benefacere non posse quosdam, item traditos in passiones ignominiae and in
reprobum sensum. Quibus quidem omnibus velle tribuere auxilium sufficiens ad
conversionem and salutem ex part Dei, nimis absurdum est, cum ejusmodi
dimissio, desertio, obduratio, excaecatio, and traditio significent auxilii
necessarii negationem vel subtractionem. Ita censura Duacensis.


tertio Augustinus lib. 3. de not. and great. c. 69. dicens: Firmissime credi
Deum justum and bonum impossibilia non potuisse praecipere. Respondeo primo,
Quod cum Augustini dictum sit universale and congruat omnibus hominibus quibus
a Deo imposita praecepta, haud dubie nihil facit contra propositionem
controversam, nisi simul velis, aut quod possint impleri mandata sine gratia
Christi, ut docebat Pelagius; aut mandata Dei non obligent infideles, quae
esser nova haeresis tam rationi quam fidei adversans; aut quod gratia Christi
nunquam desit aut obduratis and excaecatis aut infidelibus, ex quo sine illa
Deus eis praeciperet impossibilia, and quod hodie quaeritur definiendum a Sede
Apostolica, de solis hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus, quaeratur
paulo post and pro impiis, excaecatis, obduratis, aut etiam infidelibus, quibus
aeque ac justis Molina ejusque discipuli suam illam gratiam sufficientem
praesentissimam ubique contendunt contra manifestissima Scripturae testimonia
and perpetua D. Augustini contra Pelagianos asserta. Igitur respondeo secundo,
non esse Augustini mentem, quod praecepta Dei possibilia sint homini in omni
statu aut momento, dum dixit, Deum justum and bonum nihil impossible homini
praecipere; sed hoc voluit, quod mox subjunxit, Admoneri nos eo ipso and in
facilibus quid agamus, and in difficilibus quid petamus. Haec enim ejus
constans and millies repetita contra Pelagianos assertio: Deum praecipere
homini quod ex naturae viribus and voluntatis depravatione praestare nequit, ut
expertus homo suam infirmitatem, medicum quaerat liberatorem and gratiam
postulet adjutricem.

Objicitur quarto idem Augustinus de haeresi contra Manich. cap. 3. dicens,
Omnes homines posse se convertere ad Dei praecepta observanda si velint. Sed
hanc ipsam objectionem solvit Augustinus lib. Retract. c. 10. ubi quae loco
citato adversus Manichaeos dixerat replicans, and ne Pelagiani his se
communirent, praecavens, sic ait: Quod vere dixi posse omnes homines mandata
servare si velint, non existiment novi haeretici Pelagiani secundum eos esse
dictum. Verum est enim omnino, and tantum augetur munere charitatis, ut
possint, ille enim facit ut velimus bonum de quo dictum est, a Domino gressus
hominis dirigentur, and viam ejus volet. Psalm. 36, Hoc autem ibi ideo non
dixi, quoniam praesenti quae contra Manichaeos tunc versabatur quaestioni
necessarium non erat.

Epilogus and conclusio.
PRopositio itaque controversa ut in malis quos patitur sensibus jam satis per
sacri Concilii Trident. anathematismos contra Calvinum and Lutherum dejecta and
prostrata, nullius Theologi Catholici malo favore suscitatur; ita and in bonis
quos habet sensibus tota est extra censuram. Stabilitur enim ab eodem sacro
Concilio, docetur ab Augustino, confirmatur a Thoma, defenditur a Thomistis,
jugi and insuperabili orationum necessitate adstruitur, Christianae humilitatis
solidissima basi roboratur, piis and quotidianis justorum suspiriis exprimitur,
and tam tota Pauli Apostoli cohaeret sententiis, ut non nisi per spreta and
contempta tam authentica veritatis testimonia valeat condemnari.

Si secus fiat (quod avertat Deus) jam in hac una hujus propositionis censura,
tota de Christi gratia medicinali antiquissimae saluberrimaeque Theologiae
fidei moles dejicitur, hominum discretio hominibus adscribitur; humanis meritis
electio divina subjicitur; stupor Pauli circa praedestinationis Sanctorum
inscrutabilitatem non rei profunditati, sed stupentis imbecillitati deputatur;
versatilis and pedissequae gratiae omnibus retro seculis (si Molinae Theophilus
Raynaudus in Holoptheca sect. 2. serie 1. c. 5. post abunde laudatum Molinam
celebrat dictum Joannis de eo effuse prolatum disp. 48. select. number. 48. Molina
Magister magistrorum est, cujus scripta tam in disputationibus scholasticis
quam ad mores attinentibus lucem absconditis rebus emiserunt.
credimus) nova and inaudita doctrina consecratur; per versatilem hanc gratiam
olim acerrime in Pelagianos impugnatam, hodie admissam, versatilis Ecclesiae
fides, hoc est, non fides declaratur; Ecclesia tota quae erranti in caligine
Augustino per mill ducentos and amplius annos, in materia gratiae
constantissime subscripsit, caliginis quoque and erroris, quam solus depulerit
Molina, arguitur; Et ut uno verbo concludam, non aliud agendum supererit, quam
quod and Augustinus Ecclesiae Doctorum sublimior, and Paulus Gentium Apostolus,
quorum in causa divinae gratiae and praedestinationis una eademque sententia,
una praedicatio, ut prava dogmata quibus Ecclesiae tamdiu illuserunt, in
ordinem redigantur, quodque novum orbis lumen Ludovicus Molina, qui, ut ipse
gloriatur, horum discussit caligines and vicit ignorantias, victorum spolia
detrahat, cum Principibus deinceps sedeat and solium gloriae teneat; atque pro
Augustino a suo Doctoratu dejecto, pro Paulo a suo Apostolatu deposito, Molina
Doctor Ecclesiae designetur primarius, Molina nuncupetur Apostolus; huic
expectatissimo festo miris in Molinam encomiis, diris in Augustinum strophis
and sacrilegis in Paulum blasphemiis, velut sanctioribus praeludiis praecinunt
Molinistae: Nam de gratia sufficienti remota, qualem Thomistae and Bellarminus
docent, nulla hic controversia.
diesque eis laeta quam expectant prope advenerit, si quod ab Augustino
alienissimum, quod a Paulo dissentaneum, sed Molinae cerebro acceptissimum, ad
Molinistarum instantias contingat approbari: Adesse omni momento omnibus justis
volentibus and conantibus praesentes vires cumulatissimas, proximas and
immediatas ad opus, quibus tentationes quantumcunque graves, exsufflent,
martyria quaevis atrocia fortiter sustineant, and praecepta Dei quamvis ardua
and difficilia alacriter impleant.

The second Writing.
II. PROPOSITIO CONTROVERSA.
Interiori gratia in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.
CAPUT. I.
Secernuntur pravi Propositionis sensus a legitimo, and removetur quaesita a
Molinistis aequivocationis occasio.
VOlunt Sorbonici Molinistae hanc damnari propositionem. Damnetur quidem, sed
distincta damnetur, ut in quo sensu damnata fuerit, in quo sensu indemnata
remanserit, clare intelligatur. Interiores quippe gratiae multae sunt; interior
est gratia habitualis, interior gratia est charitas, interior gratia est spes,
interior gratia est sides, et interiores gratiae sunt quotquot virtutum
infusarum habitus habitualem gratiam comitantur. Quis neget his omnibus
interioribus gratiis saepe resisti, quas etiam saepe constat expelli? Rursum
interiores gratiae sunt mentis illuminationes a Deo saepius immissae, ab homine
saepe repulsae. De his omnibus, ut de exterioribus gratiae auxiliis, lege,
Prophetiis, Praedicationibus, promissis, comminationibus, suasionibus et
correptionibus, dicebat Stephanus Act. c. 7.
Indaeis, Vos semper Spiritui sancto resistitis; et Paulus 2 Cor. c. 6.
Corinthiis, Hortamur vos ne in vacuum gratiam Dei recipitatis. Praefatas omnes
gratias interiores continet universalissimum et plane aequivocum INTERIORIS
GRATIAE nomen quod in propositione ponitur; ut certo certius sit et citra omnem
controversiam indubitatum, praefatam propositionem secundum quod hujusmodi
interiores gratias sub sua universalitate comprehendit, non tam esse damnandam,
quam omnium Theologorum consensu damnatissimam asserendam. Quid ergo eam
Molinistae damnari postulant, quam nemo sanae mentis dubitat esse damnatam?

Certe cum inter Molinistas et sanctorum Augustini et Thomae Discipulos tota in
materia de gratia disceptatio sit circa gratiae efficaciam, (in hoc quod dicunt
Thomistae, omne auxilium gratiae motricis prout venit a Deo esse efficax, et
humanas sibi subdere voluntates: Dicunt vero Molinistae, nullum esse ex sua
natura efficax, sed quodcunque indifferens et humanae pedissequum voluntatis)
oportuerat omnino Molinistas (si non fucum et fraudem meditabantur)
efficacitatis gratiae in hac propositione imprimis meminisse, quo attingeretur
nodus controversiae, nec aliquis ambiguitatis subesset locus.

Oportuerat rursum resistentiae significatum clarius expressisse. Cum enim
resistentia alia sit invalida, qua frustra contranitimur: alia validissima, qua
id cui contranitimur omnimode impedimus: Debuit explicari resistentiae qualitas
ad tollendam aequivocationem, quandoquidem non de quacunque, sed de resistentia
ultimo modo dicta, proprie ambigitur in hac controversia. Et tam ipse
Jansenius, quam Augustinus, Thomas, eorumque discipuli, quibus sub Jansenii
odioso nomine infertur bellum, admittunt passim, quandiu sumus in corpore
mortis hujus, concupiscentiae et legis membrorum adversus Dei gratiam et legem
mentis contumacissimam pugnam. Admittunt pravorum desideriorum carnis adversus
victricis gratiae divinos impulsus, conatum et resistentiam: sed talem tamen
quae gratiae Dei efficacis victricem delectationem non impediat, aut
inspirationem flagrantissimae and luminosissimae charitatis non praefocet aut
extinguat.

Igitur ur sine fuco et fraud ac sine insidiarum suspicione procederetur,
debuerant Molinistae sub his verbis articulum controversum proposuisse Sedi
Apostolicae; Gratia Christi tam est efficax, quod in statu naturae lapsae
nunquam ei ita resistitur, quin haec suum ad quem proxime and immediate a Deo
destinatur effectum infallibiliter operetur: vel brevius, Nulla prorsus Christi
gratia effectu suo caret: vel adhuc clarius, Omnis Christi gratia etiam
sufficiens est efficax pro effectu ad quem datur.

Non placuere Molinistis controversae difficultatis ram sincerae et clarae
expressiones, ut quae parum favissent eorum fini, et nimia sui luce little arts
dissipassent. Intererat nimirum eorum scopo ut aequivoca propositio, quae in
suo latissimo significato has omnes complectitur, ex aliis quas etiam continet
intolerabiles et manifest falsas, indistincta damnaretur: ut mox indistinctae
damnationis calumnia ad has quoque trahi posset. Jamque eis liceret
probabiliter apud imperitos fingere, quod propositio sub nomine Jansenii
delata, et in odium Jansenii damnata, fuisset quoque damnata in sensu Jansenii,
hoc est, Thomae et Augustini. Ideoque explosam a Sede Apostolica gratiam
Christi efficacem cui nunquam resistitur, admissam et celebratam gratiam
Molinae sufficientem cui saepe resistitur et semper resisti potest; tales a
Sede Apostolica quaerere definitiones, non est quaerere pacem Ecclesiae, sed
est, per delusam Petri Sedem, nova bella et majores turbas in Ecclesia Dei
perverse excitare.

Tenemus, spero, captas vulpeculas quae demoliuntur vineam Domini Sabbath.
Apprehendimus sapientes in astutia eorum, et consilia eorum dissipavimus; dum
disjectis nebulis aequivocationum, quas in oculos Sedis Apostolicae nitebantur
obfundere, distinximus pravos et ad praesentium disputationum causam prorsus
inutiles sensus, a germano propositionis sensu, qui apicem quaestionis unice
tangens, unicus proponi debuerat. Superest ut ostendamus hunc tanquam
Augustinianum et Thomisticum, hoc est, fidei antiquae sincerissimum esse extra
censuram, nec sub Jansenii nomine quasi ex proscripti jam auctoris praejudicio
in damnationem compelli posse.

Caeterum qui Jansenium nomino, et Jansenium tueor, tam sum Jansenista quam sum
Mahometanus; antiquus sum in Schola Evangelica et Augustini et Thomae
discipulus, qui ita Augustinum and Thomam in Iansenio defendo, ut Evangelium
defenderemin Alchorano. Haber Alchoranus quatuor Evangelicas veritates,
unitatem Numinis, Christi ex Virgin nativitatem, mortuorum resurrectionem, and
futurum judicium, has ut in Evangelio defenderem, sic defenderem in Alchorano,
quia ut verae sunt in Evangelio, sic verae sunt in Alchorano, quamvis non ex
Alchorano suae infallibilitatis habeant testimonium, cui si detrahi posset,
detraheretur per Alchoranum; sic dum Jansenium allego, aut Jansenium protego,
non Jansenii parts ago, sed parts Augustini, sed parts Thomae, sed parts
veritatis, quae cum emanatio quaedam sit and vapor charitatis aeternae, tam non
in ore aut proscripti Jansenii, aut execrandi Mahometis, quidquam perdit de sua
veritate, quam nec solares radii quidquam in sterquilinio de sua puritate.

Igitur quoties occurterit, Jansenium producam, non in Jansenii patrocinium,
sed ne (quod quaerunt Molinistae) ex damnatis quae falso ab eis allegantur,
Jansenii sententiis, contingat sustinere calumniam Augustini and Thomae and
antiquae fidei saluberrimas veritates, cum quibus non raro Jansenius concordat.

CAPUT. II.
Gratia Christi tam est efficax, quod in statu naturae lapsae nunquam ei
resistitur, quin haec suum infallibiliter operetur effectum.
GRatiae quidem adversari and resistere etiam in hominibus justis
concupiscentiam, a nemine ambigitur. Sed ita adversari aut resistere, ut ejus
effectus impediat, ad quos ex decreto Dei efficaci ordinatur, falsissimum est.

Primo enim hanc veritatem ut Augustini indubitatam, hoc est, haereditatiae
fidei doctrinae sincerissimam novit Clemens VIII. qui in hoc sexto scripto sui
nominis subscriptione roborato and a se tradito Congregationi de Auxiliis die 9
Iulii 1603. inter quindecim quos continebat articulos, tres sequentes inseruit.
Quintus est: H^c gratia habet suam efficaciam ab omnipotentia Dei and a dominio
quod summa Majestas habet in hominum voluntates, sicut in caetera omnia quae
sub caelo sunt secundum S. Augustinum. Sextus est: Per hanc gratiam secundum
Augustinum agit Deus omnipotens in cordibus hominum motum voluntatis eorum,
faciendo ex nolentibus volentes, ex repugnantibus consentientes, ex
oppugnantibus amantes. Decimus tandem: Essectus hujus gratiae efficacis
secundum S. Augustinum est certus and infallibilis. Hoc novit, hoc censuit, hoc
tradidit Congregationi de Auxiliis summus Pontifex Clemens.

Norunt, and hoc ipsum censuerunt sapientissimi ejusdem Congregationis
Consultores, qui in prima Congregatione sub Paulo V. habita die 20 September.
1605. auditis super praefato scripto Clementis VIII. disputationibus P.
Bastidae Iesuitae and P. Thomae de Lemos Dominicani, and examinatis etiam per
se S. Augustini auctoritatibus ab ipso Clemente VIII. ad cujusque articuli
probationem adductis, in sequenti Congregatione concluserunt, eam esse
germanissimam D. Augustini mentem, quam Clemens VIII. summus Pontifex ex multis
hujus sancti Doctoris locis in singulis quindecim articulis suo scripto
proposuerat.

Cum ergo ex Augustini placito a Clemente and Paulo summis Pontificibus
eorumque selectissimis Consultoribus recognito, Gratia Christi suam efficaciam
sortiatur non a creati arbitrii nutu and cooperatione, ut volunt Molinistae,
sed ab ipsa omnipotentia Dei and supremo dominio quod summa divina Majestas
habet in hominum voluntates, ut habet quintus articulus: Cumque per hanc
gratiam Deus omnipotens agat in cordibus hominum motum voluntatis eorum, ut
habet sextus articulus, sequitur evidenter, quod, ut nihil resistit potestati
and actioni Dei, sic nec aliqua voluntas creata resistat ejus gratiae efficaci:
sed quod (ut habet decimus articulus) effectus hujus gratiae efficacis sit
certus and infallibilis; quodque consequenter gratiae Christi efficaci in statu
naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur, quae est propositio controversa.

Secundo, tam reciprocantur apud Augustinum, gratia Dei and voluntatis creatae
bona operatio, ut (quod de causa and effectu docent Philosophi) convertibiles
fint, and a se mutuo inseparabiles: adeo ut quemadmodum ex gratia data mox
sequitur bona operatio, sic ex defectu bonae operationis inferri certissime
possit gratia denegata. Uterque iste arguendi modus and affirmativus and
negativus tam est in hac materia apud Augustinum frequens, ut pene superfluum
sit loca aduxisse.

Ex multis tamen pauca adduco. Imprimis lib. de gratia Christi cap. 45. citat
Ambrosium dicentem: Negavit primo Petrus, and non flevit, quia non respexerat
Dominus: negavit tertio, respexit Jesus, and flevit amarissime Petrus.

Deinde lib. 1 qq. ad Simplician. q. 2. Illud autem nescio quomodo dicatur
frustra Deum misereri, nisi nos velimus: si enim Deus miseretur, jam volumus;
ad eamdem quippe misericordiam pertinet ut velimus; nullius ergo frustra
miseretur.

Lib. de great. Christi c. 13. ubi ex professo totum illud opud disputat contta
Pelagianos de adjutorio medicinalis gratiae, hoc est gratiae Christianae,
adeoque verae gratiae quae per crucem Christi humano generi revelata atque
donata est, ita definitive loquitur: Qui novit quid est quod fieri debeat and
non facit, nondum a Deo didicit secundum gratiam, sed secundum legem; non
secundum spiritum, sed secundum literam; quamvis multi quod imperat lex, facere
videantur timore poenae, non amore justitiae, quam dixit Apostolus justitiam
tuam quae est ex lege, tanquam sit imperata and non data.

Ibidem cap. 14. De isto docendi modo (nempe per gratiam) etiam Dominus ait;
Omnis qui audivit a Patre meo and didicit, venit ad me: qui ergo non venerit,
non de illo recte dicitur; audivit quidem and didicit sibi esse veniendum, sed
facere non vult quod didicit. Prorsus non recte dicitur de isto modo docendi,
quo per gratiam docet Deus; si enim, sicut veritas loquitur, omnis qui dedicit,
venit, quisquis non venit, profecto non didicit.

Et in lib. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 8. fusissime eamdem probat veritatem ex
eodem Evangelii loco; Concludimus demum, Quod si and illos quibus stultitia est
verbum crucis, ut ad Christum venirent, docere voluisset, procul dubio venirent
and ipsi: non enim fallit aut fallitur, qui ait, Omnis qui audivit a Patre and
didicit, venit ad me. Absit ergo ut quisquam quam non veniat qui a Patre
audivit and didicit. Erursum instantius and inculcatius: Qui ergo credunt
Praedicatore forinsecus insonante, intus a Patre audiunt atque discunt. Qui
autem non credunt, foris audiunt, intus no^ audiunt neque discunt, hoc est,
illis datur ut credant, istis non datur.

Poteratne for^ius D. Augustinus veritatem controversae propositionis
expressisse, and inculcasse quod gratiae Christi in statu naturae lapsae
nunquam resistitur? Adducerem and plura alia ipsius veritatis argumenta and
testimonia Augustini, ni quae jam sunt adducta, essent luculentiora quam quae
ullo artificii aut tergiversationis fuco obscurari queant. Adducerem and omnium
D. Augustini discipulorum, hoc est, omnium usque ad Molinam and Patrum and
Scholarum, and totius Ecclesiae Catholicae conformes sententias, ni una instar
omnium sufficeret D. Thomae Aquinatis, quam submitto, sincerissima and
repetitia ad hanc doctrinam subscriptio.

Subscribit certe D. Thomas Augustino manifestissime, dum 12. q. 98. a. 4 ad 2,
ultimo relatam a nobis ex lib. de praedest. Sanct. c 8. Augustini sententiam
and citat and celebrat. Rursum 2 2, q. 10. a. 4 ad 3, dum docet, Impossible
esse eum non moveri quem Spiritus Sanctus movere velit, etc. Rursum dum ait 2
2, q. 24, a. 11: Tripliciter possumus considerare charitatem, uno modo ex part
Spiritus Sancti moventis animum ad diligendum Deum, and ex hac part charitas
imperabilitatem habet ex virtute Spiritus Sancti, qui infallibiliter operatur
quodcunque voluerit, unde impossible est haec duo simul esse vera, quod
Spiritus Sanctus velit aliquem movere ad actum charitatis, and quod ipse
charitatem amittat peccando. En igitur gratiae efficaciam ex Angelici Doctoris
testimonio infallibiliter operantem! En gratiae energiam indeclinabiliter
agentem, non ex praevisione aut praescientia consensurae voluntatis, ut
nugantur Molinistae, sed ab omnipotentia Dei (ut Clemens VIII. ex Augustino)
and ex v^rtute Spiritus Sancti (ut loquitur Thomas) qui adeo infallibiliter
operatur quodcunque voluerit, ut impossible sit (Molinistae! ubi quaeso
indifferentia sensus compositi?) eum non moveri quem ipse movere voluerit.

Haec D. Thomae Aquinatis oracula manifestae sunt subscriptiones ad
praeallegatam S. Augustini doctrinam, de inseparabilitate gratiae Dei and boni
operis nostri, and plene relabuntur in illud aliud dictum Augustini de
praedest. Sanct. cap. 8. Haec graetia quae occulte humanis cordibus Divina
largitate tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur, ideoque tribuitur ut cordis
duritia primitus auferatur. Et rursum in illud de corrept. and great. cap. 14.
Deo volenti salvum facere, nullum humanum resistit arbitrium. Ut post haec
liceat nobis tuto concludere, non amplius posse dubitari quin verum and
verissimum sit, quod in hoc sensu interiori gratiae Christi in statu naturae
lapsae nunquam resistitur.

CAPUT. III.
Omnem Christi gratiam secundum Augustini and Thomae Discipulos esse efficacem,
and nullam prorsus suo carere effectu.
QUid ergo? sufficientem gratiam negant? nequaquam. Sed ne recedant a
principiis in Augustino and Thoma notissimis, quibus D. Th. 2. 2. q. 10. a. 4.
ad 3. D. Aug. lib. de great. Christi c. 13.
impossible est cum non moveri quem Spiritus Sanctus movere velit, and eum qui
discit per gratiam, non agere omnino quidquid agendum didicerit. Docent uno
ore, quod quamvis ea gratia quam sufficientem appellant, inefficax sit ad
plenum illud opus ad quod dicitur esse sufficiens, est tamen plenissime and
cumulatissime efficax ad actum proximum and immediatum, ad quem a Deo datur and
destinatur. Ita Medina 1 2, q. 109 a. 10, circa finem, and communiter
recentiores Thomistae apud Didacum Alvarem lib. 8. de Auxiliis disp. 80. per
totam.

Exemplificat Alvares suum and Thomistarum commune dictum in auxilio
sufficienti ad actum fidei, quod licet sit inefficax ad credendum, producit
tamen inefficacitet in homine pias cogitationes and notitias credendorum, vel
pia desideria and velleitates habendae fidei, and alios hujusmodi actus
imperfectos, qui regulariter loquendo antecedunt assensum fidei; similiter in
auxilio sufficienti ad actum contritionis, quod quantumvis inefficax ad ipsam
contritionem in homine formandam, producit tamen in ipso efficaciter
considerationem poenarum inferni, bonitatis Divinae, vel turpitudinis peccati,
vel attritionem, vel displicentiam sui status, vel piam velleitatem verae
conversionis in Deum, aut alios hujusmodi actus imperfectos, qui ad perfectam
contritionem sunt praevii and praeparatorii.

Probat suam hanc sententiam sic explicatam ex illo Isa. 55. Quomodo descendit
imber and nix de caelo, and illuc ultra non revertitur, sed inebriat terram and
infundit eam, and germinare eam facit, and dat semen serenti and panem
comedenti: sic erit verbum meum quod egredietur de ore meo, non revertetur ad
me vacuum, sed faciet quaecunque volui and pr sperabitur in his ad quae misi
illud. Quibus verbis fignificatur vocationem internam, qua Deus illuminat
animam, vacuam non esse, aut sine fructu: sed semper habere in homine aliquem
effectum, illum videlicet quem Deus absolute vult ut habeat, quamvis eadem
vocatio interior comparatione actus perfecti ad quem ultimate ex voluntate Dei
antecedente ordinabatur, sit solum sufficiens.

Probat secundo, quoniam auxilium actuale nunquam reperitur in intellectu
hominis aut voluntate, absque operatione ejusdem intellectus and voluntatis,
cum in hoc distinguatur auxilium actuale ab habituali, quod habitus est aliquid
permanens in anima, etiam quando nihil operatur: auxilium autem actuale est
aliquid fluens, sicut and ipsa operatio, unde and cum ipsa operatione transit:
Ergo auxilium sufficiens actuale semper habet conjunctam aliquam operationem
quam producit: Ergo respectu ejusdem operationis tale auxilium erit efficax,
quamvis comparatione ulterioris actus perfecti ad quem ultimate ordinabatur,
sit solum sufficiens.

Probat tertio, nam Deus per auxilium sufficiens excitat animam, and anima nec
per impossible excitatur formaliter nisi per actum vitalem a se elicitum, cum
ejusmodi excitatio sit vitalis, quae sine actu vitali fieri non potest: Ergo
auxilium sufficiens semper producit in homine aliquem actum vitalem saltem
indeliberatum: Ergo comparatione illius tale auxilium est semper efficax.

Probat quarto, quia implicat contradictorium, quod Deus actualiter moveat
animam, and anima non moveatur actualiter, cum movens and motum sint
correlativa: sed per auxilium sufficiens actuale Deus movet animam; Ergo anima
movetur actualiter: ergo per aliquem actum a se elicitum; anima enim nunquam
movetur actualiter nisi eliciendo aliquem actum: ergo auxilium sufficiens erit
semper efficax comparatione ill us actus.

Omitto alias rations Theologicas a Didaco Alvarez adductas quae in eo videri
possunt. Et solum addo Roberti Cardinalis Bellarmini suffragium, qui, ut
gratiam sufficientem Molinisticam constanter ubique rejicit tanquam Scripturis
contrariam, Augustino inimicam, and mysterii praedestinationis penitus
destructivam, ac salutem hominis non Deo sed homini adscribentem; gratiam vero
sufficientem Thomistarum ubique complectitur, ita et cum Thomistis in hoc
puncto de quo agimus, evidenter concordat, et eodem modo quo Didacum Alvarez
audivimus, ratiocinatur. Lib. etenim 2 de great. et lib. arb. c. 6, ubi retulit
quosdam dicentes (hi sunt Molinistae) gratiam Dei semper adesse, and Deum
perpetuo pulsare ad ostium cordis, and peccatores vocare, sed eos aliis rebus
intentos, non percipere vocationem Dei: Subdit statim, Hoc assertum
manifestissime cum ipso experimento pugnare. Nam cum vocatio, inquit, pulsus,
tractus, illa excitatio Dei, sit actio nostra, quamvis non libera, nimirum bona
cogitatio, bonumque desiderium repent ac divinitus immissum: Quomodo fieri
potest, ut non sentiatur a nobis, si fit non solum in nobis, sed etiam a nobis?

Ex quibus verbis evidentissimum est juxta Bellarminum, quod quia gratia
sufficiens in nobis semper producit bonam aliquam operationem, sit consequenter
efficax ad illam producendam. Quodque ex consequenti, nulla sit gratia
sufficiens quae non sit absolute efficax ad opus proximum et immediatum ad quod
a Deo destinatur, quamvis eadem sit inefficax ad actum ulteriorem.

CAPUT. IV.
Jansenium nihil docuisse in hac materia quam quod docuere Augustini and Thomae
discipuli.
EFficacissima gratiae natura declaratur (a Jansenio) ex eo quod nulla prorsus
effectu suo caret, sed eum in omnibus quibus datur, infallibiliter operatur.
Est hic et titulus et scopus totius capitis 25. lib. 2 de gratia Christi
Salvatoris, a quo qui per latus Jansenii Augustinum et Thomistas impetunt,
occasionem sumpsere formandae sibi proposinis quam Jansenii esse dicerent, and
quasi ex praedamnati jam auctoris infamia, damnatam tacit, damnandam public
postularent, Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resisti.

Imprimis non per aequivocas hujusmodi locutiones mentem suam Jansenius celat,
sed aperte loquitur, clare se explicat, non de quacunque gratia sermonem
instituit, de sola gratia actuali, quam toto illo volumine pertractat, se loqui
manifestat, ut sane Molinistae, non se de quaesito in Sedem Apostolicam dolo,
non se de meditata in ipsam veritatem calumnia valiant excusare, dum auctoris
verba commutant, eaque sub tam vaga expressione producunt; quod ex prima
inspectione fit sensus propositionis ambiguus, qui in ipso auctore cui illam
adscribunt, est plane apertissimus: fit propositio partim vera, partim falsa,
quae prout in praetenso auctore suo est tota cautissima.

Secundo, non utitur Jansenius verbo resistendi, quasi vero cesset in hac vita
and corpore mortis hujus pugna concupiscentiae adversus spiritum, nec quidquam
id nobis supersit dum vivimus ab hac gratia edomandum. Contrarium docet prorsus
Jansenius, contrarium ex Augustino millies ostendit, nec aliud asserit, nisi
quod quantacunque sit concupiscentiae renitentia and carnis lucta, nunquam
tamen ita gratiae praevalet, quin haec suum consequatur effectum, and omnem
contrarium repugnantemque frangat conatum, delectatione victrici, ut loquitur
Augustinus.

Tertio, nequaquam docet Jansenius omnem gratiam esse cumulate efficacem ad
plenum opus, quasi vero inefficaces ad illud excludat gratias, quas Thomistae
vocant sufficientes. Imo qui sufficientes gratias Bellarmini and Thomistarum se
nullatenus impugnare protestatur, judicans nec Augustinum ipsum in iis
admittendis fore difficilem: sic eas sublata gratiae efficacis appellatione
complectitur, quod quae respective ad ipsum totum and perfectum opus invalidae
sunt and inefficaces, sint tamen absolutae and simpliciter efficaces ad opus
proximum and immediatum, ad quod decreto Dei absoluto destinantur and pro quo a
Deo conferuntur.

An vera sint quae de mente Jansenii refero, dicat ipse Jansenius: Non moveat
quemquam, ( inquit tomo 3 de gratia Christi salvatoris cap. 27.) quod constet
multos divinitus mente collustrari, imo vero and in ipsa voluntate motibus
divinae gratiae percelli, qui tamen ab ejus interna suasione and inclinatione
dissentiunt, ut propterea falsum putet gratiam in eo cui datur, semper operari
effectum ob quem datur. Considerandum est enim multiplices esse divinae gratiae
effectus sicut and voluntatis: est enim velle perfectum, and est imperfectum
quod velleitatem appellare solent; and hoc ipsum diversos gradus habet, donec
ad ipsam primam tenuissimamque boni complacentiam veniatur: haec ergo primus
est caelestis ipsius roris effectus, quem ut minimum in omnibus operatur, in
quibus eum infundit Deus. Nam quemadmodum inundatio divinae gratiae totam
hominis voluntatem secum instar impetuosi cujusdam torrentis rapit, sic ut
omnia cordis humani retinacula, quibus terrenis rebus irretitur, velut violenta
quadam tempestate disrumpat: ita lenis ille velut aurae tenuis afflatus,
complacentiam quandaam voluntatis tenuissimam rei tam pulchrae, quae simul
objicitur contemplanda, contemperatam suaviter impetrat, and celerrime quasi
furtim post se rapit. Haec igitur gratia, quamvis non sufficiat ut homo
mandatum Dei operetur, ut Deum super omnia diligat, ut speret, ut oret, ut
credat, ad hoc tamen facit aliquid and efficax est, ut istarum vel alterius
cujusdam caelestis rei, liberas quasdam non voluntates, sed velleitates vel
complacentias excitet, quas, nisi divinitus infundantur, obtinere humana
potestate nemo potest. Sic videmus plurimos qui necdum ab immunditiis carnis se
continere possunt, vehementer tamen optare continentiam: cujusmodi vota divinae
gratiae sunt munera, and majoris gratiae provocativa, quamvis nullo modo verae
perfectaeque continentiae comparanda sint.

Hactenus Jansenius, ex cujus verbis probatum relinquitur, nihil eum circa
controversam propositionem quae ei adscribitur, and circa hanc cujuscumque
gratiae actualis efficaciam, dixisse aut docuisse, quod Thomistae non dixerint:
ideoque nec ipsum in propositione controversa, aliter quam per damnatos
Thomistas, damnari posse.

CAPUT V.
Molinistae nullam gratiam efficacem admittunt, hoc est, Christi gratiam
negant; and, si Augustino creditur, non sunt Christiani.
PEr obtentam damnationom cujuscumque ex quinque propositionibus controversis
volunt nobis Molinistae Christi gratiam efficacem eripere. Number ut in illius
locum ineffabiliori aliquo supernae largitatis dono a se reperto nos cumulent?
Id sperem haud dubie de tam probis viris. Agedum; ostendant citius quod in
hujus subtractae divinae gratiae vices sint nobis suffecturi. Videre cupimus,
probare volumus, ne quod cani Aesopeo in fabulis contigit, dum Molina praeduce
umbram insequimur, umbra nos cum offa deficiat, fames perurgeat.

Solicissimam quidem animorum pacem and adversus omnes anxietates super salutis
nostrae negotio pacatissimam quietem Lessius praecipuus Molinae discipulus
peperisse se gaudet; splendissimam mundo in caligine constituto se lucem
intulisse Molina gloriatur: per edoctam nobis eam gratiam, quae absque ulla
prorsus difficultate cum liberate hominis queat conciliari, quae non jam nos
fatalibus vinculis absolutae praedestinationis adstringat, quaeque futurae
nostrae sortis, aut aeternam calamitatem, aut nunquam defecturam beatitudinem
in cujusque manu facillime statuat. Essent haec bonae spei praeludia, ni iis
ipsis olim usi Massilienses Presbyteri sub illa and promissae lucis and
porrigendae consolationis specie densissimas sui erroris tenebras,
pestilentisque doctrinae noxiam amaritudinem spargere fuissent deprehensi.

Cavemus moniti, and hoc solum dolemus, quod qui semel in Massiliensium scrobem
incauti incidere, ne se fateantur cecidisse, velint in eandem hodie Ecclesiam
totam secum praecipitare, and quidem per easdem salebras, a quibus ne and ipsi
primum caderent, poterant deterreri. Quid enim tanta facilitas cum mysterio tam
abstruso? Quid tanta claritas in re, ut loquitur Augustinus, tam profunda and
abdita nimis? Romans 9. O homo tu quis es qui respond eas Deo? etc.
Debuit vel ipsa facilitatis praesumptio in hoc arduo and sublimi Religionis
argumento timorem injecisse, ne quod tam facile solvebatur, non recte
intelligeretur. Quid enim stupet Paulus Romans 11. O altitudo divitiarum
sapientiae and scientiae Dei! quam inscrutabilia sunc judicia ejus! etc.
gratiae dispensationem considerans? Horret and mirabundus exclamat, profundam
divini consilii in filiis regni deligendis altitudinem perpendens, praedicat
inscrutabile esse hoc mysterium and inscrutabilitet a suo artifice dispensatum,
ut omne os obstruatur, and subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo. Afferit demum, non
esse volentis neque currentis, sed Dei miserentis. Haec omnia mira and
insperata facilitate per novum gratiae commentum Molina extricat, scrutatur
inscrutabilia, comprehendit in comprehensibilia, penetrat inaccessa, stuporem
compescit, horrorem serenat, praedestinationis adyta cuique pandit, and totas
aeternitatis sorts in manu hominum deponit. Quid dicemus? Certe aut olim
delirus Paulus, aut hodie Molina insanus; and si sani Molinistae qui haec
videant, male tamen sani qui se non corrigant, sed per instructas agnitae
veritatis insidias ipsam a qua timent corrigi Sedem Apostolicam compellere
satagant in errores suos.

Non igitur gratia quam Molina docet and tam ab omni difficultate aut scrupulo
liberam ostendit, eadem esse potest cum ea quam docuit Paulus gratiae
Apostolus, quamque tot mysteriorum obscuritatibus stupuit involutam. Sed nec
potest eadem esse cum ea quam ex Apostolo Paulo and constantissime praedicavit,
and ab iisdem numero tunc Pelagianorum nunc Molinistarum calumniis (quod
libertatem evertat, quod fatum praedestinationis inducat, quod salutis
desperationem suggerat) tutatus est Augustinus. Quaenam ergo erit? Eadem omnino
quae and Pelagianorum, ipsissima, inquam, verae Christi gratiae inimicorum
gratia fallax, gratia humanae voluntatis non ductrix, sed pedissequa, non
domina, sed serva, and, ut gloriatur Molina, gratia intellectu facillima, quae,
ut nutui voluntatis omni ex part subdita, non jam suspicionem relinquit
eversae voluntatis cui semper obtemperat, non inductae fatalis
praedestinationis quam penitus tollit, non desperatae salutis quam a Dei
arbitrio ereptam in cujusque hominis arbitrio plenissime reponit. Haec olim
gratia Massiliensium, haec hodie Molinistarum, sed nunquam gratia Christi.

Itaque quod primum probandum assumpsimus, assertam a Molinistis gratiam non
esse gratiam Christi, quamvis probatum jam maneat ex ostensa contrarietate
inter gratiam Molinae and gratiam Pauli, quae est sine dubio Christi, amplius
tamen paucis ostenditur.

Primo ex precibus Ecclesiae quas Lydium lapidem esse ad dignoscendam Christi
gratiam adeo reputat Augustinus, Aug. lib. de dono persev. c. 22, 23. and 27.
and ep. 95.
ut eas solas intuendas velit, quo postulatae gratiae natura patescat. Quaero
ergo, an non gratiam Christi petat Ecclesia, cum eam a Christo postulat, aut
per Christum? Quaero, an gratiam sufficientem Molinae qua possimus, an
efficacem qua velimus? utrum eam postulet quae conferat nobis posse, an eam
quae in nobis operetur and velle? Expendantur publicae preces Collectae Dom. 9.
post Pent. Ut petentibus desiderata concedas, fac eos quae tibi sunt placita
postulare, Dom. 3. post Pent. Ut mereamur assequi quod promittis, fac nos amare
quod praecipis. Dom. 24. post Pent. Excita quaesumus, Domine, tuorum fidelium
voluntates. Dom. 8. post Pent. Largire, Domine, semper spiritum cogitandi quae
recta sunt propitius and agendi. Sabb. ante Dom. Pass. Ad te nostras etiam
rebels compelle propitius voluntates in secreta Missae. Hier. in Thren.
Converte nos, Domine, ad te and convertemur.
sive quas aut ex Psalmorum, aut ex alterius Scripturae recitatione jugiter
frequentat Ecclesia, sive quas, ut sunt ex arcano Scripturarum sensu collectae,
Collectas appellamus. Mentior si non hactenus in his inauditum, quod sive pro
nobis, sive pro aliis petamus gratiam qua orare, converti, been operari and in
bono perseverare possimus, si velimus, and si non eam semper petimus, qua
oremus, qua velimus, qua convertamur, qua been operemur, and qua in bono
perseveremus. At gratia qua possumus, si velimus, est gratia Molinae
sufficiens; gratia qua volumus and operamur, est gratia Christi efficax; igitur
ut illa nunquam postulata, sic nec pro gratia Christi reputata. Sicut ergo in
his Orationibus (Aug. 1. de dono persev. c. 23.) ita and in hac fide nata est
and crescit and crevit Ecclesia, ut eam solam Christi gratiam credat, quae, ut
ait Apostolus, dat velle and operari, eam vero prorsus ignoret, quae dat solum
posse si velimus. Hoc argumento tanquam adversus omnes Pelagianorum
cavillationes peremptorio usus est frequentissime Augustinus, definiente
Caelestino Pontifice (in ep. ad Episc. Galliae c. 10.) quod legem credendi lex
statuit supplicandi.

Secundo ex Scripturarum testimoniis quae non gratiam possibilitatis, seu
Molinae sufficientem and voluntaris pedissequam sonant, sed gratiam actionis
seu victricem, efficacem, and quae, ait Apostolus, operatur in nobis and velle
and perficere. Innumera ex his testimoniis urget Augustinus adversus Asserta
Molinistarum, influxum gratiae pendere a libero arbitrio.

Liberum arbitrium esse direct causam cur Deus influat in opus per suam
gratiam, non autem gratiam esse causam cur liberum arbitrium influat.

Nos quodammodo trahere Deum ad cooperandum.

Usum gratiae esse subjectum voluntati; pendere a libero arbitrio quod gratia
sit habitura vel non habitura effectum, etc.

Ita passim Molina, Lessius, Suarez and alii contra canonem Concilii Araus. 4.

Si quis ut a peccato purgemur, voluntatem nostram Deum expectare contendit,
non autem ut etiam purgari velimus, per Spiritus Sancti infusionem in nobis
fieri confitetur, resistit ipsi Spiritui Sancto dicenti per Salomonem,
Praeparatur voluntas a Domino, and per Apostolum, Deus est qui operatur in
nobis velle, etc.


Pelagianos. Sic enim lib. de great. Christi c. 25. c. 14. etc. 5. notat non
dixisse Apostolum, Deus est qui operatur in nobis posse, sed dixisse, qui
operatur in nobis velle and perficere. Non dixisse Christum Apostolis, Spiritus
Patris vestri est qui dat vobis posse been loqui, sed dixisse, qui loquitur in
vobis. Non dixisse, omnis qui audivit a Patre and didicit, potest venire ad me,
sed dixisse, venit ad me. Non dixisse Apostolum iis ad quos scribeba^, orare se
ad Deum pro eis, ut possent nihil mali facere, and possent bonum facere, sed
dixisse ne quid mali faciatis and bonum faciatis. Non dixisse Deum per
Prophetam, dabo vobis cor novum etc. and faciam ut in justificationibus meis
possitis ambulare; sed dixisse, faciam ut ambuletis. Haec and ejusmodi innume^a
loca quae ex Scripturis ponderat Augustinus ut gratiam sonant efficacissimam,
sic and gratiam Molinae excludunt potentialem seu sufficientem, qua homini
tribuatur posse operari si velit. Quantumcumque enim augeatur haec gratia
Molinistica, etiam ad centenos and millenos sufficientiae gradus, naturam suam
nunquam exuet, nec aliud tribuet voluntati quam posse si velit, adeo ut sive
Deus operationem secuturam videat, sive non videat, sive Deus hoc velit, sive
non velit, hoc sequetur certissime, vel ipsis Molinistis ita fatentibus, non
quod gratia voluntatem, sed quod voluntas gratiam facit facere. Gratia Christi
non est hujusmodi, nec ejus operatio aut influxus impulsum voluntatis expectat,
sed praevenit, sed determinat, quodque ex Augustino dicebat Pontifex Clemens,
Agit in cordibus hominum motum voluntatis eorum, faciendo ex nolentibus
volentes. Ergo gratiae Molinae nihil commune est cum gratia Christi.

Tertio demum probatur ex diversitate status hominis integri and hominis lapsi
quae diversa quoque exigit gratiae adjutoria. Hoc argumentum tanquam totius
doctrinae de gratia Christi basim firmissimam saepe inculcat and late
prosequitur Augustinus. Audiamus illud ex ipsius ore lib. de corrept. and great.
c. 11. and 12. Quid ergo, inquit, Adam non habuit Dei gratiam? Imo vero habuit
magnam sed disparem grasiae Christi. Ille in bonis erat quae bonitate sui
Conditoris acceperat. Sancti vero in hac vita ad quos pertinet libertationis
haec gratia, in malis sunt, ex quibus clamant ad Deum, libera nos a malo. Ille
in illis bonis Christi morte non eguit: Istos a reatu and haereditario and
proprio illius agni sanguis absolvit. Ille non opus habebat eo adjutorio quod
implorant isti cum dicunt, Video aliam legem in membris meis repugnantem legi
mentis meae, and captivantem me in lege peccati, quae est in membris meis:
quoniam in eis caro concupiscit adversus spiritum, and spiritus adversus
carnem; atque in tali certamine laborantes atque periclitantes dari sibi
pugnandi vincendique virtutem per Christi gratiam poscunt. Ille vero nulla tali
rixa a seipso adversus seipsum tentatus atque turbatus, in illo beatitudinis
loco sua secum pace fruebatur. Proinde etsi non interim laetiore nunc
verumtamen potentiore gratia indigent isti. Hinc consequenter docet Augustinus
ex Eccles. 15. Adamum tanquam fortissimum relictum in manu consilii sui,
datamque ei gratiam congruentem liberrimae sanissimaeque voluntati, quae
videlicet non alia laborabat imbecillitate quam ea quae creaturae naturalis
est; ut ad malum sufficiat, ad bonum vero nihil sit, nisi adjuvetur ab
omnipotenti Deo; gratiam, inquam, non qua fieret ut vellet, non qua fieret ut
perseveraret, non qua Deus operaretur ut vellet; sed talem, per quam posset
bonum operari and in eo perseverare si vellet, and quam desereret cum vellet,
eaque pro libito been and male uti cum vellet, hoc est, gratiam mere
potentialem and arbitrio voluntatis plenissime subditam, and quae ex operatione
voluntatis fieret efficax, ex non operatione inefficax. At non sic, inquit, non
sic actum est cum hominibus infirmis and in statu naturae lapsae constitutis,
quibus debilitata, laesa, fracta, etc. (ut loquitur Concilium Arausicanum can.
13.) amissa libertas per effrenae concupiscentiae indomitos furores in carne,
per ignorantiae vulnus in mente, non sic cum eis actum est, sed provisa eis
gratia Redemptoris, qua invictissime quod bonum est vellent, and hoc deserere
invictissime nollent. Nam si in tanta infirmitate hujus vitae, in qua propter
elationem reprimendam perfici virtutem oportebat, ipsis relinqueretur voluntas
sua, ut in adjutorio Dei, sine quo perseverare non possent, manerent si
vellent, nec Deus in eis operaretur ut vellent, inter tot and tantas
tentationes infirmitate sua voluntas ipsa succumberet, and ideo perseverare non
possent, quia deficientes infirmitate nec vellent, aut non ita vellent
infirmitate voluntatis ut possent. Prima ergo gratia quae data est Adamo talis
erat, qua homo justitiam operaretur si vellet, and in qua permaneret si vellet,
non qua fieret ut vellet. At secunda gratia quae insirmo jam and lapso
tribuitur, potentior est, qua etiam fit ut justitiam velit and tantum velit,
tantoque ardore diligat, ut carnis voluntatem contraria concupiscentem
voluntate ipsius vincat. Haec Augustinus, ex quibus sic argumentor: Gratia
possibilitatis data homini in statu naturae integrae non est gratia Christi
medicinalis seu a Christo per suae passionis meritum infirmis hominibus
comparata: At gratia Molinistarum est mera gratia possibilitatis, qua quidem
indiget voluntas creata ut possit been operari, sed qua operatur si velit, non
operatur si non velit. Ergo gratia Molinistarum non est gratia Christi quae
semper invictissime efficax: Ergo dum Molinistae gratiam efficacem rejiciunt,
gratiam Christi penitus negant.

Ex hac prima capitis part sic probata inferret Augustinus secunda efficaciter
Molinistas non esse Christianos. Quid ita? Quia Christi gratiam negantes omnem
Christi Religionem uno impulsu evertunt, Christi crucem evacuant, ejusque in
carne adventum inanem reddunt.

Sed admittunt legem, admittunt Evangelium, remissionem peccatorum, gratiam
habitualem, virtutes infusas, gratiam sufficientem, gratiam congruam; nihil
refert, his omnibus utitur voluntas cum voluerit, haec eadem deserit cum
voluerit. Nisi ergo admittant adjutorium quo, hoc est, gratiam actualem
invictissime operantem, non admittunt gratiam Christi de qua inter Pelagianos
and Ecclesiam per annos viginti and amplius certatum est; utque non admittunt
grariam Christi, ut ait Augustinus, sic nec sunt Christiani.

Confessus est Pelagius in Concilio Palaestino, Actiones naturales non
attrahere gratiam, and gratiam non dari secundum merita nostra. Fatetur apud
Augustinum lib. de gratia Christi cap. 30. Quod in omnibus operibus, liberum
arbitrium divino semper adjuvatur auxilio; fatetur cap. 35. nos nihil omnino
boni posse facere sine Deo; haecne sufficiebant Ecclesiae? nequaquam. Urgebat
enim per Augustinum cui in Conciliis duobus curam Scripturarum and
disputationum commiserat; Quaerimus adhuc quo auxilio liberum dicat adjuvari
arbitrium? cap. 37. Fateatur gratiam de qua quaestio est, cap. 31. Quaerimus
quo auxilio? quaerimus qua gratia? operatur (inquit Pelagius cap. 10.) in nobis
velle quod bonum est, velle quod sanctum est, dum nos terrenis cupiditatibus
deditos mutorum more animalium tantummodo praesentia diligentes, futurae
gloriae magnitudine and praemiorum sollicitatione succendit, dum revelatione
sapientiae in desiderium Dei stupentem excitat voluntatem, dum nobis suadet
omne quod bonum est. Optime Pelagius! Sed nunquid sat clare pro notis
Augustini? Nequaquam. In Pelagii and Caelestii scriptis (inquit cap. 30.)
quaecunque legere potui, nusquam eos inveni gratiam quemadmodum confitenda est,
confiteri. Quaerimus ergo quo auxilio? qaaerimus qua gratia? Fateatur gratiam
de qua quaestio est.

Sed quaeso, dicat ipse Augustinus, quam ipse gratiam intelligat confitendam.
Nos (inquit cap. 10.) eam gratiam volumus isti fateantur aliquando, qua futurae
gloriae magnitudo non solum promittitur, verum etiam creditur and speratur, nec
solum revelatur sapientia, verum etiam and amatur; nec suadetur solum omne quod
verum est and bonum, verum etiam and persuadetur. Non enim omnium est fides qui
audiunt per Scripturas Dominum Regnum caelorum pollicentem. Nec omnibus
persuadetur quibuscumque suadetur, ut veniant ad eam qui dicit, Venite ad me
omnes qui laboratis. Quorum autem sit fides, and quibus persuadetur ut ad eum
veniant, satis ipse demonstravit, ubi ait, Nemo venit ad me nisi Pater qui
misit me, traxerit eum. Et paulo post, cum de non credentibus loqueretur: Dixi,
inquit, vobis quia nemo potest venire ad me, nisi ei fuerit datum a Patre meo;
hanc debet Pelagius gratiam confiteri, si vult non solum vocari, verum etiam
esse Christianus.

Audistis Molinistae! quascumque suasiones habeat homo, quascumque vocationes
accipiat, si non persuadetur, si non venit, non hae gratiae sunt quas non norit
Pelagius: non hae sunt de quibus quaestio est. Quae persuadeat and quae trahat,
quaeritur: hanc debet Pelagius confiteri, si vult non solum vocari, verum etiam
esse Christianus. Sed dicent, se omne bonum opus tribuere Deo, quod Pelagius
tribuebat naturae: hoc recte dixerint apud idiotas. Quaerimus adhuc quomodo
tribuant, an per eam gratiam de qua quaestio est? Quaerimus quo auxilio nos
indigere fateantur? (cap. 33.) Dicent fateri se gratiam quae praecurrat omnem
actionem liberi arbitrii, hoc fassi and Semipelagiani; gratiam, inquient,
supernaturalem and internam, and quae non sit solum in mente, sed etiam in
voluntate. Dicam ego cum Augustino cap. 33. Quis crederet sub hac quasi
manifesta confessione sensum latere contrarium? Quaerimus adhuc quo auxilio,
suadentene voluntati an persuadente, excitante an determinante, vocante an
trahente? Nam and Pelagius, in desiderium, inquit, Dei stupentem excitat
voluntatem, dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. Si non persuadentem and
determinantem gratiam fatentur Molinistae, non eam fatentur de qua quaestio
erat inter Augustinum and Pelagium, nec se adjunxerunt Augustino, sed toti
adhaerent Pelagio: Hanc debet Pelagius confiteri, si vult non solum vocari,
verum etiam esse Christianus.

Uno verbo, in hac doctrina gratiae non datur medium, vel erratur cum
Pelagianis and Semipelagianis, vel adhaeretur Augustino, cujus fundamentalis in
illos assertio fuit, de hac gratia persuadente, determinante and victrici, a
qua caetera de praedestinatione quaesita penderent, nec querelae, objecta,
argumenta and invectivae Haereticorum in Augustinum ex alio capite promanarunt
quam hujus victricis gratiae per cum contra ipsos ex Scripturis and Ecclesiae
fide constanter assertae and stabilitae; vel hoc ipsum incogitanter fatente and
observante Ludovico Molina, dum dicit; Quod si Augustinus gratiam ejus
sufficientem and libero subditam arbitrio docuisset, forte neque Pelagiana
baeresis fuisset exorta, neque Semipelagianorum in Augustinum concertationes.
Optime dicit Molina, quia and Semipelagiani omnes and Pelagiani fraternitatis
dextras dedissent Augustino, nec aliud futurum erat, nisi quod Augustinum cum
eis Ecclesia damnasset. Igitur de gratia efficaci tota suit controversia inter
illos and Augustinum, ut and tota est hodie inter Molinistas and Augustini
discipulos, ut non durum Molinae videri debeat, si ab his ex sui Praeceptoris
verbis admonetur, quod hanc debet gratiam c^nsiteri, si vult non solum vocari,
verum etiam^sse Christianus.

Sed quare non sit Christianus qui caetera praeter hanc unicam gratiam
victricem and efficacem de Christo and Christiana doctrina confitetur? Vellem
dicti sui rationem ipse redderet Augustinus, reddam tamen ex Augustino, nec
aliam quidem ab ea quam superius insinuavi, per negatam hanc gratiam efficacem
everti uno impulsu omnem Christi Religionem, Christi crucem evacuari, ejusque
in carne adventum inanem reddi.

Has enim consequentias Augustinus and Patres contra Pelagium ex negata illa
gratia quae propria Christi est, passim intulerunt, unde gratiam ad cujus
confessionem Pelagium compellebant, soliti erant vocare gratiam Christi,
gratium qua Christiani sumus, gratiam Salvatoris, gratiam Christianam, gratiam
quae revelata est per passionem and resurrectionem Christi, gratiam quae per
Incarnationem Vnigeniti donata est, denique gratiam Dei per Jesum Christum quam
ex Apostolo (Romans 7.) didicerunt, liberare nos a morte corporis hujus, hoc est,
victores nos reddere a vitiis and passionibus corporis mortis hujus. Haec autem
gratia non est gratia illa Molinae sufficiens, similis ei qua etiam primus homo
and Angeli indiguerunt, quando in primae illius dignitatis and felicitatis
praestantia creabantur: sed est gratia medicinalis and efficax qua per
Salvatorem servamur and liberamur a vulneribus libero arbitrio inflictis, and
quae propterea non minus differt ab illa sufficient, quam morbus cui sanando
adhibetur, a pristina and primaeva sanitate quae post primi hominis lapsum
amplius non habetur. De hac sola gratia Christi Augustinus and Patres
disputant: hanc Augustinus explicuit, hanc (ut vidimus) primaevae illi gratiae
sufficienti feu possibilitatis manifest opposuit: hanc hominibus in statu
naturae lapsae, ut mundum cum suis terroribus, amoribus and erroribus
vincerent, necessariam ex fide approbantis Ecclesiae constantissime
praedicavit; hanc qui non admittit, etsi alias quascunque gratias admittat,
quantum ad praesentis controversiae cardinem spectat, perinde omnino est ac si
nullam admitteret.

Quia vero, ut salubriter monent S. Leo Papa Epistola ad Nicetam, and S.
Prosper in carmine de ingratis, and contra collatorem cap. 5. tam sunt connexi
haeresis illius Pelagianae errores, ut ex uno ejus capite vel minimo concesso,
tota statim reviviscat: ita ex negata necessitate gratiae Christi efficacis,
and dimissa in statu naturae lapsae sufficientia gratiae possibilitatis tam
tota evertitur Christiana Religio, quam per totam Pelagianam haeresim plene
evertebatur. Sequitur enim, liberi arbitrii vires integras esse quibus ad been
operandum non aliud datur post originalem noxam gratiae auxilium quam quod in
statu innocentiae dari oportebat. Sequitur nedum non integras liberi arbitrii
vires, imo and robustiores: ex quo cum eadem prorsus gratia qua in tanta status
felicitate, in tanta non peccandi facilitate, poterat Adam non peccare, in
tanta etiam qua nunc premimur aerumnosae mortalitatis calamitate, in tanta
furentium concupiscentiarum tempestate, possint homines fortiter stare, possint
and victores evadere. Sequitur contra Concilii Arausicani decreta liberum
arbitrium non esse inclinatum, debilitatum and amissum in ordine ad bonum.
Sequitur originale peccatum non vulnerasse libertatem. Sequitur non esse
peccatum originale, ex quo per illud solum humana natura universim labe^actata
est. Sequitur Christum gratis esse mortuum, ex quo per naturam justitia.
Sequitur non fuisse mortuum, ex quo gratis fuisse mortuum improbabile est.
Sequitur non esse incarnatum, ex quo non magnus de caelo venerit Medicus, si
non magnus in terris jacebat aegrotus. Number aliud in Christianae Religionis
sacrario superest evertendum? Number aliquid non solo aequatum? Igitur qui nolet
tam celebres ruinas induxisse, aut se violatae totius Christianitatis reatu
sacrilego adstrinxisse, duo gratiarum genera distinguat, nec quod sanae
arbitrio voluntatis convenit, haec aegroto tribuat, nec quod libero, hoc
captivo relinquat sufficientem possibilitatis gratiam statui naturae integrae:
asserat gratiam Christi trahentem, persuadentem, efficacem and victricem statui
naturae lapsae: Hanc debet Pelagius confiteri, si vult non solum vocari verum
etiam esse Christianus.

Hoc in Molinam transtuli ex sensu Augustini quod in Molinam quadrat, non quod
hominis religioni velim detraxisse, aut discipulorum ejus famam traduxisse: sed
quod pessimae quam incauti renovarunt doctrinae, cognita olim praecipitia a
quibus retrocedant debui indicasse, errores insequor, errantes veneror, quos ut
Ecclesiae filios incogitanter humana passos, and aliunde Christianae pietatis
cultores, potens est Deus corrigere, potens est Deus statuere and elisos
erigere: hoc interim eos rogans, ut si nondum in Augustini, hoc est, totius
antiquae fidei sententiam consenserunt, suam sibi solis habeant quae ipsis
sufficit gratiam sufficientem, nec per procurata parum sinceris artibus Sedis
Apostolicae decreta eam qua fatemur nos egere, propriae infirmitatis consciis
gratiam eripiant efficacem, quamdiu non aliud habent quod in ejus vicem
offerant quam gratiam Molinisticam, hoc est, pro pane filiorum quem auferunt,
durum lapidem, pro pisce serpentem, pro ovo scorpionem.

Epilogus and conclusio.
EX dictis patet gratiae Christi actuali de qua sola est quaestio, nunquam ita
resisti, quin haec, si ad actum consummandum datur, and victrici delectatione
spiritus omnem carnis delectationem superet, and omnipotentissima facilitate
quamvis resistentiam frangat, ac ex nolentibus volentes faciat; ex
repugnantibus consentientes, and ex oppugnantibus amantes. Hoc Augustinus ex
Scripturis and fide, hoc Clemens Papa and Congregatio de Auxiliis, hoc Thomas
Aquinas ex reconditis Theologiae fontibus decrevere.

Patet praeterea gratiam quoque actualem quae sufficiens (remota and in actu
primo) appellatur, nulla unquam prohiberi resistentia quin suum effectum
immediatum and proximum ad quem a Deo efficaciter destinatur, producat
infallibiliter. Hoc Bellarminus, hoc Thomistae omnes ex suis Praeceptoribus
Augustino and Thoma didicerunt; and nec per impossible aliter posse contingere
manifestis rationibus demonstrarunt.

Et propterea concludi debeat propositionem controversam (quod interiori
gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur) sic intellectam, nec ulli
obnoxiam esse censurae, nec ex Jansenii nomine posse proscribi, cum circa illam
nihil dixerit Jansenius quam quod ante ipsum dixerant Thomistae and Bellarminus.

Si secus fiat, and sub sensu aliquo damnetur ex iis quos jam sua felicitate ex
omnium Theologorum consensu, sed diximus esse damnatos, nisi ii distinct and
clare in proscriptionis decreto assignentur, non Ecclesiae paci consulitur, sed
acriori contentionum flammae fomes adjicitur; dum contendant Molinistae suisse
a Sede Apostolica assertam suam illam cui saepe resistitur, and cui semper
resisti potest, gratiam sufficientem Paulo inimicam, Scripturis invisam,
precibus Ecclesiae ignotam, quae ut olim Adamo innocenti percommoda, sic
hominibus lapsis incongrua, quae mysterium praedestinationis evertit, crucem
Christi evacuat, and totam haeresis Pelagianae luem radix virulenta restaurat.
Igitur quod monet S. Prosper contra Collatorem c. 44. De prostrati dudum
dogmatis corpore non hoc Nullum.
membrum sinatur assurgere, quia notum est ita se falsitatis hujus habere
versutias, ut si liceat eis praeteritae correctionis imagine aliquod sibi
faventium radicis suae germen excipere, totam sep^ssit in exigua sui part
reparare: ubi enim non aliud habet summa quam portio, non est devotionis
dedisse prope totum, sed fraud retinuisse vel minimum.

The third Writing.
III. PROPOSITIO CONTROVERSA.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur libertas a
necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
DIceres inspecto hujus propositionis cortice renovari damnatas Baii
propositiones. Diceres tolli in staru naturae lapsae sive ad malum sive ad
bonum indifferentiam. Crederes inductam libertati viatoris necessitatem,
eversumque penitus humanae voluntatis arbitrium. Quid impie magis aut a Calvino
dictum, aut a Luthero blasphematum? Peccavit certe, nec leviter, Jansenius, si
haec docuit. Sed long gravius peccant procul dubio Molinistae, si quod nec
somniavit Jansenius, mendaciter apud Sedem Apostolicam Jansenio affingunt, ur
per Jansenii latus, vel ipsa deceptae ac delusae Sedis Apostolicae sacratissima
manu confossas fidei veritates, dejectam Christi gratiam efficacem,
prostratumque Augustinum, hoc est, damnatam erroris omnium seculorum fidem,
consecratum Molinam, restitutum suae innocentiae and famae Pelagium, impletaque
uno verbo sua sacrilega valiant gloriari, Hoc volunt certissime Molinistae,
hicque unicus scopus in quem per controversae propositionis delationem
secretius collimant, non quod sperent eam in vero Jansenii sensu nunquam a Sede
Apostolica debere proscribi, sed ut proscriptam in sensu Jansenii mentiri
valiant, quam sub Jansenii nomine obtulerint proscribendam. Hinc nec pudor eos
continuit ab infami and calumnioso mendacio, nec scrupulus aliquis eos
fraenavit a Sedis Apostolicae tentanda deceptione; sed excussis pariter and
front and conscientia propositionem hanc quasi ex Baio per Jansenium
formaliter renovatam detulerunt, quod sibi persuaserint eam absque exactiori
veritatis inquisitione ad solam quam habet cum dam nata Baii propositione
verborum consonantiam, statim ab hac Apostolica Sede ut jam proscripta
declarandam.

Igitur ne eis prospere succedat ausus tam sacrilegus, sensum propositionum
Baii ostendam alienissimum a Jansenio; and demum legitimos sensus secretioribus
Molistinarum insidiis in hac propositione impetitos, and per indistinctam
propositionis censuram calumniae expositos, diligenter expendam.

CAPUT. I.
Propositiones Baii in hac materia damnatae ostenduntur a doctrina Jansenii
manifestissime alienae.
PRocul ab Augustino and Theologica veritate recessit Baius, dum docuit non
contrariari libettati, nedum necessitatem complacentiae et immutabilitatis, sed
nec ipsam quoque necessitatem absolutam qua voluntas ad malum apperendum et
exequendum sine ullo sui consensu, illicitis concupiscentiae motibus solet
perurgeri. Hoc intellexisse Baium per articulos a Pio V. damnatos 39. Quod
voluntary fit, etiamsi necessario fiat, libere tamen fit. Et 66. Sola
violentia repugnat libertati hominis naturali. Docet P. Gabriel Vasquez in 1 2
D. Th. disp. 109. cap. 8, dicens, Praedictum Michaelem Baium ita putasse
hominem peccare in omnibus affectibus and motibus suis qui non essent virtutis,
ut etiam in his quae sine liberate fiunt, peccatum esse diceret. In quo nec
Augustinus, nec ejus discipuli peccatum agnoscunt. Ita Vasquez.

Et quidem verissimam esse Vasquis interpretationem probat regula generalis P.
Francisci Suares tom. 1. de great. prolog. 6, c. 2, n. 13, qua docet quomodo in
propositionibus Baii ambiguis distinguendus sit sensus Baii damnatus a sensu
bono and Theologico, ex consensu nimirum propositionis ambiguae cum aliis
propositionibus in Bulla damnatis. Illumque dicit judicandum sensum Baii
ideoque et damnatum, qui cum aliis propositionibus Baii damnatis nec ambiguis
manifest consentit. Alium vero sensum qui cum eis non concordat, et alioquin
habet fide jussores probatos Theologos, esse reputandum censum bonum et
Theologicum, nec sub Bull ae censura aliquatenus comprehensum. Haec, inquam,
regula ad praesentem materiam applicata clare manifestat attigisse Vasquem et
Baii mentem in praedictis duobus articulis, et Pontificiae Censurae in iis
damnandis unicum scopum: siquidem illi duo articuli sic intellecti, ut
libertati et peccato locum tribuant in motibus illis illicitis, qui rationis
vigilantiam et voluntatis consensum antevertunt, consonant plenissime cum
articulis manifest reprobis. 67. Homo damnabiliter peccat in eo quod
necessario facit. 51. Concupiscentia sive lex membrorum and prava ejus
desideria, quae inviti sentiunt homines, sunt vera legis inobedientia; and 76.
Concupiscentia in renatis relapsis peccatum est, sicut and alii pravi habitus.
Si vero intelligantur praefati duo articuli de voluntario libero et ex pleno
arbitrii assensu elicito, jam nec congruunt cum articulis ultimo relatis: cum
primi illi motus, etsi voluntarii, dicantur quia in voluntatem irrumpunt, non
tamen sint aut dici queant liberi. Et ulterius habent illi duo articuli probe
intellecti side jussorem Patrum et Scholasticorum insigniorum catervam
nobilissimam uno ore docentem, libere fieri id omne quod v^luntarie fit, seu ex
ipsa interiori voluntatis electione and inclinatione procedit, quantumvis
alioquin necessario and immutabiliter fiat, nec libertati repugnare
necessitatem complacentiae and immutabilitatis, sed solius violentiae aut
coactionis, Ut infra videbimus.

Admittitur passim haec Vasquis interpretatio tanquam Theologica and omnis
censurae expers, cui Jansenium haesisse aut sciunt aut nesciunt Molinistae. Si
nesciunt, certe non potuit ab eis incusari absque temeritatis infamia, quod
praefatos Baii articulos in propositione controversa renovarit, cum projectae
temeritatis sit, de eo quod ignoramus, quempiam criminari. Si sciunt and
norant, jam profecto and deceptae Sedis Apostolicae and illatae Jansenio
calumniae convincuntu^: cum ex hoc capite, quod falsissimum norunt, Apostolicam
Sedem in damnationem Jansenii, nequssimo simul and sacrilego ausu conentur
impellere. Sed sciunt omnino, nec eis licuit ignotare quod in illo Auctore tam
pervium. Is enim tom 3, lib. 6, post explicatam suo modo liberi arbitrii
naturam fuse and per multa capita, demum cap. 36. movet sibi ipsi objectionem
ex damnatis Baii articulis sub hoc titulo: Explcantur proposiones in Bulla Pii
V. Quod voluntary fit, etiamsi necessitate fiat, libere tamen fit, and sola
violentia repugnat libertati hominis naturali: hic est titulus praesati capitis
36. in ipso vero textu duplicem assignat difficultatis solutionem. Prima sic
habet: Idcirco, inquit, utramque propositi mem damnandam censuerunt Pontifices,
quia eo tendebant, ut motus illi concupiscentiae qui rationem antevertunt,
essent peccata, quod sine dubio falsum est, etc. eo autem in illis
proposi^ionibus collimari indicat Vasquez 1 2, disp. 190, c. 18, n. 185, ubi
dicit auctorem propositionum putasse, hominem peccare in omnibus affectibus and
motibus suis qui non esse^t virtutis, ut etiam in his quae sine liberate
fiunt, peccatum esse diceret, hoc est, in istis motibus concupiscentiae
indeliberatis, quos non esse liberos constat. Haec Jansenii prima solutio, ad
quam corroborandam subsequenter confert articulos in titulo capitis recitatos
cum aliis articulis in eadem Bulla comproscriptis, ut nos antea fecimus.
Subjungit deinde alteram solutionem desumptam ex natura libertatis, quae sive
importet indifferentiam salrem contradictionis, ut volunt moderni, sive eam non
importet, ut voluit Augustinus and Patres, minus late patet quam voluntas. Sic
ergo ^it: Quamquam secundo, etiam a caeteris avulsae and de liberate
generatim, sicut eam ex posuimus, intellectae per se ipsae sine ulla
interpretatione, vel mitigatione falsae sunt, constat enim hujusmodi improviso
motus esse voluntarios and sine violentia ex voluntate fluere; nec tamen etiam
in illo sensu esse liberos. Deest illis quippe id quod praecipuum est, quia non
sunt in hominis potestate, non sumus eorum domini, fiunt sine plena rationis
advertentia, profluunt invita repugnanteque voluntate: quae singula
essentialiter repugnant libertati. Amplius ergo sine dubio requiritur quam esse
volu^tarium and sine violentia ut sit liberum. Hoc Pontifices stahilire
voluerunt, ne tales spontanei necessarii motus liberi putarentur, and in
perniciosum hujus vitae errorem iretur, quem haeretici hujus temporis
protulerunt. De amore autem beatifico, quem plures auctores veteres cum
Augustino liberrimum esse docuerunt, nulla Pontificibus cura fuit: de illo vero
solo nostra quastio est, etc. Hactenus Jansenius; and damnation^ a Pontificibus
in Baium latae religiose subscribens, and se a Baio alienissimum egtegie
comprobans: Hoc si notunt Molinistae dum Jansenium accusant, calumniatores
sunt; si non norunt, temerarii.

CAPUT. II.
Quod nec de indifferentia in statu naturae lapsae ab hominibus submovenda
Jansenius somniarit.
PRima in propositionem controversam querela de renovatis Baii articulis and
adscriptis libertati and peccato, primis concupiscentiae motibus jam abstersa
est: restat altera expurganda: quod nimirum a nobis dum vivimus tollat
indifferentiam. Hanc u^ aggrediar, quaero a Molinistis conversae propositionis
fabricatoribus et delatoribus, an haec propositio unquam a Jansenio sic fuerit
illimitate prolata, ut suspicionem aliquam facere potuerit negatae ab ipso in
nobis indifferentiae, inductae ad agendum necessitatis, ideoque et eversae
libertatis? sed, inquient, decet posse subsistere meritum sine indifferentia,
and cum ipsa agendi necessitate. Non hoc quaero, nam et hoc dixisse et docuisse
Augustinum, Thomam, et alios tam Patres quam Scholasticos, inferius ostendam.
Quaero praecise, an hoc quod dicit posse fieri, unquam dixerit de facto in
nobis fieri; Haec enim duo diversissima sunt, et talia, ut unum sit sanum and
Theologicum, alterum erroneum: nec enim a potentia ad actum jugis est
consequentia. Poterant Apostoli ita per gratiae dona firmari, ut nec venialiter
quidem laberentur; hoc qui dixerit, verissime dixerit. Anne ideo asserere
liceat eos nec peccasse venialiter; Hoc qui diceret, haeretice diceret,
reclamantibus vel ipsis Apostolis, Quoniam si dixerimus, quia peccatum non
habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, and veritas in nobis non est. Ita et in nostra
quaestione asserere liceat absque periculo indifferentiam non esse de conceptu
libertatis aut meriti, sed posse utrumque salvari vel in ipsa agendi
necessitate. At vero dicere non licet quod post lapsum hominem in Adamo careant
homines indifferentia in hujus vitae statu aut ex necessitate quidpiam sive
malum sive bonum operentur. Hoc ergo quaero an Jansenius dixerit? si enim
dixit, just in eum insurgitur; si non dixir, calumniose impetitur, ut in his
quae non dixit, quasi ea dixerit apud Sedem Apostolicam accusatus, and ab ea
mutilatus, in aliis quae cum Augustino and Patribus contra Molinam docuit,
fingi valeat a Molinistis fuisse condemnatus. Ut ergo pateat Molinistas non
Jansenium quaerere sed sub Jansenii velut praedamnati hominis infenso and malo
nomine Augustinum, Thomam, and ipsam veritatem insectari, imo ipsissimae
veritatis Sedi augustissimae decipiendae totis animorum conatibus intendere,
ipsum adduco Jansenium qui se prodat, et quid dixerit, aperte fateatur.

Certe nedum non dixit, quod eum dixisse mentiuntur Molinistae, sed contrarium
prorsus ex Augustino and universa Christiana Theologia ubique demonstravit: ut
plane mirum sit, si post deprehensum tam solenne Molinistarum mendacium, aliqua
deinceps fides eorum dictis habeatur. Unicum Jansenii locum adduco qui plures
possem adducere. Sic habet tom. 3, lib. 8, de gratia Christi Salvatoris cap. 20.

Quaeres fortassis, utrum igitur nulla indifferentia sive contrarietatis, sive
contradictionis, sit in libero voluntatis arbitrio post peccatum quandiu in
mortalitate vivimus? Si enim non adest indifferentia contrarietatis, quomodo
possumus hic semper been and male vivere? si n^n ade^ contradictionis, quomodo
ergo dicitur, Qui potuit transgredi and non est transgressus, facere mala and
non fecit?

Respondetur, quandiu hic vivimus, sive in infidelitate ante gratiam, sive jam
sub gratia, indifferentiam ad contraria, hoc est, ad volendum faciendumque
bonum et malum, semper libero inesse arbittio: sed non eo modo quo quidam
(Molinistas intelligit) putant, qui quocumque arbitrium sive gratiae sive
peccati delectationibus imbuatur, semper existimant cum utravis ejus
dispositione posse fieri, ut utrumlibet velit sive bonum sive malum, pro illa
sola scilicet innata indifferentia voluntatis, quae sub quacumque dispositione
actum, praeveniente se sua liberate, in utramvis partem flectit. Talis enim
indifferentia contrarietatis ab Augustino constantissime negata fuit, et a
Pelagianis contentiosissime postulata, prout utrumque suis locis
demonstravimus. Alio igitur sensu liberum arbitrium ante gratiam, quemadmodum
etiam alio sensu sub gratia indifferentiam contradictionis et contrarietatis
habet; ita ut videlicet quibuscunque positis quae ad agendum bonum vel malum
requisita sunt, possit liberum arbitrium in hac vita facere bonum et malum,
facere alterutrum et non facere.

Dicimus igitur, liberum arbitrium quantum cunque vehementi atque efficaci
gratiae delectatione praeventum atque determinatum ad faciendum bonum, adhuc
tamen posse bonum non tantum non facere, sed etiam facere malum. Verum est enim
istud non quidem in sensu COMPOSITO, ut vulgo dici solet, SED IN SENSU DIVISO.
Nimirum quia eodem tempore quo voluntatis arbitrium sub gratiae delectatione
efficaciter eam movente positum est, imo quo etiam actum voluntatis bonum
facit, est in eadem voluntate potestas illud non faciendi, imo peccandi, non
quod cessatio ab actu quem tunc elicit, aut actuale peccatum cum gratiae
delectantis influxu consistere possit (quod sensus compositus postularet) sed
quia cessandi et peccandi potestas cum eadem gratia, simul in eodem voluntatis
arbitrio conjungi potest; nam quamvis duo actus contrarii sunt oppositi, et in
eadem voluntate simul esse non possint, potestates tamen ad opposita non sunt
oppositae, nec sibi invicem, nec actibus oppositis, et in eodem simul subjecto
sive agente sive quiescente possunt commorari. Sic ergo voluntas quantacumque
gratiae suavitate rapiatur, potest non agere id in quod rapitur, quia veram non
agendi potestatem etiam sub gratia rapiente retinet, quamvis fieri nequeat, ut
ipsa non actio cum gratiae operatione in eadem simul voluntate copuletur. Sic
enim juxta Tridentinum HOMO RECIPIENS INSPIRATIONEM ILLAM ABJICERE POTEST, ET
LIBERUM ARB^TRIUM A DEO MOTUM POTEST DISSENT^RE SI VELIT. Qua de re qui plura
volet, auctores qui de physica praedeterminatione tractant consulendi sunt.

Hoc est igitur quod S. Augustinus tradit, quendo toties docet concupiscentiam
and ignorantiam, per quam nunc omnia peccata committuntur, non auferri ex nobis
quandiu in hac mortali vita versamur; hinc enim fit, quod non solum in nobis
ipsa potentia voluntatis, quae de se ad malum flexibilis est, sed etiam pondus
ad peccandum remanet, quod est peccandi potestas perfectissima, quae sane non
solum adest inesique voluntati quando gratiae delectatione caret, sed etiam
quando intima ejus suavitate efficaciter trahitur, propter quam sane liberum
arbitrium, qualicumque gratia ad been agendum rapiatur, rectissime dici potest
posset peccare, licet fieri nequeat, ut ipsum peccatum simul in sensu composito
cum gratiae operatione societur. Hoc sensu S. Prosper, QUI AD OBEDIENDUM SIBI
IPSUM VELLE SIC DONAT, UT ETIAM A PERSEVERATURIS ILLAM MUTABILITATEM QUAE
POTEST NOLLE, NON AUFERAT: quibus verbis significat manner in Sanctis illam
mutabilitatem quae potest in tentatione mutari; propter pugnam videlicet carnis
et spiritus.

Hactenus Jansenius, non, ut calumniantur Molinistae, indifferentiae
destructor, sed constantissimus assertor, and quidem sub iisdem prorsus te
minis, quibus eam asserunt and explicant Bellarminus and Thomistae, quibus si
quid contrarium dixerit in hac part, liceat Molinistis asserere quod solum
Jansenium impetunt. Si vero cum iis plenissime consentit, desinant suis artibus
procurare ne audiantur Thomistae, quasi non eorum, sed solius Iansenii res
agatur, nec ipsissimae veritates gratiae efficacis hodie impugnentur, quasi
ipsi per suos Antesignanos, hoc est, Dominicanos Patres ante annos quadraginta
coram summis Pontificibus Clemens VIII. and Paulo V. gloriosissime propugnarunt.

CAPUT. III.
Indifferentiam non esse essentialem libertati, sed posse stare libertatem cum
agendi necessitate, ideoque solam coactionem repugnare libertati.
VIdimus indifferentiam in hominibus, nec reclamante Iansenio, huic vitae
statui indesinenter annexam; nunc videndum existimem, an ea adeo libertati
cohaereat, ut nequeat libertas sine ipsa constare.

Certe Divus Augustinus, qui quamvis hujus indifferentiae in nobis, dum
vivimus, sit perpetuus defensor, non tamen ex hoc indifferentiae capite (ut
poterat) sed compendiosiori alia, eaque faciliori and magis simplici via
efficaciam gratiae cum nostra liberate componit, and liberrimam asserit
voluntatem sub quocumque gratiae efficacis impulsu, ex hoc solum quod ipsa non
ut quoddam inanime organum movetur, sed ita movetur fortiter and suaviter, ut
and seipsam moveat: ita pro suae naturae modo ad volendum excitatur, ut and
ipsa velit: consequenter ostendit (quod and alias frequentissime asserit) se in
eo sensu esse, ut absolute loquendo, sive voluntas sit indifferens, sive non
indifferens, sed ad unum determinata, libere tamen agat and semper libere
velit: quod consequenter indifferentia, non per se, sed per accidens, non ut
innatum quidpiam, sed ut adventitium spectet ad libertatem.

Concinunt Augustino caeteri SS. Patres and Scholasticorum turmae non
ignobiles, dum dicunt passim voluntatem tam esse sui juris, ut cogi ab ullo
nequeat, tam esse liberam ut impossible sit eam sua liberate privari qua non
plus carere valeat quam seipsa. Si enim (inquiunt) volumus, aut libere volumus,
aut inviti and nolentes: velle nolentes and invitos contradictorium est, and
tam implicat quemquam velle simul and non velle, quam implicat simul esse and
non esse. Igitur si volumus, libere volumus, qui (ut acute Augustinus) non
vellemus, si nollemus. Igitur operari voluntatem and non libere operari, nec
mente quidem potest comprehendi.

Ex hoc principio, quod ipsam voluntatis naturam exprimit, inferunt
indifferentiam esse quidem signum libertatis manifestissimum in iis in quibus
reperitur: at non esse ipsam libertatem, aut quidpiam ad libertatis per se
spectatae essentiam pertinens, inferunt libertatem constare posse cum
determinatione ad unum and necessitate agendi inevitabili: sicque demum
asserunt, subsistere in Deo primo libero and totius libertatis archetypo:
substitisse in Christo viatore, and tota aeternitate in Angelis and daemonibus,
in beatis and damnatis hominibus immobiliter substituram.

Audiamus loquentes Patres and Doctores alios.

D. Augustinus lib. 5. de Civitate Dei c. 10. Si necessitas nostra illa dicenda
est quae non est in nostra potestate, sed etiam si nolumus efficit quod potest,
sicut est necessitas mortis, manifestum est, voluntates, quibus recte aut
perperam vivimus, sub tali necessitate non esse. Nam si volumus, est; si
nolumus, non est. Non enim vellemus, si nollemus: si autem ista definitur esse
necessitas, secundum quam dicimus necesse esse ut ita sit aliquid, vel ita
fiat: nescio cur eam timeamus ne nobis auferat libertatem voluntatis; neque
enim and vitam Dei and praescientiam Dei sub necessitate ponimus, (hoc est,
necessitate contraria libertati) se dicamus necesse est Deum semper vivere and
cuncta praescire, sicut nec potestas ejus minuitur, cum dicitur mori fallique
non posse. Et lib. 22. de Civit. cap. ult. Nec ideo Beati liberum arbitrium non
habebunt, quia peccata eos delectare non poterunt; magis quippe erit liberum a
delectatione peccandi usque ad delectationem non peccandi indeclinabiliter
liberatum. Ibidem: Primum liberum arbitrium posse non peccare, novissimum non
posse peccare, sic enim erit inamissibilis voluntas pietatis and aequitatis,
quomodo and felicitatis, etc. Ibidem: Certe Deus ipse numquid quia peccare non
potest, ideo liberum arbitrium habere negandus est? Erit ergo illius civitatis
and una in omnibus, and inseparabilis in singulis voluntas libera, ab omni malo
liberata and implenda omni bono, fruens indeficienter aeternoru^ jucunditate
gaudiorum.

D. Anselmus lib. de lib. arb. cap. 5. Velle nemo potest invitus, quia non
potest velle, nolens velle. Nam omnis voluntas ipsum suum velle vult. Quomodo
itaque non est libera voluntas, quam aliena potestas sine suo assensu subjicere
non potest?

D. Bernardus de great. and lib. arb. Voluntatem impossible est sua privari
liberate. Potest quidem mutari voluntas, sed non nisi in aliam voluntatem, ut
nunquam amittat libertatem. Tam ergo non poterit privari illa quam nec seipsa.
Si poterit aliquando homo velle aliquid, and non voluntate, poterit and carere
liberate voluntas. Sicut caelestis Angelus, aut etiam ipse Deus permanet
libere bonus, propria videlicet voluntate, non aliqua extrinseca necessitate:
sic profecto diabolus aeque libere in malum corruit and perstitit, suo utique
voluntario nutu, non alieno impulsu, etc.

Hugo a S. Victore in sum. tom. 3. c. 9. Liberum arbitrium sic dicitur, quia
voluntarium, unde boni Angeli libere boni, and mali libere mali, etc. Et tract.
2. cap. 4. Quod si infers, ergo sunt indifferentes ad bonum and malum,
respondetur, non in hac indifferentia consistere liberum arbitrium, sed liberum
non aliud importare quam voluntarium. Angeli autem boni abstinent a malo non
necessitate cogente, sed liberate volente. Angeli similiter mali abstinent a
bono non quia coguntur, sed quia libere nolunt.

Richardus a S. Victore de eruditione interioris hominis cap. 30. and de statu
interioris hominis cap. 23. Libertas consistit in hoc quod non possumus cogi
inviti nec ad bonum nec ad malum, and haec aequalis in bonis and in malis: nec
perdi unquam potest, aut minui unquam.

Petrus Lombardus dictus Magister Sententiarum lib. 2. did. 23. Vbi non est
libertas, nec est voluntas. Et lib. 2. did. 7. idem docet de Angelis and
daemonibus quod Divus Bernardus and Hugo Victorinus.

Guillelmus Episcopus Parisiensis de vitiis and peccatis fol. 211. and 213.
Necessitas aut impossibilitas quae non prohibent quin actio aliqua sit
voluntaria, hoc est, quin procedat a voluntate quae non potest non esse libera,
non impediunt etiam quin actio possit esse criminosa. Et necessitas
stabilitatis and immutabilitatis qualis est quae in Deo in ordine ad bonum
reperitur, non aufert, sed perficit libertatem.

Alexander de Hales Ordinis Seraphici and Praeceptor SS. Thomae and
Bonaventurae in 2. p. sum. q. 72. m. 3. a. 3. Necessitas coactionis destruit
arbitrium, non autem necessitas immutabilitatis, qualis reperitur in Angelis
and daemonibus, etc.

D. Thomas Aquinas lib. 3. contra Gentes c. 138. Est duplex necessitas, quaedam
coactionis, and haec laudem virtuosorum actuum diminuit, quia voluntario
contrariatur. Est autem quaedam necessitas ex interiori inclinatione procedens,
and haec laudem virtuosi actus non minuit, sed auget: facit enim voluntatem non
magis intense tendere in actum virtutis; and quanto perfectior fuerit habitus
ex quo voluntas operatur, tanto vehementius eam inclinat. Quod si is ad
perfectiorem devenerit, quamdam necessitatem infert ad been agendum, sicut est
in Beatis qui peccare non possunt, nec tamen propter hoc aut libertati
voluntatis aliquid deperit aut actus bonitati. Er de potentia q. 10. a. 2. ad
5. Necessitas naturalis secundum quam voluntas aliquid ex necessitate velle
dicitur, ut felicitatem, libertati voluntatis non repugnat, ut Augustinus docet
lib. 3. de Civit. Dei: libertas enim voluntatis violentiae vel coactioni
opponitur: non est autem violentia aut coactio in hoc quod aliquid secundum
ordinem suae natura movetur, sed magis in hoc quod naturalis motus impeditur,
sicut cum impeditur grave ne descendat in medium. Vnde v^untas libere appetit
felicitatem, licet necessario appetat illam. Sic autem and Deus necessario and
tamen libere sua voluntate amat scipsum, licet de necessitate amet seipsum; and
necessarium est quod tantum amet seipsum quantum bonus est, sicut tantum
intelligit seipsum quantum est. Libere ergo Spiritus Sanctus procedit a Patre,
non tamen possibiliter, sed ex necessitate. Vide and de verit. q. 22. a. 5. ad
1. 3. and 4. and q. 23. a. 4. and ult. and q. 24. a. 1. ad 20. Et in 1. ad
Hannibaldum did. 47. q. unica, a. 1. etc.

Eadem dicunt D. Bonaventura in 2. did. 25. q. 2. Richardus de Media villa in
2. did. 7. a. 1. q. 2. and did. 25. a. 2. q. 3. Henricus de Gandavo quodlib.
12. q. 26. Joannes Scotus quodlib. 16. Thomas de Argentina in 3. did. 12.
Marsilius in 3. did. 12. a. 2. Gabriel Biel in 2. did. 18. a. 3. Nicolaus de
Orb^llis in 2. did. 25. Stephanus Bruleset in 2. did. 25. q 8. Petrus
Capuleius Episcopus Conversanus in 22. did. 7. a. 1. q. 1. puncto 1. Gibieuf
lib. 1. de liberate Dei and creaturae, cap. 9. n. 7.

Patrum and Scholasticorum auctoritatibus addo rations Theologicas.

Ab ip a prima libertatis radice exordior, quae in agente libero, non alia
concipitur quam facultas illa mirabilis reflectendi se super suos actus, non
solum appetendo, sed etiam judicando; hoc solius naturae intellectualis
proprium est, ob ejus immaterialitatem, objectique vastitatem and
illimitationem. Habet ergo agens intellectuale and liberum ex ratione quidem ut
possit de fine and mediis judicare, utrorumque proportionem expendere, and per
hoc ipsum de proprio suo judicio judicium far and definire, number recte
judicaverit; habet vero ex voluntate ut possit se non solum appetendo movere,
sed etiam super motum suum reflectendo velle movere. Haec prima radix
libertatis quam insinuavit Thomas cum distinxit liberum a naturali, per hoc
quod natural agit ex inclinatione naturae, liberum autem ex judicio and
ratione: ex hac vero altissima libertatis radice oritur in agente per
voluntatem dominium sui actus, quod est a liberate inseparabile: siquidem non
possumus concipere volentem quia vult se velle, quin statim eum concipiamus
suae volitionis plenissime dominum and in volendo absolute liberum. Cum ergo in
omni motu rationali voluntatis semper adsit express vel tacit hujusmodi super
se reflexio: consequens etiam est quod ipsa voluntas in omni motu suo rationali
aut consensu libera omnino, sibique dominetur, nec coacta agatur, nec impetu
concitetur, sed ideo velit quia vult se velle, quia scipsam excitat, quia
seipsam movet.

Hinc recte dicitut voluntas esse incogibilis and indomabilis: nec minus esse
impossible voluntatem compelli invitam quam voluntatem non esse voluntatem:
quidquid enim ex quocumque objecto voluptatis, aut timoris, aut cujuslibet
affectus quantumcumque vehementis in voluntatem inciderit, semper ipsa suo
arbitrio superior manet, and de istis tanquam de praeparatoriis ad
consentiendum aut dissentiendum judicat hoc ultro and sponte esse volendum,
istud respuendum, and sic facit id quod ei videtur, id quod ei lubet, id quod
ei placet, quae propriae and verae libertatis indicia sunt. Si vero
vehementissime placet aut displicet, nihil mirum si arbitrium quoque
vehementissime constantissimeque sibi esse volendum aut nolendum arbitratur,
and sibi ipsi legem imponit and necessitatem, quae cum in actu appareat, non
aliunde quam ab ipso arbitrio aut voluntate and domini and libertatis ejus
perfectione proficiscitur.

Ex his sequitur manifest quod probandum assumpsimus, posse stare libertatem
cum agendi necessitate; solam coactionem ei repugnare; nec ^sse de ejus
conceptu quidditativo ipsam indifferentiam, horumque exempla adducere possumus,
qualia adducunt praeallegati Auctores in Deo, Angelis and daemonibus.

In Deo quidem, quia in eminentia simplicissimi actus Divini quo Deus se
diligit ut bonum infinite diligibile, intelligere debemus quidquid perfectionis
est in agente per intellectum and voluntatem. Ut ergo summa ejus perfectio est,
quod se super actus suos reflectat and judicet se been judicare, and velit se
velle, ac per hoc sit vere Dominus sui actus and liberrime agat: sic and
concipere debemus Deum non solum cognoscere seipsum ut infinite amabilem, non
solum amare seipsum infinito amore, sed and intelligere and judicate quod been
judicet, and velle per voluntatem sequi judicium rationis, and velle diligere,
and quod semper and invariabiliter summum bonum est and sum diligendum, velle
semper and invariabiliter diligere; ideoque beatam sibi imponere necessitatem
nunquam non diligendi; ideoque esse vere Dominum sui actus, and non obstante
necessitate esse vere liberrimum.

Certe nefas est tam abjecte de Deo sentire, ut putemus eum praecipiti and
concitato amoris aestu se unquam dilexisse. In aeternis, inquit Aristoteles,
idem est esse and posse; ut id semper in Deo fuisse novetimus, quod aliquando
esse posse sine errore intelligimus. At si concepimus aeternitatem pro cerebri
nostri debilitate, seu per commensurationem ad tempus, nihil omnino
addubitabimus, quin nunc saltem post elapsas infinitas seculorum myriades,
noscant Pater and Filius se mutuo ardore, eoque justissimo, non minus quam
infinito aeternum dilexisse. Non dubitabimus quin approbent suum velle and
velint velle, and velint se notionaliter diligere: quod nunc ipsis inesse
intelligimus, semper fuisse non non dubitemus: Domini sunt and fuerint sui
actus, sponte se dilexerunt and diligunt: Ergo actus ille dilectionis vere
liberrimus, nec ut naturae foetus considerandus, sed ut liberrimae voluntatis
motus plenissime spontaneus. At simul etiam necessarius est, nec poterat aut
potest non esse, cum nequeat Deus aut seipsum odisse, aut seipsum non amare.
Fateor omnino, and ex hoc ipso concludo quod superius dixere tot Patres, stare
necessitatem cum ipsa liberate, nec indifferentiam ipsi esse essentialem.

Augustinus lib. 1. operis imperfecti contra Julianum fol. 150. objicienti
Iuliano, Liberum non est, nisi quod duo potest velle bonum and malum;
respondet, Liber ergo Deus non est, qui malum non potest velle: siccine laudas
Deum ut ei auferas libertatem? An potiusi intelligere debes esse quamdam beatam
necessitatem, qua Deus injustus esse non potest? Igitur stat suprema ratio
libertatis in Deo cum necessitate se amandi, nec aliqualiter peccandi, quae in
eo non aliud est quam firmissima, indeficiens, aeterna and immutabilis voluntas
seu amor justitiae, aequitatis atque fidelitatis erga se; non potest se non
amare; erga nos si loqui vult, non potest nisi verum dicere; sipromittit,
fidelis est, and se negare non potest.

En igitur indifferentiam specificationis a Deo remotam. Restat sola
indifferentia agendi and non agendi, quae propria est exercitii; sed ista in
Deo prorsus periit, hoc ipso quo semel immobili voluntate voluit arque statuit,
quid in singulis circumstantiis agendum sit, quam retractare non potest.
Quapropter si hoc duntaxat est esse liberum, indifferentem esse ad agendum and
non agendum, liber fuisse Deus dici potest, liber vero esse non potest: imo
vero nec liber fuisse dici potest. Quando enim liber fuerit, cum ab aeterno,
hoc est, sine ullo initio, semper ad agendum vel non agendum determinatus
fuerit? An ad instantia rationis veniendum erit, ut realem in Deo libertatem
invenire possimus? Vel ergo and esse and fuisse semper liberum oportet, vel
nunquam fuisse, nec esse, quod est impium cogitasse.

Hoc ipsum quod in Deo ostendimus, videndum est modo in Angelis and hominibus
qui viatores esse desierunt. Certe quotquot horum aeternam felicitatem sunt
adepti, necessario immutabiliter Deum amant, and tamen eos in hoc bono liberos
asseruerunt superius Sancti Patres. Nimirum non impetu concitantur ut bruta,
nec pondere suo ruunt in centrum suae quietis ut lapides, sed ex rationis
plenissimo, tranquillissimo serenissimoque judicio judicant sibi diligendum
esse Deum, quem vident infinite diligibilem, and in hoc se sanissime judicare
judicant: ex voluntate vero amando sequi rationem volunt, and hoc se velle
volunt and cessare nolunt, and toto charitatis aestu Deum amare satagunt, ideo
and seipsos movent, and sui actus dominium perfectissimum habent, vel in ipsa
vel per ipsam quam sibi imponunt immutabilem diligendi necessitatem liberrimi
existunt. Ut non frustra aut inconsulte dixerit Divus Thomas in 4. did. 48. q.
10. quod respectu amo^is beatifici, erit sempiterna and libera electio. Et
Divus Bonaventura rationem assignans and modum explanans in 2. did. 25. q. 2.
Necessitas coactionis repugnat libertati arbitrii, necessitas vero
immutabilitatis non pro eo quod arbitrium dicitur liberum, non quia sic velit
hoc, ut velit vel velle possit ejus oppositum, sed quia omne quod vult appetit
ad sui ipsius imperium, quia sic vult aliquid, ut velit se velle illud, and
ideo in actu volendi seipsum movet and sibi dominatur; and pro tanto dicitur
liberum, quamvis immutabiliter ordinetur ad illud.

Praeterea volunt Scholastici idcirco Deum nunc esse liberum, quia in illo
instanti rationis liber, hoc est, indifferens fuit, and ex propria liberate se
determinavit, in qua determinatione propter naturae voluntatisque constantiam
immutabilis permanet. Hoc si Scholasticis sufficit, nulla ratio superest cur
non and perpetuam illam justitiae voluntatem seu amorem beatificum, quo beati
Angeli and homines peccare non possunt, liberrimam voluntatem esse contendant.
Est enim certissimum Angelos and homines qui beati fiunt, ita libera
indifferentique voluntate justitiam elegisse, propriaque se liberate
determinasse ad diligendam pietatem and justitiam and in ea perseverandum,
sicut Deus ad opera quibus vel creaturas vel aliquid in creaturis operatur. Non
enim imaginandum est aliam Beatis infundi cum beatitudine voluntatem, quae
propter perpetuam determinationem non sit libera, sed eadem omnino voluntas
libera, seu amor justitiae liberrime susceptus in via, sine ulla mutatione
firmior, and ardentior, and jucundior in patria perseverat, dicente Apostolo,
Charitas non evacuatur. Igitur si immutabilitas naturae in Deo non extinguit
primigeniam electionis libertatem, ideoque Deus quamvis immutabilis and ad unum
determinatus, nihilominus liber intelligitur, quia in illo primo signo rationis
concipitur fuisse indifferens: certe immutabilitas gratiae in Beatis quae
naturalem Dei immutabilitatem non adaequat, sed solum imitatur, multo minus
eorum libertatem interimet, aut ullatenus prohibebit quin, quantumvis
immutabiles and determinati, revera tamen dicantur liberi, qui olim plane
indifferentes, hanc sibi immutabilitatis determinationem and necessitatem
voluntate liberrima elegerunt. Stat ergo in beatis Angelis and hominibus
libertas sine indifferentia.

Sed and stat quoque in peccantibus Angelis, seu semetipsos amantibus, ut in
damnatis hominibus, quorum voluntas in malo obfirmata and ad malum determinata
in aeternum sive naturae constantia, sive gratiae destitutione, sive
damnationis aequitate and pondere, stabilis perseverat: quam tamen nemo dixerit
esse minus liberam, etsi non alia quam illa ipsa, quam dixi, consideratione qua
dicitur Deum esse liberum, quia se ipsum libere sua voluntate determinavit. Ita
Divus Thomas q. 16, de malo, a. 5. 0. and ad 6. and 8. Secundum modum naturae
suae competit Angelo ut immobiliter haereat ei quod per propriam voluntatem
elegit, unde sicut motus aversionis a Deo fuit in diabolo voluntarius, ita
etiam and quies in eo quod voluit est voluntaria; nam voluntary perseverat in
malo, sed tamen voluntas ejus in hoc immutabiliter manet determinata. Et Divus
Bernardus loco supra citato: Nec Deus caret suo libero arbitrio, nec diabolus:
quoniam quod ille esse non potest malus, non infirma facit necessitas, sed
firma in bono voluntas, and voluntaria firmitas; quodque is non valet in bonum
respirare, non aliena facit violenta oppressio, sed sua ipsius in malo
obstinata voluntas ac voluntaria obstinatio. Igitur probatissimum manet, non
esse essentialem libertati per se spectatae indiffesentiam, posseque sine hac
libertatem subsistere, and cum inevitabili agendi necessitate componi, dummodo
haec necessitas oriatur ab ipsa voluntate and ab immutabili firmitate and
complacentia qua suo objecto inhaeret and agglutinatur.

Objicies vel ipsum Divum Augustinum vel alios sanctos Patres, qui liberum
arbitrium definiunt interdum per indifferentiam, vel per potentiam boni and
mali.

Respondeo, quod talis definitio non est per essentialia; sed quemadmodum
Ambrosius lib. de arca Noe cap. 4. and Augustinus lib. de ordine c. 11. and
lib. de quantitate animae cap. 25. hominem definiunt Animal rationale mortale,
non quod crediderint esse de essentia hominis, quod sit mortalis, aut quod
immortalitas glotiosa destructura sit nostram naturam; sed quod intenderint
definiendo homini in hoc statu infelici, in quo moriendi necessitas est naturae
omnium hominum conditio inseparabilis. Ita etiam ideo vel ipsi vel alii
definientes liberum arbitrium indifferentiae meminere, non quod existiment
libertatem stare non posse sine hac indifferentia, sed quod libertatem
considerent qualis in hominibus reperitur in hac vita huic annexam
indifferentiae. Fuit igitur eorum scopus, non tam definite naturam libertatis
in se spectatae, quam ejusdem contra Manichaeos probare existentiam, quae ex
indifferentia, omnibus hominibus, dum hic vivunt, communi, manifest
convincitur: Ut enim passiones humanae, doloris, famis, sitis, lassitudinis,
somni, sunt veritatis naturae nostrae certissimi indices, quibus se ideo
Christus subjecit, ut se verum hominem comprobaret: nec tamen dici potest, quod
sint essentiales naturae nostrae, quodque qui his carebunt in caelo Beati,
desinant esse homines: ita verissime quisquis hanc habet indifferentiam et
potest facere bonum et malum, operari et non operari, necessario liber est,
quamvis dici nequeat quod quisquis hanc perdit indifferentiam, perdat et
libertatem.

CAPUT. IV.
Stare posse meritum sine indifferentia and cum ipsa agendi necessitate.
QUae de liberate probavimus, nunc de merito lubet ostendere, quanquam unum ex
altero probatum maneat, et qui primum admiserit, nequeat de posteriori dubitare.

Imprimis praeter Auctores superius allegatos et loca ex iis adducta Divi
Thomae suffragium habemus manifestum, dum is in 1 p. docet, Angelos meruisse in
primo suae creationis instanti, et simul definit non eos aliquam habuisse
indifferentiam ad primam illam operationem quae erat ad unum determinata et
necessario bona.

Rursum idem statuit dum docet necessitatem amoris in Beatis nequaquam obstare
merito, si status ipse beatitudinis huic non repugnaret. Sic enim 2 2. q. 4, a.
4 0. dicit. Quod voluntas videntis Dei essentiam ex necessitate amat, quicquid
amat sub ordine ad Deum. Et postea 2, 2, q. 182, a. 2, ad 2. asse^it illum
ipsum amorem a quo removerat indifferentiam et adstruxerat necessitatem, esse
per se meritorium, nisi conditio ipsius status perfectae beatitudinis,
ulterioris progressus meritum excluderet. In statu (inquit) felicitatis futurae
homo pervenit ad perfectum, and ideo non relinquitur locus proficie di per
meritum; si tamen relinqueretur, esset efficacius meritum propter majorem
charitatem. Similiter 3 p. q. 19, a. 3, ad 1, negat D. Tbomas posse Christum in
caelo quidpiam mereri, non ex agendi necessitate ad unum determinante, sed ex
ipsa ratione status. Christus (inquit) meruit per charitatem, in quantum erat
charitas non comprehensoris sed viatoris; and ideo quia nunc non est viator,
non est in statu merendi.

Adhuc in 3. did. 18. a. 2 ad 5. dicit, quod etiamsi liberum arbitrium Christi
esset determinatum ad unum numero, sicut ad diligendum Deum, quod non facere
non potest, tamen non ex hoc amittit libertatem aut rationem laudis sive
meriti, quia in illud non coacte sed sponte tendit, and ita est actus sui
dominus. Nimirum perstat D. Thomas in suo illo centies repetito principio, quod
sola necessitas coactionis tollit libertatem and facit involuntarium, and ideo
excludit rationem laudis and meriti, non autem necessitas immutabilitatis,
complacentiae, aut firmatae voluntatis in benum. Ita 2 2. q. 88. a. 3 ad 3, et
q. 186, a. 2, ad 2. et 1. p. q. 62, a. 8 ad 3. et in 3. did. 12, q. 3, a. 1 ad
3. et alibi passim.

Addo his Divi Thomae et superius adductis Patrum et Scholasticorum
auctoritatibus ponderationem argumenti efficacissime a summo Christianae fidei
mysterio deprompti et a praefatis Auctoribus saepe insinuati ad ostendendam
libertatis et meriti cum ipsa agendi necessitate concordiam.

Petitur hoc argumentum e liberate et merito Christi Domini dum esset in hac
vita: negari siquidem non potest absque everso Religionis fundamento, quin
Christus Dominus liber fuerit, et meruerit in iis ipsis actibus, in quibus
nullam potuit habere indifferentiam. Sumo hujus rei exemplum in ea morte quam
ex Patris praescripto debuit perferre: haec enim quamvis in se esset objectum
indifferens voluntati Christi, at ut jussa a Patre non poterat non acceptari a
Christo, quia quamvis in sensu diviso posset Christus non mori, ut et caetera
opera ei per praeceptum imposita non implere: at in sensu composito jam nullus
remanebat locus indifferentiae: Cum qui non poterat habere indifferentiam ad
peccandum vel non peccandum, non etiam poterat esse indifferens ad obediendum
vel non obediendum. Q^omodo ergo fuit liber circa hoc praeceptum formaliter
sumptum, si non habuit facultatem indifferentem ad utrumlibet? Quomod^ libere
obedivit, qui non obedire non potuit? Libere quidem obedivisse in morte
appetenda certissima res est, cum ex communi omnium consensu, ubi non est
libertas, nullus sit locus merito; nec per consequens potuisset Christus
promereri salutem nostram in ea oblatione, si non in ea offerenda liber
extitisser. At quomodo liber, si non est libertas sine indifferentia, nec
libere fit, nisi quod omitti aut non fieri potest? Tenebatur Christus praecepto
Patris mortem imperantis, Ioann. 6. Non veni ut faciam voluntatem meam, sed
voluntatem Patris qui misit me. Ioann. 10. Nemo tollit animam meam, sed ego
pono eam, and iterum resumo eam: hoc mandatum didit mihi Pater. Ioann. 18.
Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater, non vis ut bibam illum? Philipp. 2. Factus
obediens usque ad mortem. Erat Christus ut peccati aut criminis, sic and
cujuscumque vel levis imperfectionis incapax, ut posset se subtrahere nedum ab
imperio and praecepto Patris, sed nec a quibuscumque vel levissimis quae ei
quomodocumque placita intellexisset; quomodo ergo indifferens in morte
appetenda? Mori debuit sub praecepto, non potuit non velle obedire: ergo non
indifferens ad mortem. Si non indifferens, quomodo liber? Sed si non liber in
obediendo, quomodo salutem nostram potuit mereri per hunc actum obedientiae?
and quomodo dicit Paulus, Factus obediens usque ad mortem, propter quod and
Deus exaltavit illum, etc.

Variis effugiis eludunt hoc argumentum indifferentiae protectores, dum dicunt,
non fuisse mortem Christo imperatam secundum omnes circumstantias, nec ex
motivo diversarum virtutum, in quibus eligendis and exercendis libertatem
habuerit. Verum non tangitur, ne dicam evacuatur per has evasiones
difficultatis nervus, qui in eo est, ut ostendatur libertas Christi in
observatione praeceptorum; sive legis naturalis, sive legis positivae and
paternae, in qua quia praefati Auctores feu recentiores Theologi non vident
indifferentiam, sic nec admittunt libertatem. Ideoque cum pernegent Christum
fuisse liberum circa praecepta, recurrunt ad nescio quas circumstantias and
virtutes non jussas ex praecepto, in quibus vel aliquam saltem libertatis
umbram Christo condonant, removentes consequenter omne meritum and laudem ab
ipsius obedientia and praeceptorum observatione: cui nihilominus Paulus
Apostolus omne meritum adscribit, Factus obediens usque ad mortem, propter quod
and Deus exaltavit illum, etc.

Non ergo est quaestio de salvanda Christi liberate in his quae justa non
erant, sed de ea comprobanda in o^i^e ad praecepta, cum obedientia
essentialiter p^e^ tum respiciat, asseratque deinde Apostolus C^um in obediendo
fuisse liberum, dum eum ^i in obediendo meruisse, cum tamen non poster non
ob^ite. Difficultatem in hoc inv^niu^ ^raefati recentiores; sed certe vel haec
sola difficultas qua se torquent, in salvanda in his actibus alioquin
nec^s^ariis, Christi liberate, permagnum mihi est argumentum, quod notio quam
habent de liberate, non sit vera nec adaequata, cum eos impediat ne eam
agnoscant ubi supreme eminet. Fatentur ut fateri debent, potentiam peccandi
necesse libertatem, nec partem libertatis, quodque e contrario summa libertas
sit, non posse peccare, ut express cum Divo Augustino and Divo Thoma universa
docet Theologia; and tamen dum inquirunt quomodo Christus potuerit esse liber,
in hoc uno haerent, quod peccare nequiverit, sicque, velint nolint, ideo vix
eum audent tueri liberum, quia norunt sum and supreme liberum. Ridiculam
prorsus contradictionem! and illi plane similem qua quis admisso quod
claudicatio nec fit ambulatio, nec pars ambulationis, sed turpissimus in
ambulance defectus, mox ideo negate vellet Patrum ambulare, quod videret Petrum
non claudicate. Si Christus obnoxious fuisset pecc^co ut caeteri hominum, nihil
laborassent in a^noscenda ejus liberate: at quia non in eo vide^ q^od ad
libertatem non confert, sed libertati multum detrahit (posse peccare) jam liber
non est, utque aliqualem in eo salvent libertarem, quaerunt aliquam in eo
potestatem si non peccandi, at saltem minus perfect and divine operandi, multa
agendo absque expectato Patris sui nutu, in quibus, inquiunt, non fuisset
liber, si ea Pater ei jussisset, quia jubenti Patri non obedire non potuisset.
Intricatam plane Philosophiam and quae seipsam turpiter collidit!

Spinas nimirum repetiunt and punguntur, ubi rosas colligerent si non ab
antiqua and Patrum and Scholasticorum doctrina recessissent: haec ipsa quippe
non peccandi necessitas, quae eos absterret ne libertatem discernant in
actionibus Christi perfectoribus, eas ipsas actiones supreme liberas eis
ostendisset, eoque liberiores quo magis n^cessarias. Audissent enim dicentes
Divum August number, Thomam, Bonaventuram and alios supra allegatos, quod
necessitas coactionis repugnat libertati arbitrii, non autem necessitas
immutabilitatis; and quod necessitas coactionis tollit rationem meriti,
necessitas autem immutabilitatis ex interiori voluntatis inclinatione and
virtuosi habitus perfectione procedens, non laudem, non meritum virtuosi actus
tollit, sed perficit, auget, non minuit.

Talis omnino fuit Christi necessitas felicissima, secundum quam non poterat
non obedire Patri. Number enim in hac illatam aliquam vim externam putas, quae eum
ad obedientiam cogeret? Number determinationem aliquam servilem, qualis reperitur
in brutis, quae non tam agunt quam aguntur ex praesentia objecti and
apprehensione phantasiae? Nec hoc delilaret ipsa impietas. Unde ergo ipsi tam
arcta necessitas ad paternas leges, nisi ex ipsissima ejus voluntate tam
firmiter bono cohaerente and tam immobiliter Deo adfixa, ut non posset vel
minimum ab ejus nutibus recessisse. Augustinus lib. de corr. and great. cap. 11.
Neque enim metuendum erat ne isto ineffabili modo in unitatem personae a Verbo
Deo natura humana suscepta, per liberum voluntatis peccaret arbitrium, cum ipsa
susceptio talis esset, ut natura hominis ita a Deo suscepta, nullum in se motum
malae voluntatis admitteret. Et lib. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 15: An ideo in
illo non libera voluntas erat et non tanto magis erat, quanto minus servire
peccato non poterat?

Demum ad hujus lucidissimae veritatis plenam intelligentiam deponendae
anticipatae opiniones, quae mentem praeoccupant, e^ con^ulendum rationis
naturalis vel solum lumen, a quo prorsus abhorret, ut dic^m^r nos liberi in
obedientia ad Deum, quia obedimus nutanti voluntare et ad singula momenta pene
defectura. Christus vero, quia forti, quia plena, quia infracta voluntate
obedivit, non ei libere obediverit, obedivit ex amore et consummata illa
charitate qua in Patrem aestuabat: nihil autem amore liberius, nec quidquam tam
libere fit, quam quod fit ex amore.

Number, quaeso, risu et sibilis foret dignus qui succenseret puero quod non
libere Patri suo obediat, quia tam impense Patrem diligit, ut prae amoris
magnitudine nequeat vel minimum ejus praeterisse mandatum? Quis tam insulse
philosophatur, ut dicat, mulietem parum sui viri amantem, libere magis aegro
assidere quam quae tota erga virum in amores colliquatur: quod quae parum
diligit, plenam habeat sui operis indifferentiam, et tam sit patata deserere
quam assidere: quae vero ferventer amat, toto sui amoris pondere quasi suavi
simul et ineluctabili necessitate trahitur, ut in aegri solatia se totam
impendat? Quis dicat generosum militem, ad defectionem et proditionem in suum
Principem magna praemiorum spe sollicitatum, parum aut nihil apud Principem
meruisse dum non consentit, quod innata animi nobilitate adstrictus, et summo
in Principem amore quasi religatus, nequiverit fidem suam prodere, quam forte
prodidisset, si minus sui Principis amans, aut minus animo nobilis extitisset?
Mentem exuerit qui hoc dicat, nec potius videat quod quo arctiori necessitate
adstringitur puer ut Patri obediat, mulier ut viro assideat, subditus ut
Principi serviat: eo et magis libere agunt, et plus laudis merentur, ex quo
ista necessitas non est necessitas coactionis aut violentiae quae minuit laudem
actus virtuosi, quia opponitur voluntario (ait Divus Thomas) sed est necessitas
complacentiae ex interiori voluntatis inclinatione procedens, hoc est, ex
ardentissimo affectu filii in patrem, conjugis in virum, et subditi in
Principem. Haec enim necessitas (addit D. Thomas) laudem virtuosi actus non
minuit, sed auget, quia facit voluntatem magis intense tendere in actum
virtutis, and minus ab eo deficere. Et ideo quo magis augetur necessitas, eo et
libertas: cumque summum suae perfectionis attigerit, ut in Christo and Beatis,
qui Deum amant immobiliter, eique obsequuntur immutabili necessitate, tunc
quoque and libertas perfecta est ac plane consummata.

Igitur Christi erga Patrem praestita toto vitae decursu obedientia, er maxim
in sui ipsius offerendo per crucem sacrificio, ut fuit actio supremi meriti,
ita and fuit supremae libertatis, quamvis simul and semel fuerit supremae
necessitatis, ex quo impossible erat, quod dilectus hic Filius dilecto Patri
non obediret. Nec vero ad haec concilianda opus est falsis subtilitatibus
cerebrum implicare, sed solum meminisse illius quod ait D. Bernardus, Ideo in
obedientia libero non caruisse arbitrio, quoniam quod non posset non obedire,
non infirma faciebat necessitas, sed firma in bono voluntas and voluntaria
firmitas.

Stat er^o quod in hoc and superiori capite probandum assumpsimus,
indifferentiam non esse essentialem libertati aut merito, nec simplicem
necessitatem, qualis est complacentiae and immutabilitatis, libertati aut
me^ito repugnare.

CAPUT. V.
De sensu composito and diviso.
SECTIO PRIMA.
Ezponitur nodus controversiae inter Molinistas and Sanctorum Augustini and
Thomae Discipulos circa liberi arbitrii cum gratia efficaci concordiam.
EOs hactenus sensus examinavi, quos controversae propositionis cortex primo
velut intuitu repraesentat. Distinxi pravos and damnatos a bonis nec
damn^bilibus, dum ostendi in primo capite illegitimam Baii doctrinam de
liberate aut peccato primis concupiscentiae motibus attributo, religiosissime
fuisse damnatam. Dum in secundo capite insinuavi indifferentiam ad bonum and
malum ab homine via ore non nisi erronee posse negari: Dumque demum in tertio
and quarto capite per rations Theologicas and ex Patrum solidissima mente, a
qua ple^que recentiorum satis inconsulte and inadvertenter recesserunt,
libertatem cum agendi necessitate composui, and absque ulla indifferentia stare
posse demonstravi.

Deregendus superest praecipuus and secretior finis qui Molinistas movit ut
propositionem controversam miro ambiguitatis studio implicatam connecterent,
and a Sede Apostolica damnandam postularent. Quid enim quaerunt? Number ut per
damnatam hanc propositionem damnetur sensus Baii tanquam a Jansenio renovatus?
Non hoc quaerunt qui Jansenium aequssimae Baii damnationi subscripsisse certo
certius norunt. Number ut indifferentia, tum contradictionis tum contrarietatis,
putetur ab homine, dum vivit, inseparabilis? Norunt and hoc etiam a Janseno
millies assertum, ac velut fidei dogmata contra Calvinum and alios hujus seculi
novatores, ex Augustino Scripturas ubique allegante, firmiter constitutum. Number
ut non liceat deinceps opinari Deum and Beatos in sua felicitate, aut daemones
and damnatos in suis aerumnis liberos esse, nec tamen indifferentes, sed
immutabilis voluntatis necessitate illos ad bonum, and hos ad malum esse
determinatos? Non hoc etiam quaerunt, qui ignorare non possunt, id olim
venerabili Patrum antiquitati constanter acceptum, id nec ab hodiernis etiam
Scholis ita exulat, quin absque aliqua censurae formidine and licuerit semper,
and liceat nobilissimis Scoti Discipulis, se etiam ex frequenti Divi Thomae
suffragio non inaniter protegentibus, vel in ipsa Spiritus Sancti aeterna ac
pet se primo necessaria processione libertatem asserere? Non igitur hoc
quaerunt, quod se express obten^utos sperare nequeant.

Solius gratiae Christi efficacis and humanorum cordium omnipotentissima
facilitate vict^icis, eversioni intendunt; huic cum Pelagio bellum indixere,
and huic ab Ecclesiae fide eliminandae suas disponunt machinas. Quamvis igitur
omnia fort^ssis supradicta quaerere se simulent, and quasi male a Jan^enio
asserta mentiantur, ea quae sub unius propositionis censura and damnatione
proscribenda sollicitent, non tamen haec quaerunt, sed per haec aut in toto aut
in part obtenta, insidiantur solidissimae veritati, quam, licet a Censoribus
impensatam, a Judicibus intactam, and a sententia nota penitus immunem, volunt
tamen velut formaliter damnatam ex probabili apud imperitos consequentia se
posse traducere. Diffidunt quippe de suae causae aequitate, quam in Fausto,
Cassiano, and aliis Semipelagianis Massiliensibus lugent totius Ecclesiae
maledictis eversam. Vident quam se periculosae viae commiserint. Sed quo
imprudentiam suam in suscepta semel doctrinae Catholicae impugnatione ipsa
facti contumacia cohonestent: and, quod perseveranter agunt, prudenter
inchoasse judicentur: nihil relinquunt intentatum, ex quo quodammodo sperent
se, si non victoriam assecuturos, saltem adversae sibi partis jura
perturbaturos.

Admittunt omnes Divi Augustini and Divi Thomae Discipuli plenam in homine, dum
vivit, ad been vel male agendum indifferentiam, quam nulia tollat gratiae
quantum cunque efficacis determinatio. Admittunt liberum hominis arbittium,
etiam sub moventis gtatiae delectatione constitutum, adhuc tamen posse bonum,
ad quod movetur, non tantum non facere, sed etiam facere malum. Verum quia non
admittunt, quod olim contentiosissime postulabat Pelagiusi, and constantissime
negabat Augustinus, posse componi actualem creatae voluntatis dissensum cum
ipsa actuali motione gratiae efficacis, seu (ut in Scholis loquuntur) dicunt
motionem efficacem Divinae gratiae non tollere a libero arbitrio
indifferentiam, aut vero infer necessitatem sensus divisi, sed solum sensus
compositi, hoc est uno verbo, and libertatem salvant and gratiae efficaciam.
Hinc Molinistarum adversus eos incitata contentio, and ferocissimus armatus
furor, qui quod desperet se posse unquam perfringere aut penetrare, tentatum
hactenus frustra hunc sensus compositi and divisi fortissimum clypeum, quo
rubiginosa Pelagianorum tela, adversus libertatis and gratiae concordiam
immissa, cuncta facillime eliduntur, de eo ab eis per dolum and insidias
subtrahendo astutissime cogitavit.

Hoc totum controversae propositionis fabricandae and apud Sedem Apostolicam
criminandae arcanum secretissimum: si enim obtinerunt Molinistae damnari
propositionem quae asserit, ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae
non requiri in homine libertatem a necessitate, sed sufficere libertatem a
coactione, mox inferent audacissime, damnatam etiam necessitatem sensus
compositi, de qua tamen Seeds Apostolica nec per somnium cogitaverit,
exultabuntque exultatione pessima, and orbem inplebunt camoribus, explo sam
gratiam Christi efficacem and consecratam gratiam Molinisticam; quod non aliud
esset quam damnatam erroris omnium seculorum fidem, and declaratam Pelagii
innocentiam.

SECTIO SECUNDA.
Distinctionis sensus compositi and divisi necessitas in rebus Theologicis
ostenditur.
COnstat imprimis hanc sensus compositi and divisi distinctionem prorsus ad
infinita necessarium, nobi^que olim ab Aristotele indicatam in 1 Elench. cap 3,
usurpasse millies Divum Thomam in sua Theologia, ubi and necessitatem sensus
compositi explicat interdum per nomina aequipo^lenti^, necessitatis ex
suppositione, necessitatis conditionat^, necessitatis consequentiae,
necessitatis de dicto, necessitatis immutabilitatis and infallibilitatis.
Necessi^atem vero sensus divisi exprimit sub nominibus necessitatis simplicis,
absolutae, consequentis, dear, and coactionis. Usi sunt and eadem distinctione
in materia de praedestinatione, gratia and libero arbitrio, Divus Augustinus
lib. de civit. Dei cap. 10. and lib. de praedest. Dei, cujus locus refertur a
Gratian. cap. Vasis i^ae. II. Quamvis 23, q 24. S. Prosper de vocatione
gentium. cap. 18. D. Anselmus lib. de concordia praedest. and lib. atb. cap.
10. Concilium Coloniense in enchiridio Christianae institutionis, de Sacramento
poenitentiae. Boethius Severinus a. Divo Thoma and Scoto relatus, Magister
Sententiatum in 1. did. 28. Alexander de Hales, Divus Bonaventura, Scotus, and
quotquot post illos fuere Theologi Scholastici.

Hujus siquidem distinctionis necessitas talis est, ut nequeant sine illa aut
apt exponi, aut in concordiam revocari, multa quae alioquin in sacris Litetis
and Conciliis videntur dissonantia. Duo hujus ^ei exempla profero. Definit
Concilium Trident. sess. 6, c. 5, and can. 4, quod semper cum Augustino and
Thoma docuerant antiquiores Theologi, Hominem a Deo per gratiam motum and
excitatum posse abjicere inspirationem divinam, illique dissentire si velit.
Quomodo, quaeso, haec Concilii definitio consonet cum variis Scripto ae locis,
in quibus dicitur, posse neminem dissentire aut resistere volenti aut moventi
Deo? Esther 13. Pr. 7.3. Isa. 14, 46, 47. and Romans 9. Quis dicat aut Concilium
Tridentinum Scripturis repugnare, aut Scripturas Concilio? Certe per hanc solam
distinctionem possunt conciliari, ut intelligantur Scripturae loquutae in sensu
composito, Tridentini vero Patres in sensu diviso. Rursum quis audiat Joannem
Apostolum 1.1, dicentem, Omnis qui natus est ex Deo non peccat; sed nec peccare
potest, quoniam semen Dei manet in illo? An non natus est ex Deo David? An non
Petrus Apostolus? An non justi alii plerique, quos tamen post acceptam gratiam
and potuisse peccare, and turpiter peccasse Scriptura commemorat? An ergo
Scripturae contraria? Nequaquam: peccare enim possunt justi absolute and
simpliciter in se spectati and in sensu diviso; At ut justi, ut ex Deo nati, ut
semen divinae gratiae in se habentes non peccant, nec peccare queunt in sensu
composito: sed ex necessitate conditionata and suppositionis impeccabiles sunt.
Implicat enim haec duo simul esse vera, quod scilicet aliquis sit natus ex Deo,
hoc est, existat in gratia, and quod simul peccet mortaliter: quand oquidem
gratia and peccatum mortale in eodem subjecto simul sic non possint. Dictum
igitur Joannis Apostoli sic explicatum nullam facit difficultatem, quod sine
hac distinctione esset intolerabile.

SECTIO TERTIA.
Sensus compositi and divisi germana intelligentia, and ad concordiam gratiae
cum libero arbitrio applicatio.
NE errari contingat in explicatione sensus compositi and divisi, aperienda est
spontanea Mo^starum hallucinatio, qui in suam and olim Pelagianorum laesae
libertatis querelam possint probabiliter ingerere, aliter hos sensus
intelligere se fingun^ quam sint intelligendi. Dicunt enim Ita imponunt
Thomistis Suarez lib. de concursu Dei c. 10. n. 5. and lib. 3. c. 9. n. 4.

Molina 1 p. q. 14. a. 13. disp. 18. m. 2.

Vasquez 14 p. q. 1. a. 13. disp. 68. c. 3 and 5.

Coninc. de actib. supernatural. l. 1. disp. 2. dub. 3.

Lessius de gratia efficaci, c. 3. n. 19.

Meratius de great. disp. 6. sect. 1. and alii communiter.


hanc Thomistarum propositionem, Liberum arbitrium mot^m a Deo potest
dissentire in sensu diviso, and non potest d^ssentire in sensu composito, sic
esse inteligendam, quod quandiu motio divinae gratiae est in nomine, ille
nequeat dissentire, sed necessario converratur: ab^ata vero motione illa
efficaci, tunc po^e^it dissentire and non converti. Non, inquam, est iste verus
sensus hujus propositionis, sed sensus a Molinistis egregie confictus, and
tanquam haereticus ac humanae libertatis penitus destructivus, falso adscrip^us
Divi Augustini and Thomae Discipulis, cum tamen ab eorum mente sit alienissimus.

Certe tam clare and tam frequenter se isti explicant Ita se explicant
Capreolus in 1. disp. 38. q. 1 ad 2. art. 1. Ferrariensis lib. 1. cont. Gentl
c. 67.

Dominicus Soto de great. and lib. arb. lib. 1. c. 16.

Bannez 1 p. q. 14. a. 13. dub. ult. and 2 2. q. 10. a. 1. dub. 2. docum. 3. ad
4.

Alvarez de auxil. disp. 25. n. 19. and disp. 92. number. 5 and 6.

Ledesma q. unica de auxil. a. 12.

Cabrera, Cumel, Salmanticenses, Gaspar and omnes passim Thomistae.


, ut nullus in eos supetsit calumniae locus. Supponunt doctrinam probatissimam
and per se manifestam Aristotelis and D. Thomae 9. Metaph. lect. 10; quod in
causa contingenti and libera simul est potentia ad utrumque oppositorum,
quamvis horum altero actu efficiatur: non tamen est potentia ad opposita simul
habenda. Sic enim in homine, quamvis actualiter aut sedente aut ambulante, est
simultas potentiae ad sedendum aut ambulandum, non tamen est potentia
simultatis, hoc est, potentia ad ambulandum and fedendum simul. Et similiter in
patiete est simul potentia ad esse nigrum and ad esse album, quae non ab eo
tollitur per actualem albedinem aut nigredinem, non tamen est potentia ad esse
simul album and nigrum, Et ratio est, quia potentia ad unum actum non repugnat
potentia ad actum contrarium; nec etiam repugnat actui contrario: Sed tota
repugnantia and incompatibilitas est solum in ipsis actibus contrariis, qui
simul and semel reperiri nequeunt in eodem subjecto. Itaque juxta hanc
doctrinam facillime explicant Thomistae suam propositionem, liberum arbitrium
efficaciter a Deo motum non posse dissentire in sensu composito; dum dicunt non
componi aut combinari in hac propositione auxilium efficax cum sola voluntate
creata aut sola potentia ad resistendum, sed cum ipso actuali dissensu and
resistentia voluntatis. Nec enim hujusmodi auxilium habet repugnantiam and
incompossibilitatem cum potentia and liberate dissensus aut resistentiae
voluntatis, sed cum solo ejus dissensu aut resistentia actuali.

Igitur si haec propositio, Petrus sedens non potest ambulare in sensu
composito, non significat quod quando Petrus sedet amiserit aut potentiam
progressivam aut libertatem ambulandi. Cum vero non sedebit, jam and potentiam
and libertatem ambulandi recuperabit; sed significat ambulationem and sessionem
esse actus simul incompossibiles in Petro. Ita and haec propositio, liberum
arbitrium motum a Deo auxilio efficaci, non potest dissentire in sensu
composito, non significat quod quando motio est efficax in homine, non posset
dissentire si velit; ablata vero motione efficaci, tunc possit dissentire; sed
significat motionem actualem auxilii efficacis and dissensum and resistentiam
voluntatis in homine esse incompossib^lia, nec minus inter se pugnare quam
pugnent in Petro sedere simul and ambulare, vel sedere and non sedere. Itaque
sicut Petrus dum sedet, ideo liberrime sedere intelligitur, quia potest
surgere, potest non sedere, potest ambulare, quamvis ipsam ambulationem nequeat
componere cum actuali sessione. Ita liberum arbirrium dum a Deo efficaciter
movetur, ideo libertime moveri seu consentire intelligitur, quia ad
dissentiendum and quidvis aliud operandum, liberrimam retinet potestatem,
quamvis actum dissensus aut resistentiae non possit componere cum ipsa motione
divina actuali.

Omnem, si quae superest, difficultatem tollent quae superius diximus in
examine secundae propositionis controversae c. 2 and 3, ubi ostendimus ex Divo
Augustino, motionem gratiae efficacis and bonam operationem nostram se
inseparabiliter comitari. Ostendimus ex Divo Thoma, impossible esse eum non
moveri, quem Spiritus Sanctus movere velit. Ostendimus ex Thomistis and
Bellarmino implicare contradictionem, nec ab homine sanae mentis concipi posse,
quomodo Deus actualiter moveat animam, and anima non moveatur actualiter, cum
movens and motum sint correlativa. Haec enim omnia manifest probant, motionem
gratiae efficacis in voluntate non importare aliquam prioritatem temporis ante
consensum ipsius voluntatis, sed solam prioritatem naturae, et quidem talem,
quae dici nequeat prioritas existentiae, quasi in uno signo naturae existat
motio efficax, et in alio signo existat consensus voluntatis; ut enim diximus,
movere et moveri correlativa sunt. Nec potest concipi Deus in aliquo instanti
naturae seu existentiae movere, quin in eodem voluntas concipiatur mota seu
consentiens. Tota ergo haec prioritas naturae consistit in dependentia actus
seu consensus voluntatis a gratiae promotione. Caeterum in eodem instanti nedum
temporis, sed et naturae, in quo verum est dicere, voluntas praemovetur per
gratiae efficacis auxilium ad Dei amorem, in eodem verum est dicere, voluntas
nunc libere elicit actum amoris: unde fit, quod ponere tale auxilium efficax in
voluntate, est etiam ponere, quod eadem voluntas libere consentiat. Sicut ergo
repugnat, quod Petrus sedens possit ambulare in sensu composito (quamvis
alioquin, ut ostendimus, liberrime se^eat), quia nimirum incompossibiles sunt
in Petro simul et semel sedere et non sedere: ita repugnat quod liberum
arbitrium motum a Deo, et simul consentiens possit dissentire in sensu
composito (quamvis alioquin liberrime consentiat), quia nimirum incompossibiles
sunt actualis consensus and actualis dissensus liberi arbitrii.

His ita positis et explicatis, ingeminent Molinistae suas de laesa per gratiam
hominis liberate querelas. Massilienses dicunt libertatem consistere in hoc
quod, positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis, possit agere and non agere. Una
hae distinctio sensus compositi et divisi ab Augustino et Thoma nobis porrecta,
omnia erum argumenta retundet. Non enim necesse est, ut cum omnibus illis ad
agendum requisitis, inter quae etiam caelestis delectatio seu gratia est, stet
simul, ut non agat voluntas, sed solum ut possit non agere. In libero enim
arbitrio quantumcumque ad agendum praeparato, imo determinato et actu operante,
requiritur, ut diximus, simultas potentiae ad operandum et non operandum, non
potentia simultatis, ut videlicet simul agat et non agat, hoc est, ut clarius
exposuimus, in libero arbitrio est potestas ad opposita, non tamen potestas
simul in se habenda: hoc enim nemo nisi insulsus dixerit. Hoc ergo sensu
admittimus Molinistis, libertatem intelligendam, ut nimirum positis omnibus ad
agendum requisitis, etiam caelesti quacumque dulcedine, praedeterminatione et
auxilio gratiae efficacis praemoventis, stet simul, ut possit non velle, non
autem ut simul non velit. Potentia enim non volendi non repugnat omnibus illis
ad volendum requisitis, sed solus actualis dissensus, quo actualiter non velit.
Itaque in sensu diviso potest voluntas non facere id quod Deus per gratiam
efficacem in ea operatur, in sensu vero composito nequaquam.

Horum utrumque insinuat Divus Augustinus, dum infirmitatem voluntatis humanae
quae potest in peccatum deflectere, passim copulat cum indeclinabili gratiae
firmitate, qua fit, ut invictissime nolit a bono, ad quod excitatur, averti.
Lib. de corrept. et great. cap. 12. Subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis
humanae, ut divina gratia indeclinabiliter and insuperabiliter ageretur.
Rursum: Et ideo quamvis infirma, non tamem deficeret, neque adversitate aliqua
vinceretur. Rursum: Infirmis servavit ut, ipso donante, invictissime quod bonum
est vellent, and hoc diserere invictissime nollent. Ubi infirmitatem voluntatis
allegat, ostendit ejus libertatem absolutam, and in sensu diviso, quae etiam
sub gtatia constitura, potest gratiae dissentire. Ubi invictissimam,
indeclinabilem and insuperabilem gratiae actionem nominat, ostendit
infallibilitatis seu sensus compositi necessitatem, qua non possit voluntas ab
opere bono ulla tentatione ita declinari, ulla adversitate ita superari, ut
actualis declina^io and superatio voluntatis una cum Dei gratia conjungatur. Id
ipsum D. Thomas 1 2. q. 10. a. 4 ad 3: Si Deus movet voluntatem ad aliquid,
impossible est huic positioni quod voluntas ad illud non moveaetur (en
necessitatem sensus compositi and condionatam) non tamen est impossible
simpliciter (en libertatem sensus divisi and absolutam) unde non sequitur quod
voluntas ex necessitate moveatur, simplici scilicet and absoluta, quae sola cum
liberate pugnat. Sic and in Boetium lib. 5 de consolatione, prosa ult. per
ea^dem distinctionem sensus compositi and divi^ concordat Dei praescientiam cum
rerum continge^ ^cens, Quae praevisa sunt a Deo necessario evenire in sensu
composito, contingenter vero in sensu divise. S^nt ipse ibi exponit necessario
necessitate conditionata, non necessitatet absoluta. Vel, ut ipsemet lib. 1
cont. gent. cap. 67, neccessario necessitate consequentiae, non necessitate
consequentis.

Igitur necessitatem hanc sensus compositi in libero arbitrio sub gratiae
motione constituto, tanquam ipsius libertatis humanae inimicam velle criminari,
non aliud est, quam aut terminos non capere, aut manifest delirare? sed nec
delirio, nec terminorum ignorantia laborant qui eam criminantur, imo
consultissimo astu tentant, quod viribus nequeunt, and suppresso callidius apud
Sedem Apostolicam tum hujus necessitatis sic explicatae, tum gratiae efficacis
nomine, quasi neutri immineant, and de neutra cogitent; propositionem
controversam tanquam male sanam, Baianam, Jansenisticam, Calvinisticam,
Turcicam, and diabolicam, simplici veritatis and Religionis zelo ementito
damnari deflagitant, ut mox sub necessitatis nomine universaliter and aequivoce
in damnata propositione expresso, damnatam etiam ipsam sensus compositi
necessitatem, de qua Seeds Apostolica ne quidem cogitaverit, stabilitam sensus
compositi indifferentiam, proscriptam victricem Christi gratiam, and
consecratam demum Massiliensem Molinae sufficientiam audacissime mentiantur,
nequissime glorientur.

Haec bona eorum fides, quae, quia modo cognita, non eis quidquam proderit.
Quamvis enim millies damnarerur propositio, quam damnari percupiunt, si non
adhibita distinctione, sublata aequivocatione, restricta universalitate, and
semota omni ambiguitate damnatur, and in ipso damnationis decreto
specialissimam censurae notam in necessitatem hanc conditionatam intorquet: non
haec, inquam, in damnatione comprehensa reputabitur adeo libertati innocua,
adeo vindex libertaris a Christo liberatae.

Meminerint Molinistae sibi per hanc ipsam allegatam sensus compositi
necessitatem a P. Thoma Lemos and P. Didaco Alvarez obstructa saepius ora coram
summis Pontificibus Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. dum ad nauseam usque in variis
Congregationibus de Auxiliis pro libero hominis arbitrio contra Christi gratiam
egregii bellatores caput quintum et canonem quartum sessionis sextae Concilii
Tridentini pro sua causa adducerent, in quo definit sanctum Concilium, Hominem
a Deo motum posse inspirationem abjicere, eique, si velit, dissentire.
Consulant acta Congregationum, et videant contra recoctam hanc crambem, quam
jugiter recoquebant, assignatam sibi hanc distinctionem sensus compositi and
divisi; admissam in libero arbitrio necessitatem conditionatam, seu in sensu
composito, ut moventi gratiae consentiat; assertam libertatem absolutam and in
sensu diviso ut dissentiat, and de hac explicatum tam fuse, et tam saepe, and
tam luculenter Concilii locum, ut nec Judices, nec Consultores iam pati
possent, quod inermis Bastida et prope exanimis pro sua saltem defensione, et
ne inultus moreretur, ad excussum sibi pluries e manibus hoc pilum rursum
vellet recurrere.

Igitur ut Conciliilocus, quem pro se tam expressum mentiebantur, and tam
ferociter intorquebant, hihil eis profuit quin causa caderent, sic nec quidquam
proderit controversae propositionis obtenta proscriptio, ni ea nominatim hanc
sensus compositi necessitatem profliget and confodiat. Profligabit autem (sic
sperem securissime) cum Seeds Romana fiet Pelagiana, and adversus eam inferi
portae praevaluerint, cum defecerit fides Petri, pro qua Christus rogavit ne
deficiat, and cum suam Spiritus Sanctus deseruerit Ecclesiam, quam spopondit se
nunquam desertutum.

Ut vero distinctius intelligant quid sint ab hac veritatis Sede reportaturi,
quoties non per fraudem circuitus, non per aequivocationum labyrinthos, non per
sensus propositionum ambiguos et implexos, sed exerte, clare et distinct
aliquid contra gratiam Christi efficacem, aliquid in favorem gratiae Fausti
Molinisticae definiri postulaverint; Audiant explicatissimam mentem Consultorum
Congregationis de Auxiliis circa sequentes articulos, qui omnes ad rem nostram.

Ex actis Congregationis de Auxiliis.
QUi dixerit, gratiam qua Deus operatur in nobis velle and perficere, non sic
movere voluntatem, nostram, ut ex virtute motionis Dei per eam operantis sit
infallibile quod actu consentiamus and operemur, errat.

Qui dixerit, gratiam istam ad volendum and operandum quae pertinent ad
salutem, aut non esse ita efficacem, ut praeveniendo voluntatem nostram, ipsam
vera and reali efficientia praemoveat, and faciat velle atque operari, aut sine
ea posse aliquem actu velle and operari, errat.

Qui dixerit gratiam efficacem excitare, allicere, invitare and suadere
voluntatem, non tamen ita ut Deus efficaciter moveat voluntatem ipsam ad
consentiendum: sed ipsa jam consentiente et cooperante, simul cum ea influat
tantum in actum, errat.

Ez Conc. Araus. can. 4 and 5.

Aug. ep. 107. Petro Diacano, c. 9.

Fulgentio de incarnat, and great. c. 18, 28, 29, and 30.


Qui dixerit, efficaciam gratiae Dei, seu hoc quod est, auxilium gratiae esse
efficax, pendere a consensu et cooperatione liberi arbitrii hominis: aut
liberum hominis arbitrium suo consensu et cooperatione efficere auxilium
gratiae efficax, adversatur doctrinae qua ab Ecclesia Dei definitum est, Deum
etiam in illis quos vocat gratis, non expectare eorum voluntates seu consensum
ad ipsos gratia sua adjuvandam, quasi ab ipsorum libero arbitrio sic penderet,
quod consentiant vocationi, aut velint id ad quod sunt vocati, ut Deus hoc in
iis non operetur efficaci sua gratia, sed ab iis expectet pro innata ipsis
voluntate, errat.

Ita sentio Petrus Lombardus Archiepiscopus Ardmacanus. Ita sentio
Archiepiscopus Fr. Jo. de Rada Episcopus Pactensis, etc. Ita sentio Laelius
Landus Episcopus Neritonensis. Ita sentio Fr. Hieronymus Pallantius Episcopus
Bisontinus. Ita sentio Anastatius Abbas Farfensis Secretarius. Ita sentio Fr.
Io. Bapt. de Plumbino Ord. S. Aug. Procurator Generalis. Ita sentio Fr.
Gregorius Nunnius Coronel Secretatius. Ita sentio Fr. Iacobus le Bossu Doctor
Sorbonicus, Religiosus S. Dionysii in Francia.


An Answer to a Writing of M. Hallier and his Colleagues, containing Sixty
Passages of S. August. relating to the First Proposition; in which we show,
that there was none of them but what was either falsely or impertinently
alleged.
Advertisement touching this Answer.
THe only thing needful to be signified to the Reader touching this Answer
(besides what I have already said of it, Part. 6. Chap. 21.) and which he will
observe of his own accord as he reads it, is, that I have added thereunto
whilst it was printing four Notes or Observations, which he will find printed
in different Characters from those of the body of the Writing, to signify more
plainly that they were annexed thereunto. Three of them are placed after our
Answer to what the abovesaid Gentlemen said in the beginning of their writing,
imputing the first Proposition to Jansenius; and the Fourth after our Answer to
the Nineth Testimony of S. Augustine, which they had cited in their Writing:
That which we presented to the Pope in refutation of them, was thus entitled
upon the outside of the first leaf; BEATISSIMO PATRI INNOCENTIO PAPAE DECIMO
PRO DOCTORIBUS infra subscriptis S. Augustini Defensoribus, CONTRA DOMINOS
Hallier, Lagaut and Joysel Doctores Parisienses, sive Iesuitarum, sivae suo,
sive alio quocunque nomine agentes in negotio quinque propositionum. INFORMATIO
QUARTA IN JURE. In qua explanantur sexaginta Sancti Augustini testimonia a D.
Hallier ejusque sociis contra primam propositionem in scripto quodam anonymo
producta. Ostenditurque ea omnia vel mala fide vel perperam citata esse.

There was also withinside another Title here subjoined.

EXPLANATIO Sexaginta testimoniorum S. Augustini. Seu Confutatio Scripti
cujusdam anonymi and a nemine subscripti, quod in manus nostras pervenit,
quodque rescimus oblatum fuisse a Domino Hallier and Sociis ejus contra primam
propositionem; in quo 60 circiter S. Augustini testimonia adversus eam ab ipsis
proferuntur.
CLarius atque commodius nullum fieri potest hujus scripti examen, quam si
integrum referatur, ac singula testimonia in eo contenta sigillatim
explanentur, sed prius aliquae notae in totum scriptum scribendique rationem
subjiciendae sunt ad pleniorum controversiae intelligentiam necessariae.

Notae generales in totum Scriptum.
I.
NOn ponitur quod in quaestione est, nihil ergo toto hoc scripto agitur. Ut
primae propositionis veritas expendatur, duo tantum inquirere necesse est,
scilicet, an gratia ex se efficax sit necessaria ad singulos pios actus, and an
illa gratia det posse proximum ad hunc actum ad quem est efficax, adeo ut per
illam possimus, and sine illa non possimus* His enim duobus positis,
propositio, ut desenditur a nobis, and ut a Iansenio asseritur, vera est. Nam
sigtatia ad praeceptum implendum necessaria sit ex se efficax, certum est
justos, qui praeceptum aliquod non implent, gratiam ex se efficacem, ad illud
implendum necessariam, non habere. Et si eadem det posse proximum and completum
ad hoc implendum, si per eam possumus, and sine ea non possumus, certum est
etiam aliquos justos, hac gratia efficace destitutos, aliquando aliquod
praeceptum implere non posse proxime and complete. Haec autem duo de quibus
potissimum agitur, agique omnino necesse est, ut propositio juxta sensum a
Iansenio assertum, and a nobis defensum expendatur, ne attinguntur quidem, nec
proinde quidquam de iis ex allatis Sancti Augustini testimoniis concludi
potest. Mala ergo fide in hoc scripto agitur, ac frustra tot S. Augustini
testimonia proferuntur.

II.
Ponitur and probatur plurimis locis quod in quaestione non est, imo quod
Iansenius confitetur, quodque nos ut certum and Catholicum asserimus.
Confitemur Deum nihil impossible hominibus praecipere, nihil cuiquam
praecepisse impossible; S. Augustini, Concilii Tridentini, Ecclesiae universae
doctrina haec est. De hoc non agitur, hoc non controvertitur: sed illud unum
explorandum, quid, cum hoc dicunt, intelligant S. Augustinus, Tridentinum,
Ecclesia. Nihil impossible homini Deus praecipit, quia per gratiam fieri
potest; quidquid praecipit fieri potest, si natura sanetur and adjuvetur gratia
Dei per Christum, Hic est S. Augustini sensus contra Pelagium, and Tridentini
contra Calvinum. An autem gratia Christi, sine qua praeceptum fieri non potest,
detur omnibus, illud est de quo quaeritur. Dicimus non dari omnibus, Negamus
hinc sequi quod Deus impossibilia praecipiat, nisi illa sententia sumatur
secundum sensum Pelagii, non Augustini. Quidquid ergo ex S. Augustino proferunt
adversarii, ut ostendant Deum impossibilia non praecipere, vanum est, nec ad
rem pertinet, ac mala fide agunt.

III.
S. Augustini testimonia truncant ac mutilant, dolose supprimunt quae illius
mentem plane explicant, illi sensum penitus alienum and contrarium affingunt,
ut ex ipsis locis manifestum est. Denique haec omnia testimonia aut falso, aut
fraudulenter, aut nequaquam ad rem allegant.

IV.
Multa S. Augustini testimonia hinc and inde adducunt, ut plurimum non dicendo
qua de re in iis agatur, quid valiant, quid probent, qua intention ea
referant. Non est haec sincera veritatis indagandae ratio, sed apertum de ea
occultanda consilium. Quam sinceriore modo agamus patet ex scripto nostro circa
primam propositionem, ubi S. Augustini testimonia discutimus, quid valiant,
quid probent ostendimus, ea singulis conclusionibus ordinatim arteximus.

V.
Simulant se gratiam ex se efficacem ad singulos pios actus necessariam non
impugnare. Se gratiam quidem sufficientem admittere ac probare, sed eam qua
gratia ex se efficax non destruitur, and tamen nulla est vis omnium fere
testimoniorum quae proferunt, vel si ad aliquid valiant, valent ad destruendam
gratiam ex se efficacem ad operandum and orandum necessariam; and cum ex iis
concludunt semper dari aliquam gratiam sufficientem ad operandum seu ad
orandum, vel nihil concludunt, vel gratiam sufficientem Molinisticam, seu
libero arbitrio quoad usum subjectam intelligunt.

VI.
Cum S. Augustini sententia clara and expressa ex iis libris in quibus
dogmatice contra Pelagianos disputat, eorum errores refutat, Ecclesiae fidem
defendit, praecipue inquirenda sit, quod nos in scripto nostro circa primam
propositionem facimus, alia via procedunt advetsarii, ac praecipue ex moralibus
S. Augustini, e fermonibus, e Psalmorum expositionibus, ex operibus contra
Manichaeos testimonia proferunt. In quibus ex professo non agit de his
quaestionibus, quanquam tamen nec quicquam in iis sit quod adversatiorum
sententiae faveat, ut ostendemus.

VII.
Imponunt Iansenio, ut infra ostendetur.

VIII.
S. Augustini testimonia referendo ejusdem auctoritatem destruunt, ut etiam
probabitur.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
Prima Propositio.
ALiqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia. Deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.

Docet Jansenius tom. 3. lib. 3. de gratia Salvatoris cap. 33. qui and addit:
Hoc enim S. Petri exemplo aliisque multis quotidie manifestum est, quitentantur
ultra quam possint sustinere.

RESPONSIO.
HOc docet Iansenius, and ex multis S. Augustini locis colligit, sed ex
antecedentibus and conquentibus, a quibus propositio avulsa est, clarum est
quam recto sensu illud dixerit. Nam non loquitur nisi de posse completissimo,
quando voluntas sic est praeparata per Christi gratiam, ut non nude possit, sed
etiam velit; quod posse completissimum dicit non haberi nisi per actualem
Christi gratiam proxime necessariam ad id quod agendum est, quae dat non solum
posse si velis, sed and velle quod potes. Sic loquitur libro 3. de gratia
Salvatoris cap. 15. Sect. Quarto itaque completissime dicimur posse, quando
Sancti Spiritus inspiratione sic voluntas praeparatur, ut non nude possit, sed
etiam velit. Tali gratia non solum posse, sed etiam ipsum agere adjuvatur: dat
enim non solum posse si velis, sed and velle quod potes. Hoc posse nunquam
habetur nisi quando reipsa quoque agitur; and est proprius effectus non fidei,
aut charitatis, seu bonae voluntatis habitualis, sed illius gratiae actualis,
quam Christus attulit hominibus infirmis per crucem suam. In hoc ergo tota
quaestio circa hanc propositionem consistit, an gratia efficax proxime ad
agendum necessaria det completissimum posse ad agendum. Hoc est, ita completam
agendi possibilitatem, ut nihil aliud per modum principii ex part Dei ad
agendum requiratur; Quam possibilitatem S. Augustinus de nature. and gratia cap.
42. vocat possibilitatem cum effectu. Nihil aliud Iansenius dicit, nihil aliud
asserimus. Quamdiu adversarii hoc non refutaverint, nihil agent. Hoc autem toto
hoc scripto nequaquam attingunt.

Nota prima.
Hoc scripto ante omnem Propositionum censuram summo Pontifici exhibito,
apertissime innotescit, a Doctoribus Augustinianis nihil aliud circa primam
Propositionem defensum fuisse, quam gratiam per se efficacem ad singulos pios
actus esse necessariam, and per illam dari posse proximum and completum, seu,
ut infra exponitur, ita completam agendi possibilitatem, ut nihil aliud per
modum principii ex part Dei ad agendum requiratur, quod solum gratiae per se
efficacis ad singulos actus necessariae dogma continet. Dum primam
propositionem veram and a se defendi aiunt, hunc unum sensum defendunt: ac, ne
quis suspicaretur, aut primam Propositionem ab iis simpliciter defendi, aut
alium in ea quam gratiae per se efficacis sensum defendi, vulgo eandem
propositionem ita exprimunt ac limitant, Propositio ut defenditur a nobis,
propositio juxta sensum a nobis defensum. Ergo ante constitutionem prima
Propositio de haeresi damnata, utpote ab isto gratiae per se efficacis sensu
alienissima, nequaquam ab Augustinianis defensa est.

Nota secunda.
Hoc uno scripto Augustiniani Jansenii sensum attingunt. Etsi enim de hoc in
ista de quinque Propositionibus controversia agere ipsis minime propositum
esset, nullamque ejus mentionem fieri monuisset summus Pontifex, cum tamen
adversarii hoc suo scripto ejus verba referrent, and alienum ab ipso sensum
illis affingerent, fieri non potuit, quin Augustiniani respondendo id obiter
animadverterent, and hanc hallucinationem very Iansenii sensus circa primam
Propositionem expositione detegerent. Non tamen de defenso Iansenii sensu
quidquam Romae auditum dixeris, quia haec, quantumvis pro argumenti magnitudine
ac difficultate brevissima, ac obiter solum dicta, nec lecta nec examinata
sunt. Cum enim, ipso fatente, Cavilli page 37.
nulla deinceps, post audios Doctores, Consultorum collatio, nulla Congregatio
habita fuerit, ita nullum hujus scripti and aliorum summo Pontifici simul
exhibitorum examen institutum est.

Nota tertia.
Ex hac Ianseniani sensus obiter in hanc responsionem inserta defensione videre
licet, unum semper ac constantem Augustinianis sensum de tota ista materia
fuisse, nec, ut quidam cavillantur, eos post constitutiones demum ubique
receptas ad hanc de male intellecto ab adversariis Iansenii sensu querelam and
disputationem confugisse. Ecce enim hic and responsione sequenti aperte
clamant, perperam ab adversariis intelligi Iansenium and illi gravissime
imponi. Non ergo Iansenii sensus nomine unquam defenderunt illos errores, qui
ipsi ab adversariis tribuuntur. Sed falso illos affingi Iansenio constanter,
and ante and post constitutiones affirmarunt. Idem semper de gratia, idem de
Iansenio senserunt. Solam ipsi efficacem gratiam propugnarunt, solam a Iansenio
efficacem gratiam explicatam ac defensam arbitrati sunt: hoc uno aliquantum a
se non sensu, sed verbis dissimiles, quod ante constitutiones gratiae efficacis
doctrinam in Propositionum verbis, minus stricte and rigorose sumptis, includi
posse merito, ut aliqui e Romany Consultoribus sentiebant: eadem vero consensu
Ecclesiae declaratione summi Pontificis, penitus jam ab iisdem exclusa, nihil
jam in illis remanere fateantur nisi errorum faecem merito a quibusque
reprobandam.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
COnstat vero ex ejus doctrina and pincipiis secundo toto isto libro, 3. and
alibi, etiam justis, quotiescunque transgrediuntur mandata Dei, deesse gratiam,
tum illam qua eadem implere possint, tum istam qua auxilium ad praecepta
implenda sufficiens impetrare queant.

RESPONSIO.
IMponunt gravissime Iansenio, nisi per auxilium sufficiens intelligant
Molinisticum, quod revera nunquam adesse in hoc statu docet Iansenius, quia per
illud vera Christi gratia destruitur, and Pelagianus error restituitur. Nunquam
vero dixit justos, quotiescumque transgrediuntur praeceptum, nullam habere
gratiam. In hac ipsa propositione de qua agitur, quaestio est de justis
volentibus utique per gratiam aliquam; dicuntur enim volentes, imperfecte
scilicet and invalide per hanc parvam gratiam, ut docet S. Augustinus de gratia
and libero arbitrio, in testimoniis quae Iansenius praecipue citat in locis ubi
de hac propositione agit. Dum ergo dicit Iansenius, non adesse gratiam qua
possint praecepta implere, intelligit de gratia dante posse ita completum, ut
det simul plenum velle, sed non excludit aliam parvam gratiam, and quae tanta
non est, quanta sufficit ad praeceptum aliquod implendum. Dum vero dicit
Iansenius non adesse gratiam qua possint impetiare auxilium operandi,
intelligit non adesse tantam gratiam, qua tam perfect oretur, quam perfect
orandum est, ut impetretur magna Dei gratia, quae non nisi magnis gemitibus
imploratur. Saepe enim Iansenius asserit esse parvam gratiam incipiendi,
imperfecte volendi, tepide orandi, in eo qui non operatur, non perficit, non
plene vult, quique ardenter and perseveranter non orat, ut videri potest multis
in locis apud ipsum Iansenium. Legatur de gratia Salvatoris lib. 2. cap. 27.
lib. 4. cap. 16, 17, 18. lib. 8. cap. 2. and postea adversariorum fide
judicetur.

Hanc autem parvam gratiam non vocavit quidem gratiam sufficientem ad
operandum, quia non existimavit illud auxilium ad aliquid sufficiens dici,
praeter quod aliud auxilium necessarium est: sed reipsa gratiam sufficientem
sumpram pro parva and imperfecta, quae tanta non est quanta sufficit ut volendo
faciamus, sed quae sufficit and efficit ut imperfecte velimus, non solum non
negavit, sed in locis citatis and ubique sicut veram Christi gratiam adstruxit,
docuitque eam saepe reperiri in iis qui transgrediuntur aliquod praeceptum.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[I S. Augustini Testimonium ab Adversariis contra primam propositionem
productum.]
COntrarium docet Sanctus Augustinus. 1. Nemini a Deo impossibilia praecipi
docet libro tertio de libero arbitrio, capite decimo octavo.

Quaecunque ista causa voluntatis, si non ei potest resisti, sine peccato ei
ceditur; si autem potest, non ei cedatur, and non peccabitur; an forte fallit
incautum? ergo caveat ne fallat. An tanta fallacia est omnino non pssit? si ita
est, nulla peccata sunt; quis enim peccat in eo quod caveri nulla modo potest?
peccatur autem; caveri igitur potest.

Approbat lib. 1. Retract. cap. 9. in quorum recensionem haec habet. In his
atque hujusmodi verbis meis, quia gratia Dei commemorata non est, de qua tunc
non agebatur, putant Pelagiani, vel putare possunt, suam nos tenuisse
sententiam: sed frustra hoc putant; voluntas quippe est qua and peccatur, and
recte vivitur, quod his verbis egimus.

Approbat lib. de natura and gratia cap. 67. Agnosco, verba measunt; sed etiam
ipse dignetur agnoscere superius cuncta quae dicta sunt. De gratia quippe Dei
agitur, quae nobis per Mediatorem medicina opitulatur, non de impossibilitate
justitiae. Potest ergoci causae, quaecumque illa est, resisti? potest plane;
nam in hoc adjutorium postulamus, dicentes, Ne nos inferas in tentationem: quod
adjutorium non posceremus, si resisti nullo modo crederemus: Potest peccatum
caveri, sed opitulante illo qui non potest falli.

RESPONSIO.
I. SI quid probat hic locus sumptus ex adversariorum mente, nimis probat;
probat quod falsissimum est, and S. Augustino evidenter contrarium, proindeque
nihil probat: nam vel adversarii probant quod intendunt, vel ex hoc loco
colligunt dari semper aliquam gratiam veram and internam voluntati, ut peccatum
vitari possit, quia alias peccatum non esset, cum vitari non posset: Ergo datur
semper singulis adultis, infidelibus, excaecatis, and aliis, aliqua vera
Christi gratia voluntati interna quotiescumque peccant; quia si non daretur,
juxta adversariorum principia dici non posset peccatum vitari posse: Hoc autem
cum falsissimum sit, and S. Augustini doctrinae penitus repugnans. Quando S.
Augustinus dicit peccatum vitari posse, sensus non est, quod omni peccanti
semper infundatur a Deo vera and interna voluntatis gratia. Adversarii ergo
nihil omnino ex hoc loco probare possunt. Jam autem quis sit hujus testimonii
sensus videamus.

II. Nihil probat hoc testimonium adversum nos, sed potius confirmat quod
dicimus. Quis enim negat peccatum posse vitari, posse illi resisti, justitiam
non esse impossibilem? De hoc inter nos quaestio non est, sed de sensu quo S.
Augustinus id asserat, dicimus hoc sensu asseri, quia, ut docet de perfect.
justitiae Caelestio respondens cap. 2. Vitari potest peccatum, si natura
sanetur gratia Dei per Christum. Et hoc ipsum in loco citato docet his verbis:
Potest peccatum caveri, sed opitulante illo qui non potest falli. Hoc est,
potest caveri quando Deus opitulatur: si autem intelligatur hoc sensu, quod
Deus semper opitulatur ad vitandum peccatum, quod semper cuique inest peccati
vitandi possibilitas proxima per gratiam Christi semper praesentem, qua
voluntas pro nutu suo vel implet praeceptum ex pietate, vel impetrat auxilium,
illud Pelagii principiis conform esse dicimus, and a S. Augustino contra
Pelagium semper negari, ut ostendimus in scripto circa primam propositionem
cap. 5. art. 1. and 2. and art. 13. respons. 1. and 2. Ut ergo adversarii id de
quo solum quaeritur probarent, in hoc deberent insudare, ut ostenderent gratiam
Christianam, per quam praeceptum seu orandi, seu credendi, seu operandi, fit
proxime and complete possibile, semper a Deo omnium hominum cordibus
misericorditer infundi, ut verum sit quod Deus in sensu S. Augustini
impossibilia non praecipit. Aliqua testimonia Augustini proferre deberent
quibus illud demonstrarent.

Sed hoc a doctrina S. Augustini omnino alienum est, apud quem peccatum and ab
homine sano and ab homine lapso vitati potest, sed diversolonge sensu; ideo
enim ab homine sano peccatum vitari potest, quia semper habet gratiam
praesentem qua id proxime pro nutu suo possit; ideo vero ab homine lapso
peccatum vitari potest, quia, ut diximus, per gratiam vitari potest, seu si
natura gratia Dei per Christum sanetur. Sed, ut S. Augustinus aperte in locis
citatis docet, natuta non semper sanatur per Christi gratiam, and tunc, ut
loquitur, ex infirmitate, quae poena peccati est, non potest, sive non videndo
qualis esse debeat, sive videndo and non volendo esse qualem se debere esse
videt; hoc docet and retract. lib. 1. cap. 8. libros de Libero arbitrio
recensens, and cit. cap. 6. de nature. and great. quae infra referentur.

Quoties ergo quae S. Augustinus de peccato in libris de lib. arb. dixerat,
peccatum scilicet non esse quod vitari non potest, and similia; Pelagiani illi
objecerunt, and eo sensu intelligi voluerunt, ut peccatum non esset, nisi
quicumque peccat, semper proxime posset illud vitare, seu nisi in quoque homine
semper esset illud pro nutu suo posse vitare and recte facere; toties S.
Augustinus respondit se quoad istum sensum locutum esse de peccato, quod
tantummodo peccatum est, non vero de peccato, quod simul and peccatum est, and
poena peccati. Lib. 1. retract. cap. 9. sic loquitur: Et in libro tertio, cum
dixissem illud quo and Pelagium de meis opusculis usum fuisse commemoravi; quis
enim, inquam, peccat in eo quod nullo modo caveri potest? Peccatur autem,
caveri igitur potest. Continuo secutus adjunxi, and tamen per ignorantiam facta
quaedam judicantur, etc. Et mox infra: Sunt etiam necessitate facta improbanda,
ubi vult homo recte facere and non potest, etc. Sed haec omnia hominum sunt ex
illa mortis damnatione venientium; nam si non est ista poena hominis, sed
natura, nulla ista peccata sunt. Et infra sic concludit^ Et alio loco,
approbate, inquam, falsa pro veris, ut erret invitus, and resistente atque
torquente dolor carnalis vinculi, non posse a libidinosis operibus temperare,
non est natura instituti hominis, sed poena damnati. Cum autem de libera
voluntate recte faciendi loquimur, de illa scilicet, in qua homo factus est,
loquimur. Ecce jam long antequam Pelagiana haeresis extitisset, sic
disputavimus, velut jam contra illos disputaremus. Quae omnia in libro de not.
and gratia cap. 67. similiter dicit. Eodem modo cum Iulianus objiceret S.
Augustino definitionem peccati ab eo contra Manichaeos prolatam, scilicet,
Peccatum est voluntas amittendi vel retinendi quod justitia vetat, and unde
liberum est abstinere; S. Augustinus ter illi in libro 1. operis imperfecti,
nempe cap. 44. 47. and 104. respondit, se ibi peccatum definivisse quod
tantummodo peccatum est, non quod etiam poena peccati: Ita definitio peccati,
inquit cap. 104. ejus est quod peccatum tantummodo est, non quod etiam poena
peccati, qua perit libertas non peccandi, a quo malo non liberat, nisi ille cui
non tantum dicimus, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, verum etiam, Et ne nos inducas
in tentationem, sed libera noc a malo.

SCRIPTUM ADVESARIORUM
[II. Testimonium.]
Idem libri 3 citati de libero arbitrio cap. 9. Objicientibus cur cum
ignorantiae caecitate and cupiditatis difficultatibus homines nascantur, ita
respondet.

REcte fortasse quererentur, si erroris aut libidinis nullus hominum victor
existeret; cum vero ubique sit praesens qui multis modis per creaturam sibi
Domino servientem aversum vocet, doceat credentem, consoletur sperantem,
diligentem exhortetur, conantem adjuvet, exaudiat deprecantem, non tibi
deputatur ad culpam, quod invitus ignoras, sed quod negligis quaerere quod
ignoras: neque illud quod vulnerata membra non colligis, sed quod volentem
sanare contemnis: ista tua propria peccata sunt; nulli enim homini ablatum est
scire utiliter, quod inutiliter ignoratur, and humiliter confitendam esse
imbecillitatem, ut quaerenti and confitenti ille subveniat, qui nec errat dum
subvenit, nec laborat; nam illud quod ignorans quisque non recte facit, and
quod recte volens facere non potest, ideo dicuntur peccata, quia de peccato
illo liberae voluntatis originem ducunt.

Approbat lib. de not. and great. cap. 67. relatis verbis subjungens: Ita
exhortatus sum quantum potui ad recte vivendum, and gratiam non evacuavi, sine
qua natura humana jam tenebrata atque vitiata illuminari non potest and sanari,
de qua re cum istis tota vertitur quaestio, ne gratiam Dei quae est in Christo
Jesu Domino nostro perversa naturae defensione frustremur.

RESPONSIO.
AD intelligentiam hujus loci notandum est S. Augustinum, cum hos de libero
arbitrio libros scriberet, nondum cognovisse nec asseruisse initium fidei esse
donum Dei, illum de hac veritate convictum fuisse solum in exordio sui
Episcopatus, scribendo secundam quaestionem lib. 1 ad Simplicianum. Hoc patet
ex libro de praedestinatione Sanct. c. 3 and 4, et de dono persev. cap. 20.

I. Hoc posito, petimus ab adversariis quid ex hoc loco colligant. An omnibus
ad excusationem in peccato dari gratiam Christi, ut incipiant credere and pie
velle, ac ut ad Deum orando confugiant? fed quomodo ex dictis a S. Augustino in
libris de libero arbitrio probare possunt dari omnibus ad credendum and ad
orandum gratiam Christi; siquidem Sanctus Augustinus, cum haec scriberet, non
putabat initium fidei and orationem esse donum gratiae Christi, ut
praenotavimus?

II. Si gratia generalis fidei and orationis hoc in loco a Sancto Augustino
tradita esset, and dicerent adversarii eam esse quam confitentur, and quam ad
fidem and orationem confiteri sufficit, se Semipelagianos esse declararent,
aliam gratiam ad initium fidei non confitendo praeter istam quam Sanctus
Augustinus agnoscens, nihilominus in errore Semipelagianorum versabatur, ut
ipse asserit.

III. Juxta S. Augustini doctrinam contra Pelagianos assertam, gratia si
daretur ad excusationem hominum in peccatis, non esset vera gratia, ut express
ptobat in epistola ad Sixtum; ergo repugnat S. Augustino ut gratiam aliquam ad
excusationem hominibus, cum peccant, dari, in libro de natura and gratia
asseruerit, and hanc esse veram Christi gratiam censuerit.

IV. Postquam adversarios convicimus ipsos hoc testimonium tam perperam
adducere, ut contra nos eo uti non possint, nisi Semipelaginanum errorem
profitendo: jam illius sensus exponendus est. Itaque S. Augustinus hoc loco
aliud contra Pelagium adstruit, scilicet, gratiam operum, quam Pelagius
negabat, and quam praecipue in libro de natura et gratia S. Augustinus probat:
aliud vero silet, scilicet, gratiam fidei et orationis, eam nec negando, quia
de illa hoc loco non agebat, nec adstruendo, quia S. Augustinus libros de
libero arbitrio scribens, nondum eam cognoscebat. Itaque in hoc testimonio lib.
3 de libero arbitrio gratiam non evacuavit, ut ipse testatur in libro de nature.
et great. quia scilicet in eo gratiam operum adstruxit, and gratiam fidei non
negavit, de ea nihil dicendo. Sic licet in libro expositionis quarumdam
propositionum ad Romanos apertius quam in ullo alio secundum errorem, in quo
erat, locutus fuerit, dixit tamen libro 1 Retract, cap. 23, se ibi evertisse
haeresim Pelagianam, negantem scilicet gratiam Christi ad operandum et ad Deum
amandum requiri: Vnde quidem, inquit, jam evertitur haeresis Pelagiana, quae
vult non ex Deo nobis, sed ex nobis esse charitatem qua been ac pie vivimus.
Proindeque Sanctus Augustinus hoc testimonium petitum ex libro 3 de libero
arbitrio repetit ac confirmat in libro de natura et gratia, non ut ex eo
adstruat gratiam fidei, quam nondum cognoscebat cum libros de libero arbitrio
scribetet, sed ut ex eo gratiam operum contra Pelagium confirmet, ostendatque
se illam non evacuasse, cum dixit homines in peccatis excusationem non habere.

Verus ergo hujus loci sensus iste est: Sanctus Augustinus ostendit homines non
habere excusationem in peccatis, quia Deus aliqua semper adjumenta vel gratiae
internae, vel saltem externae hominibus confert, per quae excusatio omnis illis
aufertur. Per creaturam, inquit, sibi Domino servientem. An haec gratia interna
est? puta per mundi ordinem, gubernationemque admirabilem, per solemn, lunam,
pluvias caeteraque caeli and terrae beneficia homines a se aversos vocat, and
quidem ut dicitur Actorum 14, Non sine testimonio seipsum relinquens,
benefaciens, de caelo dans pluvias and tempora fructifera, quod sufficit ad
auferendam excusationem hominum in peccatis. Tali cognitione, inquit S.
Fulgentius de veritate praedestinat. and great. lib. 1, cap. ultimo, ablata
excusatio est, non collata salvatio. Certum autem est, hic S. Augustinum non
plene solvisse hanc summam difficultatem, quomodo just Deus de peccatoribus
conqueratur, quibus gratiam necessariam non dat, nec latentes judiciorum Dei
causas aperuisse. Siquidem S. Augustinus nondum,, cum haec scriberet, gratiae
and praedestinationis mysterium plene cognoscebat. Nec eo in loco de gratia ex
professo agebat, ut ipse dicit lib. 1 Retract. cap. 9. De gratia vero Dei,
inquit, qua suos electos sic praedestinavit, ut eorum, qui jam in eis utuntur
libere arbitrio, ipse etiam sic praeparet voluntates, nihil in eis libris
disputatum est propter hanc propositam quaestionem. Vbi antem incidit locus, ut
hujus gratiae fieret commemoratio, transeunter commemorata est, non quasi inde
ageretur, operosa ratiocinatione defensa.

Ubi vero illi contra Pelagianos and eorum reliquias de praedestinatione Dei,
de hominum excusatione ex professo disserendum fuit, ubi opus fuit gratiam
operosa ratiocinatione defendi, videatur quid de hac re dixerit, praecipue in
epistola ad Sixtum, in qua argumentum istud ab excusatione hominum petitum
plenissime solvit, non per gratiae alicujus sufficientis voluntaris internae in
usu liberi arbitrii positae assertionem, sed per inscrutabila and justa Dei
judicia juxta Apostoli doctrinam, qui eadem responsione hominum excusationem
repressit. Videantur dicta in scripto circa primam propositionem cap. 5,
articul. 13, responsione 2 and 3.

IV. Quod haec verba, Nulli enim homini ablatum est scire utiliter, quod
inutiliter ignorant, etc. Observandum est, haec legi quidem in libro de libero
arbitrio, sed non repeti in libro de natura and gratia, quia forte in his
verbis Semipelagianus error exprimitur, si significetur in unoquoque restare
post peccatum vires, ut ad sidem se disponat, ut velle incipiat, ut suam
imbecillitatem confiteatur, and ad Deum orandum confugiat. Hic mala fides
adversariorum retegitur, qui haec verba retulerunt quasi Sanctus Augustinus in
libro de natura and gratia repetiisset ac confirmasset. Nam his verbis ex libro
de libero arbitrio citatis, mox subjungunt: Approbat libro de natura and gratia
cap. 67, relatis verbis subjungens: Ita exhortatus sum.

Dicenr adversarii: Sed haec verba S. Augustinus non retractat neque in libro
de natura and gratia, neque in lib. Retract. Respondemus haec sufficienter
retractata fuisse, cum Sanctus Augustinus and in lib Retract. and in lib. de
praedestinat. Sanctorum cap. 3. and de dono peseverantiae cap. 20. nos monuit
se ante Episcopatum de dono fidei recte non sensisse. Non est ergo quod
adversarii haec ultima verba de gratia ad quaerendum and ad orandum omnibus
data exponentes, hac accusatione fraudem suam tegere intelligentiumque oculis
eripere praesumant.

Haec tamen verba secundum Catholicum sensum exponi possent, dicendo neminem
necessitate premi ut in peccato maneat, posse unumquemque ex suae infirmitatis
experientia scire, se infirmum esse, and ab ignorantia and infirmitate, Deo
adjuvante, liberari.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[III. Testimonium.]
Idem lib. 1. de Genesis contra Manichaeos cap. 3. ILlud autem lumen non
irrationabilium animalium oculos pascit, sed pura corda eorum qui Deo credunt,
and ab amore visibilium rerum and temporalium se ad ejus praecepta servanda
convertunt, quod omnes hominet possunt si velint, quia illud lumen illuminat
omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum.

Approbat lib. 1 Retract. c. 10, in quorum recensione haec scribit. Non
existiment novi haeretici Pelagiani secundum eos esse dictum; verum est enim
omnes homines hoc posse si velint, sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino, and
tantum augetur munere charitatis ut possint, quod hic ideo dictum non est,
quoniam praesenti necessarium non erat quaestioni.

NOTA hic absolute ab Augustino asseri verum esse quod omnes homines possint ad
Dei praecepta servanda se convertere, negari tantum quod sine gratia id
possint, idque adversus Pelagianos non silendum, adversus alios haeretoos
fileri potuisse, affirmari. Quia scilicet ad veritatem propositionis id non
spectare credidit, sed tantum ad modum quo propositio vera est, significandum,
ideoque tacito etiam modo veritatis propositionem subsistere existimavit.

NOTA praeterea, dum excusat se quod agens pro libero arbitrio sileat gratiam
de qua minime agebatur, similiter innuere, nec se reprehendendum esse, si forte
agens ex professo de gratia, liberi arbitrii mentionem omittat, de quo nulla
cum Pelagianis erat quaestio.

RESPONSIO.
HAec verba prout exponuntur in libro Retractat. non solum nobis non
adversantur, sed valde favent. Verum est enim omnes homines posse si velint;
sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino scilicet ut velint; atqui certum est apud S.
Augustinum voluntatem in omnibus hominibus non praeparari. Multi, inquit, de
praedestinatione Sanctorum cap. 6, audiunt verbum veritatis, sed alii credunt,
alii contradicunt; volunt ergo isti credere; nolunt autem illi, quis hoc
ignoret? quis hoc neget? sed cum aliis preparetur, aliis non praepaeretur
voluntas a Domino, discernendum est utique quid veniat de misericordia ejus,
quid de judicio. Certum est etiam apud S. Augustinum and alios Patres,
voluntatem praeparari nihil aliud esse, quam nobis volitionem ipsam actualem a
Deo dari, ut voluntas praeparari nunquam dicatur, nisi cum actu volumus. Hoc
patet ex iis S. Augustini verbis de Christi oratione pro Petro ut fides ejus
non deficeret. Sed quia, inquit de corrept. and great. cap. 18, praeparatur
voluntas a Domino, ideo pro illo non posset esse inanis oration. Quare, ut
innumeris S. Augustini locis patet, haec Apostoli verba, Deus est qui operatur
velle, eodem sensu sumuntur atque ista, praeparatur voluntas a Domino,
proindeque ista sicut illa gratiam efficacem denotant; ergo licet omnes possint
servare mandata si velint, quia tamen nunquam volunt nisi cum voluntas eorum
praeparatur, ac semper voluntas eorum non praeparetur, probari non potest ex
hoc loco, omnes homines semper habere gratiam internam qua proxime possint Dei
mandata servare: imo ex hoc loco probatur hanc gratiam omnibus semper non dari.
Alia verba sequentia evidenter denotant, ex hoc loco concludi non posse gratiam
omnibus dari qua possint Dei praecepta servare. Sic enim S. Augustinus
loquitur: Sed praeparatur voluntata a Domino, and tantum augetur munere
charitatis ut possint. Quis autem dixerit in omnibus hominibus, infidelibus,
Atheis, Haereticis, excaecatis voluntatem tantum augeri munere charitatis ut
possint Dei praecepta servare? Cum ergo in omnibus non sit illud charitatis
munus, omnes non possunt, quia solum possunt cum augetur voluntas munere
charitatis, and illud munus est gratia haec magna de qua loquitur S. Augustinus
de gratia and libero arbitrio, cap. 15 and 16, quae tanta est, quanta sufficit
ut volendo faciamus, and quam qui non habet, nondum potest. Ut pateat quam
verum sit ac S. Augustini doctrinae conform quod dicimus, jam citata ex libro
de gratia and libero arbitrio testimonia integra legenda sunt. In his enim S.
Augustinus dicit quod non solum possumus mandata servare si volumus, sed etiam
quod ea servamus si volumus; and tamen docet nos aliquando illa non posse
servare. Per hanc, inquit cap. 18, gratiam fit, ut ipsa bona voluntas quae jam
esse coepit, augeatur, and tam magna fiat ut possit implere divina mandata (en
illud charitatis munus quo possumus) quae voluerit cum valde perfecteque
voluerit, ad hoc enim valet quod scriptum est, Si volueris conservabis mandata,
ut homo qui voluerit and non potuerit, nondum se plene velle cognoscat, and
oret ut habeat tantam voluntatem, quanta sufficit ad implenda mandata. Sic
quippe adjuvatur ut faciat quod jubetur: Tunc enim utile est velle cum
possumus, and tunc utile est posse cum volumus: Nam quid p^odest si quod non
possumus volumus, aut si quod possumus nolumus! Idem docet capite sequenti, ubi
and utitur eodem isto loco Scripturae: Voluntas praeparatur a Domino. Certum
est, inquit, nos mandata servare si volumus, sed quia praeparatur voluntas a
Domino, ab illo petendum est ut tantum velimus, quantum sufficit ut volendo
faciamus. Ex his patet, nos per eamdem gratiam simul and posse and plene velle:
proindeque cum omnes gratiam, qua plene velint, non habeant, gratiam et ^on
habere qua possint; etsi verum sit omnes n^olum posse servare mandata si
velint, sed etiam ea servare si velint. Quibus and similibus sententiis non
significatur gratiam quae det bonum posse, and bonam voluntatem semper esse
praesentem, sed denotatur omnia quae ad colendum Deum and pie vivendum
pertinent, sic in bona voluntate consistere, ut cum plene volumus, possimus
just vivere, nec bona vita ab exterioribus rebus pendeat, quas habere saepe
non possumus, etiamsi plene and toto cord eas appetamus.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[IV. Testimonium.]
Libro de duabus animabus contra Manichaeos, capite 11. NEc hi libri obscuri
mihi servandi erunt, unde dicerem neminem vituperatione suppliciove dignum qui
aut id velit quod justitia velle non prohibet, aut id non faciat quod facere
non potest. Nonne ista cantant and in mentibus pastores, and in theatris
Poetae, and indocti in circulis, and docti in bibliothecis, and magistri in
scholis, and Antistites in sacris locis, and in orb terrarum genus humanum,
quod nullo modo vituperatione and damnatione dignus est, aut non contra vetitum
justitiae faciens, aut quod non potest non faciens!

RESPONSIO.
REspondetur Sanctum Augustinum loqui tum de eo qui non facit quod facere non
potest, and si velit illud facere: quia tunc invitus illud non facit: tum de eo
qui naturaliter non potest; quia tunc natura, non voluntate non facit. Seu
Augustinus loquitur de eo qui non potest vel ob alienam vel ob propriam naturam
bonum facere, non vero de eo qui vitio naturae and ex poena primi peccati non
potest, quod evidentissime patet ex tribus capitibus.

I. Ex ipso contextu S. Augustini; Quaerit enim an peccet qui invitus and
coactus quippiam facit. Respondetque ex communi notitia generis humani non
peccate, quia non nisi voluntate peccatur. Voluntas autem, inquit, est animi
motus cogente nullo ad aliquid vel non amittendum vel adipiscendum. Et hoc,
inquit idem, ita manifestum est, and non doctrina, sed natura omnibus promptum,
ut necesse non sit libros obscuros scrutari, unde discatur neminem
vituperatione suppliciove dignum, qui id non faciat quod facere non potest.
Quis ergo non videat Augustinum loqui de eo qui vult facere quod tenetur, and
non potest, quia tunc si non facit, id non provenit ex voluntate, sed ex
coactione vel violentia? oportet autem, ait Augustinus, ut volens a cogente sit
liber. Qui ergo vult aliquid facere and violentia prohibetur ne faciat, non
peccat, quia non volens sen invitus non facit.

II. Id patet ex errore Manichaeorum, quem hic sibi confutandum proponit
Augustinus. Manichaei enim ex ipso Augustino tum in toto hoc opere, tum in lib.
1 Retractationum cap. 15, duas animas in uno homine constituebant, unam bonam a
Deo, alteram malam a principe tenebrarum; illam totius boni in homine
principium, hanc vero totius mali, adeo ut si illa velit declinare a malo and
facere bonum, haec ut potentior illi reluctans, eam co gat invitam malum facere
quod non vult, and prohibeat bonum facere quod vult, proindeque ipsam and totum
hominem pertrahat in peccatum. Quem errorem impugnat S. Augustinus, quia hinc
sequeretur, nec animam bonam peccare, nec malam; non bonam, quia cogeretur a
mala, proindeque non peccaret, cum non nisi voluntate peccetur, non etiam
malam, quia natura peccaret non voluntate.

III. Id manifest patet ex consequentia and definitione peccati, quam inde
deducit Augustinus, and quam explicat in libro Retractat. Cum enim dixisset, ex
communi notitia hominem non esse supplicio dignum qui non facit quod non
potest, statim and nullo intermedio infert hanc definitionem peccati esse
legitimam: Peccatum est voluntas retinendi and consequendi, quod justitia
vetat, and unde liberum est abstinere. Verum quia postea abutebantur Pelagiam
his Augustini verbis ut probatent nec eum esse liberum, nec peccate qui a
peccato abstinere non potest, proindeque hominem aut gratia destitutum non
peccate, aut sine gratia vince^e posse peccatum. Au^stinus in libro 1
Retractat. cap. 15, ostendit haec verba nihil favere Pelagianis; docet enim
quod a seipso dictum est adversus Manichaeos, non esse supplic^o dignum qui non
facit quod facere non potest, id intelligendum non esse de impotentia quae
oriatur ex perversis capiditatibus vitiosae voluntatis quae ipsam pertrahant in
peccatum. Cum enim his cupiditatibus illectus homo trahitur in consensum, non
praeterea non peccat, imo peccat and supplicio dignus est, quia licet
abstractus a concupiscentia sua, tamen voluntate peccat. Quod clarissimis his
verbis asserir Augustinus loco citato Retract. Quisquis sciens peccat, si
potest cogenti ad peccatum sine peccato resistere, nec tamen facit, utique
volens peccat, quoniam qui potest resistere, non cogitur cedere. Qui vero
cogenti cupiditati bona voluntate resistere non potest, and ideo facit contra
praecepta justitiae, jam hoc etiam ita peccatum est, ut sit etiam poena
peccati; quapropter peccatum sine voluntate esse non posse verissimum est.

Itemque definitio peccati, qua diximus: Peccatum est voluntas retinendi vel
consequendi quod justitia vetat, and unde liberum est abstinere, propterea vera
est, quia id definitum est quod tantummodo peccatum est, quale suit primum
peccatum Adae, non quod est etiam poena peccati, nam quando tale est ut idem
sit and poena peccati, quantum est quod valet sub dominante cupiditate, nisi
forte, si pia est, ut oret auxilium, in tantum enim libera est, quia in tantum
liberata est, and in tantum appellatur voluntas: alioqui tutius cupiditas quam
voluntas proprie nuncupanda est; quae non est, sicut Manichaei desipiunt,
alienae naturae additamentum, sed nostrae vitium, a quo non sanamur nisi gratia
Salvatoris.

Quod ipsum etiam repetit libro 1 operis imperfecti contra Julianum cap. 44.
and 47. Etenim Pelagiani arbitrantes se triumphum insignem retulisse de
Augustino per ipsummet Augustinum, illi objiciebant quod adversus Manchiaeos
scripserat, quodque hodie nobis ab adversariis objicitur: O lucens aurum in
stercore, aiebat Julianus; quid verius? quid planius dici a quoquam vel
orthodoxo potuisset? peccatum, inquit, est voluntas admittendi vel consequendi
quod justitia vetat, and unde liberum est abstinere. Sed ad hoc quid
Augustinus? Hic peccatum, inquit, definitum est quod tantummodo peccatum est,
non quod etiam poena peccati, de hoc quippe agendum fuit, quando mali origo
quaerebatur, quale commissum est a primo homine ante omnes homines malum: sed
tu aut non potes intelligere, aut non vis. Et iterum: Ipse est Adam quem nostra
illa definitio, quae tibi placuit, intuebatur, cum dicerem; Peccatum est
voluntas retinendi vel consequendi quod justitia vetat, and unde liberum est
abstinere. Adam quippe omnino, quando peccavit, nihil in se habebat mali, quo
nolens urgeretur ad operandum malum, and propter quod diceret, Non quod volo
facio bonum, sed quod nolo malum hoc ago; ac per hoc id egit peccando quod
justitia vetabat, and unde illi liberum fuerat abstinere. Nam ei qui dicit,
Quod nolo malum hoc ago, abstinere in liberum aon est. Consulatur locus
integer, ubi cognoscitur ex Augustino, eum peccare and supplicio dignum esse,
qui non facit id quod non potest facere, si ideo non possit, quia carnali
concupiscentiae, quae ex peccato irrepsit, resistere bona voluntate non
praevalet.

Pudeat adversarios antiquas illas Pelagianorum objectiones recantare; pudeat
illos cum Juliano ex Augustino contra ipsum Augustinum arma depromere; sed
magis eos pudeat locum citatum non integrum sed dimidiatum protulisse. Cum enim
objecissent haec Augustini verba, eum non esse supplicio dignum, qui id non
faciat quod facere non potest, haec verba immediate sequentia suppresserunt:
ergo peccatum est voluntas retinendi vel consequendi quod justitia vetat, and
unde liberum est abstinere. Verum quo consilio, qua mente id factum sit, non
admodum difficile est deprehendere; videbant enim id quod ab illis objectum
est, ab Augustino in sequentibus verbis esse explicatum, paratamque esse
responsionem nostram loco citato Retractionum; ideoque haec verba de
definitione peccati silentio praeterierunt, qua fraus illorum subtilius and
occultius delitesceret.

SCRIPTUM ADVESARIORUM. [V. Testimonium.]
Ejusdem libri cap. 12. DIcere animas esse malas and nihil peccare, plenum est
dementiae; dicere autem peccare fine voluntate, magnum deliramentum est; and
peccati reum teneri quemquam, quia non facit quod facere non potuit, summae
iniquitatis est and insaniae: quamobrem illae animae, quidquid faciunt, si
natura, non voluntate faciunt, id est, si libero ad faciendum and non faciendum
motu anim carent: si denique his abstinendi ab opere suo potestas nulla
conce^ur, peccato earum teneri non possumus.

RESPONSIO.
CUm S. Augustinus dicit reum non teneri quempiam quia non fecit quod facere
non potuit, loquitur tantum de eo qui id facere non potuit ob naturalem
impotentiam, sed malitiam and primaevam sui institutionem, quales esse quasdam
animas naturaliter malas contendebant Manichaei, non vero de eo quia id non
potuit vitio peccati and concupiscentiae ex peccato subsecutae. Id manifest
demonstratur ex quatuor probationibus.

I. Ex ipso argumento quaestionis. Agitur enim ibi, ut asserit S. Augustinus
Lib. 3. Retract. cap. 15.
in Retractione nujus loci, de origin mali and primi peccati quod intravit in
mundum, quodque Manichaei refund^bant in animas natura sua malas. Ex quo patet,
quod cum Augustinus dicit, nullas animas esse naturaliter malas, quia nemo
tenetur reus, quod non fecerit id quod facere non potuit, loquitur tantum de eo
qui impotens est boni ex malitia naturali, non ex vitio praecedentis peccati;
ita ut haec sit argumentatio Augustini: Qui naturaliter ita malus est ut bonus
esse non possit, non peccat; quia non facit quod facere non potest. Atqui
secundum vos, o Manichaei! sunt quaedam animae ita naturaliter malae ut bonae
esse non possint; ergo secundum vos illae animae non peccant, quia non faciunt
quod facere non possunt.

II. Id patet ex argumento S, Augustini, quia inquit, non possunt esse malae
animae nisi peccent, non possunt peccare nisi voluntate, nec possunt peccare
voluntate, si libero ad faciendum et ad non faciendum motu animi carent, quia
tunc non voluntate, sed natura peccarent. Nam voluntas rationalis non potest
alio modo fieri, quam cum facultate quadam ad bonum and ad malum; quare si qua
anima humana hac facultate careret, essetque ad malum natutaliter determinata,
profecto non voluntate peccaret, sed natura.

III. Ex alia ratione quam subjungit S. Augustinus, Manifestum est non peccare
animas in eo quod non sunt tales quales esse non possunt. Atqui S. Augustinum
loqui de impotentia ex malitia and institutione naturali, non ex vitio peccati,
manifestum est ex libro de not. and great. c. 8 and 9. ubi express docet, and
parvulos qui sine lavacro regenerationis morte praeveniuntur, and juvenes vel
senes qui nihil de Christo audierunt, just ut peccatores damnari, quamvis
aliud esse non potuerint.

IV. Quia, ut observavimus in responsionibus ad objectionem praecedentem, S.
Augustinus iterum tractans hoc opusculum de duabus animabus, express docet,
reum teneri peccati, qui non facit quod facere non potuit, si id non potuit ex
resistentia carnalis concupiscentiae legisque peccati, quae repugnat legi
mentis and captivam ducit in lege peccati. Qui vero, inquit, cogenti cupiditati
bona voluntate resistere non potost, and ideo facit contra praecepta justitiae,
jam hoc ita peccatum est, ut sit etiam poena peccati. Ex quo manifestissime
apparet, haec verba ab adversariis objecta, eum non esse reum peccati, qui non
facit id quod facere non potuit, esse solummodo intelligenda de eo qui id non
potuit ex primaeva institutione suae naturae, quod direct adversatur
Manichaeis contendentibus animas, quamvis essent naturaliter malae, peccare
tamen and supplicio dignas esse.

SCRIPTUM ADVESARIORUM. [VI. Testimonium.]
Lib. 2. 2 contra Faustum cap. 78. SIve autem iniquitas sive justitia, nisi
esset in voluntate, non esset in potestate; Porro si in potestate non esset,
nullum praemium, nulla poena justa esset; quod nemo sapit nisi qui desipit.

EX his disce duo; primum, qui ad mores spectant, nisi in arbitrio pot stays
existant h c absolute in potestate nostra posse dici, p^oinde nec pr^ceptorum
observationem, quae a voluntate eligi non po est, absolute in hominis potestate
esse dici posse; alterum, quae ea ratione in potestate nostra non sunt, illa
nec praemio digna esse, nec poena just affici dici posse.

RESPONSIO.
QUis pudor, quae fides adversariorum, qui hunc locum dimidiatum obtendunt, and
reticent verba immediate sequentia, quae adeo conserunt ad S. Augustini
sententiam, ut se habet, exponendam? En igitur verba Augustini quae proxime
sequuntur: Ignorantia vero and infirmitas, ut vel nesciat homo quid velle
debeat, vel non omne quod voluerit possit, ex occulto poenarum ordine venit,
and illis inscrutabilibus judiciie Dei, apud quem non est iniquitas. Et infra
Et quia de hac justa poena non liberat nisi misericors gratia, certum est; and
hinc Apostolus gemeb^ndus exclamat, Iufelix ego homo! quis me liberabit de
corpore mortis hujus? Gratia Dei per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Sed quid
sit distributio judicantis and miserentis Dei, cur alius sic, alius autem sic,
occultis fit causis, justis tamen.

Sed dicent adversarii, cum S. Augustinus dicat justitiam esse in voluntate and
potestate nostra; quomodo verum erit quod subjungit postea, multa nos velle in
hac infirmitate, quae tamen non possumus?

Resp. hunc nodum solvit ipse Augustinus lib. 1 Retractionum cap. 22, explicans
quomodo verum sit quod alio loco dixit, esse scilicet in nostra potestate
mutare vitam nostram; ait enim, Id non est contra gratiam Dei quam praedicamus,
in potestate quippe hominis est mutare in melius voluntatem, sed ea potestas
nulla est nisi a Deo detur, de quo dictum est, Dedit eis potestatem filios Dei
fieri; cum enim hoc sit in potestate, quod cum volumus facimus, nihil tam in
potestate quam ipsa voluntas est: sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino; eo modo
ergo dat potestatem. Sic intelligendum est and quod dixi postea, in nostra
potestate esse, ut vel inseri bonitate Doi, vel excidi ejus severitate
mereamur, quia in potestate nostra non est, nisi quod nostram sequitur
voluntatem, quae cum fortis and potens praeparatur a Domino, facile fit opus
pietatis, etiam quod difficile atque impossible fuit.

Agnoscant igitur and fateantur adversarii ex his geminis Augustini locis eam
esse hujus sancti Viri doctrinam. I. Justitiam eatenus esse in potestate
nostra, quia cum volumus illam facimus, si tamen valde and perfect volumus.
II. Ea ratione dari nobis a Deo hanc potestatem, quia ipse dat huius justitiae
voluntatem. III. In hac infirmitate and sub onere mortalitatis hujus multa esse
in voluntate nostra quae non sunt in potestate, eo quod scilicet voluntas
nostra parva est est and invalida, nondum plena ac robusta. IV. Hanc
voluntatem, seu parvam seu robustam, quibusdam dari a Deo miserente, quibusdam
non dari a Deo judicante, quia cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult indurat,
quod, inquit Augustinus, ex occulto paenarum ordine venit and ejus
inscrutabilibus judiciis. V. Nisi Deus fortem atque potentem voluntatem
praeparet, opus pietatis non solum esse difficile, sed etiam impossible.


SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[VIII. Testimonium.]
Libro 1. de fide contra Manichaeos cap. 10. QUis enim non clamat stultum esse
praecepta dare ei cui liberum non est quod praecipitur facere; and iniquum
esse, eum damnare, cui non fuit potestas jussa complere? and has injustitias
and iniquitates miseri non intelligunt Deo se adscribere; sed quid verum est,
nisi and Dominum dare praecepta, and animas esse libetae voluntatis?

RESPONSIO.
NOn minus hoc testimonio S. Augustini quam aliis supra citatis abuntuntur
adversarii; cum enim dicit, animas esse liberae voluntatis, non loquitur de
liberate illis restituta per gratiam Christi, sed de liberate naturali, quam
a Deo auctore acceperunt, and quam etiam per peccatum non amiserunt; de hac
enim liberate naturali tota quaestio vertebatur inter Catholicos and
Manichaeos; unde perpetam omnino colligunt adversarii, gratiam Christi omnibus
dari quibus praecepta dantur, qua illis ad pie vivendum restituatur libertas,
ac praecepta Dei possibilia fiant. Quod ergo docet Augustinus, illud est, nempe
liberum arbitrium ad bonum and ad malum esse etiam in hominibus lapsis, quod
manifestissime demonstrat ex praeceptis quae dantur omnibus hominibus: ut quid
enim juberet Deus si nulla esset libertas, and homines essent naturaliter
determinati ad malum? Sed quae sit illa libertas, and quod in omnibus non
sanetur nec juvetur gratia Dei, luce clarius ostendit lib. 1. operis imperfecti
contra Iulianum cap. 98.

Ex quo, inquit, homo incipit uti voluntatis arbitrio, and peccare and non
peccate potest: sed alterum horum non facit, nisi adjutus ab eo qui dixit, Sine
me nihil potestis facere; alterum vero propria voluntate sive a seipso sive ab
alio deceptore seductus, vel peccato sicut servus addictus. Adjutos autem
homines novimus Dei Spiritu, ut ea vellent quae Dei sunt, ante baptismum, sicut
Cornelium; quosdam vero nec post baptismum, sicut Simonem Magum; judicia enim
Dei sunt sicut multa abyssus, and gratia ejus non ex operibus, alioqui gratia
jam non est gratia.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[VIII. Testimonium.]
Libro 2. de peccatorum meritis and remissione cap. 3. ACute autem videntur
dicere, quasi hoc ullus nostrum ignoret, quod si nolumus non peccamus, nec
praeciperet Deus homini quod esset humanae voluntati impossible: sed hoc non
vident, quod ad nonnulla superanda vel quae male cupiuntur, vel quae male
metuuntur, magnis aliquando and totis viribus opus est voluntatis, quas nos non
perfect in omnibus adhibituros praevidit, qui per Prophetam veridice dici
voluit: Non justificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis vivens.

RESPONSIO.
NIhil penitus ad rem valet locus iste, nec magis nos premit quam S.
Augustinum, dum illi a Pelagianis proposita est, Si nolumus non peccamus,
sicut, si volumus mandata servamus, quod antea jam exposuimus; sed ut peccare
non velimus, praeparatur voluntas a Domino; omnibus autem non praeparari certum
est. Hoc unum est quod adversariis probandum est, omnibus voluntatem
praeparari, ut peccare nolint. Agnoscimus cum illis quod Deus nihil praecipit
quod sit humanae voluntati impossible, quia quidquid praecipit per Christi
gratiam possibile est; potest vitari peccatum si natura vitiata sanetur gratia
Dei per Christum: sed non vident nobiscum, magnas and totas vires voluntatis,
quibus ad nonnulla facienda aliqando opus est, semper nobis praesentes non
esse: Hae enim vires sunt gratia dei magna quae semper non datur. Certum est
nos facere cum faciamus, (inquit de gratia and libero arbitrio cap. 16.) sed
ille facit ut faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati. Et infra: Qui
ergo vult facere Dei mandatum and non potest, jam quidem habet voluntatem
bonam, sed adhuc parvam and invalidam; poterit autem, cum magnam habuerit and
robustam. Mox subjungit: Istam charitatem Apostolus Petrus nondum habuit,
quando timore Dominum ter negavit. Hinc agnoscitur, aliquando etiam justis
magnam illam deesse gratiam sine qua non possunt magnas illas vires voluntatis
habere.

Praeterea in toto hoc capite and praecedenti, ut vel minimum legenti patebit,
agitur tantum de peccatis venialibus, quae Pelagiani contendebant omnino vinci
per naturam, Augustinus vero nonnisi per gratiam. Itaque objiciebant Pelagiani
hominem posse vivere sine omni peccato si velit. Id fatebatur Sanctus
Augustinus hoc ipsomet libro cap. 6 and 15, dummodo adjuvetur a Deo, and tantum
velit quantum res exigit. Ac per hoc, inquit, potest homo, si velit, esse sine
peccato adjutus a Deo. Objiciebant Deum nihil impossible homini praecepisse,
cui praecepit vivere sine peccato. Dicebat S. Augustinus etiam id esse
possibile homini si sanetur per gratiam quantum sanari oportet; sed ad hoc ut
possit vivere sine peccato, opus esse aliquando magnis et totis viribus
voluntatis.

Jam vero quid inde adversarii colligunt? Colliguntne esse in omnibus justis
magnas et totas illas vires voluntatis, seu gratiam sufficientem qua pro nutu
suo illas magnas et totas vires adhibeant quibus opus est ad evitandum seu
vincendum omni ex part peccatum? Quo quid falsius? quid ab ipsa experientia
Sanctorum and ab ipsa doctrina S. Augustini magis alienum est? Id ciare videri
potest, si legatur ejusdem secundi libri de peccatorum meritis et remissione
cap. 5, 17 et 19, ubi passim docet, Deum quosdam Sanctos suos sanare et
adjuvare ad vitandum aliquod peccatum, quosdam non fanare nec adjuvare; quod si
facit, misericordia facit; et quibus non facit, judicio non facit. Nos autem
(inquit cap. 18.) quantum concessum est sapiamus and intelligamus, si possumus,
Dominum Deum bonum, ideo etiam Sanctis suis alicujus operis justi aliquando non
tribuere vel certa^ scientiam vel victricem delectationem, ut cognoscant non a
seipsis, sed ab illo sibi esse lucem, qua illuminent ur tenebrae eorum, and
suavitatem qua det fructum suum terra eorum.

Quin etiam eo usque progrediuntur adversarii, ut doctrinam a Concilio
Tridentino sub anathemate damnatam sequi and Augustino imponere audeant. Nam
Concilium anathemate percutit eos qui dicunt hominem justificatum posse in tota
vita peccata omnia, etiam venialia, vitare, nisi ex speciali Dei privilegio,
quemadmodum de B. Virgin tenet Ecclesia.

Absit igitur, absit, ut S. Augustinus senserit hominem justum per gratiam
sufficientem semper ipsi praesentem pro nutu suo adhibere posse magnas illas et
totas vires quibus opus est ut vivat absque omni peccato. Sed tantummodo dixit,
quod ut homo vivat sine peccato, opus est magnis et totis vitibus voluntatis,
quas homo a seipso non habet, sed a gratia sanante et adjuvante; quia vero Deus
gratia sua non omnino sanat Sanctos suos in hac vita, ideo praevidet illos has
magnas vires in omnibus non adhibituros, ex quo fit, ut non justificetur in
conspectu ejus omnis vivens.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[IX. Testimonium.]
Lib. de natura and gratia cap. 42. HIc (Pelagius) recte facit aliquando
consentire, quia non justificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis vivens; non tamen
ibi esse quaestionem, sed in ipsa non peccandi possibilitate contendit, in qua
nec nos adversus eum certare opus est: Nam neque illud nimis curo, utrum
fuerint hic aliqui, vel sint, vel esse possint, qui perfectam, cui nihil
addendum esset, habuerint, vel habeant, vel habituri sint charitatem Dei; ipsa
enim est verissima, plenissima, perfectissimaque justitia, quoniam id quod
voluntate hominis adjuta per Dei gratiam, fieri posse confiteor and defendo,
quando, vel ubi, vel in quo fiat, nimium certare non debeo, neque de ipsa
possibilitate contendo, cum, sanata and adjuta hominum voluntate, possibilitas
ipsa simul cum effectu in Sanctis proveniat, etc.

TRIA hic nota contra Jansenium: I. de possibilitate adimplendi praecepta
nullam fuisse S. Augustino cum Pelagio disputationem. II. Totam disputationem
fuisse quod hic assereret sine gratiae open praecepta omnia impleri posse;
Catholici negarent. III. Augustinum non dicere possibilitatem praecepta
adimplendi esse simpliciter cum ipsorum observatione conjunctam, quemadmodum
vult Iansenius, sed in justis tantum esse conjunctam.

RESPONSIO.
HOc unico loco prima propositio (ut a nobis defenditur) stabiliri possit, ut
mox patebit.

Quoad primam notam, respondemus nullam fuisse Sancto Augustino disputationem
cum Pelagio de possibilitate, quia scilicet Augustinus contendere nolebat,
utrum esse possent vel potuissent aliqui sine peccato, sed an hoc fieri posset
in hominibus gratia non adjutis. Fuit ergo quaestio (hoc secundam adversariorum
notam attingit) de possibilitate, an scilicet illa daretur per Christi gratiam?
Affirmabat Augustinus, negabat Pelagius; sed haec gratia de qua quaestio erat,
erat vera Christi gratia efficax dans simul posse and velle.

Ad tertiam notam respondemus, ex adversariis ipsis primam propositionem hoc
testimonio definiri. Dicunt enim, in justis possibilitatem praecepti adimplendi
simul cum ejus observatione seu cum effectu esse conjunctam. Ergo cum justus
non observat aliquod praeceptum, non habet illam possibilitatem quae simul cum
effectu conjuncta est; non habet gratiam ex qua possibilitas simul cum effectu
provenit; ergo tunc secundum vires quas habet, infirmas scilicet, non adjutas
gratia efficace, non potest praeceptum aliquod servare, tunc deest illi gratia
qua praeceptum illi possibile fiat quae est cum effectu conjuncta. Nihil aliud
Iansenius circa hanc primam propositionem docet. Ad illud denique quod
observant Adversarii, Augustinum non dicere possibilitatem esse conjunctam cum
effectu, sed solum in justis, respondemus hic affirmati de justis, quod ad
quaestionem nostram sufficit, non negari de aliis, quibus etiam, ut alibi docet
S. Augustinus, gratia Christi dat simul possibilitatem proximam cum effectu,
hoc est, cum pia voluntate seu action, seu dat simul ut velint, et ut velle
possint: ut centenis sancti Augustini testimoniis probavimus in scripto circa
primam propositionem capite 4.

Denique loquitur hic Augustinus de possibilitate cum effectu, qua natura
adjuta and sanata potest praeter crimina etiam peccata venialia superare, quae
gratia non datur nisi Sanctis; quapropter non est mirum si de Sanctis mentionem
tantummodo hic fecerit Augustinus.

Nota.
Solus ergo gratiae per seipsam efficacis necessariae sensus ab Augustinianis
circa primam Propositionem constanter defensus, solus Iansenio tributus. Sola
possibilitas quae est cum effectu, seu quae complectitur omnia ad agendum
necessaria, aliquibus justis quibusdam in tentationibus denegata.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[X. Testimonium.]
Lib. de not. and great. cap. 43. loquens de homine semivivo relicto ex peccato
originali gravibus saucio confossoque vulneribus. NOn igitur Deus impossibilia
jubet, sed jubendo admonet and facere quod possis, and petere quod non possis.
Jam nunc videamus unde possit, unde non possit. Iste dicit, voluntate non est
quod natura potest. Ego dico, voluntate quidem non est homo justus, nec natura
potest, sed medicina poterit, quod vitio non potest.

Nota differentiam inter Augustinum and Pelagium: Pelagius natum dicebat
hominem justum, atque adeo non voluntate sed natura justum; Augustinus nasci
quemcumque justum, aut naturae viribus justum fieri posse negabat, sed
voluntate per gratiam sanata asserebat.

RESPONSIO.
DEus impossibilia non jubet, quia quicquid jubet per gratiam fieri potest;
quae homo suo vitio facere non potest, illa poterit per medicinam, hoc est,
quando natura sanata erit per gratiam. Sed hinc non sequitur omnes semper
sanari per gratiam, vel dari omnibus medicinam qua possint. Multi aliqua suo
vitio non possunt, quibus non adest gratia qua possint, iis tamen Deus
impossibilia non praecipit, quia poterunt per medicinam quod suo vitio non
possunt. Hoc in loco docet S. Aug. inter hominem sanum and infirmum hoc esse
discrimen, quod homini sano semper adesset per gratiam ipsi praesentem peccata
vitandi and praecepta implendi proxima possibilitas: sed jam homo infirmus ab
illa felicitate cecidit, non habet amplius eandem possibilitatem per gratiam
ipsi semper praesentem, and quasi insitam, sed eget auxilio medicinae ut
praecepti implendi possibilitatem recuperet, and quia per medicinalem gratiam
poterit, quod suo vitio non potest, igitur Deus impossibilia non jubet.
Attendatur totus S. Augustini contextus: Verum est autem, inquit, quod ait
(scilicet Pelagius) quod Deus tam bonus quam justus talem hominem focerit, qui
peccati malo carere sufficeret, sed si voluisset. Quis cum nescit sanum and
inculpabilem factum, and libero arbitrio, atque ad just vivendum potestate
libera, constitutum. En possibilitas proxima non peccandi, per gratiam scilicet
semper praesentem. Sed nunc de illo agitur quem semivivum latrones reliquerunt,
qui gravibus saucius confossusque vulneribus, non ita potest ad justitiae
culmen ascendere sicut petuit inde descendere, qui etiamsi jam in stabulo est,
adhuc curatur. Non igitur Deus impossibilia jubet, etc. Homo ergo semivivus
relictus, si in stabulo est, curatur: Ergo poterit per medicinam quod suo vitio
non potest. Igitur Deus impossibilia non jubet; siquidem quae jubet, per
gratiam sanantem impleri possunt. Haec est tota S. Augustini doctrina, quae
nobis penitus savet, adversariis nequaquam; pleniorem hujus sententiae and
fimilium expositionem vide in scripto circa primam propositionem cap. 5. art.
1. and 2. Praeterca observandum est, hoc testimonium ab adversariis citatum tam
parum eorum sententiae favere, ut gratiam sufficientem communem, quam ex hoc
probare intendunt, destruat. Haec enim verba ab Augustino dicta sunt praecipue
in materia de peccatis venialibus, de quibus agitur toto hoc capite and
praecedenti, ut objectioni Pelagii satisfaceret, quae talis erat: Deus bonus
and justus nihil praecipit impossible; atqui praecipit homini vivere absque
omni peccato; Ergo non est impossible homini vivere absque peccato.

Jam vero quid ad haec S. Augustinus? Concedit Deum nihil praecepisse homini
impossible, cum ei praecipit vivere sine peccato; and tamen articulus est
fidei, gratiam sufficientem and necessariam non dari homini in hacvita, ut
possit vivere absque omni peccato. Igitur cum S. Augustinus dicit Deum nihil
praecipere impossible, non ideo dicit quia nihil Deus praecipit homini quod
possibile non reddat per gratiam sufficientem illi collatam, sed solummodo quia
prout homo sanatur per gratiam, medicina potest quod vitio suo, id est, vitiata
natura non poterat.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XI. Testimonium.]
Ejusdem libri cap. 69. VAlde autem bona sunt praecepta si legitime utamur: eo
quippe ipso quo firmissime credimus, Deum justum and bonum impossibilia non
potuisse praecipere, hinc admonemur, and in facilibus quid agamus, and in
difficilibus quid petamus.

NOTA I. Iustitiae and bonitati Dei dici repugnanare quod impossibilia jubeat.
II. Tam facilia quam difficilia a nobis impleri, sed facilia praesenti Dei open,
difficilia impetrato ejusdem per orationem auxilio.

RESPONSIO.
REsponsio ad haec duo testimonia patet ex praecedentibus, per praeceptum
admonemur. Sed non sequitur ex admonitione nobis a Deo semper insundi gratiam
internam, sive ad operandum sive ad orandum necessariam, ac licet non detur,
tamen praeceptum impossible dicendum non est, quia homo per medicinam poterit,
quod vitio suo non potest. Quia possibile est, si natura sanetur per gratiam:
nihilque probant adversarii, nisi ostendant dari semper gratiam, seu ad
operandum seu ad orandum necessariam, quoties aliquid a Deo praecipitur. Quod
ita erroneum dicimus, ut ex hoc principio sequatur evidentissime, Christum
gratis esse mortuum, and gratiam non esse gratiam, sed esse ex debito, ex
justitia, non ex gratia gratuita, ut omittamus hinc destrui necessitatem
auxilii efficacis seu ad operandum seu ad orandum.

Admonitionem, exhortationem and legem, saepe fine gratia voluntati interna,
proindeque sine profectu esse, ciarissime docet S. Augustinus, cum dicit, legis
auditorem frustra admoneri, nisi Deus intus operetur velle, ac sine dubio
proficere, quoties Deus dat incrementum; ex quo sequitur, incrementum, seu
gratiam interiorem auditori a Deo non dari, cum ex Dei sermon and admonitione
legis non proficit. Admoneo, inquit Sanctus Augustinus operis imperfecti lib.
2. cap. 157. ut intelligatis cui gratiae sitis inimici negando operari Deum
voluntates in mentibus hominum, non ut nolentes credant, quod absurdissime
dicitur, sed ut volentes ex nolentibus fiant; non, sicut facit Doctor homo,
docendo and hortando, minando and promittendo in sermon Dei: quod frustra fit
nisi Deus intus operetur and velle per investigabiles vias suas. Cum enim
verbis Doctor plantat and rigat, possumus dicere, forte credit auditor: cum
vero dat incrementum Deus, fine dubio credit and proficit. Ecce quod interest
inter legem and promissionem, inter literam and spiritum.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XII. Testimonium.]
Libro de gratia and libero arbitrio capite 16. MAgnum aliquid Pelagiani se
scire putant quando dicunt, non juberet Deus, quod sciret ab ab homine non
posse fieri; quis hoc nesciat? sed ideo jubet aliqua quae non possumus, ut
noverimus quid ab illo petere debeamus. Ipsa est enim fides quae orando
impetrat quod lex imperat. Denique ipse qui dixit, Si volueris, conservabis
mandata, in eodem libro Eccles. cap. 22. aliquanto post dicit, Quis dabit in
ore meo custodiam, and super labia mea signaculum astutum, ne forte cadam ab
eo, and lingua mea perdat me? -- Certum est enim nos mandata servare si
volumus, sed quia voluntas praeparatura Domino, ab illo petendum est, ut tantum
velimus, quantum sufficit ut volendo faciamus.

RESPONSIO.
MAgnum aliquid Molinistae se dicere putant, cum ex Augustino eruunt argumentum
Pelagianorum, quod risit olim idem Augustinus, sed si quid in hoc magni dicunt,
id pro nobis and contra se dicunt.

Primo enim ex hoc testimonio clare convincitur, aliqua esse Dei praecepta,
quae vult homo facere and non potest, quia non tantum vult quantum sufficit ut
volendo faciat, ut toto hoc capite and sequenti S. Augustinus demonstrat.

Secundo, ibidem docetur gratiam quae impetratur a Deo per orationem ad
implenda mandata, esse per se efficacem; ea est enim, ut dicitur sub finem
capitis, qua Deus facit ut faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati,
and auferendo a nobis cor lapideum, unde non facie bamus, and praebendo cor
ca^neum unde faciamus.

Tertio ex eodem Augustino eodemmet l. c. 18. nec ipsa gratia orationis omnibus
datur quibus praeceptum datur, quia talis gratia supponit fidem in cord
hominis, and charitatem parvam, qua vult mandatum Dei implere, and qua ad Deum
confugiat, ut illam charitatem augeat, detque illi, ut loquitur ibidem,
ardentissimam divino amore voluntatem. Sic enim loquitur S. Augustinus cap. 18.
Cur dictum est, Diligamus invicem, quia dilectio ex Deo est, nisi quia
praecepto admonitum est liberum arbitrium ut quaereret Dei donum. Quod quidem
sinesuo fructu prorsus admoneretur, nisi prius acciperet aliquid dilectionis,
ut addi sibi quaereret, unde quod jubebatur impleret.

Atqui ejusmodi dilectio inchoata non datur omnibus hominibus, puta iis qui
Deum non noverunt, and iis, qui, etsi noverint, seipsos tamen tradunt in
operationem omnis immunditiae, ut loquitur Paulus. Cum igitur illi homines nec
charitatem habeant, qua possint servare divina mandata, nec illam qua possint
ad Deum, ut oportet, confugere; and tamen illis mandata Dei sint possibilia
(quandoquidem, ut dicit S. Augustinus, non praeciperet illis Deus quod sciret
ab illis fieri non posse) nonne consequitur evidenter, mandata Dei non ideo
dici a S. Augustino omnibus, quibus dantur, possibilia, quod semper conjuncta
sint vel cum gratia qua fiant, vel cum gratia qua oretur ut fiant, sed solum
quia possunt ab homine fieri si sanetur per gratiam, and si per gratiam
accipiat unde sanetur.

Quarto, Debebant adversarii didicisse a S. Augustino, etiam gratiam orationis
non esse pure sufficientem, sed efficacem, sicut and quamlibet gratiam Christi,
ad omne opus pietatis necessariam. De hac enim orationis gratia sic loquitur
lib. de corr. and great. cap. 1. Littera legis adjuvat nos ut declinemus a malo
and faciamus bonum, quod nemo potest sine spiritu gratiae, quae, si desit, ad
hoc lex adest, ut reos faciat and occidat, propter quod dicit Apostolus, Litera
occidit, spiritus autem vivificat. Qui ergo legitime lege utitur, discit in ea
malum and bonum, and non confidens in virtute sua confugit ad gratiam, qua
praestante declinet a malo and faciat bonum. Quis autem confugit ad gratiam,
nisi cum a Domino gressus hominis diriguntur, and viam ejus volet? ac per hoc
and desiderare auxilium gratiae, initium gratiae est, de quo ait ille: Et dixi,
nunc co^pi, haec est immutatio dexterae Excessi. Ex quo sic conficitur
argumentum.

Nemo potest confugere ad auxilium gratiae nisi sit praeventus ea gratia qua
dextera Excelsi immutat cot hominis, qua Dominus ditigit gressu hominis, and
qua facit ut homo vias Dei velit. Atqui eadem gratia est gratia de se efficax,
ut patet ex eodem capite de gratia and libero arbitrio producto ab adversariis,
ubi eadem verba (a Domino gress^s hominis diriguntur) citantur ab Augustino pro
gratia de se efficace. Ergo sine gratia efficace nemo potest confugere ad
auxilium gratiae, proindeque gratia ad salubriter orandum necessaria non datur
omnibus quibus praeceptum datur.

TRES NOTAE NECESSARIAE. Ad intelligenda multa testimonia ex Sermonibus and
Moralibus S. Augustini desumpta, quae postea sequuntur.
POst supra relata testimonia adversarii multa alia proferunt e sermonibus, and
ex enarrationibus in Psalmos, in quibus S. Augustinus gratiae dogmata non
expendit, sed mores instruit, quamquam nihil hic doceat quod verissimum non
sit. Ad omnia haec testimonia intelligenda, aliqua notanda sunt.

I. Haec omnia a S. Augustino dicta, Si volumus, possumus; si nolumus, non
peccamus; peccatum vitare ac inimicos diligere possumus. Deus in potestate
nostra posuit qualiter in die judicii judicemur. Non dixit, vade in Orientem,
and quaere justitiam, etc. Haec, inquam, omnia and similia quae saepe in
sermonibus and aliis operibus leguntur, nihil aliud significant quam bonos and
plos mores, and quidquid ad Deum colendum and just vivendum pertinet, ita a
bona voluntate pendere, ut, cum plene volumus, possimus, neque exterioribus,
quae, cum habere volumus, saepe habere non possumus, ad salutem indigeamus, ac
nunquam Deus nobis imputet in peccatum quod non possumus si plene velimus, sed
solum malam and perversam voluntatem, quae a rebus corporalibus non pendet.
Quaeritur autem unde ista bona voluntas proveniat? Nos dicimus a gratia
gratuita and singulari, praedeterminante, efficaci, quam Deus pro bona
voluntate sua cui vult largitur, nec omnibus confert. Ex his ergo omnibus and
similibus nihil adversum nos adversarii probant.

II. Notandum est S. Augustinum in sermonibus ad populum alloqui auditores
tanquam electos. Unde saepe dicit: Deus vos non tentabit supra quam potestis.
Deus vos adjuvat. Deus vos non deseret. Vos eriget, vos suscipiet, etc.
Augustinus sic a se exhortationibus ad fideles agi, and ab omnibus agendum esse
docet de corrept. and great. cap. 15. Nescientes enimi, inquit, quis pertineat
ad praedestinatorum numerum; quis non pertineat: sic assici debemus charitatis
affectu, ut omnes velimus salvos fieri. Hoc quippe fit, cum singulos quosque,
ut occurrerint, cum quibus id agere valeamus, ad hoc conamur adducere, ut
justificati, etc. Et infra: Ad nos ergo, qui nescimus quisnam sit filius pacis
aut non sit, pertinet, nullum exceptum facere, nullumque discernere, sed velle
omnes salvos fieri quibus praedicamus hanc pacem. Neque enim metuendum est ne
perdamus eam, si ille cui praedicamus, non est filius pacis ignorantibus nobis,
etc. Et de dono perseverantiae cap. 22. ubi praescribit rectum modum divinae
praedestinationis populis praedicandae, ut, Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur.
Nunquam vult de iis, qui praesentes sunt, dici, quod forte ex ipsis aliqui sunt
reprobi and rejiciendi, sed de aliis potius qui absunt, per verbi personam
tertiam, hoc dicendo salubrem hunc timorem incuti, ut ex hoc illi qui audiunt,
non scandalizentur aut commoveantur, sed instruantur. Quamvis ergo haec vera
sint (inquit, eos scilicet qui praedestinati non sunt, non perseveraturos), non
tamen isto modo dicenda sunt audientibus multis, ut sermo ad ipsos etiam
convertatur. Et infra: Sed si and de iis qui non perseverant, aliquid placet
dicere, vel necesse est, cur non potius ita saltem dicitur, ut paulo ante a me
dictum est? primum ut non de ipsis, qui in populo audiunt hoc dicatur, sed de
illis ad ipsos. Et infra: Nonne and verius eadem res and congruenentius
dicitur, ut non ipsis tantum malum tanquam optare videamur sed de aliis refer
quod oderint, nec ad se existiment pertinere, sperando orandeque meliora?
Itaque quidquid e S. Augustini sermonibus ad populum profertur, non probat
semper dari omnibus gratiam qua tentationem vincere possint ac vincant, licet
fidelibus loquatur S. Augustinus, quasi eam habituri sint, nesciens quis eam
habiturus sit nec ne, ac de omnibus been sperans and optans. Ergo ex his S.
Augustini verbis non sequitur, singulis semper adesse gratiam qua possint
tentationem vincere, and qua eam vincant, qua possint salubriter orare, and
salubriter orent. Nam si ille, cui praedicamus, non est filius pacis, certum
est quod in eo Deus non operabitur velle, seu quod eum postea in peccatum
cadere sinet, nec illi gratiam largietur, ut tentationem vincat and in justitia
perseveret.

Certum autem est omnes fideles, quibus loquebatur S. Augustinus, non fuisse
filios pacis and promissionis. Ergo omnes non habebant gratiam necessariam ad
tentationes vincendas, ad resurgendum a peccato, ad perseverandum in oratione
and in operatione bona, licet loquatur omnibus tanquam filiis pacis and
promissionis. Corripiatur ergo, inquit de corrept. and great. origo damnabilis,
ut ex dolor correptionis voluntas regenerationis oriatur; si tamen, qui
corrtpitur, filius est promissionis, ut, strepitu correptionis forinsecus
insonante atque flagellante, Deus in illo intrinsecus occulta inspiratione
operetur and velle. Exhortamur ergo: inquit de dono perseverantiae cap. 14.
atque praedicamus, sed qui habent aures audiendi, obedienter nos audiunt; qui
vero eas non habent, fit in eis quod scriptum est, Ut audientes non audiant;
audientes videlicet corporis sensu, non audiant cordis assensu. Hac etiam
doctrina fideles in sermonibus suis S. Augustinus saepe imbuit, ut patet ex
multis sermonibus de verbis Apostoli and aliis. Sermon. 13, evp. 11. Ptorsus,
inquit, si defuerit adjutorium Christi, nihil boni agere poteris. Agis quidem,
illo non adjuvante, libera voluntate, sed male. Ad hoc idonea est voluntas tua
quae vocatur libera, and male agendo fit damnabilis ancilla. Nonne clarissime
hic populum docet adjutorium sine quo non possumus, semper non adesse: non
adesse cum male agimus, and tamen nos male agendo, nec Dei adjutorium habendo
damnabiles fieri? Hae duae notae ad solvenda omnia sequentia testimonia ex
fermonibus ad populum and ex moralibus prolata sufficient, ut pateat ex his non
sequi, singulis fidelibus semper adesse gratiam voluntati internam ad
salubriter orandum seu ad just vivendum necessatiam, sicut contendunt
adversarii.

III. Operae pretium erit diligentissime observare, inter arts Adversariorum,
quibus veritatem impugnare solent, hanc esse unam ex praecipuis, quod passim
and ubique promissiones Dei conditionatas, quae tum in Scripturis tum in
Patribus leguntur, nobis objiciant, ut conditiones ejusmodi promistionum non
esse singular Dei donum, sed istas esse in potestate cujuslibet, per gratiam
sufficientem evincant. Verbi gratia, haec and similia leguntur in Scripturis
and Patribus; Si quis legitime utitur lege, id est, si quis per legem de sua
infirmitate convictus consugiat ad spiritum gratiae, habebit Deum adjutorem,
and implebit legem: si quis humiliet se sub potenti manu Dei, si quis non in se
sed in Deo praesumat, si quis oret ut in tentationem non inducatur, Deus illum
custodiet a malo, eumque non patietur tentari supra id quod potest, sed
perficiet bonum opus quod incepit in eo; Hinc concludunt adversarii situm esse
in potestate cujuslibet per gratiam sufficientem, and confugere ad spiritum
gratiae, and humiliare se sub Deo, and in illo, non in seipso praesumere, and
petere donum perseverantiae sicut oportet, and alia virtutum opera facere,
quibus gratiam Dei ad ea facienda quae nondum potest, obtineat and impetret.
Verum falsitas hujus consequentiae statim deprebendetur, si solummodo legatur
apud Augustinum cap. 11 de praedestinatione Sanctorum, ubi, postquam
efficacissime probasset superioribus capitibus, fidem etiam inchoatam donum
esse gratiae singularis and efficacis, sibi hoc argumentum Pelagianorum
proponit dissolvendum his verbis: Sed cum dicitur, inquiunt, si credidetis,
salvus eris, unum horum exigitur, alterum offertur: quod exigitur, in hominis,
quod offertur, in Dei est potestate. Cui objectioni continuo sic respondet: Cur
non utrumque in Dei est potestate, and quod jubetur, and quod offertur? Rogatur
enim ut det quod jubet, rogant credentes ut sibi augeatur fides, rogant pro non
credentibus, ut eis donetur fides, ut and in suis incrementis, and in suis
initiis Dei donum sit fides. Sic autem dicitur, Si credideris, salvus eris,
quemadmodum dicitur, Si spiritu facta carnis mortificaveritis, vivetis. Nam ex
his duobus unum exigitur, alterum offertur. Si spiritu, inquit, facta carnis
mortificaveritis, vivetis; ut ergo spiritu facta carn^s mortificemus, exigitur;
ut autem vivamus, offertur. Number igitur placet ut facta carnis mortificare non
Dei esse dicamus, neque id donum Dei esse fateamur; quoniam exigi a nobis
audivimus, praemio vitae, si hoc fecerimus, oblato? Absit ut hoc placeat
participibus and defensoribus gratiae. Pelagianorum est error iste damnabilis,
quorum mox Apostolus ora obstruxit, adjungens: Quotquot enim spiritu Dei
aguntur, hi sunt filii Dei; ne facta mortificare nos carnis, non per Dei, sed
per nostrum spiritum crederemus. De quo Dei spiritu etiam ibi loquebatur, ubi
ait: Omnia autem haec operantur unus atque idem Spiritus, dividens propria
unicuique prout vult. Inter quae omnia, ficut scitis, nominavit and fidem.
Sicut ergo, quamvis donum Dei sit facta carnis mortificare, exigitur tamen a
nobis, proposito praemio vitae: Ita donum Dei est and fides, quamvis and ipsa,
cum dicitur, Si credideris, salvus eris, proposito praemio salutis exigatur a
nobis. Haec Aug.

Nec dicant adversarii, se fateri fidem esse donum Dei, sed hoc donum omnibus
esse concessum ex part Dei per gratiam sufficientem; illud, inquam, non
dicant, siquidem toto hoc libro S. Augustinus contendit fidem etiam inchoatam
esse donum Dei singular per gratiam singularem and efficacem, quae omnibus non
datur: sunt enim haec ejus verba cap. 8: Fides igitur inchoata and fides
perfecta donum Dei est, and hoc donum quibusdam dari quibusdam non dari, omnino
non dubiter qui non vult manifestissimis sacris literis repugnare. Praeterea ex
allegato testimonio semper manet, non sequi ut conditiones quae ab homine
exiguntur, in hominis potestate and nutu sint. Quandoquidem quomodo dicitur, Si
credideris, salvus eris; eo prorsus modo dicitur, Si dilexeris Deum, omnia tibi
cooperabuntur in bonum; eo modo dicitur, Si confugias ad Deum, auxiliabitur
tibi: eo modo dicitur, Si te humiliaveris; and oraveris, charitatis munus
obtinebis; si in orando non defeceris, perseverantiam in fide and dilectione
impetrabis; proindeque sicut fides qua creditur, licet proposito salutis
praemio, exigatur, tamen gratiae singularis donum esse non definit; pariter
oration and humilitas, licet ad charitatem and perseverantiam exigantur, tamen
singularis and efficacis gratiae donum esse non desinunt. Plura de gratia
orandi in scripto circa primam propositionem cap. 6

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XIII. Testimonium.]
Idem in Psalm 48. Sermon. 1. SI ergo iniquitas calcanei circumdabit nos, ut quid
timemus in die mala, cum conversi ad Christum habeamus in potestate ut non
faciamus iniquitatem?

RESPONSIO.
REspondet ipse Augustinus lib. 1 Retract. cap. 22: Sic intelligendum est quod
dixi, quia in potestate nostra est quod cum volumus facimus, and quod nostram
sequitur voluntatem, quae cum fortis and potens praeparatur a Domino, facile
fit opus pietatis, quod difficile atque impossible fuit.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XIV. Testimonium.]
Idem in Psalm 56. NEque imperaret hoc Deus ut faceremus, si impossible
judicaret ut hoc ab homine fieret; si considerans infirmitatem tuam deficis sub
praecepto, confortare in exemplo: sed etiam exemplum ad te multum est, adest
ille qui praebuit exemplum ut praebeat auxilium.

RESPONSIO.
VErum est quod Deus nihil imperaret si per adjutorium gratiae non posset homo,
quod per vitium naturae non potest. Adjutos autem homines, ait Augustinus Lib.
1. oper. imperf. cap. 98.
, novimus Spiritu Dei, ut ea vellent quae Dei sunt, ante baptismum, sicut
Cornelium; quosdam vero nec post baptismum, sicut Simonem Magum; judicia enim
Dei abyssus multa. Et lib. 2 de peccat. me^it. cap. 5; Cur autem illum adjuvet,
illum non adjuvet, illum tantum, illum autem non tantum, istum illo, illum isto
modo, penes ipsum est and aequitatis tam secreta ratio, and excellentia
potestatis.

Jam vero quod S. Augustinus subjicit, Si deficis sub praecepto, adest ille qui
praebeat adjutorium, duplici sensu S. Augustini verissimum est. Primo sub hac
condition, si illud adjutorium petas, and tantum petas, quantum res ista
petenda est. Secundo sub alia condition, si filius es pacis and promissionis,
quales, ut supra monitum est, sentiebat S. Augustinus esse fideles quibus
praedicabat, exemplo Pauli dicentis: Sicut mihi justum est hoc sentire pro
omnibus v^bis, eo quod habeam vos in cord.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XV. Testimonium.]
Sermon 191 de tempore. EXecramur etiam blaspemiam eorum qui dicunt
impossible aliquid homini esse praeceptum; and mandatae Dei non a singulis,
sed ab omnibus in commune posse servari.

1 NOTA dici a 2 Jansenistis, sermonem istum non esse Augustini, sed Pelagii;
nam and confessionem Pelagii legi in tomis Conciliorum iisdem fere verbis
exaratam, quibus iste sermo conceptus est, and ejus aliquam partem tamquam ex
libello Pelagii oblato Innocentio P P. referri ab Augustino tamquam ambiguam
continentem doctrinam, lib. de great. Christ. c. 30 and 31. Neque nos
pertinacius defendere velle hunc sermonem esse Augustini, quamvis and 3 a viris
omni exceptione majoribus pro Augustini sermon habeatur 4 and nihil vetet ut
confessio Pelagii, ubi ab Ecclesia Romana probatam eam fuisse innotuit, ab
Augustino quoque populo credenda proponeretur: sed cui placebit hunc sermonem
S. Augustino abdicare ut Pelagio attribuat, nobis gratum faciet, si modo addat,
quod ere est, confessionem istam Pelagii a Zozimo Pontifice, in cujus manus
inciderat, post mortem Innocentii I 5 probatam fuisse, a Clero Romano cum
gaudio susceptam, ut vix fletu quidam and lachrymis temperarent, judicatum ex
earum lectione literarum absolutae fidei Pelagium fuisse; 6 Herotem and Lazarum
delatores Pelagii tamquam calumniatores habitos fuisse, ut constat ex Epistolis
Zozimi ad Episcopos Africae; Hinc enim and sequitur, and 7 Zozimum Pontificem,
and Clerum Romanum (8 quorum apud Catholicos major quam Augustini ipsius debet
esse auctoritas) jam ab eo tempore execratos tamquam blaspemiam fuisse
propositionem istam, quae p^steo a Jansenio prolata est: Impossible aliquid
homini esse praeceptum, and mandata Dei non a singulis, sed ab omnibus in
commune posse servari.

RESPONSIO.
MUlta sunt hic notatu dignissima, ex quibus seu ignorantia seu mala fides
astversariorum arguitur.

1 Indubitatum est hunc sermonem non esse Sancti Augustini, sed esse
confessionem Pelagii; siquidem S. Augustinus ea quae hoc sermon continentur,
velut libellum fidei Pelagii in libro de gratia Christi cap. 30. 31, 32, 33,
and de peccato originali cap. 20, con^utat detegi que verborum am^iguitatem and
aequivocationem, quibus Pelagius ad ad ^eci^iendum Innocentium seu Zozimum ejus
s^ccessorem usus erat. Quid autem absurdius fingi potest, quam ut attribuatut
Augustino opus aliquod quod ipse Pelagii esse testatut, quo^que ut aequivocum
and dolosum duobus in locis refellit?

2 NOTA, inquiunt, a Jansenistis dici sermonem istum non esse Augustini, sed
Pelagii, Ergo Janieni^ ^st Augustinus ipse, qui dicit esse opus Pelagii,
proindeque non suum: Ergo Baronius and Bellarminus Jansenistae sunt, qui ante
ortum Jansenium idem docuerunt.

Baronius e codice Vaticano hunc libellum Pelagii nomine praenotatum in lucem
edidit. Et Bellarminus lib. de Script. Ecclesiast. in observat. super tomum 9
S. Hieronymi. Non est, inquit, Hieronymi ad Damasum, sed Pelagii ad Innocentium.

3 Si aliqui viri omni exceptione majores arbitrati sunt hoc opus esse
Augustini, cum nondum res illa elocidata esset, non mirum est si in re facti
falli potuerunt: sed postquam detectum est ex ipso Augustino non esse sermonem
Augustini, sed confessionem Pelagii, Pelagio tribuendum est, non Augustino,
licet viri magnae auctoritatis, qui illud non examinatunt, aliud sensetint. Nec
in hoc facto alicujus momenti est eorum auctoritas, uhi illos deceptos esse
constat, nec, postquam de veritate rei constitit, illi qui pertinaciter hoc
opus obtrudunt pro sermon Augustini, ullam habent in sua pertinacia
excusationem. Male ergo tentant adversarii ut his velut rationibus res adeo
explorata in dubium revocetur.

4 Nihil absurdius excogitati potest quam quod dicicur. Nihil vetare ut
confessio Pelagii, ubi ab Ecclesia Romana probatam eam fuisse innotuit, ab
Augustino quoque populo credenda proponeretur. Quia scilicet etiam postquam a
Zozimo approbata est, non solum S. Augustinus eam ut ambiguam and dolosam
confutavit in lib. de gratia Christi and de peccato originali, sed etiam a
Zozimo and ambigua habita est. Ad quod intelligendum, notandum, quod statim
atque Zozimus, examinata Pelagii confessione, eum and Caelestium Catholicos
pronunciasset ob voluntatis emendarionem, quam uterque profitebatur, statim
conquesti sunt Africani Zozimum Pelagii and Caelestii dolis circumventum
fuisse; ex quo factum est postea ut Zozimus re before perspecta fraudem
agnoverit, in Pelagium and Caelestium sententiam tulerit, eorumque haereses
damnaverit, ut pater ex Prospero. Id resert Baronius anno 417, and 418. Ergo
Zozimus judicavit Pelagium non alio quam fallendi animo hanc fidei
confessionem. Sedi Apostolicae obtulisse, siquidem jucicavit, Pelagium nunquam
Catholicam fidem sincare professum fuisse. Itaque licet Zozimus Pelagi^
confessionem ut Catholicam approbasset ob rectum sensum quem prae se ferebat,
maxim ab homine Sedi Apostolicae sese submittente prolatam, tamen Pelagium
postea ut haereticum damnans, agnovit ejus conseffionem subdolam esse, atque
aliud intendisse Pelagium quam quod ipse Zozimus scilicet approbaverat. Sanctus
Augustinus Pelagii dolis assuetus, ejus confessionis ambiguitatem deprehendit.
Zozimum monuit impulitque ut Pelagium and ejus haeresim damnaret. Dici ergo non
potest fine summa absurditate quod Sanctus Augustinus hanc Pelagii
confessionem, postquam a Zozimo recepta est, eam memoriter didicerit ac populo
credendam proposuerit, siquidem semper eam ut subdolam and ambiguam habuit ac
refutavit.

5 Hanc itaque Pelagii confessionem a Zozimo and Clero Romano probatam fuisse
agnoscimus, sed sensu Catholico, qui Augustini est, intellectam, non vero
Pelagiano, and a Pelagio intento: ut ergo pateat quo sensu Zozimus illam
approbaverit, videndum est quo sensu Augustinus cum Ecclesia Catholica docuerit
Deum impossible non praecipere, and quo sensu Pelagius asseruerit. S.
Augustini sensum sequimur, adversarii vero sensum Pelagii, a quo nos cum
abhorreamus, ideo nobis falso objiciunt, quod objiciebat S. Augustino Pelagius,
nos dicere Deum impossibilia praecipere, illudqae ex sententia nostra sequi.

6 D. Hallier operum suorum non meminit, cum Heroti ac Lazaro Gallis Episcopis
calumniatorum notam inurit, postquam semel atque iterum libris in lucem editis
eorum nomen ab hac injuria vindicavit, eo usque ut dixerit, illos injuste a
Zozimo Papa infamatos fuisse ut iniquos, ipsumque postea, re magis perspecta,
suam sententiam de Coelestio ac Pelagio revocasse, neque ex hoc quidquam
dedecoris in S. Sedem redundare, cum res facti ageretur, in qua unicuique notum
erat hunc Pontificem circumventum fuisse.

7, Juxta S. Augustini, hoc est, Zozimi ipsius and Ecclesiae Romanae sensum cum
Zozimo and Clero Romano execramur blasphemiam little qui dicunt impossible
aliquid homini esse praeceptum, and mandata Dei non a singulis, sed ab omnibus
in commune posse servari, quia quidquid praecipit Deus possibile est singulis
si eorum natura sanetur per Christi gratiam.

Calumniam Jansenio affingunt adversarii, cum dicunt hanc propositionem,
impossible aliquid homini esse praecoptum, etc. prolatam fuisse a Jansenio.
Nunquam illud apud Jansenium legent, nisi ab eo prolatum intelligant quod
refutavit ac damnavit.

8 Denique dicunt quod Zozimi and Cleri Romani apud Catholicos major quam
Augustini ipsius debet esse auctoritas, and sic Zozimum opponunt Augustino, ut
insinuent (quod arbitrantur) ab Augustino assertum esse quod a Zozimo damnatum
est. Qua in re ipsis Zozimo and Augustino, sanctae Sedi, ac universae Ecclesiae
maximam injuriam faciunt, siquidem and illud jam aperte declaravimus, S.
Augustini auctoritatem secundum se consideratam, inferiorem esse summi cujusvis
Pontificis auctoritate, sed postquam ejus doctrina a tot Pontificibus fuit
probata, jam ejus auctoritas non est alia quam ipsorum Pontificum qui illam
receperunt, probandoque suam fecerunt. Adeo ut nunc opponere Augustinum Zozimo,
idem sit at opponere Zozimum aliis summis Pontificibus S. Augustini
approbatoribus, imo Zozimum sibi ipsi, cum inter ejus approbatores annumeretur.
Quo quid atrocius in S. Sedem and in S. Augustinum ab infensissimo utriusque
host excogitari potest? oportebat videlicet, ut se, Deo ita vindicante,
proderent, qui S. Augustini auctoritatem venerarise apud S. Sedem profitentur,
ne illam, ut oportet, recognoscere adigantur, quippe ipsam Sedem ideo maxim
venerantur, ut eam, si possint, circumveniant.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XVI. Testimonium.]
Sermon 61. de tempore. ADditur and hoc quod, cum tam magnum sit verae and
perfectae charitatis remedium, nullus tamen invenitur qui eam cum adjutorio Dei
non possit habere. Et ideo quia nulla nobis ante Tribunal Christi excusatio
poterit esse, cum Dei adjutorio totis viribus laboremus: sed, dicit aliquis,
Nulla ratione possum inimicos diligere. In omnibus Scripturis Deus tibi dicit
quia potes: Tu e contrario respondes, non posse. Considera nunc utrum tibi an
Deo debeat credi? and ideo quia veritas mentiri non potest, jam vanas suas
excusationes relinquat humana fragilitas, quia nec impossible abiquid potuit
imperare qui justus est, nec damnaturus est hominem pro eo quod non potuit
vitare qui pius est, quid tergiversamur incassum? nemo enim melius novit
quantum possumus, quam qui nobis ipsum posse donavit.

RESPONSIO.
PAtet ex hujus sermonis lectione quo sensu S. Augustinus hoc doceat. Hic, ut
and in multis aliis sermonibus, comparat praecepta quae per corporis vires and
res exteriores implentur, quae, etsivelimus, non fiunt, qualia sunt praecepta
jejunandi, eleemosynam dandi and similia, cum iis quae per cor implentur, quae,
cum volumus, fiunt; qualia sunt praecepta dilectionis Dei and proximi. Dicit in
primis praeceptis excusationem esse posse, ad ea hominem non teneri cum ea
servare non potest, quia Deus impossibilia non praecipit, nec damnaturus est
hominem pro eo quod vitare non potuit. In aliis vero praeceptis, quae in animi
bonitate and voluntate consistunt, quale est praeceptum dilectionis inimicorum,
de quo toto hoc sermon agit, excusationem praetendi non posse, neque dici
posse, Inimicos diligere non possum. Additur, inquit, and hoc, quod, cum am
magnum sit verae and perfectae charitatis remedium, nullus tamen invenitur qui
eam cum Dei adjutorio non possit habere. In reliquis operibus bonis interdum
potest aliquis qualemcumque excusationem praetendere; in habenda vero
dilectione nullus poterit se excusare; potest mihi dicere aliquis, non possum
jejunare; numquid potest dicere, non possum amare? potest dicere, propter
infirmitatem corporis mei non possum a vino vel a carnibus abstinere; numquid
potest dicere, non possum diligere? Et infra: Cum enim multa sint quae propter
fragilitatem humanam corporaliter implere non possumus, charitatem tamen in
cord nostro, Deo inspirante, si in veritate voluerimus, sine aliqua
dubitatione habere poterimus. Multa enim sunt quae de horreo, canavo, vel
cellario aliquoties proferre non possumus; de thesauro vero cordis nimis foedum
and turpe est, si aliquam excusationem praetendere videmur: non enim ibi aut
pedes laborant cur^endo, aut oculi videndo, aures audiendo, aut manus operando
lassantur. Non nobis dicitur, Ite ad Orientem and quaerite charitatem, navigate
ad Occidentem and invenietis dilectionem. Intus in cord nostro est, unde nos
iracundia excludere solet, and redire jubemur, dicente Propheta, Redite
praevaricatores ad cor: non enim, sicut jam dixi, in longinquis regionibus
invenitut quod a nobis Dominus petit; intus ad cor nostrum nos mittit; in nobis
enim ponit quod requitit, ubi tota charitas profecto in animi bonitate vel
voluntare consistit, etc. Et paulo post refert quod citatur, Quia nec
impossible aliquid, etc. Quo fine haec adversarii omiserunt, nisi quia nihil
aliud quaerunt quam ut fallant? S. Augustinus in Sermon. 47. de Sanctis idem
omnino docer.

Numquam ergo S. Augustino venit in mentem ut diceret, omnes omnino homines
habere gratiam sufficientem qua possint inimicos propter Deum diligere, quia
ejusmodi gratia nihil est aliud quam inspiratio perfectae charitatis, jaxta
illud supra citatum S. Augustini, Praeparatur voluntas a Domino, and tantum
augetur munere charitatis ut possint. Quid autem absurdius and falsius dici
posset quam inspirationem perfectae charitatis esse in omnibus hominibus? sed
solum Augustinus docet, omnes homines posse inimicos diligere, Deo inspirante
dilectionem, si in veritate voluerint, ut ipsemet loquitur; quo nihil verius.
Proindeque si inimicos non diligant, non esse excusationem, sed accusationem,
quia ideo non diligunt quia nolunt; and hoc est illud ipsum quod S. Augustinus
ubique docet, and praecipue lib. 1. de libero arbitrio cap. 12. loquens de bona
voluntate, quae nihil est aliud, ut ipse docet, quam charitas. In voluntate
nostra constitutum est, ait, ut hoc vel fruamur vel careamus tanto and tam vero
bono; quid enim tam in voluntate quam ipsa voluntas est? Et cap. 13. Ex quo
conficitur, ut, quisquis recte honesteque vult vivere, si id se velle prae
sugacibus bonis velit, assequatur tantam rem tanta facilitate, ut nihil aliud
ei quam ipsum velle sit habere quod voluit.

Ecce quo sensu secundum Augustinum possunt omnes homines diligere inimicos,
quia diligunt de facto statim ut (...) diligere in veritate voluerint, non vero
quod (...) ^ibus ut velint, sine quo velle non possunt, (...) S. Augustinus,
Lib. 1. Retract. c. 9.
explicans sua verba de libero arbittio supra citata: In his atque hujusmodi
verbis meis putant Pelagiani, vel putare possunt, suam nos tenuisse sententiam:
sed frustra hoc putant; voluntas quippe est qua and peccatur, and recte
vivitur; voluntas ergo ipsa, nisi Dei gratia liberetur a servitute qua facta
est serva peccati, and ut vitia superet, adjuvetur, recte pieque vivi a
mortalibus non potest.

Illud maxim notandum est, eamdem S. Augustini sententiam apud Pelagium iisdem
omnino verbis, sed penitus diverso sensu expressam reperiri in ejus Epistola ad
Demetriadem. Hanc refert and refutat Beda lib 1. in Cantica Canticorum contra
Iulianum. Ita cap. 5. Et paulo post inquit, (scilicet auctor Epistolae ad
Demetriadem) nec impossible aliquid potuit imperare qui justus est, nec
damnaturus est hominem ob ea quae non potuit vitare qui pius est. Tum cap. 6.
Beda hanc sententiam sic refellit: Quod dicit (scilicet Iulianus, seu potius
Pelagius) Dominum non impossible aliquid praecepisse qui justus est, verum
profecto dicit, si ad ejus respicit auxilium, cui Catholica vox supplicat,
Deduc me in semita mandatorum tuorum. Si vero viribus animi sui fidit, refellit
eum veridica ejusdem justi conditoris sententia, qua dicit, Sine me nihil
potestis facere. Quod dicit, eum qui pius est, non damnaturum esse hominem pro
eo quod vitare non potuit, contradicit ejusdem pii Redemptoris and justi
Iudicis sententia; qua etiam de parvulis ait, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua
and Spiritu, non potest videre Regnum Dei. Hinc agnoscitur eamdem penitus
sententiam ab Augustino and a Pelagio prolatam fuisse sensu long diverso;
siquidem ut a Pelagio prolata est, a Beda refutatur. Intendebat Pelagius
gratiam Christi and peccatum originale destruere, dicendo Deum nihil homini
impossible praecipere, proximam praecepti implendi possibilitatem in omnibus
esse insinuabat, proindeque gratiam Christi singularem, and omnibus non
communem, qualis a S. Augustino asserbatur, non esse necessariam, dicendo Deum
non esse damnaturum hominem pro hoc quod vitare non potuit. Volebat peccatum
originale non esse in parvulis, nec eos ob illud damnati, siquidem illud vitare
non potuerant. Patet ex iis quae diximus quam contrario sensu eadem sententia a
S. Augustino usurpata fuerit, and quam facile pateat aequivocationi, siquidem
uno sensu Catholica est and Augustiniana, alio haeretica and Pelagiana.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XVII. Testimonium.]
Sermon de verbis Domini in Matthaeum. QUi recte intelligit, utrumque implet,
and serviet universalissimo Domino qui servum pigrum non damnaret si ea quae
fieri nullo modo poterant, imperaret.

Mendum aliquod hic subest.
II. S. Augustinus rations omnes Jansenii eludit. Io quidem quia docet Deum
neminem permittere tentari supra id quod potest, seu nulla cupiditate ita
hominem vinci, quin possint cum Dei adjutorio in contrarium ad, p^ceptorum
observationem adniti, eaque cum (...) ^bervare.

RESPONSIO.
CUm de verbis Domini in Matthaeum multi sint sermones, citandum erat quo
sermon; hoc in totis his sermonibus non invenimus. Tamen non dubitamusa S.
Augustino dictum quod primo refertur. Ad quod respondemus, hanc sententiam
saepe solutam esse. Verum enim non est nullo modo fieri posse quod per gratiam
fieri potest.

Ad secundum respondemus; adversarios ibi imponere S. Augustino and Jansenio.
Augustino quidem, quod asserunt ipsum docere, Deum neminem permittere tentari
supra id quod potest, hoc numquam ita absolute dixit. Iansenio autem, cum
significant ipsum dixisse, hominem ita posse cupiditate vinci, ut nec possit
quidem cum Dei adjutorio in contrarium ad praeceptorum observationem adniti,
eaque cum eodem observare.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XVIII. Testimonium.]
Libro de gratia and libero arbitrio cap. 2. QUomodo dicit inexcusabiles, nisi
de illa excusatione qua solet dicere humana superbia, Si scissem fecissem, ideo
non feci quia nescivi; aut si scitem facerem, ideo non facio quia nescio: haec
ejus excusatio tollitur quando praeceptum datur, vel scientia non peccandi
manifestatur, sed sunt homines qui etiam de Deo se excusare conantur, quibus
dicit Apostolus Iacobus cap. 1. Nemo, cum tentatur, dicat, quia a Deo tentor;
Deus enim intentator malorum est; ipse autem neminem tentat; unusquisque vero
tentatur a concupiscentia sua abstractus and illectus. Deinde cum
concupiscentia conceperit, parit peccatum; peccatum vero cum consummatum
fuerit, generat mortem. Idem de ipso Deo excusare se volentibus respondet libet
Prove. Solomon, cap. 13. Insipientia viri violat vias ejus: Deum autem causatur
in cord suo. Et liber Eccles. cap. 15. dicit: Ne dixeris quia propter Deum
recessi, quae enim odit ne facias, etc. Ipse ab initio fecit illum, and
reliquit illum in manu consilii sui.

RESPONSIO.
NIhil ad rem nec ad propositum iste locus. Hoc enim Augustinus solum vult,
homines, cum peccant, peccata in Deum injuste refer, quasi ei placeant, vel
ad ea peccatores inducat. Quod manifest apparet ex verbis sequentibus
Scripturae a S. Augustino immediate subjunctis, and ab adversariis partim
suppressis. Sic enim S. Augustinus and liber Ecclesiasticus dicit: Ne dixeris
quia propter Deum recessi, quae enim odit ne facias: ne dixeris quia ipse me
induxit, non enim opus habet viro peccatore.

Verum tantum abest ut hoc loco vel alio S. Augustinus docuerit, homines posse
de Deo just se excusare, si illis gratiam necessariam non daret qua possent
vitare peccata, quin potius express contrarium docet in tota epistola 105. ad
Sixtum; ubi eadem verba Scripturae ab adversariis nobis objecta producit,
ostenditque, solis hominibus peccatum imputandum esse, quia, ut ait, Merito
peccati universa massa damnata est, nec obdurat Deus impertiendo malitiam, sed
non impertiendo misericordiam. Et infra: Postremo quonam se ipsi excusabunt
modo? nempe illo, quem breviter tamquam ex eorum voce sibi objecit Apostolus,
ut dicant: Quid adhuc conqueritur? Nam voluntati ejus quis resistit? Hoc est
enim dicere, quid de nobis fit querela quod Deum offendamus male vivendo, cum
illius voluntati non possimus resistere, qui nos obduravit misericordiam non
praestando? si ergo illos non pudet hac excusatione, non nobis, sed Apostolo
contradicere, cur nos pigeat eis, quod dixit Apostolus, hoc idem atque
identidem dicere: O homo! tu quis es qui respondeas Deo, etc.?

Et infra: Nihil ergo fit in eis qui dicunt, Quid adhuc conqueritur? nam
voluntati ejus quis resistit? nisi quod legitur in libro Salomonis: Insipientia
viri violat vias ejus, Deum autem causatur in cord suo. Quamvis itaque Deus
faciat vasa irae in perditionem ut ostendat iram and demonstret potentiam suam,
qua been etiam utitur malis, and ut notas faciat divitias gloriae suae in vasa
misericordiae, quae fecit in honorem, non damnabili massae debitum, sed suae
gratiae largitate donatum: tamen in eisdem irae vasis propter meritum massae in
contumeliam debitam factis, id est, hominibus propter naturae quidem bonum
creatis, sed propter vitia supplicio destinatis, iniquitatem, quam rectissime
veritas improbat, damnare novit ipse non facere. Sicut enim voluntati ejus
tribuitur natura humana nullo dubitante laudanda, sic hominis voluntati
tribuitur nullo recusante damnanda.

Porro ipsa Scripturae verba ab Augustino allata and objecta ab adversariis:
Ipse ab initio fecit hominem, and reliquit eum in manu consilii sui, quid vel
minimum ad propositum, cum ibi agatur de liberate naturali hominis cum qua
creatus est? Quod cuilibet patet qui hunc librum de gratia Dei and libero
arbitrio tantisper legerit; nam tribus primis capitibus ostendit S. Augustinus,
per praecepta, promissa, praemia, supplicia, esse in homine liberum arbitrium
quod habet homo per naturam, sed nihil illi prodesse ad praecepta implenda,
nisi sanetur per gratiam.

Et certe quaerimus ab adversariis quid velint his verbis probare, Deus ab
initio fecit hominem, and reliquit eum in manu consilii sui. An quod homo ita
est in manu consilii sui, ut per naturam sine gratia possit eligere bonum vel
malum? sed hoc Pelagianum est. An quod Deus constituat homines in manu consilii
sui per gratiam liberatricem? quod est contra Apostolum: Etenim cum essetis
servi peccati: Nulla esset in homine peccandi necessitas, quod pertinet ad
errorem Pelagianorum: Multa erras, ait Augustinus ad Julianum lib. 1. oper.
imperf. cap. 105. qui vel necessitatem nullam putas esse peccandi, vel eam non
intelligis illius peccati esse poenam quod nulla necessitate commissum est.
Denique omnes omnino homines nascerentur cum charitate quae sola illos facit
liberos ad precepta servanda, ut ait Augustinus ibidem n. 84. his verbis: Alia
est remissio peccatoris in eis quae mala facta sunt, alia charitas quae facit
liberum ad ea quae bona facienda sunt: utroque modo liberat Christus, quia and
iniquitatem ignoscendo aufert, and inspirando tribuit charitatem.

Itaque his verbis Scripturae nihil aliud insinuatur, nisi hominem per naturam
esse liberi arbitrii, esse in manu consilii sui, esse constitutum inter bonum
and malum, inter vitam and mortem duplici ratione: Prima, quia quod voluerit
faciet, and quod elegerit dabitur ei. Secunda, quia potest se flectere in
utramque partem, and eligere bonum and malum, ita tamen ut bonum non possit
eligere, nisi Deus in illo operetur and velle, malum vero per seipsum; sic enim
S. Augustinus hanc sententiam Scripturae explicat, cum illi objiceretur a
Pelagianis lib. 1. oper. imperf. cap. 45. Haec testimonia propter illam
voluntatem dicta sunt, in qua quisque id quod vult agit; at si non habetur,
(scilicet ipsa voluntas) ab eo poscatur qui in nobis operatur and velle; si
autem habetur, fiant opera justitiae, and ei qui illam operatus est, agantur
gratiae. Item de perf. justit cap. 19. eodem modo Calestio hoc Scripturae
testimonium and alia similia objicienti S. Augustinus sic respondet: Aut quia
in Deuteronomio scriptum est, Vitam and mortem dedit ante faciem hominis, bonum
and malum, and admonuit ut eligeret vitam; quasi and ipsa admonitio non de
misericordia veniat, vel a iquid prodesset eligere vitam, nisi Deus eligendi
charitatem inspiraret and electam habere praestaret. Et infra: Aut quia dictum
est, Si voles praecepta, servabunt te; quasi non debeat Deo gratias agere quia
praecepta voluit, qui desertus omni lumine veritatis haec velle non potest.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XIX. Testimonium.]
Ejusdem libri capite 3. QUando autem dicit homo, Non possum facere quod
praecipitur, quoniam concupiscentia mea vincor. Jam quidem de ignorantia non
habet excusationem, nec Deum causatur in cord suo, sed malum suum in se
cognoscit, and dolet, cui tamen dicit Apostolus Romans 12. Noli vinci a malo, sed
vince in bono malum. Ei utique cui dicitur, Noli vinci, arbitrium proculdubio
voluntatis ejus convenitur; velle enim and nolle proptiae voluntatis est.

RESPONSIO.
NIhil etiam contra nos probat hic locus. Velle and nolle propriae voluntatis
est: sed ad recte volendum praeparatur voluntas a Domino. Omnibus autem non
praeparatur. Vide dicta de praedestinatione Sanctorum cap. 5. and 6. Non quia,
inquit, credere vel non credere non est in arbitrio voluntatis humanae, sed in
electis praeparatur voluntas a Domino. Multi audiunt verbum veritatis, fed alii
credunt, alii contradicunt; volunt ergo isti credere, nolunt autem illi; quis
hoc neget? sed cum aliis praeparetur, aliis non praeparetur voluntas a Domino,
discernendum est utique quid veniat de misericordia, quid de judicio. Et infra:
Misericordia igitur and judicium in ipsis voluntatibus facta sunt.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XX. Testimonium.]
Ejusdem libri capite 4. UBi si dixeris, Volo servare, sed vincor a
concupiscentia mea, respondet Scriptura libero ejus arbitrio quae jam superius
dixi: Noli vinci a malo, sed vince in bono malum; quod tamen ut fiat, adjuvat
gratia, etc.

RESPONSIO.
QVod ut fiat, inquit S. Augustinus in loco citato (ut scilicet vincatur in
bono malum) adjuvat gratia. Verum nec semper, nec omnes adjuvat ut paret ex his
verbis immediate sequentibus, quae nisi adjuverit, nihil lex erit nisi virtus
peccati: Nonne enim his verbis denotatur, gratiam non semper adjuvare? Ita sunt
assueti fraudibus adversarii, ut ludum putent verba reticere tam aperta, quae
ita conferunt ad sensum atque explanationem testimonii quod citant, ut eorum
reticentia sensum omnino contrarium in animum legentis ingeneret. Hoc profecto
committere horreret men's hominis quae nondum pudori omni renunciasset.

Tam vero clarum est, hoc ipso capite S. Augustinum docere gratiam omnibus non
dari, ut illud and in verbis antecedentibus and in consequentibus tradat, Dicit
enim omnes, quibus datur gratia continendi, continere: Ex quo sequitur, omnibus
hanc gratiam non dari, siquidem multi seipsos non continent; Et tamen, inquit,
non omnes capiunt verbum hoc (Contine teipsum,) sed quibus datum est; quibus
enim non est datum, aut nolunt, aut non implent quod volunt; quibus autem datum
est, sic volunt, ut impleant quod volunt. Et paulo post in fine ejusdem capitis
S. Augustinus sic loquitur: Ecce unde dicit homo, Volo legis servare mandatum,
sed virtute concupiscentiae meae vincor: Et cum voluntas ejus convenitur, and
ei dicitur, Noli vinci a malo, quid ei prodest, nisi gratia succurrente fiat?
quod ipse Apostolus secutus adjunxit: Gratias autem Deo qui dat nobis victoriam
per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum; ergo and victoria qua peccatum vincitur,
nihil aliud est quam donum Dei in isto certamine adjuvantis liberum arbitrium.

Quis itaque non miretur adversarios ex eo colligere, gratiam sufficientem
omnibus dari qui se dicunt a propria cupiditate superari, quod illorum
arbitrium per legem conveniatur, cum S. Augustinus express dicat hanc legem
nihil homini prodesse, nisi Deus illum adjuvet, Deum autem hominem adjuvare,
quando dat illi victoriam per Jesum Christum; cum ergo non dot omnibus
victoriam per Jesum Christum, nonne consequitur evidenter, Deum omnes infirmos
non adjuvare cum per legem conveniuntur?

Et ut mala fides adversariorum, vel eorum ignorantia in doctrina S. Augustini
magis pateat, sufficient nobis unum ex ejus testimoniis inter sexcenta
producete. Ex sermon. 4. de diversis, ubi clarissime docet, peccatorem auxilio
Dei destiturum, non posse de ignorantia and de sua infirmitate conqueri, seu
excusationes praetexere, quo minus peccet and pereat. Si acceperis legem,
inquit, and defuerit tibi adjutorium spiritus, non imples quod legis, non
imples quod tibi jubetur; sed homo sub lege insuper praevaricator tenetur:
accedat spiritus; adjuvet, and fit quod jubetur; si defit spiritus, litera
occidit te; quare litera occidit te? quia peccatorem te facit, nec potes te
excusare de ignorantia, quia legem accepisti; jam quod faceres didicisti,
ignorantia te non excusat, spiritus te non adjuvat: ergo peristi.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXI. Testimonium.]
Lib. de pastoribus cap. 6. SEd ne futuris tentationibus deficiat infirmus, nec
falsa spe dejiciendus est, nec terrore frangendus: Dic ei: Praepara animam tuam
ad tentationem, (Eccles. 2.) sed forte incipit labi, contremiscere, nolle
accedere. Habes aliud 1 Corinthians. 10. Fidelis Deus, qui vos non sinit tentari
supra quam far potestis; Illud autem promittere and praedicare futuras
passiones, infirmum confirmare est; timenti autem nimium, and ex hoc deterrito
cum polliceris misericordiam Dei, non quia tentationes deerunt, sed quia non
permittit tentari supra quam far potestis, fractum colligare est: affert
consolationes alligamentum, alliga quod fractum est, dic ne timeas, non deerit
in tentationibus ille in quem credidisti, fidelis Deus, qui non sinit te
tentari supra quam potes far; non hoc a me audis, Apostolus dicit: qui etiam
dicit, An vultis experimentum ejus accipere qui in me loquitur Christus? hoc
ergo cum audis, ab ipso Christo audis, and ab illo Pastore qui pascit Israel;
illi enim dictum est Psalm. 79. Potabis eos in lachrymis in mensura: quod enim
ait Apostolus, non sinit tentari vos supra quam potestis far, hoc ait
Propheta in mensura: Tantum tu noli dimittere corripientem and exhortantem,
terrentem and consolantem, percutientem and sanantem.

RESPONSIO.
QUod hic and aliis multis sermonibus sequentibus dicitur, Fidelis Deus, qui
non permittit vos tentari supra id quod potestis, sic intelligi debet ut
diximus: quia S. Augustinus quasi electis loquitur, Quos Deus non permittit
tentari supra quam possunt, spe and confidentia auxilii non defuturi, fideles
erigit, terrore non frangit, ut hinc se ad orandum and operandum accingant, and
omnem spem in Deo collocent. In scripto circa primam propositionem c. 2. art.
3. hanc Apostoli sententiam fuse exposuimus, nec solummodo argumentum, quod ex
ea infertur, solvimus, sed etiam ex eadem sententia probavimus semper non
adesse fidelibus gratiam qua possint tentationem sustinere ac vincere. Hanc
promissionem in his qui secundum propositum vocati sunt, impleri docet S.
Augustinus. Confirmat Hormisdas Papa: Tentatus est Petrus supra quam posset
sustinere. Quam verum est quod Deus in omnibus, qui tentantur, non facit cum
tentatione proventum, seu, ut habet textus Graecus, and ut saepe S. Augustinus
and S. Hieronymus loquuntur, non facit exitum ut possint sustinere! alias omnes
in tentatione proficerent, evaderent, nullusque deficeret.

Quamvis autem ista Apostoli verba intelligi tantum debeant de praedestinatis,
vult tamen Augustinus, ut prudens Pastor illis verbis utatur ad confirmandum
hominem infirmum, qui in cultu Dei tentationes reformidare posset; quia oportet
ut cum illo agat tamquam cum electo, ad quem proinde pertineant promissa Dei de
protectione and conservatione suorum electorum, ita tamen, ut, cum eum de tali
protectione divina securum faciat, hac condition faciat, ut non dimittat Deum
corripientem and exhortantem, terrentem and consolantem, percutientem and
sanantem, quemadmodum extremis verbis loquitur Augustinus.

Verum haec conditio, sicut and quaelibet alia ad salutem pertinens, donum est
gratiae singularis; sicut and praemium, ut supra demonstratum est, observatione
3 praemissa ad responsiones.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 40. NE dicas, non possum tenere and portare and fraenare carnem meam;
adjuvaris ut possis: Dominus opem ferat super lectum doloris ejus.

RESPONSIO.
VErum est te adjuvari, si velis carnem tuam fraenare in nomine Christi, si non
praesumas de viribus tuis, si praesumas de gratia, si praesumendo ad Christum
venias, hoc est, Christi implores auxilium, ut loqitur S. Augustinus eodem
loco, and paulo supra.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXIII. Testimonium.]
Enarrat. in Psalm 61. UT non cadat paries, Dominus suscipiet, quoniam qui dat
potestatem tentatori, ipse tentato praebet misericordiam; ad mensuram enim
permittitur tentare diabolus: Et potabis nos, inquit, in lacrymis in mensura;
noli ergo timere nisi permissum aliquid facere tentatorem; habes enim
misericordissimum Salvatorem; tantum permittitur ille tentare, quantum tibi
prodest ut exercearis, ut proberis, ut, qui te nesciebas, ab ipso inveniaris:
Nam ubi vel unde de hac Dei potestate and misericordia securi esse debemus
secundum illam Apostolicam sententiam: Fidelis Deus qui non permittit vos
tentari supra id quod potestis, etc. Et paulo post circa finem: Noli ergo
mirari, permittit Deus, and judicio permittit and mensura, numero and pondere
permitrit, apud illum non est iniquitas, tu tantum ad eum pertine, in ipso spem
pone, ipse sit adjutor tuus, salutare tuum, in illo sit locus munitus, turris
fortitudinis: Refugium tuum ipse est, and non sinit te tentari supra quam potes
far, sed faciet cum tentatione exitum, ut possis sustinere; ut quod te sinit
pati tentationem potestas ejus sit, quod non sinit ultra in te fieri quam potes
far, misericordia ejus sit, quoniam potestas Dei est, and tibi Domine
misericordia.

RESPONSIO.
SAnctus Augustinus loquitur, ut jam toties dictum est, omnibus fidelibus, ac
si essent omnes praedestinati; Et ut utamur ipsius S. Augustini verbis; Paleae
loquitur tanquam grano, quia paleam a grano discernere non potest, cujus rei
evidentissimum est argumentum in illis verbis, tantum permittitur diabolus
tentare, quantum tibi prodest ut exercearis, ut proberis, ut qui te nesciebas,
ab ipso inveniaris; quod certe de reprobis dici non potest.

Add quod S. Augustinus hanc gratiam and Dei protectionem spondet omnibus
fidelibus sub ea condition, si ad Deum pertineant, si in Deo spem suam ponant,
si ad illum confugiant, tamquam ad locum munitum and turrim fortitudinis, si
illorum refugium ipse sit. Verum hanc conditionem esse donum gratiae
singularis, supra ostendimus observatione 3.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXIV. Testimonium.]
Idem in Psalmum 91. SI non est valde impius, ad manum Satanam habet quem
accuset, Satanas fecit, dicit, quasi Satanas habeat potestatem cogendi,
astutiam habet: sed si Satanas loqueretur, and taceret Deus, haberes unde te
excusares: modo aures tuae positae sunt inter monentem Deum and suggerentem
serpentem: quare hinc flectuntur, hinc avertuntur; non cessat Satanas suadere
malum, sed nec Deus cessat admonere bonum, etc.

RESPONSIO.
EX S. Augustino libro de gratia Christi cap. 13. admonitio qua Deus admonet,
sicut and doctrina qua docet, duplex est: una qua Deus ostendit veritatem,
altera qua impertit charitatem; una qua docet per legis literam, altera per
spiritus gratiam; una qua suadet, altera qua persuadet; una quae facit homines
inexcusabiles, and, si sola sit, legis praevaricatores, altera quae facit eos
legis dilectores. Prior illa quaecumque sit, sive interior, sive exterior,
pertinet ad legem atque doctrinam. Posterior vero est vera gratia Christi quae
necessaria est ad singulos actus.

De prima loquitur S. Augustinus in objectione quam contra nos adversarii
proponunt. Ibi enim ostendit S. Augustinus, homines, cum peccant, inexcusabiles
esse, nec posse accusare diabolum de peccatis suis. Primo quia diabolus non
cogit invitum ad peccandum; suadere potest, cogere non potest. Secundo, quia si
diabolus non cessat suadere peccatum, Deus ex altera part non cessat,
fidelibus saltem, suadere justitiam, quod sufficit ut peccantes sint
inexcusablies. Quod vero S. Augustinus ne verbum quidem faciat de posteriore,
inde patet, quod express doceat, eum, qui ea doctrina vel admonitione vitare
peccatum and facere bonum a Deo edoctus est, femper peccatum vitare and bonum
facere. Haec sunt verba S. Augustini docentis gratiam esse doctrinam Dei. De
gratia Christi cap. 13. Haec graria si doctrina dicenda est, certe sic dicatur,
ut altius and interius eam Deus cum ineffabili suavitare credatur infundere,
non solum per eos qui plantant and rigant extrinsecus, sed etiam per seipsum,
qui incrementum subministrat occultus. Ita ut non ostendat tantummodo
veritatem, verum etiam impertiat charitatem; sic enim docet Deus cos qui
secundum propositum vocari sunt, simul donans and quod agant scire, and quod
sciunt agere. Unde ad Thessalonicenses sic Apostolus loquitur: De charitate
autem fraternitatis non opus habetis vobis scribere, nam ipsi vos a Deo
didicistis, ut diligatis invicem: tamquam hoc sit certissimum indicium quod a
Deo didiceritis, si id quod didiceritis feceritis. Qui aurem novit quid est
quod fieri debeat, and non facit, nondum a Deo didicit secundum gratiam, sed
secundum legem, non secundum spiritum, sed secundum literam.

Et cap. 14. De isto docendi modo etiam Dominus aic; Omnis qui audivit and
didicit a Patre meo, venit ad me. Qui ergo non venerit, non de illo recte
dicitur. Audivit quidem and didicit sibi esse veniendum, sed facere non vult
quod didicit. Prorsus non recte dicitur de isto docendi modo, quo per gratiam
docet Deus. Si enim, sicut veritas loquitur, omnis qui didicit venit, quisquis
non venit, profecto nec didicit. Breviter igitur sic respondemus objectioni
ipsismet S. Augustini verbis; Qui admonetur a Deo in tentatione and hac
admonitione novit quid facere debeat, and non facit, nondum a Deo didicit
secundum gratiam, sed secundum legem; non secundum spiritum, sed secundum
literam: proindeque haec admonitio de qua loquitur S. Augustinus in Psalm.
citat. non est illa gratia Christi qua docet homines quantum sufficit ut
peccata vitare and bonum facere possint and faciant.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXV. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 120 prope finem. FIdelis Deus qui non permittit vos tentari supra
quam vos potestis far, ecce introitus tuus custoditur, quando non tibi sinit
Deus accidere tentationem, quam non potes far, introitum tuum custodit and
exitum; sed faciet, inquit, etiam cum tentatione exitum ut possitis sustinere.
Numquid possumus nos, fratres, interpretari aliter quam ipsa verba Apostoli
docuerunt? Custodite ergo vos, sed non a vobis, quia Dominus tegum entum tuum,
qui custodit, qui non dormitat neque dormit.

ALTERAM similirer rationem refellit S. Doctor, quod scilicet Deus gratiam nec
praevaricatoribus legis deneget, vel qua possint eam observare, vel a Deo
auxilium necessarium petere.

RESPONSIO.
I. HUic objectioni plenissime satisfactum est in responsione ad testimonium 21.

II. Non dicit absolute S. Augustinus quod neminem Deus permittit tentari supra
id quod potest, sed tantummodo quod, quando id permittit, tunc custodit
introitum hominis in tentationem, and quando facit cum tentatione proventum,
tunc custodit exitum a tentatione.

III. Docet id fieri tantum a Deo in iis qui non habent ventum superbiae, quia
humilitas, inquit, custodit in omni tentatione qui de se non praesumunt, sed
auxilium suum ponunt in Domino, ut ipsemet dicit in contextu paginae. Atqui
idem S. Augustinus docet in libro 2 de peccat. mer. cap. 17 and 19, hanc
superbiam, quae omnium humanorum vitiorum causa est, and propter quam Deus
plerumque sinit nos tentari supra quam possumus, non in omnibus sanari per
gratiam; and cum Deus id facit, misericordia id facere; cum non facit, judicio
non facere: judicio, inquam, vel condemnationis, si, ut loquitur S. Augustinus,
damnandi praedestinati sunt propter iniquitatem superbiae; vel eruditionis, si
filii sunt misericordiae, and contra ipsam suam superhiam erudiendi.

Et in fine capiris 19 docet, ad obtinendam gratiam, qua peccata vitentur,
necessarium esse ut conemur vigilanter, and Deum ardenter deprecemur, and
agnoscamus hanc vigilantiam and orationem nobis a Deo donari per gratiam. Haec
sunt ejus verba; Nec ideo tamen in iisdem vitiis nobis permanendum esse
existimemus, sed adversus ipsam maxim superbiam; propter quam in eis
humiliamur, and nos vigilanter conemur, and ipsum deprecemur ardenter, simul
intelligentes, and quod sic conamur, and quod sic deprecamur, dono illius nos
habere, ut in omnibus, non ad nos respicientes, sed sursum cor habenses, Domino
Deo nostro gratias agamus, and, cum gloriamur, in illo gloriemur.

Quis autem dicat hunc conarum, hanc vigilantiam continuam, hanc ardentem
orationem non esse donum gratiae singularis and efficacis, sed solum
sufficientis omnibus concessae? Hoc posito, respondemus, quod aliis similibus
testimoniis solvendis sufficit; cum Paulus and S. Augustinus ubique spondent
fidelibus Deum non permissurum eos tentari supra id quod possunt, hanc illis
gratiam spondere, si humiles sint, si contra superbiam vigilanter conentur, si
Deum ardenter deprecentur. Ad hoc ergo ut adversarii inde possent infer Deum
neminem permittere tentari supra quam potest, oporteret ut prius probarent,
hanc animi piam humilitatem, hanc conantem vigilantiam, hanc ferventem
orationem dari a Deo omnibus hominibus per gratiam sufficientem, quod certe
falsissimum est, nec id adversarii coram sua Sanctitate audebunt unquam
asserere.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXVI. Testimonium.]
Libro 1 de Genesis contra Manichaeos cap. 3. QVod (praecepta Dei servare) omnes
homines possum si velint, quia illud lumen omnem hominem illuminat venientem in
hunc mundum, probat lib. Retract.

RESPONSIO.
HOc testimonium jam antea relatum solutumque est n. 3.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXVII. Testimonium.]
Lib. 1 ad Simplicianum quaest. 1. HOc enim restat in hacce mortali vita libero
arbitrio, ut non impleat homo justitiam cum voluerit, sed ut sese supplici
pietate convertat ad Deum, cujus dono possit eam implere.

NOTA Sancti Augustini doctrinam eam esse quam locis infra citandis tradit, non
semper nobis suppetere ut absque auxilio per preces nostras impretando
praecepta Dei quaelibet impleamus, sed nullum esse quod non vel gratis oblato
auxilio nulla nostra prece efflagitato, vel certe auxilio a Deo impetrando
possimus implere.

RESPONSIO.
I. SI quid probaret hic locus, gratiam sufficientem ad orandum libero arbitrio
subjectam esse probaret.

II. Si quid adhuc probaret hic locus, id tantum probaret de iis qui jam per
gratiam Christi volunt implere justitiam Christi and conantur, sed majore
impetu concupiscentiae prohibentur ne possint. Nam quod S. Augustinus de
omnibus omnino hominibus id non dicat, clarum est ex cap. 22 de not. and Stat.
ubi docet, eos qui deseruntur a Deo, subdi necessitati peccandi, adeo ut
audiant tantum auribus corporis vocem legis, qua admoneantur ad Deum recurrere;
sic enim loquitur de Pelagio, qui far non poterat peccatum peccato and
induratione vel caecitate a Deo vindicari. Nec cogitat, inquit S. Augustinus,
praevaricatorem legis quam digne lux deserat veritatis, qua desertus utique fit
coecus, and plus necesse est offendat, and cadendo vexetur, vexatusque non
surgat, ut ideo tantum audiat vocem legis, quo admoneatur implorare gratiam
Salvatoris, etc. Consulatur, si placet, locus integer.

III. Nihil probari potest ex hoc loco, nisi postquam homo peccatum suum
miseriamque, in quam demersus est, agnovit, nihil illi aliud restare, quam ut
gemat and imploret auxilium Dei, quo justitiam implere possit and a peccato
liberari, seu homini sub lege and peccato captivo alium modum resurgendi and
just vivendi non superesse nisi gemitum and orationem.

Ex quo nequaquam sequitur, quod concludunt adversarii, omnibus semper dari
orandi gratiam; imo contrarium semper docuerunt and S. Augustinus, and Prosper,
and Fulgentius. Sic enim S. Augustinus lib. de not. and great. cap. 7. Vnde
admonemur a Deo petere sapientiam qui dat omnibus affluenter, utique his qui
sic petunt, quomodo and quantum res tanta petenda est.

Et lib. de moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae cap. 17. Si sapientia and veritas non
totis animi viribus concupiscatur, inveniri nullo pacto potest. At si ista ita
quaeratur ut dignum est, subtrahere sese atque abscondere a suis dilectoribus
non potest. Hinc est illud quod ait Jesus: Petite and accipietis, quaerite and
invenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis, amore petitur, amore quaeritur, amore
pulsatur.

Quis autem adeo superbi est animi, ut praesumere audeat se semper habere
sufficientem Dei gratiam, qua possit ab eo petere observationem mandatorum
eius, quantum and quomodo res tanta petenda est, id est, amore petendo,
quaerendo, pulsanco, and totis viribus animi jugiter concupiscendo, praesertim
in tentatione, cum animus illecebris voluptatum distractus est, nec toto animi
conatu potest ad Deum confugere?

Et lib. 1 oper. imperf. cap. 94, dicit admonitionem legis prodesse
praedestinatis, sed non dicit prodesse omnibus hominibus, quia Deus omnibus
quibus jubet bonum, non largitur charitatem quae sola vult bonum. Homo
Pelagiane, inquit, charitas vult bonum, and charitas ex Deo est, non per legis
literam, sed per spiritum gratiae: in hoc est praedestinatis adjutorium litera,
quia jubendo and non juvando admonet infirmos confugere ad spiritum gratiae.
Sic lege legitime utuntur quibus bona est, id est, utilis: alioquin per se ipsa
litera occidit, quia jubendo bonum, and non largiendo charitatem qua sola vult
bonum, reos praevaricationis facit.

Et lib. de cor. and great. c. 1: Qui etgo legitime lege utitur, discit in ea
malum and bonum, and non confidens in virtute sua, confugit ad gratiam, qua
praestante declinet a malo and faciat bonum. Quis autem confugit ad gratiam
nisi cum a Domino gressus hominis diriguntur, and viam ejus volet? Ac per hoc
and desiderare auxilium gratiae initium gratiae est: de quo ait ille, Et dixi,
nunc coepi, haec mutatio dexterae Excelsi.

Post S. Augustinum sic S. Prosper adversus Collat. c. 23. Imperantur autem
ista homini, ut ex ipso praecepto Dei, quo ei hoc quod accepit, indicitur,
agnoscat id se suo vitio perdidisse, and non ideo iniquam esse exactionem quia
ad reddendum quod debet, idoneus non est, sed a litera occidente confugiat ap
spititum vivificantem, and facultatem quam ante non invenit in natura, quaerat
ex gratia: quod si facit, magna est misericordia Domini; si non facit, justa
est poena peccati.

Denique post S. Prosperum S. Fulgentius lib. 2 de veritate praedestinationis
and gratiae c. 4. Dum praecipitur nobis ut velimus, ostenditur quid habere
debeamus; sed quia id ex nobis habere non possumus, admonemur, ut a quo nobis
datur praeceptum, ab ipso petamus auxilium, quod tamen non possumus poscere,
nisi Deus in nobis operetur and velle. Sufficiat igitur in posterum quod semel
ex Patribus ostendimus, non consequi ex admonitione legis omnibus hominibus,
quod lex admonet inesse sufficientes and necessarias vires per gratiam, quibus
possint vel mandata legis implere, vel ad spiritum gratiae confugere.

SCRIPTUM ADVESARIORUM. [XXVIII. Testimonium.]
Libri 1 quaest. 2 ad eumdem. NOluit Esau, and non cucurrit, sed si voluisset,
and cucurrisset, Dei adjutorio pervenisset, qui etiam ei velle and currere
volendo praestaret, nisi vocatione contempta reprobus fieret.

RESPONSIO.
HIc S. Augustinus errorem quem deponebat, disputando agitat; ibi enim eadem de
vocatione and fide docet, quae in expositione proposionum ad Romanos dixerat
cum in Semipelagiano errore versaretur. Hinc ergo concludi non potest juxta
Ecclesiae sensum esse aliquam vocationem internam, cui pro nutu alter
obtemperat, and alter resistit. Verum postquam ventilavit S. Augustinus, an
voluntas credendi sit donum Dei eo solum nomine, quia credere non possumus nisi
Deo vocante, tandem definit fidem esse donum Dei quia ut velimus and incipiamus
credere, Deus miseretur, and cum miseretur, sine dubio volumus. Illud pater ex
expositione hujus sententiae Apostoli, Non est volentis, neque currentis, etc.
quam de gratia ex se efficaci ad bonam voluntatem and fidem necessaria S.
Augustinus intelligendam esse docet.

Nota etiam quod si quid ex testimonio citato probaretur, ex eo gratia
sufficiens libero arbitrio subjecta probaretur.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXIX. Testimonium.]
Lib. 83. qq. quaest. 68. AD illam coenam quam Dominus dixit in Evangelio
praeparatam, neque omnes qui vocati sunt venire voluerunt, neque illi qui
venerunt, venire possunt, nisi vocarentur; Itaque neque illi sibi debent
tribuere qui venerunt, quia vocati venerunt, neque illi qui noluerunt, alteri
tribuere, sed tantum sibi; quia ut venirent vocati, in eorum erat libera
potestate.

RESPONSIO.
EX hoc loco nihil etiam colligi potest, nisi pro errore Semipelagiano, in quo
erat S. Augustinus cum has quaestiones dictaret; tunc enim non putabat fidem
Dei gratia praeveniti, ut clarius innotescit ex iis quae praecedunt verba ab
adversariis relata, quaeque Semipelagianismum expressus continent.

Sed cur, inquient, haec verba quaest. 68, in quibus errorem esse dicimus, S.
Augustinus non correxit, cum hanc quaestionem Retractavit? Imo vero
manifestissime correxit, sic loquendo lib. 1 Retractationum cap. 26: Est
misericordia Dei praeveniens ipsam voluntatem, quae, si non esset, non
praepararetur voluntas a Domino. Ad eam misericordiam pertinet and ipsa
vocatio, quae etiam fidem praevenit. II. Quia quaecumque ad illum errorem circa
fidei donum pertinent, satis retractivit in lib. de praedestinat. Sanctor. cap.
3 and 4.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXX. Testimonium.]
De natura and gratia cap. 26. NOn deserit, si non deseratur, ut pie semper
justeque vivatur.

RESPONSIO.
I. SI quid ex hoc loco probatur, probatur gratia sufficiens libero subjecta
arbitrio.

II. Resp. Deus neminem deserit, si non deseratur, quia, ut inquiunt Thomistae
fere omnes in hunc and Concilii Tridentini locum, nulli justo Deus gratiam
sanctificantem subtrahit, nisi Deum per peccatum mortale deseruerit; seu, si de
gratia actuali illud intelligendum sit, Deus nulli justo negat gratiam
operandi, nisi negligendo orare Deum deseruerit, seu nisi Dei auxilium
implorare desierit. Plura diximus ad hujus loci expositionem in scripto circa
primam propositionem cap. 6. art. 3. Ex his patet solutio ad multas alias
similes sententias quae adversus veram Christi gratiam, quam defendimus,
proferuntur.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXI. Testimonium.]
Libro 4 ad Bonifacium capite ultimo in fine. UT petant prudentes (homines)
Deus instruit and clementer audit.

NOTA, ridicule instrueret nos ut peteremus auxilium quod non esset paratus
dare: quare si instruit ut petamus, dare paratus est, ideoque in nobis est ut
petamus, quia petentes exauditurus est, in nobis est ut impetremus.

RESPONSIO.
DEus est paratus dare auxilium suum petentibus quantum petendum est, ideoque
nos ad petendum instruit; sed ut pie petamus, ut petamus digne, fideliter,
ardenter, peseverantet, and quantum petendum est, praeparatur voluntas a
Domino. Quod si quia Deus nos monet ut petamus, colligitur ab adversariis
semper nobis adesse petendi gratiam: Respondemus hunc fuisse Adrumetinorum
errorem, qui vel correctionem and exhortationem inutilem esse contendebant, vel
in unoquoque inesse facere quod praecipitur, vel orare. Ad quem errorem
refutandum S. Augustinus scripsit librum de corrept. and great. and praeterea
contra Iulianum lib. 4. cap. 8. Pelagianos arguit, quod existimarent, ideo
omnes salvos fieri, quia, cum Deus velit dare, nolunt ipsi petere, docetque,
cum nemo velle possit, nisi Deo voluntatem praeparante atque subveniente,
profundum esse cur and in majoribus and in minoribus Deus velit alteri, and
nolit alteri subvenire, nec tamen ridicule instruit omnes ad petendum, licet
nolit omnibus subvenire.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXII. Testimonium.]
De gratia and lib. arb. cap. 15. QVare jubet si ipse daturus est? quare dat si
homo facturus est? nisi quia dat quod jubet, and adjuvat ut faciat cui jubet.

RESPONSIO.
HIc locus ab adversariis male citatur, nam in editionibus correctioribus non
ita legitur, Dat quod jubet, and adjuvat ut faciat cui jubet; sed ita legitur,
Dat quod jubet, cum adjuvat ut faciat cui jubet. Itaque non est sensus, Deum
semper dare quod jubet, and adjuvare cui jubet, hoc enim evidenter falsum est,
siquidem non dat Deus quod jubet quando ejus praecepta violantur: sed sensus
est, Deum dare quod jubet, quando adjuvat eum cui jubet; quod maxim evertit
doctrinam adversariorum. Inde enim sequitur nullam esse gratiam propriae
sufficientem, nisi eam qua Deus dat quod jubet, talis autem gratia efficax est,
cum sit vera gratia quam a Deo petimus.

II. Cum dicit Augustinus Deum adjuvare cui jubet, loquitur de gratia efficaci,
qua Deus dat quod jubet, and facit in nobis cor novum, and spiritum novum ponit
in medio nostri, and convertit nos ad se, ut patet locum and caput integrum
legenti: Atqui Deus non dat omnibus gratiam efficacem: Ergo non adjuvat omnes
ut faciant quod jubet.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXIII. Testimonium.]
Ejusdem libri capite 18. NIsi quia praecepto admonitum est liberum arbitrium,
ut quaereret Dei donum. Quod quidem sine suo fructu prorsus admonefetur, nisi
prius acciperet aliquid dilectionis ut addi sibi quaereret, unde quod jubebatur
impleret: cum dicitur, Diligamus invicem, lex est; cum dicitur, Quia dilectio
ex Deo est, gratia est, sapientia quippe. Dei legem and misericordiam in lingua
portat: unde scriptum est Psalm 83. Benedictionem dabit qui legem dedit.

NOTA, Ibi probari frustra statuendum sine dono gratiae praeceptum, illudque
semper cum praecepto esse conjunctum.

RESPONSIO.
I. SI quid ex hoc loco probari posset, probaretur, gratiam, seu ad operandum
seu ad orandum necessariam subjectam esse libero arbitrio.

II. Hujus loci hic sensus est: (liberum arbitrium sine suo fructu admoneretur)
scilicet quoad vim faciendi id quod jubetur, nisi prius acciperet aliquid
dilectionis, quia gratia est fructus vim tribuens praecepti illius implendi,
non vero quia gratia semper conceditur cum praeceptum datur: frustra tamen and
inutiliter praeceptum non datur cum sine gratia datur, multae sunt enim
praecepti utilitates: sed ubi non est gratia qua praeceptum impleatur, vel qua
Dei donum quaeratur, non est praecipuus praecepti fructus. Ita ipse S.
Augustinus eodem in libro exponit cap. 4. Nisi, inquit, gratia adjuverit, nihil
lex erit nisi virtus peccati, augetur enim concupiscentia, etc. Et infra: Et
cum voluntas ejus convenitur and ei dicitur, Noli vinci a malo; quid ei prodest
nisi gratia succurrente fiat? Unde concludit in fine capitis: Homo ergo gratia
juvatur, ne sine causa voluntati ejus jubeatur. Et cap. 15. Sic quippe
adjuvatur ut faciat quod jubetur, tunc enim utile est velle cum postumus, and
tunc utile est posse cum volumus. Nam quid prodest si quod non possumus
volumus, aut si quod possumus nolumus? Clare docet S. Augustinus 2 operis
imperfecti cap. 157. frustra Doctorem hortari, nisi Deus det incrementum, and
cum Deus dat incrementum, auditorem sine dubio proficere. Ergo ubi non est
gratia efficax, aliquo sensu frustra admonetur liberum arbitrium. Itaque ex
loco citato non sequitur semper esse gratiam ubi est praeceptum, licet tunc
praeceptum sit sine suo fructu quoad vim faciendi id quod jubetur: quamquam
vero aliquo sensu sit frustra, and nihil prosit illi qui admonetur, frustra
tamen and sine omni fructu and utilitate praeceptum non est, licet illi gratia
conjuncta non sit. Ostendit esse in homine liberum arbirrium, sine quo
praecepta impleri non possunt, monet hominem quid ab eo fieri debeat, aufert
excusationem quam homines solent de ignorantia obtendere.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXIV. Testimonium.]
Lib. 2. de Pastoribus cap. 5. COnfortatur infirmus cum ei dicitur, spera
quidem tentationes hujus saeculi, sed ab omnibus eruet te Dominus, si ab illo
non recedat retro cor nostrum.

RESPONSIO.
VErum id, ut ait S. Augustinus lib. de dono pers. c. 7. Dei est facere ut non
recedat retro cor nostrum. Post casum, inquit, hominis nonnisi ad gratiam suam
voluit pertinere ut homo accedat ad Deum, neque nisi ad gratiam suam voluit
pertinere, ut homo non recedat ab eo. Et paulo infra: Manus igitur est Dei
ista, non nostra, ut non discedamus a Deo qui dixit: Timorem meum dabo in cor
eorum ut a me non recedant.

Quod certe in quibusdam facit, and in quibusdam non facit: Cur autem in
omnibus non faciat audi S. Prosperum: Resp. 14. ad obj. Vincentianas.
Cur autem illum retineat (ne Deum deserat) illum non retineat, nec possibile
est comprehendere, nec licitum vestigare; cum scire sufficiat ab illo esse quod
statur, and non ab illo esse quod ruitur.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXV. Testimonium.]
Enarrat. in Psalmum 26. NOli de te praesumere; si te dereliquerit, in ipsa via
deficies, cades, aberrabis, remanebis: dic ergo illi, Voluntatem quidem liberam
mihi dedisti, sed sine te nihil est mihi conatus meus; adjutor meus esto, ne
derelinquas me, neque despicias me, Deus salutaris meus: Tu enim adjuvas qui
condidisti, tu non deseris qui creasti.

RESPONSIO.
ID verum est; sed eum quide Deo, non de se praesumit, quique illi dicit in
oratione sicut dicere o-Portet, Adjutor meus es tu, quod quidem nemo Potest
dicere, nisi Deus in illo operetur and velle, ait S. Fulgentius loco supra
citato.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXVI. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 43. NOn ergo relinquit Deus, and cum videtur relinquere; tollit quod
male desiderasti, and docet quid debeas been desiderare.

RESPONSIO.
SEnsus est, Deum non propterea derelinquere hominem, cum subtrahit illi bona
temporalia, sicut quidam arbitrantur se a Deo derelictos, cum illis in
prosperitatibus non favet. Videatur locus iste apud S. Augustinum, ut pudeat
adversarios tot testimonia, quae nihil ad propositum faciunt, congerere. Cum
autem tollit tibi Deus haec temporalia quae male desiderasti, docet quid debeas
been desiderare. Verum est; sed ista doctrina, ait ipse S. Augustinus libro
supra citato de gratia Christi, nisi eam Deus altius and interius cum
ineffabili suavitate infundat, non solum ostendendo veritatem, sed etiam
impertiendo charitatem, doctrina est literae, non gratiae, legis, non spiritus.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXVII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 51. NOluit intelligere ut been ageret; non enim dictum est, Non
potuit, sed noluit, inquit, intelligere ut been ageret; claudit oculos suos a
luce praesenti.

RESPONSIO.
REsp. primo, loquitur hic Sanctus Augustinus de cognitione and intelligentia
veritatis quae obligat ad been agendum, and ad quam sufficientes sumus per
legem atque doctrinam, non vero de viribus sufficientibus ad legem implendam.

Secundo, Illud dicimur posse secundum S. Augustinum, quod nostram sequitur
voluntatem, and quod facimus quando volumus: quia vero plerique hominum
cognoscerent veritatem si vellent, ideo de illis just dicitur, non quod non
potuerunt cognoscere, sed quod noluerunt, and quod in illis ignorantia sequitur
voluntatem, non praecedit. Verum quid haec ad propositum? quid haec ad gratiam
sufficientem omnibus datam ut praecepta impleantur?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXVIII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 77. PRaecessit enim aliquid unde Deus justissime iratus ab eis suum
lumen auferret.

RESPONSIO.
ERat officii adversariorum locum integrum producere, and haec verba immediate
sequentia addere, Ut in peccata, quae nulla tergiversatione defendi possunt,
non esse peccata, caecitas humanae mentis ostenderet ab itinere justitiae
deviando and errando.

Haee S. Augustinus de Aegyptiis, qui caecitate mentis Deo rebellabant eique
detrectabant obedire. Verum quid inde pro gratia sufficient? quid enim aliud
intendit S. Augustinus, quam aliqua peccata puniri a Deo tanta caecitate
mentis, ut prae illa caecitate homines postea in alia peccata offendant, quae
aut non vident esse peccata, aut, si vident, contemnunt? Quis hoc neget,
peccata peccatis vindicari? nonne docet Apostolus, sapientes hujus mundi, qui
Deum ex creaturis agnoverunt, quia tamen ei gratias non egerunt, sed pro vero
Deo idola coluerunt, just ab ipso traditos esse in reprobum sensum, and in
passiones ignominiae, ut facerent quae non conveniebant?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XXXIX. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 102. SAnat omnino ille quemlibet languidum, sed non sanat invitum;
quid autem te beatius? quam ut tamquam in manu tua vitam, sed habeas in
voluntate tua sanitatem tuam, etc. Vide ibi plura, sed maxim ista: Non enim
cessavit vocare, aut vocatum neglexit instruere, aut perfectum neglexit
coronare.

RESPONSIO.
MIra est omnino adversariorum audacia, and libentes dixerimus animadversione
S. Sedis Apostolicae digna, non solum quod inverso ordine S. Augustini
testimonium proferunt, sed etiam quod illud detruncant ac mutilant.

Haec enim sunt priora verba S. Augustini: Non cessavit Deus vocare, aut
vocatum neglexit instruere, aut instructum cessavit perficere, aut perfectum
neglexit coronare; Ex quibus haec praecipua expunxerunt, aut instructum
cessavit perficere; quia cum gratiam generalem omnibus datam ex hoc loco
colligere velint, ac videant non posse dici de omnibus quod perficit per
gratiam quos instruit, quia alias omnes per Christi gratiam essent perfecti,
quod dici non potest, ideo fraudulenter haec verba suppresserunt, ex quibus
solis S. Augustinum de gratia interiori omnibus data, in isto loco loqui non
posse constat. Post ejusmodi frauds quae sinceritas ab adversariis expectanda
est? Deinde esto, nulla sit fraus in citatione hujus testimonii, qua front
adversarii illud audent producere ab probandum peccatoribus gratiam
sufficientem semper dari, cum ibi loquatur S. Augustinus homini peccatori, sed
non de ipso peccatore, verum de homine justo, ut erat David, cujus
iniquitatibus Deus propitius fuit, cujus sanavit omnes infirmitates, cujus
redemit de interitu vitam, and quem coronavit in misericordia and
miserationibus. Nam S. Augustinus hunc Psalmum explicandum suscipi, Benedic
anima -- qui propitiatur omnibus iniquitatibus tuis, etc. Ex hoc animat
peccatorem ad spem similis gratiae, and a desperatione revocat; subdit enim
immediate: Quid dicis quia es peccator? convertere and accipe retributiones
istas, propitius sit omnibus iniquitatibus tuis, id est, convertere, and
retribuet tibi Dominus bona pro malis, sicut retribuit isti justo qui dicit,
qui propitiatur omnibus iniquitatibus tuis.

Quod attinet ad illa verba quae sequuntur in S. Augustino: Sanat omnino ille
quemlibet languidum, sed non sanat invitum: verum est, sed, ut ait ipse S.
Augustinus ibidem: Opus est ut sanari velis, ut manum Medici non repellas, ut
non solum delecteris cum fovet, sed etiam toleres cum secat, ut toleres
medicinalem dolorem, futuram cogitans sanitatem. Denique ut pro salute aeterna
toleres, quod pro temporali solent homines aegroti tolerare. Sed, amabo, velle
sicut oportet sanari, patienter manus Medici far, tolerare omnia dura and
amara hujus seculi tamquam medicamenta morborum nostrorum amore salutis
aeternae, parvane sunt ista? and quis ad tanta idoneus est, nisi Deus operetur
in homine istud velle, illudque in eo de die in diem confirmet and corroboret
per efficaciam gratiae suae singularis?

Sed dicent adversarii: Subjungit S. Augustinus nos habere, id est, in
voluntate nostra sanitatem nostram. Fatemur, verum non in eo sensu quem
contendunt, quasi id omnes proxime possint per gratiam sufficientem omnibus
datam, sed quia statim ut volumus sanari, sanamur, quia ista voluntas est
sanitas, and quanto major voluntas, tanto major sanitas, quod certe dici non
potest de omnibus aliis bonis quae extra voluntatem sita sunt. Audiant, quaeso,
adversarii ipsum Sanctum Augustinum seipsum hoc eodem loco explicantem: Hanc
salutem si volueris, obtinebis; honores, divitias cum quaesieris, non continuo
si volueris habebis: hoc and pretiosius est, and sequitur voluntatem, ejus
scilicet qui voluerit.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XL. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 118. Concione 17. QUia itaque credidi tua esse mandata, ipsa fides
mea qua id credidi, impetrat abs te gratiam qua faciam quod mandasti; si enim
homo mihi haec juberet forinsecus, numquid etiam ut facerem quod jubebat
adjuvaret intrinsecus? doce ergo me suavitatem inspirando charitatem, doce me
disciplinam donando patientiam, doce me scientiam illuminando intelligentiam,
quoniam tuis mandatis credidi, te illa credidi mandasse, quia Deus es, and
homini donas unde facias eum facere quod mandas.

RESPONSIO.
PRobat hoc testimonium jus esse homini Deum obtestari per fidei orationem, ut
charitatem inspiret qua fiant ejus mandata quae fieri ipse praecepit. Quis hoc
neget? imo ex hoc argumento invictissime demonstramus, haec omnia quae petimus
a Deo, scilicet charitatem, suavitatem, sapientiam, bonitatem, and universa
ejusmodi ad salutem pertinentia, nobis a Deo donari per gratiam efficacem, and
proinde singularem; nulli er in unquam Christiano aut saltem Ecclesiae venit in
mentem a Deo petere gratiam sufficientem libeto arbitrio subjectam, sed gratiam
tantummodo quae ipsum liberum arbitrium invincibiliter and insuperabiliter sibi
subjiciat.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLI. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 120. IN nostra potestate est, Deo donante, si eum nobis faciamus
custodem, qui non dormit neque dormitam, qui custodit Israel.

RESPONSIO.
QUid illud est quod S. Augustinus dicit esse in potestate nostra, nisi ut
habeamus custodem qui nunquam dormiat, and impediat quo minus moveatur pes
noster? Si enim, ait Sanctus Augustinus tota hac enarratione, quaeras inter
homines custodem qui non dormiat, non invenies. Nam omnis homo dormit and
moritur; vis habere custodem non dormientem? Deum elige custodem. Ex quo
concludit in fine: Est ergo in potestate nostra habere custodem non dormientem,
si voluerimus eum eligere in custodem nostrum. Quis hoc neget? sed illa
potestas ut eligamus Deum custodem nostrum, and in illo ponamus auxilium
nostrum and fortitudinem nostram, nulla est nisi Deo donante, id est, nisi Deus
eam det per gratiam suam efficacem.

Quam autem male and perperam inferant adversarii ex hoc testimonio Sancti
Augustini and similibus; nos posse per gratiam sufficientem quod S. Augustinus
dicit esse in potestate nostra, patet ex ipsomet Sancto Augustino in eodem
Sermon ex quo hoc testimonium adversarii desumpserunt; sic enim loquitur: Ut
autem sis ad dexteram, id est, ut possis Dei filius fieri, potestatem
accepisti, quam potestatem, de qua dicit Apostolus Joannes, Dedit eis
potestatem filios Dei fieri; unde accepisti hanc potestatem? Credentibus,
inquit, in nomine cjus; si ergo credis, ipsa tibi potestas data est, ut fis
inter filios Dei. Sed quid ipsa potestas quam accepit homo, nisi Dominus
protegat? Ecce credidit, jam ambulat in fide; infirmus est inter tentationes,
agitator inter molestias, inter carnales corruptiones, inter suggestiones,
inter cupiditates, inter versutias and laqueos inimici; quid valet ergo quia
habet potestatem and credidit in Christum, ut sit inter filios Dei! Vae homini
illi, nisi and ipsius fidem Dominus protegat, id est, ut non te permittat
tentari supra quam potes far, sicut dicit Apostolus: Fidelis Deus, etc.

En habes a Sancto Augustino haec tria: I. Christianos omnes, per fidem
scilicet charitate operantem, potestatem habere sic vitam regere ut sint ad
dexteram inter filios Dei. II. Hanc potestatem infirmam esse, and ciro deficere
nisi Deus eam foveat, protegat, and confirmet. III. Deum non facere in omnibus
ut non deficiat in tentatione fides eorum, vel non tententur supra id quod
possunt far.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 131. NEmo praesumat viribus suis se reddere quod voverit: qui te
hortatur ut voveas, ipse adjuvat ut reddas. Cui affine est illud Sermon. 7. de
tempore: Dulciter and confidenter voveamus, illed daebit possibilitatem ut
reddere possimus.

RESPONSIO.
ITta sanc, sed addendum erat quod praemisit S. Augustinus, Ipse David vovit
tamquam in potestate habens, and rogat Deum ut impleat quod vovit; est devotio
voventis; sed humilitas deprecantis. Nemo praesumat viribus suis se reddere
quod voverit. Adjuvat ergo Deus eum qui vovit ut reddat quod voverit, sed
adjuvat humilem, sed adjuvat de Deo, non de se praefumentem. Et quis talis est,
nisi per veram gratiam efficacem?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLIII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 143. VIde quam securus opereris, quia non desereris ab illo quem
quaeris.

RESPONSIO.
HOc in loco agitur non de desertione adjutorii gratiae Dei sed mercedis. Sic
enim justum alloquitur S. Augustinus: Quamvis opereris in nocte, id est, in
obscuritate fidei, credens and non videns, tamen opera tua (id est, merces
operum tuorum) non peribunt; non enim, si quaeris Deum in veritate, desereris
in die judicii ab eo quem quaeris; libet hic afferre verba Sancti Augustini,
Ergo operare quamvis in nocte manibus tuis, id est, bonis operibus inquire
Deum, antequam veniat dies ille qui te laetificet, ne veniat qui te
moestificet: vide enim quam securius opereris, quia non desereris ab illo quem
quaris. Sic abutuntur Molinae discipuli Religione summi Pontificis, sic
imponunt Iudicibus suis, sic illudunt otio and eruditioni Eminentissimorum
Cardinalium, quasi aut eis non vacet testimonia ipsa in S. Augustino examinare,
aut vetum illorum sensum non valiant deprehendere.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLIV. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 145. APpropinqua, incipe desiderare, incipe quaerere and agnoscere
eum a quo factus es; non enim deserit opus suum, si ab opere suo non deseratur.

RESPONSIO.
EX integro loco S. Augustini clare patebit quis fuerit ejus sensus: Dicitur
homini in afflictione aliqua constituto, Est quidem homo magnus per quem possis
liberari, arridet, gaudet; En igitur, quod si dicatur illi, Liberat te Deus,
quasi desperatione frigescit: promirtitur auxilium mortalis, and gaudes;
promittitur immortalis, and tristis es, etc. Vae talibus cogitationibus, etc.
Appropinqua, incipe desiderare, incipe quaerere and agnoscere eum a quo factus
es, con enim deseret opus suum si ab opere non deseratur.

Ex quo perspicuum est Sanctum Augustinum loqui de homine in aliqua
tribulatione temporali constituto, cui spondet Deum illi non defuturum, sed eum
a tribulatione liberaturum, si ipse homo Deum non deserat, id est, dummodo Deum
quaerat, ad Deum confugiat, and in Deo, saltem tamquam in homine potente, spem
suam reponat: quo quid vetius? and quis illud unquam negaverit? Verum, ut
monuimus supra, in ejusmodi promissis conditionatis, and promissum and
conditio, and quod exigitur and quod offertur, utrumque aequaliter donum est
miserentis Dei, qui cujus vult miseretur.

Quod si adversarii velint haec verba extendere ad omnem tentationem and
adjutoriom gratiae Dei necessarium ut tentatio vinci possit, non contendemus
cum illis, imo ultro satebimur Deum non deserturum hominem, si ab homine ipso
non deseratur; sed ut S. Augustinus Lib. de done pers. cap. 16.
dicit: Deus ipse facit ut non deseratur, nam ideo petimus ne inferamur in
tentationem. Qua autem gratia facit ut non deseratur, sufficienti an efficaci?
Audiatur ipse S. Augustinus cap. 2. citans illud Hier. Timorem meum dabo in cor
eorum ut a me non recedant. Quod quid est aliud, quam talis ac tantus erit
timor meus quem dabo in cor eorum, ut mihi perseveranter adhaereant?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLV. Testimonium.]
Ex sermon 181 de tempore. HAbent tertium genus medicinae a quo se excusare
non possunt, nisi qui morbos aenimae suae sanaere contempserint. Hoc ergo
medicamentum, quod nulli sani mentae deesse potest, studiose and pie
frequentemus, implentes illud Apostolicum, Sine intermissione orate.

RESPONSIO.
DIcit Augustinus triplicem esse medicinam peccatorum nostrorum, jejunium
scilicet, eleemosynam and orationem; posse autem contingere ut quis
excusationem justam praetendat quod non jej^net propter stomachi
imbecillitatem, vel quod eleemosynam non det propter paupertatem; cum vero
oration intus in cord fiat, and orare nihil aliud sit quam desiderare, suaque
desideria Deo exponere, si quis negligat orare, and hoc remedio uti ad
sanitatem animae suae, profecto seipsum excusare non poterit, quia quod non
oret, id non ex aliqua defectu vel corporis vel rerum externarum, sed ex solo
contemptu salutis suae provenit; nam si non contemneret, and esset sanae
mentis, hanc medicinam quae sola illi superest ad curanda vulnera sua, non
negligeret. Jam vero quod ex his verbis S. Augustini, Hoc medicamentum nulli
sanae menti deesse potest, inferunt omnibus qui phrenesi vel delitio non
laborant, aut qui compotes sunt mentis suae, adesse gratiam sufficientem qua
possint pie, frequenter and fine intermissione orare, sicut S. Aug. in
objectione dicit esse orandum: quis non videat quantum a veritate, ab
experientia, and a mente S. Augustini abhorreat? Quaerimus enim ab adversariis
an gratia sufficiens qua in illorum opinione requiritur, tantum ad pie and sine
intermissione orandum, sufficiat etiam ad jejunandum and eleemosynas dandum, an
non sufficiat? si dixerit sufficere; Ergo gratia per se efficax non erit
amplius necessaria ad aliquod opus bonum, cum haec tria, jejunium scilicet,
eleemosyna and oration omnia bona opera vitae Christianae comprehendat, and sic
nulla erit gratia nisi subdita libero arbitrio, quod sane ab errore Pelagiano
non recedit.

Si dixerint non sufficere, sed ad jejunandum and dandum eleemosynas requiri
gratiam per se efficacem, ad orandum vero pie and sine intermissione non
requiri, sed tantum sufficientem; quomodo cum sana mente id poterunt dicere?
quae est enim ista insania? si dicatur piam and jugem orationem magis esse in
nostra potestate minusque a Deo pendere quam jejunium and eleemosynam,
gratiamque ipsius orationis omnibus nominibus dari, je junii and eleemosynae
non dari: nonne quotidie sanctiores quique experiuntur in seipsis nullem inter
opera peitatis esse magis arduum ac difficile, nullumque inter Dei dona rarius
aut preciosius esse quam ejusmodi piam and continuam orationem?

Itaque cu dicit S. Augustinus, Hoc medicamentum nulli sanae menti deesse
potest, non in hoc sensu dicit, quod omnis homo sanae mentis hanc gratiam piae
and jugis orationis acceperit, sed quod nulli homini invito, and qui non
contemnat salutem suam deesse potest, in quo hoc medicamentum differt ab aliis
remediis jejunii and eleemosynae, quae homini invito and studioso salutis suae
frequentissime desunt.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLVI. Testimonium.]
Sermon. 1 inter additos and opera Sirmondi editos. OStendit illos quos Esau
praefigurabat sic esse peccatores ut in potestate haberent, and in libero
arbitrio mutare se and fratri conjungi.

RESPONSIO.
UT non cessant Adversarii haec and similia objicere, ita non cessamus
respondere cum S. Augustino lib. 1 Retractat. cap. 22: In potestate malorum est
mutare in melius voluntatem, sed illa potestas nulla est, nisi praeparetur
voluntas a Domino, quae cum fortis and potens praeparatur, facile fit opus
pietatis, etiam quod difficile atque impossible fuit.

Itaque cum dicit S. Augustinus esse in peccatorum potestate mutare vitam suam,
non est sensus quod detur illis omnibus gratia sufficiens subdita libero
arbitrio qua possint, sed tantummodo quod id vere possunt, and revera id
faciunt, quando Deo operante in corda illorum id volunt, quia, ut ait S.
Augustinus, illud est in potestate nostra quod cum volumus facimus, and quod
nostram sequitur voluntatem.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLVII, Testimonium.^
Tractat. 2 in cap. 1 Evangelii Joannis. ECce hic est, and modo and hic erat,
and semper hic est, and numquam recedit; opus est ut non deseras, and non
desereris; noli cadere, and non tibi aceidet; si tu feeris casum, ille tibi
facit occasum; si autem tu stas, praesent est tibi.

RESPONSIO.
SEnsus est, opus est ut non deseras per iniquitatem, and non desereris ab eo
secundum praesentiam qua vivificat animam piam. Nam ipse est vita and lumen
animae: haec autem desertio peccatum subsequitur, verum quod fit alia quaedam
desertio praecedens peccatum, qua licet Deus non auferat vires quas dedit, non
tamen eas auget, nec novas addit in tentatione ut ei resistatur; ita clare
docet S. Augustinus Sermon 9. de div^rsis.
, ut de hoc dubitare fas non sit. Haec sunt ejus verba: In illa tentatione qua
quisque decipitur and seducitur, neminem tentat Deus, sed plane judicio suo
alto and occulto quosdam deserit; cum ille deseruerit, invenit quid faciat
tentator; non enim invenit adversus te luctatorem, sed continuo illi se exhibet
possessorem si deserat Deus; ne deserat ergo nos, ideo dicimus, Ne nos inferas
in tentationem.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLVIII. Testimonium.]
Cap. 5. de gratia and lib. arbitrio. SI quaesieritis Deum, invenietis; si
autem dereliqueritis eum, derelinquet vos; manifestat quidem liberum voluntatis
arbitrium.

RESPONSIO.
VIx adduci possumus ut credamus, adversaries, qui ista nobis objiciunt, librum
legisse de gratia and libero arbitrio unde desumpta sunt, cum totum illud caput
ab Augustino conscriptum sit, ut hanc and similes Pelagianorum objectiones
refelleret, ostenderetque, quod saepe jam diximus, promissa Dei conditionata
nihil officere prorsus necessitati gratiae victricis efficacis and singularis.
Talia, inquit, de Scripturis colligunt Pelagiani, Convertimini ad me, and
convertar ad vos; ut secundum meritum conversionis nostrae detur gratia ejus in
qua ad nos and ipse convertitur, nec attendunt qui hoc sentiunt, quia nisi
donum Dei esset etiam ipsa ad Deum nostra conversio, non ei diceretur: Deus
virtutum converte nos, and Deus tu convertens vivificabis nos; Et converte nos
Deus sanitatum nostratum and ejusmodi alia quae commemorare longum est: Nam and
venire ad Christum quid est aliud nisi ad eum credendo converti? and tamen ait,
Nemo potest venire ad me, nisi datum fuerit ei a Patre meo. Item quod scriptum
est in lib. 2 Paralipomen. Dominus vobiscum cum vos estis cum eo; and Si
quaesieritis eum, invenietis; si autem dereliqueritis eum, derelinquet vos. Sed
illi qui dicunt gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari, ista testimonia sic
accipiunt ut dicant meritum nostrum in eo esse quod sumus cum Deo, ejus autem
gratiam secundum hoc meritum dari ut sit and ipse nobiscum. Item meritum
nostrum in eo esse quod quaerimus eum, and seuundum hoc meritum dari ejus
gratiam ut inveniam^s eum. Et in lib. 1, quod dictum est. Et tu Solomon, fili
mi, cognosce Deum, servi ei in cord perfecto and anima volente. Si quaesieris
eum, invenietur tibi; and si dimiseris eum, repellet te in perpetuum, declarat
voluntatis arbitrium. Jam igitur ex testimonio S. Augustini patet, Pelagianos,
ut probatent gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari, haec testimonia illi
objecisse: Convertimini ad me and ego convertar ad vos. Et illud: Dominus
vobiscum, cum vos estis cum eo. Si quaesieris Dominum cord perfecto and anima
volente, invenietur tibi. Et quid ad haec respondebat S. Augustinus?
Respondebat nostrum conversionem ad Deum, propter quam Deus convertitur ad nos,
donum esse gratiae singularis and efficacis, nempe illius gratiae quae his
verbis exprimitur: Deus virtutum converte nos, and Nemo potest venire ad me,
nisi fuerit ei datum a Patre meo. Quo autem modo dicitur, ut docet Augustinus,
Si convertaris ad Deum, Deus convertetur ad te, eodem plane dicitur, Si
quaesieris Dominum, invenies eum. Sicut ergo converti ad Deum ut convertatur ad
nos, ita quaerere Deum ut inveniatur a nobis, donum est gratiae singularis and
efficacis.

Denique ex eo quod dixit Augustinus demonstrari liberum arbitrium ex
Scripturae testimonio, Si quaesieris Deum, invenies eum, quid inde colligunt
adversarii? and ad quid probandum haec verba proferunt? Voluntne his verbis
Scripturae secundum Augustinum demonstrari, esse im omnibus hominibus liberum
arbitrium instructum gratia sufficient, qua possinr quaetere Deum, ut Deus
inveniatut ab eis, an non volunt? si volunt, ergo per gratiam sufficientem sine
efficaci possunt omnes homines quaerere Deum in cord perfecto and anima
volente? Quo nihil Christianae gratiae infensius dici potest; and cum hoc
adscribunt Augustino, quid magis falsum etiam in illorum sententia? fatentur
enim Augustinum defendisse contra Pelagianos gratiam efficacem. Si non volunt,
ut quid proferunt illud testimonium pro gratia sufficient? Ut igitur
objectioni respondeatur, dicimus quod cum Pelagiani uterentur his testimoniis
Scripturae, ut probarent esse liberum arbitrium in homine per naturam quo
possit ad Deum converti, eumque toto cord suo quaerere, fatebatur Augustinus
haec testimonia demonstrare hoc liberum arbitrium esse in homine per naturam,
nec amissum esse per culpam, sed simul etiam contendebat contra illo, hoc
liberum arbitrium non esse sufficiens ad quaerendum Deum, nisi sanetur per
gratiam.

Itaque non dicit S. Augustinus his testimoniis Scripturae, si quaesieris
Dominum cord perfecto, invenies eum, demonstrari esse in homine liberum
arbitrium instructum per gratiam, sed tantummodo esse in omni homine per
naturam, quod ad nihil valet nisi adjutum and sanatum per gratiam.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[XLIX. Testimonium.]
Sermon 9 inter eos qui a Sirmondo editi sunt. HAbe ergo spem and gloriam, non
in te, sed in praecedente and subsequente misericordia Dei. Vide autem quo te
perducit si non deserueris deducentem? ad domum Dei te ducit, non ut hospitem
ad tempus ut migres ex ea, sed ut habitatorem, ut permaneas in ea, etc.

EX his deducitur, Deum, quantum in se est, unumquemque in observatione
praeceptorum, cum eorum observandorum obligatio imminet, sufficienter adjuvare,
nec ulli deesse nisi qui voluerit. Quin etiam ex praedictis tertium illud
deducitur, nempe fidelibus, multo magis justis qui tenacius adhaerent, nunquam
gratiam omnem denegari ad observationem praeceptorum. Id autem pluribus locis.

RESPONSIO.
SAnctus Augustinus dicit debere hominem ponere totam spem, fortitudinem and
gloriam suam, non in se, id est, in suis viribus, sed constituereun
misericordia Dei praecedente and subsequente, id est, quae praecedit peccatorem
ut justum faciat, and subsequitur justum ut justus permaneat.

Inferunt adversarii Deum quantum in se est, unumquemque in observatione
praeceptorum, cum little observandorum obligatio imminet, sufficiente^ adjuvare,
nec ulli deesse, nisi qui voluerit. Si n^n deserueris Deum deducentem, ad domum
Dei te ducet, id est, ad regnum Dei, ut inhabites in illo in perpetuum. Haec
enim verba sibi proposuerat explicanda: Et m^sericordia tua subsequetur me
omnibus diebus vitae meae, ut inhabitem in domo Domini omnibus diebus vitae
meae. Ubi his verbis vel minimum verbum aut vestigum gratiae communis and
sufficientis? Quid enim aliud illa verba: Si non deserueris Deum per peccatum,
ducet te in regnum suum, quam illa significant; si servaveris mandata, vitam
habetis: aut illa: Si perseveraveris usque ad finem, salvus eris? Et hinc
licebitne infer: Ergo omnes homines, etiam impii and infideles, habent
iufficiens auxilium quo possint implere mandata, and in eis perseverare? Quae
consequentia? Addunt adversarii: Quin etiam ex praedictis tertium illud
deducitur, nempe fidelibus, multo magis justis qui tenacius adhaerent, nunquam
gratiam omnem denegari ad observationem praeceptorum. Ita sane, haec
consequentia deducitur ab adversariis, sed contendimus a nemine nisi falso and
pertinaciter deduci posse.

II. Non dicimus omnem gratiam denegari fidelibus and justis, cum nonnisi per
gratiam justi sint and fideles; sed dicimus cum Augustino hanc potentiam quam
dedit Deus fidelibus filios Dei fieri, infirmam esse and imparem tot and tantis
tentationibus sustinendis, nisi eam Deus protegat indies and augeat, quod in
quibusdam facit per misericordiam, in quibusdam non facit per judicium, and
licet nulli justo aut fideli vires, quas illi dedit, non auferat nisi ob
peccatum, non tamen semper novas and majores tribuit, sine quibus multae
tentationes superari non possunt.

III. Fatemur gratiam non denegari justis and fidelibus ad observationem
praeceptorum, and ut loquamur cum Augustino loco ab adversariis citato,
misericordiam Dei omnes fideles subsequi. Verum ea condition, ad quam illos
ibidem hortatur Augustinus, ut caveant jactantiam, ut per superbiam non
deserant comitatem, ut apprehendant virgam disciplinae, and in baculo
misericordiae fidenter incumbant, ut correptionem Domini patienter ferant
secundum illud Psalmi: Virga tua and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt. Verum
quis ista potest, nisi gratia singulari and efficaci adjutus?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[L. Testimonium]
In Psalm 7. DUo sunt officia medicinae; unum quo fanatur infirmitas, alterum
quo sanitas custoditur.... Juxta illud ibi dicitur (Psalm 6,) Salvum me fac
propter misericordiam tuam. Juxta illud hic dicitur: Judica me, Domine, secudum
justitiam meam; ibi enim ut a malo evadat, remedium: hic autem, ne in morbum
recidat, tuitionem petit. Juxta illud dicitur, Salvum me fac, Domine, secundum
misericordiam tuam; Juxta hoc dicitur, Justum auxilium a Domino, qui salvos
facit rectos cord; and illa enim and ista salvos facit, sed illa ex
aegritudine ad salutem transfert, haec in ipsa salute conservat: Itaque ibi
misericots auxilium est, quia nullum habet meritum peccator qui adhuc
justificari desiderat, credens in eum qui justificat impium: hic autem justam
auxilium est, quod jam justo tribuitur: Dicat ergo ibi peccator, qui dixit
infirmus, Salvum me fac, Domine, propter misericordiam tuam; and dicat hic
justus, qui dixit, Si reddidi retribuentibus mihi mala, justum auxilium meum a
Domino qui salvos facit rectos cord; si enim medicinam adhibet qua sanemur
infirmi, quanto magis eam qua custodiamur sani? Quoniam si, cum adhuc
peccatores essemus, Christus pro nobis mortuus est, Romans 5, quanto magis nunc
justificati salvi erimus ab ita per ipsum?

RESPONSIO.
JUstus, de quo hic ait S. Augustinus loquitur, ille est, qui vocatus and
justificatus est secundum propositum, quia talis est vere filius promissionis,
ut loquitur S. Augustinus cap. 9 de cor. and great. Filius in illa
praedestinatione qua datus est Christo ut non pereat in aeternum, sed habeat
vitam aeternam. Quoniam ergo vere filius promissionis est and haeres per Deum;
ille est qui vere dicere potest, Justum adjutorium meum a Domino; ille est cui
post regenerationem suam, quodammodo debetur adiutorium perseverentiae, habita
ratione meritorum and mortis Christi; ad hoc enim datus est Christo a Patre,
and Christus animam suam pro illo posuit, ut ei and perseverantia donetur, ut
omnia ipsi cooperentur in bonum, and non pereat in aeternum, sed habeat vitam
aeternam, ut late probat S. Augustinus ibidem.

At vero non ita est de illo justo, qui quoniam victurus est impie, and in
eadem impietate moriturus, non est haeres secundum praescientiam Dei, nec
proinde filius in memoriali Patris aeterni, inconcussa stabilitate conscriptus:
Est quidem Dei filius, sicut est justus propter susceptam temporaliter gratiam,
ut loquitur Augustinus, sed non proprer praescientiam and praedestinationem
Dei, de quo proinde intelligi debet illud Joannis: Ex nobis exierunt, sed non
erant ex nobis: Nam si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent utique nobiscum. Quibus
verbis quid aliud dicit Joannes, nisi Non erant filii etiam quando erant in
professione and nomine filiorum, non quia justitiam simulaverunt, sed quia in
ea non permanserunt. Huic autem justo non debetur adjutorium, and licet
Christus pro illo mortuus sit pluribus ac veris modis, non tamen ut morte sua
perseverantiam in justitia, ac vitam aeternam illi efficaciter promereretur.
Quia vero Sanctus Augustinus in suis enarrationibus super Psalmos sermonem
habebat ad populum, eique moris erat frequenter fideles omnes ut justos, and ut
electos, and praedestinatos alloqui: hinc fit ut de omnibus indifferenter haec
verba Davidis intelligat: Justum adjutorium meum a Domino. Quod autem S.
Augustinus cum omnibus fidelibus agat velut cum electis, eisque omnia electorum
adscribat privilegia, dubitare nemo poterit qui legerit caput 9 de cor. and
great. Ubi inter caetera haec ait: Appellamus ergo eos and electos Christi
Discipulos, and Dei filios, quiae sic appellandi sunt, quos regeneratos pie
vivere cernimus: sed tunc vere sunt quod appellantur, si manserint in eo
propter quod sic appellantur.

Sed demus adversariis hunc locum Sancti Augustini quem nobis objiciunt, de
quibuscumque justis, sive electis, sive reprobis intelligendum esse. Quid inde
propterea concludent pro sua sententia? cum ibidem dicat S. Augustinus hoc
adjutorium justo semper esse a Deo petendum, Nam, inquit, infirmus orat ut
liberetur, sanus orat ne corrumpatur. Nonne ergo inde sequitur hoc adjutorium
ideo dici justum, non quia omni justo semper datur, sed quia ex quadam justitia
justo debetur oranti and petenti, and tantum petenti quantum and quomodo res
tanta petenda est, id est, pie, ardenter, and perseveranter, ut supra ex eodem
Augustino ostendimus lib. 2 de peccat. meritis.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LI. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 48. SI ergo iniquitas calcanei circumdabit nos, ut quid timemus,
cum conversi ad Christum habeamus in potestate ut non faciamus iniquitatem?

RESPONSIO.
HAec eadem objectio jam facta and refutata est.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 53. OMnes Sancti adjuvantur a Deo, sed intus ubi nemo videt: quomodo
enim poena impiorum conscientia, sic magnum gaudium piorum ipsa conscientia.

RESPONSIO.
LOquitur S. Augustinus de adjutorio consolationis ex bona conscientia, quo
Deus adjuvat Sanctos, ne doleant ex prosperitate impiorum, dando jucunditatem
in cor eorum de bonis operibus, juxta illud Davidis, Dedisti jucunditatem in
cord meo. Hic sensus patet ex contextu. Quis autem negat hanc consolationem
Spiritus Sancti and laetitiam bonae conscientiae dari Sanctis a Deo consolante?
sed unde ista bona conscientia? nisi ex charitate, de qua dicit Apostolus:
Charitas de cord puro and conscientia bona and fide non ficta; and charitas
unde? nisi a Deo, juxta illud Joannis, Charitas ex Deo est; non ex libero
arbitrio quod est in nobis, ut toties ait S. Augustinus, Sed per Spiritum
Sanctum qui datus est nobis.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LIII. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 66. CAnta in via, noli timere judicem, antequam esses fidelis
timebas, sed invenisti Salvatorem; Impium te quaesivit ut redimeret, redemptum
deseret ut perdat?

RESPONSIO.
REsp. Primo, Hic deprehenditur iterum mala adversariorum fides, quod
suppresserint verba immediate praecedentia, quae sensum S. Augustini omnino
aperiunt. Ait enim S. Augustinus in haec verba, ET GENTES IN TERRA DIRIGIS:
Directae autem gentes, ambulantes in fide, exultantes in illo, facientes opera
bona, and si qua forte, quoniam per mare navig ant, intrat aqua per
minutissimas cavernas, per rimulas ad sentinam exhauriendo eam per opera bona,
ne plus intrando cumulum faciat, and navem deprimat exhauriendo, quotidie je
junando, operando, eleemosynas faciendo, dicendo puro cord, Dimitte nobis
debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris, dicendo ista,
ambula securus, and exulta in via, canta in via, noli timere judicem.

Secundo, haec via, ut ait S. Augustinus eodem Psalmo paulo supra, Christus
est; quanto securius cantas in Christo, non habet via ista latronem, etc. Ipsa
cantatio confessio est; confessio peccatorum tuorum, and virtutis Dei, tuam
iniquitatem confitere, te accusa, illum glorifica, te reprehende, illum lauda,
ut and ipse veniens inveniat te punitorem, and exhibeat se tibi Salvatorem
tuum. Vides quod ibi S. Augustinus loquitur de Christo Salvatore in die judicii.

Tertio, Cum dicit S. Augustinus, Noli timere judicem, loquitur pro altera
vita, non pro ista: nam superius dixerat: Gaudeat judicandus qui timuit
judicaturum; and sensus est: Noli timere, ne judex tuus, cum venerit
judicaturus, fallatur, ne corrumpatur sicut homo mortalis, quia judicat populos
in aequitate. Audiatur, si placet, ipse S. Augustinus: Ille, cum venerit,
populos in aequitate judicabit, quid ibi valebit calliditas accusatoris ubi est
testis conscientia? ubi tu eris and causa tua? ubi Judex non quaerit testem?
advocatum misit tibi, propter illum and per illum confitere, age causam tuam,
and defensor est poenitentis, and peritor veniae confitentis, and judex
innocentis: vere timere poteris causam tuam ubi advocatus tuus erit judex tuus.
Laetentur ergo and exultent gentes, quoniam judicas populos in aequitate, sed
timere poterunt ne male judicentur? dent se corrigendos, ei qui videt
judicandos; hic corrigantur, and non timeant cum judicantut.

Quibus ita deductis, nonne luce clarius est hanc esse mentem S. Augustini in
hac oratione ad fidelem and justum, si ambulas in via, id est; in Christo, si
exultas in illo, facies opera bona, si sollicitus es quotidie sentinam
exhaurire, id est, levia peccata quae irrepunt redimere jejunando, orando,
eleemosynam dando, noli timere de tuo Judice acsi corrumpi posset aut falli,
imo gaude and exulta quia reperies Judicem qui judicabit populos in aequitate,
qui tunc Salvator tuus erit, quia tui ipsius fuisti punitor. Nam si, cum esses
impius, quaesivit te ut redimiret, redemptum non deseret ut perdat, id est, non
te deseret aut trader adve^sario tuo and accusatori ut pereas. Quid enim ibi
valebit calliditas accusatoris?

Verum ex his verbis colligere, Homini justo quamdiu degit in corpore mortis
hujus, non esse quod timeat ne desereatur a Deo and inferatur in tentationem,
quis hoc ferat? quae Catholicorum aures id sine zelo and indignatione audire
possunt? and ubi illud Pauli, Cum timore and tremore salutem vestram operamini?
Deus enim est qui operatur in vobis velle and perficere pro bona voluntate. Et
illud D. Leonis Magni: Et haec est Sanctis causa metuendi atque tremendi, ne
ipsis operibus pietatis elati, deserantur open gratiae, and relinquantur in
infirmitate naturae.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LIV. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 83. TAnta dat and malis, and tibi nihil servat? falsum est quod tibi
promittit? servat, securus esto, qui tni misertus est cum esses impius, deseret
te cum factus es pius? qui peccatori donavit mortem Filii sui, quid servat
salvo per mortem Filii sui? Tene debitorem quia credidisti in promissorem.
Dominus non privabit bonis ambulantes in innocentia.

RESPONSIO.
SEnsus est, non te deseret sine mercede quam promisit. Cum enim peccent omnes
qui peccant propter bona temporalia vel adipiscenda vel retinenda, vult eos S.
Augustinus ab hac iniquitate dehortari spe praestantiorum bonorum quae
repromisit Deus diligentibus se. Et quae sunt illa bona? requies, immortalitas,
aeternitas, impassibilitas, ipsa sunt bona quae servat Deus fidelibus suis. Et
paulo infra: Tanta dat and malis, and tibi nihil servat? falsum est quod tibi
promisit? servat, securus esto; qui misertus tui cum esses impius, deseret te
cum factus es pius? qui peccatori donavit mortem Filii sui, quid servat salvato
per mortem filii sui? tene debitorem, qui credisti in promissorem.

Quis post haec verba dubitare poterit, S. Augustinum cum dicit Deum non
desertutum hominem qui factus est pius, loqui, non de desertione auxilii ad
perseverandum in hac vita, sed mercedis in altera? I. Quia haec verba sibi
proponit explicanda, Non privabit bonis eos qui ambulant in innocentia. Unde
concludit: Quod si Deus tanta dat bona malis, quanta servabit bonis? atqui
verbum servare designat alteram vitam. II. Quia ista bona, sunt immortalitas,
aeternitas, etc. quae sunt bona alterius vitae, non istius. III. Quia vult S.
Augustinus hominem esse securum quod Deus illum non deseret, quia homo habet
illum promissorem: atqui Deus promisit bona aeterna ambulantibus in innocentia,
sed nulli promisit perseverantiam usque in finem. Ideoque secundum Concilium
Tridentinum nemo sibi hoc singular donum certo debet polliceri, nec in hoc
tentationis loco degere securus: Et quidem si homo debet esse securus se a Deo
numquam deserendum auxilio sibi necessario ad perseverandum in innocenti^, cur
igitur rogat Deum ut ab illo non deseratur? cur dicit cum Propheta, Non me
d^relinquas usquequaque, id est, ut interpretatur Augustinus, si dereliquisti,
ut sine adjutorio tuo infirmus appaream, noli usquequaque, ne peream?

Cur dicit cum eodem Propheta, Ne repellas me a mandatis tuis? Quid en^m est a
Deo repelli, ait S. Augustinus, nisi non adjuvari? mandatis quippe ejm rectis
and arduis humana non contemperatur infirmitas, nisi praeveniens ejus adjuvet
ca^itas. Quos autem non adjuvat, hos merito videtur repellere, tamquam flammea
framea prohibeantur indignine manum extendant ad arborem vitae; quis est autem
dignus ex quo peccatum intravit in mundum, and per peccatum mors, and ita in
omnes homines mors pertransit in quo omnes peccaverunt? sed indebita
m^sericordia sanatur debita nostra miseria.

Quam multa and praeclara hic docentur ab Augustino!

I. Repelli homines a mandatis Dei cum non adjuvantur.

II. Quosdam adjuvari, quosdam non adjuvari.

III. Neminem etiam justum (nam justorum est ista vox, Ne repellas me a
mandatis tuis) dignum esse qui adjuvetur ex quo periit in Adam.

IV. Cum adjuvatur, per indebitam gratiam and misericordiam adjuvari, and ei
propter ea hanc gratiam and misericordiam jugiter esse implorandam, dicendo cum
Propheta, Ne repellas me a mandatis tuis. Quid autum stultius quam orare Deum
ne faciat quod numquam facit nec ex justitia facere posset?

Quod ergo anima Christiana confidens promissis Dei secura sit se numquam, si
in innocentia ambulet, deserendam a Deo, nec privandam bonis quae Deus promisit
and servat iis qui ambulant in innocentia, nihil sanctius, nihil Deo gratius;
quod vero secura sit, se numquam a Deo deserendam illo adjutorio sine quo non
potest ambulare in innocentia usque in finem, absit a cordibus Christianis ista
praesumptio and securitas damnata etiam in Concilio Tridentino, sess. 6. cap.
13. and can. 16. and 22.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LV. Testimonium.]
In Psalm 84. QVam certa, quam firma promissione servat justis vitam suam, qui
injustis donavit mortem suam!

RESPONSIO.
HAec verba non reperiuntur apud S. Augustinum in Psalmum praedictum, sed in
Psalm. 85. Quod ibi dicit S. Augustine. nihil omnino ad propositum: loquitur
enim de vita beata, quam servat justis in praedestinatione sua, and cujus
pignus voluit esse vitam and sanguinem suum. Haec sunt verba S. Augustini in
Psalmo superiori: Ille quippe sponsus dans arras sponsae suae sanguinem suum
and spiritum suum, quo locupletavit nos interim in ista peregrinatione, adhuc
tamen servat nobis divitias suas; unde enim tale pignus dedit? quid est quod
servat? Et post pauca: Ibi ergo Propheta videbat futura, nobis jam vero facta
in illius providentia and praedestinatione certissima. Verum quid haec ad
gratiam sufficientem?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LVI. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 85. QVi praeter viam sunt, Christiani non sunt; aut Catholici
nondum sunt, deducuntur ad viam: sed cum perducti fuerint ad viam, and
Catholici in Christo facti fuerint, ab ipso deducuntur in ipsa via ne cadant:
certe jam ambulant in via. Deduc me, Domine, in via tua; certe jam in via tua
sum, deduc me ibi, and ambulabo in veritate tua: deducente te non errabo; si
dimiseris, errabo. Ora ergo ut te non dimittat, sed usque in finem deducat,
quomodo deducit semper movendo, semper dando tibi manum suam.

RESPONSIO.
I. FAlsitas est in citatione. Non enim dicit S. Augustinus, deducuntur, sed
deducantur; aliud estautum dicere, cum homines Christiani facti sunt,
deducuntur a Deo in via salutis: aliud dicere, deducantur; quia, ut subjungit
Augustinus, nisi Deus deducat, ipsi cadunt.

II. Non continuate legendum, quomodo deducit semper monendo, semper dando tibi
manum suam. Sed per interrogationem: quomodo deducit? cui respondet semper
monendo, semper dando tibi manum suam. Non ergo vult S. Augustinus Deum
quemlibet Christianum deducere, quia, ut colligitur ex ejus verbis, si semper
deduceret omnem justum, nullus justus aberraret; dicit enim David, Deduc me
Domine, in via tua, and ingrediar in veritate tua; cum justus deducitur, semper
ingreditur and ambulat; sed tantum docet S. Augustinus hoc modo Deum justos
deducere, semper illis dando manum suam, quia si tantisper manum subtrahit and
avertit faciem suam, non deducit sed dimittit. Quid ergo in his vetbis pro
sententia adversariorum, imo vero quid ipsis magis contrarium ab ipsis poterat
proferri?

I. enim dicit Sanctus Augustinus, deducente te non errabo; ergo qui errant non
deducuntur, and tamen volunt adversarii probare ex S. Augustino illos deduci.

II. Subjungit, Sidimiseris, errabo; unde concludit and oratione opus esse ut
Deus non deserat. Igitur qui non orant, deseruntur: quod si ex eo quod S.
Augustinus dicit Deum esse orandum ne dimittat sed deducat, inferant advesarii,
ergo omnes habet gratiam orandi; idem est acsi diceretur, Perseverandum est
usque in finem ut salvus fias, ergo omnes habent gratiam perseverandi; vel si
diceretur, Credendum est in Christum, and agenda poenitentia ut peccata
remittantur, ergo omnes habent gratiam fidei and poenitentiae. Ecce validissima
Molinistarum argumenta, ecce illorum obliquae consequentiae!

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LVII. Testimonium]
In Psalm 86. FIlius Dei pro nobis mortuus est, securus esto^; accepturum te
vitam ipsius, qui pignus habes mortem ipsius; pro quibus enim mortuus est
Christus? nunquid pro justis? Paulum interroga: Etenim Christus pro impius
mortuus est; impius eras, and mortuus est pro te; justificatus es, and deseret
te? qui justificavit impium, relinquet pium?

RESPONSIO.
I. NE minimum quidem verbum hujus Objectionis loco citato.

II. Quantum ad mortem Christi, quemadmodum dicebat olim S. Augustinus Lib. 1
de adult. conjug. c. 5.
, Omnis qui Christi sanguine redemptus est, homo est; non tamen omnis qui homo
est, etiam Christi sanguine redemptus est. Ita dicimus quod omnis qui Christi
sanguine redemptus est, primum impius est, non tamen omnis impius etiam
sanguine Christi redemptus est; non enim mortuus est Christus pro omnibus
impiis, eo scilicet sensu, ut absolute voluerit singulos mortis suae participes
fieri, and mortem suam illis applicari; neque enim omnibus infidelibus per
ipsius mortem donatur gratia fidei, sicut nec singulis fidelibus vel justis
donatur gratia perseverantiae in fide vel justitia.

III. Quod spectat ad haec verba quae subjungit S. Augustinus: Justificatus es,
and deseret te? loquitur de desertione mercedis, ita ut deserat justum sine
mercede, nulla habita ratione bonorum operum ejus; qui sensus confirmatur ex
praecedentibus verbis citatis: Securus esto percepturum te vitam ipsius qui
pignus habes mortem ipsius.

IV. Si contendant adversarii and probare possint S. Augustinum loqui de
desertione quantum ad vitam aeternam, and media ad illam consequendam
necessaria. Respondemus juxta ipsius mentem and principia, eum loqui de
justificato pro cujus salute aeterna Christus mortuus est; quamvis enim mortuus
sit et etiam pro justis reprobis ad temporales quosdam divinae gratiae
effectus, non tamen ad obtinendam pro eis perseverantiam in justitia and vitam
aeternam; alioquin, vel hanc gratiam and salutem sicut alii qui electi sunt,
recepissent, vel oration Christi pro illi^ fuisset inanis: quod impium est
tantummodo cogitare.

Hanc autem explicationem libet confirmare ipsismet Sancti Augustini verbis
lib. 22. de Civit. cap. 24. Quid dabit eis quos praedestinavit ad vitam, qui
haec dedit etiam eis quos praedestinavit ad mortem? quae bona in illa beata
vita faciet eos sumere, pro quibus in hac miseria unigenitum Filium suum voluit
usque ad mortem tanta mala perferre? Vnde Apostolus de ipsis in illud regnum
praedestinatis loquens, Qui proprio, inquit, Filio non pep^rcit, sed pro nobis
omnibus tradidit eum, quomodo non etiam cum illo omnia nobis d^nabit? cum haec
promissio complebitur, quid erimus? quales erimus? quae bona in illo regno
accepturi sumus? quandoquidem Christo moriente pro nobis tale jam pignus
accepimus? Ubi vides Sanctum Augustinum ita intelligere haec verba de electis,
ut tamen and seipsum and fideles omnes inter electos computet and recenseat.

Sanctum Augustinum secutus celebris ille Scripturarum interpres magnus Estius
in haec eadem Pauli verba: Qui proprio filio non pepercit, quomodo non etiam
cum illo omnia nobis donabit? Colligit, inquit, Apostolas argumento a majori
Deum certissime largiturum nobis, id est, electis, bona jam enumerata, gratiae
scilicet and gloriae; qui enim Filio suo, quo nihil habet carius, non pepercit,
sed pro salute nostra impendit, tradens eum pro nobis omnibus in mortem, certe
nec caetera d na ad salutem necessaria, nec ipsam denique salutem est
negaturus; hoc de electis interpretatur S. Augustinus lib. 22. de Civit. cap.
24. and alibi, quamquam id per se clarum est, ex eo maxim quod sequi ur, Quis
accusabit adversus electos Dei?

Et paulo supra in illa verba, Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos? dicitur hoc
in persona electorum seu praedestinatorum, de quibus jam locutus fuerat, quorum
in persona etiam sequentia dicuntur; quatenm ergo quisque fidelium confidere
potest ac debet se esse e numero electorum, ea ratione sententiam hanc cum iis
quae sequuntur, potest ac debet sibimet applicare.

Vides, lector, quomodo hac solida hujus loci interpretatione pateat vanitas
omnium argumentorum quae adversarii ex testimoniis Augustini deducunt, in
quibus ille Sanctus Doctor animat fideles ad spem and fiduciam promissorum Dei,
eosque vult esse securos de Dei protectione and charitate, cujus pignus mortem
unigeniti filii sui acceperunt.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LVIII. Testimonium.]
In Psalmum 87. in hunc versum: Et ipsi expulsi sunt de manu tua. JD est, cum
ab eis factus sum, ipsi expulsi sunt de manu tua, ipsi adjutorio manus tuae
privati sunt, qui me sine adjutorio esse putaverunt: foderunt enim, sicut dicit
in alio Psalmo, ante faciem meam foveam, and inciderunt in eam; melius enim sic
intelligendum existimo, quam ut id quod dictum est, and ipsi expulsi sunt de
manu tua, ad illos referatur dormientes in sepulchro, quorum non meminit adhuc,
ut resurgant; de his tamen dictum est Sapientiae 3. Justorum animae in manu Dei
sunt, hoc est, habitant in adjutorio Altissimi, and in protectione Dei caeli
commorantur, Psalm 90. Ibi vide plura.

RESPONSIO.
QUis non videat quantum adversarii bonis probationibus indigeant ad suam
sententiam confirmandam, cum tam invalidas and nec ad rem pertinentes
accumulent? quid enim in hoc toto Sancti Augustini Sermon pro gratia
sufficient, vel omnibus vel fidelibus donata? siquidem

In prima part hujus testimonii dicit Sanctus Augustinus Judaeos repulsos
fuisse a manu, and adjutorio Dei, qui Christum occidendo, eum sine adjutorio
Dei esse putaverunt. Illi, inquit, expulsi sunt de manu Dei, qui Dominum Jesum
Christum de manu ejus expulsum esse crediderunt, quia eum inter iniquos d
putatum occidere potuerunt.

In altera part, ubi citavit hunc Sapientiae locum, Justorum nimae in manu Dei
sunt, etc. loquitur S. Augustinus, sicut and Sapiens, de animabus Sanctorum qui
cum pietate decesserunt, ita ut sit sensus, Cum inter dormientes in sepu chris
sint justi quidam quorum licet nondum meminerit Deus ut resurgant, de his tamen
dictum est, Justorum animae in manu Dei sunt, hoc est, habitant in adjutorio
Altissimi, and in protectione Dei caeli commorantur. Quomodo enim animae
Sanctorum non erant in manu Dei, si vel capillus de capite eorum non peribit?

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LIX. Testimonium.]
Libro de corr. and great. cap. 7. QUoniam potest dici homini, in eo quod
audieras and tenueras, perseverares si velles; nullo modo autem dici potest, id
quod non audieras crederes si velles.

NOTA, de justo sermonem esse, in cujus arbitrio esse dicitur, ut si velit
perseverare possit, quia nonnisi volenti Deumque deserenti gratia denegatur:
Deus autem ex se gratiam ad perseverandum ad singulos actus semper dare paratus
est, ideoque in eo non sit par ratio justi perseverare volentis, cui Dei pro
certo illi auxilium danti proxima ad singula praecepta, quae ad perseverandum
occurrunt, potestas inest, cum homini infideli eadem proxima potestas non adsit
ut Evangelio sibi nondum praedicato assentiatur.

RESPONSIO.
I. SI quid probaret hic locus, probaret gratiam Christi libero justi arbitrio
subjectam esse ad perseverandum seu in oratione, seu in operatione, atque ex
nota and ratiocinatione Adversariorum illud sequitur.

II. Si locus non truncatus, sed integer referretur, sola illius lectione
agnosceretur, illum scopo adversariorum nequaquam favere, neque ibi adstrui
gratiam perseverandi justis omnibus semper dari pro nutu voluntatis eorum: Sic
enim Sanctus Aug. loquitur: Si ab hac damnatione non se liberabunt qui poterunt
dicere, non se audisse Evangelium Christi, cum fides ex auditu sit: quanto
minus se liberabunt qui dicturi sunt, perseverantiam non accepimus? Justior
enim videtur excusatio dicentium, Non accepimus audientiam, quam dicentium, Non
accepimus perseverantiam, quoniam potest dici: homo, in eo quod audieras and
tenueras, in eo perseverares si velles: nullo modo autem dici potest, id quod
non audieras crederes si velles. Sed nullus vult perseverare nisi in quo Deus
per donum perseverantiae operatur istud velle: unde his verbis S. Augustinus
tantum ostendit, justiorem videri querelam dicentium, Non audivimus Evangelium,
quam dicentium, Non accepimus perseverantiam; licet enim vere hic perseverare
non possit, sicut ille credere non potest, tamen quod hic non perseverat, ex
mala voluntate proficiscitur, unde recte illi dicitur, perseverares si velles,
id est, nisi bonum quod tenueras, per malam tuam voluntatem relinqueres. Alteri
autem dici non potest, crederes si velles, cum nullus, eriam si velit, credere
possit ea de quibus nihil audivit. Haec est hujus loci expositio.

Quod vero Sanctus ille Doctor nunquam senserit, nec dixerit gratiam
perseverandi justis omnibus semper dari, qua pro nutu suae voluntatis utantur
seu possint uti vel non uti; tam certis argumentis ex hoc libro desumptis
demonstrari potest, ut cum qui id vel in dubium revocaverit, hunc librum non
legisse necesse sit. Ex multis aliqua solum proponimus; hoc enim fusius a nobis
hic tractandum non est, cum jam satis testimonium objectum expo suerimus,
illudque nullo modo adversariis favere ostenderimus.

I. Itaque hoc probatur ex discrimine duplicis adjutorii, naturae sanae and
integrae, quod hoc libro cap. 11. ex professo and plene exponitur, siquidem
unum dat posse perseverare si velis, nec efficit ut velis; aliud dat non solum
posse perseverare si velis, sed etiam effitit ut velis. Gratia primi hominis
est adjutorium sine quo non fit: gratia vero secundi hom nis ad singulos
pietatis actus necessaria est adjutorium sine quo non fit, and quo fit, quod
indeclinabiliter, insuperabiliter; invictissime voluntatem ad agendum agit. Cum
ergo S. Augustinus dicit justum perseveraturum esse si vellet, id non
intelligit eo sensu, ut habeat gratiam sibi relictam, qua si vult perseverat,
and qua non efficitur ut velit, quia tale adjutorium non esset hominis per
peccatum infirmi, sed integri; non esset gratia Christi Salvatoris, sed Dei
Creatoris.

II. S. Augustinus cap. 12. docet justum post naturam lapsam perseverare non
posse, nisi illi perseverantia donetur, per quam nonnisi perseverans est. Nunc
vero, inquit, Sanctis in Regnum Dei per gratiam praedestinatis non tantum tale
adjutorium perseverantiae datur, sed tale ut eis perseverantia ipsa donetur,
non solum ut sine isto dono perseverantes esse non possint, verum etiam ut per
hoc donum nonnisi perseverantes sint. Ex hoc quaerimus an justis omnibus haec
perseverandi gratia donetur? Responderi non potest affirmative, quia justi
omnes perseverarent, siquidem haec gratia talis est, ut justi per illam nonnisi
perseverantes sint. An ergo isti quibus eadem gratia non datur, perseverarent
si vellent, adeo ut in eorum nutu sit perseverare? nec etiam hoc dici potest;
alias haec perseverantiae gratia ad perseverandum necessaria non esset, quod S.
Augustino repugnat, docenti hoc donum tale esse, ut sine isto perseverantes
esse non possint. Quare and eodem capite asserit gratiam ad perseverandum
necessariam talem esse, ut simul perseverandi and possibilitatem and voluntatem
donet. Vt quoniam, inquit, non perseverabunt nisi and possint and velint,
perseverandi eis possibilitas and voluntas divinae gratiae largitate donetur.
Ergo justi qui non perseverant, non acceperunt gratiam, nec qua pro nutu suo,
seu si velint, perseverent, nec qua perseverare possint.

Denique si in voluntate justorum gratia sibi relicta ac semper praesente pro
nutu utentium perseverare vel non perseverare positum esset, nullum esset
inscrutabile judicium quod ex duobus justis unus perseveraret, and alter non
perseveraret; sed illud totum per velle and nolle facillime solveretur. Docet
autem S. Augustinus toto isto libro hoc esse penitus inscrutabile. Hic si a me
quaeratur, inquit cap. 8. cur eis Deus perseverantiam non dederit, quibus eam
qua Christian viverent dilectionem dedit? me ignorare respondeo. Non enim
arroganter, sed agnoscens modulum meum audio dicentem Apostolum: O homo! tu
quis es qui respondeas Deo? and altitudo divitiarum sapientiae and scientiae
Dei, quam inscrutabilia sunt judicia ejus, and investigabiles viae ejus. Et
paulo infra: Si ergo confiteris donum Dei esse perseverare in bono usque ad
finem, cur hoc donum ille accipiat, ille non accipiat, puto quod mecum patiter
nescis, and ambo hic inscrutabilia judicia Dei penetrate non possumus. Et libro
de dono perseverantiae cap. 9. docet hoc judicium Dei magis esse inscrutabile
circa duos parvulos ac duos impios: Ex duobus autem piis, inquit, cur huic
donetur perseverantia usque in finem, illi autem non donetur, inscrutabiliora
sunt judicia Dei.

Ex his patet quam alienum sit a S. Augustini sententia in libro de corr. and
great. expressa, ut dicatur docuisse dari semper omnibus justis in justitia
perseverandi gratiam, qua pro suo nutu, seu si velint, utantur vel non utantur.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
[LX. Testimonium.]
Sermon. 21. de verbis Domini. ET ideo unusquisque nostrum, dum licet, and cum
Dei adjutorio in potestate nostra consistit, (id est, toto vitae tempore, ut
patet ex serie sermonis) and peccata vitare, and quod bonum est, exercere
contend.

RESPONSIO.
ERror est in citatione (istud enim non legitur in sermon citato,) Augustini
tamen esse concedimus. Sed nihil aliud hoc testimonio significatur, quam, dum
in hac vita sumus, semper nos per bona opera salvari posse, ut S. Prosper in
responsione ad sextam objectionem Vincentianam docet his verbis: Hoc inter
malos homines distat and daemones, quod hominibus etiam valde malis superest,
si Deus misereatur, reconciliatio, daemonibus autem nulla est in aeternum
servata conversio.

CONCLUSIO.
EX his facile est intelligere quae sit habenda Molinist is fides: quid sperari
possit in rebus humanis ab hoc hominum genere, qui circa divinas artificio
ludunt fallaci and sophistico. Interpretes falsi (ut de veritatis inimicis
dicebat olim Cyprianus) Lib. de unitate Eccles.
extrema ponunt, and superiora praetereunt, partis memores, and partem subdole
comprimentes. Divi Augustini reprehensores vana objiciunt, recta impugnant,
prava defendunt. Neglectis atque contemptis Augustini libris integris, ubi rem,
de qua agitur, data opera tractat, explanat, confirmat, inculcat, quasdam ejus
sententias aut ad rem non pertinentes, aut dimidiatas, aut aliquando corruptas
hinc inde colligunt, ut lectoribus credulis, aut solitae suae versutiae non
assuetis fucum faciant. Ecce quibus artificiis relatorum ex Augustino
testimoniorum interpolatores Doctorem probatissimum suas in parts invitum
trahunt. Ecce quo candore genuinam ejus mentem exponunt, salutaremque doctrinam
inquirunt. Ecce quibus viis perniciosos de gratia generali Molinistica errores
defendunt. Locuti sunt adversum nos lingua dolosa, Psalm 108.
sed ille nos ab eorum insidiis liberabit, qui apprehendit sapientes in astutia
eorum, and consilium pravorum dissipat. Job 5.
In oppugnandis Augustini Discipulis Molinistae ita se gerunt, quasi persuasum
and exploratum habeant fraudibus and calumniis Catholicam fidem expugnari
posse. Itane Molinae discipuli existimant in omnibus hominibus intelligentiae
caligare obtutum, and a cunctis Ecclesiae filiis spiritum scientiae and
pietatis abscessisse, ut non erubescant ingerere se judiciis legentium tam
inhonesto mendacio? S. Prosper cont. Collat. c. 33.
Verum haec iniquae fortassis ipsorum causae tribuenda sunt, miserabiles istos
conatus ab ingeniis non contemnendis extorsit dura necessitas. Haec opprobria
facere jussit male susceptum patrocinium falsitatis. Erraverunt ab utero;
locuti sunt falsa. Psalm 57.
Itaque illos admonemus, ut si deinceps lucidissima and saluberrima scripta
Sancti Augustini eo consilio scrutari velint, ut magistrum optimum atque
sapientissimum suis adversari Discipulis, imo sibi ipsi contrarium esse, cum
aliqua very specie jactitent* paululum saltem humanae, si non Christianae
sinceritatis assumant; vel certe cordatis hominibus persuadeant mendaciis
indigere ac defendi posse veritatem. Alioqui dum hesterna Ludovici Molinae
commenta in antiquissimis and fundatissimis Augustini documentis quaerunt, vano
and poenitendo labor seipsos fatigant, novitatem suam in ipsis visceribus
orthodoxae vetustatis indagantes.

Quae omnia Sanctae Sedis correctioni ac judicio subjicimus. Subscriptum Romae
die Lunae XIX. Maii anno MDCLIII. Thus signed with Paraphs. Natalis de Lalane
Doctor Facultatis Parisiensis, Abbas B. Mariae de Valle-crescente. Tussanus des
Mares Presbyter Congregationis Oratorii Domini Jesu. Ludovicus de Saint-Amour
in sacra Facultate Parisiensi Doctor ac Socius Sorbonicus. Nicolaus Manessier
in sacra Facultate Parisiensi Doctor ac Socius Sorbonicus. Ludovicus Angran
ejusdem sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Licentiatus ac Insignis Ecclesiae
Trecensis Canonicus.


Apologetical Memoires in behalf of the Rector, Deanes, Proctors, and Deputies
of the University of Paris. [Mention'd Part. 3. Chap. 9.] Against the
Enterprise of certain Irish, for the most part Students in the University.
THough the University of Paris ought to prepare it self to suffer continual
persecutions, so long as its Peace and Liberty are eye-sores to its Enemies:
nevertheless the quality of the persons lately employed to divide it, is a
thing of sufficient wonder; and 'twas scarce credible either, that a small
number of Irish, circumvented by strange Artifices, could raise against it the
Syndic of the Theological Faculty, or that so many Doctors could be brought to
favor so temerarious an enterprise. But since it finds it self in so
deplorable a pass, as to be put to uphold its Authority against its own
children, and to render an account of its proceedings, yet it has this
consolation in its disgraces, that if it speaks for its non justification, it is
before the Parliament of Paris, that is to say, before that August Tribunal
which has for many ages been the protector of its rights, liberties and
privilidges; and it has no reason to fear that the Court will account it as a
crime, that had a zeal so full of moderation and prudence to repress an
Innovation which it could not have suffered without conspiring at the same time
against the Churches discipline and the Kings Authority. The representation of
the matter of Fact without colors or artifices will be sufficient to stop the
mouths of its adversaries; and being always a cordial cherisher and lover of
peace, it had rather justify it self before all the world by the innocent force
of its reasons, then say all that it might allege against the violence of its
most unjust adversaries.

I.
A faithful Narrative of all that passed in reference to a Declaration of the
Irish; and of the true motives which induced the University of Paris to stop
their interprises by an exemplary Decree.
'TWas not credible that after the Archbishop of Paris, the most August Clergy
of France, assembled at Paris a year before, and the famous Faculty of
Divinity, forbore upon important reason to pass any judgment upon the
questions concerning the matter of Grace, any should have with extreme
importunities solicited a Decision of certain Irish students in the University
of Paris, as if the doctrine of the Church depended on their judgment, or as if
this unjust appeal gave them a new jurisdiction.

Nevertheless the Rector of the University of Paris heard the astonishing
news of such a design. He was informed that these Irish, solicited by certain
Ecclesiastics who are thought to be in some credit at Court, had consulted in
several assemblies held to that end by them, to make some doctrinal declaration
concerning the controverted opinions about Grace; and this new project obliged
him to use all precautions necessary to stop the progress of it. For which
end, having notice of an Assembly then held in the chamber of Nicholas Poetus
an Irishman, Bachelor of Divinity and Professor of Philosophy in the College
of Lysieux, and that they were upon the point to determine certain Questions of
Grace; he caused one of the Beadles of the University to warn them on Febr. 3.
to abstain from such kind of Conventicles, and not to presume to pronounce any
doctrinal judgment.

Their speedy departure from the abovesaid Batchelor's chamber seemed to imply
at first that the command was given to obedient persons; but they who inveigled
them into the business determined to effect that with less noise which did
not succeed in those assemblies; and they run from door to door to get the
subscriptions of particular persons to three or four copies of a Declaration
which was presented to them ready drawn, and which contained a judgment upon
the five Propositions touching the matter of Grace.

Such urgent solicitations made to strangers whom their domestical Afflictions
reduced to many hardships, prevailed with some of these Irish to hearken to
those promised them assistance only upon this condition; and of twenty six who
subscribed, there was only one Doctor of Divinity, two Batchelors and two
Masters of Arts, all the rest having no rank nor degree in the University of
Paris, and some of them having scarce studied Philosophy or Grammar.

The Rector being informed of this secret negotiation, could not, without
betraying his Magistracy, but complain of this enteprise against his authority.
He gave notice of it to the Deans of Faculties, and the Procurators of Nations,
and the ordinary assembly held at his house on Saturday the fourth of March; he
represented to them how important it was to hinder such Conventicles from being
held in the Colleges of the University, and to punish those who contrary to
his express prohibitions, and without having either authority or degree to
pass any Judgment in matters of doctrine, were nevertheless so bold as to
pronounce upon Propositions which the Faculty of Divinity had Judged expedient
not to meddle with, when the same were presented to it in the assembly of the
first of July to be examined; that the Archbishop of Paris and the whole Clergy
of France assembled a year before in that capital City of the Kingdom, had
likewise refused to define any thing upon that matter. He gave them further to
understand that this Declaration contained things extremely prejudicial to the
authority of the University of Paris, and notoriously injurious to the rights
and privileges of the Kingdom and Gallicane Church. Lastly, he told them that
of these Irish he had ordered four who were of the body of the University to
appear before the Assembly, to speak for themselves in the business, and to
produce all the Copies of the Declaration by them subscribed.

The Deanes of Faculties and Procurators of Nations having agreed to hear the
Irish before further proceeding, they were called into the Assembly, and after
the reading of the Declaration to them, they all acknowledged that they had
subscribed the same apart, and without having examined it in common; that no
copy of the three or four which they had signed remained in their hand, but
they had given one to M. Vincent General of the Priests of the Mission and
Principal of the College des Bons-Enfans; that they were ready to revoke their
subscriptions if the University commanded them; to which also they obliged
themselves under their hands.

At the same time the Rector produced a Petition which had been presented to
himself with the Deans of Faculties and Proctors of Nations by the Irish
Divines of the University of Paris; who most humbly beseecht them in the name
of their whole nation, not to impute to all the body the fault and temerity of
certain particular persons, some of whom had been mistaken and understood not
the things which they subscribed, and others had been seduced by the
Adversaries of the University to prevent the mischief which some particulars
were going to bring upon the whole nation, to keep the bond of fraternal
charity from being broken, and that they might not be branded with so shameful
a blot to their reputation, as if they had all consented to the fault of some,
who had committed so strange an attempt against the rights of the Gallicane
Church and the whole Realm of France.

After the reading of this Petition diverse Irish Divines were heard, some of
whom declared that two Jesuits had promised to give the Irish a house, if they
would subscribe the Declaration; and that they were also put in hopes that some
other personage would make a Foundation in their favor, and that Benefices
should be given to the Subscribers.

All these things being heard and deliberately considered, the whole Assembly
unanimously resolved, That it belonged not to any person to define any thing in
matters of doctrine; and consequently that small number of Irish, who were only
private persons, of no authority, and most of them of no note for learning, or
any degree in the University of Paris, had committed an action of temerity and
insolence, in that after express prohibition given to them by the Rector, they
took upon them to pass a doctrinal Judgment, and to decide Questions touching
which neither the Faculty of Divinity, nor the Archbishop of Paris, nor the
Clergy of France, would define any thing. That upon this account the University
condemned, abrogated and nullifi'd the said Declaration, Judging the same
prejudicial to its Authority^, contrary to the custom, and rights of the Realm
and Gallicane Church; and it also ordained that all the copies that could be
found thereof in any place whatever, with the subscriptions of those Irish
should be brought to the Rector and cancelled: That it deprived of all degree,
right and privilege of the University of Paris, those members of it who had
subscribed the said Declaration; that it debarred the rest from ever receiving
any degree, and expelled them out of all its Colleges, if within 8 days next
after the signification of this Decree, they did not under their hand revoke
that first subscription, and deliver their Declaration into the hands of the
Register of the University; after which time there should not be any hope of
pardon for such as should be convicted of contumacy: That it prohibited these
Irish and all others in the University of Paris to attempt the like projects
for the future, under pain of being deprived of all degrees, privileges,
rights and Colleges of the same Universite: That this Degree should be
forthwith signified to all Principals of Colleges and to all others to whom it
might appertain. And accordingly being signed by Quintaine Scribe of the
University, it was published by the Grand Bedle of the Nation of France.

This so important Decree was afterward confirmed in the General Assembly held
at the Mathurins March 21. It Is true, M. Hallier Syndic of the Faculty of
Divinity, was mighty hot in this assembly for the defense of so unjust a cause,
being prepossessed with interest and passion; but because he boasted that he
spoke in the name of the Faculty who gave him no order, and it belonged to the
Dean, and not to him to be the Mouth of the Faculty in this case, as it was
ever practiced in these Assemblies, he was sufficiently convicted of the
novelty of his proceeding. Yet above fifty Doctors of the Faculty who were
present could not prevail with this Syndic to let the Dean take the voices of
the Doctors according to custom. M. Masters who was Dean in this Assembly was
also desired several times to gather their suffrages. But M. Pereyret and some
others hindered him from doing it. In fine, M. Hallier having clamor'd much
that none should speak, received no other satisfaction from his bustle but the
shame of having had abundance of witnesses of his disorder.

After this solemn confirmation, 'twas hoped the Irish would betake themselves
to their duty; but being possessed by other spirits then their own, they were
counseled to appeal from this Decree to the Parliament, not that they hoped to
find any protection to their disobedience there, but only to continue the
trouble longer in the University, which is the only aim of those who make them
the Instruments of their passion. Wherefore having presented their Petition to
the Parliament, the Court retained the Cause by Arrest of March 24. which was
signified to the Rector on the 29th of the same month. But these Irish meaning
to testify that they had as little respect to the Parliament as to the
University, took a very strange course, and addressed to the Faculty of
Divinity, under pretext of imploring whose intervention, they demanded that it
would please to judge of their difference touching the said Decree; as if the
Faculty had been a Tribunal Superior to the University and the Parliament, and
as if it had right to judge of a Judgment of the whole University. M. Nicholas
Poerus being chosen as the boldest with M. Thomas Medus, brought this Petition
to the Faculty of Divinity assembled in Sorbonne, April 1. They also presented
to it an Original of that Declaration which they had Signed, and another Act
made by the Irish before a Notary, March 22. viz. after the Confirmation of the
Decree made by the University in its General Assembly held at the Mathurines,
March 21. Such as had any knowledge of what had passed, were surprised; when by
the reading of this Act, they found that these private persons, instead of
revoking their Declaration, confirmed it by an Act directly contrary to what
they had promised, and obliged themselves under their hands to do, in the
Assembly of the fourth of March. And whereas the Declaration begins with a
complaint against new Opinions, which it says are publicly taught by some
persons in this unhappy Age; M. de Sainte-Beuve, Doctor of Sorboune, and
Professor of Divinity, asked Poerus what were those new Opinions, and who were
the Professors that taught them: But they who had inspired this Bachelor with
the boldness to come upon the Stage, and kindle the flame of Division, hindered
him from answering to the Question, and immediately got him away; amongst whom
M. Hallier forgetting that he was Syndic, to remember only that he was M.
Hallier, and betraying the honor of his Office for the interest of his person,
was so far from seconding M. de Sainte-Beuve's Proposal, that he became of
Counsel with Poerus, by an unworthy prevarication, suitable indeed to the
shameful manner whereby he entered into the Syndical. He gave notice to this
Bachelor to withdraw instantly, and said he should answer with advice,
respondebit ex consilio.

The blindness of this Syndic could not but lead him to greater disorders. He
propounded the affair to the Faculty, he moved to have it debated, he became
the Advocate of the Irish, and the Defender of their Declaration; He undertakes
to make it good in all its points, says they committed no fault in making such
a private Declaration, and highly condemns the Universities Decree: And to
citcumvent the Assembly, he boldly imposes upon it, and affirms, that the said
Decree was not confirmed by any of the Faculties in the Assembly at the
Mathurines; although M. de Sainte-Beuve being unable to endure such a notorious
falsehood, declared openly, that the Decree was confirmed there, that he had a
Transcript of it in his hand Signed by the Register of the University, which he
offered to read to the Company. And by this artifice M. Hallier,
notwithstanding the resistance of a great number of Doctors, brought the
Conclusion to be, that the Faculty disapproved the Decree Improbavit praedictum
Decretum diei 4. Martii: consensum qu^que si quem praebuit in comitiis privatis
apud ampliss. D. Rectorem illi Decreto D. Prodecanus Theologiae; quae vero
gesta sunt a D. Syndico die 21. Martii in Comitiis generalibus Mathurensium
approbavit; and appellationi Hibernorum sese adjunxit, etc.
and the consent which his Sub-Dean had given thereunto in the Assembly of the
Rector, if he had given any; approved that which M. Hallier had done in the
General Assembly at the Mathurines, and seconded the Appeal of the Irish: To
which Conclusion about forty secular Doctors opposed themselves, declaring,
that they adhered to the Rector, and to the University, to make good its Decree
against those Irish.

Certainly if this Doctor did not take pride in appearing a public Enemy of
the Privileges of the Theological Faculty of the University of Paris, of the
Rights and Safety of the Kingdom, of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church,
and of all Ecclesiastical Discipline and Policy, he could not have been carried
to such strange excesses, his Society would be in peace, and the tranquillity
of the University would not be disturbed by Domestic Divisions.

II.
The Weighty Reasons which engaged sundry Doctors of the Faculty of Divinity
not to relinquish the University.
THis affair is none of those which are decided by plurality of voices, for all
forms have been violated in it; and upon this account many, and those the most
ancient Doctors, viz. MM. Hennequin, Chastelain, de Mince, Coppin, Dreux,
Bachelier, Brousse, Bourgecis, and above thirty other Seculars opposed so
injust a Conclusion, and declared, that they stood for the whole University to
make good its Decree against the Irish; in which they had none but just
considerations, and most reasonable inducements.

I. This Decree was made according to all forms; all Rules of Law were observed
in it; it was not made but by the advice of the Faculty of Divinity, being
presented to the Assembly by M. Hennequin, Sub-Dean thereof, who first gave his
suffrage and consent to it; and no body will accuse this Venerable Sub-Dean
either of impudence or precipitation, but such as know not his integrity,
wisdom and zeal for preserving the interests of the Faculty. His carriage in
this affair is most justifiable, and it may be made appear, that he deserves
the general approbation and thanks of the whole Faculty, as he received the
same from all the Doctors, who with the greatest Justice defend the true
interests of that Society: And lastly, this Decree was confirmed in the General
Assembly held at the Mathurines, March 21. by the Deans of Superior Faculties,
and Proctors of Nations.

II. Were not the Declaration of the Irish altogether illegal, as it is; and
were their proceedings as justifiable, as it is unjust and worthy of
punishment, there would be no need of the Faculties siding with those Irish. If
it pretended to receive any injury in its rights, it might and ought rather to
complain thereof to the University, and for want of satisfaction, to have
recourse to the Court. But it not only joins with the Irish, and so becomes
divided both in it self. (inasmuch as so many Doctors oppose what it acts)
and from the whole Body of the University; but besides, it passes Judgment
upon a Decree of the whole University, and disapproves it; and this is that
which renders its Conclusion perfectly null and abusive, since it has no Power
nor Jurisdiction to disallow the Judgment of the University: The Faculty of
Divinity is but a Member and part, though the Prime and Noblest of all the
whole University; it is inferior thereunto, as a part is to its whole, it has
no right to judge of the Universities Judgment, nor to disapprove what it
does; it can only oppose it self thereunto, and appeal to the Parliament, or
intervene in the Cause with Appellants; and it cannot say and pretend, that
this Decree is not the Decree of the University, since having been made in all
the forms, it was confirmed in the General Assembly of the Mathurines before
the Assembly of the Faculty: Nevertheless, in the mean time, the Faculty of
Divinity parted and divided in it self; pronounces that it disapproves this
Decree, Inprobat Decretum.

III. It is certain, that when M. Hallier spoke in the General Assembly of the
Mathurines in the name of the whole Faculty, without order from it so to do;
when he took upon him to be the Spokesman of his Society, in presence of the
Deans to whom that right belonged; and when he refused to put to the Question
what he had proposed, and to let the suffrages be gathered of the Doctors who
were present in that Assembly, and composed the Body of the Theologal Faculty:
It Is certain, I say, that in all this he acted against the Forms and Customs:
And therefore how can the Faculty approve what he did in that Assembly contrary
to the Rules of the Faculty? It Is not then the mind of the Faculty which framed
this so illegal Conclusion: It Is manifest, that the Doctors who opposed it, are
Defenders of the true Interests and Rights of their Society; add that if they
are not the most numerous, yet they are the best and soundest part. It Is well
seen, that M. Hallier could not get such a Conclusion made, without canvasing
and intrigue. Four or five Doctors, who took upon them to overrule the Faculty,
having counseled M. Hallier to attempt what he did in the Assembly of the
Mathurines against all forms; and having authorized him themselves, they got it
approved by the plurality of voices, how injust and illegal soever it were, and
whatever Remonstrances were made by the Doctors, who in behalf of the Faculty
opposed this pretended Conclusion. But how does the Faculty approve that which
M. Hallier did in the Assembly of the Mathurines, without knowing what he did?
He says, that not being allowed to speak in that Assembly, he made an Act
before a Notary to oppose the Decree, which Act he ought to have produced and
showed to the Faculty; and the Faculty by the reading thereof have known what
he did: All which defects evidence, that more care was taken to bring that to
pass in the Faculty which had been unsuccessfully atempted in the Assembly of
the University, then to observe the Laws of the Faculty, and the Rules of
Justice.

IV. Is it not further apparent, that M. Hallier the Syndic, and the Doctors
who uphold him, violated in this Assembly all forms of right, and the most
certain rules of Natural Equity? Is it credidible that M. Richard Nugent was
suffered to be a Judge in this affair? Yet he was present at the debate, gave
his Opinion, and a long Contest there was about writing down and reckoning his
suffrage. Is there any greater Evidence of a Conspiracy, and any less just
proceeding, then obstinately to hold him a Judge in his own cause, who was a
Witness to the debate which principally concerned himself?

V. But there was no cause for the Faculties intervening in behalf of its own
rights, since the same were no wise injured, nei her in respect of the Decree,
which contains nothing but a Regulation of Discipline against those who usurped
a Doctrinal Judgment, nor in respect of the Doctor comprised in the Decree,
since the University has right to judge as it did, and to decree a penalty
against him which was only comminatory. And indeed this Doctor appeared in the
Assembly, was examined, and willingly submitted himself under his own hand to
the judgment of the University, and was not actually and by name excluded by
that Decree from the rights of the Faculty. A second Judgment ought to be
pronounced against him, and all the rest, to make them really understand the
penalties specified in this Decree; which indeed is rather an exemplary and
necessary Regulation for the keeping up of discipline and the Authority Royal,
then a punishing of those that transgressed it, since no body in effect
incurred any penalty by this Decree, and all might have escaped only with
acknowledging their fault, and submitting themselves, as they publicly
promised, to what the University should please to ordain. But supposing it had
been expedient, for the avoiding of Consequences, to interest the whole Faculty
of Divinity upon that Doctors account; was this a sufficient cause for the
Faculty to judge of the Decree, and intervene in the affair of the Irish
against the University?

VI. Had there been reason to oppose this Decree, it ought to have been done in
the General Assembly of the University at the Mathurines; but since no
opposition was made there, either from the Faculty or any Doctor, how is it
fitting to stir again an affair already judged and publicly passed by
Authentic Confirmation? M. Hallier demanded to speak in the Assembly of the
Mathurines, and was interrupted for the reasons abovementioned; but neither
he, nor any other Doctor, publicly opposed the Confirmation of this Decree: M.
Hallier protested only that he was hindered from speaking, but no body heard
him say, that he opposed himself to the Confirmation of the Decree: Nor can it
be showed that he makes any mention of his opposition in the act of the
Confirmation of the Decree. It Is well known, that when one makes an opposition
and demands an Act of it, it is always the custom to grant it to him. He told
the Faculty that he opposed it by an Act before Notaries: but this was not
sufficient; he ought to have said publicly in the Assembly of the Mathurines
that he opposed such confirmation. He was heard to say to Notaries, that he
demanded of them an Act, for that he was hindered from speaking, but not that
he opposed the confirmation of the Decree, or demanded an act of such
oppposition. And thus the Decree having been confirmed without public
opposition, from the Faculty, Dean, Syndic, or any other particular Doctor,
there was no longer any place for the Faculty to oppose the same afterward.
But had M. Hallier the Syndic in that assembly opposed the confirmation of the
Decree, he ought to have taken the suffrages of the Doctors then present, who
represented the body of the Faculty, to declare the sentence of the Faculty.
That was the place and time appointed to debate of this affair; and M.
Hallier's obstructing of the debate shows that he apprehended the Faculties
unfavorable design, and that it would have confirmed the Decree, if it had had
the liberty of opining in that Assembly. What violence was not used to keep M.
Messier then Dean from speaking his advice publicly and intelligibly, and from
taking those of the Doctors present, as he was required to do? Things having
passed thus at the Mathurines, either the Faculty then assembled ought to be
acccounted to have confirmed the Decree, or not opposing it in that place, it
cannot oppose the same afterward. But in brief, the Faculty of Divinity being
but a part of the University, though it had opposed this Decree acaccording to
form; yet the same had been confirmed by the University, being so by the other
Faculties and by the four Nations.

VII. Lastly, the Doctors opposers are ready to make good to all the world the
justice of the Decree it self, the injustice of the Declaration of the Irish in
every thing that it contained. Whereas therefore they are persuaded here, and
know that the university used its own right with extreme moderation and
prudence, they cannot consent to this new faction which insensibly tends to the
utter ruin of the University. This is what it is easy for the University to
justify, and to show that its Decree is most just and moderate, and that the
Declaration of the Irish is most injust and temerarious.

III.
The Declaration of the Irish refuted in general, ad the rashness and
dangerous consequence of this enterprise laid open, chiefly as to the
discipline of the Church in matter of Doctrine.
NOw to comply with the obstinacy of our Adversaries, and consider this affair
without respect to the Decree, and its confirmation, and as a thing not already
decided; certainly it is hard to conceive what those protectors of the worst of
causes can reply, when they are shown by most plain and convincing proofs, 1.
That the Declaration is a very manifest enterprise of the Irish. 2. That it is
unjust and temerarious in every of its parts, and wholly contrary to the
liberties of the Gallicane Church, the rights of the Realm, and the safety of
the sacred persons of our Kings. 3. That the Rector, Deanes and Proctors had
right to vacate it, and punish those exemplarily who were convicted to have
subscribed it. 4. That having resolved to make an example of them, they
proceeded therein with so much prudence and moderation, that they cannot be
accused either of excess in their chastisment or of precipitation in their
conduct.

To begin with the Declaration, it is no Hyperbole to say that it wounds the
peace of the Church, and particularly that of the Faculty; that it is contrary
to Ecclesiastical discipline and policy, and of very dangerous consequence in
reference to matters of Doctrine; that it is contrary to the Arrests of the
Court of Parliament, and injurious to the Faculty in reference to the Five
Propositions, which it qualifies as suspected of heresy; that it violates the
Arrests of the Court, destroys the rights of France, ruins Royal and Sovereign
Authority in what regards the power of Popes, whose temporal power it
establishes ovet things; lastly, that it is against all kind of forms and
equity.

As the University has neither judged nor pretended to judge of the matter of
doctrine; as it has said nothing in its Decree concerning the truth or
falsehood of the Five Propositions of Grace contained in the declaration of
these Irish; so has it not any design either of approving or disapproving the
same Propositions, whether considered in themselves, or according to the
several senses which they admit, But it looks upon them as Propositions, about
which there is great contest between Catholic Doctors, and the Faculty thought
fit not to pronounce, and of which there has not been any Judgment of the
Church, since they were first set on foot. And indeed were the Propositions
really such as the Irish determine them, to wit suspected of error and heresy,
yet their enterprise were intolerable and of very pernicious consequence to the
Church, because they have made a new Declaration of the points of Doctrine in
contest, and drawn an unreceiv'd and unheard of Profession of faith, without
having any authority in the Church.

I. He must be ignorant of all the Ordinances of the Realm as well as of all
the laws of the Church, who does not know that it pertaines not to any private
person to make private conventicles, wherein to consult about judging of
doctrine, drawing declarations of faith, and to cause diverse copies of the same
to be subscribed and put into the hands and disposal of others. Yet thus the
Irish began their enterprise. They assembled at the college of Lisieux in the
chamber of M. Nicholas Poerus, and there resolved upon subscribing the
Declaration. This matter of Fact is evident by the signification made to them
in the Rector's name by the grand Bedle of the Nation of France. Now the
attempt is the more worthy of punishment in that these strangers ought to have
had more sense of the hospitality given them by France, then to do that amongst
us which is not permitted them in any place of the earth.

II. It is not lawful for any private person to make any new declaration or
profession of Faith, nor to subscribe it; otherwise, every one might take the
same license, and take upon them to subscribe such as are contrary one to
another. And so the Church would be divided by an infinite number of different
professions of Faith, and the particular persons who made them without any
Ecclesiastical Authority would wholly extinguish all the marks of the unity of
Faith which makes all the Faithful but one and the same Religious Body.

III. The same course might be practiced in all sort of matters, and when there
is no public allowance to write, or regularly examine, or appear as Divines
before the Tribunals of the Church about points of Doctrine contested between
Catholic Doctors, the weakest in knowledge but strongest in intrigues and
credit, might have recourse to these negotiations of darkness in order to
promote their opinions, and by this means render themselves absolute Masters
and supreme Judges of Doctrine by making others subscribe the condemnation of
what Tenets themselves dislike. They who hold a doctrine most complying and
favorable to the genius of the world and humane interests, will take this
course to authorize their sentiments to enervate the vigor of Ecclesiastical
discipline, and to corrupt the purity of manners in Christianity. They likewise
whose hearts are envenomed against the temporal power of our Kings, and burn
with continual desire to subject their Crowns to the temporal power of the
supreme Pontifs, will have recourse to this artifice for the upholding of a
doctrine which they cannot retract; and the ancient sentiments of the
University and Faculty of Divinity shall be betrayed by the iniquity of this
practice. The bare description of this proceeding is sufficient to display the
injustice and pernicious consequence of it.

IV. It Is easy to verify that most part of those who subscribed are utterly
ignorant in the matters whereof they judge. Of twenty seven, one and twenty
have neither title nor degree in the University; and of these 21 there are 12
students in Divinity, and 7 students in Philosophy; the five rest are two
Batchelors and two Masters of Arts; who indeed have been examined for the
Degree of Bachelor but never kept their Act; and there is but one single
Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, M. Richard Newgent. What Ecclesiastic, how
ignorant soever, will not undertake to make the like Declarations in all
matters of Doctrine, whether in reference to faith or manners, if this
enterprise be suffered and not exemplarily punished in these Irish Scholars?

IV.
The Declaration of the Irish particularly examined, chiefly in what relates to
the power of Kings.
I. WE may see by the bare reading of this Writing that it is a form of
Profession of Faith and a doctrinal Declaration; and should we go no further
then the preface, these Irish might seem very considerable persons and of great
Authority in the Church. Do but consider this magnificent beginning, Cum nova
dogmata in his calamitosissimis temporibus a quibusdam doceantur, praedicentur,
typis maudentur, etc. Nos infra scripti huic periculo mature pro Viribus
occurrere proponentes, etc. Could the H. See or the Archbishop of Paris, the
Clergy of France, speak with more authorithy if they were to make decisions?
and may it not be said upon considering the style of these Irish, that every
one of them is a Pope, or at least a Bishop? Certainly if the Faculty of Paris
were obliged to give their judgment upon these matters, it would use other
words, and not these expressions which denote power. Who then can endure that
simple scholars should use such strange language? And what is more ridiculous
then the boldness wherewith they say they will seasonably remedy the mischiefs
which appear risen in the Church by the divisions concerning the matter of
Grace? Does it belong to students of Philosophy and Divinity to judge and
pronounce, that new doctrines are taught in the University of Paris? to judge
of Professors of Divinity who are their Masters? and do they know what a new
doctrine is?

II. What may we expect from a Preface which denotes so great knowledge and
authority, and in what manner will these Irish pronounce? They pronounce as
persons that intended to make decisions. Firmiter statuimus (say they)
promittimusque; we ordain and promise. Who can suffer so manifest an insolence
of this small number of private persons, who having neither authority nor
degree, forbear not to speak like Oracles in matters of Divinity? Who can but
disapprove the temerity which leads them to make a common resolution upon
points of doctrine? In brief, who could have imagined that persons of this
conditions durst have subscribed the form of a Profession of faith wholly new
and unheard of hitherto in the Church?

III. But what do these Irish promise in such magnificent terms? Promittimus
(say they) nos semper adhaesuro omnibus Decretis ac Censuris summorum
Pontificum. To speak truth, this promise is nothing else but a Threat to all
France, and an act of hostility against the rights of the Crown. But let us not
lay the blame upon these scholars, who no doubt had not malignity enough to
frame such a dangerous Conspiracy of their own heads. And since this is the
stone of stumbling; let us not fear to say, that they who contrived this
Declaration, had a direct design to wound the Rights of the Gallicane Church,
to do an outrage to the Royal Power, to despise the Arrests of Parliament, and
to trample upon the Censures of the University and Faculty of Divinity,
especially the last which was made against the pernicious Doctrine of
Sanctarel. For besides the general terms omnibus Decretis, they have explained
themselves more fully, in this manner; Insuper promittimus nunquam nos ex animi
sententia privatam aut public def^nsuros, etc. ullas Propositiones de err^re
aut haeresi suspectas, AUT QUOMODOLIBET A QUOVIS SUMMO PONTIFICE DAMNATAS.
Behold the poison and the most dangerous artifice of so black a plot included
in these last words! Is it possible to wound the Sovereign Authority of our
Kings more openly, or more punctually denote the Bulls and Decrees of some
Popes against their Sacred Power? These strangers are made to say, (that so, if
possible, all Frenchmen might say the same) that they are contented to resolve
and promise perpetual adherence to all Decrees and Censures of Popes: They add,
they will never deliberately maintain, either privately or publicly, any
doctrine condemned by any Pope whatsoever, by any way or manner whatsoever,
without particularizing the Bulls of Popes; for except particularly specifying
the Bulls of Popes against Kings, it is impossible to use more express words
whereby to denote such as are prejudicial to our Kings, and contrary to the
Liberties of France. And the Act in which these Irish are inveigled to declare
themselves upon this point, is contrived in such sort, that it is no less
contrary to the Royal Power then their first Declaration: For in this Act,
which begins with Insuper promittimus, they say, that by Propositions condemned
in what manner soever, and by what Pope soever, they did and do understand such
Propositions as have been condemned by any Censure whatsoever. Declaramus nos
hic intellexisse and intelligere Propositiones quacunque censura sive nota
haeresios, sive erroris, sive falsitatis aut temeritatis damnatas nunquam
docturos. And thus their interpretation is rather a new Confirmation, then a
disguizing of their design, or rather of the design of those who are the
Authors and Instruments of this whole enterprise; nor do they declare
themselves otherwise upon this point in the French Declaration made before
Notaries. But should these second Declarations contain a favorable
Interpretation, or even a formal revocation of what they had said in their
first, were the Decree of the University ever the less just? Ought not that to
be considered which they said in their first Declaration, against which the
University made its Decree, which was also confirmed in the General Assembly of
the 21 of March, before this second Declaration was made upon the 22. In which
regard, the Faculty ought not to have had any consideration of these second
Declarations, and the same ought not to have been a pretext for it to join with
the Irish against the University, and disapprove its Decree, supposing it had
right and power to judge thereof.

Now if we consider the quality of this enterprise, we cannot but confess, that
the Rector and the University had been culpable, if they had not repressed it.
Some Irish residing in France, obliged by the public hospitality of this
Courteous Nation, and though Strangers, yet admitted to Study with perfect
liberty, in the University of Paris, are so presumptuous, as to make
Conventicles about points of doctrine and our Religion; They subscribe
Declarations against the Authority of Kings, the Arrests of Parliament, the
Censures of the University and the Faculty; They approve, ordain by a firm
resolution and promise to maintain the Bull of Boniface the VIII. upon which
Sanctarel, and all the Sanctarellists, both on this and the other side of the
Mountains, chiefly found their pernicious doctrine of deposing Kings, disposing
of their Kingdoms, and absolving their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance;
insomuch that one of them, Suarez the Jesuit, boldly alleges that Bull as his
principal proof of his saying that this doctrine ought to be believed as an
Article of Faith. These Irish, in general terms without exception, promise to
maintain the Bull of Julius 11. against Lewis XII. and John d' Albret King of
Navarre, both Predecessors of our most Christian King Lewis XIV. King of France
and Navarre; They engage themselves by Oath to defend that Bull, whereby the
Kingdom of Navarre has been usurped from its lawful Lord: They oblige
themselves to receive that Bull, by which Sixtus V. deprived the late King
Henry the Great (of glorious memory) of the Kingdom of Navarre, and declared
the same King, and Henry Prince of Conde, and their Posterity, incapable of
succeeding to the Realm of France, or to any other Principality or Dignity, and
absolved all their Subjects and Vassals from the Oath of Fidelity, and all
other duty. They determine and promise to adhere inviolably to the Bull in
Caena Domini, Excommunicamus and Anathematizanus omnes and singulos
Cancellarios and Vice-Cancellarios, and Consiliarios ordinarios and
extraordinarios quorumcunque Regum and Principum, ac Praesidentes
Cancellariorum, Consiliorum and Parlamentorum; nec non Procuratores generales
eorundem, aliosque judices tam ordinarios quam delegatos: nec non
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Commendatarios, Vicarios and Officiales,
qui per se vel alium seu alios Beneficiales, and decimarum, ac alias
spirituales and spiritualibus annexas causas ab Auditoribus and Commissariis
nostris aliisque Judicibus Ecclesiasticis avocant -- ac sese illarum cognitione
tanquam judices interponunt, etiam sub praetextu violentiae prohibendae. Ex
Rulla in Coena Domini.
by which the Appeals, used for so many Ages in this Realm, are expressly
condemned, and all persons who interpose or favor them, and all Secular Judges
who receive and take cognizance of them, are Excommunicated. Now what could the
Rector do in this case, when complaints were made to him of this Declaration,
and attested Copies thereof delivered to him by those who had seen the Original
and the Subscriptions? Could he be (as he is) the Guardian of the Discipline of
the University of Paris, and Head of that Renowned Body, and remain in silence,
the meanest graduate and most careless of all men? Should not he acquaint the
Deans of Faculties, and Procurators of Nations therewith? But if after he has
done his duty therein, and the deed is evidenced by Confession of the
Accomplices, shall the University, which can no longer be ignorant of so
dangerous an enterprise, neglect to repress it by the just severity of its
Decree? Shall it not take a course to nullify such a Declaration, and punish
those who subscribed it, unless they revoke and renounce it? But if the Rector
were capable of so soft and stupid patience, what would the University say? And
if the University were so regardless of the Rights of the Crown, what would the
King, what would the Parliament of Paris say?

IV. If we will go further, and search into the secret of this affair, we shall
see that none of all these words were inserted without design: To which
purpose, consider but what persons they are who have the chief hand in this
intrigue. It Is plain on one side, that the Jesuits were the promoters of it,
and that the Declaration of the Irish was contrived by those Fathers, who
always retaining the poison of their evil Doctrine against Kings, spread the
same in all places where they come; and on the other, it is as clear, that M.
Hallier Syndic of the Faculty was in the plot of this Declaration, since he
became the Defender of it, contrary to the duty of his place. And as this
Doctor has signed in one of the Commentaries of Corn. a Lapide the Jesuit,
the doctrine of Sanctarel, a Jesuit likewise; so he desists not from those
pernicious Tenets, but favors them upon all occasions in his Signing of
Theses. He hugs himself for the public opposition and reproaches charged upon
him by some Doctors of the Faculty, because this renders him more considerable
in the Court of Rome; and indeed he has no other aim, both as Syndic, and as
Doctor, then to diffuse Sanctarellisme, where he can insinuate it handsomely.
It Is left to the Parliaments wisdom to judge, whether it be fit to suffer
these Monopolists longer, and whether it be not expedient to inform against the
Authors and Accomplices of this Declaration, that they may be punished, as those
deserve, who make public Conspiracies against the Interests of the Crown.

V. Firmiter Statuimus (say these Irish) promittimusque nos semper adhaesuros
omnibus Decretis ac Statutis summorum Pontificum, nominatimque iis quae lata
sunt a Pio V. Gregorio XIII. Urbano VIII. and Innocentio X. contra Bain,
Jansenium, eorumque sequaces. What a bold thing is this, for Irish Students in
the University of Paris to promise by a public act, that they will adhere
particularly to a Bull, contrary to the Liberties of the Gallicane Church,
which the Faculty of Divinity would not receive, and which was never Registered
in the Parliament? Is this a fitting course, when legal considerations, and
weighty reasons, keep the Magistrates or Universities from receiving some Bull
in France? Shall this License be taken to oblige private persons by their
Subscriptions to Declarations to receive that as an Authentic Piece which
whole Societies have refused to admit, not through any aversion to the Church,
whose power will always be Sacred to Magistrates and Doctors, but upon the
urgent necessity of withstanding the encroachments of the Roman Court? What
force will the Laws of Realms have? What will the Authority of the Parliament
serve for? Who will not slight the Resolutions of the University of Paris, and
of the Faculty of Divinity, if this way be practiced, of Authorizing and
causing to be received into France all sorts of Bulls and Decrees? If we grant
impunity to this example, nothing will hinder, but as much may be done in
reference to those Bulls which directly wound the Regal Rights and Authority,
and which tend to overthrow the Fundamental Laws of the Realm. Certainly there
is no proceeding more unjust, or which more deserves to be repressed by the
care of the Magistrates.

VI. Insuper promittimus (say the Irish) nunquam nos defensuros ullas
propositiones de errore aut haeresi suspectas, etc. praesertimque sequentes; 1.
Aliqua Dei Praecepta, etc. We expect that these Scholars tell us what
Authority, Power or Skill, they think they have to determine so positively, and
brand with suspicion of Heresy five Propositions, upon which neither the H.
See, nor the Clergy of France, nor the Archbishop of Paris, nor the Faculty of
Divinity, have passed any Judgment. When the said five Propositions were
proposed to be examined, the Faculty not only refused to judge of them, but by
common accord and consent concluded in the Assembly of December 7. 1649. that
it was not necessary to Examination or Judgment of them. And whereas a
Writing, under the name of some Doctors, deputed for that purpose, was spread
abroad, by which these Propositions were determined Erroneous; those very
Doctors, who were Commissioned to make their report thereof, being cited to the
Parliament, disowned the publication of that pretended Censure, or that they
had qualified the same in that manner, and passed their word to do nothing in
the business, directly or indirectly, till the Court had taken order in it;
which public Protestation was followed with the Arrest of October. 5. 1649.
forbidding all further proceeding. Now is there any greater boldness then that
of these Irish! and must not he have renounced all sense of Honor, who can
like, that Students of Divinity and Philosophy, determine, condemn and reject
these Propositions under their hands, and hold Conventicles for passing
Judgment upon them, though without all examination? When was it ever known
that Doctors were silenced, and Scholars allowed to speak as Judges upon
questions important to the whole Church? Did the Faculty resolve to hold its
peace for no other end, but that it might give attention to the Oracles and
Decisions of these Irish?

VII. They will say by the mouths of their Partisans, what was said for them in
the Assembly of the Faculty by M. Hallier, who defended the Declaration of the
Irish, in all particulars, together with their manner of proceeding. According
to the subtilty of this famous Divine, they will say, it is a private
Declaration of some particular persons, who promise not to maintain a doctrine
which seemed bad to them, or was represented to them as such; not that they
pretend to make any Censure or doctrinal Judgment upon it. But this defense is
too weak, and there must be something more solid alleged to cassate a Decree
of the University. For it has been said before, that these Irish cannot speak
in that manner, unless they were persons of Authority in the Church. To declare
that new doctrines are taught, that they have resolved forthwith to redress so
dangerous a mischief, to determine Propositions and brand them as suspected of
heresy; is not this to pass a doctrinal judgment? whether could the enterprise
of these Irish go farther? It Is well known that they pretend not to pass a
juridical censure; nor are they accused of so doing; but they are accused of
making and signing a Doctrinal Declaration, and a new form of profession of
faith, without having degrees, authority or skill for that purpose. Now if that
reason which they allege by the mouth of M. Hallier one of their most zealous
apologists, were a receivable justification, who might not lawfully do the
same? Who might not make doctrinal Declarations in every matter, and
professions of faith of a new stamp, in order to get them signed by all sort of
private persons, Ecclesiastics, Laymen, Seculars, Regulars, Learned, ignorant,
men and women? For according to the reasoning of that Syndic, it will be free
for every one to declare and sign what he thinks and judges upon matters of
faith; and it is in the liberty of all particular persons to oblige themselves
even under their hands to maintain and teach what they think fit, and without
countervening the Laws of the Realm and Constitutions of the Church, to make
Conventicles and Assemblies in order to league themselves together by the
public confederacy of the same opinions and upon mutual engagement to maintain
this doctrine, and to condemn or reject another. And yet they who do thus, need
not pretend to make juridical Censures, as Prelates or Faculties do, nor to
pass judgments which others are obliged to follow. Certainly they who reckon
the greatest confusion that can be introduced into the Church as to faith an
manners and indifferent thing, may answer in this manner, and slight all the
sad inconveniences which are natural sequels of so strange a proceeding. But
such as apprehend that this license would in a little time produce as many
different professions of faith as there are persons, cannot approve a course
which tends to cause the same mischiefs in France in point of Religion which
now make England a theater of division and a sink of all heresies and errors
imaginable.

VIII. But lastly, it is very false, that this Declaration of the Irish is a
private one; Cetainly, it is as public as such a thing can be. Six or seven and
twenty persons assemble together several times, all sign the same writing, in
three or four Copies which they send into all parts. This Writing is so little
secret, that it is complained of to the Rector. The very persons who signed it
caused diverse copies of it to be printed. In fine, the Jesuits, who set a work
the chief springs of this engine, have already alleged it as an authentic
piece Triumphus Catholicae veritatis, p. 415.
in a book published April 1. So that if this Declaration be not public, it is
hard to say what is. Mean while M. Hallier who saw and knew all this, forbore
not to persuade the Faculty that it was only private; and in stead of
considering that were what he said, true; yet being so illegal and injust as it
is, it cannot come to public knowledge without being abolished; He has used
all his endevors to maintain before the whole Assembly of the Faculty so
unjustifiable and unreasonable a pretension.

V.
That the Rector, Deans of Faculties, and Procurators of Nations had right to
pronounce the judgment in this case which they did.
AFter having pretended that the Irish might of their own private authority
subscribe a new Declaration of Faith, their partisans had no other expedient to
crown so great injustice, but to dispute the jurisdiction of the whole
University over its own members, and to ravish a right from it which it enjoyed
from its first foundation.

I. But the Parliament of Paris, the perpetual guardian of its privileges,
will not endure that jurisdiction to be questioned which it has always had of
regulating, punishing and correcting those who offend against its constitutions
and discipline. This authority has been preserved in it in all reformations
from time to time, particularly in the last which was made in the first year of
this Century by the authority of that August Senate.

II. If the Gallicane Church be maintained in its liberties, Recherches de
Pasquier l. 3. c. 16.
it is the University of Paris which has always upheld the same amongst other
societies. It Is well known what important services it performed for it in the
time of S. Lewis, Id. c. 18.
what care it took to preserve the exemption from Tenths in France, when
Gregory XII. Benedict XIII. and Alexander V. contended for the H. See; how
vigorously it upheld the cause of all France, under the Pontificate of John
XXIII. Moreover the Rector is particularly entrusted to see that nothing be
done against the liberties of the same Church, which are nothing else but the
common right in which it has always preserved it self, and it is founded upon
Custom and Arrests for defending the Royal power and Authority. Upon this
account he makes complaint to the Parliament, where any Decree of Rome contrary
to the liberties of this Church comes to his knowledge. Upon this ancient right
was the verification of the Cardinal d' Amboise's Bulls opposed by him in the
Universities name in full Parliament. And lately complaint being made to that
Court by him, of a Decree of the Roman Inquisition published at Paris, the
Kings Counsel highly commended him for his good service to the King and Crown.

III. It Is certain that the Declaration of the Irish is illegal, contrary to
the Policy of the Church, to the discipline and rules of the University; that
it violates the peace of the Theological Faculty and the Conclusion which it
made not to examine or judge of these Propositions. It Is injurious to the
Arrests of Parliament, both in reference to the Prohibitions. It Is injurious to
the Arrests of Parliament, both in reference to the Prohibitions made to the
Faculty of doing any thing concerning them, and to the Arrests against
Sanctarel and others; and it invades the sacred authority of our Kings and the
laws of the Realm. Whence it is manifest that the Rector, Deans and Proctors,
had right to cassate the said writings; and since they who subscribed it are
subject to the Universities discipline, of which they have the honor to be
members, it has right to punish them if they revoke not their signature, to
exclude the Scholars out its Colleges and debar them of their degrees; The
Doctor amongst them, being a member of the University as well as the rest, is
also subject to the jurisdicton of his Mother, as he acknowledged by appearing
at the Assembly of the University, answering to the Questons propounded to him,
and submitting himself under his hand to what the University should ordain.
Though indeed his bad example makes him more culpable then the rest.

IV. The Rector and the University having an undoubted jurisdiction in
reference to discipline, they might exercise the same in matter purely of
discipline. For though the Declaration of the Irish concern matters of
doctrine, yet the University judged of their Fact and their Declaration,
without out pronouncing upon the doctrine, as it declares by its Decree of May
31. Facile intelligi ex verbis dicti Decreti nihil statutum de veritate aut
falsitate quinque propositionum in dicta Hibernorum Declaratione contentarum;
atque in ear DD. Deputatos secutos Academiae mentem.

V. Nothing was done in this case, but what was done lately in a like case,
without the dislike of any particular person of the University. For M. Francis
Veron having libelled the University, and spoken new injuries viva voce in its
Assembly, whether he was cited, M. Godefroy Hermant then Rector, and now Doctor
of Sorbonne, concluded by the advice of the Deans and Proctors Sept. 14. 1647.
that he should be deprived of all degrees, rights, privileges and prerogatives
of the same University, that his Letters of Master of Arts should be torn and
cancelled in the General Assembly of the University at the Mathurines. Which
was executed without any contradiction.

VI. The authority of the University cannot be contested without countervening
that solemn Arrest given at S. Germanien Lay, July 8. 1651 for maintaining its
privilege in jurisdiction. And as for judging of doctrine, we may say that the
cognizance thereof belongs rather to the University then to the Faculty, the
former having power to hear witnesses, cite the subscribers, receive their
depositions, etc. which the latter cannot practice but with extreme
difficulties. Besides, all the offenders, except one Doctor, were of the
Faculty of Arts; and consequently the cognizance of the cause belonged more
particularly to the Rector and Proctors of Nations then to any other.

VII. But the rise and progress of this affair will manifest the justice of
the University. The Rector received complaints of the Irish Declaration and often
their Conventicles; and thereupon apprehending the pernicious consequences of
the same, prohibited the Irish to pass any judgment of doctrine; which most
just and easy command they disobeyed, and proceeded to sign their Declaration.
Notice whereof being given to the Rector together with Copies of it, could he,
without betraying his trust, the cause of God, his Church, the King, the
Parliament, and also of the Theologal Faculty, look upon this enterprise with
indifferent eyes, and not remedy such a public disorder?

VI.
That the Rector and that University acted herein with much prudence and
moderation.
THis assertion will easily be manifested by the bare narration of the affair.
Notice is given to the Rector, of Assemblies held in the Colleges of the
University for making new Declarations about points of doctrine; and
particularly of one held at the Chamber of M. Nicholas Poerus. The Rector sends
the grand Bedle of the Nation of France thither, to forbid such assembling and
declaring. They dissolve, yet afterwise sign their Declaration contrary to the
said express prohibition. The Rector is informed of this, and a copy of the
Declaration brought to him. All this while he remains very patient, and is
lo^h to use all his authority, so long as he conceives more gentle ways may
serve. In this spirit of moderation and prudence, he sends for the Irish to
inquire the truth; in which work he spends almost a whole month. He acquaints
the chief of the University with the business, who all agree to check the
enterprise and punish this disobedience. At the ordinary Assembly of the
University the Irish are interrogated, their depositions writ down: and four or
five hours spent in consultation about them. At length after an exact
discussion of the affair, all the Deans and Proctors are of advice to make an
exemplary Decree. In all which proceeding what can the most severe Censors find
to reprehend?

They who complain that an affair of this consequence is determind in one
single assembly, consider not that the Rector was a month in preparing it, and
the depositions were all heard, that the fact was evident, as well as the
dangerous consequence of it.

But 'twill be said that the Irish submitted to what the University should
ordain in reference to their action, and why then should they be punished with
such severity? These Objectors may be answered that 'twas in the power of the
Irish to free themselves from this pretended severity, after they had received
the judgment of it. For being obligd thereby only to revoke their signatures,
and no punishment inflcted but in case of refusal, let them acquit themselves
of their promises, and they are subject to no penalty. Now this comminatory
punishment was only to engage them to performance of their word; and thence
forward they could not break it without doubly meriting punishment both for
disobeying the laws of the University and violating their promise. But the
truth is, they did not submit as they promised; but instead thereof recurr'd to
the Parliament and the Faculty.

VII.
The Conclusion.
NO doubt the Parliament judges the enterprise of the Irish an insolent action,
and the conspiracy of the Syndic and many Doctors with them against the Rector
and the University an effect of blind passion deserving to be repelled by the
public authority of Justice. If it is a crime in the Rector and the University
to have performed their office, to have had respect for the Arrests of
Parliament and laws of the Realm, to have hindered conspirators against the
Churches peace and the King's rights, it is so goodly a crime, that it is
honorable to be accused of it, and glorious to be punished for it. But the Court
ordains not punishments for actions, which it has always honored with
praises; and there is reason to hope, that if it have condemnations to
pronounce, it is against those who favor an enterprise wholly unjust, and who
tend by this public division to ruin one of the most ancient works of our
Kings, the Mother of all good learning and one of the rarest ornaments of the
State and Gallicane Church.

But if they are so in just as to pretend that this Decree is the cause of all
this trouble, let them look back and see whether the University were not in
peace before the Doctrinal Declaration of the Irish. The unreasonablenesse of
requiring the connivance of the University, as it is sufficiently shown
already. They are the authors of the trouble who thus complain: But it is not
credible that the Parliament will countenance their pretenses, but authorize a
Decree made for maintainning the discipline of the University, The honor of
the Faculty of Divinity, the policy of the Church, the Arrests of the Court,
the Laws of the Realm, the power of our Kings, and the safety of their sacred
persons.

DECLARATIO HIBERNORUM
Juxta Exemplar ab ipsis typis mandatum.
CUm nova dogmata his calamitosissimis temporibus a quibusdam doceantur,
praedicentur, typis mandentur, in colloquis familiaribus misceantur, and
denique quod pejus est, catechismo rudi and incautae plebi proponantur cum
summa animorum dissensione, periculumque sit, ne aliqui ex Hibernis, qui
Parisiis majori numero student, quam in ulla totius orbis civitate, his
dogmatibus imbuantur, quae in patriam nostram Hiberniam fidei avitaeque
Religionis tenacissimam reduces disseminare, ac incautorum animis instillare
conarentur, sicque Ecclesiam Hibernicam, a centum annis and amplius,
haereticorum insultibus ac vehementissimis persecutionibus nimis afflictam, and
a decennio crudeli ac periculoso bello agitatam, perturbarent. Nos infra
scripti huic periculo mature pro viribus occurrerere proponentes, firmiter
statuimus promittimusque nos semper adhaesuros universis Conciliis Oecumenicis,
ac praecipue Tridentino, necnon omnibus decretis ac censuris summorum
Pontificum, nominatimque iis quae lata sunt a Pio V. Gregorio XIII. Urbano
VIII. and Innocentio X. contra Baium, Jansenium, eorumque sequaces. Insuper
promittimus, nunquam nos ex animi sententia privatim aut public defensuros,
doctutos, praedicaturos, multoque minus catechismo plebi proposituros ullas
propositiones de errore aut haeresi suspectas, aut quomodolibet a quovis summo
Pontifice damnatas, praesertimque sequentes:

PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.

II.
Interiori gratiae iu statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

III.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

IV.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulo actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici, quod vellent
eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare.

V.
Semipelagianorum error est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse, aut sangninem fudisse.

Mauritius Durcanus, Doctor Theologus. Richardus Nugent, sacrae Facultatis
Parisiensis Doctor, and Decanus Ecclesiae Cluonensis. Daniel Nune, Doctor
Theologus. Nicolaus Poerus, sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Baccalaureus, and
apud Lexovaeos Philosophiae Professor. Thomos Medus, sacrae Facultatis
Parisiensis Baccalaureus. Dermitius Hederman, sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis
Baccalaureus admissus and relatus. Johannes Mollony, sacrae Facultatis
Parisiensis Baccalaureus admissus and relatus, nec non Decanus Ecclesiae
Metropolitanae Casselensis. Cornelius Fogorty, Protonotarius Apostolicus.
Bernardus Cunlevy, Theologus. Carolus Horan. Theologus. Joannes Fleminge,
Theologus. Moriatus Obrien, Theologus. Eugenius Okiffe, Theologus. Edmundus
Barry, Theologus. Guielmus Quaeleus, Theologus. Philippus Lain, Theologus.
Donatus Horan, Theologus. Joannes Cuollaghan, Theologus. Edvardus Conell,
Theologus. Gelasius Omeagher, Theologus. Donatus Falvy, Philosophus.
Constantinus Brien, Philosophus. Guillielmus Gallueus, Philosophus. Thomas
Laehi, Philosophus. Joannes Bourgo, Philosophus. Doratus Kennedie, Philosophus.
Joannes Madden, Philosophus.

Omnes supradicti sunt Sacerdotes, qui Superioribus suis tam in spiritualibus
quam in temporalibus reverentiam and obedientiam promittunt.
DECRETUM UNIVERSITATIS
Studii Parisiensis.
ANNO DOMINI millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo primo, die Sabbati quarta
Martii in Comitiis ordinariis Universitatis studii Parisiensis apud amplissimum
Dominum Rectorem in Regia Navarra. Exposuit amplissimus D. Rector, cum sibi
renunciatum esset nonnullos Hibernos a paucis mensibus saepe congregari in
Collegio Bonorum, ut vocant, Puerorum, Praeside uno ex Missionariis, and
eorumdem Hibernorum aliquos nuper inductos in cubiculum Magistri Nicolai Poeri
Hiberni Baccalaurei Theologi and Philosophiae Professoris in Gymnasio Lexovaeo,
ut illic de nonnullis quaestionibus in materia gratiae statuerent; se Rectorem
statim illis significasse per unum ex Apparitoribus Univesitatis uti
abstinerent ab ejusmodi conventiculis and ab omni judicio doctrinali: Visos
quidem illos parere, quia statim discesserint, sed itum paulo post ostiatim ad
singulos, and unicuique clanculum proposita tria^ aut quatuor subsignanda
exemplaria Declarationis, cujus hic tenor est: Cum nova irrepserint dogmata
quorum aliqua public doceantur, alia colloquiis particularibus misceantur,
alia rudi plebi in catechismo proponantur imbuenda, and quia periculum est ne
aliqui ex Hibernis qui nunc Parisiis student, perniciosa dogmata loco avitae
fidei deferant in patriam Catholicae Religionis, ex quo semel in ea incepit,
tenacissimam. Nos infrascripti his malis mature occurrere volentes, firmiter
statuimus ac promittimus nos semper adhaesuros Conciliis Oecumenicis,
praesertimque Tridentino, necnon omnibus decretis ac censuris summorum
Pontificum, nominatimque iis quae lata sunt a Pio V. Gregorio XIII. Urbano
VIII. and Innocentio X. contra Baium, Jansenium, and sequaces eorum. Insuper
promittimus, nos nunquam ullas doctrinas de haeresi suspectas and quomodolibet
a quocumque summo Pontifice prohibitas defensuros, docturos, praedicaturos,
multoque minus in catechismo plebi proposituros, praesertimque sequentes
propositiones: I. Aliqua Dei praecepta justis volentibus and conantibus
secundum praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque eis
gratia qua possibilia fiant. II. Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae
nunquam resistitur. III. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non
requiritur in homine libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
IV. Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare. V. Semipelagianum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse. Hibernorum autem praedictorum unumquemque
privatim omni art sollicitatum ut praedictae Declarationi subscriberet,
tandemque effectum ut subscripserint aliqui numero circiter viginti sex, quorum
unus tantum Doctor erat Theologus Parisiensis, duo Baccalaurei, duo Magistri in
Artibus, caeteri nullius gradus and nominis in Academia, quorum alii vix
Philosophiam salutaverint, alii vix Grammaticam. Ostendit dictus Dominus Rector
quanti intererat Universitatis, arcere a Gymnasiis suis conventicula ejusmodi,
atque in eos animadvertere qui contra quam fuerat prohibitum in doctrinae causa
sine ulla auctoritate statuere ausi sint, praesertim vero de propositionibus in
ea Declaratione contentis, de quibus sacra Theologiae Facultas, tametsi
deliberationi suae ante octodecim menses propositis, nihil decreverit, neque
illustrissimus Parisiorum Archiepiscopus, neque Augustissimus, qui etiamnum
Parisiis sedet suaque habet Comitia, Clerus Galliarum, de iisdem
propositionibus quicquam definierint. Observavit item Dominus Rector quaedam in
praedicta Declaratione contineri, quibus Academiae Parisiensis auctoritas, ac
Regni and Ecclesiae Gallicanae jura and privilegia maxim laedi viderentur.
Postremo dixit Academicos quatuor qui subscripserant, adesse jussos, ut de re
tota audirentur, exemplariaque omnia Declarationis a se subscripta
repraesentarent. PLACUIT igitur primum audiri illos; quibus admissis perlecta
est praedicta Declaratio, fassique sunt se illi subscripsisse privatim and
absque ullo praevio examine communi, and subscripsisse tribus quidem aut
quatuor illius exemplaribus, quorum nullum penes se superesset, sed illorum
unum traditum Magistro Vincentio a Paulo Missionariorum Generali, and
supradicti Collegii Bonorum Puerorum Primario; paratos esse se revocare
subscriptionem illam suam, si ita Universitati videretur; quae omnia vere a se
dici and promitti, adhibito etiam suo syngrapho, confirmarunt. Tum Dominus
Rector exhibuit libellum supplicem sibi and DD. Decanis and Procuratoribus
oblatum ab aliis Hibernis Academicis Theologis, quo quidem Nationis suae nomine
vehementer obtestabantur uti ne universae Genti suae imputaretur paucorum
factum and temeritas, quorum alios ob inscitiam deceptos, alios ab Academiae
adversariis seductos fuisse dicebant; postulabantque ut placeret Universitati
diligenter occurrere huic paucorum malo, quo quidem charitas fraterna
dissolvitur, inuriturque nota quasi omnes consenserint in paucorum istorum
culpam, qui contra Ecclesiae Gallicanae and Regni jura id ausi sint. Quo
perfecto libello supplici auditi-sunt plures Hiberni Theologi, quorum aliqui
declararunt Jesuitas duos religiosissime pollicitos fuisse-Hibernis domum, si
praedictae Declarationi subscriberent, factam etiam spem fundationis ab aliquo
alio viro, and Sacerdotiorum seu Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum a praedicto
Magistro Vincentio a, Paulo Missionariorum Generali. QUIBUS omnibus auditis, re
in maturam deliberationem vocata, CENSUERUNT omnes unanimi consensu, neminem,
qui privatae sit auctoritatis, posse in doctrinae causa decernere, proptereaque
factum esse temere and insolenter ab istis paucis and privatis hominibus
nullius auctoritatis, and maximam partem nullius doctrinae and nullius gradus
in Academia, qui contra quam prohibitum illis fuerat ab Amplissimo Domino
Rectore, doctrinale sibi judicium arrogare ausi sint, and de praedictis
quaestionibus statuere, de quibus nec sacra Theologiae Facultas, nec
illustrissimus Parisiorum Archiepiscopus, nec Augustissimus Galliarum Clerus
quicquam definierint. QUOCIRCA UNIVERSITAS Declarationem istam damnat and
abrogat, eamque irritam esse vult, and nullam, judicat eam auctoritati suae
adversam, ac moribus and juribus Regni and Ecclesiae Gallicanae contrariam,
jubetque exemplaria illius omnia ubicunque subscripta occurrerint ad
amplissimum D. Rectorem affe^ri and aboleri. Academicos qui praedictae
Declarationi subscripserunt, omni Academiae gradu, jure and privilegio dejicit:
caeteros vero omni spe and aditu graduum excludit, and Gymnasiis omnibus
expellit: nisi intra diem octavum a significatione hujus Decreti subscriptionem
illam suam scripto and syngrapho apud Scribam Universitatis revocaverint, quo
exacto tempore nullam spem futuram veniae contumacibus. Vetat ne illi aut alii
in Academia simile aliquid privata auctoritate posthac ullatenus audeant:
alioqui certissimam illis ab omnibus Academ^ae gradibus, privilegiis, juribus
and Gymnas^is ejectionem edicit; primo quoque tempore ^n ficandum Decrerum hoc
censet omnibus Gymnasiarchis and aliis quorum intererit. ET ITA a Domino
Rectore concluium fuit.

Subscriptum QUINTAINE Scriba Vniversitatis.

Acta in Comitiis generalibus Universitatis studii Parisiensis apud
Mathurinenses, die 21 Martii.
ANno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo primo, die vigesima prima
mensis Martii, alma Universitas studii Parisiensis de mandato clarissimi Viri
M. Joannis Courtin Rectoris amplissimi hora nona matutina convenit apud
Mathurinenses. Tum D. Rector apud omnes ejusdem Universitatis Ordines
frequentissimos exposuit causam congregationis, nempe supplicationes a se
indictas ad S. Medardi pro gratiis immortalibus Deo praepotenti agendis, quo
quidem Auctore tum haec Urbs, quae a Rege Henrico IV. quondam defecerat, in
optimi Principis ditionem tandem redacta fuit, tum Regiae prosapiae Principes
de Conde and de Conty, and Dux de Longue-ville e carcere, in quem conjecti
erant, post annum and amplius fuerunt emissi. Praeterea D. Rector verba fecit
de quodam Decreto nuper facto, nempe die Sabbati quarto Martii anni praesentis
in Comitiis ordinariis ejusdem Universitatis apud Regiam Navarram, adversus
quosdam Hibernos, qui contra quam prohibitum fuerat ab amplissimo D. Rectore,
doctrinale sibi judicium arrogare ausi sint, and cum nullius sint auctoritatis,
de nonnullis quaestionibus in materia gratiae statuere, de quibus nec sacra
Theologiae Facultas, nec illustrissimus Parisiorum Archiepiscopus, nec
Augustissimus Galliarum Clerus quicquam definierint; quique firmiter statuerint
ac pic^serint se semper adhaesuros omnibus Decretis summorum Pontificum; quo
quidem Regni and Ecclesiae Gallicanae jura and priv^legia, atque adeo Curiae
Decreta maxim laedi viderentur. Insuper Dominus Rector pro more postulavit
rata and grata haberi quaecumque gessit in suo Magistratu amplissimo,
literasque commendatitias sibi decerni, simulque frequentissimum comitatum ad
aedem Deo sub invocatione S. Medardi sacram. Denique D. Rector fecit
supplicandi potestatem. Tum D. Hallier Doctor and Syndicus sacri Theologorum
Ordinis dixit se velle loqui nomine suae Facultatis; sed Doctores plurimi
contenderunt hoc ad ipsum non pertinere, nisi ab eadem Facultate ipsi data
fuisset loquendi potestas, sed esse Prodecani qui tum aderat, Doctorum, qui tum
Facultatem repraesentabant, suffragia colligere, and ex pluribus suffragiis
concludere: cum vero Syndicus prohibuisset contra morem Academiae, quominus res
in Doctorum deliberationem adduceretur, Doctores quominus ipse Facultatis
nomine loqueretur, pariter intercesserunt, atque adeo contenderunt ad Decanum,
aut ad seniorem, qui vices illius gerit, pertinere, Facultatis sententiam,
inito prius consilio, refer, nec aliter fieri in generalibus Comitiis
Academiae: penes vero D. Hallier esse, quod voluerit ab Academia privato nomine
postulare, cujus rei instrumentum Doctores illi postularunt, sibi quod juris
erit and rationis valiturum. Nihilominus DD. Decani superiorum Facultatum and
quatuor Nationum Procuratores confirmarunt quaecumque gesta sunt ab amplissimo
D. Rectore, ipsique proinde literas commendatitias decreverunt, and comitatum
ad S. Medardi amplissimum. Et ita per D. Rectorem conclusum fuit Parisiis, anno
and die praedictis.

Subscriptum QUINTAINE.

DECRETUM ALTERUM
Vniversitatis studii Parisiensis.
ANNO DOMINI millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo primo, die ultima mensis
Maii, in Comitiis extraordinariis Universitatis studii Parisiensis per DD.
Deputatos congregatae apud amplissimum Dominum Rectorem in Regia Navarra:
Exposuit amplissimus Dominus Rector editum fuisse libellum ante dies tres,
eumque illo ipso die Pentecostes programmate publico tota Universitate, quin
and urbe tota divulgatum pro triviis and compitis, proclamatumque deinde per
vicos omnes cum hac inscriptione, CONCLUSIO Facultatis Theologicae Parisiensis
pro Hibernis, adversus Decretum amp. Dom. Rectoris Academiae de die quarta
Martii 1651. and Iansenistas. Parisiis apud Guillielmum Sassier Typographum
Regis via Restionum prope Sorbonam ad insigne duorum Turturum, MDCLI. cum
privilegio Regis. Quo quidem libel^o multa continerentur praesenti
animadversione diguissima; verumtamen quia longum esset deliberare nunc de
omnibus, propositurum se tantum aliqua. Primo quid censeant de libelli
inscriptione and de ejusdem programmatis. Secundo nunquid placeat inquiri in
auctores. Tertio contineri in eo libello expostulationem Nicolai Poeri and
Thomae Medi Hibernorum Baccalaureorum in Theologia, factam in Comitiis sacrae
Facultatis Theologiae anno 1651. die 1 mensis Aprilis, multa de Decreto
adversus se lato querentium, obtestantiumque dictam Facultatem uti de eo
judicare velit, and revera de eo judicatum, latamque illo ipso die sententiam a
dicta Facultate. Meminerint igitur DD. Deputati Hibernos istos duos auditos
fuisse in Comitiis Ordinariis in Regia Navarra die quarta Martii, eosdem illic
subscripsisse, paratos esse se renunciare Declarationi suae, si quid deliquisse
viderentur: Decreto deinde adversus eos lato provocasse ad Senatum; retentam a
Senatu cognitionem causae: Id ita significatum sibi Rectori die 29 ejusdem
mensis Martii. Videant igitut DD. Deputati an isti Hiberni duo recte and rite
querelam and judicium causae defer postea potuerint ad dictam Facultatem die
1 Aprilis, and an dicta Facultas certior facta per eosdem Hibernos de ipsorum
ad Senatum provocatione, de Decreto cognoscere and judicare potuerit salva
Academiae and praesertim Senatus auctoritate. Quarto M. Franciscum Hallier
Syndicum dictae Facultatis imposuisse graviter eidem suae Facultati, quia in
expostulatione sua dicto libello dontenta leguntur haec illius verba: Ita ut
praedictus D. Rector discesserit (ex postremis Comitiis generalibus apud
Mathurinenses) sine confirmatione (dicti Decreti) facta ab ulla generalium
Comitiorum Facultate, Diem crastinum statum diem esse Comitiorum dictae
Facultatis. Judicent nunquid videatur e re Academiae dictam Facultatem
congregatam de Decreti confirmatione certiorem legitime fieri. Et quia libellus
prae se fert privilegium Regis, nunquid illustrissimo Cancellario Galliarum
fraus facta, resque illi parum religiose recitata videatur. QUIBUS AUDITIS
PLACUIT legi libellum totum; quo perlecto agnoverunt DD. Depurati ita rem esse
plane, quemadmodum amplissimus D. Rector observaverat. Atque ita de omnibus ab
eo propositis, CENSUERUNT: circumventam religionem illustrissim. Cancellarii
Galliarum: libelli inscriptionem falsissimam esse and contumeliosissimam
univesrae Academiae Parisiensi: rem esse inauditam and inausam hactenus,
violari honorem Academiae injurioso etiam programmate publico; inquirendum in
auctores fraudis and injuriae, and adversus eos omni jure agendum: Sacrae
Facultati Theologiae insigniter impositum a M. Francisco Hallier illius
Syndico, qui persuaserit Decretum latum adversus Hibernos aliquos a nulla
Facultate fuisse confirmatum in postremis Comitiis generalibus capud
Mathurinenses die 21. Martii, cum revera confirmatum fuerit a DD. Decanis
superiorum Facultatum and quatuor Procuratoribus Nationum: in eo Decreto nihil
factum inconsulta dicta Faculiate Theologiae, quia Decreto illi ferendo dicta
Facultas affuerit per M. Jacobum Hennequin Prodecanum suum, qui primus
sententiam dixerit, primusque consenserit in Decretum: neque propterea
convocandas and consulendas fuisse Facultates and Nationes, quia soli Deputati
decernere soleant quando peccatur in disciplinam: Declaratione Hibernorum
violatam disciplinam Academiae, and graviter laesa jura and securitatem Regis
and Regni: Facile intelligi ex verbis dicti Decreti nihil statutum de veritate
aut falsitate quinque propositionum in dicta Hibernorum Declaratione
contentarum, atque in ea re DD. Deputatos secutos Academiae mentem: priusquam
dictum Decretum ferretur, Hibernos istos duos Nicolaum Poerum and Thomam Medum
auditos fuisse in dictis Comitiis ordinariis in Regia Navarra die 4. Martii,
eosdem illic subscripsisse paratos esse se^renunciare Declarationi illi suae,
si quid in ea peccavisse viderentur; visum fuisse peccasse illos vehementer in
disciplinam Academiae and in jura Ecclesiae Gallicanae and Regni, proptereaque
Decretum adversus eos latum fuisse, iisdemque significatum die 21, Martii:
provocasse illos ad Senatum, retentam a Senatu cognitionem and definitionem
causae 24. Martii; id ita significatum amplissimo D. Rectori 29. ejusdem
Martii; proindeque neque istos Hibernos duos ab eo tempore querelam and
judicium causae defer potuisse ad dictam Facultatem Theologiae, nec ab eadem
Facultate judicium ullum ferri de dicto Decreto salva Academiae maxim vero
Senatus auctoritate. Et ne istorum omnium praetendi posthac ulla ignoratio
possit, crastino die primo Junii qui status est dies Comitiorum dictae
Facultatis Theologiae, significandum Decretum hoc eidem congregatae Facultati
per Apparitores Universitatis, atque hujus exemplum palam deponendum apud
dictam Facultatem una cum exemplo dictae confirmationis Decreti lati adverius
Hibernos, quod utrumque exemplum subscriptum fit a M. Nicolao Quintaine
Universitatis Scriba. Atque hoc Decretum pro Gymnasiorum omnium sotibus primo
quoque tempore affigendum. Et ita a Domino Rectore conclusum fuit.

Subscriptum QUINTAINE.

THe foregoing was signified by me Peter le Vasseur (underwritten) Grand Bedle
of the Nation of France in the said University, to MM. the Venerable and
learned Dean and Doctors of the Sacred Faculty of Theology founded in the said
University, in their Assembly held at the College of Sorbonne, this first day
of June, between seven and eight of the clock in the forenoon, 1651. by
speaking to the Venerable and Learned M. John Mulot Dean, and M. Francis
Hallier Syndic, and diverse others in great number assembled, to the end they
may not pretend ignorance thereof; and I left them a Copy of the Contents above
mentioned, and of the present signification. Done in the presence of Peter
Portier, Bedle of the Faculty of Canon Law, Lewis de la Roche, Grand Bedle of
the Faculty of Physic, John de la Port, Petty Bedle of the said Nation of
France (who have signed this present writing) and of other Witnesses. LE
VASSEUR, P. PORTIER, L. DE LA ROCHE, DE LA PORT.

A Writing of Father Morel (an Augustine, Doctor of the Faculty of Paris) full
of calumnies against: S. Augustin's Disciples, and spread about Rome at the
time of his being there in the year 1651.
SO much of this Writing as is enclosed between two Crochets, [] is the
additions which F. Morel made to it, upon his being blamed of exorbitances in
it, by Monsignor Sacrista, according as I have mentioned, Part. 3. Chap. 8.

De controversia inter Jansenistas and Anti-Jansenistas.
AB eo momento quo prodiit in lucem liber Iansenii Episcopi Iprensis pro titulo
praeferens Iansenii Augustinus de gratia, etc. velut flammae cinerum latebris
aliquandiu sepultae, facto impetu eruperunt jamdiu delitescentes praemeditatae
factionis ignes, ex quorumdam etiam Doctorum Parisiensium and Lovaniensium
eadem simul concilia machinantium animis and calamis, qui miserabili successu
funesta, quae nunc ardentius flagrant, excitarunt incendia, forsan deinceps non
ita facile restinguenda, and quidem ad perstringendam (si possint) S. Sedis
auctoritatem, and sanioris doctrinae puritatem cum ipsa maculandam. Adverti
enim debet in Gallia and Belgio haereticorum radices in ipsos etiam Catholicos
aliquem sinistrae in sanctam Sedem propensionis and doctrinae spiritum
refundere, unde orti sunt viri politici and partiarii, ex fontibus haereticorum
illam odii vel aversionis a summa sanctae Sedis porestate mentem perniciosius
ebibentes: inter quos aliqui etiam sunt Facultatum Doctores erga ipsam minus
been affecti, qui mediis omnibus nituntur ipsam labefactare. En finis eorum qui
Jansenistae appellantur, quia per fas and nefas etiam contra Bullas Pontificias
Jansenii dogmata tuentur tanquam obtinendo suo fini aptiora.

Ut vero finem facilius assequi possint, his artificiis utuntur, and imprimis
operae pretium aestimant praecipuos sanctae Sedis zelatores tam seculares quam
regulares debilitare, ac, si possent, opprimere: quod hujusmodi viri multis
modis semper tentarunt, primo aperte conantes Religiosos Mendicantes (quos
vocant mancipia Papae, quia Generales eorum sunt Itali and semper in Italia
commorantes) ex Universitatibus and Facultatibus eliminate, ut debilior sit hoc
modo numerus defensorum sanctae Sedis; propterea Richeristae sequaces Richerii
qui potestatem Pontificiam impugnavit anno 1626. and novissime anno 1649.
currente Jansenistae id sollicitarunt and super hoc Arrestum a Senatu
obtinuerunt, ut tantum duo Doctores ex singulis Ordinibus Mendicantium votum
habeant in Comitiis Facultatis Parisiensis. Secundo, Quia per vim id obtinere
non potuerunt propter generosam and nunquam satis laudandam DD. Doctorum
secularium erga sanctam Sedem been affectorum etiam adversus Senatus-placita
resistentiam, ideo secretioribus viis and diabolicam intentionem magis apt
dissimulantibus id moliti sunt, videlicet scriptis impugnando communes aliorum
Doctorum and Regularium sanctae Sedis addictorum sententias, and selegerunt
materiam de gratia and praedestinatione, utpote implicandis animis commodiorem,
quas vulgo persuadere volunt esse sanctis Patribus contrarias, ut sinistram de
ipsis in populorum animos opinionem injiciant. Hoc artificio Jansenistae usi
sunt: ut enim Doctorum sacrae Facultatis tam seculatium quam Regularium sanctae
Sedis zelarorum conceptam apud omnes aestimationem convellant, ac facilius
deinde possint sinistrae suae machinationis venenum respergere, velis and remis
saniores eorum sententias insequuntur quasi cum Pelagianis and Semipelagianis
in materia gratiae omnino consonas; and ad hoc aptius insinuandum, praeferunt
ubique D. Augustinum velut suarum opinionum vindicem and assertorem, cui alios
repugnare and dissentire continuo declamitant and derisorie ipsos appellant
Molinistas and Jesuitas, quasi praeferant Molinam D. Augustino, imo ita
calumniantur, ut appellent S. Augustini adversarios, cum tamen nec Jesuitis nec
Molinae sed soli veritati sint addicti. Tertio, Nedum scriptis nituntur sua
dogmata in perniciem zelatorum sanctae Sedis sub praetextu tuendi doctrinam D.
Augustini propalare, sed conducunt etiam pecuniis Doctores and Concionatores
qui virus idem effundant in pulpitis Scholarum and templorum, Baccalaureos in
Facultate ut suis in conclusionibus publicis eorum placita sustineant: imo
Students in omnibus Galliae and Belgii Universitatibus and Facultatibus
venales habent, necnon omnis conditionis viros in urbibus fere singulis, ut
pestiferam eruditionem in Scholis and in privatis domibus disseminent, and
simpliciores etiam instiruant privatis colloquiis, in quibus miscent cum rebus
de gratia and praedestinatione res horrendas de sacramentis Altaris and
Poenitentiae, and contra auctoritatem sacri Concilii Tridentini, and perpetuas
interserunt calumnias adversus Doctores and viros quoscum que sanctae Sedis
zelatores praecipuos: and eo fine Magnates aliquos ditissimos suam in partem
artificiose deduxerunt, a quibus ingentes pecuniarum summas habent ad
perficiendas hujusmodi nefarias molitiones; and mirum est quos conatus
efficiant ad finem assequendum. Habent aliquot in locis sectariorum suorum
seminaria and congregationes his tantum machinationibus intentas.

Deinde quia viderunt Jansenistae non satis promoveri votum suum contra
zelatores sanctae Sedi^ per solas disputationes de materia gratiae and
praetextatum in his D. Augustinum, tum propter saniorem and ampliorem Doctorum
adversantium partem, tum propter Bullas Pontificias talem controversiam
prohibentes, non potuerunt diu conceptum adversus S. Sedem and Ecclesiam
venenum retinere; quare illud for as evomuerunt per libros and scripta de
frequenti vel melius de infrequenti communione, de poenitentia, etc. accusantes
Ecclesiam corruptelae, cujus se medicos and reformatores ventilant, and etiam
apertius per scripta de duobus Capitibus Ecclesiae, and quidquid in Bullis
Pontificiis de his rebus sancitum ac prohibitum est, subreptitium and male
sancitum esse palam dixerunt semper and scripserunt, and ubicunque ipsis
liberum and obvium fuit, seditiones excitarunt, and conati sunt impedire ne iu
Facultate and in Ecclesiis Bullae Pontificiae super his rebus emanatae
publicarentur and reciperentur: Fuerunt tamen irriti ac vani omnes eorum
impetus ob majorem triplo in Facultate numerum Doctorum sanctae Sedis
zelatorum, and propterea rabie ac furore perciti, antiquos errores and
offensivas sententias de gratia and sacramentis ubique, sicut antea, scribere,
dictare and evulgare non destiterunt.

Quibus perspectis sacra Facultas Parisina sanctae Sedis semper observantissima
nedum Bullas praefatas legit, amplexa est, and suos in commentarios ad aeternam
memoriam and obsequentiam retulit, ^ed etiam novis decretis sanxit, ne unquam
vel in scriptis vel in concionibus, vel in conclusionibus Theologicis Doctores
sui and Baccalaurei auderent his de rebus a Sancta Sede prohibitis agere; and
quoties aliquis Baccalaureus suis in Thesibus aliquam hujusmodi conclusionem
adhibuit, deleta est a D. Syndico: cum tamen post tot and tantas cautiones
adhibitas nunquam requiescerent a scribendo and loquendo Jansenistae, sed in
dies cresceret eorum factio, imo aliqui Baccalaurei a Magistris illius
factionis profecti eo devenissent audaciae, ut hujusmodi propositiones a D.
Syndico deletas suis in conclusionibus reponerent, and factionarii magis ac
magis offensivas propositiones ubique depraedicarent in contemptum Bullarum
Pontificiarum and decretorum sacrae Facultatis, and magnum totius Ecclesiae
scandalum, imo and aliarum nationum (quae jamdiu Facultatem Parisiensem
Jansenisni calumniose insimulabant;) ad hoc ut posset illas factiones and
factionarios perstringere atque configere, ac simul tamen Bullis Pontificiis
prohibentibus discussionem and censuram Auctorum de praefatis materiis
contradictorie disputantium non repugnare, censuit unanimi fere omnium
Doctorum, exceptis quibusdam scilicet Jansenistis, consilio and decreto
seligendas esse propositiones magis offensivas ex iis quae continuo in vulgus
ubique spargebantur, nulla habita ratione vel mentione an sint Jansenii, vel
Arnaldi, vel Jesuitarum, vel cujuscunque alterius, and eas afficiendas censura,
si opus esset, post exactam Doctorum nedum aliquot ad hoc specialiter
depuratorum, sed etiam omnium and singulorum discussionem and examen ad
avertendum ne ulterius populi deciperentur: selectae sunt autem sequentes
propositiones;

I.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia: deest quoque iis gratia qua
possibilia fiant.

II.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.

III.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

IV.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare.

V.
Semipelagianorum error est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse, aut sanguinem fudisse.

VI.
Sensit olim Ecclesia privatam sacramentalem poenitentiam pro peccatis occultis
non sufficere.

VII.
Naturalis attritio sufficit ad sacramentum Poenitentiae.

Atque istis propositionibus per Deputatos aliquos diligenter examinatis per
aliquot menses, tandem sacta Facultas destinaverat eas censere in Comitiis
prima Augusti proxime praeteriti: quod cum praeviderent Jansenistae, primo ad
ea Comitia ex omnibus Regni partibus convocarunt dispersos suae factionis
Doctores and alios etiam, quibus subdole and calumniose rescripserant,
Facultatis Molinistas (sic appellant Doctores sanctae Sedis zelatores) velle
censura perstringere S. Augustinum, dictitantes praedictas propositiones,
exceptis duabus ultimis, esse D. Augustini, and ad hoc creduntur 40 librarum
millia pro evocandis hujusmodi magistris undequaque dispersis impendisse.
Secundo, Aliquibus etiam Re^igiosis idem persuaserunt hic agi de vindicando a
censuris Augustino. Tertio, Cum non obstantbus illis artificus viderent se
impares evitandae sacrae Facultatis censurae, seditionem excitarunt in
Comitiis, nova fraud volentes contra consuetudinem intrudere in locum D.
Decani quendam Doctorem eo praetextu quod sit Cancellarius Universitatis, and
excitatis clamoribus continuis, hoc modo impedierunt determinationem
Facultatis, in qua contra 25 vel 30 Jansenistas, and aliquot alios titulo
tuendi S. Augustinum deceptos, erant centum and amplius Doctores. Quarto,
Denique ad Parlamentum non ad sanctam Sedem appellarunt, and unum ex motivis
appellationis inter alia proferunt, quod Comitiis Facultatis adessent
Mendicantes qui ex Senatus-consulto debent abesse. Libellum supplicem eorum
subscripsisse dicuntur 40 circiter, numerando eos qui praetextu vindicandi a
censura D. Augustinum subscripserunt innocenter. Quinto, Etiam sollicitarunt
aliquos ut Romam scriberent ad Generales Ordinum and alios, quod Facultas
Parisiensis vellet censura perstringere D. Augustinum, ut hac art, fraud and
calumnia viros de rebus illis minime institutos praevenirent and suas in parts
apud sanctam Sedem agendas illicerent; imo quaedam transmiferunt excerpta ex
scriptis cujusdam excellentissimi viri sanctae Sedis inter alios
observantissimi D. Pereyrer Regiae Navarrae magni Magistri, ut nitantur
persuadete quod ille ac simul alii ejusdem partis sint adversarii D. Augustino,
and notare possint cum ipso alios insignes sanctae Sedis zelatores infra
nominandos, and commiserunt provinciam istas naenias and calumnias Romae
disseminandi quibusdam ibidem nunc temporis commorantibus, qui nec sunt
Doctores, nec ullatenus de veritate instructi; and aliquid jam profecerant apud
nonnullos satis spectabiles, nisi casu adfuissent quidam Doctores illius sacrae
Facultatis qui calumnias illas suae Parenti nefarie impositas eluerunt.

Debet sancta Seeds sum cavere ne autem praebeat illis Jansenistis, quia
mixti and conjuncti sunt cum Richeristis, id est, cum sequacibus Richerii, qui
adversus Eeclesiasticam Monarchiam tantum scripsit and factiones fecit ab anno
1611. ad 1628. and omnis eorum factio nihil sic ambit and prosequitur quam
sanctae Sedis auctoritatem labefactare (ut dixi) and artificia praetextatae
doctrinae S. Augustini in Jansenio, and alia id genus non habent alium finem
sibi propositum modo superius explicato. Praecipua vero Jansenistarum capita
and columina sunt DD. Arnauld, Guilbert, du Hamel, Bourgeois qui Romae
Jansenium defendit, Ludovicus de Saint-Amour funestus Guillielmi de Sancto
Amore in persequendis apud Senatum Mendicantibus imitator cum socio suo Carol.
de Roux, ambo ignobilis farinae homines, deinde D. de Mince Richerius alter
redivivus sanctae Sedi minime affectus, D. Rousse S. Rochi Parisiis Curatus vir
litigiosus and in Facultate maxim seditiosus, de Sainte-Beuve pro illa
factione maxim zelosus, and alii qui memoriae jam non occurrunt. Illustriores
autem illorum partiatiorum adversarii and sanctae Sedis zelatores ardentissimi
sunt praefatus D. Pereyret, D. Cornet, D. Hallier Syndicus Facultatis, vir de
sancta Sede pro zelo suo sum meritus, sicut and D. Morel, qui apud Regni
primates pro ejusdem sanctae Sedis and sanioris doctrinae tutela continuo
desudat; similiter D. le Moyne, D. Grandin Professores Sorbonici, D. Charton
Parisiensis Poenitentiarius, D. Guichard Navarricus Professor. Inter
Mendicantes P. Nicolai vir insignis, etc. Tot sunt ut commode nequeant
enumerati. [D. Loysel Cancellarius S. Augustino quidem, non factiosis addictus,
and praecipuus Augustiniensium in Facultate and apud S. Sedem benefactor.]

Verum si liceat dicere quod sentio, quam vis sicut Jansenistarum factio est
pessima and pessimos habet fines supra delibatos, ita ex adverso pars
Anti-Jansenistarum sit omnino religiosa, and nonnisi sanctum pro Dei gloria and
sanctae Sedis and purioris doctrinae defensione finem inspiciat; tamen ex
reciproco oppositarum partium conflictu mali and perniciosi effectus oriuntur:
quia enim Jansenistae pro clypeo praetenso and praetextato assumunt D.
Augustinum, and Anti-Jansenistae ad illos configendos in materia gratiae and
sacramentorum maxim nituntur Concilio Tridentino: hinc fit quod istorum aliqui
videantur de^rimere in aliquo auctoritatem D. Augustini, and sane nonnulli
Jesuitae.
peccant aliquando and excedunt in D. August. ut convellant fundamentum
Jansenistarum; and Jansenistae ex opposito nituntur infringere auctoritatem
illius sacrosancti Concilii, quod potissimum est partis adversae fundamentum,
asserentes non fuisse ita legitimum, ut aestimatur, sed ex solis Papae
mancipiis conflatum, etc. Unde non parum minuitur and S. Sedis and SS.
Conciliorum auctoritas, and maxim debilitatur vis impugnandi haereticos per
illa media, nec immerito haeretici subsannant in hoc Catholicos.

Quamobrem his in controversiis existimo agendum magna cum cautela, and brevius
esse omnibus silentium imponere, ut jam toties factum est. Sed non debet S.
Seeds fastidire continuas reiterationes prohibitionum jam factarum, quia qui
prima vice non obtemperant, secunda vice obsequentur. Studiose tamen cavendum
est a Jansenistis, and consulendum, quantum fieri poterit, aliis qui sunt
sanioris doctrinae and sanctae Sedis in omnibus ardentissimi zelatores, and
quam citius fieri potest, sancta Seeds praesertim in Galliis propter haereticos
quibuscunque novitatibus radicem praecidat, ne infausta iterum suscipiant
incrementa, quod omen avertat Deus.

[Revera tamen utrobique puniendi essent ac debito censura castigandi, nedum
Jansenistae qui doctrina and nomine D. P. Augustini abutuntur ad commovendas
seditiones; verum etiam illi Jesuitae qui temeratie ac irreverenter ausi sunt
scribere vel loqui de sanctissimo and doctissimo illo Ecclesiae Doctore and
Doctorum Principe, suum Molinam suasque novitates illi ac caeteris omnibus
praeferendo: unde merito S. Inquisitio Decreto suo animadvertit in blasphemas
illas contra D. P. Augustinum propositiones nuper in publicum disseminatas.

Tamen praesens rerum necessitas postulat ut prius Romana Seeds circa Jansenii
singulares propositiones distinct mentem aperiat ad extinguendum tot
incendiorum fomitem: quia enim Bulla sanctissimi Urbani VIII. contra Jansenium
hunc prohibet damnatque tanquam renovantem propositiones jam alias a summis
Pontificibus damnatas; and Jansenistae insimulant accusant que hanc Bullae
partem subreptionis, and fraud Jesuitarum fuisse infertam. Cum id maxim
perstringat honorem and auctoritatem Romanae Sedis quae est columna veritatis:
illa debet praefatae Bullae veritatem vindicare, and notatim ac singulatim
designare quaenam sint illae propositiones ab ipso renovatae and alias a summis
Pontificibus damnatae, ut nullam amplius habeant Jansenistae excusationis
causam and occasionem alios decipiendi, maxim definiendo simul discrimen
doctrinae Jansenii a D Augustino. Postea in alios D. Augustini doctrinaeque
ipsius neglectores debita erit severitate agendum.

Pieces added to this Collection.
An Advertisement concerning F. Mulard's Speech.
J Placed F. Morel's Writing at first amongst the Pieces of this Collection, as
all the rest, according to the order wherein they are spoken of in my Journal:
But having found it expedient, not to confine my self so strictly to that order
in the printing of them, as not to consider the Connection, both of their
Subjects and the persons they concern, I reserved this same Writing for the
last of those that I had joined to it, intending to subjoyn F. Mulard's Speech
to it, as the first of the Additions. But afterward, considering that the said
Speech is at length in the Fifth Disquisition of Paulus Irenaeus, at the Fifth
Article, I conceived it unprofitable to insert it in two places, and better to
suppress it here, where it would be but as a loose piece: The Reader therefore
may please to have recourse thither, if he has the curiosity to see it.

An Advertisement touching the Suffrages of the Consultors.
J Could discover nothing of these Suffrages whilst I was at Rome, but Copies
of them were sent, which my L. the Bishop of Montpellier acknowledged in the
presence of my LL. the Bishops of Olone and Conzerans, to be conformable to
that which himself has related thereof: So that on one side the truth of these
Suffrages cannot be doubted; and on the other the Decree of the Inquisition of
Rome, which declared them Apocryphal, is easy to be understood. For it does
not pretend to say, that they are false or supposititious, since if they were,
the Consultors themselves, to whom this writing attributes them, would be made
to disavow them, and their disclaiming would be published; but it only implies,
that they are pieces which they at Rome would have been glad had not come
forth. But having been printed with the Notes of a Divine S. Thomas's Disciple,
I shall not scruple to insert them here with the same Notes.

TREDECIM THEOLOGORVM
Ad examinandas quinque Propositiones ab Innocentio X selectorum Suffragia,
seu, ut appellant, Vota, summo Pontifici scripto tradita. Ex quibus verus
Constitutionis sensus innotescit; and ad optatam inter Catholicos Theologos
pacem stabiliendam via facilis aperitur.
PRAEFATIO.
ECclesiae vulnera in membrorum ejus intestina pugna qui non defleat, prorsus
pietatis expers sit. Cuncta tamen deflere pauci possunt, quia partium studio
pauci carent. Partem dolet qui parti addictus est. Universa lugere is unus
potest, qui unius veritatis amicus est. Talem me esse, nisi sit insolens,
dicere ausim. Certe nec Jansenio, nec Molinae studeo, Sancti Thomae jam inde ab
initio sequax, and ipsius Scholae discipulus, quam utrique Catholicam fatentur.
Illa ergo vel hoc nomine maxim idonea ad conciliand^s animos tanta inter se
contentione dissidentes.

Sed quoniam video nescio quorum temeritatem eo processisse, ut summi
Pontificis Constitutione ad S. Thomae auctoritatem labefactandam abutantur, ad
Sedis Apostolicae honorem pertinere vi^um est, hanc ab ipsa contumeliam
depellere; simul Ecclesiae de gratia Christi doctrinam ab illis corruptelis
vindicare, quas in ipsam certi homines immiscere variis artibus tentant.

Ad id autem opportunissimum est visum, palam exhiberi Consultorum Vota sive
suffragia, ex quibus summus Pontifex Constitutionem confecit. Ex his enim tum
vera Pontificiae Constitutionis intelligentia patebit, tum multorum novitia
Molinae commenta sectantium argutiae refellentur, qui dum Jansenio ardentius
instant, Ecclesiam in Pelagii errorem pene praecipitant: cujus reum Molinam
ante Clementem VIII. and Paulum V. egerunt and peregerunt clarissimi ex Schola
nostra Theologi.

Si quis autem de hujus scripti veritate dubitet, adire poterit Episcopum
Montis-Pessuli, qui illud Roma rediens secum attulit: quod idem fecerunt alii
ex Ordine Religio so, qui itidem illud ex manuscripto exemplar Romae
descripserant; ut jam multa Parisiis hujus scripti exemplaria circumferantur.
Quo magis necessarium est illud typis quam primum excudi, ne inter varias
describentium manus, multas, ut fit, maculas contrahat, and fidem atque
auctoritatem amittat.

Ex eo autem constabit, 1. adeo non laesam Constitutione Thomistarum doctrinam,
ut ad eam potius ipsa Constitutio conformara sit. Siquidem Consultores pene
omnes doctrinam de gratia per se efficaci, quae maxim nostrae Scholae propria
est, omnibus locis Catholicam, orthodoxam, veram esse profitentur.

Constabit 2. Romae inter Consultores non de ipsa re, sive de aliquo dogmate
disputatum esse, sed tantum de sensu Propositionum. Illas enim quicunque ad
gratiam efficacem pertinere putarunt, etiam Catholicas pronunciarunt. Quicunque
autem declararunt haereticas, etiam a gratia efficaci lato discrimine se
junxerunt.

Constabit 3. quo pacto Jansenii causa Romae tractata sit. Nam qui ejus nullam
a Consultoribus rationem habitam velit, longissime erret. Multi enim ex
Consultoribus express sensus Janseniani meminerunt. Contra qui id
Consultoribus mandatum a summo Pontifice contendat, ut sensum Jansenii
inquirerent, vel an Propositiones ex Jansenio excerptae essent, dijudicarent,
prae studio falsus and iniquus videri possit. Aperte enim unus e Consultoribus,
isque sancti Officii Commissarius, Propositiones a summo Pontifice propositas
dicit in abst acto, and ut praescindunt ab omne proferente; quod illum coram
summo Pontifice dicere ausum, nisi verum esset, nulli unquam sano verisimile
fiet. Multi ergo de Jansenio locuti sunt; verum est. Sed injussi and sine
mandato locuti sunt; and hoc verum est. Ita de Jansenii sensu neutiquam Romae
judicatum est; nullum enim judicium sine praevia inquisitione: sed ex
Theologorum obiter inter disputandum de mente Jansenii loquentium sermon,
obiter in Constitutione nominatus Jansenius.

Caeterum non mediocris mihi spes est, sore ud hoc scriptum ad hoc dissidium
sedandum permultum faciat. Nam ex illo cernere poterunt Molinistae quam frustia
gratiae efficacis doctrinam attentent. Rursus Jansenii defensores, qui toties
germanos S. Thomae se discipulos esse testati sunt, quid sinceritatis habeat
haec professio, facile indicare poterunt, si probatam and quasi sancitam in
Consultotum Votis Thomistarum in quinque Propositionibus doctrinam ex animo
amplectantur.

Nullum autem tam absurdum futurum puto, ut ex istis Consultorum sententiis
neget indagandam Pontificiae Constitutionis mentem. Non enim, ut omnes Theologi
convenient, ex aliquo (...), and tanquam ex tripode promit oracula summus
Pontifex, sed humano modo veritatem inquirens, doctos homines consulens, and ex
illorum sententia fidei dogmata definiens. Nihil autem absurdius fingi potest,
quam ut summus Pontifex tredecim viris doctis in confilium adhibitis, id
haereticum pronunciet, quod illorum omnium calculo tanquam orthodoxum
comprobatum sit. Quamobrem, ut dixi, cum omnes Consultores S. Thomae doctrinam
de gratia per se efficaci passim extra aleam ponant, qui hanc vel leviter ausit
incessere, tanquam summo Pontifici injuriosus ab omnibus repellendus est.

10. Freb. 1657.
CONSULTORUM super quinque Propositionibus VOTA. Brevibus interdum
animadversionibus illustrata.
PRIMA PROPOSITIO.
Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia: deest quoque ill is gratia qua
possibilia fiant.
I.
Pater SFORSA PALAVICINUS, Societatis Jesu.
Die 1 Octobris 1652.
PUtant hanc Propositionem explicatam de illis viribus and illa gratia, quas
Deus tenetur tribuere nullo supposito peccato, ne originali quidem, ad hoc ut
valide obligaret, esse erroneam.

ANIMADVERSIO.
HIc Jansenium ne nominat quidem ille Consultor, ex ea licet Societate quae
Jansenium maxim insectatur. Patet tamen ex illius in alias Propositiones
censuris, sensum illum quem in 1 Prositione damnat, Jansenio ab eo atribui:
gratiam scilicet, de qua loquitur Propositio, deesse sine ullo ^eccato, ne
originali quidem. Quod a Jansenii sententia omnino alienum esse, omnibus palam
est. Quare merito in hoc sensu Propositionem damnat: sensum vero Jansenii
omnino non attingit.

II.
Pater MARCUS ANTON. CARPINETUS, Procurator generalis Capucinorum.
MEa sententia est, quod tota propositio, ut jacet, cum illo addito, Derst
quoque illis gratia, etc. sit non solum erronea and male sonans, sed etiam
haeretica, vel haeresi proxima. Quia tamen Propositio potest hunc duplicem
sensum habere, quod scilicet Deus hic and nunc sub^rahat gatiam, qua praecepta
fiant possibilia justis volentibus and conantibus, fideliter aut non fideliter:
ideo in primo sensu, ubi justi non fideliter agunt cum Deo, Propositio erit
Catholica; sicut Catholica quod Deus nunquam subtrahat gratiam justis fideliter
se gerentibus.

ANIMADVERSIO.
PRaeclare Consultor duplicem in vocibus illis conantibus and volentibus sensum
distinguit. Quidam enim fideliter conantur: his nunquam deest gratia efficax ad
operandum necessaria. Quidam infideliter; quia nempe gratiae excitanti and
sufficienti sensu Thomistico resistunt: his deesse potest, and ideo illi
mandata implere non possunt, ea scilicet potestate cui nihil desit. An ille
sensum Jansenii damnaverit, ex eo praecise judicandum, an per illos justos
volentes and conantes intelligat Jansenius fideliter volentes and conantes; an
vero volentes and conantes infideliter. Si primum, procul dubio illius sensum
erroris damnat; si secundum ut pugnant Jansenistae, procul dubio absolvit.
Utrum sit verisimilius, nolim hic definire, ne contentioni detur locus. Interim
ex Consultoris mente haec propositio: Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis
volentibus and conantibus infideliter, sunt impossibilia; deest queque gatia
qua possibilia fiant, est Catholica: and qui hunc Jansenii sensum esse velit, a
Consultore nullo modo differt Apparet vero long ipsum a Molinistarum sensu
abhorruisse qui gratiam implendi praeceptum justis quocumque modo se gerentibus
nusquam deesse volunt.

III.
Pater THOMAS D'ELBENE, Clericus Regularis.
PRopositio haec si intelligatur in sensu formali, hoc est, sumendo justos
secundum praesentes quas habent vires, habituales, supernaturales, and
actuales, est Catholica. Si sumatur in sensu reali, prout se habet a part rei,
sunt impossibilia simpliciter, quia deest gratia actualis quaecunque, sive sit
efficax, sive sufficiens, est haeretica. Si sumatur, sunt impossibilia,
secundum quid, propter negationem gratiae efficacis, sed non sufficientis; in
hoc sensu est Catholica, conformis Scripturis and sanctis Patribus.

ANIMADVERSIO.
EX isto Consultore hoc sensu tantum haeretica est propositio, si nomine
gratiae, quae deesse dicitur, intelligatur tum efficax tum sufficiens. Ita si
justis volentibus and conantibus deesse gratiam sufficientem Thomistico sensu
Jansenius voluit, prorsus eum damnat Consultor. Sin autem, ut contendunt ipsius
defensorers, solam efficacem; nihil illum laedit; siquidem ex ipso haec
propositio, Aliqua Dei praecepta justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia secundum quid, propter
negationem gratiae efficacis and non sufficientis, est propositio Catholica,
conformis Scripturis and Patribus. Nec minus perspiciuum est quam iste sit
alienus a Molina: siquidem nullam Molina impossibilitatem praeceptorum, nec
absolutam, nec secundum quid admittit: sed omnibus praesto esse vult
sufficientem quandam gratiam, cui non sit necessaria gratia efficax ad actu
operandum.

IV.
P. AUGUSTINE. MARIA a CREMONA, Ordinis Servorum.
Die 8 October. 1652.
SI propositio sumatur in sensu universali, sive loquendo simpliciter de
omnibus justis, sive de omnibus justis transgressoribus, est propositio
haeretica: si in sensu particulati, attento proprio and rigoroso verborum
sensu, pariter est haeretica: si in sensu indefinito, prout jacet, est etiam
haeretica.

ANIMADVERSIO.
REcte Consultor propositionem Damnat, tum in sensu universali, quia sic
Calviniana est: tum in sensu particulari, attento proprio and rigoroso sensu;
quia sic impossibilitatem absolutam significat, non tantum impossibilitatem
secundum quid; denique recte eitam in sensu indefini^o; quia sensus indefinitus
in materia controversa and doctrinali pro universali sumitur; sicut ista
propositio: Astra moventur a propria forma; quia de eo disputant Philosophi,
fere sumitur, in sensu universali.

Hujus Consultoris sententiam nihil officere Thomistis palam est. Jans^nistae
vero illam amovent, quod absolutam preceptorum impossibilitatem nec a se, nec a
Jansenio admissam contendunt: quorum exceptiones nec probare mihi, nec
improbare consilium est, sed tantum indica^

V.
(...) WADINGUS, ^dini^strictoris Observantiae.
SI haec propositio intelligatur universaliter, ita ut omnes justos
comprehendat, and pro omni tempore denegetur gratia ad implenda praecepta
necessaria, est temeraria, a Pattibus damnata, scandalosa, Deo injuriosa,
hominibus perniciosa: si vero intelligatur de praeceptis respectu peccatorum
venialium; aut de justis operantibus secundum suas duntaxat vires, in iis
tantum sistendo: aut tertio (quem putat sensum Jansenii) intelligatur de
potentia proxima and completa, and de gratia actuali non semper, sed aliquando
denegata, nullam meretur censuram.

ANIMADVERSIO.
REcte Consultor propositionem defendit, si intelligatur de potentia completa,
and de gratia actuali efficaci, scilicet justis aliquando subtracta: id enim
docent plurimi Thomistae, imo omnes; si quidem potentiae completae nomine
intelligatur ea cui nihil desit. Discans ergo ex isto Theolog^ Molinistae,
verum esse justis aliquando deesse gratiam efficacem, and tunc ipsis mandatu
non esse possibilia potestate omnino completa, and quae nihil aliud requirat ad
agendum. Verum hic obiter nota dum est, et si Consultor ante Constitutionem sic
potuerit propositionem explicare, and sic explicatam defen^ ^ost Constitutionem
tamen id non licere. Judicavit enim summus Pontifex pravum illius sensum mag is
esse naturalem. Itaque illam nunc ab omnibus sine explicatione rejici convenit.
Verum iste sensus, quem Catholicum defendit eruditus Consultor, etiamnum post
Constitutionem ab omnibus Thomistis ut orthodoxus defenditur.

Sensum Jansenii aperte absolvit iste Consultor; nihil tamen a caeter is
distans qui illum damnaverunt, sed alio tantum modo illum exponens. Si melius
ipse, Jansenius extra aleam est: si melius alii, Jansenius haeret in luto. Sed
utut sit, Consultorum ipsorum hic existimatio non agitur, ubi de Jansenii sensu
citra fidei periculum dissentire inter s^potuerunt.

VI.
Pater DOMINICUS CAMPENELLA, Ordinis Carmelitarum.
ISta propositio videtur contra fidem coarctata ad aliqua praecepta, cum debeat
extendi ad omnia. 2. Est insipienter composita ex duabus partibus
contradictotiis. 3. Quoad utramque partem est formaliter haeretica.

ANIMADVERSIO.
VOtum istius Consultoris obscurius est, ideo nec prodest, nec obest ulli.

VII.
Pater MODESTUS a FERRARIA, Procurator generalis Ordinis Minorum Conventualium.
SI prima pars hujus propositionis praecise accipiatur, vel facit sensum
universalem, and sic est haeretica: vel facit sensum singularem, and sic
quamvis possit explicari and tra^i in bonum sensum ut ly impossibilia dicat
negationem potentiae proximae, potest admitti: and absolute cum illo termino,
impossibilia, est re jicienda tanquam remetaria, and a Patribus sub
anathematate prohibita. Si accipiatur secundum se totam, vel consideratur ut
ille terminus, gratia, supponit pro gratia efficaci, cum exclusione gratiae
sufficientis, and sic est haeretica: vel consideratur absolute secundum quod
sonant termini ipsius, and sic faltem est errori proxima.

ANIMADVERSIO.
FAtetur Consultor bonum esse istum sensum: Aliqua Dei praecepta non sunt
possibilia hominibus justis potestate proxima. Vnde nescio quid cogitarint, qui
super illa voce tot modo turbas excitarunt, quasi potestatem proximam admittere
in omnibus justis necesse sit.

Quod autem de side ait esse, justis volentibus and conantibus non deesse
efficacem and sufficientem simul, hic sat scio inclamabunt quidam Janseniani,
and Concilium ^ut Scripturae locum ostendi postulabunt, in quo haec gratia
sufficiens Thomistico sensu contineatur. His tamen si ta^ aequi sunt quam
videri volunt, facile satisfieri potest. Verbum ipsum gratiae sufficientis non
est de fide: nullo enim Conciliorum decreto consecratum est. Res ipsa nomine
significata ad fidem pertinet: hoc enim nomine significamus gratiam excitantem
quae imperfectos actus preducit, nec plenum tamen confensum operatur nifi adsit
validior gratia; and ideo secundum quid tantum efficax est; semper enim
producit actus illos imperfectos: and secundum quid est inefficax; quia nos
excitat, and nobis dat vires ad bona opera facienda, quae tamen re^psa non
perficimus propter resistentiam voluntatis. Ea gratia sic explicata nonne
millies in Patrum monumentis reperitur? nonne eam omnes vel proprio experimento
saepissime sentiunt? Quis enim est qui se excitanti Deo restitisse non dol eat?
Ergo talem gratiam necessario admittendam vel ipsi, sise and re voluerint,
certe fatebuntur, eamque conamibus and volentibus semper praesto esse. Vnde
enim conarentur and vellent nisi per illam? Vtrum autem ista gratia dicenda sit
sufficiens, necne, nominis quaestio est ad fidem nihil pertinens, in quo multos
ex ipsis vidi consentientes, nullum aperte refragantem. Malim ipse cum mea
Schola etiam verbis congruere, dummodo non apud imperitos sermoc^ner, qui hoc
verbo facile abutuntur: quia illud Moliniano sensu accipiunt. Caeterum propter
ambiguum nomen, and nulla auctoritate sancitum, nullam cuiquam molestiam
libenter f^cerim.

VIII.
P. RAPHAEL AVERSA, Ordinis Clericorum Minorum.
PRopositio in plano and aperto verborum sensu, sive dicamus in proprio and
rigoroso significatu, est omnino damnabilis, tanquam temeraria contra omnem
sententiam Theologorum, tanquam scandalosa contra communem sensum Catholicorum,
tanquam injuriosa and blasphema contra Deum, and denique tanquam haeretica
contra sidem.

ANIMADVERSIO.
ET hic rigorosum verborum sensum attendit, quem baereticum esse inter omnes
constat.

P. VINCENTIUS DEPRETIS Dominicanus Commissarius generalis S. Officii.
HAec propositio non est qualificabilis ratione proferentis; quia proposita
fuit in abstracto, ut praescindit ab omni proferente: est qualificabilis
secundum sensum communem and usitatum, faventem haereticis in modo loquendi
recepto ab ipsis, and damnato ab Ecclesia Catholica; and est temeraria,
scandalosa, male sonans. 3. Oportet formare prius sensum legitimum istius
propositionis, antequam qualificetur ratione rei significatae; quia non apparet
ex quo appareat ista impossibilitas.

IDEM.
Die 6. Novembris 1652.
ISta propositio secundum omnes terminos quibus constat actualiter, acceptos in
significatione propria, usuali and consueta, non est qualificabilis, and non
est qualificabilis nisi reducta ad sensum in quo protuli esse erroneam; hoc est
loquendo de impossibilitate physica, non tollente obligationem, nec excusante
transgressores a culpa and a poena, and refusa ex negatione virium quas Deus
teneretur dare ad praecepta talia observanda nulla existente culpa. Vbi autem
ly justis, debet necessario impropriati, and stare pro justis de praeterito,
and per appositionem terminorum nullo existente obice peccati actualis and
originalis, qui termini nec implicit nec explicit includerentur in
significatione usuali dictae propositionis.

ANIMADVERSIO.
HIc veritati concedendum est. Plane demonstrat Consultoris votum nusquam jussu
Pontificis ex cuss um esse Jansenii sensum, neque id aut ignorare potuit S.
Officii Commissarius, aut cognitum apud ipsum summum Pontificem dissimulare.
Cur ergo de Jansenio nonnuli loquuntur? Quia libuit, non quia jussum erat.

Caeterum hujus votum a Molina alienum non negabunt ipsi Molinistae.

X.
P. PHILIPPUS VICECOMES, Generalis Augustimanorum.
SI propositio faciat hunc sensum: Justi secundum vires tantum quibus
formaliter justi sunt, praeciso divino auxilio actuali, non possunt implere
aliqua Dei praecepta, est vera and Catholica: si autem consideretur in suis
terminis, est male sonans; quia pro eo quod dicere debuerat: Justi secundum
praesentes vires tantum non possunt complete implere praecepta; maluit dicere:
Praecepta sunt impossibilia secundum praesentes vires: vox autem ista praecepta
impossibil^a, etiamsi limitata ad vires praesentes cum exclusione auxilii
actualis, male sonat. Quoad secundam particulam, si faciat hunc sensum: Deest
quoque gratia, scilicet actualis auxilii, qua secundum praesentes vires
praedictas tantum possent illa complete implere: propositio est Catholica:
propter tamen terminum, impossibilia, est male sonans.

ANIMADVERSIO.
VIr ille doctrina eximius sententiam, qua justi dicuntur aliquando praecepta
non posse complete implete, Catholicam fatetur. Caeterum vocem, impossibila,
been repudiat; quia ex se significat non solum absentiam potentiae completae,
sed omnimodam potentiae negationem. Quisquis igitur solam potentiam completam,
and cui nihil desit, justis deneget absente efficaci gratia, verbis and re cum
Consultore consentit. Molinistas vero, qui potentiam omni ratione completam
semper justis adesse volunt, quomodo ab illius censura eximam, prorsus non
invenio.

XI.
P. VINCENTIUS CANDIDUS, Dominicanus, Magister sacri Palatii.
Die 14 Novembris 1652.
SEntio praedictam propositionem aliquam non mereri censuram, sed esse
verissimam and Catholicam; quia similis assertio conspicitut in variis locis
Scripturae sacrae extare. Tradita etiam in venitur sub aequivalentibus terminis
a Synodo Tridentina sess. 6. de Reform. c. 11. si attente verba illa
prependantur. Consona etiam videtur praedicta propositio familiarissimo modo
loquendi aliquorum Theologorum.

ANIMADVERSIO.
CAve putes. R. P. Vincentium in errore fuisse, quia primam propositionem
censurae judicat immunem; nam and ante Constitutionem, and post, maximo semper
honor apud summum Pontificem fuit, imo moriens magnam sanctitatis opinionem
Romae reliquit. Cur igitur absolvit quod Pontifex damnat? Quia hanc
propositionem aliter interpretatus est quam summus Pontifex. Putavit illam in
sensu gratiae efficacis accipi posse, and ideo Catholicam esse asseruit,
conformem Scripturis and Patribus. At contra, sic illam interpretandam non esse
judicavit summus Pontifex, cujus judicio Christianus orbis assensus est.
Catholicus ergo sensus est quem defendit P. Candidus, sed hunc damnatae
propositionis verbis exprimere nefas est post Constitutionem; ante
Constitutionem nefas non erat. Unde nescio cur crimini vertatur quibusdam
Doctoribus Parisiensibus, quod has propositiones in multis aliis sensibus jure
damnandas, tamen in sensu gratiae efficacis defendi posse dixerint ante
Constitutionem; cum id Consultores celeberrimi coram summo Pontifice sine
invidia aut formidine tam aperte fecerint.

XII.
P. JOANN. AUGUSTINE. A NATIVITATE, (Tartaglia) Carmelita Discalceatus.
CEnseo hanc propositionem in aliquo sensu minus proprio posse sustineri: in
sensu intento ab auctore, id est, Cornelio Jansenio, esse dignam censura, ut
jam damnatam a sacra Tridentina Synodo; absolute ut praescindit ab hoc vel illo
sensu determinate, offensivam aurium fidelium.

ANIMADVERSIO.
SEnsus iste minus proprius, sensus est gratiae efficacis ad quam revocari
posse primam proposionem quidam putabant. In hoc sensu posse sustineti
propositionem censuit Consultor. Quod autem damnat propositionem in sensu
Jansenii, magno nos negotio liberasset si simul expressisset istum Jansenii
sensum. Nihil enim magis ambiguum: ita vary a suis vel adversariis vel
defensoribus torquetur. Quia tamen hunc sensum indicat a Synodo Tridentina ante
damnatum; cum illa Lutheri utique sensum damnaverit, videtur id existimasse
Consultor, eundem Lutheri and Jansenii sensum esse quod vehementer pernegant
Janseniani. Ita-Lutheri error primum constituendus: post, illud expendetur, an
cum illo sentiat Jansenius: quae postrema quaestio facto non jure continetur.

XIII.
P. COELESTINUS BRUNUS, Ordinis S. Augustini.
CEnseo hanc propositionem esse censurandam, prout sacrum Concilium declarat,
uti temerariam, and a sanctis Patribus anathemate damnatam. Et item quia
immediate opposita est Scripturae sacrae, and sacro Concilio Tridentino, and
aliis Conciliis; and novissime Bullis summorum Pontificum Pii V. Gregorii XIII.
and Urbani VIII. Existimo etiam esse haeresi proximam. Possunt tamen opponi
aliqua praeservativa.

ANIMADVERSIO.
PRaeservativa illa quae apponi posse censet Consultor, non alia intelligi
possunt quam quae sensum efficacis gratiae a pravis sensibus segregant: nam and
istum gratiae efficacis patronum fuisse patebit ex sequentibus votis.

Quamobrem ut votorum summam colligam, damnant propositionem in sensu
universali (qui Calvinianus est) tres Consultores. In proprio and rigoroso, vel
tanquam haeresim, vel tanquam haeresi proximam, quatuor. Absolvunt in sensu
potentiae completae and proximae, tres. Sensum Jansenii unus express rejicit,
unus express probat. Et quia propositionem omnes, excepto Candido sacri
Palatii Magistro, aliquatenus damnant, ex omnium votis confecta Constitutio
dicenda est.

SECUNDA PROPOSITIO.
Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur.
I.
P. JOANN. AUGUST. A NATIVITATE, Carmelita Discalceatus.
Die 18 November. 1652.
HAEC propositio in aliquo sensu minus proprio est vera, in sensu intento a
Jansenio est digna censura, ut repugnans S. Tridentinae Synodo, and sacris
Scripturis; and sic est haeresi proxima. Ut praescindit ab hoc vel illo sensu
determinate, offendit aures fidelium.

II.
P. COELESTINUS BRUNUS, Ordinis S. Augustini.
HAEC praepositio si intelligatur de gratia efficaci praecise, vera est; sed
quia proprie and juxta terminos suos indefinite loquitur de omni gratia, and
quia fautores hujus propositionis destruant omnino sufficientem, quod est
contra omnem Theologiam, SS. Patres, and precipue D. Augustinum, quem sibi
falso patronum asciscunt, and contra sacrum concilium Tridentinum, ideo eadem
censura, qua prima propositio, censeo qualificandam.

III.
P. SFORSA PALAVICINUS, Societatis Jesu.
HAEC propositio secundum se recepta mihi videtur immunis ab omni censura:
quatenus vero profertur a Jansenio, and infertur tanquam ex praemissis, ex eo
quod negat in natura lapsa etiam hominibus justificatis vires sufficientes ad
implenda praecepta, quando reipsa peccant, est digna eadem censura, qui notavi
primam propositionem; non secundum se, sed quatenus eonsequentia illius.

ANIMADVERSIO.
NOta a Palavicino secundam propositionem propterea tantum damnari, quia
sequitur ex prima propositione. Quare cum in prima manifest a sensu Jansenii
aberraverit; patet nec eum in secunda recte collimasse, si Jansenium ferire
voluit: quod idem de reliquis propositionibus dici potest, in quibus semper
ipsius censurae ad primam illam referuntur, and ex ea pendent. Quare si in ipso
limine, ut patet, a Jansenii sensu deerraverit, prorsus ipsum in reliquo cursu
non attingit.

IV.
P. MARCUS ANTON. CARPINETUS, Procurator generalis Capucinorum.
HAEC secunda propositio ut jacet, secundum suum sensum clarum non solum est
perniciosa, temeraria, and male sonans; sed est etiam formaliter haeretica, aut
haeresim sapiens.

V.
P. THOMAS D'ELBENE, Clericus Regularis.
Die 20 Novembris 1652.
HAEC propositio si intelligatur de gratia interiori efficaci, est Catholica:
si intelligatur de gratia interioti quacunque, distinguo: velfacit sensum quoad
ipsum formaliter, and est Catholica; vel facit sensum quoad consensum qui
semper sequatur, ita ut omnis gratia interior sit efficax, and nulla
sufficiens, in quo sensu loquitur Jansenius; and sic, si non formaliter, saltem
proxime est haeretica, and evidenter falsa.

VI.
P. AUGUSTINE. MARIA A CREMONA, Ordinis Serverum.
HAEC propositio si sumatur in sensu connaturali, est haeresi proxima: si in
sensu particulari, esto in aliqua sententia sit vera and probablis; in proprio
tamen sensu and rigoroso verborum ab auctore, id est, Jansenio, intento, est
haeretica: si in sensu indefinito prout jacet, est temeraria, male sonans, and
scandalosa.

VII.
P. LUCAS WADINGUS, Ordinie strictioris Observatiae.
HAEC propositio cujuscunque auctoris illa sit, si intelligatur de gratia
efficaci, sive adjuvante, sive excitante, est vera and Catholica; si vero de
sufficienti, and quacunque gratia interiori, secundum omnem gratiae
latitudinem, est temeraria, and haeresi proxima.

P. DOMINICUS CAMPANELLA, Ordinis Carmelitarum.
CEnseo istam propositionem, sive consideretur prout jacet, sive ut explicata
ab auctore, id est Jansenio, esse formaliter haereticam; tanquam destructivam
gratiae sufficientis, quae de fide est concedenda.

IX.
Pater MODESTUS a FERRARIA, Procurator generalis Ordinis Minorum Conventualium.
CEnseo hanc propositionem non solum in sensu Jansenii, sed etiam in proprio
verborum sensu esse saltem haeresi proximam.

X.
Pater RAPHAEL AVERSA, Ordinis Clericorum Minorum.
PRopositio haec ita intellecta, seu potius correcta: Interiori gratiae
efficaci nunquam resistitur, est vera and Catholica; supplendo tamen in bona
Theologia, non solum (juxta Jansenium) in statu naturae lapsae, sed nec in
statu naturae integrae, nec in statu viae Angelorum; at accepta ut sonat
universaliter, quod nulli prorsus gratiae resistatur, si procederet ex
suppositione, quod gratia desit peccatoribus, eo quod non esset illis
necessaria, saperet haeresim Pelagianam. Procedente autem ex suppositione, quod
gratia sit quidem necessaria, sed denegetur a Deo, ut non possit homo servare
mandata, quo pacto proprie and in rigore est de mente Jansenii, sic coincidit
cum prima propositione, ac propterea participat cum illa eandem censuram.

XI.
Pater VINCENTIUS DE PRETIS, Dominicanus Commissarius generalis S. Officii.
HAec propositio non est qualificabilis; quia gratia interior Augustiniana
propugnata contra Pelagianos, est solum gratia efficax; ac proinde apud
Augustinum convertuntur gratia interior and gratia efficax. Dicere hanc
propositionem esse qualificabilem, quia tollit gratiam sufficientem omnibus
modis, est qualificare ipsissimam doctrinam D. Augustini in suis operibus
ultimis, and omnium Thomistarum.

XII.
Pater PHILIPPUS VICECOMES, Generalis Augustinianorum.
Die 27. Novembris 1652.
GRatiae interiori, hoc est, efficaci, quae proprie interior dicitur, nunquam
resistitur. Propositio vera and Catholica.

XIII.
Pater VINCENTIUS CANDIDUS, Dominicanus, Magister sacri Palatii.
CEnseo hanc propositionem nullam mereri censuram, imo esse Catholicam and
veram. Nomine enim interioris gratiae in hac propositione vere and proprie
debet intelligi de gratia efficaci. Etenim analoga stare pro famosiori
significatu, nedum humanae Philosophiae, verum etiam sacrarum literarum mori
and consuetudini est consentaneum. Ulterius si ly resistere accipiatur large
and communiter, quamvis homo possit resistere si velit in sensu diviso, nunquam
tamen in sensu composito dissentiet. In tali sensu est Catholica and vera.
Similiter si ly resistere intelligatur stricte, nunquam resistet etiam loquendo
in sensu diviso.

ANIMADVERSIO GENERALIS In Vota Consultorum super secunda Propositione.
SEcundam propositionem de gratia efficaci intellectam, septem, ut videre est,
Consultores absolvunt, imo potius novem. Nam sensus ille in quo illam veram
esse aiunt Augustinus a Nativitate, and Palavicinus, sensum esse gratiae
efficacis, manifestum est. Caeteri gratiam efficacem ne vellicant quidem. Qui
Jansenium defendere voluerit, non leve ex Wad ngi voto argumentum eliciet, ut
probet nunquam mandatum esse Consultoribus ut sensum Jansenii excuterent.
Incredibile enim est Consultorem de sensu Jansenii interrogatum a summo
Pontifice, sic ipsi respondere ausum esse: Haec propositio cujuscunque auctoris
illa sit.

Quod autem id unum in Jansenio reprehendunt Consultores, quod gratiam
sufficientem prorsus aboleverit, nullamque esse voluerit gratiam cui
dissentiatur, hoc vehementer labefactant hodierni Jansenii defensores, cum se
gratiam sufficientem Thomistico sensu reipsa admittere, eidemque vere resisti,
vere ab ea dissentiri profitentur. Quo semel posito, nulla super hac
propositione lis est ipsos inter and Consultores. Verum istam litem dirimendam
Jansenianis relinquamus: nobis illius parts fovere nihil necesse est. Hoc unum
dico, sufficientem illam gratiam, quam plerique Consultores admittunt, non esse
Molinianam, ut patet, quia iidem gratiam per se efficacem simul admittunt, quam
Moliniana prorsus abigit.

TERTIA PROPOSITIO.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.
I.
P. JOANN. AUGUST. a NATIVITATE, Carmelita Discalceatus.
Die 27. November. 1652.
HAEc propositio in aliquo casu particulari non est digna aliqua censura: prout
a Jansenio asseritur, repugnat Scripturae, and Concilio Tridentino, and
successive est haeretica.

II.
P. COELESTINUS BRUNUS, Ordinis S. Augustini.
CEnseo hanc propositionem esse temerariam, and formaliter haereticam.

III.
Pater SFORSA PALAVICINUS, Societatis Jesu.
HAEc propositio secundum se, and intellecta de liberate includente
sufficientem deliberationem, and indifferentiam judicii, ut intelligunt ejus
auctores, puto non mereri ullam censuram: prout vero habetur in Jansenio, quod
scilicet omnes, etiam justi qui peccant mortaliter, in natura lapsa careant
liberate indifferentiae, and necessario taliter peccent, puto esse dignam
eadem censura qua affeci primam propositionem.

ANIMADVERSIO.
NOtatu dignum in hoc voto sententiam Thomisticam de indifferentia judicii
circa media, quae non impedit quominus voluntas efficaciter a Deo
praedererminetur, express ab hoc Molinae discipulo, sed moderatissimo, ab omni
censura eximi. Auctores enim illi, a quibus eam asseri dicit, non alii sunt
quam Thomistae. Quod autem addit ex Jansenio, Omnes qui peccant mortaliter,
necessario taliter peccare, id vulgo negant Janseniani, qui se in peccatoribus
indifferentiam contradictionis admittere dictitant, nec quicquam omnino a
vulgari Thomistarum doctrina hac in part differ.

IV.
P. MARCUS ANTON. CARPINETUS, Procurator generalis Capucinorum.
PRopositio haec, si accipiatur meritum and demeritum late, nulla digna est
censura. Similiter si propositio intelligatur non solum de possibilitate in
ordine ad Deum, sed etiam de facto, ex speciali privilegio quoad meritum, and
ex aliqua causa speciali quoad demeritum, nulla est digna censura. Accipiendo
vero propositionem ut jacet, and secundum sensum quem regulariter importat, and
in sensu ab auctore, hoc est, Jansenio intento, est non solum male sonans, sed
etiam absolute haeretica.

V.
Pater THOMAS D'ELBENE, Clericus Regularis.
CEnseo tertiam propositionem hanc simpliciter, esse formaliter haereticam.

VI.
P. AUGUSTINE. MARIA a CREMONA, Ordinis Servorum.
HAec propositio in proprio and rigoroso sensu, maxim a Jansenio intento, est
formaliter haeretica.

VII.
Pater LUCAS WADINGUS, Ordinis strictioris Observantiae.
CEnseo propter multitudinem and auctoritatem gravissimorum virorum, qui
doctrinam omnem, a qua pendet propositio, defendunt, propositionem probabilem
and nulla dignam censura Theologica.

VIII.
Pater DOMINICUS CAMPANELLA, Ordinis Carmelitarum.
CEnseo istam propositionem in sensu ab auctoribus explicato esse formalissime
haereticam, tanquam destruentem libertatem, and consequenter rationem meriti
and demeriti in nostris actionibus.

IX.
Pater MODESTUS a FERRARIA, Procurator generalis Ordinis Minorum Conventualium.
CEnseo hanc propositionem secundum proprium sensum verborum, and secundum se
absolute consideratam, esse saltem erroneam in fide.

X.
Pater RAPHAEL AVERSA, Ordinis Clericorum Minorum.
CEnseo propositionem hanc non solum esse damnatam a summis Pontificibus contra
Michaelem Baium, and contra Jansenium; sed esse formaliter haereticam, damnatam
a D. Thoma, and ab aliis summis Pontificibus and Conciliis, and esse formaliter
haeresim Calvini and Lutheri, damnatam in Concilio Tridentino. Quod si
coarctaretur ad aliquem casum particularem, adhuc declinat in partem haeresis.

XI.
Pater VINCENTIUS DE PRETIS, Dominicanus, Commissarius generalis S. Officii.
HAec propositio intellecta de liberate a coactione, excludente libertatem
indifferentiae destruentem efficaciam gratiae positam a D. Augustino, est
Catholica, and non est qualificabilis; intellecta autem de liberate a
coactione excludente indifferentiam compatientem secum efficaciam divinae
gratiae Augustinianae, est qualificabilis, and est erronea, and etiam majori
censura digna.

XII.
Pater PHILIPPUS VICECOMES, Generalis Augustinianorum.
Die 11. Decembris 1652.
PRopositio quoad meritum est vera and Catholica; quoad demeritum respectu
peccatoum quae sunt poena peccati, de quibus dicitur, De necessitatibus meis
eripe me, Domine, non est qualificabilis.

XIII.
Pater VINCENTIUS CANDIDUS, Dominicanus, Magister sacri Palatii.
HAec propositio cum non solum a pluribus Doctoribus Scholasticis, sed etiam a
multis Patribus and Doctoribus Ecclesiae, praesertim a D. Augustino and D.
Thoma reperiatur asserta, necesse est dicere eam in sensu Catholico defendi
posse, ne dicamus ipsos propositiones temeratias aut haereticas scripsisse. In
re enim dubia and probabili interpretatio illa praeferenda, unde jus tertii non
laeditur. Sentio igitur propositionem assertam nullam mereri censuram, imo esse
veram and Catholicam.

ANIMADVERSIO GENERALIS in Vota Consultorum super tertia propositione.
VAlde hic nos turbant Consultores; quia sensum Jansenii saepe damnant, nunquam
exprimunt. Quod tamen ex illorum votis conjici licet, sic illum utique
acceperunt, quasi omnem prorsus indifferentiam, etiam eam quae cum gratia
efficaci cohaeret, etiam indifferentiam judicii and electionis mediorum
funditus sustulerit, and meram necessitatem invexerit: quo sensu, qui certe, ut
aiunt, rigorosus and proprius est, illam etiam repudiant omnes tum Thomistae
tum Jansenistae, qui hunc sensum Jansenio falso tribui pugnant. At quia praeter
illas indifferentias judicii and electionis, quas omnes admittunt, est alia
quaedam notissima, nempe Moliniana, illa scilicet quae semper in utramque
partem sic expedita est, ut nihil ipsi desit quominus se vel in bonum vel in
malum convertat; hanc utique nullo modo adstruunt Consultores, utpote gratiae
efficaci capitaliter aversam. Imo quatuor ex ipsis dignitate long praecipui,
eruditione non postremi, propositionem ipsam a censura liberant, quatenus
excludit hoc Molinianae Scholae figmentum; nec tamen cum caeteris Consultoribus
pugnant, nisi quod illam aliter quam ipsi interpretantur. Hi propositionem
recte damnant; quia in proprio sensu destruit omnem indifferentiam: illi mitius
de ea sentiunt, quia solam Molinianam impugnare videri potuit, quod non modo
non vetat fides, sed etiam jubet. Ergo qui caeteras indifferentias admittit
excepta Moliniana, cum omnibus Consultoribus reipsa consentit.

QUARTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent eam gratiam esse talem, cui posset humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare.
I.
P. JOANN. AUGUSTINE. a NATIVITATE, Carmelita Discalceatus.
Die 11. Decembris 1652.
HAec quarta propositio ut jacet est haeretica; ut asseritur a Jansenio contra
quosdam Doctores Catholicos, meretur censuram propter acerbitatem: ut est
antecedens ex quo ipse infert consequentiam de gratia victrice and medicinali,
est etiam haeretica.

ANIMADVERSIO.
NOn nihil ille gratiam efficacem videtur impetere, sed in speciem tantum: non
enim credibile est aliquem ex illo Ordine, qui speciali decreto
praedeterminationem physicam docere and defendere tenetur, quae utique gratia
victrix and medicinalis est, aliquid contra Ordinis sui doctrinam ausum esse.
Quid igitur senserit, breviter indicabo. Sunt quidam, sed ii perpauci, qui cum
p^aedeterminationem physicam defendant, tamen illam a victrici delectatione a
Jansenio asserta in eo se jungunt, quod praedeterminatio physica relinquat
adhuc voluntatem indifferentem in sensu diviso and etiam composito, componendo
scilicet potentiam cum actu opposito. At vero, inquiunt, delectatio victrix
omnimodam necessitatem affert ex Jansenio, nec ullam relinquit indifferentiam.
Sic videtur sensisse iste Consultor, itemque Raphael Aversa in suo suffragio.
At in hoc valde repugnantes habebunt Jansenii defensores, qui hanc meram esse
cavillationem a suo and Jansenii sensu alienissimam clamitant, nec ullam a se
necessitatem gratiae tribui, nisi quam Thomistae infallibilitatis vocant;
nullam indifferentiam repudiari nisi Molinianam. Ita hic etiam de sensu
Jansenii ab istis Consultoribus dissident, at in ipsis dogmatis cum
Consultoribus congruunt.

II.
Pater COELESTINUS BRUNUS, Ordinis S. Augustini.
Die 16. Decembris 1652.
HAnc propositionem secundum historiam evidenter patet esse falsam: quantum
vero ad id quod asserit in secunda part, praeter censuram tertiae
propositionis, quia ex ea infertur necessario omnes Catholicos haereticos esse,
dico esse temerariam, blasphemam, and ad minus virtualiter haereticam, and
forsan etiam formaliter.

III.
(...) PALAVICINUS, Societatis Jesu.
P^ h^ propositionem esse^aliam and temerariem propter acerbitatem censurae
quae notat sententiam probabilem, and uti talem ab Ecclesia admiss^.
Praescindendo autem a censura hujus sententiae probabilis, propositio ipsa in
se, and prout prola^ a Jansenio, mihi videtur immunis ab omni censura
Theologica.

IV.
P. MARCUS ANTON. CARPINETUS, Procurator generalis Capucinorum.
PRima pars propositionis in quantum continet factum sive historiam, non est
digna censura, neque est etiam evidenter falsa. Secunda pars propositionis
accepta indefinite prout sonat and potest extendi tam ad gratiam efficacem,
quam sufficientem, est non solum temeraria and erronea, sed etiam formaliter
haeretica. Prout restringitur ad gratiam efficacem, in quo sensu visus est
Jansenius proferre, non est digna aliqua censura Theologica, nisi in quantum
nimis rigorose censurat aientes, ejusmodi gratiae posse resisti and
obtemperari: quae cum sit doctrina probabilis, non meretu^ notam haeresis.

V.
Pater THOMAS D'ELBENE, Clericus Regularis.
JSta propositio, quicquid sit de prima part, in qua est quaestio de facto,
and mera historia, tamen quoad secundam partem prout intelligitur a Jansenio,
est formaliter haeretica.

VI.
P. AUGUSTINE. MARIA a CREMONA, Ordinis Servorum.
CIrca hanc quartam propositionem sum in voto, quoad primam partem esse falsam.
Quoad secundam, licet in aliquo sensu posset probabiliter sustineri, in proprio
tamen and rigoroso sensu verborum a Jansenio intento, cum annexis and connexis
sub quibus porrigitur ab eodem, cui non potest adaptari sensus probabilis quem
potest habere, propositionem esse formaliter haereticam.

VII.
Pater LUCAS WADINGUS, Ordinis strictioris Observantiae.
CEnseo propositionem hanc fuisse male conceptam, and auctorem (quisquis ille
fuerit) in prima part circa dogmata Semipelagianorum, and in secunda circa
mentem Jansenii fuisse plane deceptum. Caeterum in libro Jansenii censeo
scandalosum esse and temerarium nimis vehementem illum modum propugnanci
sententiam propriam, and impugnandi alienas, praesertim Patrum Jesuitarum.

VIII.
Pater DOMINICUS CAMPANELLA, Ordinis Carmelitarum.
CEnseo hanc quart am propositionem quoad p^imam partem, tanquam punctum
pertinens ad historiam, non cadere sub censura Theologica. Quoad secundam, and
falso imponi Semipelagianis tanquam errorem, and esse formaliter haereticam, in
quantum sententiam Catholicam antiquissimam, utpote a multis seculis, ipso
Calvino fatente, traditam in Ecclesia Dei, and a cunctis fidelibus sine ^lla
contradictione and discrepantia creditam, dicit haereticam.

IX.
Pater MODESTUS a FERRARIA, Procuratogeneralis Ordinis Minorum Conventualium.
DIco hujus propositionis primam partem esse falsam, alteram esse saltem
haeresi proximam.

X.
Pater RAPHAEL AVERSA, Ordinis Clericorum Minorum.
Die 23. Decembris 1652.
PRopositio haec est tota falsa and perniciosa contra fidem historiae: sed
specialiter secunda pars redundat in maximam contumeliam Ecclesiae Catholicae,
profitentis dari talem gratiam cui possit humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare, and ipsa in se est haeretica contra definitionem Concilii
Tridentini. Quod si quarta propositio ita corrigatur: Gratiae efficaci humanam
voluntatem non posse resistere, adhuc eo m^do quo ponitur a Jansenio, videtur
haeretica; sed explicando gratiam efficacem eo modo quo apud alterutram Scholam
intelligitur in sensu composito vel sub similibus terminis, sic contineret
sanam doctrinam.

XI.
Pater VINCENTIUS DE PRETIS, Dominicanus, Commissarius generalis S. Officii.
HAEc propositio quia imponit notam haereticorum Semipelagianis, ex eo quod
affirmarent gratiam ab ipsis positam esse talem, cui voluntas possit obsistere
vel obtemperare, per taleitatem destruentem efficaciam gratiae Divi Augustini,
^approbantem inefficacitatem gratiae assertam a Semipelagianis, impugnatam a
Divo Augustino, est immunis ab omni censura.

XII.
Pater PHILIPPUS VICECOMES, Generalis Augustinianorum.
SI propositio ista intelligitur, quod solum admitteret talem gratiam cui
posset humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare, cum exclusione omnis gratiae
efficacis, and secundum propositum, sic utique erant haeretici Semipelagiani:
si vero ita intelligitur, ut ita vellent eam gratiam esse talem cui posset
humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare, ut tamen praeter illam admitterent
gratiam efficacem and secundum propositum, sic non erant haeretici, sicut non
sunt doctissimi viri qui utramque gratiam admittunt.

XIII.
Pater VINCENTIUS CANDIDUS, Dominicanus, Magister sacri Palatii.
QUoad primam partem propositionis quartae, censeo non mereri aliquam censuram;
ut ex mu^is relatis, praesertim ex testimonio D. Augustini de Praedestin. cap.
1. Quoad secundam partem, in hoc erant haeretici, quod sensum Pelagianorum
proprium, quatenus excludebant gratiam vere efficacem quam statuit D.
Augustinus in suis operibus, falsa est: si autem ly resistere accipiatur in
proprio significatu, non videtur censuranda secunda pars propositionis.

ANIMADVERSIO GENERALIS in Vota Consultorum super quanta propositione.
PRopositionem ipsim, ut palam est, sex Consultores innoxiam pronunciant:
caeteri propterea damnant, quia erroris accusare videtur Catholicam doctrinam
contra Calvinum definitam, scilicet gratiae resisti vel obtemperari posse. An
igitur sex ex illo numero haeretici fuerunt, and septem Catholici? An fides ab
haeresi non nisi uno Consultoris calculo dissidet? Neutiquam, omnes idem reipsa
senserunt: sed ut in aliis propositionibus, sic etiam in illa, de sensu ejus
non convenient.

Sensum Iansenii hic express Iesuita Palavicinus, Carpinetus, Wadingus, a
censura eximunt: imo postremus ille auctorem illarum propositionum in Iansenii
mente plane deceptum coram summo Pontifice praedicat, verene an falso, nihil ad
me. Interim obiter noto hanc de Iansenii sensu controversiam inter ipsos
Consultores viguisse, nec demum post Constitutionem natam esse, ut quidam
fabulantur, quam utinam ex professo and non obiter tantum agitassent: tantas
enim fortasse lites nobis non reliquissent.

Rectissime autem Generalis Augustinianorum, itemque Commissarius S. Officii,
in eo collocant Semipelagianorum errorem, quod gratiae efficacis necessitatem
ad initium fidei destruerent, quod adversus Molinistas idipsum sentientes
semper tenuit, and etiam nunc tenet omnis Schola Thomistica, omnesque graves
Theologi.

QUINTA PROPOSITIO.
Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum
fuisse, and sanguinem fudisse.
I.
Pater IOANN. AUGUSTINE. a NATIVITATE, Carmelita Discalceatus.
Dei 30. Decembris 1652.
HAec propositio, ut jacet, non est Catholica; si exponatur quoad auxilia
sufficientia praeparata omnibus hominibus ex meritis Christi, meretur censuram
propter acerbitatem. Ut est connexa cum propositione Iansenii, quod Christus
sit mortuus solum pro praedestinatis, and illis solis praeparaverit auxilia
sufficientia ad perseverandum, meretur eandem censuram ac prima propositio.

II.
Pater COELESTINUS BRUNUS, Ordinis S. Augustini.
EXistimo hanc propositionem tanquam omnibus horrendam and impiam, and tanquam
animam reliquarum propositionum, and quia habet etiam affinitatem cum multis
propositionibus damnatis Baii, prorsus temerariam and plus reliquis haereticam.

III.
Pater SFORSA PALAVICINUS, Societatis Jesu.
CEnseo istam propositionem secundum se esse Catholicam, and non dignam
censura, nisi propter censuram annexam propositionis. Propter ejusmodi censuram
qua damnat propositionem admissam a multis Scholasticis, and simpliciter
prolatam in Tridentino, censeo esse temerariam and male sonantem; prout
profertur a Iansenio, censeo mereri eandem censuram qua notavi primam
propositionem.

IV.
Pater MARCUS ANTON. CARPINETUS, Procurator generalis Capucinorum.
Die 12. Ian. 1653.
HAec propositio ut jacet, Christus non est mortuus pro omnibus omnino
hominibus, and pro omnibus omnino hominibus sanguinem non fudit, sine alio
addito explicante, est male sonans, pias aures offendens, and si non formaliter
haeretica, saltem haeresi proxima. Eadem propositio restricta hoc modo:
Christus non est mortuus pro praescitis, adhuc est formaliter haeretica, sic
simpliciter and sine alia explicatione proposita. Eadem propositio restricta
hoc modo: Christus non est mortuus pro omnibus omnino hominibus; quia non est
mortuus pro infidelibus, adhuc est haeretica. Eadem propositio restricta hoc
modo: Christus non est mortuus pro omnibus omnino hominibus, quia non est
mortuus pro parvulis, adhuc est haeretica, simpliciter and sine aliqua
declaratione prolata. Eadem propositio etiam declarata hoc modo: Christus non
est mortuus pro omnibus, quia non omnibus contulit beneficium suae passionis,
sed solum praedestinatis, adhuc est haeretica. In uno vero sensu solo erit
Catholica, si dicatur: Christus non est mortuus pro omnibus, quia non omnibus
contulit beneficium salutis sive beatitudinis aeternae.

V.
Pater THOMAS D'ELBENE, Clericus Regularis.
DIco: Vel quinta ista propositio facit sensum, quod Christus non sit mortuus
pro omnibus efficaciter, and non est digna censura, sed Catholica: vel facit
sensum quod non sit mortuus pro omnibus aequaliter: ita ut discretio sit ex
nobis, non autem ex gratia; and est etiam Catholica: vel facit sensum quod non
sit mortuus pro quibusdam, ut pro infantulis qui moriuntur sine baptismo, pro
paganis, and quibusdam Christianis induratis; and esterronea and temeraria;
saltem prout vocat opinionem oppositam, errorem Semipelagianorum: vel facit
sensum quod sit mortuus pro praedestinatis tantum, and pro nullis aliis etiam
justificatis, uti per baptismum, etc. and in hoc sensu, qui vere est Jansenii,
est haeretica.

VI.
Pater AUGUSTINE. MARIA aCREMONA, Ordinis Servorum.
SUm in voto, propositionem hanc ratione censurae esse male sonantem and
temerariam: secundum se esse scandalosam: in sensu auctoris, nempe Jansenii,
quatenus excludit a beneficio aeterno mortis Christi infideles and parvulos,
esse parum probabilem, and nihil piam: quatenus excludit aliquos ex
justificatis, esse erroneam and formaliter haereticam.

ANIMADVERSIO.
HAereo, fateor, quomodo hic duos istos Consultores excusem, quod eam Jansenio
sententiam tribuant, Christum ita pro solis praedestinatis mortuum esse, ut pro
nullis aliis mortuus sit, etiam justificatis per baptismum. Hoc enim constat a
sensu Jansenii verbisque disjunctissimum esse, cum pro omnibus justificatis,
etiam reprobis Christum esse mortuum profiteatur. Non video igitur quid dici
possit, nisi Consultores istos indiligentius sensum Jansenii excussisse; quia
summus Pontifex propositiones expendi jusserat in abstracto, and ut
praescindunt ab omni proferente, ut ait Vincentius de Pretis S. Officii
Commissarius in suo suffragio. Quamobrem illi summi Pontificis jussu,
propositionibus in abstracto spectandis intenti, de Jansenio audita potius quam
visa retulere, aliter procul dubio locuturi, si Jansenium suis oculis
inspexissent.

VII.
Pater LUCAS WADINGUS, Ordinis strictioris Observantiae.
Die 15. Januarii 1653.
JSta propositio quinta cum illa nota sive censura Semipelagiani erroris,
nullibi legitur apud Iansenium. Explicatio autem quam adhibuit locis sacrae
Scripturae de morte Christi pro solis fidelibus, praesertim pro praedestinatis,
sana est and Catholica, utpote conformis eidem sacrae Scripturae, and quae
express habetur apud Augustinum, and alios SS. Patres, and alios gravissimos
Doctores.

VIII.
Pater DOMINICUS CAMPANELLA, Ordinis Carmelitarum.
DIco propositionem istam fuisse primo evomitam ex Calvino: secundo
Semipelagianos non errasse in hoc puncto, sed recte and Catholice sensisse:
tertio esse formaliter haereticam, tanquam repugnantem apertissimis and toties
repetitis testimoniis Apostolicis, necnon sacris Conciliis, and SS. Patribus
contradicentem; and proprie omnipotenti Deo, cujus natura bonitas; and
copiosissimae Christi redemptioni, cujus modica sanguinis gutta pro totius
mundi redemptione suffecisset, ut testatur Clemens VI. in Extravagante
Vnigenitus, de poenitentia, esse valde injuriosam.

IX.
Pater MODESTUS a FERRARIA, Procurator generalis Ordinis Minorum Conventualium.
CUm haec propositio, Christus pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuus est, sit de
fide, ex Scripturis, Concilio Trid. and SS. Patribus, haec quinta propositio
est omnino haeretica.

X.
Pater RAPHAEL AVERSA, Ordinis Clericorum Minorum.
Die 20. Januarii 1653.
HAec propositio in modo loquendi proprie and rigorose sumpta, est blasphema,
contumeliosa, contraria S. Scripturae, and Concilio Tridentino; in sensu vero
Iansenii partim ex professo lib. 3. de gratia Salvatoris cap. ultimo, reducitur
ad primas tres propositiones; quare eandem cum illis censuram meretur.

XI.
Pater VINCENTIUS DE PRETIS, Dominicanus, Commissarius generalis S. Officii.
HAec propositio per hoc quod afficitur nota erroris subit censuram quam
meretur, and proinde est immunis ab omni censura.

ANIMADVERSIO.
Men's Consultoris est, recte Semipelagiani erroris nota affici hanc
propositionem, Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, intellectam Molinistico sensu,
videlicet quod Christus omnibus promeruerit gratiam quandam Molinianam, quam
alii accipiunt, alii respuunt pro solo nutu voluntatis; adeoque immunem judicat
a censura quintam propositionem, quatenus Molinae sententiam damnat.

XII.
Pater PHILIPPUS VICECOMES, Generalis Augustinianorum.
VOtum est. Haec propositio ex D. Prospero and Hilario in terminis est a
Semipelagianis asserta tanquam contraria sententiae S. Patris Augustini. An
vero ab illis simpliciter asseratur, vel tanquam illorum error habenda sit,
dico secundum sensum intentum a Semipelagianis, ista propositio est falsa,
quatenus nimirum existimant Christum Dominum aequaliter ac indifferenter
quacunque lege seclusa omni gratia efficaci, Deest hic aliquid.
and secundum propositum de quo loquitur Apostolus, and explicat Augustinus.

ANIMADVERSIO.
ET hic Consultor propositionem vocat, non totum istud complexum,
Semipelagianum est dicere, etc. sed hanc solam partem ultimam, Christus pro
omnibus omnino hominibus mortuus est; quam falsam dicit, secundum sensum a
Semipelagianis intentum, quem eundem esse manifest vult ac sensum Molinistarum.

XIII.
Pater VINCENTIUS CANDIDUS, Dominicanus, Magister sacri Palatii.
CEnseo quintam propositionem praedictam nullam mereri censuram, and sustineri
posse ut probabilem, and fine dubio veram. Semipelagianorum enim error fuit, ut
omnibus pro comperto est, ita Christum Dominum esse omnium Redemptorem, and pro
omnibus mortuum existimarunt, ut penes liberum arbitrium omnium hominum esset
tale Redemptoris beneficium acceptare seu repudiare, etiam proxima and
immediata, and, ut aiunt Theologi, cum actu conjuncta potentia: quo errore
manifest humano arbitrio parts primas, gratiae vero secundas tribuebant,
contra Magistrum Gentium Paulum ad Corinth. 4. ac ipsius electionis
profundissima mysteria relegabant, quo consequenter veram Christi Domini
redemptionem de medio tollebant, ut talis redemptionis participes esse homines
ex liberi arbitrii viribus operantes autumarent.

ANIMADVERSIO GENERALIS in Vota Consultorum super quinta propositione.
IN hac quinta propositione similiter se gerunt Consultores atque in caeteris.
Quidam ex illis de sensu Jansenii pro libito loquuntur. Con^ra Wadingus nullibi
legi apud Jansenium istam propositionem asserit. Ipsam propositionem quidam
defendunt, quidam damnant, in ejus intelligentia dissentientes, in ipsis
dogmatis aut nihil, aut parum. Siquidem inter omnes gratiae efficacis patronos,
aut certe non impugnatores, quales illi fuerunt, sententias sequentes
orthodoxas esse convenit.

I. Christum solis praedestinatis ea beneficia morte sua promeruisse, quibus
certissime liberantur quicunque liberan^ur. II. Nulli reprobo datum esse aut
promeritum. per mortem Christi efficax and gratuitum perseverantiae donum, sine
quo nemo unquam salvus erit. III. Gratias omnes quas justificati reprobi
recipient, ipsis ex meritis Christi conferri: and quia justificati omnes habent
gratias Thomistico sensu sufficientes, modo actuales, modo habituales, etiam
pro illis promerendis Christum esse mortuum. IV. Mortem Christi esse
sufficientem pro totius 'mundi salute. V. Christum humana, vel divina etiam,
sed antecedente voluntate omnium hominum salutem optasse. VI. Absoluta
voluntate and efficaci solis praedestinatis aeternam beatitudinem optasse,
petiisse, promeruisse.
Haec fere inter Thomistas constant, nec ullum ex istis capitibus convellunt
Consultores, multa etiam express probant. Sunt autem quaedam in nostra Schola
controversa, v. g. an omnes infideles and obdurati habeant gratias
sufficientes: haec non attingunt Consultores.

Si quaeras quem sensum Jansenio tribuant qui ipsi videntur adversi; Respondeo
hunc esse, ut ex ipso pro solis praedestinatis Christus mortuus sit, and nullo
modo pro reprobis; ex quo consequens aiunt esse, nulli, ne justo quidem, adesse
sufficientia media ad salutem. Talem non esse Jansenii sensum multi contendunt:
jure an injuria, grandis quaestio; at mei nec instituti, nec stomachi. Omnino
enim quo pertineat de unius hominis sententia litigare prorsus non intelligo.
Erret, an recte sentiat Jansenius, nihil ad me: imo nihil ad fidem, nihil ad
Ecclesiam; dummodo de ipsis dogmatis constet. De ipsis propositionibus inter se
Consultores dissenserunt; quanto id durius? Integra tamen omnium fides; quia
verborum potius ista, quam rerum dissensio fuit. Potest idem in Jansenii sensu
accidere, quem vary acceptum probare illi possunt, illi improbare, nihil inter
se in ipsis dogmatis discrepantes. An ita sit, videant quorum id interest. Ego
vero doctis illis viris, qui defensi Jansenii invidia laborant, libenter hanc
conditionem tulerim, quam simili in causa Origenistis infensissimus illorum
hostis Hieronymus tulit; aut deserant Jansenium, aut doceant illius mentem a
proprio sensu propositionum penitus alienam, and in his quinque capitulis
nostrae Scholae penitus consentientem, in qua certissimum ipsis ad vitandam
Molinistarum ferocientium audaciam perfugium semper patebit.

An Advertisement touching the General of the Augustines.
It Is manifest in these Suffrages, that F. Philip Visconty General of the
Augustines, always held the five Propositions as free from Censure, because he
took them in the sense of Effectual Grace: Whence it also appears, that the
holding of the Propositions in the said sense was never taken ill at Rome,
since the sentiments of this General hindered not his being afterward offered
three Bishoppricks, of which he refused the two first out of humility; but at
the instances of the present Pope, at length accepted that of Ascoli in the
Kingdom of Naples, which preferment of his was certifi'd to me by a Letter
written from Rome, Febr. 19. 1657.

IO non so che nuova darle se nou brevemente significare a V. S. che doppo
esser stati proposti i Vescovati di Catanzaro e Nardo nel Regno al P. Visconti,
and esser stati da lui rifiutati; Mercordi passato, giorno delle Cineri su
fatto avvisare da N. S. che li proponeva il Vescovato d' Ascoli pure in Regno;
e perch da questo scopri che sua Santita in tutti i modi lo volea Vescovo; e'l
giorno dopo lo mando a chiamare Monsignor Ghiggi per l'istesso, la mattina
seguente del Venerdi fu intimato all essame, e fu essaminato con Monsu Alliere
per il Vescovato di Cavaglione. Non so che mi dire di questa premura; e come si
siano incontrati a stare assieme l'Arca e Dagone. L' Alliere se ne sta nel
convento di S. Marcello, e lo serve dicarozza il C. Barberino. Del resto le
vivo servirore ela saluto con tutti amorosissimamente. Di Roma li 19. Febraro.

PAVLI IRENAEI CAVSA JANSENIANA, SIVE FICTITIA HAERESIS, SEX DISQUISITIONIBUS
Theologice historice explicata explosa.
ADVERTISEMENT Touching these Disquisitions.
THREE of these Disquisitons have been formerly Printed; the other three, not
till now. I was invited to annex them to my Journal by the conformity which I
found in them with the historical matters related therein. Although I must not
dissemble that the Author has particular reflections of his own upon the same
actions; which may be attributed to the diversity of Memoires and intelligence
written touching the same Occurrences both by our Colleagues and our
Adversaries. The sincerity and candor which appears in his manner of writing
suffer me not to doubt but he has spoken as faithfully and honestly as my
self. And indeed these disquisitions so clear the matters which they treat of,
and are all six so convincing, that what was formerly said of the two first
which were printed, may be said of them all, viz. that they are ad presents
Ecclesiae tumultus sedandos opportunae.

These following passages of S. Augustine were set in the front of the two
former instead of a Preface when they were first printed.

S. AUGUSTINUS. CERTUM est non mandata servare si volumus; sed quia praeparatur
voluntas a Domino, ab illo pretendum est ut tantum velimus, quantum sufficit ut
volendo faciamus -- Qui ergo vult facere Dei mandatum, and non potest, jam
quidem habet voluntatem bonam, sed adhuc parvam and invalidam; poterit autem
cum magnam habuerit and robustam -- Et quis istam etsi parvam dare coeperat
caritatem, nisi ille qui praeparat voluntatem, and cooperando perficit, quod
operando incipit? Quoniam ipse ut velimus operatur incipiens, qui volentibus
cooperatur perficiens -- tamen sine illo vel operante ut velimus, vel
cooperante cum volumus, ad bona pietatis opera NIHIL VALEMUS. De gratia and
lib. arb. c. 16. 17.

Idem S. AUGUSTINUS. Concupiscentiae reatus nisi in renascentibus non solvitur,
ut eo post hanc absolutionem non inquinetur, nisi qui ei ad perpetrandum opus
malum spi itu adversus eam vel non concupiscente, VEL NON FORTIUS CONCUPISCENTE
consentit. Lib. 6. operis ult. Iul. cap. ult.

Idem S. AUGUSTINUS. Dicite nobis, o vani, non defensores, sed inflatores
liberi arbit rii; dicite inquam, nobis, si noluissent Gentes eredere, justeque
vivere, evacuaretur promissio quae facta est ad Abraham? Non inquies. Ergo ut
Abraham ob stipendium fidei consequeretur dilatationem seminis, praeparata est
Gentium voluntas a Domino; and ut vellent, QuOD ET NOLLE POTUISSENT, ab illo
factum est, qui ea quae promisit, potens est facere. Contra secundam Julian.
Resp. lib. 2.

Idem ADVERSUS SEMIPELAGIANOS. Omnes Deus docet venire ad Christum, non quia
omnes veniunt, sed quia nemo aliter venit -- Nam si and illos quibus stultitia
est verbum crucis, ut ad Christum venirent docere voluisset, proculdubio
venirent and ipsi. Non enim fallit aut fallitur qui ait: Omnis qui audivit a
Patre, and didicit, venit ad me. Absit ergo ut quisquam non veniat qui a Patre
audivit and didicit. Quare, inquiunt, non omnes docet? Si dixerimus, quia
nolunt discere quos non docet, respondebitur nobis. Et ubi est quod ei dicitur,
Dom ne tu convertens vivificabis nos? Aut si non facit VOLENTES EX NOLENTIBUS
Deus, quid orat Ecclesia secundum praeceptum Domini pro persecutoribus suis,
quandoquidem hoc pro eis oratur, ut non credentibus, id est, fidem non
habuentibus, FIDES IPSA DONETUR? Cum igitur Evangelium praedicatur, quidam
credunt, quidam non credunt. Sed qui credunt, Praedicatore forin secus
insonante, intus a Patre audiunt atque discunt; qui autem non credunt, foris
audiunt, intus non audiunt, neque discunt; hoc est, illis datur ut credant,
illis non datur. Quia nemo, inquit, venit ad me, nisi Pater qui me misit,
taxerit eum. -- Et nemo potest venire ad me, nisi fuerit ei datum a Patre meo.
Ergo trahi a Patre ad Christum, and audire ac discere a Patre quo credat in
Christum, nihil aliud est quam donum accipere a Patre quo credat in Christum.
Haec est Augustino Catholica fides Semipelagianorum errori opposita. De
praedest. SS. c. 8.

S. THOMAS. Omnis absoluta voluntas Christi, etiam humana, fuit impleta; quia
fuit Deo conformis: and per consequens omnis ejus oration fuit exaudita. Quare
dicendum est, quod Dominus non oravit pro omnibus crucifixoribus; neque etiam
pro omnibus qui erant credituri in eum, sed pro his solum qui erant
praedestinati, ut per ipsum vitam consequerentur aeternam. 3. p. q. 21. a. 4.


PAULI IRENAEI DISQUISITIO PRIMA.
An sint in Ecclesia novae alicujus haeresis Sectatores.
OMnibus retro seculis nihil fortasse ejusmodi visum aut auditum, quale his
nostris remporibus cernere est. Sollicitantur omnes and Ecclesiae and seculi
potestates, armantur concionatores, populi concitantur, ad extinguendum nescio
cujus novae latentis, ut aiunt, haeresis incendium. Periclitari dicitur res
Christiana, nisi gliscenti malo mature occurratur. Rem totam proprius inspice,
nec vanis rumoribus, sed fidelibus oculis crede^ nec haereseos, nec periculi
umbram aut somnium reperies.

Id quoniam ostendi mirifice pertinet ad conciliandam Ecclesiae pacem, hac
scriptione breviter, at, ni sallor, invicte demonstrabitur, nullam in Ecclesia
haeresim, nullos haereticos esse, ut ex omnibus constet non tam hanc schismatis
and haereseos flammam este, quam occultae malevolentiae and privati odii fumum:
quem omnibus, ac praesertim Ecclesiae rectoribus, offundere nituntur homines
sibi male conscii, nec obscuris de causis exulcerati, ut in hac omnium rerum
caligine suis interim cupiditatibus serviant.

Quod proposui, sic efficio. Nulla haeresis sine haeretico dogmate. Nulli
haeretici sine pertinacia in damnato dogmate defendendo. Neutrum est in
Ecclesia. Igitur nec haeresis in Ecclesia, nec haeretici.

Singulas parts separatim exequemur, ac primum de haeretico dogmate.

ARTICULUS. I.
Novam illam haeresim in ipsis quinque propositionibus non residere, quia eas
nemo defendit.
OMnes de gratia controversiae ad quinque propositiones jam redierunt. Nam
caetera omnia citra fidei dispendium libere defendi jam ipsi adversarii
consentiunt. Ergo aut ibi haeresis sita, aut nusquam. At non ibi esse facile
convincitur. Omnes enim ad unum Catholici istas propositiones proscribunt, and
quidem in proprio verborum sensu: ubinam igitur haeresis? Confectam quaestionem
diceres, nisi adversariorum calliditas novas rursum lites serere instituisset.
Non satis aiunt esse ad declinandam haeresim, si propositiones damnentur in
proprio sensu, nisi etiam damnentur in Janseniano. Ad hunc finem decretum
quoddam ab Episcopis Galliae expresserunt Annati sui opera Jesuitae, quo
jubentur omnes Theologi propositiones in Janseniano sensu damnare. Hoc qui
renuat, quod multi faciunt, illico hoc Annatino argumento feritur: Jansenianus
sensus ab Episcopis ut haereticus proscribitur. Defendis sensum Jansenit. Ergo
defendis haereticum sensum. Ergo es haereticus. Hoc sophismate, minis and
terroribus ar mato, omnes jam Molinismi vires continentur. Ex illo novam
Jansenianam illam haeresim eruunt. Hoc igitur accuratius excutiendum,
dissolvendum, obterendum est, quo simul fictitiae haereseos terriculum
evanescat.

ARTICULUS II.
Sophismatis Moliniani dissolutio.
SI quis Bellarminum and Baronium Cardinales hoc argumento propter desensum
Honorii summi Pontificis sensum, Monothelitanae haereseos ageret reos: Sexta
Synodus oecumenica, item duae sequentes, ac duo summi Pontifices, Honorii
Epistolas and sensum utique damnarunt haereseos Monothelitanae. Vos defenditis
sensum Honorii. Ergo Monothelitanae haereseos crimen suscipitis. Quaero quo
pacto tanti viri a tam foedo and tam aperte falso crimine eximendi sint?
Nimirum detegendo argumenti vitio, quod constat quatuor terminis, and sub
Honorii sensu aequivocationem and fallaciam tegit.

Damnavit sensum Honorii sexta Synodus. Sensum Honorii defendunt Bellarminus
and Baronius. Sed non eundem sensum illa damnavit, isti defendunt.
Monothelitarum sensum in epistolis Honorii esse credidit sexta Synodus, and
ideo damnavit. At easdem epistolas Catholico sensu interpretantur illustrissimi
Cardinales, and ideo defendunt. Non ergo Synodo adversantur in quaestione
juris, sed tantum in facto, id est, literarum Honorii interpretatione.

Omnino duplici ratione hominis etiam ab Ecclesia damnati sensus defendi
potest. Primo, ut ille ipse sensus, eademque sententia quam damnavit Ecclesia,
defendatur. Hoc qui faciat, haereticus est. Secundo, ut alicujus auctoris
sensus ab haeresi ad Catholicam fidem benigna interpretatione flectatur. Hoc
qui faciat, sit temerarius, sit praepostere benignus, haereticus certe dici non
potest: non enim haereticum, sed Catholicum sensum defendit.

Utroque modo defensus Origines, and utrumque defensions modum valde Patres pro
sua aequitate secreverunt. Multi enim ipsos Origenis errores defenderunt. Ergo
illi a Patribus pro haereticis habiti. Alii contra sic Origeni patrocinati
sunt, ut illos errores falso illi ascriptos esse certarent, ejusque verba
durius accipi contenderent. Hi non sectatores, sed defensores Originis ab
Augustino dicuntur, in quos nemo tam injustus fuit, ut ob hanc rem notam
haeresos in illos conferret.

Ex illis manifestum est Jansenii sensum dupliciter defendi posse. Primo ita ut
quinque propositiones, and proprium earum sensum Jansenii esse quis fateatur,
and eas nihilominus defendere non desistat. Hoc si quis fecerit, in illum
insurgant Jesuitae quantum volent.

Verum alia plane eximendi a noxa Jansenii ratio est: si quis videlicet ejus
verba eo sensu interpretetur, quem constat esse Catholicum; idemque
propositiones in earum proprio sensu damnet; at ipsas propositiones and
proprium earum sensum in Jansenio se videre deneget. Qui ita se gerat,
quocunque nomine afficiatur, haereticus dici nequit, cum sensus ille, quem vere
an falso Jansenii esse putat, ut Catholicus ab omnibus probetur.

Hoc constituto, reliquum est ut demonstrem hac tantum secunda ratione a
permultis viris eruditis defendi Jansenium; quia nimirum ejus verba eo sensu
accipiunt, quem nemo haereseos accusare audeat. Quod postquam confecero, sponte
corruet Annatinum sophisma. Damnant enim Jansenii sensum Episcopi; sed illum
videlicet, quem Jansenii esse crediderunt. Rursum quidam Jansenii sensum non
ejurant; sed quia illum aliter quam Episcopi interpretantur, and eam tantum
arbitrantur doctrinam in illo contineri, quam ipsis Episcopis, ipsi summo
Pontifici, probatam esse certo sciunt. Non ergo illi ab Episcoporum mente and
sententia discedunt in aliquo dogmate, sed tantum in intelligentia Jansenii,
quem illi durius, hi benignius interpretantur. Vtrum in hoc sit temeritas
aliqua, alia est controversia; non esse haeresim, extra controversiam est.

Omnis ergo difficultas ad hoc caput reducitur, utrum ille sensus, quem
Jansenio tribuunt qui illum condemnare recusant, sit Catholicus, nec ab
Episcopis damnatus dici possit. Hanc, ni fallor, prorsus eximet subjuncta
sensus illius Janseniani explicatio, quem tuemur.

ARTICULUS. III.
Tota Jansenii doctrina circa quinque propositiones ad duo capita haud dubie
Catholica reducitur.
QVid Episcopi sensus Janseniani nomine intellexerint, haud facile conjici
potest: nunquam enim illum explicarunt. Tam vary autem adhuc illum
interpretati sunt qui adversus ipsum scripsere, ut vix cuos reperias in eodem
sensu congruentes. Prorsus enim quemlibet sensum Jansenio licet affingere,
dummodo insulsum aliquem errorem contineat. Itemque quamlibet sententiam licet
defendere, dummodo Jansenium verbo renus repudies. Quid ergo, inquam, Episcopi
senserint, incertum est; illud certum and indubitatum, nusquam illis in mente
fuisse damnare eam sententiam, qua contineri sensum Jansenii arbitrantur qui
ejus damnationi non consentiunt. Tota res sola expositione indiget illius
doctrinae quam isti esse Catholicam certo sciunt, and Jansenianam etiam esse
putanr. Videant vel infensissimi adversarii quid in ea reprehendere habeant.

Sic igitur existimant illi, totam Jansenii doctrinam circa quinque
propositiones duobus istis capitibus contineri.

Primo gratiam efficacem, qui voluntas infallibiliter, sed sine necessitate ad
been operandum applicatur and determinatur, ad singulas actiones bonas, and ad
ipsam orationem esse necessariam. Ita per orbem Christianum omnis S. Thomae
Schola, and celeberrimae Academiae. Nec vero isti gratiae majorem Jansenius
attribuit efficaciam, quam Thomistae, ut quidam insulse criminari occipiunt;
sed eandem plane qua scilicet voluntas physice praedeterminetur, sed sine
necessitate, nisi isto nomine effectum infallibilem intelligas.

Secundum est, nullam in hoc statu naturae corruptae dari gratiam sufficientem
Moliniano sensu acceptam, quae scilicet nullum aliud auxilium requirat ad been
operandum: sed pro arbitrii nutu vel consentientis vel dissentientis, modo
effectum habeat, modo non habeat. Ita etiam omnes Thomistae, ut ipse Jansenius
testatur tom. 3. lib. 3. c. 1.

Si nihil aliud Jansenius circa quinque propositiones doceat nisi haec duo
capita, proculdubio Catholice sentit; proculdubio verum ejus sensum non
damnarunt Episcopi, cum nemo dicere audeat, ab Episcopis vel gratiam efficacem
esse damnatam, vel Molinianam gratiam pro fidei dogmate sancitam esse.

Si quid aliud ipse sentiat aut doceat, ostendatur modo, and jam ipsius sensum
nemo abdicare recusabit. Nam qui recusant, hac una ratione moventur, quod nihil
aliud in ipso vident. In quo utique ertare possunt: possunt de illo benignius
quam par esset sentire: possunt esse temerarii. At haeretici prorsus esse non
possunt; nisi haereticum sit ipsam Ecclesiae fidem sub Jansenii nomine
defendere.

Sed ne tam generali asseveratione fucum facere velle existimentur, operae
pretium est sigillatim ostendere quid Jansenium circa propositiones senfisse
putant: ex quo patebit, nihil aliud astrui, nisi efficacis gratiae necessitatem
ad singulos actus; nihil aliud re^ci, nisi versatilem Molinae gratiam.

ARTICULUS. IV.
Quid circa primam propositionem senserit Jansenius, prout a suis defensoribus
explicatur.
HAec una est ex quinque propositionibus cujus verba ex Jansenio deprompta
sunt; quanquam loco suo avulsa alium plane sensum exhibeant, quam qui ex
appositis verbis elicitur. Hunc enim talem esse credimus.

Cum omnibus hominibus, atque adeo justis necessaria sit gratia praedeterminans
ad been operandum, ad implenda Christiano animo praecepta, ad graves
tentationes vincendas: illa tamen gratia non omnibus justis, etiam volentibus,
conantibus, and orantibus imperfecte per gratias inefficaces, quas Thomistae
sufficientes vocant, semper praesto est. Ergo etiamsi justi in hoc statu
constituti veram habeant implendi mandata potestatem per gratiam illam tum
habitualem tum actualem; illa tamen potestas non complectitur omnia ad agendum
necessaria: nec sufficiens est Molinistico sensu; quia deest adhuc illi gratia
efficax agendi, quae necessaria prorsus est ut voluntas ad plene consentiendum
applicetur and determinetur. Ita si gratia sufficiens Thomistico sensu
usurpetur pro ea quae tribuit posse internum a gratia efficaci applicandum,
certum est omnes justos volentes and conantes nunquam carere ejusmodi gratia
sin autem Molinistico sensu, sic quibuscunque deest gratia efficax, deest etiam
gratia sufficiens Moliniana. Sola enim gratia efficax est omnibus modis
sufficiens, ut vulgo Thomistae omnes agnoscunt. Similiter si vox posse
usurpetur pro potentia interna agendi, ut vulgo sumitur a Thomistis, omnes
justi semper habent ejusmodi potestatem, qualis est oculi sani in tenebris, ut
iidem docent. Sin autem usurpetur Moliniano and vulgari sensu pro ea cui nihil
deest necessarium ad operandum, non habent semper omnes justi ejusmodi
potentiam; imo quicunque gratia efficaci carent, tali etiam potestate carent;
carent enim aliquo necessario. Id si Moliniani defendi aegre ferent, damnari
curent ab Episcopis and a summo Pontifice disertis verbis. Tunc enim sensum
Jansenii constabit esse damnatum. Sin autem id se impetrare non posse sat
sciunt, quid est cur haereseos accusent eos quorum sensus non ambiguis verbis
expressos ne attentare quidem audeant?

ARTICULUS V.
Quid circa secundam propositionem.
DVplex gratiae interioris actualis genus a Jansenio admissam existimamus: alia
enim efficax apud illum, alia inefficax. Prima illa est, quam Thomistae
simpliciter efficacem vocant: huic semper resisti potest, nunquam reipsa
resistitur. Inefficax gratia eadem prorsus est atque ea, quam Thomistae modo
sufficientem vocant, modo excitantem. Haec tribuit posse and vires ad alium
effectum quem non habet, non tamen ita validas ut efficaci gratia ad been
operandum nihil egeant. Illi gratiae vere resistitur in eo effectu quem posset
habere, si voluntas plene consentiret; imo nunquam isti gratiae non resistitur,
nisi cum efficax and praedeterminans gratia illi adjungitur.

Sed quamvis ista gratia sit inefficax respectu boni operis ad quod ex natura
sua tendit, and ad quod implendum voluntatem excitat and roborat; alio tamen
sensu est efficax secundum quid; quia semper actus illos imperfectos producit
ad quos ex decreto absoluto divinae voluntatis ordinatur. Atque ita generatim
omnis Christi gratia efficax dici potest; quia semper id efficit quod Deus
absolute fieri decrevit.

Quid haec doctrina a vulgari doctrina Thomistarum discrepet, omnino ignorare
nos fatemur. Quare cum nihil laesam constet ab Episcopis Thomistarum
sententiam, certum est etiam hanc, quam Jansenianam esse credimus, nullo modo
ab ipsis violatam.

Ergo ex Jansenio, prout a nobis intelligitur, ali^ui gratiae interiori
verissime resistitur, sed non ita ut Molinistae docent, quasi eidem gratiae
nunc resistatur, nunc non resistatur pro solo flexu voluntatis.

ARTICULUS VI.
Quid circa tertiam propositionem.
CUm gratia efficax infallibiliter moveat voluntatem, nec ei auferat aut
libertatem aut meritum, certum est ad merendum non requiri indifferentiam illam
Molinianam, qua voluntas ita potest bonum and malum agere, ut ad utrum libet
actu and effective pro libito sese determiner: contingere enim non potest, ut
cum gratia efficaci malum eligat.

Rursus cum sine gratia efficaci nemo been agat, multi contra peccent and
demereantur, certum est ad demerendum non requiri indifferentiam Molinianam,
qua voluntas ita se ad bonum and malum potest convertere, ut ei nihil desit
necessarium, quo se in utramlibet partem convertat: caret enim in illo casu
gratia efficaci ad been agendum necessaria.

At hac una indifferentia dempta caeteras omnes, quia gratiae efficaci non
adversantur, semper in hoc statu natura lapsae reperiri, nobis videtur sentire
Jansenius. Itaque ex illo ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae
non sufficit libertas a coactione, sed requiritur etiam libertas a necessitate;
and cum ipsa gratia efficaci voluntas adhuc remanet indifferens ad male agendum
in sensu tum diviso tum composito, prout explicatur a Thomistis. Vtrum autem
hae indifferentiae requirantur ad libertatem in genere, vel ad libertatem
abstrahendo a statu naturae integrae and lapsae, a liberate Christi and
hominum, alia quaestio est, quae Constitutionem non attingit.

ARTICULUS. VII.
Quid circa quartam propositionem.
NOn propterea Semipelagiani haeretici fuerunt, quia gratiae vel obtemperari
vel resisti posse dicerent, omnes enim id Catholici docent; sed in eo praecise
ab Augustino oppugnati, and postea ab Ecclesia damnati sunt, quod fidem
inchoatam, and perseverantiam in fide negarent hominibus dari per gratiam
efficacem; eam videlicet quae non esset communis bonis and malis, sed
discerneret bonos a malis: eam de qua dictum est: Omnis qui audivit a Patre,
and didicit, venit ad me: and eam ex qua totum gratuitae praedestinationis
mysterium indissolubili serie necteretur. Id unum nobis videtur docere
Iansenius.

ARTICULUS VIII.
Quid circa quintam propositionem.
MInime Semipelagianum est cum Prospero dicere, Christum pro omnibus hominibus
mortuum esse quantum ad sufficientiam pretii, and communem generis humani
causam.

Non est item Semipelagianum, Christo tribuere humanam velleitatem pro omnium
omnino hominum salute moriendi.

Haereticum foret asserere, Christum tantum pro salute praedestinatorum esse
mortuum: mortuus est enim pro promerenda gratia omnibus reprobis quibus
aliquando collata est.

Cum omnes justi gratiam habeant ad implenda mandata Thomistico sensu
sufficientem, sive habitualem, sive actualem, omnisque gratia ex Christi morte
derivetur, consequens est, Christum mortuum esse pro promeranda ista gratia
omnibus justis.

Cum absoluta Christi voluntas divinae semper conformis extiterit, proculdubio
consensit aeterno praedestinationis decreto, quo Deus certos tantum destinavit
ad regnum gratuita misericordia, rejectis ad hoc dono aliis pariter reis, quos
in massa perditionis reliquit. Illudque decretum nec precibus suis, nec mortis
oblatione absolute mutare voluit: non igitur reprobis vel perseverantiae donum,
vel salutem aeternam, per mortem suam absoluta voluntate promereri voluit,
quamvis utrumque antecedente and minus proprie dicta voluntate optare potuerit.

ARTICULUS IX.
Sensus istos nec a summo Pontifice, nec ab Episcopis esse damnatos; sed a tota
Ecclesia Catholicos haberi.
HAbent Molinistae, quid sentiant ii quos falsis criminibus apud populum, apud
Ecclesiae Principes, in invidiam vocare non cessant. Nihil aliud sensisse
Iansenium opinamur. Nos certe nihil aliud tenere, quoniam propriae conscientiae
extra Deum quisque arbiter est, sanctissime confirmamus. Ergo aut hunc sensum
aggrediantur, aut maledicere desinant.

Verum quo pacto hunc sensum nisi apud impe ritos lacessere auderent, cum luce
clarius pateat, nil in ipso contineri nisi gratiae efficacis assertionem, and
Molinianae gratiae rejectionem, quorum a terutrum haereseos accusare, aut a
summo Pontifice damnatum dicere, nullus alicujus nominis Theologus adhuc ausus
est? Quin and ipse Molinistarum signifer Annatus in Cavil. p. 29. aperre
confitetur, summum Pont ficem id in quo dissident Thomistae a Jesuitis
disputationi reliqu^sse, nec attingere voluisse controversiam de gratia per se
ipsam efficaci.

Hoc Annatus veritati litavit, volenine an invitus, nihil definio. Aliter certe
facere non potuit: noverat enim quam saepe Pontifex vivae vocis oraculo de
gratia efficaci ulla in re violanda ne quidem cogitasse se declaraverat. Quod
ne ulli obscurum esse posset, voci scriptum adjunxit. Nam in illo Brevi ad
Episcopos Galliae misso, mentionem facit cujusdam decreti sacrae Inquisitionis,
in quo express habetur, controversiam de auxiliis codem loco ab Innocentio X.
relictam, quo illam Clemens VIII. and Paulus V. reliquerant. Hinc Romanorum
Theologorum pars multo maxima non minus post Constitutionem quam ante, eandem
doctrinam coram summo Pontifice quotidie tuetur and docet. Caetera vero per
orbem Academiae adeo illam non rejiciunt, ut multae non aliam admittant, nullae
excludant.

Quid Societates religiosas Dominicanorum, and Carmelitarum Discalceatorum
loquar, a quibus exulat Molinismus, in quibus regnat victrix Dei gratia? Quid
Presbyteros Oratorii, and Canonicos Regulares sancti Augustini? Quam paucos
habet in hoc numero Molina sectatores!

Atenim quidam ex iis cum gratiam efficacem vel acerrime tueantur, sufficientem
Molinianam vel cum execratione repudient, tamen iniquiores sunt Jansenio,
fareor; sed quia Jansenii aliam mentem fuisse arbitrantur, eumque super hoc
maxim Catholico gratiae efficacis dogmate nescio quos errores, imo illos ipsos
qui in proprio quinque propositionum significatu continentur, superstruxisse
existimant. At nos, quibus hoc errores recens a Jansenio exaedificatos nondum
videre contigit, quique nihil in illo legimus super quinque illis
propositionibus nisi puram and simplicem gratiae praedeterminantis doctrinam,
Molinae oppositam, sicut cum illis in ipsis dogmatis congruimus, ita in
interpretatione Jansenii tamdiu ab illis dissentiemus donec istos errores
gratiae efficaci superadjectos ipsis lumen praeferentibus deprehenderimus.

Ita prorsus de Episcopis Galliae Lutetiae congregatis sentire pium ducimus,
quorum vel maximam partem a S. Thomae partibus stare, a Molina abhorrere notum
est; nec ullum esse ex illis arbitror, qui Molinae patronus audire vellet. Et
tamen illi Jansenii sensum damnari exigunt. Quamobrem? Quia nimirum ita multis
sic asserentibus crediderunt aliquid sentire Jansenium a gratia efficaci
diversum, a Thomistarum schola alienum.

Verum de illorum mente divinare nihil necesse est; iis enim notis affecerunt
Jansenianum illum sensum quem damnari volunt, ut non possit quicquam a gratiae
efficacis doctrina esse disjunctius. Nam primo sensum illum recens a Jansenio
inductum, and omnibus scholis Catholicis ante Baium ignotum esse ponunciant. At
hoc minme in gratiam efficacem cadit. Quid enim in scholis Catholicis notius
and illustrius quam haec doctrina, quae una ante Molinam, and nescio quosdam
Theologos Pighium and Catharinum in scholis Catholicis viguit: post natos vero
Jesuitas ac Molinianam factionem, etsi in illis locis in quibus dominantur,
minus floruerit, tamen in nobilissimis Academiis eandem semper auctoritatem
tenuit, and etiamnunc tenet.

Secundo, talem aiunt istum sensum esse, ut ipse Jansenius fateatur illum a
quingentis annis fuisse Scholasticis incognitum. At contra Jansenius non uno
loco, sed pluribus divinae gratiae efficientiam infallibilem ex Thomistica
schola confirmat; illosque doctissimos, ut ipse appellat, Theologos de vi
illius praedetermnatrice rectissime sensisse testatur. Non igitur illa doctrina
est, quam Jansenius scholis incognitam esse fatetur, cum eam ex schola
didicerit, hauserit, expresserit.

Nec minus illud a gratiae efficacis necessitate sensum illum Jansenianum
abjungit, quod hunc Augustino adversum esse testantur Episcopi: nisi enim
omnium oculi adhuc caligaverunt, nihil ab ullo Scriptore clarius,
significantius, crebrius exprimi potest quam illius gratiae tum necessitas, tum
vis indeclinabilis and insuperabilis omnibus locis ab Augustino expressa est.
Legantur modo libri de Correctione and gratia, de Praedestinatione Sanctorum,
de Dono perseverantiae, de Gratia Christi; nec ullum arbitror fore, nisi
privatis cupiditatibus aut praejudiciis occaecatum, qui non Augustinum vel
stultum fuisse, aut gratiae efficacis necessitatem ad singulos pietatis actus
docuisse, clarissime and validissime confirmasse fateatur. Quam opinionem
tantis nixam testimoniis, tot seculorum vetustate roboratam, ut verbulo obiter
and aliud agentes Episcopi damnare voluerint, incredibile, indignum,
contumeliosum in ipsos est. Verum, ut dixi, ne tam foeda macula aspergi
possent, sedulo caverunt, tum illis notis quibus Jansenianum illum sensum
designaverunt, tum maxim celeberrima illa Thesi apud Patres Oratorii defensa,
ipsisque dedicata, in qua cum gratiae efficacis necessitas ad singulos actus
clarissime esset expressa, ne huic doctrinae existimarentur iniqui, actum illum
frequentia sua and plausu cohonestaverunt.

ARTICULUS. X.
Concluditur nullam in Ecclesia novam haeresim esse, nullos haereticos.
ERgo cum in Jansenio praeter ipsum gratiae efficacis dogma nihil ipsius
defensores videant and defendant: nec illum sensum quisquam haereseos accuset,
consequens est nullum in Ecclesia haereticum dogma a quoquam defendi. Aut enim
tantum gratiam efficacem docet Jansenius, and sic a nemine jure culpatur; aut
aliquid praeterea, and sic a nemine defenditur. Sive autem recte sentiat, sive
erret, prorsus tamen errore vacant ipsius defensotes, qui non aliam ob causam
ejus sensum damnare refugiunt, nisi quia sic illum intepretantur, ut Catholicus
esse a nemine negari possit.

Consequens est secundo, illos Episcopis in nullo prorsus dogmate refragari.
Quamvis enim Episcopi sensum Jansenii damnent, illi damnare renuant, tamen haec
omnis dissensio nominis est, non rei. Arbitrantur Episcopi in Jansenio esse
doctrinam quandam omnibus scholis Catholicis ignotam, a Iansenio velipsomet
test recens inventam, Augustino manifest repugnantem, toto orb damnatam, a
summo Pontifice percussam, quae denique proprium propositionum sensum
contineat; and ideo illum sensum, quisquis est tandem, nullo enim ipsum loco
indicant, merito proscripserunt. At illi qui in Iansenio monstrosum illum
sensum omnino non vident, and nihil aliud in ipso deprehendunt, nisi gratiae
efficacis doctrinam omnibus scholis Catholicis notissimam, a Iansenio
Thomistarum consensione confirmatam, ab Augugustino, vel fatentibus
adversariis, aperte traditam, ipsis Episcopis, ipsi summo Pontifici
probatissimam, and a proprio propositionum sensu omnino alienam, utique illum
sensum, quem unum in Iansenio vident, damnare sua subscriptione non possunt.

Consequens tertio est quicquid Iesuitae ad patiendam quandam juris
controversiam in Ecclaesia machinentur, totam tamen disceptationem in facto
consistere. Palam est enim, illos Theologos, qui Iansenii defensores dicuntur,
non aliter ab Episcopis quam in interpretatione Iansenii dissidere, quod qui
facti quaestionem esse neget, nescio quid juris aut facti quaestionem appellet.
Illa certe quaestio ad fidem pertinere non potest: fides enim Scriptura and
Traditione nititur: at sic interpretandum esse Iansenium an aliter, quomodo
Scriptura aut Traditione probabitur?

Postremo, quod initio proposueram, consequens est, nullos in Ecclesia
haereticos esse. Nemo enim haereticus ob ejusmodi quaestionem quae Traditione
probari nequit, and in nuperi Auctoris interpretatione sita est. Nec vero ulli
sunt, quibus pertinacia in dogmate damnato defendendo jure objectari possit;
nullum enim damnatum dogma a quoquam defenditur; aut si defenditur, sine
pertinacia certe defenditur: nam quale sit illud, prorsus ignoratur. Nemo autem
pertinax dici potest in illo dogmate tuendo quod ignorant.

Quamobrem ut paucis omnia complectar, and adversariis os occludam,
propositiones in proprio sensu a me damnari iterum professus, reliquas
controversias sic expedio.

Qui gratiae efficacis necessitatem ab Episcopis, aut a summo Pontifice
Ianseniani sensus nomine damnatam dicere ausit, in illos mendacissime
contumeliosus est, quem satis sit hoc argumento refellere: Si damnarunt
Episcopi and summus Pontifex gratiam efficacem, iterum utique libentissime
damnabunt. At (fidentissime hoc dicimus) ipsi nec ex summo Pontifice, nec ex
Episcopis ullum auferre decretum possunt, quo gratiae efficacis doctrina a
Thomistis omnibus defensa damnetur haereseos. Igitur ista doctrina prorsus ab
omni censura libera est.

Secundo, qui Ianseniani sensus defensores aliud his verbis quam efficacis
gratiae doctrinam, qualis a Thomistis defenditur, intelligere dicat, aut
delusus ipse est, aut alios deludere vult.

Tertio, qui propterea Catholicos Theologos haereseos accuset, quod Catholici
Antistitis verba benignius interpretentur, nescire testatur aut quid aequitas
sit, aut quid haeresis.

Ex omnibus autem manifestum esse arbitror, nisi tantos clamores tolleret
iniquitas ut vix exauditi veritas possit, controversias illas, quae nunc tanta
animorum contentione tanquam gravissimae, and ad summam Religionis pertinentes
agitantur, ita leves, ita faciles esse, ut, nisi collationem utriusque partis
semper Jesuitarum gratia praepediisset, vel semihora omnes turbaeconsopiri,
omnes dissensiones sedari possent. De verbis enim aequivocis; non de re ipsa
nunc disceptatur, cum a solida gratiae efficacis controversi ad potestatis
proximae and sufficientis verba, ad actus primos and secundos disputatio
abducatur; in quibus si varias vocum acceptiones sustuleris, lites pariter ac
contentiones prorsus extinxetis. Id quominus adhuc fieret obstitit potentia
Jesuitarum: fieri enim non potest quin continuo sua Ecclesiae tranquillitas
reddatur, quod ne fiat omnibus modis agunt.

FINIS.
PAVLI IRENAEI DISQVISITIO SECVNDA.
De vero sensu Jansenii, and multis commentitiis sensibus illi affictis circa
primam propositionem.
NUllos in Ecclesia haereticos esse qui diffiteri pergat, magis id oprare
malevole, quam revera sentire videatur. Restat temeritatis erratum, quo
nonnulli Theologi aspergi possint; non leve illud quidem, at humanum tamen, nec
dignum omnino quod tanta severitate coerceatur: nisi forte tam felici seculo
vivimus, ut haec demum culpa judicii potius quam morum, cogitationis potius
quam facti, castiganda supersit. Quam multis undique vitiis premimur, quae aut
prudenti aut inerti indulgentia tolerantur! Quid ergo tantum committere potuit
Jansenius, cui doctrinae ac probitatis laudem vel adversarii tribuunt, ut
benignior de ipso sensus, nulla dignum venia scelus hoc seculo sit, quod non
modo tunc plectendum, cum se profert and exerit; sed ex ipsis animi latebris,
adhibitis subscriptionum tormentis eruendum videatur? Quid facient quibus non
satis manifestum est Jansenium errasse, ut ipsum damnare tuta conscientia
possint? Silere ipsis in votis erat, at loqui compellit subscriptionis exactor.
Fidem suam palam profiteri non sufficit. Nam ad Jansenianum sensum tanquam ad
scopulam semper urgentur. Quid igitur? Nempe quod restat; eas rations afferent
quibus Jansenium innocentem probent. Quod si quis gravius ferat, non ipsis
imputet sed illis qui hanc necessitatem imponunt.

Ex illorum numero vel postremus ego, postquam prima Disquisitione eum sensum
qui Jansenio ab ipsius defensoribus tribuitur; Catholicum comprobavi; hac
secunda plus praestabo, and sic omnino sentire Jansenium astruam; non ut ullis
Episcoporum decretis refrager, sed ut temeritatis crimen aut purgem aut
deponam. Si quis enim his quas proferam rationibus solid respondeat, quin ejus
in parts concedam, nulla in me mora sit. Sin autem id nullus poterit, non
video qui temerarius existimari possim, quod iis argumentis crediderim, quae
reselli a nemine possint. Sensum Jansenii circa primam tantum propositionem hic
exquiremus; de caeteris alias locuturi si opus sit; etsi vix necesse est, cum
omnes ab adversariis ad primam revocentur.

ARTICULUS I.
Figuntur quaedam Regulae ad intelligendum Jansenii sensum necessariae.
AUctoris sensus ex verbis eruitur; nam verborum ea vis est, ut animi
cogitationes exprimant. At quia verba nonnunquam varios intellectus habent,
hinc ex circumjectis saepe ad certam notionem alliganda sunt. Quod si quis
Scriptor verborum suorum vim ipse exposuetit, tunc illo sensu semper intelligi
in decursu operis debent; and quoties id verbum occurit, ipsa notio in mente
substituenda. Viderunt hoc Geometrae, in veritate rimanda omnium sagacissimi.
Hinc ad vitandos aequivocationis errores, verba in primis ipsa definiunt:
constituta autem apud illos alicujus vocis notione, qui de sensu ejus adhuc
dubitet, aut illam ex vulgi more, non ex ipsa definitione interpretatur, merito
ab ominibus ridetur.

Nusquam autem hujus instituti major necessitas extitit, quam in hac
controversia de sensu Jansenii. Nam quinque propositionum prima, cujus unius
voces apud Jansenium reperiuntur, tam vagos habet significatus, ut nisi illam
ad certam notionem revocaveris, nihil certi de sensu ipsius possis constituete.

Primo enim vox justis, aut de omnibus, aut de quibusdam, aut indefinite
accipitur.

Voces illae, conantibus and v l^ntibus, aut de conantibus per naturam, aut de
conantibus pet gratiam. Rursus de conantibus per gratiam, aut sufficientem, aut
efficacem, aut Molinianam: de conantibus per gratiam cui consentiunt, aut de
conantibus per gratiam cui renituntur; id est, de conantibus fideliter aut
infideliter.

Praesentes vires intelliguntur aut actuales, aut habituales; naturales, aut
supernaturales; comparatae ad vires hujus vitae, aut ad vires alterius vitae.

Vox impossibilia, significat impossibilitatem absolutam, aut secundum quid;
voluntariam, aut involuntariam: negat vel potentiam in actu primo, vel tantum
potentiam in actu secundo; vel removet potestatem omnem, vel tantum completam,
perfectam, sufficientem. Rursum potentia completa, proxima, etc. duos habet
signicatus, ut notat Alvarez: apud Molinianos significat potentiam cui nihil
deest; apud Thomistas etiam illam, cui deest adhuc aliquid necessarium, nempe
gratia efficax.

Similiter vox deest, a quibusdam accipitur pro eo quod deest fine peccato. Ita
Nicolai, and quidam alii. Ab aliis simplicus pro eo quod deest quocunque modo.

Gratia quae deesse dicitur, aut est habitualis, aut actualis: illa vero vel
sufficiens, vel efficax: sufficiens, aut Moliniana, aut Thomistica, utraque vel
agendi, vel orandi.

Varias illas acceptiones si inter se permisceas, miraberis quantus
discrepantium aliquantisper propositionum numerus exurgat, ut norunt omnes qui
Artihmeticam callent.

ARTICULUS II.
Singularum vocum notio constituitur.
CUm igitur non multiplicem, sed unicum sensum Jansenius habuerit, antequam de
illo statuas, prius singula verba ad singulas notiones restringenda sunt: tunc
demum liquido vera ejus sententia patebit, quod a multis praetermissum tam
varios nobis sensus Jansenianos procudit.

JUSTIS.
Vocem justis, a Jansenio non de omnibus, sed de quibusdam tantum justis
intelligi jam fere omnes consentiunt. Quod satis constat ex eo quod affert ex
Augustino, paulo ante propositionis verba: Quarumdam cupiditatum tentationes
ALIQUORUM hominum vires superare. Ergo justis idem est, ac qu^busdam justis.

VOLENTIBUS ET CONANTIBUS.
Primo non loquitur Jansenius de conatu naturali. Affert enim exemplum Petri
ante lapsum, and Augustini ante conversionem, quorum infirmam voluntatem saepe
exgratia fuisse agnoscit.

II. Non loquitur de plena voluntate and efficaci. Nam voluntatem, de qua
loquitur crebro, ex Augustino vocat parvam, infirmam, and invalidam.

III. Certum est infirmae illi voluntati ex gratia profectae non consentiri ex
Jansenio, sed potius resisti. Nam de conatu quem habuit Augustinus ante
conversionem express ait: Nonne conabatur Augustinus, quando d ceb^t: Quibus
sententiarum verberibus non flagellavi animum meum, ut sequeretur con ntem post
teire, and tamen tanto conatui renitebatur? etc, Et in eo ipso loco unde
deprompta propositio, renisu concupiscentiae fieri dicit, ut homo non plene
velit, non integre velit, non tota voluntate velit.

IV. Certum est, voluntatem illam imbecillem afferre vires quasdam. Non enim
nullas esse, sed invalidas dicit Augustinus, and ex Augustino Jansenius.

V. Certum est denique, voluntatem illam nunquam effectum habituraum, nisi
adsit per gratiam efficacem plena and integra voluntas. Ideo saepe ait, cum
illa homines non posse been agere, id est nunquam been acturos esse.

Iam vero quid est gratia imperfectam voluntatem producens, quae dat aliquas
vires, aliquod posse, tale tamen ut effectu semper careat, nisi adsit efficax
auxilium? Quid est, inquam, illa gratia, nisi ea quam sufficientem Thomistae
recentiores vocant, non nomine designata, sed, quod multo clarius est, sua
notione expressa?

Hinc patet quam immerito Jansenius repudiatae penitus hoc loco sufficientis
gratiae arguatur. Sed magis illud etiam constabit exposito vocis illius
sufficiens sensu prout a Jansenio usurpatur: quo minus animadverso, multos in
errorem inductos video.

SUFFICIENS GRATIA ET POTESTAS, quid apud Jansenium.
NIhil est quod hic divinationibus indulgeamus; omnem enim dobitationem
praecidit Jansenius his verbis tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 1 Vocamus inquit, illam
sufficientem gratiam seu sufficientem sufficiens adjutorium, praeter quod nihil
aliud ex part Dei per modum principii necessarium est, ut homo velit aut
operetur; sic enim a multis recentioribus and vulgo fere acc^pi solet. Ecce
apertissime testatur solam se Molinianam intelligere.

Nunc vide de Thomistica quid sentiat: Quod si vero sic accipiatur ut
sufficiens d^catur, sicut a qui. busdam d^citur, quod satis est ut homo dicatur
posse operari, quamvis aliud necessarium sit ut de facto operetur; de hujusmodi
sufficienti gratia non est h^c nostra controversia. Talem enim sufficientem
fortasse non difficulter Augustinus admitteret, quamvis eam esse veram Christi
gratiam, de qua question est, pernegaret. Quod idem disertis verbis de gratia
sufficient habet Alvarez disp. 92. n. 2.

Quoties igitur negat Jansenius gratiam imperfectae voluntatis esse
sufficientem; idem est ac si diceret non esse Moliniano modo sufficientem; non
esse ita sufficientem ut nihil aliud requiratur. At quin sufficiens sit
Thomistico sensu, nec negavit unquam, nec negare potuit.

Ex his omnibus liquet, haec verba, conantibus and volentibus, sic
interpretanda esse, conantibus and volentibus per gratiam Thomistico sensu
sufficientem, and ei resistentibus and ideo infideliter conantibus.

IMPOSSIBILIA.
Non loquitur Jansenius de impossibilitate absoluta. Omnibus enim locis fatetur
mandatum quodlibet per gratiam efficacem impleri posse. Nec de impossibilitate
involuntaria: nam ex Augustino saepe ab illo citato omnes homines mandata
servarent si vellent. Non negat omnem potentiam: nec habitualem, quia loquitur
de justis, quos per gratiam habitualem asserit posse, tom. 3 lib. cap. 15. nec
actualem, quia loquitur de conantibus qui per gratiam excitantem habent vires
invalidas.

Quam ergo potestatem negat? Audiamus ipsum optimum sui interprerem: Ad hanc,
inquit, sanitatem voluntatis assequindam, gratiam invocamus, hoc ipso
clarissime profitentes deesse nobis sufficientem ad illa praecepta facienda
potestatem. Et adhuc clarius paulo superius de justis volentibus and conantibus
loquens: Nondum inquit, possunt tantum velle, quantum sufficit ad implenda
mandata. Non negat igitur potestatem simpliciter, sed negat sufficientem
potestatem. Quid est autem sufficiens potestas Jansenio? Meminerimus fixae
supra notionis: ea scilicet cui nihil deest ex part Dei. Quamobrem cum hoc
loco dicit, mandata esse impossibilia sufficienter, idem est ac si dicat; Non
sunt possibila ea potestate cui nihil desit. Itemque cum negat potestatem illam
esse completam, non Thomistico sensu negat: de hoc enim ne cogitavit quidem:
sed Moliniano tantum negat; quia deest ipsi gratia efficax. Quamobrem ut
notiones verborum istorum magis etiam infigantur, iterum hic repeto, illa
verba, Potestas sufficiens, completa, proxima: Potestas cui nihil deest ex
part Dei: Potestas complectens omnia necessaria ad agendum, idem omnino apud
Jansenium significare, talisque potestatis defectum aliquando exprimi vel
simplici voce, non posse, vel durius etiam per vocem, impossible: quae quidem
significatio, etsi dura and minus propria, non tamen auctoritate Patrum caret,
in primisque Augustini and Prosperi.

SECUNDUM PRAESENTES VIRES.
Eas vires intelligit Jansenius quas justi habent in eo statu quo invalide and
infideliter and conantur and volunt. Non probo, quia non negatur.

DEEST.
Nil notius in doctrina Jansenii, quam homini gratiam sine ipsius peccato
subtrahi non posse; nec hic immoror in re non dubia.

GRATIA.
Non sufficiens utique, quia illam supposuit his verbis, conantibus and
volentibus, sed ea quam invocari dicit, ut plene integreque velle possimus, id
est, efficax, eaque non orandi, loquitur enim de orantibus, and gratiam
invocantibus, non tamen tam fideliter and ferventer quam debent; sed agendi,
and implendi actu praecepti.

ARTICULUS III.
Verus Jansenii sensus.
IGitur ad constituendum certo Jansenii sensum, nihil aliud opus est, quam
stabilitas verborum, quibus constat propositio, notiones pro ipsis verbis
substituere. Sic enim nullus errori locus esse, vel si velis, potest. Exiis
autem collectis hic sensus exurgit: Aliqua Dei Praecepta quibusdam hominibus
Justis Conantibus and volentibus per gratiam excitantem Thomistico sensu
sufficientem, sed et renit^ntibus and Ideo infideliter Volentibus, non sunt
possibilia ex potestate cui nihil desit: deest quoque illis gratia efficax
agendi, qua possibilia fiant ea potestate quae comp^ectitur omnia ad agendum
necessaria. Ineptam hanc verborum congeriem vocat Annatus, quia praecisa
ambiguitate nullum hic fraudi locum reperit. Ast ego aptissimam puto ad
cavillationes ipsius elidendas. Aequivocis enim and nominum quaestionibus
jamdiu Jesuitae Christianum orbem Iudificantur: cujus mali una cautio ac
provisio, voces ipsas definire, ne de vocibus frustra litigetur. Quamobrem si
solidam sibi victoriam quaerunt, hunc ipsum sensum his verbis expressum damnari
diserte a summo Pontifice curent. Huc gratiam, huc arts suas conferant: huc
machinas suas impendat numerosa Societas. Sin autem id se impetrare posse
diffidit, cur de Janseniano sensu tot turbas excitat, quem non nisi involutum
audet lacessere, evolutum attingere reformidat?

ARTICULUS IV.
Sensum illum Jansenii non esse proprium sensum propositionis in sespectatae.
HIc merito quaeri potest, utrum sensus ille quem Catholicum esse constat,
quemque Iansenianum etiam ostendimus, sit verus and proprius primae
propositionis in se spectatae sensus? Respondeo non esse proprium, and facile
probo. Nam primo vox justis, cum sit indefinita, potius universaliter sumi
debet, quam particulariter. Ut enim been notat Franciscus Amicus Iesuita, t. 8.
disp. 3. n. 67. Verba indefinita in mat ria doctrinali accip^untur universal
ter, sicut istam propositionem, Planetae non nisi a Sole lucent, nemo aliter
interpretatur, nisi omnes Planetas a Sole luccre.

Secundo, vox conantibus and volentibus, significat potius plenam voluntatem,
quam velleitatem quandam, quae non est simpliciter voluntas, ut ait S. Thomas 1
part. quaest 19. art. 5. deinde significat potius voluntatem sine renisu, quam
voluntatem cui validior voluntas resistit. Quod enim ita volumus, magis nolle
dicimur quam velle.

Tertio, vox impossible, magis significat impossibilitatem absolutam, quam
secundum quid. Nam, ut ait S. Thomas 1. part. quest. 62: art. 2 ad 2. Imp
ssibile proprie significat id ad quod nullo modo pervenire possumus, ne quidem
cum alterius auxilio. Magis etiam proprie significat impotentiam involuntariam,
quam voluntariam. Quod enim fit cum volumus, cum eo ipso sit in potestate
nostra, proprie impossible dici non debet. Et, cum loquatur propositio de
justis volentibus qui non posse dicuntur, omnino significare videtur
impotentiam non voluntariam.

Quarto, gratia cum sit nomen generis, magis proprie significat quamcumque
gratiam, quam gratiam efficacem agendi.

Fatendum est igitur, propositionem in se spectatam, and in proprio ac rigoroso
sensu, ut loquuntur Romani Consultores, non unam, sed multas haereses
complecti. At Iansenii locum, ex quo illus propositionis verba revulsa sunt,
minime in isto proprio and rigoroso sensu intelligi jam demonstravimus; sed in
alio sensu improprio quidem, tralatitio, and catachrestico, si verha seorsim
spectes; and tamen juxta notiones ab ipso constitutas legitimo and maxim
Catholico. Non ergo potest ille haereseos accusari; and multo minus illi, qui
ejus sensum tuentur: nam illi his vocibus nec usi sunt unquam nec utentur.

ARTICULUS V.
Falsi sensus Jansenio afficti.
SCrupulosior ac minutior haec singularum propositionis vocum interpretatio
videri possit, nisi ex ea facilis and expedita pateret via ad fictitios illos
sensus explodendos, quibus Iansenii doctrinam ipsius adversarii passim
adulterarunt. Manifestum enim omnibus erit, illorum errorem inde proficisci,
quod aliquas propositionis voces contra mentem ipsius interpretati sunt; quod
in singulis ostendere non erit inutile.

Primus sensus falso Jansenio attributus, nempe Calvinianus.
Nil frequentius in iis Iesuitarum scriptis quae Constitutionem antecesserunt,
quam ut Iansenius Calviniani erroris circa praeceptorum impossibilitatem
arguatur. Id habent praecipue Clatomontanae Theses ann. 1644. in quibus prima
propositio ex iis Lutheri and Calvini locis expressa dicebatur, in quibus illi
haeretici aperte docent, impossibilia semper este praecepta omnibus justis,
utcunque spiritu Dei adjuventur. At post Constitutionem, cum id viderent
vehementer officere causae suae, velificatione mutata, jam negant vulgarem
Calvini ertorem de praeceptorum impossibilirate omnibus generatim justis unquam
Iansenio attributum, sed aliam quandam fictitiam and inauditam Calvini
sententiam, de impossibilitate praecepti quibusdam justis tantum, ex defectu
gratiae efficacis. Sic nuper disputare coepit Annatus, sed futiliter, ne quid
gravius dicam. Quem enim alium intelligere potuerunt Romani Consultores ac
summus Pontifex, nisi verum and notum Calvini errorem, qui certe in proprio
primae propositionis sensu cum multis aliis continetu^? An vero suspicari
debuerunt aut potuerunt nescio quam Calvini haeresim nondum natam, at ex
Iesuitarum cerebro propediem erupturam? Necessario tamen a Iesuitis haec fabula
instituta est, ut hoc suae causae grande vitium quodammodo sarcirent. Sed ut
saepe in magno numero quidam crassiores reperiuntur, qui scenae suae male
serviunt; ita nuper contigit, ut quidam Iesuita Aurelianensis nomine Crasset,
Societatis suae arts aut oblitus, aut non edoctus, rursus adversariis suis,
quos Iansenistas vocat, crudum Calvini dogma objectaret. In publica enim
concione dixit, Ex illorum sententia consectarium esse, omnes confessiones esse
invalidas, quod actum contritionis impossibilem esse dicerent. Et ne tantae
calumniae memoria intercideret, in famoso quodam libello adversus Aurelianensem
Episcopum, qui ipsum a sacris concionibus interdixerat, scripto illam ipsam
animose propugnavit. Verum hunc ad Societatem suam calliditatis magistram
remitrere sat erit, ut rudem illam dediscat audaciam. Interim ex eo constabit,
Calvinianum sensum, nempe omnibus justis mandata Dei esse impossibilia,
Iansenio a Iesuitis attributum esse, sed falso.

II. SENSUS FALSUS.
Ex illa voce, conantibus and volentibus, male accepta.
Voces illas dupliciter accipi posse fatetur Carpinetus Procurator generalis
Capucinorum, Consultor in quinque propositionum causa delectus. Aut enim
intelsiguntur, inquit, de justis infideliter conantibus, quo sensu ait,
Catholica est propositio: aut de justis fideliter conantibus, and hoc sensu est
haeretica. Et quia ille sensum Jansenii damnare voluit, ut in sequentibus votis
indicat, utique hunc sensum Jansenio tribuit: Justis volentibus and conantibus
fideliter, mandata Dei sunt impossibilia. At cum supra demonstraverimus per
illos justos volentes and conantes eos intelligi a Jansenio, qui a gratiae
suavitate dissentiunt, qui renituntur bonae voluntati a gratia immissae; patet
etiam non eos intelligi qui conantur fideliter, nisi forte dissentire a gratia,
and ejus instinctus repudiare, sit fideliter conari aut velle. Perspicum est
igitur, sensum illum, quem damnavit iste Consultor, merito quidem potuisse
damnari; sed a Jansenii mente prorsus alienum esse.

III. SENSUS FALSUS.
qui est Annatinus, Ex iisdem vocibus, and verbo impossibilia, perperam
acceptis.
Pater Annatus Molinianorum facile primipilus, antequam illam de Jansenii sensu
non exprimendo, sed generatim damnando, technam excogitasset, multis illum
locis, prout sibi visum, expressit; ubique fraudulenter, and ex suo ac
Societatis suae genio, sed praecipue in Cavillis cap. 8. page 56. Homines
justi, inquit, quotiescunque divina praecepta transgrediuntur, ea
transgrediuntur ex impossibilitate servandi, quae sequitur ex defectu gratiae
ad constituendam servandi potentiam necessariae: esto non desit servandi
voluntas and conatus: hic sensus est germanus Jansenii, and Jansenianorum,
idemque haereticus. Sic ille.

At ex ipso libenter quaesierim, quid tantopere laborat, ut Iansenii sensus
adversariorum suorum subscriptione damnetur. Faciliorem long viam ipsi
demonstrabo. Tollat Iansenii nomen, jam ille Iansenianus, ut ipsi videtur,
sensus omnium subscriptione damnabitur. Scatet enim aequivocis, and, prout
sonant termini, apertas haereses continet.

Primo, falsum est homines transgredi praecepta ex defectu gratiae. Nam
defectus gratiae efficacis non est causa peccati, sed mala voluntas.

Secundo, impossibilitas illa non peccandi, de qua loquitur Annatus, cum
voluntate servandi praecepti conjuncta manifest significat, impossibilitatem
non a voluntate profectam.

Tertio, impossibilitas illa quam adstruit, non solum removet potentiam
Molinianam, cui nihil necessarium deest, sed etiam Thomisticam. Talem enim esse
vult, ut ei omnes Thomistae adversentur.

Quarto, verba illa, voluntas, and conatus, cum minime restricta sint, ex se
significant plenam and absolutam voluntatem, non quandam velleitatem; quo
nomine etiam damnanda est Annatina propositio. Ergo ille sensum Iansenii non
expressit, sed corrupit; and in his vocibus, conantibus, and volentibus,
itemque in verbo impossibilia, fucum fecit.

IV SENSUS.
Ex eadem voce male intellecta.
Quartum hunc sensum, quamvis cum Annatino quadantenus conveniat, visum est
sejungere; quia planius multo and distinctius, animoque long candidiore, a
quibusdam vitis doctis and piis, verae and Christianae gratiae amatoribus
propositus est. Hi cum Iansenianorum nomen effugere, and nihilominus Catholicam
and Augustinianam gratiae efficacis doctrinam retinere vellent, utrumque
assequi se posse sperarunt, si ita Iansenii mentem interpretarentur, quasi ille
justos gratia efficaci destitutos, omni prorsus potentia spoliaverit, etiam ea
quam Thomistae vocana in actu primo; ita ut etiam si adsint caetera adjutoria,
nihilo magis ipsi bonum velle possint, quam caecus videre, claudus currere,
beatus peccare. Sic illi Iansenii sensum expresserunt, and quidem ipsius
verbis: fateor enim comparationes illas esse depromptas ex tom. 3. lib. 2. cap.
1. and 2. Simpliciter dicunt a se verba Iansenii accipi, and ideo nullam ipsi
injuriam inferri. In quo primum videre oportuerat, an tali simplicitate sua
ipsorum verba expendi vellent. Quod profecto recusarent. Nullus est enim fere
qui non alicujus haereseos argui possit, si verba pressius urgere and ad vivum
resecare liceat. Omnino ut in caeteris rebus humanis, ita sermonibus nostris,
nisi aequitas interveniat; ex summo jure summa fit injuria.

Id hoc loco factum ab illis esse contendo. Quod remoto contentionis studio
paucis hic ostendam. Sine gratia efficaci non magis potest justus been agere,
quam caecus videre; agnosco haec Iansenii verba. Ergo, inquiunt, non modo negat
sine gratia efficaci quidquam been fieri, sed omnino destruit eam potentiam in
actu primo, quam Thomistae defendunt. Nego hanc esse Iansenii sententiam, aut
illam ex his verbis been elici. Et cur negem affero. In omni comparatione non
omnia similia sunt. Sufficit ut illa inter se conveniant, quae inter se
comparantur. Iam vero caecus cum justo gratia efficaci destituto dupliciter
potest comparari. Primo, si spectentur potentiae in actu primo: sic nulla inter
utrosque similitudo, sed potius magna dissimilitudo. Caecus enim caret interna
videndi virtute: justus pollet interiori facultate been agendi, etiam actuali,
si vult and conatur. At si spectentur istae potentiae in actu secundo, tunc in
eo plane convenient, quod sicut caecus videre actu and effective non potest;
ita justus been agere sine efficaci gratia actu and effective non potest. Plena
est communis vita talibus locutionibus. Quis enim erroris arguat eum, qui sanis
oculis praeditum non magis in tenebris posse videre, quam caecum dictitet?
Igitur si Iansenius justum cum caeco comparavit, spectando potentiam in actu
primo, inepte prorsus locutus est, and, si velis, haeretice. Sin autem
spectavit potentiam in actu secundo, recte, Catholice, Thomistice locutus est.
Verum est enim tam contingere non posse, ut justus sine efficaci gratia been
agat; quam ut caecus videat. Primo sensu, absurdo illo scilicet and inepto,
Iansenium interpretantur viri cruditi. Scio, and dolet. Sed ab ipsis libenter
quaererem, quid eos compulit tam prave de illius judicio sentire. Simpliciter
aiunt se ejus verba interpretari. Verum jubet nos Apostolus in bono simplices
esse; at in malo, id est, cum de aliquo incommodius sentiendum est, idem nobis
prudentiam imperat. Quid ergo illos moverit, nescio: cur ab iis dissentiam,
illa me movent.

Primum, ridiculum mihi videntur Iansenio consilium tribuere, ut grande volumen
composuerit ad evertendam potentiam quandam in actu primo, quae nunquam in
actum prodeat. Quid enim illi obest talis potentia? An illa praedestinationis
divinae mysterium immutat? An efficacis gratiae necessitatem tollit? Omnino
magna quaedam and gravis quaestio est, utrum sit necessaria gratia efficax ad
been agendum. At illa semel stabilita, de gradibus illius been agendi
potentiae, quae in justis, etiam efficaci gratia desertis, manner, quaeque
nullum unquam sola producit actum, operose disputare, otiosorum hominum esse
videtur. Quamobrem ne quis mihi de illa unquam negotium sa^essat, profiteor
illam me locare in summo gradu, dummodo nunquam ex illo gradu in actum ullum
prodeat sine efficaci Dei auxilio.

II. Jansenius aperte pergratiam habitualem dari posse profitetur, tom. 3. lib.
3. c. 15. Idemque conartes and volentes vires invalidas habere dicit; ideo
autem invalidas habere dicit, quia gratia efficaci egent ad actu operandum.

III. Diserte Iansenius tom 1. lib. 5. cap. 11. asserit gratiam efficacem esse
adjutorium actus secundi. Hoc enim discrimen constituit inter gratiam
possibilitatis (quae comprehendit gratiam sufficientem Thomisticam quae dat
posse,) and gratiam efficacem quam post Augustinum vocat adjutorium voluntatis
and actionis; Quod adjutorium possibilitatis sit adjutorium actus primi;
adjutorium voluntatis and actionis sit adjutorium ACTUS SECUNDI. Illud enim
facit ut potentia in actu primo potens fiat, and ad volendum agendumque habilis
and praeparata: hoc vero ut in actu secundo velit atque agat. Supponit ergo
manifest Jansenius actum primum ante gratiam efficacem.

IV. Quo maxim istius interpretationis iniquitas ostenditu^, cum ille tom. 3.
lib. 2. cap. 3. discrimen inter suam Thomistarumque sentertiam explicat, illud
in eo praecise situm docet, quod illi tam infirmum hominem esse fingant ante
lapsum, quam ipse cum Augustino asserit esse post lapsum. Quare ut Thomistae
homini stanti potentiam in actu primo largiuntur; sic illam Jansenius homini
lapso libenter concedet; dummodo maneat illud, gratiam efficacem ad been
agendum nobis in hoc statu omnino necessariam esse.

Haec de quarto illo sensu fusius disputavi, quod is unus Jansenio cum aliquo
color, licet, ut videre est, dilatiore a bonis viris imputetur: Caeteri sua
sponte ex positis fundamentis dissiliunt, in primisque ille quem quinto loco
afferemus.

V SENSUS.
Ex vocula, deest, male intellecta.
Pater Palavicinus Iesuita, e Romany Consultoribus unus, sic sensum Iansenii
interpretatus est, ut patet ex illius suffragio recens edito, quasi justis
Iansenius deesse voluerit gratiam sine ullo peccato, ne originali quidem.
Itaque videtur sic accepisse voculam, deest, quomodo illam accipit Ioannes
Nicolai, qui eodem modo Iansenii sensum interpretatur in suffragio censorio,
page 9. Cum gratia, inquit, dicitur deesse, non omnimoda tantum and absoluta
defectio, sed spontanea ex part Dei abdicatio indicatur, qua juvare plane
nolit conantem licet ac volentem, qui manifestus Jansenii sensus est, expressus
ex Jansenio per Arnaldum; unde ille novam istam voculae deest notionem
hauserit, cum volet edisseret. Caeterum ipsum in Iansenii sensu plane decipi
manifestum est. Ex illo enim homini stanti gratia nunquam defuit: lapsis deesse
non potest sine causa, quae sit in ipsis, non in Deo, ut omnibus notum est.

VI SENSUS.
Ex vocula, gratia, male intellecta.
Multi Romani Consultores, in quibus est Thomas d'Elbene, and Raphael Aversa,
illud Iansenio crimini dederunt, quod a justis volentibus and conantibus non
modo gratiam efficacem removerit, sed etiam sufficientem Thomistico sensu. Quod
cum falsum esse supra demonstraverimus, and istos patet in sensu Iansenii
fuisse deceptos, cum generice gratiae nomen accipiant, quod specifice Iansenius
accepit. Idem cum istis sensisse videtur Nicolaus Cornet, qui cum dixisset
efficacis gratiae doctrinam optimam esse, nihilominus Iansenium reprehendebat,
quod non illam sufficientis gratiae condimento temperabat.

VII SENSUS.
Ex eadem vocula male accepta.
Nec ab illorum errore abludit Professor Sorbonae Chamillardus, qui negatam hoc
loco vult a Iansenio non modo gratiam agendi, sed etiam orandi. Sustineo,
inquit in secunda Epistola page 5. hunc esse Iansenii sensum: justis volentibus
and conantibus mandata esse impossibilia, quia nec adsit gratia agendi, nec
gratia orandi and impetrandi divini auxilii. At in utroque aperte fallitur;
adeo enim hoc loco Iansenius non ait gratiam orandi deesse, ut illam gratiam
quam deesse dicit, ideo deesse probet, quia oramus. Nemo aurem tam absurdus
fingi potest, ut gratiam orandi probet deesse quia oramus, id est, quia gratiam
orandi habemus. Et certe conatus ille and voluntas est gratia quaedam
orationis: orare enim ex Augustino est desiderare; imo est agendi gratia, non
efficax quidem, at Thomistico sensu sufficiens. Verum hic ipsius error alibi
fusius exagitatus est.

CONCLUSIO.
Hic jam omnes non modo ab omni praejudicio liberos, sed non penitus privatis
studiis occaecatos compello and obtestor, ut serio tandem secum considerent
quam perniciosum exemplum in Ecclesiam inducatur, and quam intolerando jugo
Catholicorum Theologorum fides opprimatur, conscientia vexetur, hoc novo
extorquendarum subscriptionum consilio. Videant, quaeso, quid aequitatis habeat
hoc inceptum. Quid enim? Postulatur a me ut quinque propositiones damnem.
Facio, ac libenter. Non satis est, aiunt; illas in proprio sensu damnes
oportet. Etiam hic non invitus obtempero. Urgeor adhuc: Addas, inquiunt,
necesse est, proprium illum sensum esse etiam Iansenianum. Eia quid hoc ad
fidem? Quid ad haeresim? Sed tamen obsequi studeo, si possim. Iansenianum
sensum damnari placet? At quem potissimum? Nam multos video circumferri.
Carpineticumne, an Annatinum? Corneticum, an Palavicinicum? Chamillardicum, an
Crasseticum? Unum si eligam, caeteris injuriam infero. Quem voles, inquiunt,
modo aliquem. Itane igitur ut Iansenius erret meo arbitratu? Sed quid mihi
affertur, ut meipsum in hoc damnando non erraturum credam, cum caeteri omnes
mihi adversentur?

Age igitur, prolixius agamus, and plus quam postulatur ultro praestemus.
Iansenium damno prout explicatur a Palavicino, Annato, Corneto, Carpineto,
Crasseto, and caeteris hujusmodi. Ita non jam unum, ut exigitur, sed septem and
plures etiam sensus Jansenianos rejicio. Quid est ergo quod a me amplius peti
possit? Ut istos existimem and profitear de Iansenii sensu been sensisse.
Omnesne? Qui possunt, cum uni scriptori multiplicem sensum imponant, qui non
nisi unum habuit? An singulos? Si quem eligam ex septem, sex ex illis infensos
habebo. Deinde si singulos separatim possum rejicere, cut non universos?

An igitur eo res denique redibit, ut Iansenium in genere errasse fatendum sit,
abstrahendo a quocunque sensu? At prorsus ignorare me fateor, quid sit error in
abstracto, and in genere, cujus species assignari non possit. Neque enim genus
fine ulla specie cohaerere, in Logicae elementis didicisse commemini.
Assignetur ergo Iansenianus ille sensus: alioquin quomodo a quoquam damnari
possit non video.

Attendant igitur quorum id interest, in quam horrendam perturbationem and
caliginem praecipitetur Ecclesia, dum certorum hominum studiis indulgetur. Quod
totum eorum art and consiliis effectum est, qui semper omni ratione
providerunt, ne tota haec causa, auditis utrinque partibus, praecisis nominum
quaestionibus, constitutis dissensionis capitibus, in legitimo judicio
disceptetur. Quod donec impetretur, infinitis semper contentionibus, quarum
pleraeque de nomine sunt, jactabitur Ecclesia, and ipsius membra caeca
concertatione inter se collidentur. Id gaudent, qui in hac confusione potentiam
suam and securitatem quaerunt. Id dolent quibus veritas quae periclitatur,
unitas quae scinditur, charitas quae violatur, cordi and solicitudini est.

FINIS.
PAVLI IRENAEI DIS QVISITIO TERTIA;
SIVE ECCLESIAE TVRBAE, Fr. ANNATO Jesuita judice compositae.
I.
Imprudentiae arguitur Annatus.
DUram, mi Pater, cepi provinciam, qui te monere aggrediat in tanto tuo ac
Societatis tuae plausu. Nihil enim monentibus inimicus, quam cupiditas felix,
and opinione victoriae elatus animus. Sed tamen hac incommoda affectione tua
non tardatus, peragam munus meum. Qui sibi uni peccat, dimitti potest
incastigatus. Tuae culpae, mi Annate, latius manant, eae praesertim quas in hac
postrema scriptiuncula admisisti. Patere igitur in viam te molliter reduci vel
invitum, ut quos tecum in errorem abripis, vel tecum, vel sine te ad saniora
judicia revocentur. In hac controversia tu mihi summus eris testis, tu
praecipuus judex. Ita si te test, te judice, causa cecideris, de nullo habebis
nisi de te queri. Quin etiam hoc tibi tribuendum duxi, ut errata tua Latin
potius quam Gallice retegerem, quod major tibi hujus linguae facultas sit ad
responsandum. Sic enim habeto, me quidem nihil magis optare, quam ut meis
monitis perniciosissimum turbandae Ecclesiae consilium deponas: hoc dempto,
nihil malle, quam ut saltem ad respondendum te accingas. Nam id te facere non
posse certo scio, quin causae tuae iniquitatem omnium oculis subjicias. Atque
adeo non ut te pungam, sed ut vehementius extimulem, liberius indicabo quid sit
in quo te incusem.

Imprudentius aio a te factum esse, mi Annate, quod huic tanto Molinistarum
triumpho despicatissimam quandam schedulam antevertisti, tam apertis fallaciis
scatentem, ut victoriam tuam plus labefafactet, quam ulla cujusquam impugnatio.
Haec palam demonstrari non erit inutile, ut Societas tua alium sibi provideat
defensorem, aut tu certe aliam defensionem.

II.
Annatus causam suam prodit potius quam defendit.
MAle collineat qui in adversam scopo partem jaculatur. Male parts Oratoris
implet, qui quod astruere nititur destruit. De te fabula narratur, mi Annate:
nihil enim minus efficis, quam quod effectum vis. Nempe hoc tibi propositum est
in illa scriptiuncula tua, ut eos quos Iansenistas vocas, haereticos doceas. At
ipsos nemo clarius quam tu Catholicos probavit. Miraberis quae dicam. Non jam
ad Episcopos, non ad summum Pontificem provocamus, quando ne ad illos aspirent
voces nostrae, Jesuitarum gratia praepedit. Te, te appellamus, mi Annate: tuo
judicio stabimus, and, quae nobis causae nostrae fiducia est, tuo judicio
vincemus. Age igitur, mi Pater, supremum te judicem finge, nos humiles and
demissi sic fidem tibi nostram purgamus.

III.
Augustinianorum apud Annatum purgatio.
CAlumniis impetimur a Societate tua, Pater Annate. Ridiculi nobis errotes
imponuntur, de quibus cogitavimus nunquam. Sed ad eos amovendos sufficit
sententiam nostram hoc unico argumento vindicare. Gratiae efficacis ad omnes
pietatis actus necessariae dogma summus Pontifex Catholicum agnoscit, omnes per
orbem Episcopi, omnes Universitates, imo tu ipse. Atqui hoc unum dogma circa
quinque propositiones tuemur, and nullum aliud. Igitur and circa propositiones,
summi Pontificis, Episcoporum, Universitatum, tuo denique judicio Catholice
sentimus. Nec premere ullum potest non damnatus express Jansenius. Aut enim
ille nihil aliud habet circa istas propositiones praeter hoc dogma, and sic
caret errore: aut aliquid aliud, and sic defensoribus caret. Utrum autem
habeat, necne, ita manifesta quaestio facti est, ut eam ad fidem pertinere ne
fingere quidem possis. Brevissime dicam. Quem tu sensum Jansenii esse putas,
nos damnamus: quem nos sensum Jansenii esse putamus, ne tu quidem damnare
ausis. Habes orationis nostrae summam. Nos judicium tuum expectamus. Illud vero
his verbis gravibus sane ac luculentis exponis.

IV.
Annati responsio.
GRatia efficax ( inquis in postremo tuo libello p. 21. and 22.) cuplici modo
defendi potest, quorum ille haereticus est, haereticis principiis nixus; alter
orthodoxus, sancitis auctoritate Conciliorum principiis suffultus. Primum
sequitur Calvinus, and ideo haereticus est. Catholici Doctores, Thomistae,
Scotistae, Sorbonistae, Iesuitae de secundo consentiunt, and propterea, variis
licet concertationibus distracti, tamen in eadem and indivulsa Ecclesiae
communione permanent. Ergo ut explores, an Iansenius defendendae gratiae
efficacis professione sit immunis, illud indagandum, quo pacto ipsam defendat,
tanquam Calvinus, antanquam Catholici Doctores.

Hactenus, mi Pater, bellissime principia posuisti. Itaque nos hic tibi nihil
omnino refragantes habebis. Perge igitur.

V.
Primum judicium Annatinum.
CAlvinus ita gratiam efficacem defendit, ut ab illa nullam aliam nobis
relinqui libertatem putet, nisi eam quae dicitur a coactione; caeterum ab ista
gratia agendi necessitatem imponi, quae potestatem auferat resistendi quamdiu
gratia perseverat.

VI.
Subscriptio.
HAec paulisper, quaesumus, subsiste, mi Annate, and nobis expedi quo pacto
quis hunc a se Calvini errorem possit amoliri, nimirum eo simpliciter, aperte,
and sincere damnando. Been habet. Igitur jam te judice, Calviniano errore
liberati sumus: hunc enim simpliciter, ingenue, and aperte damnamus, rejicimus,
execramur. Quid ultra postulas? Ut non modo de gratia efficaci non Calviniane
sentiamus, sed etiam ut Catholice? Praescribe ergo quid sit Catholice gratiam
efficacem defendere.

VII.
Secundum judicium Annatinum.
CAtholici Doctores inter se consentiunt, gratiam per se efficacem ita regere
voluntatem, ut vim and potestatem resistendi ei non adimat, ita ut haec duo
inter se componantur, gratia in voluntate, and in eadem voluntate sub gratia
constituta sufficiens non consentiendi potestas: nec dubitant quin hic verus
sit Concilii Tridentini sensus in istis verbis, potest dissentire si velit.

VIII.
Subscriptio.
ITerum quaerimus quo pacto quis fidem facere possit, hanc fibi doctrinam
probari? An aliter quam ingenua and simplici subscriptione? Tollantur ergo
vanae concertationes; subscribimus enim and sincere profitemur, remanere cum
ipsa gratia efficaci dissentiendi potestatem. Verum ex omnium Thomistarum
doctrina adjungimus, seu potius explicamus quae tu involvis, eam vim esse
gratiae praedeterminantis ut physice semper and infallibiliter efficiat, non ut
voluntas dissentire non possit, sed ut nolit. Relinquit ergo dissentiendi
potestatem, aufert dissentiendi voluntatem: hoc est, cum ipsa gratia pacifice
consistit dissentiendi potestas, consistere non potest dissentiendi voluntas.
Nam, ut ait Alvares disp. 72. number. 4. Quando motio Dei est efficax, liberum
arbitrium infallibiliter consentiet. Etenim hoc operatur gratia in libero
arbitrio, quod cum possit dissentire, non dissentiat; cujus ratio est quam
assignat S. Thomas 1. 2. qu. 112. art. 3. Nam intentio Dei deficere non potest.
Unde si ex intention Dei moventis est, quod homo, cujus cor movet, consentiat
and consequatur gratiam, infallibiliter eam consequetur, and necessario,
necessitate infallibilitatis, non autem ex necessitate absoluta. En doctrinae
nostrae circa gratiam efficacem sinceram expositionem!

Jam si quaeras quo pacto Concilii Tridentini locum accipiamus, non alium
interpretem adhibebimus, quam illum Societatis vestrae coryphaeum, Dionysium
Petavium. Audi, si placet, illum loquentem tom. 1. l. 9. p. 602. and nos Sodali
tuo succinentes amplectere. Illud quod per Christi merita tribuitur donum, non
solum dat posse si velint, sed etiam velle quod possunt; and est tale, ut eo
dato non nisi perseverantes sint, id est, ut certo, and quod in scholis
dicitur, infallibiliter perseverent, tametsi libere gratiae illi donoque
consentiant, non necessario; sed ita ut dissentire possint si velint, quod
Tridentina sciscit Synodus, quamvis ut non dissentire velint, eodem illo
perseverantiae dono perficitur. Ergo etiam hic tibi plane satisfaciamus necesse
est. Tuae enim doctrinae sine exceptione subscribimus. Superest 3. caput, quod
sic expressisti.

IX.
Tertium judicium Annatinum.
IN hoc quoque capite Catholici Doctores consentiunt, gratiam sub efficacis
formalitate non esse ita ad bona opera necessariam, ut non possit sine hac esse
sufficiens, omnemque largiri potestatem, quae necessaria est ad hoc ut quod
jubet Deus, nobis possibile sit, quamvis illud reipsa non praestemus. Ex quo
fit ut vitio nostro haec gratia effectu careat.

X.
Explicatio and subscriptio.
ETsi, mi Annate, hic doctrinam tuam consulto obscurasse videri possis, ut nos
ab ea amplectenda deterreres; quia tamen verba tua significas eo sensu
accipienda qui Thomistarum doctrinam nihil laedat, nec me utique laedere
possunt, nec ullum Augustini discipulum. Nam illi circa quinque propositiones
cum vulgaribus Thomistis plane consentiunt. Nihil est ergo quominus eodem sensu
quo illi tuum illud tertium caput approbem: imo nihil necesse est id a me jam
fieri, cum in prima Disquisitione jam fecerim, aperteque dixetim, duplex esse
gratiae genus, aliud efficax, aliud inefficax: hoc idem prorsus esse atque
illud quod Thomistae auxilium sufficiens vocant, eoque mandata fieri vere
possibilia, etiam cum illa reipsa non praestamus, adeoque hanc gratiam suo
nonnunquam effectu carere. Haec omnia omnes Augustini discipuli toties
iterarunt, ut mirum sit vos adhuc adversus eorum voces obsurdescere.

XI.
Thomistarum, quos orthodoxos agnoscit Annatus, de gratia efficaci pronunciata.
CAeterum, mi Annate, quemadmodum in verbis tuis involutam Thomistarum
sententiam probavi, sic eam paulo enucleatius hic a me proferri, ne fraudi
detur locus, quaeso boni consulas. Haec vero ad ista dogmata, quae cum illis
adversus Sodalitium tuum tuemur, fere redigitur. 1. Gratiam efficacem ad omnia
pietatis opera, and ad ipsam orationem necessariam esse. Nam, ut rectissime
Alvares disp. 55. number. 13. Praeter vocationem sufficientem, quae tribuit
voluntati posse consentire, requiritur etiam ut actualiter consentiat, vocatio
efficax qua fiat consentiens. Et adhuc clarius paulo supra, number 6. Nulla
dispositio remota ad gratiam haberi potest ex sola facultate naturae, sive sit
petere, sive desiderare ipsam gratiam, sive quodlibet aliud: sed ad illam
necessario requiritur SPECIALE AUXILIUM PRAEMOVENTIS GRATIAE.

Secundo, hujus tam necessariae gratiae ea vis and efficacia est, ut ait
Alvares disp. 23. Ut haec duo sint incompossibilia: quod Deus auxilio efficaci
moveat liberum arbitrium ad consensum; and nihilominus liberum arbitrium
dissentiat. Alias enim non ageretur a gratia efficaci indeclinabiliter and
insuperabiliter.

Ac de efficaci quidem gratia ita sentimus. De inefficaci vero nostram
sententiam habes Disq. 1. art. 5. Tantum hic duo nominatim annotabo.

1. Etsi haec potestatem afferat observandi mandata, tamen istam potestatem
talem non esse, ut complectatur omnia ad agendum necessaria. Nam illud, mi
Annate, devores oportet ex Navarretta tom. 2. contr. 19. Quod Suares dicit,
auxilium sufficiens includere in se omnia quae sunt necessaria ad operationem,
falsum est, and contra D. Augustinum. Et ibidem: Non continet auxilium
sufficiens quicquid per modum principii est necessarium ad illam operationem.

II. Etiam gratiam sufficientem semper illum operati effectum, ad quem absoluta
Dei voluntate ordinatur. Recte enim idem Alvarez disp. 80. Omne auxilium
sufficiens comparatione unius actus semper est efficax respectu alterius, ad
quem efficiendum decreto absoluto divinae voluntatis destinarur. Unde generatim
omnis gratia dici efficax potest, and rursus dividi in efficacem secundum quid,
quae eadem sufficiens vel excitans dicitur; and efficacem simpliciter and
proprie. Eia, mi Annare, quid jam habes quod succenseas? An hoc forte nobis
succenses, quod succensendi causas praecidimus? Nec modo levem controversiam
super quinque propositionibus reliquam esse docemus: sed plane nullam. Nullam,
nullam, inquam, invenies, Pater Annate, quantumvis omnes ingenii tui nervos
intendas, dum Thomistarum sententiam, ut facis, orthodoxam fateberis. Atque
adeo experire: enitere ut verbis ab omni ambiguitate remotis quaestionis caput
assign^ Si feceris, mi Annate, viceris. Quae conditio quior cuiquam offerri
potest, quam ut clare aperteque enunciet quod obtinere nititur? Et nobis
pervicaciam objectas, qui tibi morigeri sumus plus fortasse quam velles. Et
haeresim in Ecclesia esse dictitas, cum nullam de certo dogmate disceptationem
possis ostendere. Prius ergo responde huic argumento: Nulla certa haeresis sine
certa controversia. At nulla in Ecclesia certa controversia. Ergo nulla
haeresis.

XII.
Annati sententia victus Annatus.
NOn vereor igitur, mi Pater, quam de nobis jam sententiam pronunciaturus sis.
Jam tu illam pronunciasti, cum tam accurato discrimine Calvinianum errorem a
Catholica fide distinxisti. Quisquis enim Calvinum, ut a te explicatur,
rejicit, te judice, Calvinianus non est. Quisquis Catholicam fidem ex ore tuo
amplectitur, te judice, Catholicus est. Ita si nos ut haereticos pergas
incessere, non tam nobis turpissimi criminis notam inures, quam tibi injuriae,
inconstantiae famam apud homines, culpam apud Deum accersis. Hujus judicium, mi
Annate, nimis abest ab oculis tuis. Aliter ageres, si de illo serio cogitares.
Quam enim tandem Deo rationem redditurus es, cum exprobrabit tibi tot servorum
suorum famam inanissimo haereseos crimine conscissam: projectam in periculum
schismatis Ecclesiam: vilissimis, imo nullis quaestiunculis turbaram fidelium
pacem: delusam artibus tuis summi Pontificis aequitatem, cujus aures, heu!
vobis nimium credulas, innumeris quotidie mendaciis oneratis? Non agitur de
Jansenio. Ille in tuto locatus non jam veretur humanum diem. De nobis agitur,
quibus orb Christiano inspectante Calvinianum sensum objicere non dubitas.
Etiamne id nobis imperabis, ut reclamante conscientia hunc errorem a nobis
defensum agnoscamus, quem tota mente semper repudiavimus? Nimis, nimis hoc
durum est, Pater Annate, ut falsum crimen agnoscendum sit, ne falso accusasse
videaris.

XIII.
Iterata responsione eliditur Annatinus de sensu Jansenii Cavillus.
QUid afferes igitur quominus illa haeresis, quam nobis objectas, plane
evanuerit? Iterumne ad Jansenii sensus cavillationem recurres, and ad tuum
illud sophisma: Jansenianus sensus est Calvinianus: at Jansenianum sensum
defenditis: ergo Calvinianum? Deus immortalis! Adeone homines ex odio and
cupiditate immutari, ut nullum in iis non dicam humanitatis, sed rationis
vestigium agnoscas? Nam tu, si homo esses, mi Annate, illo potius modo a
gumentum tuum contexeres: Jansenianus sensus est Calvinianus: at damnatis
sensum Calvini: ergo damnatis sensum Jansenii. Debueras ergo nobis non Calvinum
objicere probatum, sed Jannium desertum. Certe enim Jansenianus ille sensus
aliquo dogmate continetur, non nudis illis vocibus quae nihil ex se
significant. Hoc dogma tu ipse definis, circumscribis, explicas, and in
Calviniano errore situm doces. Nos illud dogma rejicimus. Ergo rejicimus
sententiam illam, quam tu Jansenianam appellas. At quidam eam negant esse
Jansenianus O miram haeresim, and ante inauditam! Duo homines eandem omnino
sententiam tuentur, nempe Thomisticam; eandem sententiam damnant, nempe
Calvinianam: eo solum discrepant, quod alter Calvinianum sensum appellat
Jansenianum, and ideo damnat: alter sententiam Thomisticam, utrique probatam,
appellat Iansenianam, and ideo verbulum illud non damnat; ob hoc unum discrimen
hic haereticus, ille Catholicus.

Cur ergo non intelligis, Dialectice senex, puerile argumentationis tuae
vitium, duplicemque sub his verbis Janseniani sensus notionem supponi, aliam a
me, aliam a te; Thomisticam a me, a te Calvinianam? An tantum illius nominis
virus est, ut quodcunque demum Janseniani sensus voce afficiarut, etsi
caeteroquin orthodoxum, statim evadat haereticum? Quid si mibi persuadeam
eundem esse Molinae and Jansenii sensum? Iamne tuus Molina haereticus fieret?
Injurius in te mihi viderer, mi Annate, si te fingerem tam absurdum. Ecce
quidam sibi persuaserunt Iansenium nihil omnino a vulgari Thomistarum doctrina
circa quinque propositiones dissidere. Quis non videat nihil fieri posse
dementius, quam si quis ea re ipsos haereseos insimulet? At stulte sibi
persuaserunt. Stultos igitur voca, Catholicos fatere: quanquam jam ostendam
tibi unde stultitiam istam hauserint. Hauserunt enim non modo ex multis
Iansenii locis, quorum nonnulla 2. Disquisitione protulimus; fed etiam ex Patre
Palavicino, Romano Iesuita, viro in istis rebus and intelligente and moderato.
Audi ergo quomodo ille Iansenium cum Thomistis conjungat, de gratia sufficient
loquens: Primum, inquit Tr. de Great. ann. 1645. in Col. Romans Disp. 4. art. 4.
asserunt communiter Patres Dominicani, and idem reipsa docet Jansen. lib. 3. de
Gr. cap. 1. cum inficiaretur dari gratiam aliquam sufficientem, subdit eam
concedi posse, si admittatur in eo sensu in quo eam admittit Alvares,
caeterique nobis adversarii in quaestione de Auxiliis; ut nimirum det quidem
posse, non tamen sit sufficiens adagendum, nisi aliquid aliud addatur ex part
Dei; adhuc tamen non esse veram Christi gratiam. Contratia est doctrina
Societatis, pro qua sit conclusio.

Hinc ille in votis suis eadem censura Iansenium perstrinxit, qua idem Alvarem
perstrinxisset. Erroneum dixit illius sensum, quia Thomisticum: haereticum
nunquam dixit, quia Thomistas haereticos dicere nondum audetis. Quid quod ille
super quarta propositione sensum Iansenii disertis verbis absolvit, and immunem
jadicat a censura? Hic, quaeso, responde, Pater Annate. Cum Palavicinus sensum
Iansenii immunem judicabat a censura, an ille Calvinianus erat, an blasphemus,
an haereticus? Non opinor. Quare ergo ut Catholicum defendebat, quod tu
Calviniani erroris accusas, nisi quia aliter qaam tu Iansenium interpretabatur?
Sentisne igitur non propterea quemquam Calvino adhaerescere, quia Iansenium
defendat, alioquin Romanum illud judicium dimidio fere Calvinistarum numero
conflatum fuisset.

XIV.
Solam Molinae and Suaresii sufficientem gratiam a Jansenio explosam.
CAEterum hoc Palavicini tui loco admoneor, ut obiter hic apetiam quantopere
credulis lectoribus hoc sufficientis gratiae nomine sciens vel imprudens
imponas. Scilicet nihil crebrius in ore habes, ut tibi Dominicanos adjungas,
quam gratiam sufficientem Thomistarum a Iansenio quasi monstrum esse
exagitatam. At in hoc, mi Annate, longissime erras. Illa enim gratia
sufficiens, quam ut monstrum insectatur Iansenius, t. 3. l. 3. c. 3. non est
illa Thomistica, quam ab Augustino libenter admissum iti docuerat cap. 1. sed
Sodalium vestrorum, Suarisque praecipue incongrua gratia, quae lato limite a
Thomistica dividitur. Hoc vero tam manifest non innuit solum, sed express
testificatur, ut mitum sit vos tam putidam criminationem toties iterasse.
Quamobrem, mi Pater, ne vel te, vel alios fallas, sic habeto: Quoties Iansenius
gratiam sufficientem explodit, non aliam intelligi, nisi Molinianam aut
incongruam Suaresianam. Idem de caeteris Augustini discipulis affirmo, quibus
in ista gratia sufficient Thomistica nihil displicet praeter nomen, quo vos ad
Molinam sovendum abutimini. At, si satis innotuerit, non eam hoc verbo
significati gratiam quae complectatur omnia ad agendum necessaria, nihil jam
erit cur non id nominis facile admittatur, and hoc sensu gratia sufficiens
omnibus justis volentibus and conantibus concedatur. Quamobrem, ut dixi, res
isto nomine a Thomistis significata probatur ab omnibus: ac verbum ipsum ante
Moliniano veneno perpurgandum, quam in Ecclesiam invehatur; aut certe cum ea
cautione usurpandum, ut Molinisticus sensus express rejiciatur.

XV.
Refellitur alia fallacia Annatina de sensu legitimo.
EX his similiter corruit aliud tuum, in quo non mediocriter tibi places,
argumentum, seu verius sophisma. Quinque propositiones, inquis, in sensu
legitimo a quibusdam doctoribus defensae sunt: at damnatae sunt in sensu
legitimo: ergo damnatae sunt eo sensu, quo defensae ab illis sunt. Hic etiam
legitimi sensus aequivocatione nos illudis; nec aliter argumentaris, quam si
quis ita concluderet: Legitimum Honorii sensum damnavit sexta Synodus: at
legitimum Honorii sensum tuetur Bellarminus: ergo sexta Synodus damnavit sensum
quem tuetur Bellarminus: ergo Bellarminus haereticus est. Siccine, mi Pater, in
Dialecticis operam tuam diutinam consumpsisti, ut adhuc istius argumenti vitium
non percipias, nec intelligas in sensus legitimi voce latere fallaciam? Alius
enim prorsus legitimus sensus, quem Pontifex damnavit; alius legitimus sensus,
quem illi defenderunt. Quis enim ille sensus ab illis Doctoribus propugnatus?
Audiamus te ipsum little verba referentem: Auctor, inquis, libri de gratia
victrice ait, propositiones esse veras, and maxim Catholicas in sensu gratiae
efficacis, atque hoc solum sensu a Iansenio defendi. Ecce quid sit ille sensus
legitimus, doctrina nempe de gratia efficaci, quam tu veram and orthodoxam
sateris. Hanc illi in quinque propositiones includi posse existimarunt. Nec
soli, mi Annate, ita senserunt. Praecip^ Consultoribus idem quod illi
censuerant; nec t^en Calviniani erant, aut ulla sinistra unquam opinione
aspersi sunt. Contra Consultores alii numero plures sensum legitimum
propositionum a gratia efficaci plane segregatum esse contenderunt. His
assensus est summus Pontifex, ipsi orbis Christianus. Quid sequitur? Nempe hoc
unum; gratiae efficacis doctrinam in sensu propositionum includi non debere,
omninoque sentiendum, hunc gratiae efficacis sensum non esse legitimum quinque
propositionum sensum. Quod illo argumento tuo been convincitur. Summus Pontifex
non damnavit gratiae efficacis doctrinam. At damnavit sensum legitimum quinque
propositionum. Ergo doctrina gratiae efficacis non est sensus legitimus quinque
propositionum. At sensus ille quem Doctores tuebantur, nihil aliud erat quam
doctrina efficacis gratiae. Igitur sensus illorum a summo Pontifice damnatus
non est. Hoc solum ergo ipsis exprobrare potes, sensum illum, quem legitimum
dixere, sententia summi Pontificis illegitimum and alienum a propositionibus
esse judicatum. Quod honori and reverentiae summi Pontificis facile dabunt.

XVI.
Ridicule implicitam Augustinianorum sententiam insectantur Jesuitae, cujus
explicit and non ambiguis verbis expressae damnationem extorquere non possunt.
CErnisne, Pater Annate, rations tuas sponte dissilire? Sed paulisper subit
hoc loco mitari fraudulentum Societatis institutum. Quorsum enim nos assidue
legitimi sensus, Janseniani sensus vocibus pulsat and obtundit? Non obtegimus,
non reticemus sensus nostros, imo eos planissimis verbis enunciamus. Non deest
vobis gratia apud Reges, apud multos Episcopos, apud summum denique Pontificem.
Quin jam igitur omissa illa futili de Janseniani sensus vocibus concertatione,
sententiam nostram nostris verbis expressam apud summum Pontificem vel apud
Episcopos Galliae accusatis? Si jam illam implicitam damnaverunt, ut
contenditis, libentissime utique explicatam damnabunt.

Agite ergo and enitimini, Jesuitae, ut in aliqua Bulla haec verba orbis
Christianus legate: Haec propositio; Quibusdam justis gratiae excitanti and
Thomistico sensu sufficienti renitentibus non adest gratia efficax, necessaria
ad been agendum, sive sine qua non adsunt omnia ad agendum necessaria; est
haeretica, blasphema and impia.

Facite ut legamus: Haec propositio; Duplex est gratiae genus: alia efficax,
alia inefficax. Huic semper, cum sola est, resistitur; illi qunquam. Vtraque
vero in eo convenit, quod semper efficax sit respectu illius effectus ad quem
absoluta Dei voluntate ordinatur; est haeretica.

Facite ut legamus; Haec propositio; Ad merendum and demerendum in statu
naturae lapsae non requiritur indifferentia Moliniana, qua voluntas ita potest
velle and nolle, ut non modo cum gratia efficaci potestas dissentiendi
cohaereat, sed etiam actus contrarius; est haeretica.

Facite ut legamus: Haec propositio; Semipelagiani in eo errabant, quod
negarent fidem ita esse donum Dei, ut nemo credat ut oportet nisi cui per
gratiam efficacem fides ipsa donetur; est haeretica.

Facite demum ut legamus: Haec propositio; Christus non est mortuus ut omnibus
reprobis gratias Moliniano sensu sufficientes impetraret, quae sine efficacis
auxilio in actum prorumpant; haeretica est and blasphema.

XVII.
Apostolica and Augustiniana gratiae efficacis doctrina, Jesuitarum in eam
machinationibus confirmatur and illustratur.
EJusmodi Bullam, Pater Annate, non timemus ne unquam a summo Pontifice
Jesuiticae arts eliciant, and propterea triumphos tuos, vanasque victorias
irridemus, seu potius miseramur. Nunquam enim forte illustriori exemplo
comprobavit Deus quanta fit firmitas veritatis, and quam inanes sint hominum in
illam insurgentium conatus. Ecce per duodecim annos conjurata in gratiam
efficacem Molinistarum natio nullas arts, nullas machinationes ad eam
evertendam omittit; Regibus, Episcopis, summis Pontificibus obrepit; and tamen
eadem doctrina validius indies confirmatur; ab Episcopis, quotidie probatur;
Romae ut cum maxim floret; nec quisquam est qui Molinista libenter audiat. Hoc
tanto nobis solatio est, ut illos fluctus in nos concitatos securi laetique
prospectemus. Non enim jam fides, non veritas periclitatur, quae adversariorum
etiam ore and testimonio sancitur: non conscientia nostra, quae nobis coram Deo
hoc sincerum testimonium reddit, nihil aliud nos in hac materia sentire, nisi
quae supra exposuimus, quaeque omnium Theologorum calculo tanquam orthodoxa
comprobari certo scimus. Ergo famae duntaxat nostrae, aut temporalium
commodorum discrimen agitur, de qui bus siquis vehementius solicitus sit, and
Christiani and Theologi nomine sit indignus. In haec saeviant Jesuitae quantum
volent. Nobis illorum fortunam optare nunquam subibit. Interim dum nostra
illorum calumniis obscuratur fama, veritatis, quam adversus illos tuemur,
splendour clarius enitescit. Ecquis enim non hanc certam, Catholicam, ac divinam
doctrinam putet, quae defensoribus suis in summam invidiam per falsas
criminationes adductis, Jesuitarum tamen in petum in excidium suum, and
Principum, and summi Pontificis gratia abutentium, suo robore sustentat? aut
quomodo unquam huic argumento respondebunt Jesuitae? Si quid esset in doctrina
superius exposita, quod vel levissimam notam mereretur, non ei parceret summus
Pontifex, Jesuitarum operatione adversus illorum dogmatum defensores
exasperatus. Sed nullum unquam ex supra posits capitibus express damnabit.
Ergo nullum est damnatione dignum; nullum quod orthodoxum and sanctum non sit.

XVIII.
Cur Jansenium multi Thomistae damnare detractent.
NImirum igitur accusatione haereseos excidisti, Pater Annate. Restat ut alio
impetum convertas, ac nos dicas vere quidem Jansenii sensum damnare, quippe qui
Calvinianum damnemus, quem eundem atque Jansenianum putas; sed sive pudore,
sive stupore aut pertinacia hunc quem rejiciamus errorem, noluisse hactenus
appellare Jansenianum. Hoc tantum, mi Annate, potes dicere, si te ipse audire
volueris, nec a ratione desciscere. At hoc tamen cave ne dicas: nam eo si
descenderis, hoc ipso pax erit constituta quam odisti. Parum enim admodum hac
accusatione movebuntur adversarii tui, facilemque de se palmam hac in part
tibi praebebunt, ac te in hac victoriae specie quam voles exultare impune
permittent. Itaque per eos licet ut debellati Jansenii sibi trophaeum erigat
Societas: licet ut eos bardos, stupidos, pertinaces appellet. Desinat modo
commentitiae haereseos formidine Ecclesiam solicitare. Quin etiam, nisi plane
sis intractabilis, facile erit de reliquis transigere. Quid enim restat cum
tuum illum sensum Jansenianum omnes damnent? Hoc unum scilicet, ut eum
Jansenianum omnes appellent. Leviculum negotiums jam enim de syllabis agitur,
non de sensu. Sed vin tibi expeditam ostendi viam, mi Pater, qua non aegre
omnes adduxeris; ut te de Jansenii sensu recte sensisse non inviti, sed ultro
fateantur. Dignere, mi Pater, dubitationibus illorum occurrere, and quosdam ab
ipsis evellere scrupulos quibus ab hac opinione retardantur: hos ne ignores,
sincere and simpliciter hic expromam.

XIX.
Calvini doctrinam videtur damnare Jansenius.
MAgnum postulas ut Jansenium Calvino succinere fateamur. Ego contra, levem
hanc operam a te exigo, ut patienter auscultes, cur hoc creditu valde sit
arduum. Difficile est enim, mi Pater, Catholico Antistiti eam sententiam
tribuere q^am express damnat and rejiicit. Ubinam, inquis, id facit Jansenius?
Tom. 3. mi Annate, lib. 8. cap. 21. Haec sunt, inquit, quae Ecclesia in
Calvino, quantum ad hanc materiam gratiae and liberi arbitrii, improbavit.
Primum est, quod Calvinus negat esse in homine boni and mali electionem, etc.
Secundum est, quod Calvinus doceat gratiam ita movere hominem ut non sit ei
liberum resistere. Sic enim loquitur: Voluntatem Deus movet, non qualiter
multis seculis traditum est and creditum, ut nostrae postea sit electionis
motioni aut obtemperare aut refragari. Augustino vero Dominus ita movet
voluntatem, ut quamvis infallibiliter convertatur and operetur, possit tamen
motioni Dei refragari aut obtemperare, seu, ut Concilium Tridentinum loquitur,
illi dissentire si velit. Potentia quippe dissentiendi non repugnat actuali
gratiae motioni and consensui, quamvis fieri nequeat ut actualis dissensus cum
actuali Dei motione jungatur. Ecce Calvini dogma express damnatum, ut
Ecclesiae and Augustino contrarium. Ecce sub actuali gratia permanentem
dissentiendi potestatem.

XX.
Thomistarum doctrina a Jansenio explanata and comprobata.
NEc vero hoc uno loco, sed integris capitibus ex professo docet and inculcat,
and in primis capite superiori, ubi sic Thomistarum doctrinam explanat, ut vix
ulli Thomistae eam luculentius exposuerint. Dicimus igitur, inquit, liberum
arbitrium quantumcunque vehementi atque efficaci gratiae delectatione
praeventum atque determinatum ad faciendum bonum, adhuc tamen posse bonum
tantum non facere, sed etiam malum. Verum est enim istud, non quidem in sensu
composito, ut vulgo dici solet, sed in sensu diviso; nimirum, quia eodem
tempore, quo voluntatis arbitrium sub gratiae delectatione efficaciter eam
movente positum est, imo quo etiam actum voluntatis bonum facit, est in eadem
voluntate potestas illud non faciendi, imo peccandi; non quod cessatio ab actu
quem tunc elicit, aut actuale peccatum cum gratiae delectantis influxu
consistere possit, quod sensus compositus postularet; sed quia cessandi and
peccandi potestas cum eadem gratia simul in eodem voluntatis arbitrio conjungi
potest. Nam quamvis duo actus contrarii sint oppositi, and in eadem voluntate
simul esse non possint, potestates tamen ad opposita non sunt oppositae, nec
sibi invicem, nec actibus oppositis, and in eodem simul subjecto sive agente,
sive quiescente commorantur. Sic ergo voluntas quantumcunque gratiae suavitate
capiatur, potest non agereid quo rapitur: quia veram non agendi potentiam etiam
sub gratia rapiente retinet; quamvis fieri nequeat, ut ipsa non actio cum
gratiae operatione in eadem simul voluntate copuletur. Quin etiam Jansenius
diserte asserit hanc esse mentem Trid. Concilii. Attend enim quid adjungat:
Sic etiam juxta Tridentinum homo recipiens inspirationem, illam abjicere
potest: and liberum arbitrium a Deo motum potest dissentire si velit.

XXI.
Alvaris doctrina Jansenio consona.
QUaeso igitur, Pater Annate, hunc laborem suscipe, ut aliquo discrimine hanc
Jansenii doctrinam a vulgari Thomistarum mente secernas. Id enim perdifficile
videtur. Quid enim aliud Jansenius, quam quod Alvarez his verbis disp. 115. n.
3. and 4. Potentia ad unum actum non repugnat potentiae ad actum contrarium,
nec etiam repugnat actui contrario? Actus autem contrarii rep^nant inter se in
eodem subjecto. Et infra: No ^andum secundo, quod cum dicitur potentiam liberam
esse, quae, positis omnibus requisitis ad operandum potest operari and non
operari, etiam in sensu composito, hoc dupliciter intelligi potest: primo, ut
compositio fiat inter praerequisita ad operandum, and potentiam operandi and
non operandi; and tunc sensus est, quod potentia ad operandum and non operandnm
stat simul in eodem subjecto cum antecedenter praerequisitis ad talem
operationem; and hic sensus verissimus est. Secundo modo potest intelligi, ita
ut compositio fiat inter antecedenter praerequisita ad operandum talem actum,
and carentiam talis actus, and tunc sensus est, quod omnia praerequisita, etam
ex part Dei, ad operandum talem actum particularem, and carentia ejusdem
actus, seu actus contrarius, possint esse aut aliquando sint simul in eodem
subjecto. In hoc sensu intendimus praedictam definitionem impugnare. Et disp.
92. cum Molinistarum sententiam sic expressisset, Quidam dixerunt, quod stante
in homine quocunque auxilio praevenientis gratiae secundum omnem realem
virtutem and perfectionem quam habet ut venit a Deo, possit etiam in sensu
composito dissentire and non converti. Mox number. 4. subjicit: Contraria
sententia vera est, and de mente Sancti Thomae, omniumque Doctorum quos supra
adduximus. Idemque disp. 74. number. 6. Liberum arbitrium motum a Deo auxilio
efficaci, non potest illi dissentire in sensu composito, sed in sensu diviso,
ut inferius patebit. Sequeretur enim quod voluntas Dei esset inefficax, and
impedibilis per hominis voluntatem: quod, ut Augustinus dicit, and nos supra
ostendimus, est impossible. Vides, mi Pater, non levibus causis adductos
fuisse, qui cum Patre Palavicino senserunt, nihil ab Alvare circa quinque
propositiones discrepare Jansenium. Tu tamen, ut ingeniosus ^, quaedam certe
discrimina deteges, ut nullus jam scrupulus a damnando Jansenio quemquam
retrahat.

XXII.
Occurritur argutiis Annatinis.
NEc vero me ad eam quaestionem pe^traxeris, mi Pater, utrum potestas
dissentiendi, quae cum gratia efficaci cohaeret, sit sufficiens, completa,
proxima. Hanc enim uno verbo sic incido: Voces illae, ut notat Alvares disp.
117. n. 11. ambiguae sunt, and alium apud Thomistas, alium apud Molinistas
significatum habent. Apud hos ea demum dicitur potestas sufficiens, quae nihil
praerequirit ut in actum prodeat. Apud illos autem, etiam ea quae nunquam cum
actu conjungitur. Itaque si illis verbis exprimas eam potestatem quae cum
effectu aliquando conjungatur, quo sensu haec verba solet usurpare Jansenius,
certum est eam dissentiendi potestatem, quae cum gratia efficaci remanet, nec
proximam, nec sufficientem esse; nunquam enim cum actualli dissensu
conjungitur, quamdiu gratia perseverat. At si quamvis aliam potestatem in actu
primo cogites, per me licet ut eam sufficientem, sufficientissimam, completam,
completissimam, plenam, plenissimam, expeditam, expeditissimam dicas, and, si
velis, trecenta alia nomina excogites, dummodo gratiae efficaci nunquam actu
and effective dissentiatur. Omnino ad istas cavillationes semel resecandas in
secunda Disquisitione jam dixi, potentias illas nunquam cum actu conjunctas in
summo gradu me semper constituere. Itaque, mi Pater, justis gratia efficaci
instructis potentiam non agendi quibussibet nominibus ornatam tribue quantum
voles: and iisdem gratia efficaci distitutis quamlibet been agendi potentiam
largire. Dummodo enim efficaci per se, and non exscientia media, gratiae
neminem actu diffentire, and sine illa neminem been agere fatearis, nihil
omnino sententiae nostrae adversabetis.

XXIII.
Cuivis Theologo non licet quemlibet Jansenii locum pro arbitrio damnatarum
propositionum loco supponere, idque temerarie ab Annato tentatum.
NII necesse arbitror, mi Annate, in invidiosa, and, nisi fallor, infrugifera
facti quaestione operose versari, ac tuum illum indiculum diligentius excutere,
in quo tu praepostere quaedam Jansenii loca cum 5. propositionibus quasi sensu
congruentia componis, quamquam hoc recte and salva summi Pontificis
Episcoporumque reverentia poteram. Licet enim illi proprium and rigorosum 5.
propositionum sensum in Jansenio extare significent; non tamen cuivis privato
Theologo eam licentiam dederunt, ut quemlibet Jansenii locum pro damnatis
propositionibus substitueret. Imo potius hoc omnino fieri non licere innuunt
Galliae Episcopi, qui in sua Narratione propositionum sensum non aliquo
peculiari loco contineri, sed ex totius doctrinae compage resilere asserunt.

Multo minus licet, mi Annate, quod tu fecisti, Augustini loca pro damnatis
propositionibus supponere, ipsa foede mutilare and corrumpere. Multo minus
licet Lessianas sententias distinctis apud Jansenium characteribus expressas,
and ab omnibus Thomistis in Lessii sensu rejectas, a summo Pontifice
consecratas contendere. Verum minutiorem illam Disquisitionem nunc omittemus.
Interim quaedam generaliora hic annotabo, quibus si responderis, tum ad
pressiorem disputationem fortasse descendemus.

XXIV.
Propositiones in Jansenio totidem verbis extare asseruit Annatus, nec promisso
satisfacit.
IN primis, P. Annate, illud me male habet, quod non satis hic tuam ipse
liberas fidem. Ecquid enim excidit tibi quam magnifice olim palam praedicaveris
in Cavillis quinque illa damnata capita esse propositiones individuas and
singulares totidem verbis in Jansenio contentas? Aut nobis igitur totidem illa
verb read, vel inconsultum te promissorem fatere. At iniqui sumus qui a te
totidem illa verba exigamus. Quasi vero iniquum sit, id a te exigere, quod tu
promisisti, quodque omnibus semper seculis usurpatum est. Ecquod enim exemplum
afferes, assignatas nominatim alicui scriptori nonnullas propositiones tanquam
ex ejus libris excerptas, nisi totidem verbis ab illo scriptae essent?

XXV.
Annati in assignandis aequivalentibus propositionibus inconstantia.
FRustra igitur, mi Pater, ad aequivalentes propositiones confugis, omissis
illis totidem verbis, quae nobis representare debebas. Verum in his quoque, ne
quid gravius dicam, parum felix es. Primum enim illud explicare decuerat, quod
multos diu torsit, and etiamnum torquet. Si revera in Jansenio erant
propositiones damnatis aequivalentes, cur non illae potius Jansenii verbis
expressae summo Pontifici oblatae sunt? Expediendum tibi ante omnina fuerat, mi
Annate, intricatum istius consilii mysterium.

Sed quae tandem sunt illae tuae propositiones aequivalentes? Vagae, incertae,
volaticae, sine certa sede ac domicilio: novae singulis annis priscis exclusis
sese ostentant, mox, quasi partibus suis peractis, e proscenio se subtrahunt,
and aliis locum dant. Itaque, mi Annate, anno 1654. alias plane propositiones
aequivalentes attulisti, his depulsus ad alias nunc confug^s. Verum, ut tunc
tibi me non debuisse credere res ipsa docuit, sic nihil satis firmum video, cur
tibi nunc credam. Quid si enim ad duos annos alia loca Jansenii proferas, an
tunc quo que tecum sententia mutanda erit? Non omnibus, mi Annate, tam mobile
ac desultorium jud cium contigit. Propria haec virtus tua, quam tibi non
invidemus. Praestat ergo diutius expectare dum in certis Jansenii locis
constiteris: nec tu nobis hanc dilationem denegare potes.

XXVI.
Vitiosae Annati argumentationes.
ESt aliud, mi Pater, quod valde in illo tuo inlice eruditi homines
reprehendunt; infirma scilicet and imbellis argumentandi ratio: nam si quis
illud omne quod postulas tibi concedat, nihil tamen omnino promoveris. Acc
modari, inquis, po^est damnata ^um propositionum significatus certis, ill^s
Jansenii locis. M^lti negant. Sed quid tum, mi Pater? Accommodati potesi
Arianorum haeresis his Scriptura verbis: Pater major me est. Ergo revera illa
Scripturae verba continent Arianam haeresim. Accommodari potest sensus secunda
propositionis damnatae, Gratiae interiori nunquam resistitur, his verbis S.
Augustini, Gratia Christi a nullo duro cord respuitur, quia ideo tribuitur, ut
cordis duritia primitus auferatur. Ergo accomodandus. Sentisne quam ista male
colligantur? Nihil igitur haberes, etiamsi illud impetrasses, istis Jansenii
verbis damnatarum propositionum sensum accommodari posse. Illud, illud, mi
Annate, probandum est, hunc damnatum sensum verbis illis suis a Jansemo
accommodatum esse Quis enim scriptor Catholicus tam accurate locutus est, ut
nonnunquam ipsius verbis non perversus aliquis sensus affingi possit?

Exemplo eritille locus Jansenii, quem ut quartae propositioni consentaneum
affers, ex tom. 1. l. 8. c. 6. In hoc ergo, inquit, propr^e Massiliensium error
situs est, quod aliquid primaevae libertatis reliquum putarent, qua sicut Adam,
si voluisset, p^terat perseveranter operari bonum ita la sus homo saltem
credere p sset si vellet; neuter tamen absque interioris gratiae adjutorio,
cujus usus vel abusus relictus esset in un uscujusque arbitrio and potestate.
Huic tu loco sensum quartae propositionis aptas, nempe Calvinianum, quasi
Jansenius hic dicere voluerit, Semipelagianos ideo fuisse haereticos, quod
gratiam talem^sse vellent, cui possit humana voluntas resistere vel
obtemperare: Fatentur, mi Annate, adversarii tui, omni gratiae resisti and
obtemperari posse, sive illa fit efficax, sive inefficax. Efficaci enim semper
obtemperatur, and nihilominus semper resisti potest: inefficaci contra, cum
sola est, semper resistitur, semper obtemperari potest. Hoc si neget Jansenius,
errat. Sed unde concludis hoc ab ipso Jansenio negatum? Potest, inquis, illius
verbis accommodari sensus Calvinianus. At potest etiam accommodari sensus
Catholicus, nempe gratiae usum vel abusum non esse voluntati Moliniano modo
subjectum: ita ut eadem gratia pro solo nutu voluntatis modo inefficax sit,
modo efficax sine ulla alia Dei open. Hic sensus, mi Annate, ita Catholicus est,
ut contrarium Semipelagiani erroris damnaverit tota Congregatio de Auxiliis in
tuo Molina.

Haec propositio, inquit, and doctrina Patris Molinae, quatenus d cet
efficaciam auxilii divini pend^re ab effectu and liberate arbitrii humani, non
autem ab ipso auxilio prout a Deo venit, and ex modo motionis divinae, videtur
tradita a Semipelagianis, ut licet videre in Epistola S. Hilarii ad ^.
Augustinum: asseritur autem a Molina contra expressam sententiam. S. Augustini
lib. de corr. and great.

Demus, mi Pater, utrumque sensum admittere verba Jansenii. Sint ergo haeretica
si cum Calvino potentiam dissentiendi negent: sed Catholica erunt si cum
Congregatione de Auxiliis Molinisticam gratiam Semipelagiani erroris accusent.
At tu cur tuo jure in pejorem partem accipis? Cur ad Calvini sensum detorques?
Debueras ergo aliqua loca proferre, ex quibus constaret Jansenium haec verba
Calviniano sensu usurpasse. Nihil enim certius hoc principio: Ex solis verbis
quae duplicem sensum habere possunt, quorum alter verus sit, alter falsus,
constare non potest, malo illa sensu accipienda.

Disce igitur^, mi Pater, accuratioris dialecticae leges. Si velis hunc locum
quem profers, haereticum probare, alia conquire, quibus doceas non solum hic
Molinam rejectum esse a Jansenio, sed Calvini errorem comprobatum, quod ex
solis illis locis, ut multum, ambiguis nunquam elicies. Omnino enim in
Semipelagianis solum videtur culpare Molinismum, ut cum tom. 3. lib. 3. c. 1.
constituta Molinianae gratiae notione, in eo praecise quod nullum aliud Dei
auxilium requirat, sic deinceps Semipelagianorum exprimit errorem: Pro scripti
sunt Massil^enses non aliam ob causam nisi quia tale auxilium homini sufficere
putarent, adeoque Nullum aliud adjutorium ad credendum actu ex part Dei esse
necessarium.

XXVII.
Damnati quinque propositionum sensus genuinae notae.
FRustra sensum illum damnatarum propositionum in Jansenio quaeris, mi Annate,
nisi prius damnatum illarum sensum qualis sit, noveris. Hunc vero, ne erremus,
quibusdam notis indicarunt tum summus Pontifex, tum Episcopi Galliae; quas
notas ubi non repereris, ibi scito sensum illum damnatum minime reperiri. Has
etsi jam delibavi prima Disquisitione, tamen iterum hic clarius indicabo, ut ex
his eruditi lectores de tuo indiculo possint statuere.

PRIMA NOTA.
In primis testantur Episcopi variis narrationis suae loci^ praesertimque p.
15. hunc sensum damnatum, esse proprium and germanum istarum Propositionum
sensum. Idem loquuntur Romani Consul. tores qui semper proprium and rigorosum
sensum damnant. Hinc statuitur illud axioma:

Quaecunque propositio non continet rigorosum and proprium sensum alicujus ex
propositionibus, haec non c^n^inet sensum damnatum illius propositionis.

TERTIA NOTA.
Declarant Episcopi Galliae sensum illum damnatum esse Augustino contrarium.
Hinc elice aliud axioma:

Nulla propositio Augustino and Jansenio communis co^tinet damnatum
propositionum sensum.

Declaret Romana Inquisitio: assentiuntur Episcopi: omnes Universitates
consentiunt, Thomistarum doctrinam Innocentii Constitutione nulla in re
violatam. Inde collige tertium axioma:

Nulla propositio Thomastis and Jansenio communis continet proprium and
damnatum sensum propositionum

QUARTA NOTA.
Speciatim declaravit summus Pontifex Innocentius gratiae efficacis doctrinam,
prout a Thomistis defenditur, minime decreto suo ulla auctoritate spoliatam, ac
de hoc capite tota Ecclesia consentit. Hinc nascitur quartum axioma:

Quacunque propositio continet solam gratiae efficacis, prout a Thomistis
defenditur, assertionem, damnatum illum seusum non continet.

QUINTA NOTA
Testantur Episcopi in narratione sua, hunc sensum damnatum a nullo ante Baium
and Jansenium esse traditum, adeoque illum omnibus Scholasticis adversari. Inde
colligo quintum axioma:

Nulla propositio Scholasticis usitata, trita, and probata continet damnatum
illum sensum propositionum.

SEXTA NOTA.
Damnatus ille sensus a summo Pontifice reprobatur, ab Episcopis proscribitur,
tota Ecclesia hereticus judicatur. Sequitur inde sextum axioma:

Nulla propositio quam vulgo Theologi nemine improbante defendunt, continet
damnatum illum sensum.

His notis, mi Annatae, probe perspectis, certius in explorando sensu Jansenii
versabere: non perspectis, semper errabis.

XXVIII.
CONCLVSIO.
MActe igitur animo, mi Pater, and cursum parum feliciter institutum felicius
persequere. Non ingratam nobis, nec Societati tuae inutilem operam navaveris si
fugitivas illas propositiones tandem elatibulis suis extraxeris. Nam quod
simpliciter and libere decendum sit, tu quoque, mi Annate, jejunius adhuc in
hoc argumento versatus es, magisque ad rudem imperitorum levitatem, quam ad
eruditorum certum limatumque judicium elaborasse videris. Sed tu^, credo, quae
per incuriam exciderunt, moni^us emendabis, and instructior redibis in
praelium. Quin ne tibi aulicis occupationibus vale districto, nimis oneris
videar imponere, unum hoc a te contendo; ut quae de prima propositione in
altera Disquisitione disputavi, refellenda suscipias: hanc enim ideo, caeteris
omissis, accuratius pertractavimus, quod ex ipsa reliquae necterentur. Ubi huic
responderis, tum tibi de quatuor aliis responsio non deerit.

Verum, si quid, ut vehementer aveo, rescribere dignetis, facito, quaeso, ut
meos sensus impetas, non alienos affingas. Questionem illam generalem, an
propositiones sint in Jansenio, necne, prorsus omitto. Sed loca illa quae
profers, damnatis propositionibus esse aequivalentiae nego. Hinc sequitur, te
propositiones in Jansenio non reperiste: non sequitur, neminem alium posse
reperiere. Fortasse id praestabunt alii acutiores and diligentiores: non enim
solus homo es, sed unus e multis. Non continebis te tamen, sat scio, quin me,
si non haereticum, certe haereseos fautorem appelles. Ast ego hoc tibi in
antecessum repono: Nemo haeresi favere potest quae nulla est: at nulla in
Ecclesia nova haeresis: nulli ergo novae haereseos fautores. Quorsum igitur tot
decreta, tot Epistolae, tot conciones, tot libelli? Nescio, mi Pater. Unum hoc
scio, quaenam ista esset haeresis, quam vos sensus Janseniani haeresim dicitis,
neminem adhuc me reperisse qui nosset. Incredibile, inquis, fictitiae haereseos
larva Ecclesiam jactari. Incredibilius, mi Pater, esse quandam haeresim, quam
nemo verbis perspicuis nec ambiguis possit exprimere, quam ignorent and qui
accusant and qui accusantur; cujusque tota vis sex syllabis, sensus Jansenii,
sine ulla certa notione and sensu contineatur. At in hac opinione vehementer,
erro. Omnino vehementer mi Pater, si erro. Add etiam ex vestris decretis,
inculpate: invincibiliter enim erro, quippe qui omnem adhibuerim diligentiam ad
novam illam haeresim detegendam, nec tamen detegere potuerim. Ita si me
inclementius objurges, vel Escobario judice confutabitur reprehensor Annatus.

FINIS,
PAVLI IRENAEI DISQVISITIO QVARTO.
Nullum fuisse inter Doctores ex utraque part Romam missos, legitimum
controversiae caput.
PRAEFATIO AD FRANCISCUM ANNATUM.
Perstingitur ejus taciturnitas, occasio scriptionis declaratur.
SIc est prorsus, mi Annate, insipienter speravimus fore ut Disquisitionum
nostrarum aculeis aliquid a te responsi eliceremus. Sed insipienter quoque illi
judicant, qui etiam silentio tuo causam praetendunt, quod indignum auctoritate
tua sis arbitratus cum ignoto host confligere. Mihi vero and de te iniquius
senti e videntur, qui tam insolens tibi fastidium tribuunt; and de ipsa re non
recte, qui te parum decore in hoc certamen descensurum putant. Enim vero si
honor spectatur tuus, lacessito tibi and vehementur tum Gallice tum Latin
exagitato, long fuit honestius respondere, quam tacre; praesertim cum tam
facilem vincendi conditionem tulissem tibi, and id modo a re, quo me victum
faterer, exegissem, ut controversiae qua hodie conflictatur Ecclaesia, certum
aliquod caput assignares. Hoc, mi Annate, cur recusaris, non alia cuiquam causa
occurit, nisi quod id te praestare posse di^fisus es.

Praeterea non ignoras scriptiunculam nostram, ac multo magis celebrem illam
decimam-octavam Provincialem epistolam, quae te, mi Pater, in magnas conjecit
angustias, multorum manibus teri, nec paucis illud persuasisse quod volebant,
nullam omnino de ullo fide dogmate contentionem in Ecclesia esse, totamque
illam Janseniani sensus haeresim meram fabulam esse, a vobis inductam, ut
adversariis vestris invidiam apud imperitos faceretis. Quam opinionem cur ex
animis hominum nolles evellere, si hoc a te fieri posse confideres?

Ergo illud propensius vero, si minus honorisicum tibi silentiam erat, utile
certe Societati tuae fuisse, e cujus commodis and loqui tuum, and tacere
metiris. Scilicet eam in non leve discrimen adduxerat incaute a te tradita
Janseniani sensus explicatio, de gratia necessitante, quae dissentiendi
potestatem auferret. Actum erat de causa tua, si tam perspicue loqui
perstitisses. Nihil illa magis quam lucem timet: nihil illi insensius, quam si
intelligatur. Unde te vehementius aiunt a Sociis tuis increpitum fuisse, quod
praepostera and incallida defensione omnes penes defensiones suas disjecisses.

Igitur, mi Annate, non ita prae studio iniqui sumus, ut susceptum tibi
prudentissimae taciturnitatis consilium a te abjici contendamus. Novimus enim
quam illud rationibus tuis opportunum, imo necessarium fuerit. Tu modo ne
succenseas, si quando nobis non idem quod tibi conducit, non eandem quoque
rationem ineamus. Tam nostra studet introspici causa, quam tua id causa
reformidat. Ergo suae saltem utilitati servire cuique sit liberum. Tibi silere
sit jus: nobis saltem hactenus loqui, ut veritatis patefactione lucem ac pacem
frustra turbatae Ecclesiae concilemus: abacto scilicet fictitiae haereseos
terriculo, quo illam jamdiu sine causa tu caeterique Sodales tui commovetis.

Adeo aurem turbas hac scriptione contentionesque non molimur, ut nihil aliud
contendamus, quam nullam omnino de fide in Ecclesia turbam, nullam inter nos
and adversarios nostros contentionem vel esse, vel fuisse. Quod argumentum cum
jam in prima Disquisitione pertractarim, cur hic uberius pertractandum censeam,
paucis aperio.

Dilucidis, ni fallor, and necessariis rationibus evici, nullum de quinque
propositionibus dissidium in Ecclesia versari, nec causam esse cur ulli in
suspicionem hae eseos vocentur, cum de ipsis dogmatis omnes consentiant, omnes
illum sensum qui dicitur Jansenianus, peraeque respuant. Illud tamen, fateor,
vehementius, mi Annate, mitabar, cur ergo Romam disceptaturi Doctores ivissent.
Nimis enim mihi ridiculum videbatur, ut vel Doctores inter se de nihilo animose
pugnaverint, vel judices de nihilo pugnari non intellexe int.

Quamobrem hoc totum quale esset inquirendi consilium cepi; opportuneque nactus
varia scripta quae utraque ex part Consultoribus aut summo Pontifici oblata
sunt, and praeterea multas eorum, qui tum Romae praesentes aderant, literas,
nondum peracto negotio scriptas, in quibus quaecunque illic facta, dicta,
agitata sunt, sigillatim recensentur; cuncta diligenter perlustravi. Hic quae
mihi ante obscura and implicata videbantur, explicata and aperta visa sunt.
Intellexi solidam initio and Theologicam fuisse contentionem de gratia efficaci
and sufficient Moliniana. Intellexi gravi and legitima a ratione Romam
perfectos Augustinianos Doctores, ut eas calamitates averterent, quas ex
confusa propositionum censura videmus accidisse. Reperi causae suae diffisos
Molinistas, clam Romae totam controversiae faciam immutasse: efficacis gratiae
oppugnatione deserta, abjectoque Molinianae patrocinio, veram disceptationis
causam penitus sustulisse; aliamque commentitiam calumniis superextructam
contentionem Consultoribus Romany and summo Pontifici obtrusisse, nec in veros
Augustini discipulos, sed in quasdam Jansenistarum larvas ab ipsis effictas
impetum fecisse. Reperi postremo: tantum artibus and gratia valuisse Jesuitas,
ut nec illae calumniae dilui, nec novae illius and fictitiae controversiae
inanitas retegi and redargui posset.

Enimvero, mi Annate, non mediocriter indolui, tamdiu accurata istarum rerum
cognitione fraudatum esse orbem Christianum; nec leviter succensui eorum
lentitudini, qui haec cum optime noverint, tamen adhuc a conficienda illa
narratione supersederunt. Sed quam recte ipsi in tanta veritatis caligine
opportunum fugandis tenebris lumen fidelibus subtrahant, ipsi viderint. Mihi
certe licere non sum arbitratus ea tacere, quae abigendo fictitiae haereseos
crimini, quo tot Catholici immeritissimo asperguntur, prorsus necessaris sunt.

Quod nos eo minus invidiose facturi videmur, quod hic nulla de Jansenio
quaestio est, sed tantum de Augustini discipulis, quos falso Jansenistatum
nomine traducunt adversarii, a quibus quinque propositionum errores removeri
adeo a summo Pontifici injurium non est, ut sit etiam honorificum and optabile.
Quid enim ad probandum Pontifice Constitutionis aequitatem validius, quam
ejusmodi esse illas propositiones, ut eas nemo in proprio sensu, and illo qui
cicitur Jansenianus, un quam defenderit? Quid summo omnium Christianorum
parenti optatius, quam filios omnes suos id ipsum de fide sentire and dicere;
nec modo nunc, sed semper circa damnata haec capita extitisse concordes?

ARTICULUS. I.
De primo statu controversiae, dum Parisiis agitabatur ante quinque
propositionum exortum.
QUo pacto Romae inter se concordes reipsa Doctores extiterint, and falso
discordes existimati sint qui Parisiis tam a criter inter se pugnaverant, hac
quarta Disquisitione retegere, and in lucem promere consilium est; quia hujus
ignoratio magnas huic toti negotio tenebras offundit.

Norunt omnes, quibus contentiones illae, quae quinque propositionum ortum
antecesserunt, auditae and perspecta sunt totam Augustinianos inter and
Molinistas contentionum fuisse; Thomistasque in illa rixa nullatenus
implicitos. Contendebant Augustiniani gratiam illam sufficientem Molinisticam,
quae nihil aliud requirit ex part Dei ut in actam prodeat, merum
Semipelagianismum esse. Contra Jesuitae and eorum gregales, nisi ejusmodi
gratia versatilis and libero arbitrio subjecta sive ad orandum, sive ad agendum
admitteretur, fatum induci, necessitatem invehi, desperationem hominibus
afferri, importunissime quiritabantur. Saepe Moinius in Scholis Sorbonicis hoc
uno discrimine Jansenium a Thomistis secrevit, quod Thomistae duriores,
horridiores, and adversus hosts suos minus tuti. Saepe de Hallerio multi
audierunt: Si contentio fiat Jansenianae and Thomisticae opinionis, istam long
crudeliorem esse, quippe quae ad hominem innocentem acerba illa humanis
sensibus gratuitae praedestinationis dogmata extenderet, quae tantum in
hominibus lapsis Jansenius admittit.

Quid vos in scholis vestris Claromontanis? Nonne apperte praedeterminationem
physicam Calvinismi insimulastis, ut propterea Sedis Apostolicae Nuncius, ne
Theses vestrae in quibus illud erat expressum, public sustinerentur,
inhibuerit?

Quid tu ipse, mi Annate? Nonne cum in quodam de scientia media libro
Calvinistis Thomistas aequiparasses, ab Academia Tholozana censura inustus es?

Quid Moinius? Nonne aliquot ante annis hanc Jansenii propositionem Romam
miserat, in ejus censuram impetraret: Nullum jam dari hominibus lapsis
adjutorium sufficiens juxta primum sensum, oc est, praeter quod nullum aliud ex
part Dei per modum principii necessarium est, ut homo velit, aut operetur,
quin simul efficax sit? Qui tum agebant ut haec propositio censura notaretur,
quid aliud quam Molinianam gratiam Apostolicae Sedis judicio san ciri
contendebant.

Ergo, mi Pater, si verum dicere velis, ante quinque propositionum exortum, de
sola efficaci gratia and sufficient Moliniana tota erat controversia.
Augustiniani pro efficaci contra Molinianam gratiam depugnabant. Vos cum
vestris asseclis pro sufficienti Moliniana contra efficacem.

Erat alia de Sancti Augustini auctoritate contentio. Hujus doctrinam sartam
tectam volebant ipsius discipuli; vos eam non obscure vellic abatis.

Quid enim aliud tendebat vester Ex-Jesuita Cornetus cum anno 1649. quo Syndici
officio fungebatur, hanc conclusionem e thesibus jam impressis eradi jussit:
Augustini doctrine m posse a quovis sine erroris periculo susti^e^i?

Quid Adamus ille vester concionator and scriptor, qui tunc temporis innumeris
concidit conviciis S. Augustinum, tanquam obscutum, intricatum, and qui nimio
Pelagianorum odio in Calvinismum impegisset: a quo scilicet discedendum erat,
ut veritas Catholica Pelagianos inter and Calvinistas interjecta retineretur.

Quid caeteri passim vestri Sodales, quibus id temporis hoc unum studio fuisse
videtur, ut Augustinum arroderent, ejusque auctoritatem elevarent?

ARTICULUS. II.
Quid de propositionibus questi sunt Augustiniani, cum primum a Corneto editae
sunt.
HIc scilicet fuit rerum status, cum famosae illae propositiones in lucem
prodierunt. Mitto refer quo pacto Nicolaus Cornetus primo invitus ad istud
inceptum adductus sit: quemadmodum secreta illa coitio coaluerit: tum quae
Comitiis illis die 1. Julii anni 1649. habitis contingerint, ut totam fabulam
prodiderit bonus senex, qui nomina Inquisitorum quos illi suggesseratis
oblitus, schedulam e sinu protulit, Doctoris Moinii manu scriptam, in qua illa
extabant. Quomodo Cornetus Doctori Jansenium subdole impeti conquerenti, ita
responderit: Non agitur de Jansenio, Domine mi. Postremo quo modo tantus
apparatus, intercessione septuaginta Doctorum, supremi Senatus auctoritate
discussus sit. Conventio denique inter Doctores facta sit, ut de istis
propositionibus tanquam a nullo prolatis auctore sileretur.

Unum dico, Doctores Augustinianos de istarum propositionem fabrica multa
questos; atque illud inprimis, fictas ad arbitrium propositiones, obscuras, and
ambiguas, in quibus veritas cum errore permixta esset: Hinc in scripto
Facultati oblato 1. Decembris 1649. a M. Petro Coppin omnium Doctorum nomine
qui huic apparatui intercesserant, propositiones vocanter ambiguae, aequivocae,
a nullo auctore, in sensu quem prae se far videntur, assertae.

2. Testati sunt veritatem illam, quam subdole involutam in quinque
propositionibus querebantur, esse dogma gratiae efficacis. Hinc liber de Gratia
victrice anno 1650. de hoc uno argumento conscriptus.

3. In praedicto sensu gratiae efficacis, propositiones istas verissimas and
orthodoxas esse contenderunt: quod non est istas propositiones defendere, sed
tantum dogma gratiae efficacis.

4. In multis aliis sensibus falsas erroneas, and haereticas esse confessi
sunt, sed qui nemine sustinerentur.

5. Detexerunt artificium Molinistarum, ambiguam censuram obtinere molientium,
quam deinde in Augustini doctrinam and efficacis gratiae dogma torquerent.

Postremo multis scriptis id ostendere laborarunt, de aequivocis
propositionibus sententiam ferri non oportere, priusquam evolutis illarum
sensibus, in falsitatis damnatione veritas implicari non possit.

De Jansenio autem quid dixerint, constare potest tum ex variis scriptis tunc
editis, tum ex subjuncto loco qui habetur in scripto cui titulus est:

Quinque propositionum de gratia; quas Facultati Theologicae Parisiensi M.
Nicolaus Cornet subdole exhibuit 1 Julii 1649. vera and Catholico expositio
juxta mentem discipulorum S. Augustini.
Has propositiones, inquiunt, esse ab libitum fictas tamdiu constabit, quamdiu
ubi, and a quo ut jacent assertae sint, demonstratum non fuerit; quod a nemine
hactenus nisi mendaciter praestitum est, nec praestari potest. Quam periculosum
autem, quam iniquum, quam inusitatum est, propositiones a nullo auctore
assertas, a nullo auditas, ad libitum fictas, examini subjicere? Primam
propositionem utcunque excipimus, quae iisdem quibus verbis in Iprensis
Episcopi opere expressa, at tamen a praecedentibus and consequentibus verbis,
quae apud Jansenium planum and rectum illius sensum declarant, dolose avulsa,
sic exhibita est ut obscura and ambigua penitus perversaeque interpretationi
obnoxia videatur: proptereaque non sine art and consilio dissimulatus est
locus Iprensis Episcopi, ne scilicet quo sensu ibi asseritur and exponitur,
tota Augustiniana, hoc est, tota Catholica, tota non alio sensu, quam qui
Gratiae per se efficacis ad singulos actus necessitatem exprimit defensa
deprehenderetur. Posterius est, quod spectat ad harum propositionum sensum,
scilicet aequivocas esse penitus and ambiguas omnes; proptereaque hinc rectae,
inde perversae; hinc Catholicae, inde erroneae and haereticae interpretationi
obnoxias. Possunt enim ad gratiae victricis and per se efficacis, ad singulos
piae voluntatis motus necessariae doctrinam singulae revocari; nec alio quam
gratiae istius per se efficacis sensu, aut ab Episcopo prensi, quantum ex ejus
operis lectione innotescit, aut a quovis alio B. Augustini discipulo defensae
sunt nunquam ab iis, ut jacent (id est in proprio significatu) assertae, ut in
libro de gratia Christi victrice satisfuse and perspicue demonstratur.

Sic Augustiniani loquebantur anno 1651. quo is libellus editus est, hoc est,
duobus ante Constitutionem annis. Unde patet quam audacter viris primariis
imposuerint, qui hanc iis fabulam persuadere veriti non sunt: Ante
Constitutionem editam, nec in Gallia, nec in Belgio dubitatum, quin quinque
propositiones Jan senii essent. Dubitatum enim non est, quin quinque illae
propositiones ad efficacem gratiam revocari possint: quod verum esse omnes
agnoscunt. Sed secluso illo sensu, qui a Pontifice utique damnatus non est, cum
a tota Ecclesia and ab ipso summo Pontifice quotidie probetur in Thomistis; in
quocunque alio sensu apud Jansenium extare nunquam agnoverunt illius defensores.

ARTICULUS II.
Censura quinque propositionum, ex Doctoris de Sainte-Beuve scriptis dictatis
in Sorbona anno 1651. deprompta.
SEd ne generatim haec tantum ad declinandam offensionem ab Augustini
discipulis dicta causari possis, mi Annate, mecum, quaeso, recognosce, censuram
in illas propositiones latam long ante Constitutionem a Doctore de
Sainte-Beuve, notissimae eruditionis, probitatis, sinceritatis viro. Hic vero,
utpote scholastico more de his propositionibus in scholis agens, enucleatius
sensum Augustianorum aperuit.

Censura primae propositionis. D sp. 1. sect. 3^.
ALii ad e^citandam invidiam in discipulos B. Augustini, alio modo contexuerunt
propositionem suam, quam postea illis imposuerunt. Dixerunt scilicet, quod hanc
propositionem Augustiniani iuentur: Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis
volentibus and conantibus secundum praesentes quas habent vires, sunt
impossibilia: deest quoque illis gratia qua possibilia fiant. De qua
propositione diximus, quod conflata per adversarios Augustinanae doctrinae, una
cum aliis quatuor, ex terminis ambiguis, aliquo sensu falsa est, and aliquo
sensu vera; [quem tamen non esse proprium and germanum satis ipse declarat.]

1. Falsa est and haeretica, si vox ista, hominibus, supponat universaliter pro
singulis hominibus, and sensus sit, quod aliqua praecepta omnibus, and singulis
hominibus, secundum praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia: nam certum
est aliquos justos servare Dei mandata.

2. Falsa est and haeretica, si voces istae, secundum praesentes quas habent
vires, significent vires quas habent justi in haec vita: nam de fide est,
justos in hac praesenti vita posse servare Dei mandata.

3. Falsa est and haeretica, si vox illa, volentibus, significet plenam and
perfectam voluntatem. Nam plene and perfect velle servare mandata non potest
justus, nisi ea servet actu.

4. Prima ejusdem pars est etiam falsa and haeretica. Nam primo homines justi
sunt liberi and viatores, adeoque capaces auxiliorum quibus mandata observent.
Illud autem non est impossible simpliciter, quod est possibile per gratia.
Secundo, Gratia sanctificans, and actualia auxilia quae habent, si parva sunt,
sunt aliquod principium propinquius observationis illorum: si magna, sunt
principium proximum.

Secunda autem pars falsa est and haeretica, intellecta de singulis justis, and
de gratia qua possibilia fiant proxima Dei mandata. Nam cum sint aliqui justi
in hac vita, qui Dei mandata observant, falsum est neminem esse justorum in hac
vita qui habeat proximam ad implenda praecepta possibilitatem. Falsa etiam est
and erronea, intellecta de aliquibus justis and de possibilitate remota: [sensu
scilicet Moliniano, quam eadem proximam dici sensu Thomistico nihil vetet] Nam
gratia sanctificans, and auxilia actualia quae habent, sunt quoddam principium
mandatorum observationis.

Est autem vera eo sensu, quod aliqua Dei praecepta aliquibus hominibus justis,
non plane ac perfect volentibus and conantibus, secundum vires quas habent in
via, cum non plene ac perfect volunt atque conantur sunt illis impossibilia
potestate proxima, [id est, quae complectitur omnia ad agendum necessaria, and
excludit necessitatem efficacis auxilii ad agendum,] deest quoque gratia
[efficax scilicet, nam sufficientem: Thomisticam in istis justis supra agnovit]
qua possibilia proxime fiant.

Proximam enim potentiam quam negat, intellige semper Moliniano modo, praeter
quam nihil aliud requiritur; nam hoc sensu hanc vocem semper usurpat. Aliam
enim potentiam, quam Thomistae etiam completam vocant, cur cum ipsis non
admitteret, cum illa nihil obsit gratiae efficacis necessitati, quam solam ille
and caeteri Augustiniani tuenter? Praesertim cum idem Doctor infra nihil
virtutis deesse gratiae excitanti ad effectum producendum fateatur, and ob
solam resistentiam effectu carere: quod est illam asserere in actu primo
completam.

Censura secundae propositionis. Ex eadem sectione.
QUod spectat ad istam propositionem: Interiori gratia nunquam resistitur, quae
secunda est ex quinque quas composuerunt adversari doctrinae S. Augustini, and
discipulis ejus tanquam auctoribus objecerunt, idem dico quod de aliis,
scilicet aequivocam esse; secundum aliquem sensum falsissimam, secundum alium
verissimam.

Falsissima est sub aliquo sensu; quia sub aliquo sensu verum est, quod
interiori gratiae semper resistitur. Prob. Omnis gratia interio est habitualis
vel actualis; and omnis resistentia est cum victoria vel sine victoria.
Resistitur habituali gratia ab homine cum victoria supra gratiam, quando peccat
mortaliter: nam qui peccat mortaliter, agit contra gratiam habitualem, adeoque
illi resistit. Resistitur gratiae habituali sine victoria super illam, quando
concupiscentia insurgente and tentate, voluntas non consentit.

Gratia actualis vel est intellectus, vel voluntatis. Gratiae interiori
intellectus resistitur cum victoria quae de illa reportatur, quando sola est:
quia ejusdem est conditionis quoad hoc cum gratia exteriori legis, quae si sola
est, obest occasionaliter, etc. Gratia voluntatis vel est parva, vel magna:
parva resistitur, sed ita ut aliqua ex part, sed majori superetur, minori
superet. Superatur, quia non ponit effectum, quem in subjecto minus resistente
ponerit: superat, quia ponit omnem effectum ad quem ordinatur a Deo: facit
velle, licet non plene, sed imperfecte. Verissima autem est haec propositio,
intellecta de gratia quantumlibet magna vel parva, si per hanc vocem,
resistere, intelligatur ea resistentia qua conatus omnis gratia ita inanis and
vacuus fiat, ut impediatur a ponendo effectu ad quem ordinatur a Deo, [per
voluntatem nempe absolutam, ut idem Doctor indicat alio loco. Nam gratiam
frustrari eo effectu ad quem ordinetur per voluntatem antecedentem, libenter
dabunt quicunque sentiunt istam voluntatem in Deo esse formaliter.]

Censura tertiae propositionis. Eodem sectione.
EX dictis judicium patiter facile fiet de tertia propositione, ab iisdem
auctoribus eodem spiritu fabricata ex equivocis, and calumniose imposita
Augustinianis. Talis est: Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae
non requiritur libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

Scilicet prima pars ejus, procedens de homine puro viatore, and non
comprehensore, falsus est, and haeretica. Nam libertas voluntatis in genere,
est libertas a necessitate extrinseca: quod aurem convenit superiori, convenit
ejus inferioribus.

2. Intellecta de liberate electionis, quae est libertas per quam meremur in
via, and eadem intellecta de necessitate ab interiori inclinatione procedente,
sive intrinseca, quae sit absoluta, est falsa. Nam libertati electionis
essentialis est indifferentia ex part potentiae: [activae scilicet, non
passivae, ut late idem Doctor probat:] talis autem indifferentia opponitur
necessitati inte iori absolutae, qualis est ea necessitas qua Deus amatur a
Beatis.

Verissima est autem de liberate electionis, and necessitate procedente ab
interiori inclinatione, quae sit duntaxat hypothetica. Ratio est, quia posita
motione divinae gratiae, sequitur necessario [hypothetice scilicet] agere
voluntatem, sed suo modo, and absque essentialis libertatis suae indifferentiae
nocumento; sed tantum cum defectu indifferentiae ex part actionis, quae est
illi accidentalis duntaxat.

Posterior vero pars propositionis istius falsissima est eo sensu, quod omnis
actus voluntatis non coactus, sed spontaneus, sit sufficiens ad meritum and
demeritum: alias motus primo primi essent demeritorii. Secundo, Eo sensus quo
coactum dicitur, quod fit a principio externo non concurrente, sed renitente
passo: alias eo ipso quo vis ista inferretur voluntati, ut tamen ageret in bono
sive in malo, posset demereri: quod absurdam esse docet Augustinus, ubi de fato
Mathematicorum, and vi illata bonae naturae per malam in haeresi Man chaeorum.

Verissima autem est, si liberum esse a coactione sit aliud, non tantum quod
vim non pure pariter, quae prima species est coactionis, ut in lapide cum
sursum projicitur: non tantum quod vim patiter and agit; sed modo
praeternaturali, ut in lapide decidente sponte cum propellitur, ut majori
decidat impetu, que est secunda species coactionis: sed etiam quod non est
determinatum a natura, sed se suo modo determinat, quae est tertiae species
coactionis. Nam apud SS. Patres quod est determinatum a natura, aliquando
coactum appellatur. [Vides quam in aliena tantum, and minime propria
significatione veram esse agnoscat, in aliis falsam concedat.]

Censura quartae propositionis. Ex. 1. disp. sect. 1. art. 2.
EX dictis patet, quale judicium ferendum sit de hac propositione:
Semipelagiani admittebant praeve^ientis gra ie interi^ris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei, and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere, vel
obtempe^are. Quam propositionem una cum aliis quatuor B. Augustini discipulis
calumniose imputant aliqui Molinae fautores.

Dicimus igitur, quod ista propositio quibus libuit ab ipsis contexta terminis
aequivoca est, sub quibusdam sensibus vera, and falia sub aliis. Prior ejus
pars absolute falsa est, intellecta de Semipelagianis omnibus: quia certum est
ex S. Prospero, Epistola ad Augustinum, quod aliqui ipsorum pelagianizabant,
non agnoscentes illam gratiam ad initium fidei a gratia exteriori legis atque
doctrinae. Eadem prior pars est vera de alio genere Semipelagianorum,
intellecta de gratia interiori intellectus; hanc enim a Semipelagianis istis
non negatam fuisse sole clarius est.

Rursum vera est, intellecta de gratia voluntatis, quae commissa sit, seu
subdita libero arbitrio; seu de auxilio sin^ quo non, quod dat homini posse si
velit, sed non velle quod possit, ut probationes nostrae evincunt. Sed falsa
est, intellecta de gratia voluntatis, cui sit commissum seu subditum liberum
arbitrium; seu de auxilio quo, eo scilicet quod dat homini velle quod possit,
and non tantum posse si velit. Talis siquidem gratiae necessitatem ad initium
fidei non admittebant Semipelagiani.

Quod ad posteriorem vero ejus partem, scilicet quod in hoc erant haeretici,
quod vellent tam gratiam talem esse, cu^p sset human, voluntas resistere, vel
obtemperare; dicimus illam simpliciter lo quendo falsum esse and haereticam.
Nam de side est ex Conc. Trid. homines posse gratiae interiori voluntatis
resistere, vel obtemperare. [Quid before quid, Pontificiae Constitutioni
congruentius.]

Censura quintae propositionis. Ex disp. 5. art. 7.
REcenset primo v^rios sensus istius propositionis, Christus pro omnibus
mortuus est; septem videlicet Catholicos, and unum Semipelagianum.

Primus est, quod Christus pro omnium hominum salute mori voluerit, voluntate
quadam antecedente, seu velleitate, u^ colligitur ex S. Thoma.

2. Quod mortuus sit pro omnibus and singulis, quoad sufficientiam pretii.

3. Quod mortuus sit pro omnibus and singulis hominibus, ratione causae and
naturae communis.

4. Quod mortuus sit non pro singulis generum, sed pro generibus singulorum.

6. Quod mortuus sit pro omnibus fidelibus, co sensu, quod nullus est fidelium
qui non sit particeps alicujus effectus mortis Christi, maxim que redemptionis
a peccato originali.

7. Christus mortuus est pro singulis hominibus, modo ipsi credant, and se
disponant ad gratiam adoptionis recipiendam.

Sensus Semipelagianus est, ita mortuum esse pro singulis hominibus, modo ipsi
credant, ut fides in omnium nutu sine efficaci gratia sit posita; quod refellit
eruditus Professor variis locis and praesertim articulo praecedente.

His positis, suam de quinta propositione censuram subjungit his verbis:

Ex his patet quale judicium ferendum sit de hac propositione quam objiciunt
Molinae defensores Augustini discipulis quasi suam, cum tamen ipsi ad
excitandum invidiam ad libitum eam composuerint: Semipelagianum est Christum
pro omnibus ommnino hominibus mortuum esse aut sanguinem fudisse. Scilicet
Semipelagianum non est; imo maxim Catholicum id dicere in sensibus Catholicis
a nobis propositis, licet id sit Semipelagianum dicere in sensu
Semipelagianorum.

En Professoris eruditi sincerum de quinque propositionibus judicium, ante
Constitutionem Innocentii decimi editum, cui congruunt omnia illa scripta tunc
temporis ab Augustinianis evulgata and maxim istarum propositionum explicatio
Catholica excusa Parisiis anno 1651. itemque sensum distinctio summo Pontifici
exhibita.

ARTICULUS IV.
De gratia sufficient Thomistica quomodo locuti sint Augustiniani Doctores.
SEcunda Disquisitione planum feci quo pacto nanc gratiam universim Jansenius e
disputatione removerit, and speciatim in volentibus and conantibus admiserit.
Operae pretium est hic ostendere quomodo illi quos Jansenistas Moliniani
dicunt, hanc quaestionem ante Constitutionem omnino seposuerint and attingere
noluerint.

Inprimis Auctor Apologiae Patrum diserte testatur quam gratiam sufficientem
impugnat, eam Molinianam esse, non Thomisticam, graviterque castigat Doctorem
Morellium, quod Thomistas quasi gratiae sufficientis patrones auxilio
accersivisset cum illi aliusmodo gratiam sufficientem admittant a Moliniana,
quam Augustiniani aversabantur, long diversam.

Clarius adhuc Auctor libri de Initio piae voluntatis cap. 1. page 2. Non hic
impugno, inquit, eam gratiam sufficientem, praeter quam alia ex se efficax
necessaria dicitur ad singulos pietatis actus sed gratiam versatilem, in manu
liberi arbitrii positam, ut a S. Augustini and Ecclesiae doctrina omnino
alienam rejicio. Nullum esse talem ut a liberi arbitrii consensu effectam
sortiatur contendo. Aliquam autem necessariam ad singulos pietatis motus,
conatus, and actus, quae ex se sit efficax, assevero. Intellige ergo me, cum
gratiae sufficientis, flexibilis, vel aequilibris, versatilis, anticipitis, in
manu liberi arbitrii positae, nuncupatione utor, gratiam eam Mlcinisticam
designare, quae effectum suum a voluntatis consensu Deo efficaciter non
praemovente, fortiatur.

Ubinam igitur totam reponit controversiam? Audi, quaeso, Lector, and intellige
de quo tunc certaretur. Constat totam Molinistas inter and sancti Augustini
discipulos controversiam in hoc sitam esse: An dentur aliquae gratiae actuales
internae, cor and voluntatem intus afficientes, quae vi sua bonam voluntatem
non efficiant: sed quas secundum se indifferentes and aequilibres, liberum
lapsi hominis arbitrium ad effectum seu ad profectum operis perducat.

Vides, mi Annate, Augustinianos semper seposuisse illam de generali gratia
sufficient quaestionem, nec omnino prompsisse quid de ea sentirent, excepto
quod Iansenius ab Augustino illam non difficile admissum iri proficetur. Hujus
autem cautionis ea causa fuit, quod semper eas quaestiones a^tingere veriti
sint, ex quibus parum fructus posset in Ecclesiam redundare. Talis erat haec de
generali gratia sufficient quaestio, qualem omnibas etiam infidelibus nonnulli
Thomistae concedunt. Nam quae cunque demum sit ea gratia, non ea certe est quam
orant sibi fideles, and quam infidelibus petunt. Non enim petunt sterilem
quandam been agendi potestatem, sed perunt omnino ut been agant, ut saepe ait
Augustinus.

Accedit quod talis gratiae explicatio parum admodum prodest ad compescendas
hominum voces, divinae legis implendae potestatem sibi defuisse querentium.
Nihil enim querulos illos consolatur potestas alterius auxilii ad agendum
indiga. Unde Sylvius insignis Theologus Academiae Duacensis 1. 2. q. 109. a. 4.
Sive detur aliqua gratia, quae tantum est sufficiens, non efficax, sive non
detur; ea secundum rei veritatem est impertinens ad salvandum; quod homo possit
divina mandata servare: partim quia ut ipse illa servet, ea gratia sola non
sufficit; sed oportet quod etiam adsit gratia efficax quae a solo, Deo pendet,
and gratis seu sine merito tribuitur: partim quia juxia communem sententiam
gratia sufficiens non semper datur, and tamen homines viatores semper possunt
divina mandata servare; ac per consequens etiam tunc quando non habent gratiam
sufficientem. Ergo ut observatio praeceptorum dicatur esse possibilis, non est
necesse venire eo ut dicatur quod habeant gratiam sufficientem. Haec ille long
ante natas ex occasion libri Janseniani de gratia contentiones.

Erat aliud in istius gratiae tractatione periculosum, ipsum scilicet vocabulum
sufficientis gratiae, quod facillime maximeque ab imperitis in perversum sensum
detorquetur. Unde liquet apud Patres and S. Thomam nunquam illud illa notione
usurpatum qua usurpatur a nonnullis Thomistis; nec sufficiens olim dictum, nisi
quod ad agendum reipsa sufficeret. Quam ob causam Lovaniensis Facultas hoc
nomen soli demum efficaci gratiae impertit. Gratia, inquiunt in justificatione
censurae, ad conversionem sufficiens, ipsa convertit; quae vero non convertit,
non sufficit.

His de causis istam gratiam prorsus omittere satius plerique Augustiniani
duxerunt; adeoque talis gratiae defensio vel impugnatio nunquam capitalis
Augustinianae doctrinae pars ab ipsis constituta. Adstrueres illam vel non
adstrueres, nihil ad cardinem causae, nec ad Augustinianae doctrinae summam.

Sed illud animadversione dignissimum, Iesuiticae causae defensores, Hallerium
scilicet, and socios diserte in scriptis Romae oblatis esse testatos, nolle se
gratiam sufficientem generalem adstruere, sed prorsus intactas relinquere has
quaestiones, utrum Christus morte sua gratiam sufficientem infantibus,
obduratis, infidelibus, promeruerit. Sic enim loquuntur super quinta
propositione in scripto Consultoribus oblato, quod tandem cum quibusdam aliis
in Augustinianorum manus venit: Hoc sensu examinata propositione, intactae
relinquuntur difficultates quae occurrunt circa infantes sine baptismo
decedentes, aut infideles, aut obduratos. Nam qui dicit Christum non pro solis
praedestinatis esse mortuum, non dicit consequenter pro quolibet reprobo in
particulari mortuum esse: sed sufficit quod pro aliquibus saltem reprobis.

Atque haec de gratia generali, quatenus infidelibus, obduratis, generatim
conceditur, Augustinianorum circumspectio fuit: sed aliter se gesserunt in
asserenda eadem gratia respectu justorum. Multi enim gravissimique Doctores eam
gratiam in infidelibus non admiserunt. At fidelibus eam prorsus negare, quod ad
rem ipsam nemo potest, qui intelligat quid eo nomine Thomistae significant.
Intelligunt enim motionem Spiritus Sancti, cujus instinctu volunt is imperfect
as quasdam voluntares seu velleitates eliciat, quibus ita ad perfectiores actus
disponatur, ut nisi ipsa resisteret, plenum illae gratiae effectum obtinerent.
Resistit a^tem semper, inquiunt Thomistae, nisi voluntas ad perfect
consentiendum ^fficaciter applicetur. Talem gratiam qui prorsus respuat, omnino
non dicam Catholicus, sed sanus non sit, cum eam experiri quisque saepe
potuerit.

Certum igitur talem gratiam admisisse Augustinianos, quam tamen libentius
inefficacem appellabant quam sufficientem, ut videre est in secunda Apologia
Iansenii lib. 2. cap. 22. page 273. Ideo autem non appellabant sufficientem;
quia eo nomine vulgus intelligit eam gratiam praeter quam nihil aliud praere
quiritur ex part Dei ad been agendum and plene consentiendum: non quo
negaverint unquam talem gratiam sensu Thomistico sufficientem dici posse. Quare
Professor Sorbonicus D. de Sainte-Beuve, tametsi ut qui maxim Augustinianus,
non dubitavit tamen hanc gratiam in justis, seclusa nominis ambiguitate, admi
tere; Ejus verba describam, ne tu, mi Annate, causari possis, post
Constitutionem demum de hac gratia admittenda Augustinianos cogitasse. Sic ergo
ille in scriptis dictatis anno 1651. disp. 5. a. 6.

Legitima est divisio gratiae voluntatis propriae status naturae lapsae per
Christum Dominum reparatae, in gratiam sufficientem and efficacem, si per
gratiam sufficientem intellig^tur gratia parva, ea scilicet quae cum sit
efficax ejus effectus ad quem proxime ordinatur, and quem Deus ABSOLUTA
VOLUNTATE [audi absolutam voluntatem] intendit; non est tamen efficax ejus
effectus quem Deus absoluta voluntate non intendit, and ad quem ordinatur,
quantum est de se [and antecedente si velis voluntate] and si per gratiam
efficaem intelligatur gratia magna, ea scilicet quae est efficax ultimi
effectus, quem Deus absoluta sua voluntate intendit. Sic gratia sufficiens ea
est quae verbi gratia parit desideria parva; and parvam voluntatem
conversionis; efficax, quae convertit perfect.

Probatur, quia legitima est divisio gratiae voluntatis status praesentis, in
parvam and magnam. Augustinus illam agnovit l. de gr. and lib. arb. c. 17.
sensit in sua conversione, expressit in confessionibus suis clarissime and
eloquentissime. Haec autem quae parit desideria parva, and imbecillem dat
voluntatem, licet sit efficax ratione hujus effectus, est tamen SUFFICIENS
RESPECTU ULTERIORIS EFFECTUS; quia quod eum non ponat, NON EST DEFECTU
VIRTUTIS, [audi virtutem cui nihil deest, id est, completam in actu primo] quae
de se habet omnia quae requiruntur ad effectum illum ponendum, sed ratione
resistentiae subjecti; quia scilicet gratia victrix est, non absolute, sed
comparate duntaxat ad minorem concupiscentiam. Deus vero non intendit sua
absoluta voluntate ultimum hunc effectum poni in subjecto sic resistente. Atque
haec acceptio gratiae sufficientis pro gratia parva efficaci ejus effectus ad
quem proxime ordinatur a Deo, and efficacis sumptae pro gratia magna, est
insigniorum e Schola S. Thomae Doctorum, ut constat ex Sylvio 1. 2. q. 111. a.
3. scribente; Revera omnis gratia est efficax alicujus effectus, ejus nimirum
ad quem proxime ordinatur, and quem Deus absoluta voluntate intendit. Laudat
idem Doctor in eamdem sententiam Alvarem and Medinam, potuissetque omnes omnino
Thomistas adjungere.

ARTICULUS V.
De potestate justorum ad observanda mandata, and de possibilitate proxima,
quomodo ante Constitutionem Augustini discipuli locuti sint.
BReviter dicam, una possibilitate excepta, caeteras omnes concesserunt. Non
aliam, inquiunt in expositione propositionum ann. 1651. superius citata,
impotentiam aliquando inesse justo alicui dicit Jansenius, nisi eam quae a
gratiae per se efficacis absentia oritur, quae simul and posse proximum and
velle donat. Et paulo supra: Atque ita aliquando justus aliquis non habet
gratiam quae proximam and completissimam praecepti ut oportet observandi
potentiam donat.

Verum quia voces illae, potentiae proximae and completae, ambiguae sunt,
alioque a Thomistis, alio a Molinistis sensu accipi^ntur, dispiciendum
praeterea quid illi nomine potentiae proximae and completissimae, quam negabant
justis, intellexerint: neque enim hoc ambi^uum reliquerunt. Sed multis locis
vocibus his, posse proximi, intelligi a se significarunt possibilitatem cum
effectu; possibilitatem cum ipso velle conjunctam, ut in ista expositione
videre est; vel adhuc clarius; vel posse cui nihil necessarium deest ad
operandum; potentiam quae non indiget alio auxilio, ut in opus suum exeat. Sic
aperte Auctor scripti super quinque propositionibus, quod incipit: In nomine
Domini nostri and Dei Servatoris Christi, anno 1649 editi. In hac igitur
Christi schola faciunt profecto, quotquot possunt; non possunt vero quotquot
non faciunt, hoc est, potentia proxima and directa, QUAE ALIO INSUPER AUX LIO
NON INDIGET UT IN OPUS SUUM EXEAT. Quod identidem advertendum censeo, ne qua
hic Thomistarum sufficienti gratiae, quam admitto lubens, fiat injuria. Ex quo
liquet solam illos proximam potestatem Moliniano sensu justis negasse; and cum
aliam qualemlibet concesserint, etiam proximam potestatem sensu Thomistico
reipsa non impugnasse: licet eam remotam congruentius dici ea re sentirent,
quod alterius gratiae auxilio ad operandum indigeret.

ARTICULUS. VI.
De indifferentia quomodo locuti sint.
HIc etiam brevissime sententiam suam complexi sunt. Ex quibus patet, inquiunt
in expositione quinque propositionum, indifferentiam qualemlibet in hoc lapsae
naturae statu, ab Augustini discipulis in his quae ad salutem and finem
supernaturalem pertinent, admitti, praeter Molinisticam, quae gratiae ad
singulos pios actus necessariae efficaciam and vim propriam destruit.

Et speciatim de indifferentia Thomistica: In statu naturae laplae, inquiunt,
ad merendum and demerendum adest semper, and etiam requiritur in puris
viatoribus, indifferentia potentiae, non modo circa media, verum and circa
rectum finem, non quidem ratione libertatis aut meriti secundum se, sed ratione
status hujus and condi^ionis.

Sed quia peccandi facultas Christo prorsus abfuit, cujus statui omnino
repugnabat, ideo negarunt ad libertatem meriti and demeriti generatim and in
alio quocumque statu requiri potentiam peccandi vel ullam indifferentiam
potentiae, non ut in hominum lapsorum merito eam indifferentiam reperiri and
requiri negarent; sed ne Christus Dominus qui peccare, qui Dei praeceptis non
obsequi, qui opera sua ad Patris sui gloriam non refer non poterat, in
actibus obedientiae and dilectionis Dei, vel liber non fuisse, vel non meruisse
dicatur.

ARTICULUS VII.
Vtrum ante Constitutionem necessitantem gratiam admiserint Augustiniani.
NEcessitatis vocem non exhorret quodam sensu S. Thomas. Sic enim 1. 2. q. 112.
a. 3. Si praeparatio ad gratiam consideretur, secundum quod est a Deo movente,
tunc habet necessitatem ad id ad quod ordinatur a Deo, non quidem coactinis,
sed infallibi itatis; quia intentio Dei deficere non potest. Eodemque nomine
frequenter utitur schola Thomistarum; sed Augustiniani raro admodum, nec fere
unquam sine explicatione subjecta.

Necessitantis vero gratiae voce, quia malo animo ficta and composita est,
nusquam illos usos reperies: ac multo minus perversum illum sensum admiserunt
qui sub illa fictitia voce solet ab illius artificibus inc^udi: Necessitantis
enim gratiae voce eam intelligunt Moliniani, non modo quae infallibiliter
habeat effectum, and physice praedeterminet, sed quae tollat dissentiendi
potentiam, etiam in sensu diviso, id est, quae impedit quominus cum actu
contrario potestas remaneat. Quisquis igitur resisti and dissentiri posse
gratiae confitetur, is necessitantem gratiam repudiat. Hoc vero tam clare, tam
crebro, tam sine ambagibus Augustiniani passim praedicaverunt, ut monstro
simile videri possit ipsos in hoc capite columniam passos.

Inprimis ante exortas propositiones, Auctor secundae Apologiae pro Iansenio
ann. 1645. in lucem editae, lib. 2. cap. 18. ejus adversus quem scribit
criminationem his verbis refert: Docet Jansen^us gratiae resisti non posse,
quia necessitatem imponit. Quid ipse igitur? An ita sentire Iansenium agnoscit?
Nihil minus. Ex Iesuitarum Thesibus hanc calumniam ab ipso mutuatam ostendit;
mox ex ipso Iansenio late refellit, atque ex ejus doctrina tradit, dissentiendi
a gratia potentiam non subtracta gratia supervenire, sed cum ipsa gratia
consistere: quia actus opponitur non-actui, non autem potentiae ad contrarium.

Nec minus clare Auctor expos. 5. propos. jam saepe laudatus: Etsi, inquit,
efficiat haec Christi gratia, ut homo illi non dissentiat, nec dissentire
velit, semper tamen dissentire potest, si vult, ut sacro Tridentino Concilio
definitum est.

Ac ne quis causari posset ipsos hanc dissentiendi potentiam admittere tantum
subtracta gratia, non simul cum ipsa gratia, hanc malignam criminationem
submovet his verbis: Licet in justis, etiam cum per divinam gratiam
efficacissimam ad pie agendum moti, pie a^unt, peccandi seu male agendi
potentia semper perseveret, propter quam dissentire possunt Deo moventi, hoc
est peccare, and a justitia excidere: nunquam tamen stat ut tunc actu
dissentiant.

Et expressius adhuc Doctor de Sainte-Beuve in praelect. de gratia disp. 5.
art. 7. super eodem Trid. Synodi loco: Respondeo, inquit, Concilium desinire,
quod voluntas potest dissentire, stante divino auxilio; sed non definire quod
actu dissentit, quando per gratiam omnem necessariam antecedenter ex part Dei
ad conversionem perfectam praemovetur, de quo tamen solo quaestio est; seu quod
aliis terminis dicunt Theologi, potest in sensu diviso, non potest in sensu
composito. Cujus distinctionis sensus non est, quod si voluntas non moveatur
per gratiam, potest dissentire: sed quod etiam mota per gratiam conservat
potentiam ad dissensum; quamvis nunquam contingat dissensus cum ejusmodi
actuali Dei motione. Nam actus opponitur non actui; non opponitur potentiae ad
non-actum.

Sic illi quidem distinctionem illam vul^o acceperunt and vulgo interpretati
sunt. Monendi sunt tamen Molinistae, explicationem illius sensus, quae a
nonnemine per flexibilitatem liberi arbitrii tradita est, nullo modo repugnare
huic Thomisticae: sed ea supposita aliquid ipsi superaddere, ut infra
demonstrabitur.

ARTICULUS VIII.
Quid Romae circa propositiones contenderint Augustiniani Doctores.
SIc illi quidem enucleate and distinct quid de propositionibus, quid de
controversiae summa, quid de gratia sufficient, quid de aliis capitibus
sentirent, aperuerunt. Vestri autem etsi initio retecta front gratiam
Molinianam a summo Pontifice sanciri voluissent, ut jam ostendimus, postea
tamen obscurius agere coeperunt. Et quanquam propositiones generatim haereseos
inconditis clamoribus accusarent, quamvis Augustini discipulos, solius, ut
probatum est, in istis propositionibus gratiae efficacis defensores, omnibus
maledictis concerperent, tamen sensum quo illas propositiones proscribi
volebant, omnibus modis occultare conati sunt, maxim postquam Haberti Episcopi
Vabrensis epistola Dineti Iesuitae concursatione ab Episcopis compluribus
subscripta, totam rem ad summum Pontificem deferri curarunt, ut generalem
quandam propositionum censuram ab eo impetrarent.

Ad eam arcendam ab aliis Episcopis, numero quidem paucioribus, sed, ut omnes
norunt, eruditione, dignitate and vitae sanctimonia non postremis, missi sunt
Romam quidam Doctores; quibus quid mandatum sit ab illis Episcopis, and quid
ipsi toto biennio quod Romae traduxerunt apud summum Pontificem egerint, ante
omnia nosse, operae pretium est. Sic enim statim ut Romam appulerunt ex
Episcoporum mandato summo Pontifici postulatorum suorum summam exposuerunt in
Memoriali Sanctitati suae exhibito 21. Ianuar. ann. 1652. Iuxta literas a
pluribus illustrissimis Ecclesiae Gallicanae Antistitibus ad Beatitudinem
vestram missas, illorum nomine Doctores Parisienses infra-scripti Sanctitati
vestrae humillime supplicant ut distingui and sigillatim examinati jubeat
varios sensus quinque propositionum aequivoca^um and ad fraudem fictarum, quae
vestrae Beatitudini exhibitae sunt: de praedictis sensibus, prout exiget
illorum veritas ac aliorum falsitas, sententiam far velit, partibus prius in
Congregatione, tum voce, tum scripto coram auditis, and omnibus illorum
scriptis mutuo communicatis, sicut postulat negotii magnitudo, in similibus
occasionibus Ecclesiae consuetudo, ipsiusque sanctae Sedis Apostolicae usus,
non ita pridem a felicis memoriae Clemente VIII. and Paulo V. vestrae
Sanctitatis spraedecessoribus observatus.

Qui hanc supplicationem viderit, simul videt quid per totum fere biennium
Romae Augustiniani Doctores fecerint. Innumeris enim supplicationibus,
obsecrationibus, libellis, nil aliud apud Cardinales and summum Pontificem
egerunt, nisi ut Congregatio solemnis institueretur, in qua auditis partibus,
communicatis scriptis, tota controversia claro, nec ambiguo judicio
dirimeretur. Quod cur non impetrarint, in altera Disquisitione narrabitur.

ARTICULUS IX.
Quid mali ex ambiguo decreto, non auditis coram partibus facto, eventurum
Augustiniani Doctores multo ante praenunciarint.
NOn difficile fuit ex Iesuitarum moribus conjicere, quorsum illi generalem
censuram nullo nominatim expresso sensu a summo Pontifice elicere tenderent.
Itaque quaecunque postea contigisse videmus, tam distinct and accurate ante a
Doctoribus praedicta sunt, ut id Iesuitis studio fuisse videatur, illorum
vaticinia ad amussim implere. Ecce quo pacto illorum consilia explicet Auctor
expositionis 5. prop. Per aequivocarum assertionum censuram ancipitem and
variis interpretationibus obnoxiam, in animo habuerunt invidiam and odium in
Episcopum Iprensem and S. Augustini discipulos concitare; vera falsis
involvere; Pelagianum errorem cum Catholica simul fide commiscere; perturbare
omnia; censuram ipsam ancipitem, hujus sibi judicium and interpretationum
arrogando, in quos libebit sensus inflectere; sibi hujus censurae tuendae
praetextu, quidvis audendi licentiam facere; apud imperitam multitudinem, cui
uni fallendae and deludendae student, totum Iprensis Episcopi opus, ut de
errore vel haeresi notatum conclamare. Idem augurium videri potest late
explicatum in praef. and concl. libri de gratia victrice.

Multo etiam gravius Episcopi, cum pro illa solenni quam postulaverant
Congregatione, aliam long diversam institutam accepissent, inter Regulares
tredecim and quinque Cardinales, in qua omnia clam peragerentur; nulla fieret
scriptorum communicatio, nulla partium institueretur collatio: Episcopali
liberate summum Pontificem monuerunt, fore ut ex tali agendi ratione infinitae
turbae, contentiones, scandala oritentur, and magna Augustinianae doctrinae,
magna Pontificiae Sedi labes aspergeretur. Ipsorum epistolam divinae prudentiae
plenissimam, in sequenti Disquisitione recitabimus.

ARTICULUS X.
Jesuitarum calliditas in excipiendis Thomistis ex propositionum accusatione.
ID igitur metuentes Doctores Augustiniani, ex Episcoporum, a quibus missi
erant, mandatis, ut regia via res tractaretur, ante omnia solennem
Congregationem institui postulabant, cum aliter calumniis, quibus potissimum
Augustiniana causa premebatur, prorsus occurri and resisti non posset. Jesuitae
contra ac Jesuitici Doctores, qui hoc causae ^uae capitaliter adversum esse
sentiebant, devium quoddam ac tortuosum iter ingredi coeperunt, ut optato exitu
potirentur. Hujus consilii, mi Pater, ne nega, auctor praecipuus extitisti;
Neque enim in homines Sorbonicos cadebat tanta versuties. Sed tu tunc temporis
Romae eras totius negotii moderator and rector, qui illos Doctores assidue
tecum versantes ad hanc calliditatem instrueres. Patere igitur tibi breviter in
memoriam redigi tuas palmas, id est, subtiliter excogitatas fallacias.

Harum prima and maxim necessaria fuit, ficta cum Thomistis ad tempus
consensio; quam tu propterea assimulare coactuses, quod cum illorum doctrina
magna Romae auctoritate floreat, si paulummodo ipsos lacessivisses, certam tibi
repulsam paratam esse sagaciter odorabaris. Illico enim insurrexissent in te
Romani fere omnes Theologi; convolassent ex toto orb Dominicani, ac multae
aliae familiae Augustinianis subsidio venissent.

Ergo ad auxiliares illas copias submovendas, necessario prae se ferendum,
palamque denunciandum erat, nullum Thomisticae doctrinae caput in quinque
propositionibus agi: totam hanc controversiam a disputatione de Auxiliis sub
Clemente VIII. instituta esse alienissimam: gratiae praedeterminanti and
Thomisticae Scholae nullum omnino imminere ex illarum propositionum damnatione
periculum; Iesuitarum sententiae nihil penitus firmamenti accessurum. Haec, mi
Annate, in ipso limine pleno ore praedicanda; alioquin statim exclusus esses.

Verum hic tibi minime defuisti, ac ne quis dubitaret, ipse tantus Thomistarum
hostis, fucati illius cum Thomistis super quinque propositionibus foederis
praeco and buccinaror esse voluisti. Hoc consilio liber a te primum Hallerio
Romae ad usum commodatus, mox tuo nomine editus est cum hoc titulo; Jansenius a
Thomistis damnatus. Hic liber totus praeclaris Didaci, Alvaris, Nugnez,
Cabesudo, Ledesmae, Nazarii, Gonzalis, Navarrettae, atque aliis ejusmodi
nominibus personat.

Quin ut Thomistis omnem omnino suspicionem demeres, sic eos in Praefatione
metu and periculo liberas: Interesse puto, inquis, tum communis boni veritatis,
quam omnes quaerimus, tum privatae Thomistarum dignitatis, auctoritatisque,
quam non expedit in censura damnabilium sententiarum implicari, ut omnes
intelligant pracipuos defensores gratiae praedeterminantis, and qui causam
illam ardentius egere circae tempora disputationum, contraria prorsus posuisse
principia principiis Jansenianorum. Quod, ut spero, lector perspicue intelliget
ex oppositione doctrinae Thomistarum ad quinque propositiones, quae modo ad
examen vocantur, ut non dubitem quin mecum dicturus sis eos qui tam facile sibi
patiuntur imponi, alterutram Theologiam necessario nescire, nempe vel
Thomisticam vel Jansenianam.

Potuisti-ne amantius and benignius pro Thomistarum dignitate sollicitari?
Parum tamen fuisset, nisi ad eum modum tuos etiam defensores instituisses.
Hallerium loquor, Lagautium, Mulardum, Jossellium. Verum illi in ludo tuo ad
calliditatem edocti, praeclare magistri sui arts retulerunt. Nihil enim magis
laborarunt, quam ut alieni in Thomistas animi a se suspicionem averterent.
Itaque Hallerius non obscure sese dictitabat efficacis gratiae patronum, and
versatilis gratiae hostem, cum tu has injurias non iniquo stomacho concoquetes.
Sic enim Romae faciendum fuit, and tempori serviendum. Haec cum ipsi, ubicumque
tulerat occasio, praecipue coram Dominicanis sine dubitatione jactarent, tum
vero in scriptis quae Consultoribus and Dominicanis obtulerunt, luculentissime
expressere. Ex quibus quoniam omnia fere nactus sum, licet hic pauca
describere, quae tu, credo, facile agnosces. Pleraque enim, aut potius omnia,
ex Iesuitica officina prodierunt, eademque etiam Romae in multorum manibus
versantur.

In scripto cui titulus est, An sit sopienda quae jam fervet Jansenistarum
controversia, imposito utrique parti silentio? sic loquuntur: Non est similis
haec controversia controversiae de Auxiliis. In illa enim disputabatur de rebus
nondum decisis, and ita disputabatur ut ipsa disputatione magis dubium fieret
an and quid esset decidendum; and ideo facta est utrique parti copia suam
defendendi sententiam. Hoc autem fieri non potest de controversia Janseniana.

Item in fine: Hanc esse causam Thomistarum and Jesuitarum qui dicunt, errant
toto caelo. Nihil proponitur summo Pontifici de quo fuerit controversia inter
i^los Ordines: nihil quod non sit inter ambas familias communi consensu
constitutum.

Item in alio scripto Dominicanis conciliandis facto, Cum Iansenistae per se
ipsos stare non possint, alios sibi adjungere conantur, quibus innitantur,
praesertimque reverendissimos Patres Dominicanos, quasi utrisque communis sit
causa, cum tamen una toto caelo ab alia discrepet; quod, ni fallor, ipsa
causarum expositione demonstrari potest.

Ibidem: Quod autem res seu causa praedeterminantium in integro relinquatur,
etiamsi quinque illae propositiones decreto Pontificio damnentur, vel quia jam
damnatae sunt, damnatas esse declaretur, manifestum est; nempe ex hoc decreto
non magis urgeri poterunt, quam modo urgentur ex Tridentino.

Ibidem: Nullum ex Thomistis invenio, qui vel unam e quinque propositionibus
admittat vel defendat. Ibidem: Nec quidquam ponderis accedet Jesuitarum
hypothesi ex novo Pontificio decreto.

Item in quodam scripto longiore super quinta propositione: Colligitur secundo,
quid dicendum fit illis, qui hanc esse putant controversiam de auxiliis divinae
gratiae tamdiu olim dissertatam sub duobus Pontificibus inter Thomistas and
Jesuitas, hocque jam praetextu Janseniani utuntur, ut censuras eludant, ut cum
non putent posse Thomistas in eamdem ruinam trahi cum illis, ipsi communione
sententiarum and connexione erigantur and stent. Sed in eo quoque latius
aberrant quam toto caelo. Nihil omnino illis exprobratur, de quo Thomistae cum
Jesuitis contenderint: Nihl exigitur quam quod fuerit concordissimo duorum
illorum Ordinum consensu atque suffragiis constitutum.

Videsne quam instanter illud urgeant, nihil se omnino in judicium vocare quo
vel tantillum Thomistarum sententia laedi possit, and Jesuitarum causa robotari.

ARTICULUS XI.
Conciliandorum cum Thomistis Molinistarum quanta fuerit difficultas. Summa in
hoc Annati solerita.
VErum pinguior istorum Doctorum calliditas extitisset, si universim tantum
juravissent nolle se Thomistis injuriam factam; indignos esse tam graves
Theologos, qui in quinque propositionum damnatione implicarentur. Merito non
tam stolidos homines Romae putaverunt, ut haec sua sponte absurda ipsis tantum
affirmantibus crederent. Ergo speciatim ostendendum fuit quo pacto ipsi a
Thomistis alieni non essent, nec quidquam omnino contenderent, quod ipsorum
causae obesse aliquatenus posset.

Arduum profecto negotium; in quo tamen sic te nobilitasti, ut nusquam magis
cognitum sit quantum esset in solertia tua. Quamobrem patientem, quaeso, nobis
au^em accommoda, dum paulo latius mirabile illud commentum, cui tu praecipuam
laudem procul dubio inter omnes calliditates tuas tribuis, and tuis and
lectorum oculis subjicimus.

Omnium dissidiorum quibus Molinistae a Thomistis distrahuntur, unicus pene
fons est praedeterminantis and per se efficacis gratiae doctrina, quam hi
tuentur, illi respuunt. Asserunt Thomistae ex Scripturae oraculis and
Conciliorum Decretis sine gratia efficaci and praedeterminante nullum bonum
opus fieri, nullum praeceptum impleri ut oportet: sive ut loquuntur, motionem
Dei efficacem, cui voluntas infallibiliter consentit, ad omnia pietatis opera
necessarium esse. Hujus opinions rigorem Molina non ferens, abjecta efficaci
gratia quasi libertatis inimica, aliam excogitavit versatilem and sufficientem,
quae daret posse, non velle: sed pro nutu voluntatis modo efficax, modo
inefficax esset. Hae duae sententiae ex adverso sibi oppositae sunt: Perimit
versatilem gratiam efficax ad omnia pietatis opera necessaria; abjicit
efficacem versatilis and sufficiens Moliniano sensu gratia.

Ex capitali illa opinionum distractione, aliae deinde Thomistas inter ac
Molinistas contentiones nascuntur. Et primo circa possibilitatem praeceptorum
longissime a Molinistis Thomistae dissident. Nam cur certum sit non omnes actu
implere praecepta, certum est etiam non omnibus adesse efficacem gratiam ad
illorum observationem necessariam: Hac enim praesente semper i^plentur, absente
nunquam. Viderunt igitur Thomistae non omnibus talem implendorum praeceptorum
potestatem concedi posse, quae cum actu aliquando conjungeretur. Potestas enim
quam habent gratia efficaci destituti, nunquam cum actu conjungitur. Itaque
distinctionem in scholis traditam ad hoc explicandum advocaverunt, sensus
nimirum compositi and divisi. Quibus adest gratia efficax, his possibilia
dicunt mandata in sensu composito, quia actualis observatio mandatorum cum illa
gratia semper componitur: quibus autem non adest, hos negant mandata observare
posse in sensu composito. Nunquam enim actualis observatio mandatorum, cum
gratiae efficacis absentia componitur: posse tamen aiunt in sensu diviso: quia
potestas observandi mandata cum illorum contemptu and omissione consistit, qui
vocari etiam sensus compositus potest, si non actus cum actu contrario, sed
potentia cum actu componi intelligatur. Hinc Alverez disp. 23. de Auxil. ^. 33.
In sensu composito nihil velle possumus sine praedeterminatione divina: quia
haec duo non possunt simul consistere, quod scilicet nos velimus in particulari
aliquid, and quod Deus non praedeterminaverit quod velimus illud.

Molinistae contra hanc sensus divisi potestatem irrident, omnibusque volunt
mandata esse possibilia in sensu composito, ita ut actualis observatio semper
cum illa potestate, actu and effective possit consistere, and aliquando
consistat.

ARTICULUS. XII.
Fons discordiae sedatus, seposita quaestione de Gratia praedeterminante. Et
contentio circa possibilitatem praeceptorum composita per possibilitatem
abstractivam.
VIdeamus, mi Pater, quo pacto tantam discordiam sedaveris; scilicet ut bonus
medicus statim ad illius fontem remedium apposuisti, totam hanc de gratia
praedeterminante contentionem e medio tollens. Non agitur de gratia
praedeterminante, inquiebant tuo monitu Doctores Augustinianis adversi in
scripto adjungendis Dominicanis facto. Item alio loco: Non agitur de modo quo
gratia efficax est. Et infra; In hac causa nullo modo includitur celebris illa
quaestio de Auxiliis, tam acriter olim sub Clemente VIII. and Paulo V.
Thomistas inter and Jesuitas agitata. Eodem pertinent loca superius adducta de
Thomistarum dogmatis in damnatione propositionum nullo modo periclitantibus.

Liberalius etiam Hallerius in celebri collatione apud Dominicanos habita coram
Generali and praecipuis Religiosis illius O^dinis, paratum se professus est
subscribendae suo nomine gratiae efficaci, ut postmodum dicemus.

Verum hac quaestione seposita de mandatorum possibilitate, quomodo potuerunt
illi cum Thomistis concordes se fingere? Famosa nempe abstractionum methodo;
quandam enim abstractivam possibilitatem postulaverunt, quae neutri opinioni
officeret, sed utriusque scholae calculis comprobaretur: quae non esset
possibilitas sensus compositi: hanc enim rejicit schola Thomistica; nec
possibilitas sensus divisi; hanc enim subsannat Schola Moliniana; sed nescio
quae ab utraque praecisa possibilitas.

Nihil fingo, mi Annate, nec jocor. Ex te ipso sciscitor, Potentia illa
observandi mandata, quam in justis praecepta transgredientibus semper reperiri
contentebant tui Doctores, cujusmodi esset? Talisne ut sola nonnunquam sine
efficaci auxilio operetur? Jacent ergo Thomistae, jacet pollicitatio tua
praedeterminantis gratiae minime laesae, jacet ipse Hallerius efficacis
gratiae, ut ipse ferebat, defensor. Talisne ut sine auxilio efficaci in actum
nunquam prodeat? Jacet Molina tuus. Igitur ut Molinae ac Thomistis sua jura
serventur, statuenda fuit in justis illis peccantibus possibilitas, generalis
quaedam abstrahendo ab ea quae aliquando operatur, and ea quae iners perpetuo
remanet sine efficaci auxilio.

ARTICULUS XII.
Dissidium Thomistarum and Molinistarum de potentia proxima, abstractione ab
Annato compositum.
NUnquam majori cuiquam usui abstractiones fuere quam tibi in hac causa.
Protinus enim nova abstractio fuit tibi necessaria, ut te cum Thomistis
nonnullis in proximae and completae potestatis vocibus conjungeres. Mirifice
tibi illae placebant; eo magis, quod eas ab Augustinianis vulgo repudiari, and
a quibusdam Thomistis admitti videbas, rem consiliis tuis opportunissimam, cum
id ageres ut cum Thomistis consentire, cum Augustinianis pugnare videreris.
Verum nescius non eras has voces alio sensua Thomistis, alio a vobis usurpari.
Thomistis enim potestas proxima dicitur, etiamsi indigeat auxilio efficaci ad
operandum antecedenter necessario. Vobis ea demum potestas proxima, quae nihil
aliud requirit ad agendum. Itaque vos potestatem proximam Thomistarum
irridetis, illi contra proximam potestatem vestram promiscue omnibus concessam,
haereticam censent: quia tollit efficacis gratiae necessitatem. Non te fugiebat
nec Doctores tuos, tanta in illa voce aequivocatio and fallicia. Imo and tu in
Jansenio a Thomistis damnato, and Doctores tui in quadam propositionum censura,
Consultoribus oblata, locum Alvaris retulerunt in quo hujus nominis
aequivocatio luculenter explicatur.

Is locus petitur ex disp. 117. n. 11. Potentia potest dupl^citer dici proxima
and expedita ad operandum. Primo, quia nihil al ud requiritur ex part ipsius
potentiae, quo in actu primo co^stituatur ad actualiter operandum, sive ad
volendum and nolendum. Et hoc modo liberum arbitrium, positis omnibus
requisitis ad operandum, potest potentia proxima and expedita operari and non
operari, velle and nolle. Secundo modo potest dici facultas proxima and
expedita ad operandum, quia in sua operatione non dependet ab alia priori c^usa
tribuente ipsam cooperationem, vel actualiter concurrente, and in hoc sensu
nulla causa secunda, quantumvis ponatur perfecta secundum se, and seclusa
praemotione divina, est exped ta ad operanddum.

Videsne igitur duplicem hujus vocis significationem ab Alvare distinctam?
Alteram Thomisticam, alteram Molinianam: alteram quae adest gratiam efficacem
non habentibus; alteram quae deest omnibus ista gratia carentibus? jam quaero
quam statuere Romae volueritis? Non Thomisticam, credo; nam hanc irridetis; nec
Molinianam etiam, nam illam respuit Alvarez quo tum nitebantur, and tota
Thomistarum schola. Stultum est autem ex Alvare and Thomistis probare velle,
quod negat Alvarez, negant omnes Thomistae. Quam igitur nisi possibilitatem
proximam in genere, sive abstrahendo a possibilitate proxima Thomistarum, and
possibilitate proxima Molin starum?

ARTICULUS XIV.
Dissensio de gratia sufficient Thomistas inter and Molinistas, compressa per
gratiam sufficientem abstractivam.
MActe abstractionibus, mi Annate, bellissime enim procedunt. Ecce alia gravis
Thomistas inter and Molinistas de gratia sufficient discordia. Sufficientem
gratiam admittunt Thomistae, quae producit actus quosdam imperfectos, and
potestatem largitur ad perfectiores: Sed iidem docent nunquam isti gratiae
plene consentiri: imo contingere non posse ut illi consentiatur sine efficaci.

Contra Molinistae gratiam admittunt versatilem, cui sine efficaci auxilio
aliquando consentitur. Quid ages? quo te vertes? Molinianam adstruere tutum non
erat; Thomisticam admittete alienum a rationibus tuis. Quid igitur? Nec illam
adstrues, nec istam, sed quandam gratiam sufficientem in abstracto. Audi
Sorbonicos Doctores a te eruditos in quodam brevi scripto super quinque
propositionibus, ubi pugnant; Justis volentibus and conantibus non deesse
gratias sufficientes. At ne Molinani viderentur, quod nescio quomodo semper
probrosum est, illud adjungunt; Nota, per has voces, auxilii sufficientis, non
intelligi gratiam illam versatilem, quae modo effectum habet, modo non habet,
quae a Multis Doctoribus Catholicis Refutatur: sed intelligi gratiam quae vere
sufficiens sit, quocunque tandem modo: seu quae vere facultatem tribuat justo
aut implendi praeceptum, aut petendi gratiam necessariam ad illud implendum,
ita ut per eam justus inexcusabilis reddatur, quando praeceptum transgreditur.
Et in explicatione, 2. propos. Non hic agitur de gratia sufficient versatili
statuenda, quae modo effectum suum habeat, modo non habeat; sed tantum in
genere quaeritur, utrum verum sit in statu naturae lapsae nullam dari gratiam
quae vere suffic^ens sit.

Dixeramne tibi Doctores tuos Romae sufficientem gratiam in abstracto
defendisse, and ne se cum Thomistis committerent, sufficientis Molinianae
defensionem long a se removisse? Perierat videlicer Catholica fides, si
abstractionum methodus intercidisset. Sed reliqua videamus.

ARTICULUS. XV.
Dissensio Thomistarum and Molinistarum circa indifferentiam libertatis,
absractione item ab Annato composita.
SEquitur alia non levis inter Thomistas and Molinistas pugna ex eodem
praedeterminantis gratiae font profecta. Ex Thomistarum dogmatis, cum adest
efficax praedeterminatio ad aliquem actum, fieri nequit ut voluntas in istum ad
quem praemovetur actum, non consentiat. Hinc illi consequenter philosophantes
negant, ad libertatem requi i, ut positis omnibus ad agendum praerequisitis
voluntas possit agere and non agere in sensu composito, ita scilicet ut cum
istis antecedenter praerequisitis possit componi tam actus quam carentia talis
actus. Praemot^o enim, inquiunt, est unam ex antecedent^r praerequisitis, cum
qua tamen componi non potest carentia actus ad quem praemovet. Ergo aliusmodi
indifferentiam admisere, quam indifferentiam potentiae appellant, oppositam
determinationi naturali; hac fit ut quantacunque praemotione afficiatur
voluntas, possit tamen agere, and non agere in sensu diviso, qui quatenus
compositus dici possit, supra diximus. Quia, inquiunt, tametsi non possit
contingere ut voluntas non el^ciat actum illum ad quem a Deo praemovetur,
retinet tamen illius non eliciendi potentiam. Non enim potentia opponitur actui
contrar^o, sed tantum actus contrarius. Sed praestat hoc ex ipso Alvare
condiscere.

Liberum arbitrium creatum, inquit. disp. 115. n 3. and 4. non solum antequam
determinetur ad unum actum, sed etiam in ipso instanti in quo determinatur a
Deo, and seipsum determinat ad eundem actum, simul habet potentiam qua potest
libere producere actum contrarium, non tamen habet potentiam ad actum
contrarium simul habendum. Nam duo actus contrarii simul in eadem potentia esse
non possunt, sed solum successive. Hinc habuit ortum illa distinctio communiter
a Theologis and Metaphysicis recepta, de simultate potentiae, and potentia
simultatis. Est enim in libero arbitrio simultas potentiae ad operandum and non
operandum. Nam per hoc quod operetur unum actum, non destruit liberam
facultatem and potentiam quam habet ad operandum actum contrarium si velit, vel
non operandum. Ad hoc igitur explicandum deservit illa distinctio sensus
compositi and divisi, qua utuntur communiter Doctores, ut disp. 25 visum est.

Notandum secundo, quod cum dicitur potentiam liberam esse, quae positis
omnibus requisitis ad operandum, potest operari, etiam in sensu composito, hoc
dupliciter intelligi potest. Primo ita ut compositio fiat inter praerequisita
ad operandum, and potentiam ipsam operandi and non operandi, and tunc sensus
est quod potentia ad operandum and non operandum stat simul in eodem subjecto
cum antecedenter praerequisitis ad talem operationem; and hic sensus verissimus
est, ut postea explicabimus.

Secundo modo potest intelligi, ita ut compositio fiat inter antecedenter
praerequisita etiam ex part Dei ad operandum talem actum, and carentiam talis
actus, seu actum ipsum contrarium. Et tunc sensus est quod omnia praerequisita
etiam ex part Dei operandum talem actum particularem ad, and carentia ejusdem
actus, seu actus contrarius possint esse, aut aliquando sint simul in eodem
subjecto. In hoc ergo intendimus praedictam definitionem impugnare. Sic
Alvarez, and cum eo Thomistae.

Imo quidam rigidiores definitionem vulgarem libertatis, quia dicitur id demum
esse liberum, quod positis omn^bus ad agendum praerequisitis, potest agere and
non agere, funditus repudiant. Haec definitio, inquit Lece ma disp. de
Auxiliis, contra. 7. art. 1. neque apud Aristotelem neque apud S. Thomam, neque
apud gravem auctorem nisi apud Almainum and alios nominales invenitur.

Et ante Ledesmam Medina 1. 2. q. 10. art. 4. de Almaino loquens: Dat, inquit,
definitionem libertatis su liberi pro sua phantasia, d cens, quod ad libertatem
sufficit ac requiritur, quod positis omnibus praeviis necessario requisitis ad
agendum, sit in potestate voluntatis agere and non agere. Et paulo infra vocat
definitionem libertatis ab Almaino co^fictam. Cum his Cabezudus praedictam
definitinem libertatis omnino negat, tract. de Auxil. q. 2. paulo ante finem,
and Navarrettus tom. 2. contr. 12. S. 2.

Sed quidquid demum de illa sentiant, certum est omnes Thomistas indifferentiam
illam in sensu composito, cum scilicet componitur actus dissensus cum gratia
efficaci, penitus rejicere, licet aliam admittunt, quam vocant indifferentiam
potentiae and sensus divisi.

Quid vos Molinistae? de ista indifferentia potentiae quid sentitis? Non aegre
illam a Calvino admissum iti, prorsusque ad libertatem requiri indifferentiam
ad agendum and non agendum in sensu comsito, quo possit componi uterque actus
cum potentia. Sic tu in tractatu de scientia media, sic tecum caeteri
Molinistae. Quo pacto igitur tu tam long a Thomistis discrepans in
indifferentiae notione, cum iis tamen super hoc capite foedus inibis? Rem
conficient pacificae illae abstractiones. Ad libertatem requiri quandam
indifferentiam dixisti, dixerunt Jesuitici Doctores, sed cujusmodi esset ista
indifferentia, non explicasti, nec illi item. Iam si te rogem, quam
indifferentiam intellexeritis, nec Molinianam dices; quomodo enim illam,
Thomistarum, ut ubique fecistis, testimoniis confirmassetis? nec etiam
Thomisticam; jam enim aperte Molina repudiatus foret. Ecquam igitur nisi
generalem indifferentiam and abstractivam? Habes compositionis tuae super
indifferentia subtilem rationem.

ARTICULUS XVI.
Pugnam Thomistarum and Molinistarum super necessitate antecedente abstractione
diremit Annatus.
SUperest modo una de necessitate pugna, ex gratia item praedeterminante
derivata. Hac posita quia semper consentit voluntas, in Thomistas istius
gratiae defensores acriter insurrexerunt Molinistae hoc argumento, quod refert
Alvarez disp. 22. n. 5. Necessitas antecede s liberum consensum creatae
voluntatis, seu quae provenit ex causis prioribus, tollit libertatem. Sed
necessi^as operandi habens ortum ex absoluto decreto voluntatis divinae
praedeterminantis liberum arbitrium ad omnem suam actionem in particulari, est
necessitas ex causis prioribus proveniens. Ergo, etc.

Quid ad hoc Alvarez? distinguit duplicem sensum necessitatis antecedentis,
dicitque hoc nomine ab Anselmo, unde fluxit, non intellectam esse omnem
necessitatem a priori, ut Molinistae opinantur, sed tantum necessitatem
absolutam; atque adeo necessitatem quae provenit ex voluntate divina, negat
esse antecedeutem, quia non est absoluta, sed conditionata. Voluntas enim
divina non tollit contingentiam a rebus.

Respondet secundo, necessitatem ex suppositione voluntatis divinae non esse
necessitatem antecedentem, sed potius consequentem causam rei. Licet enim
antecedat causam creatam, non tamen antecedit causam primam simpliciter, quae
est voluntas divina, quae magis influit in effectum quam causa secunda.

Vides igitur Alvarem ideo negasse antecedentem necessitatem inferri a gratia
vel praemotione, quia hoc nomine intelligit vel necessitatem absolutam, vel
necessitatem quae omnem causam rei antecedat. Iesuitis autem omnis necessitas a
priori causa dicitur antecedens: ideo cum utrique dicitis necessitatem
antecedentem destruere libertatem, non idem tamen dicitis, quia non idem
intelligitis. Quaero igitur ut in aliis, cum tui Doctores Romae clamitabant
necessitate antecedente perimi libertatem: quid illo nomine significarent? an
quod Thomistae, nempe necessitatem absolutam quae tollat contingentiam? quid
inde ad ipsos utilitatis redire possit? An quod Molinistae, nempe omnem
necessitatem a priori? Ergo illi omnibus Thomistis eversae libertatis crimen
intendissent, quod sedulo semper caverunt. Neutram ergo proprie intellexerunt,
sed quandam duntaxat in abstracto necessitatem antecedentem impugnarunt. Verum
ut magis hoc abstractionum commmento fruare, juvat hic abstractivam illam
compositionem, quo melius percipiatur, brevi tabella delineare.

TABVLA Compositionis inter Thomistas and Jesuitas factae, sex abstractionum
opera.
Thomistae. Abstractivi Jesuitae. Molinistae. I. GRatia praedeterminans and per
se efficax, ad omnia pretatis opera est necessaria.

I. ABstrahitur a quaestione de gratia per se efficaci and sufficient
versatili.

I. GRatia praedeterminans and per se efficax, non est necessaria ad omnia
pietatis opera: sed est tantum necessaria gratia sufficiens quae pro nutu
voluntatis modo efficax, modo inefficax sit.

II. Justis volentibus and conantibus, sed gratiam efficacem non habentibus,
mandata Dei sunt possibilia tantum in sensu diviso, non autem in sensu
composito, quo observantia mandatorum cum potentia illa observandi aliquando
componatur.

II. Justis volentibus and conantibus mandata Dei sunt semper possibilia,
abstrahendo a sensu composito and diviso.

II. Justis volentibus, and conantibus mandata Dei sunt semper possibilia in
sensu composito.

III. Justis peccantibus suppetit proxima non peccandi facultas, quae nunquam
in actum prodit sine gratia efficaci.

III. Justis peccantibus suppetit proxima non peccandi facultas abstrahendo ab
ea quae prodit, and ea quae nunquam prodit in actum sine alio auxilio.

III. Justis peccantibus suppetit semper proxima non peccandi facultas, quae
non indiget ut in actum prodeat efficaci auxilio.

IV. Datur gratia sufficiens, sed praeter quam aliud auxilium praerequiritur,
ut voluntas ipsi plene consentiat.

IV. Datur gratia sufficiens quomodocunque, sive abstrahendo a Moliniana and
Thomistica.

IV. Datur gratia sufficiens extra quam nihil aliud praerequiritur ex part Dei.

V. Indifferentia qua positis omnibus antecedenter praerequisitis ad agendum,
potest quis agere vel non agere in sensu composito, non requiritur ad
libertatem meriti and demeriti, sed tantum ut possit quis agere vel non agere
in sensu diviso.

V. Requiritur ad libertatem indifferentia, quocunque tandem modo, sive
abstrahendo a sensu composito and diviso.

V. Requiritur ad libertatem indifferentia agendi vel non agendi in sensu
composito.

VI. Necessitas antecedens sumpta pro necessitate absoluta, quae tollit
contingentiam effectus, destruit libertatem: non autem si sumatut tantum pro
necessitate orta a causa prima quae praemoveat infallibiliter voluntatem, nec
tamen tollat contingentiam.

VI. Necessitas antecedens tollit libertatem abstrahendo ab utroque istius
vocis sensu.

VI. Omnis necessitas a priori est antecedens and tollit libertatem.



ARTICULUS XVII.
Annatum hoc inito cum Thomistis foedere, nullam sibi dissensionem reliquisse
cum Augustinianis.
NOn omnia sunt in astutia, mi Annate; habet illa suum modum, nec unquam
praetergreditur naturae fines. Hac tua fucata cum Thomistis consensione nil
fieri potuit solertius, fateor. Est tamen magnum in ea re vitium, non tua
quidem culpa, sed ipsius rei. Non ignoras, credo, axioma Geometris pariter ac
Philosophis tritum: Quae sunt eadem uni tertio, sunt eadem inter se. O si illud
ex libris omnibus, vel potius e communi sensu delevisses! Nam velis nolis,
unicum illud pronunciatum omnes tibi machinas disturbabit.

Quo pacto, inquies? Audi, mi Pater? Habet hunc finem suscepta tibi cum
Thomistis concordiae species, ut illorum auxilio fretus Augustinianos facilius
expugnares. Sed frustra cum Thomistis coitionem facis, si hac cum illis
coitione cum Augustinianis pariter in gratiam rediisti, nec ullas tibi
reliquisti certandi causas. Dicam planius. Cum eadem prorsus sit Thomistarum
and Augustinianorum in illis 5 capitibus doctrina, non potuisti super illis cum
Thomistis foedus inire, quin pariter cum Augustinianis inieris. Nam quae natura
eadem sunt, ut ea divellas, natura non patitur. Ergo ut te brevi constringam
argumento: De possibilitate praeceptorum, de gratia sufficient justorum
volentium and conantium, de indifferentia, de gratia necessitante, idem
sentiunt prorsus Augustiniani atque Thomistae. Atqui cum Thomistis nulla tibi
lis est, nec Romae fuit, ut tute confiteris. Ergo cum Augustinanis nulla est,
nec fuit. Recurrit enim suprapositum axioma: Quae sunt eadem uni tertio, sunt
eadem inter se. Id nobis paulo latius explicandum.

ARTICULUS XVIII.
Cum de gratia praedeterminante Romae non actum sit, nulla fuit pugna inter
utriusque partis Doctores.
TOti, ut dixi, in gratia efficaci defendenda Augustiniani fuere. Hic unus
ipsis amor, hic thesaurus est. Hunc ipsis qui relinquit, nihil eripit.
Gratulantur ergo tibi, quod tuo monitu hanc adeo se venerari Hallerius and
socii finxerint. Jure enim illas Pauli voces usurpare possunt: Dum omnimodo,
sive per occasionem, sive per veritatem Christus annuncietur, and in hoc
gaudeo, sed and gaudebo. Ergo quia nihil aliud circa quinque propositiones
sentiunt, qui de eo capite non pugnat, ut nemo pugnavit, cum illis reipsa non
pugnat. Rursus cum illi solam gratiam Molinianam and Parisiis and Romae
impugnaverint, ut jam ostendimus, quando illam adstruere nec vos nec vestri
Doctores voluistis, nec Augustiniani vobiscum pugnaverunt.

Ostendimus totam controversiam Parisiis in eo sitam, an ad singulos actus
gratia efficax requireretur, an daretur Moliniana and versatilis gratia, quae
nihil aliud requirit ad agendum actu and effect^ve. Number ergo illi aliud Romae
egerunt, aliud defendendum aut impugnandum susceperunt? Number se operosis de
gratia sufficient Thomistarum controversiis implicarunt? Imo vero legantur ad
unum omnia scripta quae summo Pontifici paulo ante editam constitutionem
obtulerunt, nihil aliud in illis reperies, quam gratiae efficacis
confirmationem, Molinianae gratiae impugnationem; ac ne unum quidem verbum quo
Thomistarum gratia sufficiens vel minime violata sit.

Ecce quam caute clarus ille Des-mares coram Summo Pontifice quaestionis summam
constituerit: Vt ab ipso sermonis exordio omnis prorsus aequivocatio toll^tur,
ac citra omnem ambiguitatem nostra decurrat oration, operae pretium existimavi
breviter insinuare Sanctitati Vestrae, quid nomine gratiae per se efficacis,
quid gratiae sufficientis and MOLINISTICAE intelligendum sit. Per gratiam ex se
efficacem intelligimus gratia^ quae sua vi ac virtute prima interraque, and, ut
utar verbis Apostoli, (...), non solum dat homini posse si velit, sed etiam
facit certissime ac invictissime ut velit. Haec autem vis ac virtus gratiae,
nihil aliud est quam, ut docet Augustinus contra Pelagianos, suavitas quaedam
caelestis ac delectatio dilectionis, seu infusio in animos caritatis, quae
diffunditur in cordibus nostris per Spiritum Sanctum, qua cognita sancto amore
facimus. En gratiae efficacis descriptionem ex Augustino. Ubi illud somnium
gratiae necessitantis? Ne umbra quidem.

Videamus contra, quam gratiam sufficientem impugnent: Verum, inquit, ex
opposito, per gratiam indifferentem and Molinisticam intelligunt ejus
assertores illuminatione^ quandam intellectus, and pium motum in voluntate,
indeliberatum tamen and non liberum, quo mediante possit homo velle vel agere
bonum aliquod: ut autem velit, id relictum esse in suo libero arbitrio, quod
nutu suo quandoque vult, quandoque non vult, modoque in unam partem se flectit,
modo in alteram. Itaque haec inter nos and istos est quaestio: An gratia regnet
in voluntatem, an voluntas in gratiam: An gratia sibi subjiciat liberum
arbitrium, an liberum arbitrium sibi subjiciat gratiam. Nos dicimus gratiam
esse victricem liberi arbitrii, eamque esse necessariam ad singulos actus.

Vides-ne, mi Annate, quam constans Augustinianorum ut sententia, sic oration
fuerit? ut adversus cavillationes vestras tuta atque munita? Quare nec ullum
quidem aut verbum aut scriptum ipsorum proferre potes, in quo vel tantillum ex
istis finibus quos sibi circumscripserant, egressi sunt. At tu quid habes ad
haec? Quid tui Doctores? Gratiam, inquiunt, praedeterminantem non impugnamus.
Been est. Versatilem and Molinianam non adstruimus. Sat est, dormiamus in
utramque aurem, veritas enim in vado est: vel potius, alacres, jam quaesitas a
te dissensionis causas, futiles and inanes esse probemus.

ARTICULUS XIX.
Explicantur calumniae quibus Annatus falsam haeresim, falsam contentionem,
fictitios in quos pugnaret adversarios extruxit.
SI quis vincere velit mi Annate, ut tu certe volebas, nec ullum habeat
adversarium, ut tibi, hac de gratia efficaci quaestione seposita nullus erat,
restat ut is ludicrum certamen instituat, ludicros fingat adversarios de quibus
possit triumphare. Hanc tu viam, mi Pater, hanc tui Doctores arripuerunt, non
enim alia supererat.

Pro veris Augustini discipulis, nescio quos adorti sunt Jansenistas, qui
nemini praeterquam ipsis visi, auditi, cogniti forent. His stramineis
Jansenistis quae voluerunt commenta, quas libuit haereses tribuerunt. Joculare
figmentum, and tantum ridendum, nisi haec ipsa crimina, has haereses in
Augustinianos Theologos, qui nunquam de his vel sommaverant, confer
voluissent. Illas igitur fictitias haereses seu veras potius calumnias operae
pretium est hic ex sociorum tuorum and illorum Doctorum quos tuis artibus
instruxeras, scriptis explicari. Non enim aliunde, credo, erui possunt.
Audiamus itaque Jesuiticos Doctores, suae cum mentitis illis Jansenistis
contentionis summam exponentes.

In scripto de adjungendis Dominicanis instituto ita loquuntur: Non agitur de
modo rei in hac causa, sed de ipsa re. Non agitur de modo quo gratia efficax
est, de quo Thomistas inter and Jesuitas controvertitur, sed de gratia ipsa
sufficient, quam tam hi quam illi admittunt; and de efficaci, utrum scilicet
NECESSITET ABSOLUTE ET ANTECEDENTER VOLUNTATEM, quod certe utrique negant, and
soli ADSTRUUNT JANSENISTAE (habes Jansenianam haeresim.) Non agitur de modo quo
gratia cum liberate concilianda est: sed de liberate ipsa, quae revera per
necessitatem antecedentem destruitur. Ergo in hac causa nullo modo includitur
CELEBRIS ILLA QUAESTIO DE AUXILIIS tam acriter olim sub Clemente VIII. and
Paulo V. Thomistas inter and Jesuitas agitata. Nempe utrique concedunt divinae
gratiae humanam voluntatem CONSENTIRE ET DISSENTIRE POSSE. HOC IPSUM
JANSENISTAE NEGANT. Igitur diversa causa est, nec quidquam ponderis accedet
Jesuitarum hypothesi ex novo Pontificio decreto.

Item in scripto super quinta prop. Qui hanc esse putant controversiam de
Auxiliis....... LATIUS ABERRANT QUAM TOTO CAELO. Nihil omnino illis exprobratur
de quo Thomistae cum Jesuitis contenderent. Nihil exigitur quam quod fuerit
concordissimo duorum illorum Ordinum consensu atque suffragiis constitutum; id
est, quod possibilia sint Dei praecepta transgressoribus; Quod detur Auxilium
sufficiens atque internum, a quo homines dissentiunt; Quod indifferentia ad
agendum and non agendum, a liberate arbitrii quae requiritur ad merendum and
demerendum, SIT INSEPARABILIS; Quod non sint haeretici qui dicunt libe^um
arbitrium Deo moventi per GRATIAM EFFICACEM, (nota efficacem) dissentire posse:
Et quod sensus divisus quo id posse dicitur, non idem sit quod ex hypothesi
mutationis and subtractionis gratiae, ita ut cum illa sit expedita ad
dissentiendum potentia.

Observa, quaeso, mi Annate, quoties hic nomiant vel tu vel isti Doctores,
gratiam sufficientem, possibilitatem; indifferentiam, haec omnia intelligi
debere in abstracto; abstrahendo scilicet a notione Molinistica and Thomistica.
His positis, pergamus, and nos in istis liberales expecta; imo tibi in
expugnandis tuis illis Jansenistis fidissimos adjutores.

ARTICULUS XX.
Expurgantur priora ex fictitiis illis dissenssionis capitibus ab Annato
ejusque Doctoribus Romae excogitatis.
NOn leviter certe tibi ac Doctoribus tuis succenseo, mi Pater, quod tantum
frustra laborem ceperitis. Idcircone Romam petere oportuit, ut possibilitates
abstractivas, gratias sufficientes abstractivas, indifferentias abstractivas
obtineretis? Poenitet me operae tuae tam male collocatae. Quin tu nobis ista
praedicebas? Certe sine sumptu, sine labor hic ab Augustinianis non minus
satisfactum foret, quam a Thomistis, omninoque ipsos in insectandis ac delendis
nescio quibus illis Jansenianis necessitantis gratiae assertoribus, socios vel
promptissimos habuissetis. Quid enim, mi Annate, hic petierunt tui Doctores,
quod non ipsi Augustiniani, and ante Romanum judicium, and in ipso Romano
judicio, and post istud denique judicium, tam prolixe quam ulli Thomistae
detulerint? Petierunt ut possibilia dicantur Dei mandata. Quis hoc unquam
Augustinianorum negavit? Ut vero possibilia dicantur. Been est. Sed dic,
quaeso, an satis sit possibilitas Thomistica actus primi and sensus divisi.
Nempe illam satis esse fatearis necesse est, aut jam tibi cum Thomistis
pugnandum, quod jure detrectas. Ergo illam tibi ac sociis tuis, quantacunque
est, tradunt, concedunt, largiuntur Augustiniani. Ecquid beant te? At forte id
meo nomine facio, quod nullum est? Imo vero sat scio, me nemo temerarium dicet,
si hoc pro omnibus spondeam. Hoc certe concessit Arnaldus in Apologeticis
epistolis: hoc caeteri quotidie Augustiniani largiuntur. Itaque cum
expeditissimas, completissimas, sufficitissimas, proximas potentias, sine
efficaci auxilio nunquam in actum prodeuntes plenis manibus tertia
Disquisitione in sinum tuum congerebam, nemo Augustinianorum reclamavit, aut me
questus est liberialiorem esse quam par erat. Ergo de possibilitate ipsa
conveniat tibi nobiscum necesse est, quando cum Thomistis convenit.

Nec de gratia sufficient difficilior consensio est. Vide enim quam
liberaliter Arnaldus in Dissertationis de propositione sua praefatione:
Speciatim vero, iniquit, in justis volentibus and conantibus, gratias
excitantes admittendas fateor, easque Thomistico sensu sufficientes. Quamobrem
quaecunque demum sententia Constitutioni Innocentii subjiciatur, fateor verum
esse illum sensum, quo vulgo a Thomistis accipitur, nimirum omnibis justis
volentibus and conantibus adesse gratias excitantes sufficientes Thomistico
sensu, neque deesse illis gratiam qua possibilia fiant praecepta, tum quia jam
habent excitantem, qua possunt sensu praedicto: tum quia si illi gratiae plene
consenserint (quod possunt si velint, quod si non fecerint, in culpa sunt)
gratiam efficacem non jam habituri sunt, sed jam habebunt: quia si quis gratiae
sufficienti consenserit, ut iidem docent, signum est a posteriori affuisse illi
gratiam efficacem.

Haec post costitutionem Arnaldus, quod idem, ut vidimus, ante Constitutionem
varii dixerant, imprimisque Doctor de Sainte-Beuve, cujus locum ante retulimus.
Nec aliter locuti sunt Romae Augustiniani Doctores, cum tandem casu nescio quod
Hallerii scriptum nacti essent, cujus illi confutationem brevi confectam non
Consultoribus, sed summo Pontifici obtulerunt ipso quo auditi sunt die, id est
jam confecta Constitutione, ut fateris. In hoc scripto verba Hallerii referunt
ita sensum Jansenii super prima propositione complectentis.

SCRIPTUM ADVERSARIORUM.
Constat vero ex Jansenii doctrina, ex principiis toto isto libro tertio, and
alibi, etiam justis quotiescunque transgrediuntur mandata Dei, deesse gratiam,
tum illam qua eadem implere possunt, tum istam qua auxilium ad praecepta
implenda sufficiens impetrare queant. Hoc illi, qui de Jansenio nominatim Romae
agi non putabant, obiter tamen and quasi aliud agentes ita refellunt.

RESPONSIO.
Imponunt gravissime Jansenio, nisi per auxilium sufficiens intelligant
Molinisticum, quod revera nunquam adesse in hoc statu docet Jansenius, quia per
illud vera Christi gratia destruitur, and Pelagianus error restituitur. Nunquam
vero dixit justos, quotiescunque transgrediuntur praeceptum, nullam habere
gratiam. In hac ipsa propositione de qua agitur, quaestio est de JUSTIS
VOLENTIBUS UTIQUE PER GRATIAM ALIQUAM. Dicuntur enim volentes, imperfecte
scilicet and invalide, per hanc parvam gratiam, ut docet S. Augustinus de great.
and lib. arb. in testimoniis quae Jansenius praecipue citat in locis ubi de
propositione agit. Dum ergo dicit Jansenius non adesse gratiam qua possint
praecepta implere, intellgit de gratia dante posse ita completum, ut det simul
ipsum velle; sed non excludit aliam parvam gratiam. Legatur de gratia
Salvatoris lib. 2. c. 27. lib. 4. c. 16. 17, 18. lib. 8. c. 2. and postea de
adversariorum fide judicetur. Hanc autem gratiam parvam non vocavit quidem
gratiam sufficientem ad operandum, quia non existimavit illud auxilium ad
aliquid sufficiens dici, praeter quod aliud auxilium necessarium est: sed
reipsa gratiam sufficientem sumptam pro parva and imperfecta, quae tanta non
est, quanta sufficit ut volendo faciamus, sed quae sufficit ut imperfecte
velimus, non solum non negavit, sed in locis citatis and ubique SICUT VERAM
CHRISTI GRATIAM adstruxit.

En quid illi tum obiter de Jansenio quem nusquam alias nec in scrptis nec in
orationibus suis appellaverunt. Ergo, mi Annate, and ante and post
Constitutionem, and Romae and Parisiis de gratia sufficient justorum volentium
tibi semper satisfecerunt Doctores Augustiniani. Non postulas Molinianam,
concedunt Augustiniani Thomisticam. In hac includitur abstractiva illa tua
gratia sufficiens, ut in specie genus, si sit aliquid; aut si nihil est illa
gratia sufficiens in abstracto, ut long probabilius est, and si hanc negarent
Augustiniani, mi Annate, nihil negarent.

Si nil Cinna petis, nil tibi Cinna nego. ARTICULUS XXI.
Alia fictitiae altercandi causae exploduntur.
QUi vestram in calumniando audaciam ignoret, suspicetur necesse est, esse
quosdam Hyperboreos Jansenistas, vulgo hominum ignotos, quorum nomina Romae
detuleritis. Plane enim incredibile est vos iis qui vel in Gallia, vel in
Belgio ac caeteris Europae locis versantur, tam inepta and absurda commenta
affingere ausos, qualia his fictitiis Jansenistis ascribitis.

Agitur, haec vestra sunt atque Hallerii verba superius relata, de gratia
efficaci; utrum scilicet necessitet absolute and antecedenter voluntatem, quod
certe utrique, id est, Thomistae and Molinistae negant, and soli ADSTRUUNT
JANSENISTAE. Et infra: Utrique concedunt divinae gratiae humanam; voluntatem
consentire and dissentire posse: hoc IPSUM JANSENISTAE NEGANT. Item: Exigitur
ab ipsis ut fateantur QUOD NON sint haeretici qui dicunt liberum arbitrium per
gratiam EFFICACEM MOTUM DISSENTIRE POSSE; and quod sensus divisus, quo id posse
dicitur, non idem sit quod ex hypothesi mutationis and subtractions gratiae,
ita ut cum illa sit expedita ad dissentiendum potentia.

Age dic, mi Pater, quinam sunt illi Jansenistae qui id negant vel negaverunt?
Quibus in urbibus, quibus in locis habitant? Quibus in libris id docuerunt?
Quem testem adducis qui hoc de ipsis audierit?

De Jansenio non agitur, de quo in hac tota Disquisitione non disputo; quanquam
ipsius sententia ex ejus locis tertia Disquis. adductis, itemque ex toto cap.
4. lib. 8. de gratia Christi facile pervideri possit. Agitur de Augustini
discipulis, in quos sub Jansenistarum nomine hanc calumniam contulistis; quam
ergo in antecessum ex tot illorum locis art. 5. 6. and seq. allatis elisi. Hanc
si Romae refellere potuissent Augustiniani Doctores, quis sociorum Doctorumve
tuorum pudor? Quae angustiae fuissent? Quanta in illos summi Pontificis
indignatio exarsisset, cum se tam aperte ab illis cognovisset illusum? Verum
sedulo providistis, ut vobis haec objicere impune liceret; adversariis vestris
haec non modo repellere, sed vix nosse quidem l^ceret: gratia siquidem vestra,
perfectum est; ut Augustinianis and scriptorum communicatio, and tanta
contentione postulata collatio negaretur, uti mox narrabimus. Divino tamen nutu
factum est, ut in scriptis summo Pontifici oblatis, sed quae nullus omnino
legit, ut pote Constitutione jam confecta, hanc calumniam, aliud agentes
confutarint, illud ipsum asserentes, quod negare arguebantur. Sic enim illi in
scripto de gratia efficaci, paulo ante Constitutionem editam summo Pontifici
oblato: Ex ratione status, reperitur semper indifferentia potentiae, qua
voluntas etiam sub gratia proxime necessaria ex se efficace, potest nolle. Et
infra: Quod ad haec verba, SVFFICIT LIBERTAS a CO ACTION, non intelligitur
nullam esse in hujus status merito and demerito indifferentiam potentiae, hoc
enim haereticum esset, and a nullo Catholico assertum est. Et infra: ista
indifferentia ratione status hujus semper reperitur.

Abeant nunc quicunque jactare Romae non erubuerunt, gratiam efficacem talem ab
Augustinianis adstrui, quae necessitet absolute: negare illos gratiae efficaci
posse dissentiri, omnem omnino indifferentiam amovere, sensumque divisum tantum
statuere ex hypothesi subtractionis gratiae, quod somnium coram adversariis
suis ne minima quidem potuissent probabiltatis specie praetexere. Hi fere sunt
sensus illi quos sub quinque propositionibus ab adversariis suis defendi
criminabantur, ut ex te ipso, mi Annate, dicere est in praefatione Jansenii a
Thomistis damnati ita loquente: Cum Thomistae, inquis, censeant intrinsecam
omnino libero arbirio indifferentiam, eamque proximam and expeditam, (scilicet
in sensu diviso) tertiam propositionem Jansenii penitus conterunt: unde
sequitur etiam destruction quartae: quia fi gratia efficax non tollit
libertatem, consequenter nec tollit indifferentiam qua fit ut possit
dissentire; quod dicere, judicatur haereticum in illa propositione. Similiter
Hallerius in explicatione quartae propos. Quaeritur, inquit, utrum
haereticumsit dicere gratiam actualem Christi talem esse cui possit humana
voluntas consentire vel dissentire -- Neque etiam attingitur quaestio hic de
gratia efficaci, a se aut a consensu, qui utriusque opinionis assertores
fatentur quod gratiam Dei possumus abjicere, juxta Concilium Tridentinum, sess.
6. c. 5. sed tantum quaeritur utrum gratia in statu naturae corruptae talis
sit, UT NECESSITATEM INFERAT VOLUNTATI ADEO UT NON POSSIT EI DISSENTIRE: quod
nullus Catholicus unquam admisit.

Primam and secundam propositionem eodem multi Moliniani referunt, nec quintam
revocare difficile est. Ita ex unica illa necessitantis gratiae criminatione
omnes pene propositiones conflatae sunt.

Sed ut haec etiam magis dilucescant, non abs re erit, quemadmodum in
abstractiva tua cum Thomistis pacificatione feci, itidem tuam hanc cum
Augustini discipulis consensionem and fictam cum fictitiis Jansenistis pugnam
exigna tabella hic repraesentari: In qua etiam adjicietur ad cumulum, verum and
solidum inter Augustinianos and Molinistas de gratia efficaci vobiscum
certamen, ne quid ad plenam totius hujus causae cognitionem desit.

Vera pugna Fucata concordia (...) Molinistas inter, and Augustinianos ac
Thomistas. Inter Thomistas, and Molinistas abstractivos. Inter Molinistas
abstractivos, and fictitios Jansenistas. Very Molinistae. Augustiniani and
Thomistae. Molinistae abstractivi. Fictitii Jansenistae. I. NOn datur gratia
nec per se efficax, nec necessitans, sed tantum sufficiens.

I. DAtur gratia per se efficax non necessitans.

I. NOn datur gratia necessitans, sed alia abstrahendo ab efficaci and
sufficient.

I. DAtur gratia necessitans sive dissentiendi potestatem tollens.

II. Mandata Dei justis volentibus and conantibus sunt possibilia semper in
sensu composito.

II. Mandata Dei justis volentibus and conantibus, sed gratia efficaci ad plene
conandum necessaria carentibus, non sunt possibilia in sensu composito, sunt
tamen iisdem possibilia in sensu diviso, and in actu primo, ea potestate quae
nunquam in actum prodit sine efficaci auxilio.

II. Mandata Dei justis volentibus and conantibus sunt possibilia, abstrahendo
a sensu diviso and composito.

II. Mandata Dei justis volentibus and conantibus sunt absolute impossibilia
tam in sensu diviso quam composito.

III. Datur gratia sufficiens versatilis quae pro nutu voluntatis modo est
inefficax, modo est efficax, sine novo auxilio. Non datur autem ejusmodi gratia
sufficiens quae aliud insuper requirit auxilium ut in actum prodeat.

III. Non datur gratia sufficiens versatilis, quae sine alio novo auxilio modo
efficax sit, modo inefficax pro solo nutu voluntatis. Datur tamen gratia
sufficiens, si per eam vocem ea intelligatur quae cum imperfectam voluntatem
inspiret (qua ratione efficax est, potentiam dat ad plenam voluntatem, quam
tamen nunquam producit sine efficaci auxilio.

III. Datur gratia sufficiens quomodocunque, sive abstrahendo ab ea quae
nunquam, and ea quae aliquando in actum prodit sine efficaci auxilio.

III. Nulla datur prorsus gratia sufficiens nec versatilis, ne^ Thomistioa: sed
omnis gratia efficax est pleni consensus.

IV. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae, requiritur
indifferentia in sensu composito, sive qua quis ita agat, ut contingere
potuerit eum actu and effective non agere. Non sufficit autem indifferentia
potentiae, sive in sensu diviso, qua ita voluntas dicitur posse non agere, ut
nunquam reipsa non agat.

IV. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur
indifferentia in sensu composito: sive non requiritur ut voluntas, positis
omnibus ad agendum praerequisitis, ita sit ad agendum aut non agendum
indeterminata, ut utrumlibet actu and effective contingere possit, and
aliquando reipsa contingat, sufficit autem indifferentia in sensu diviso, qua
ita dicitur voluntas posse non agere, ut tamen posito efficace gratiae divinae
auxilio, nunquam ipsam non agere contingat.

IV. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae requiritur
indifferentia abstrahendo ab indifferentia sensus compositi vel divisi.

IV. Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae, nulla requiritur
indifferentia, nec in sensu diviso, nec composito, nec actus nec potentiae.

V. Cuilibet gratiae in sensu composito obtemperari and resisti potest.

V. Cuilibet gratiae in sensu diviso obtemperari and resisti potest; sed in
sensu composito gratiae efficaci semper obtemperatur, nunquam resistitur.
Inefficaci autem vel sufficienti, ratione illius effectus, respectu cujus
dicitur sufficiens, semper resistitur, cum sola est nunquam obtemperatur.

V. Gratia cuilibet obtemperari vel resisti potest, abstrahendo a sensu
composito vel diviso.

V. Gratiae efficaci resisti omnino non potest, nec in sensu diviso, nec in
sensu composito.



ARTICULUS XXIII.
Conclusio cum exhortatione ad concordiam.
SEd jurgiorum satis, mi Annate, praestat in concordiam redire, condonatis
injuriis. Vides de necessitante illa gratia nullum unquam Augustini discipulum
cogitasse. Desine ergo in illo figmento concertationis causas quaerere. Et
quando abjecta Molinianae indifferentiae Molinianaeque gratiae defensione,
nullum tibi esse cum Thomistis certamen agnoscis, agnosce itidem nullu^ cum
Augustinianis vel esse vel fuisse. Fratres in se pugnare, miseru^ est; sine
causa pugnare, miserrimum. Nullam autem causam fuisse cur Augustinianis illos
errores impingeretis, ita perspicue planum feci, ut id nec palam negare audeas,
si quid eruditorum judicium vereris; nec tacitus apud te, si quid vereris
conscientiam tuam. Saltem ergo convictus define, and hanc discordiae stammam
qua sine causa flagrat Ecclesia, compone. Bono zelo fortasse nescio quam illam
gratiae necessitantis haeresim insecutus quibusdam videbere, si ea evanescente
turbare desistas. At si postquam omnes insuperabili, indeclinabili, invicta
gratia constantissime retenta, hanc tuam gratiam necessitantem propalam
exploserint, tamen haereseos formidines intentare non desistas: tunc vel caecis
patebit qui te spiritus agat, non eum pacis, sed discordiae; non veritatis, sed
calumniae spiritum esse.

v. Idus Augusti, Ann. Sal. MDCLVII.
FINIS.
PAVLI IRENAEI DISQVISITIO QVINTA, HISTORICA and THEOLOGICA.
Qua ratione Jesuitae effecerint, ne Romae intelligeretur de nihilo pugnari.
Ubi brevis historia Romani judicii.
ARTICULUS I.
Scopus hujus Disquisitionis. Annati Consilia.
QUo clarius demonstravimus nullam reipsa inter Doctores ex utraque part Romam
missos controversiam fuisse, eo videtur obscurius, cur hoc Romae sit ignoratum;
curve tam facile Jesuitarum and Hallerii calumniis creditum sit. Hoc illud est,
quod hac Disquisitione explanandum aggredimur. Sed ad id necesse est brevem
totius Romani Judicii historiam praetexi: quam etsi in totum comprimi
maluissemus, extorquet a nobis adversariorum in objectando haereseos crimine
pervicacia, quod pro viribus depelli, nemo non iniquus aegre ferat.

Tu vero, mi Annate, quando in quarta Disquisitione tam benignam nobis operam
navasti, and ubique scriptis tuis orationi nostrae fidem adstruxisti, hic
etiam, obsecro, noli te subducere. Consiliorum enim tuorum profundam
calliditatem oculis omnium, tuisque subjecturi sumus, qua te vel potissimum
frui decet. Nolo ingredi in interiora mentis tuae; facta per se ipsa loquuntur
and mentem produnt. Liceat ergo perfacili quodam divinationis genere ex eis
quae fecisti, colligere quae cogitaris, initioque hic repraesentare consiliorum
tuorum summam quae postmodum ex iis quae acta sunt, luculenter patuere.

Rerum tuarum, mi Annate, status hic erat. Oblata Thomistis pacificatio nullam
pugnandi cum Augustinianis solidam tibi in propositionum negotio relinquebat
causam. His tamen alienissima commenta affingere decreveras, ut quocunque
tandem modo aliquam auferres propositionum censuram. Huc ut pervenires, ea tibi
opportunissima visa est via.

Imprimis destinatum fuit variis calumniis ab hoc quidem negotio alienis, suum
tamen in animo morsum relinquentibus, Augustinianos adoriri, potissimumque
inimici in Sedem Romanam animi labe aspergere. Sic futurum sperasti, ut eos
Romani in propositionum controversia nocentes optarent, eoque facilius
crederent.

Jam vero non modo singularis in Sedem Romanam veneratio vobis prae se ferenda
fuit; sed deforme ac degener in singulos Curiae Romanae ministros obsequium
simulandum. Haec Romae virtutum non postrema censetur.

Sed enim occurrebat hic grandis scopulus, ad quem tua coepta allisum iri pene
certum erat: expetita illa nempe Augustinianis, and a summo Pontifice promissa
collatio: quae si constituta fuisset, jam tuum cum illis consensum, and
calumniarum tuarum vanitatem ad oculum demonstrari necesse erat. Hujus tam
certi naufragii vitandi, mi Annate, una ratio erat, ut nervos omnes tuos
intenderes ad summum Pontificem ab instituendae collationis consilio
deterrendum.

Magnum erat hoc impetrasse, non sufficiebat tamen ad victoriam. Quid si enim
scripta mutuo communicarentur inter Doctores, and tui cogerentur explanate and
distinct quid peterent and vellent, aperire? Scilicet abstractionum commentum
nudatum esset, quod metus erat, ne sibilis a Romany exciperetur. Quid tu
igitur commodius hic ageres, nisi ut ne scripta communicarentur, pugnares,
illudque pervinceres, ut soli tam voce quam scripto Doctores tui loquerentur,
nec illorum mendacia ulli liceret refellere?

Hoc assecutus poteras tu quidem esse superior, non tamen certo. Quid si enim
Consultores Jansenii sensum circa quinque Propositiones explanassent, and cum
Thomistis convenire docuissent? Fortasse illorum auctoritate motus esset summus
Pontifex. Enitendum igitur fuit ut neminem audiret pro Jansenio loquentem,
multos contra Iansenio obloquentes.

Unum restabat non minus difficile, sed quoquomodo tamen conficiendum:
Augustinianos Doctores and omnino non audiri, and plane audiri, peraeque causae
tuae noxium. Arripiendum ergo medium quoddam iter, ut sic audirentur, quatenus
tibi utile erat, non quatenus ipsis. Audirentur ad pompam, non audirentur ad
hanc controversiam penitus explicandam.

Haec cogitare potuisti, mi Annate, ipsa ejus quod gerebas, negotii natura and
terrena prudentia qua vales, admonente. Haec certe fecisse te ex consequenti
narratione patebit.

ARTICULUS II.
Quam praeclare calumniis Romae Jesuitae pugnaverint in Augustinianos.
NIhil unquam tantis studiis Jesuitae expetiere quam Augustinianorum excidium.
Nulla in causa tantopere Societatis suae existmationem imo salutem verti
putarunt. Quantum igitur in illa contenderint, ex ipsorum cupiditatis
magnitudine conjici licet. Quibus autem potius armis uterentur quam iis quae ut
sibi semper paratissima essent, diligenter curarunt? Calumniam and
maledicentiam loquor, quam alii vitiorum capitalium numero subduxerunt, cum
Jesuiticis utilitatibus inservit, and in illos exeritur, quos suae Societati
infensos putant. Hanc cum in levissimis rebus adhibere soliti sint, si in tanto
rerum cardine negligerent, stultos seipsi deputarent.

Itaque nusquam illi laxiores calumniae habenas admisere quam cum Romae 5
propositionum causa expenderetur. Mitto illas quibus novam haeresim
Augustinianis affinxerunt, superiori Disquisitione confutatas. De his loquor
quibus Romanorum animos praepararunt ad illa ipsa novae haereseos commenta
proclivius accipienda.

Toto ex orb, id agentibus ipsis, sinistri de Jansenistarum molitionibus
rumores Romam affluebant. Illi a quadringentis Jesuitis per urbem
differebantur, ipsique nominatim Pontifici clam a certis insusurrabantur
hominibus. In his putida illa de negata Transubstantiatione, deletis
imaginibus, negato purgatorio, spreta Sanctorum invocatione, explosis
indulgentiis, mendacia quae jam in Gallia frigebant, Romae, quanto major hic
Iesuitis quam illic fides, maxim calebant.

Haec ipsi quidem Jesuitae, magna Romae gratia pollentes. Sed plus etiam
auctoritatis habebant illae calumniae quae per alios Romae disseminabantur.
Quam ad rem multi operam suam Jesuitis commodarunt, ac praecipue Hallerius, and
duo quidam Religiosi, de quibus infra dicetur. Hi praesertim eas sibi ceperunt
dissipandas, quae graviorem Augustinianis invidiam conflare apud Romanos
possent.

Hoc consilio Hallerius, dum adhuc Parisiis esset, longas ad Albizium, ad
Cardinalem Barberinum atque ad alios Romanae Curiae proceres mittebat
epistolas, quibus, ut ex illo multi in ipsa Sorbona audierunt, Jansenistas
confodiebat, hoc est calumniis conscindebat. In quibusdam, ut ex illo specimine
hominis istius fides cernatur, scripserat, certa se habere documenta quibus
convinceret eos qui S. Augustinum sequi se profitentur, innumeros errores
docuisse, and istos nominatim: Christianos qui peccant mortaliter, baptismi
characterem amittere neque Sacerdotes and Episcopos, si lethale crimen
admiserint, privari suo charactere, neque Sacerdotes and Episcopos amplius
esse: summum Pontificem esse tantum primum inter pares.

Haec and alia multa in illas epistolas congessaret Franciscus Hallerius. Quod
cum Parisiis rescissent Augustiniani Doctores, 1 die December. 1651. in ipsis
Facultatis Comitiis praedictum Hallerium interpellavere, ut ista quae se habere
jactavisset documenta proferret, quo Facultas pro merito in istorum auctores
animadverteret. Sed ille tum perculsus pudesactusque conticuit.

Ar postquam Romam v^nit, quo Jesuitis ibi conjunctior erat, eo ad calumniandum
effraeuatior fuit, cum ipse Curiae Romanae Primores quotidie inviseret, and
tanquam unus e priscis illis Doctoriribus ab ipsis audiretur. Itaque mirum quam
stulta multis persuaserit, tam apertum esse Jansenistarum schisma, ut jam vulgo
differentem a caeteris habitum induerent: Frequenter mulieres sic adulteria sua
in confessione explicate, Toties defuit mihi gratia: Esse nonnullos quos ad
desperationem illarum opinionum crudelitas adegisset. His fabulis Romanorum
credulitate abutebatur Hallerius. Mox eas Jesuitae ac multi alii Monachi
acceptas Hallerio referentes, in vulgus spargebant, quasi irrefragabili
auctoritate munitas.

Horum quos dixi Religiosorum, unus Morellius appellabatur, Theologus
Parisiensis. Hic cum Romae tum adesset, and voce and scripto Augustinianos
insectari non destitit. Voces praetereo, scriptum unum mihi in manibus est, e
quo nonnulla hic attexam, ut omnes intelligant qualia Romae de Jansenii
defensoribus jactarentur. Hujus scripti titulus est: De c^ntroversia inter
Jansenistas and Anti-Jansenistas. Hominis ingenium sequentia indicabunt.

In Gallia and Belgio, inquit, orti sunt viri politici ac partiarii ex fontibus
haereticorum, illam odii vel aversionis a summa sanctae Sedis potestate mentem
perniciosius ebibentes, inter quos aliqui sunt etiam Facultatum Doctores erga
ipsam minus been affecti: qui mediis omnibus nituntur ipsam labefactare. En
finis illorum qui Jansenistae appellantur; quia per fas and nefas etiam contra
Bullas Pontificias Jansenii dogmata tuentur, tanquam obtinendo suo fini
aptiora. Ut vero finem facilius assequi possint, his artificiis utuntur: and
inprimis operae pretium aestimant praecipuos SANCTAE SEDIS ZELATORES tam
seculares quam Regulates debilitare, ac, si possint, opprimere; quod hujusmodi
viri multis modis semper tentarunt. Et infra: Secretioribus viis diabolicam
intentionem magis apt dissimulantes, id moliti sunt, videlicet scriptis
impugnando communes aliorum Doctorum and Regularium SANCTAE SEDI ADDICTORUM
sententias, selegerunt materiam de gratia and praedestinatione, utpote
implicandis animis commodiorem. -- Hoc artificio Jansenistae usi sunt, ut
Doctorum sacrae Facultatis tam Secularium quam Regularium S. SEDIS ZELATORUM
conceptam apud omnes existimationem convellant, ut facilius deinde possint suae
machinationis venenum respergere. Et infra: In perniciem ZELATORUM S. SEDIS
conducunt pecuniis Doctores and Concionatores qui virus idem effundant in
pulpitis scholarum and templorum: Baccalaureos in Facultate, ut suis in
conclusionibus eorum placita sustineant, imo students in omnibus Galliae and
Belgii Universitatibus and Facultatibus venales habent: nec non omnis
conditionis viros in urbibus fere singulis, ut pestiferam eruditionem in
scholis and in privatis domibus disseminent, and simpliciores etiam instituant
privatis colloquiis, in quibus miscent cum rebus de gratia and praedestinatione
RES HORRENDAS de Sacramento Altaris and poenitentiae, contra auctoritatem
Concilii Tridentini, and perpetuas interserunt calumnias adversus Doctores and
viros quoscunque S. SEDISZ ELATORES praecipuos. Et eo fine Magnates aliquos
ditissimos suam in partem artificiose deduxerunt, a quibus ingentes pecuniarum
summas habent, ad perficiendas hujusmodi nefarias molitiones. Et mirum est,
quos conatus efficiant ad finem assequendum. Habent aliquot in locis
sectariorum suorum seminaria and congregationes his tantum machinationibus
intentas. Deinde quia viderunt Jansenistae non satis promoveri votum suum
contra ZELATORES S. SEDIS per solas materias de gratia, and praetextatum in his
D. Augustinum, non potuerunt diu conceptum adversus S. SEDEM and Ecclesiam
venenum retinere. Quare illud for as evomuerunt per libros and scripta de
frequenti, vel melius de infrequenti communione, accusantes Ecclesiam
corruptelae, cujus se medicos and reformatores ventilant, and etiam apertius
per scripta de duobus capitibus.

Haec si Religiosus ille confidenter and cum laud ac plausu multorum Romae
spargebat, quid censes Jesuitas? Itaque inanissimae illae calumniae tam altas
egerunt in Romanorum mente radices, ut nihil mirum inde opprimendae
Jansenianae, ut putarunt, factionis consilia fruticasse.

ARTICULUS. III.
Mulardi Franciscani, Regis Christianissimi nomine, cujus se Legatum ferebat,
ad summum Pontificem in Augustinianos calumniae.
SEd Jesuitis parum suit omnium sodalium suorum singuas in Augustini discipulos
armare. Parum fuit Religiosorum maledicentiam in illos distringere. Parum
denique Episcoporum Legatum falsa sed magna doctrinae opinione Romae florentem
Hallerium in ipsos immittere, nisi etiam Regis Christianissimi ridiculum
quendam Legatum adornassent, qui ingentia crimina coram summo Pontifice, quasi
Regis ipsius mandato, illis imponeret. Hic qualis fuerit, operae pretium paucis
aperire, ut norit indigneturque posteritas, tam despectam Molinistis fuisse
Regis Christianissimi Majestatem, ut ipsi tam infamem Legatum obtrudere non
dubitarint.

Huic Legato nomen fuit Mulardo. Erat autem origin Carnotensis, genere
Hallerii consobrinus. Ille primum Capucinorum institutum professus; mox
desertor and transfuga and Ordinis and Catholicae Religionis, Montis-Pessulam
Calvinistam egit, uxorem duxit, and Medicinam factitavit. Deinde conjugalis
vitae pertaesus, Romam petit, summo Pontifici obrepsit, and ab ipso cum
absolutione, mutandi Ordinis, and ad minus asperum transeundi licentiam
impetravit. Fit igitur ut pridem ex Capucino Calvinista, sic ex Calvinista
Franciscanus, laxioris, vel nullius potius observantiae, parasiticam potius
quam religiosam vitam agens, ubique turbans, and se vel alios prae animi vaga
mobilitate exagitans.

Hic, cum illa in Augustini discipulos invidiae flamma exarsisset, avide hanc
occasionem arripuit, non tam ut sibi gloriam, quam ut huc illuc cursandi
licentiam compararet. Itaque Hallerii opera delectus est, qui Romae
Jansenistarum damnationem Facultatis ac Regis nomine deposceret, dignus a
Molinistis judicatus, qui talem legationem obiret. Dedit etiam ipsi Hallerius
ad Albisium aliosque literas, quibus eum a Facultate Theologica Parisiensi ad
summum Pontificem missum fuisse mentiebatur. Post commendatam enim ipsius
summam fidem, curam, experientiam: Audies igitur illum, inquiebat, plura nostro
nomine, hoc est. Facultatis nomine loquentem. Denique quo Romae commendatior
esset, adjuncta est Episcoporum literis, Reginae Regni tunc moderatricis ad
summum Pontificem Epistola, qua ut hanc causam brevi decideret, orabat.

His ille mandatis superbus Romam venit, nec modo quinque propositionum
judicium petivit, sed infandas etiam calumnias tanquam regio jussu in Augustini
discipulos contulit. Has nihil necesse est ex manuscripto erui, cum eas
Jesuitarum assecla nomine F^leau nuper publicave it in illo etiam Jesuitis
pudendo libello quem inscripsere, Relation juridique, Narratio jur dica. Ibi
Mulardi oration, tanquam insigne Molinisticae causae firmamentum typis sic edita
est, page 177:

Oration ad summum Pontificem Innocentium divina providentia Papam X. habita
Romae die. 25. Septembris anni 1651. a Patre Francisco Mulard, Praedicatore
regio Ordinis Minorum, pro negotiis controversiae Jansenianae a Christianissimo
Rege Romam misso.
Missus a Christianissimo Rege, and a Syndico Sorbonae deputatus, romine
Facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis, ad Sanctitatis Vestrae pedes, ut secundum
antiquae Ecclesiae formam super dubiis rebus ac controversis Jansenianorum
propositionibus Sedem Romanam consuleremus, and de ore Sanctitatis Vestrae
Apostolico font responsa tandem aliquando per omnes Regni nostri provincias
emanent. Hoc postulat, Beatissime Pater, apud nos Reipub. Christianae
necessitas. Non enim apud eos qui Jansenianas parts sequuntur, doctrinae
duntaxat consensio est, seu potius erroris uniformitas, sed and consiliorum
communicatio. Jam ista doctrina in Sectam coaluit: conspiratio est hominum
temerariorum, qui omnes spernunt praeter suos, sibi non faventibus quoque modo
maledicunt, and Adversus summi Pontificis dignitatem atque auctoritatem
vexillum erexerunt, juniorum Doctorum ac scholasticorum manipulos conducentes
pretio, quod a mulieribus and laicis quibus poenitentiae publicae necessitatem
inculcant, facile corradunt blanditiis, factione, novitatis dulcedine. Ab
hominibus istiusmodi, Beatissime Pater, quid sperandum, vel potius, quid
timendum praeter turbas, quas jam miserrime in Gallia excitarunt, and Ecclesiae
turbationem quam pro certo moliuntur? Opus est igitur celeri ac potenti manu
Sanctitatis Vestrae qua comprimantur. Nisi enim eorum dogmata erronea, quibus
tanquam tessera ac sacramento confoederatio ista constringitur, certa ac
singularia damnentur censura Pontificiis irrefragabili, quam alio nomine
elevare nequeant, quasi sit Congregationis Inquisitionis, aut a certis
hominibus dictata, non a Pontifice ipso lata, nunquam ad plenum debellari
poterit ista factio. Ista, Beatissime Pater, non tam meo nomine, neque enim, si
meo nomine tantum loquerer, adeo confidenter loquerer Sanctitati Vestrae, Sed
nomine Christianissimi Regis, nomine Plurimorum Episcoporum, nomine multorum
Doctorum and Sorbonicorum and Aliorum, imo omnium fere quotquot in Regno nostro
sunt Catholicae fidei zelo aestuantium, and prudentia insignium ore loquor;
aequi boni ut consulas hanc orationem nostram precamur. Et Sanctitati Vestrae
plurimos ac felices annos optamus, ut Ecclesiae Dei and orbi universo pacem and
spiritualem and temporalem tandem aliquando reddere possit and valeat.

Sic ille and Regis Christianissimi Majestate, and summi Pontificis apice
indignissime abutebatur. Sed quo effraenatior ejus audacia, eo minorem fraudis
suspicionem praeferebat. An enim Christianissimi Regis Legato non credidisset
Innocentius, octoginta praeterea Episcoporum and Facultatis Theologiae quasi
suffragium proferenti? Si ergo credidit, credidit misere potius quam temere;
atque eatenus erga fictitiam illam conspirationem and sectam pejus in dies
animatus fuit.

ARTICULUS IV.
Collationis inter Hallerium and Dominicanos brevis historia.
ROmanorum animisita per illas calumnias praeparatis, tota deinde vestra
contentio fuit, ut collationis consilium disturbaretis. Quam id causae tuae
capitaliter infestum esset, tu quidem ab ipsis initiis solertia tua sensisti:
Hallerius autem non modo ratione, sed etiam quodam experimento, cujus
narrationem placuit praemittere, ut omnibus pateat tam male compactam fuisse
sententiam vestram, ut ne minimum quidem in legitimae collationis luce posset
consistere. Hoc Hallerius, ut dixi, expertus est in brevi colloquio quod cum
Dominicanis habuit, cujus historiam Romae tunc temporis fidelissime
conscriptam, and mox in Galliam missam, nos hic compendio summa cum fide
narrabimus.

Die Martis undecima Februarii anni 1653. Generalem Dominicanorum convenit
Hallerius. Dixit se cum Thomistis congruere, gratiam efficacem ultro admittere,
non hoc sensu impeti a se Jansenium, sed alio qui Thomistas nil prorsus
attingeret. Respondet Generalis gravius esse negotium quam ut brevi decidi
possit, illud prius cum Theologis Ordinis sui communicandum. Res ergo ad feriam
sextam rejicitur; interim cum Theologis suis consilium habet Generalis, quorum
praecipue erant Nolano, Reginaldus, Galassinus, Alvarez, Libelli, quibus visum
est sequentes propositionis contexere, quas Hallerio subscribendas offerent, ad
id explorandum number vere and ex animo secum sentiret.

I.
Gratia efficax vere, realiter ac physice praemovens and praedeterminans
immutabiliter, infallibiliter, insuperabiliter, ita est necessaria ad singulos
actus, etiam initium fidei and ad orationem, ut sine illa homo, etiam justus,
non possit adimplere Dei praecepta, etiamsi velit and conetur affectu and
conatu imperfecto; quia deest illi gratia qua possit, sive qua siant illi
possibilia possibilitate cum effectu, ut loquitur Augustinus de natura and g
atia, capite 42.

II.
In natura lapsa nunquam resistitur gratiae interiori, id est efficaci, in
sensu explicato in prima propositione, quae secundum phrasim Augustini vocatur
interior.

III.
Admerendum and demerendum iu statu natura lapsae, non requiritur libertas ab
omni necessitate, sed sufficit libertas ab omni coactione, hoc est, a violentia
and naturali necessitate.

IV.
Admiserunt Semipelagiani gratiae interioris ad singulos actus necessitatem;
and in hoc erant haerettci, quod vellent eam gratiaus talem esse cui posset
humana voluntas resistere vel obtemperare; id est, in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent gratiam illam non esse efficacem modo explicato in prima propositione.

V.
Error est Semipelagianorum dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum esse, aut sanguinem fudisse: quia videlicet Christus est quidem mortuus
pro omnibus quoad sufficientiam pretii sufficienter, non tamen efficaciter,
quia non omnes participant beneficium mortis ejus.

Die dicta, scilicet Februarii 14. Valentino Martyri sacra, Hallerius and socii
cum Dominicanis collaturi adveniunt, ac post prima illa quae in congressu
solent, demonstrare conatus est Hallerius quinque propositiones a controversia
quae inter Dominicanos and Jesuitas viget, omnino esse alienas. Hic de Baianis
propositionibus agi, quas Jansenius renovarat. Nominatim esse cautum in iis
Congregationibus quae propositionibus excutiendis jam habitae erant, ut tota de
Auxiliis controversia prorsus intacta relinqueretur, nihil omnino cum illa
implicatas esse propositiones, nec enim eas a se impugnari, quatenus ad gratiam
efficacem revocantur, sed tantum in sensu Jansenii, sicut ex omnibus libellis
summo Pontifici oblatis planum erat; qui sensus prorsus a Dominicanorum
sententia abhorreat. Hoc breviter ille in singulis propositionibus probare
conatus est, his tantum duobus principiis nitens; admissam semper esse a
Thomistis gratiam sufficientem, rejectam ab iisdem esse necessitantem gratiam
quae tolleret dissentiendi potentiam; contra a Jansenio necessitantem gratiam
adstrui, rejici funditus sufficientem, and tanquam monstrum exagitari.

Ubi peroravit, jussu Generalis Pater Reginaldus sic exorsus est: Tria in hac
quaestione supponenda; Primo, pro fidei decreto haberi non posse gratiam
sufficientem omnibus communem. Secundo, ex Thomistis gratiam sufficientem
semper esse ad imperfectos actus efficacem, neque hoc sensu a Iansenio negatam,
eandemque long diversam esse a Moliniana quae sit efficax per consensum,
utpote quae nunquam in actum prodeat, nisi efficaci auxilio ad opus applicetur.
Tertio, gratiam efficacem, qua insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter voluntas ad
actum impellitur, ad omnem pietatis actum, adeoque etiam ad fidei and orationis
initia esse prorsus necessariam.

His positis, facile est, inquit, probare in sensu gratiae efficacis omnes
propositiones veras esse. De possibilitate praeceptorum in Congregationibus de
Auxiliis disputatu^ est. Urgebant Jesuitae in sententia Dominic. praecepta esse
impossibilia justis gratia efficaci carentibus. Respondebant nostri esse
impossibilia, in sensu composito, non in sensu diviso; sive possibilia esse
possibilitate simplici, non autem possibilitate, cum effectu: adeoque verum est
ex nostra doctrina justis volentibus and conantibus mandata Dei esse
impossibilia in sensu composito, licet sint possibilia in sensu diviso per
illam gratiam quae satis indicantur his vocibus volentibus and conantibus, id
est, per gratiam sufficientem Thomistico sensu, quae nihil aliud est, quam
voluntas and conatus quidam imperfectus. Caeteras eo modo ad gratiam efficacem
revocavit, quo explicatur in Propositionibus supra memoratis.

Postquam Reginaldus conticuit, excepit Hallerius: Gratiae efficacis doctrinam
olim a se in scholis traditam dixit, nec se minus ad eandem profitendam paratum
esse; and ita se in publica oratione coram Cardinalibus and Consultoribus
testificatum. Verum hac absente nequaquam praecepta esse impossibilia, nec hac
praesente potestatem dissentiendi eripi, ut Concilium Tridentinum desinierat,
nec ipsi ex necessitate consentiri. Porro illam quam attulerat Pater Reginaldus
diistnctionem possibilitatis simplicis and possibitatis cum effectu a nemine
unquam esse traditam. Respondit Reginaldus eam extare apud Augustinum cap. 41.
de not. and great. Tum Hallerius: Nusquam in Augustino reperire est haec verba:
possibilitas cum effectu. Atqui, inquit, Reginaldus, hae ipsae Augustini sunt
voces, and eo quo dixi loco. Convictus Hallerius alio sermonem detorsit,
iterumque conformavit in sensu efficacis gratiae nullo modo propositiones a se
impeti, quod ipsum asseverarunt sodales ejus Lagautius and Iosselius, idque a
se express in omnibus supplicibus libellis suis esse declaratum. Non igitur,
inquit Generalis, sine causa doctrinae nostrae timemus, quando vos ipsi illi
timuistis. Tum Hallerius: sed nihil est jam quod illi timeatis. Inseretur enim
in Bulla oration nostra, qua illa nominatim e discrimine tollitur.

His dictis, Pater Alvarez Theologiae Professor sententiam dicere jussus: ut
video, inquit, facilis inter nos compositio. Conceditis gratiam efficacem a
praevisione Dei minime pendentem. Ergo etiam in sensu gratiae efficacis
propositiones esse veras concedatis necesse est. Ergo fatendum est vobis,
gratiae efficaci carentibus praecepta esse impossibilia impossibilitate
consequenti, non antecedenti. Ergo etiam illud dabitis, gratiae efficac nunquam
resisti, nec ista necessitate meritum tolli. Hoc igitur tantum facto opus est.
Distinguendae sunt propositiones in varios sensus: mox a summo Pontifice
communiter petendum, ut illas sanciat in sensu gratiae efficacis, damnet in
aliis sensibus.

Hic Patrem Alvarem interpellavit Hallerius. Quam tu, inquit, gratiam efficacem
postulas, eam libenter concedo. Fateor itidem ea carentibus praecepta esse
impossibilia impossibilitate consequenti. Hoc privatim subscribere paratus sum,
non tanquam Episcoporum Legatus. Vos vicissim damnationi propositionum in sensu
Iansenii subscribite. Hallerio ita loquenti caeteri Doctores palam assensi
sunt. Tum Reginaldus: Quid si, inquit, nobiscum vel in omnibus propositionibus,
vel in quibusdam sentiat Iansenius? An sic quoque a nobis damnabitur? Hoc illud
est, inquit Generalis, quod inquirendum est: cur igitur hunc sensum Iansenii
explicare detrectatis? Enimvero, inquit Reginaldus, ante omnia explicandus est
ille sensus Iansenii, quem si pateat a Thomistis esse diversum, tum ejus
damnationem communibus votis a summo Pontifice postulabimus. Hic Hallerius ac
socii uno ore negarunt, hunc se Jansenii sensum explicare posse, ne a Mandatis
Episcoporum discederent. Tum Pater Alvarez: Quando hunc Iansenii sensum
explicare non potestis, nos vobiscum convenire non possumus. Volumus, inquit
Hallerius, damnati Iansenium, quatenus negat gratiam sufficientem. Atqui,
inquit Pater Alvarez, in hac ipsa propositione quam impugnatis, eam admittit.
Quid est enim volentibus and conantibus, nisi gratiam sufficientem habentibus?
Imperfecta enim voluntas and imperfectus conatus est gratia sufficiens
Thomistarum.

Illi autem: Si gratiam sufficientem, inquiunt, admittit Iansenius, sibi ipse
repugnat. Tum Alvarez; Si sib contradicit Iansenius, ob noc ipsum explicandus
est ejus sensus: alioqui damnato sensu Ianseniano, utra tandem contradictionis
pars damnata dicetur? Sed vos q^id tandem admittitis, quod Iansenius non
admiserit? Admittitis in justo gratiam habitualem; admittit Iansenius.
Admittitis virtutes infusas; admittit Iansenius. Admittitis inspirationes and
illustrationes; admittit Iansenius. Admittitis desideria bona; admittit
Iansenius in hac prima propositione. Bona enim voluntas de qua loquitur, ex hac
gratia est, and ista gratia ipsissima est gratia sufficiens Thomistarum. Quid
ergo Thomistae, quid vos supra Iansenium? Ut illi nihil respondebant, idem
argumentum ter iteravit Pater Alvarez. Ad extremum respondit e tribus
Doctoribus postremus; praeter haec omnia admittendam esse gratiam sufficientem,
extra quam nihil homini deeft, praeter ipsum actum qui a gratia efficaci
confertur. Negarunt Dominicani aliam a Thomistis admitti gratiam sufficientem,
ab ea quam supra exposuerant, lateque probarunt ex sancto Thoma, sine efficaci
Dei gratia nihil been fieri posse: itaque damnata prima propositione damnari
duos Sancti Thomae articulos. Non aliam igitur compositionis viam inire posse,
quam si accurate very istarum propositionum sensus secernerentur a falsis, ut
falsorum damnationem simul prosequerentur. Tum Doctores: Nobis, inquiunt Sensus
illos distinguere non licet, ne a mandatis Episcoporum desciscamus, nec nos,
inquit Pater Alvarez, possumus consentire vobiscum.

Haec ubi dixit; Generalis assurgens, Videtis, inquit, quantum e re nostra sit,
ne propositiones sine explicatione damnentur. Boni ergo consulite, si, ne hoc
fiat, pro viribus elaboremus. Quae cum dixisset, Hallerius and socii non multum
alacres discesserunt.

Postea Generalis totius familiae suae nomine december and septem vicibus
audientiam a summo Pontifice postulavit, nec impetravit tamen: adeo summo
Pontifici illud haeserat de gratia efficace and de tota controversia de
Auxiliis nullam hic verti questionem; and ideo non audiendos qui gratiae tantum
efficacis defendendae causa audire postularent.

ARTICULUS V.
Qua pacto Jesuitarum gratia Auoustinianis Doctoribus solennis Congregatio
scriptorumque communicatio negata sit.
QUam bona fide Augustiniani in hac controversia versarentur, hinc perspici
licuit, quod omni studio ac contentione semper egerunt, ut solenni
congregatione institura, facta scriptorum communicatione, fraudis omnis
amoveretur suspicio: Quam vos mala, inde potuit intelligi, quod omni art
semper tenebras and clandestina judicia captastis. Utrique prudenter; sed illi
Christiana prudentia; vos seculari atque terrena.

Nimirum si haec solennis, quam postulabant, Congregatio esset instituta, illi
vicerant, vos perieratis. Quid enim fieret putidis illis abstractionibus
vestris, si adversarii vultum, si disputationis lucem subiissent? Quid illa
gratiae necessitantis larva, ac caeteris vitreis calumniis? Recte igitur ad
illam Congregationem arcendam omnes vestrae Societatis arts, gratiam,
potentiam contulistis. Hanc propria ductus aequitate summus Pontifex
Episcoporum Doctorumque precibus initio concesserat: sed ad eum ab hac mente
deducendum, quae non admotae sunt machinae? Qui non terrores allati?

Quoties longaevo seni per homines familiares ac vobis addictos insusurratum,
ne extremam senectutem superfluis curis oneraret, neve disputationum illarum
molestia festinam sibi arcesseret mortem? Id Clementi VIII interitus causam
fuisse citra fructum. Ad Sedis Apostolicae majestatem id quoque pertinere, ut
inauditis partibus res fidei di judicare possit. Sic Pii V. sic Gregorii XIII.
Bullas in Baium, sic novissimam Urbani in Iansenium nemine audito confectam. Si
semel istius Congregationis fama in exteras manaret provincias, advolaturos
undique Doctores, and plura fortasse postulaturos Abunde odiosos esse qui jam
Romae aderant; quid si rursum alii adjungerentur? Audiri jam non nullorum
susurros de celebrandi Concilii necessitate. Asserendum omnino jus illud summo
Pontifici de dogmatis sine ullis judiciorum dilationibus, and nullis partibus
auditis decernendi; utendumque ad id ea temporum inclinatione qua nulla
opportunior contingere poterat. Nunc Aulam Gallicam, nunc long numerosissimam
Episcoporum partem, nunc praecipua Senatus Parisiensis capita (ficenim de
illorum voluntate largiebamini) ad accipiendam Pontificiam Constitutionem
parata. Periculum in mora esse, hac confirmari Iansenianam factionem,
reformationis specie toti Ecclesiae imminentem, novandae Religionis avidam, de
summi Pontificis infallibilitate male sentientem, cujus opprimendae tempus
idoneum non omittendum, sed quam celerrime occupandum esset.

Sentis, ml Annate, quam nihil mentiar: sed ne me putes divinatione verum
assequi, sic habeto, nihil me conjecturis hic indulgere; nec quidquam scribere
quod non tibi certis argumentis aliquando probetur. Erat summus Pontifex ob
multa ab Ianseniana causa alienus, and maxim quod Urbani VIII. Bullam falsi
accusaverant Iansenii defensores, in qua conficienda ipse, dum Cardinalis
esset, affuerat: nec adhuc abscesserat ex ejus animo bicipitis illius capitis
terror, initique olim, ut Romae jactatum erat, ab Iansenianis cum Cardinali
Richelio foederis de duplici summo Pontifice constituendo: quo rumore
praesertim adducta est Inquisito ad librum illum de auctoritate Petri and Pauli
suo decreto profligandum.

Hoc ergo timore perculsus, and praeterea variis rumoribus undique pulsatus
Innocentius, quamprimum illa se molestia, illa suspicione exolvere statuit.
Itaque pro solenni quam promiserat Congregatione, rem totam Inquisitioni, seu
potius nonnullis ex Inquisitione selectis Cardinalibus and Consultoribus
excutiendam remisit, ratus id and brevius, and ad auctoritatem Romanae Sedis
ampliandum opportunius.

Nihil laetius and exoptatius Iesuitis poterat accidere: si quidem inter
Cardinales Inquisitionis praefectos erat Spada, ipsis pridem conjunctus,
duriusque olim in nescio quibus notis a nonnullis Augustinianis habitus. Erat
etiam inter ministros Inquisitionis Albisius ejusdem S. Officii assessor,
professas cum Augustini Discipulis inimicitias exercens, quae Romae etiam
vehementius ob multas ipsius injurias recruduerant. E. Consultoribus multi
Iesuitis addicti, imo unius etiam Iesuita. Accidit praeterea ut Abbas Hilarion
and Pater Ubaldinus e Consultorum numero se subducerent. Ille a Cardinali Spada
monitus ne adesset, hic nihil super ea re a summo Pontifice decretum iri
arbitratus, ideoque inutilem contentionis invidiam fugiens. Quibus amotis, quos
Iesuitis minime deditos esse certum erat, illico in eorum locum intruduntur
Tartaglia Discalceatus Carmelita, and Celestinus Brunus, ambo Molinistis
obnoxii.

Non statim tamen Augustinianis Doctoribus innotuit hujus controversiae
judicium ad Inquisitionem delatum. Tacitis enim Consultorum nominibus soli
demum Cardinales huic negotio praefecti ipsis indicati sunt, quibus deinde
tanquam impetrata quam postulabant Congregatione, praeambula quaedam scripta
obtulerunt de auctoritate sancti Augustini, and de rebus in Sorbona gestis.

At postquam and Consultorum nomina rescivere, and, quod nunquam credidissent,
nom modo cum adversariis collationem, sed and mutuam scriptorum communicationem
sibi negari; tum vero destitutos se and illusos graviter apud Cardinales
expostulavere; cum fraudulentis adversariis sibi rem esse dixerunt, quorum
scripta and sermones innumeris mendaciis scaterent: haec a se nisi
communicarentur, refelli non posse: nihil habere aequitatis ut accusatori
liceret pro libito crimina confingere, reo negaretur haec saltem crimina de
quibus accusaretur, nosse: hanc materiam ambiguis verborum notionibus sic
implicatam, ut nihil facilius sit quam adversarii mentem in alienos sensus
detorquere, and perversa interpretatione corrumpere; totam hanc concertationem
meram (...) fore, nisi partibus coram auditis utriusque sententia ex mutuo illo
conflictu liquido pernosceretur.

Haec illi super ipsa judicii forma; mox de personis quibus illa Congregatio
constabat. Omisso honoris causa Cardinali Spada, quanquam hunc sibi manifest
infensum judicis parts obtinere aequum non esset, Albisium violentas cum ipsis
and apertas inimicitias gerentem, omnesque adversus ipsos solicitantem; item
Patrem Modestum Annatini libelli approbatorem; Patrem Palavicinum Rei personam
sustinentem e Congregatione removeri petierunt.

Nihil justius ea postulatione videbatur, nec ullus in Gallia judex qui ob
istas recusationis causas non se ipse sponte de judicio subduceret. Alii Romae
mores vigent. Ergo extrema haec postulatio statim explosa, aegre id quidem
ferentibus Augustinianis, sed injuriam tamen istam ad tempus mussitantibus, ut
saltem scriptorum communicatio and mutua collatio non negaretur.

Verum ad hoc eludendum varias causationes attulerunt delecti Cardinales;
alienum ab Inquisitionis more id esse, quae ne ad homines quidem morti
addicendos, testes coram reis adesse necessarium censet: non privatorum esse
Doctorum leges summo Pontifici dicere, tantamque ipsorum contentionem
contumaciae vicinam: an dubitarent summum Pontificem de rebus fidei sine ullis
disputationibus, sine ullis collationum ambagibus posse judicare? An vererentur
ne si parts inter se contendentes non audisset, S. Spiritus afflatu in
judicando privaretur? Long ipsis modestiores and submissiores esse adversarios
suos, qui nihil mallent, quam ut totares sine ulla scriptorum communicatione,
sine disputatione, pro summi Pontificis arbitrio brevissime decideretur:
denique non satis decoram Theologis illam pugnis cum adversariis suis
decertandi cupiditatem.

Opponebant Augustiniani long majorem huic judicio fidem futuram, si solita
majorum, non illa inusitata and clandestina via perageretur; long exploratius
omnibus fore affuisse summo Pontifici in judicando Spiritum Sanctum, si idoneas
veritati aperiendae vias amplecteretur. Id enim jubere Spiritum Sanctum,
humanas inquirendi very rations non respui, Traditionem consuli, doctos
homines adhiberi, calumniae and fraudibus aditum obsepiri. Ad discutiendam
illam aequivocationum mendaciorumque caliginem, qua totam hanc controversiam
adversarii sui involvere studerent, mutuam disputationem plane necessariam:
nihil esse cur Hallerii, ipsiusque sociorum obsequium Cardinales laudibus
ferrent, non illos Romanae Curiae, sed rationibus suis obsequi: videre homines
astutos actum esse de causa sua, si sententiam suam coram adversatiis promere
and defendere cogerentur: Ideo quidvis ad hoc amoliendum moliri: unum illis
esse praesidium in calumnia: haec vero in tenebris exultat, in luce jacet and
evanescit: ita nihil mirum si in declinanda collatione tantopere se morigeros
praestent. At stillorum obsequium concessa collatione periclitari velint, fore
ut illos tam inobsequentes offendant, quam Augustinianos contra hac in part ad
parendum promptos and expeditos. Haec si Inquisitionis mos non ferret,
argumento esse res tantas alio quam Inquisitionis judicio disceptandas: nec se
Romam ab Episcopis missos, ut aliquod Inquisitionis decretum otiosi
expectarent, sed ut solennem Congregationem efflagitarent, in qua sancti
Augustini doctrinam adversus eos omnes tueri possent, qui eam vel palam, vel
subdole impugnare auderent. Contumeliosum esse in Episcopos Gallos, si ipsis
postulantibus in Augustini causa negaretur, quod olim Jesuitis in Molinae causa
tam prolixe concessum erat. Caeterum non pugnis se sed rationibus, sed Patrum
auctoritate certare velle, nec pugnis certe coram Clemente VIII. decertatum,
nec pugnis in Concilio Tridentino pugnatum, quamvis utrobique multae
Theologorum rations habitae sint: Nil injuriae fieri summo Pontifici, nec
quidquam juris ipsi detrahi, si d ab ipso postuletur, quod a Conciliis
Oecumenicis studiose servari solet: sed gravem Theologis Catholicis, gravem
Episcopis injuriam fieri, si hoc ipsis negetur, quod haereticis negari nec
solet, nec potest.

Dura haec Romany autibus oration visa, incendentibus odia Jesuitis and
Hallerio, tantoque demissius Tribunal Inquisitionis venerantibus, quanto illius
auctoritatem agnoscere constantius Augustiniani detrectabant. Itaque tota res
astute in honoris contentionem versa. Ostendere voluerunt Romani Inquisitores,
decreta fidei, non auditis contradictorie partibus, tametsi auditi
flagitantibus, a summo Pontifice condi posse. Ad extremum doctoribus semper
libellis supplicibus solennem Congregationem urgentibus, and cur nega^etur
poscentibus, simpliciter responsum est: Negatur quia postulatis. Hac spe illi
dejecti nullum deinceps scriptum Cardinalibus obtulerunt; omninoque ex
Episcoporum, quorum Legati erant, mandato, and de more Callicae gentis, quae
Inquisitionis tribunal non agnoscit, causam dicere in hoc judicio defugerunt.

Exinde res ad voluntatem Iesuitarum fluere coepit. Semotis adversariis causam
Iesuiticam in illa Congregatione egit Hallerius. Augustinianos quibus voluit
criminibus and maledictis oneravit. Suas de gratia necessitante, de erepta
dissentiendi liberate, de impossibilitate praeceptorum, etiam in sensu diviso,
naenias decantavit: patulis judicum auribus quas voluit fabulas instillavit.
Sic institutum, sic peractum illud judicium Romanum fuit, in quo Hallerius and
socii quae voluere nemine refellente, dixerunt: nullus pro altera part locutus
est: ita nullam serendis calumniis opportuniorem judicii formam, ne si vellent
quidem, Iesuitae optare protuissent.

ARTICULUS VI.
Episcoporum literae ad summum Pontificem.
POstquam hoc Romanae Congregationis institutum Gallis Episcopis pro Augustino
laborantibus auditum est, non mediocriter illi in tanto rei Christianae
periculo commoti, statim literas expostulatorias ad summum Pontificem misere,
in quibus quae consecuta vidimus mala, praesaga prudentia denunciant. Harum
partem aliquam subjici non erit alienum.

BEATISSIME PATER,
Cum famosas illas quinque propositiones, structura ancipites, sensu aequivocas
and subdolas, per homines sibi addictos ideo tantum ad libitum suum
providissent Iesuitae, ut S. Augustini auctoritas funditus convelleretur,
neoterica Ludovici Molinae opinio de Romanae Sedis judicio, de tot retro
seculorum consensu, de orthodoxa veterum Theologiae familiarum doctrina
triumpharet; sancti divinae gratiae Doctoris existimatio in tuto jam esse
videbatur, postquam ad illud tribunal devoluta erat, ex cujus gloriosa
commendatione publicam obtinet toto orb celebritatems. Verum, Beatissime
Pater, quanta fuerat hactenus ad hujus Congregationis tumorem exultatio nostra,
tanta nos repentinae mutationis admiratio percellit. Ex quo illi ipsi Doctores
Theologi, quibus ad Sanctitatem Vestram Deputatis utimur, postremis literis
significarunt contraria long via totum negotium procedere coepisse: Non haberi
promissam Congregationem, in qua parts oppositae mutuo congrederentur, viva
voce coram inter se contenderent, and scriptis ultro citroque communicatis,
omnem fraudis suspicionem amolirentur: sed aliud jam penitus institui, quam
quod annuente Vestra Sanctitate jam se consecutos esse rescripserant. Quod
quidem ut a speratae pacis ratione alienum est, sic a nobis sine intimo
moeroris sensu disci non potuit, cum attendimus quanta inde publicis S.
Augustini adversariis accederet audacia, quae malorum seges excresceret, quam
opportuna inquietis hominibus praeberetur occasio novos long lateque tumultus
excitandi: quanta denique Romanae Sedi, adeoque ipsi Ecclesiae labes
aspergeretur, si quod Molinae fautores tot callidis molitionibus ambiunt,
maxima hujus aetatis controversia ambiguo tantum and obscuro judicio
dirimeretur, quo illi non in sanctum modo Augustinum ejusque discipulos, sed in
ipsius etiam Apostolicae Cathedrae auctoritatem ac famam impune abuti possent
imposterum.

En quid illi futurum praesagiebant ex clandestinis illis obscurisque
Congregationibus. His autem malis antevertendis plenum prudentiae, plenum
charitatis summo Pontifici consilium deinde suggerunt. Patiatur Sanctitas
vestra, Beatissime Pater, non tam pietatis ac reverentiae quam doloris ac
gemituum plenam admonitionem. Exiguae scintillae latum jam undique sparserunt
incendium; mali vis improba non uno loco grassatur: litigant filii, gemit
matter: in Patris providentia totius remedii summa posita est. Magno aestu res
geritur, sed quem Pontificia restinguat auctoritas, si nullis aequivocorum
sensuum involucris obtectum proferatur, judicium, si secundum solitas
Ecclesiasticorum judiciorum formas ac regulas pronuncietur; si denique tam omni
ex part absolutum sit, ut illi tanquam caelesti oraculo acquiescere debent,
qui contrarias hactenus sententias propugnarunt: quod ut ipso even^u ratum
fiat, neque ullus supersit justae exceptionis locus, quaedam imprimis videntur
necessaria. Primum ut nostris ad Sanctitatem Vestram Delegatis facultas fiat
libere coram adversariis, qui praesentes sunt, aperiendi quod sentiunt, and
omnes illorum technas retegendi. Deinde ut quae ultro citroque ad sententiae
defensionem prolata erunt, fida and accurata manu in publicos commentarios
referantur: rerum in commentarios relatarum apographa concedantur
disceptantibus, ipsique inter sese mutuo ac bona fide communicent, quae vel ad
suam stabiliendam, vel ad impugnandam oppositam exhibuerint. Praeterea ut
Iesuitae, quibus tanquam Molinianae novitatis assertoribus, and apertis
Augustinianae doctrinae hostibus praecipua contentionis ineundae moles
incumbit, in judicium tanquam primariae parts accedant, praesertim cum scripta
jam produxe^int, quae Franciscus Annatus ex hac Societate Theologus suo nomine
Paris^s palam edere ausus sit. Demum ut Dominus Albisius a Congregatione
abstineat, ob eas recusationis causas, quarum aequitas ipsa per sese satis
elucescit. Denique Frater Modestus qui Francisci Annati librum a praelo
recentem approbate veritus non est, neque ullis ab hac audacia prohibitionibus
potuit deterreri, ab eodem judicio semoveatur, nec ferendae sententiae jus
obtineat, qui tam evidenti praejudicio mentem Molinae patronis obnoxiam
declaravit. Haec sunt, Beatissime Pater, non declinandi judicii consilia, sed
subsidia stabiliendae pacis. Speramus Sanctitati Vestrae acceptas fore preces
nostras in hoc rerum cardine necessarias, justitia commendabiles, pietatis ac
venerationis plenissimas -- Postulamus ut non impar malo remedium adhibeat,
eoque judicio lis tanta dirimatur, quod omnes admittant Catholici, regiones
omnes venerentur. Atque illud profecto futurum est, si qualem Congregationem
Clemens VIII. and Paulus V. instituerant, talem Sanctitas Vestra nobis annuat,
disceptaturis apertam and liberam, omni carentem invidia, celebritate solennem.

Ita loquuntur, ita monent, quos sincerus pacis ac veritatis amor incendit: Sed
quibus artibus Iesuitae tam justa Episcoporum vota, tam summissas preces
frustati sint, in hujus narrationis serie patebit.

ARTICULUS VII.
Nova Episcoporum Legatio pro obtinenda Congregatione.
NEc vero hac libera admonitione contenti, duos rursus Legatos ad summum
Pontificem mittunt, qui novis obsecrationibus Congregationem solennem ab ipso
impetrare conarentur. Admissi in conspectum summi Pontificis novi Legati
exponunt Episcoporum vota, collationis habendae necessitatem, pro ea obtinenda
demisse supplicant, nec aliam certe pacis stabiliendae viam esse demonstrant.
Ad omnia respondet summus Pontifex, supremum Christi Vicarium ad illas
collationes concedendas nulla lege teneri. Congregationem a se institutam,
qualem praesenti rerum statui convenire judicaverat: auditos a se Consultores
diligenter de propositionibus disputantes; nec defuturam sibi S. Spiritus
inspirationem ad illarum veritatem aut falsitatem pernoscendam, prorsusque
Pontificiorum decretorum veritatem ab hac solum Spiritus S. inspiratione
pendere: velle se totum negotium brevi transigere; disputationibus rem extrahi:
affuturos toto orb Doctores: inde contentiones infinitas: has se matura
Constitutione velle componere. Multa illi contra suppliciter summum Pontificem
obtestati sunt, ut illi diligentiae quam se in excutiendis propositionibus
adhibuisse dictitabat, aliam etiam instituendae Congregationis diligentiam
addere dignaretur. Hoc quoque divinae providentiae, Romanae Sedi tuendae semper
invigilantis indicium esse, quod talem Episcopis Gallis mentem immisisset. Non
enim afflatu prophetico veritatem summis Pontificibus innotescere; sed sacra
Traditione consulenda, rebusque controversis humana and Ecclesiastica
diligentia expendendis. Tum summus Pontifex, cujus aures sua sponte placidas
Iesuiticae criminationes and Albisii arts prorsus obstruxerant, saepius ista
sibi ingesta dixit, eademque toties iterari superfluum: sibi constitutum esse
nullam scriptorum communicationem, nullam disputationem concedere. Sed si
audiri, inquit, sine adversariis vultis, ad vos quantum volueritis (quanto
tempore) audiendos paratus sum. Nec pluta hac de re prae summi Pontificis
reverentia adjicere ausi sunt.

ARTICULUS VIII.
Quomodo quaestio facti, seu Jansenii causa Romae tractata: quanta versutia
Jesuitae effecerint ne quisquam pro eo loqueretur.
VIsum est hanc totam pro impetranda solenni Congregatione altercationem, quo
magis appareret, simul refer, tametsi per biennium ferme duraverit. Nunc
uberius explicandum quo pacto in arcana illa Congregatione Iansenii causa, sive
facti quaestio tractata sit. Quam narrationem paulo altius repetere non erit
inutile.

Non novum erat Romae Iansenii nomen: sed primo in bonam partem, deinde in
malam clarissimum. Magnam enim initio apud Romanos famam ipsi conciliarant
nobilia ejus pro fide Catholica adversus haereticos certamina: adeo ut Iprensis
Episcopatus Bullae gratis ipsi omnium consensu Cardinalium concessae sint. Sed
liber ipsius posthumus, tametsi eruditissimorum virorum lauds etiam Romae
promeritus, tamen Jesuitarum potentia in gravem invidiam vocari coepit. Magna,
and merito quidem, Romany cura, ne quis Ecclesiae pacem solicitet. Sed non
eadem semper ipsis felicitas in detegendis turbarum auctoribus. Quod cum
apprime Iesuitae nossent, tota Europa in Iansenium and Iansenistas tumultuari
coeperunt. Tumultum exaudiere Romani, unde oriretur non sensere. Iesuitae enim
toto orb dispersi sedulo operam dabant, ut undique sinistri de Jansenii
defensoribus rumores Romam afferentur, quod ipsis adversus incautos adversarios
non difficile fuisse, quisquis eorum potentiam, and magnam asseclarum
multitudinem cogitabit, facile perspiciet.

His assidue verberatus Urbanus VIII. statuit quam mitissimo remedio gliscens
incendium extinguere, libro scilicet Jansenii, aliisque adversus eum scriptis
eo tantum nomine prohibendis, quod adversus Pontificum decreta, inconsulta
Romana Sede, de gratia scribi vetantium, in lucem editi essent. Deinde quoniam
nescio quas Baii sententias renovasse arguebatur Iansenius, placuit Urbano Pii
V. and Gregorii XIII. Bullas renovare, non nominato Iansenio: Neque enim fas
esse censebat sugillare hominem quemquam inaudita part, ut ex ipso in hac ipsa
Iansenii causa multi audierunt. Sed quid Iesuitis proderat renovata Baii Bulla?
Damnari, aut certe perstringi Iansenium volebant, ut hoc color ipsius
defensores vexarent, and Romanam cum ipsis Curiam colliderent. Estecerunt
igitur Albilii praesertim opera, ut Iansenii nomen, quasi qui Baianas
Propositiones renovasset, inscio Pontifice in Bullam insereretur.

Tametsi vero nullum de Iansenii doctrina judicium, sed tantum libri
prohibitionem haec Bulla contineret, ubi tamen in exteras missa est provincias,
magnas ubique eruditorum querelas excivit, praesertim in Belgio and Academia
Lovaniensi, cujus doctrinam, sicut Augustini, toto suo volumine Jansenius
illustrarat. Ergo haec Doctores duos Romam misit, qui Iansenium coram summo
Pontifice defenderent, quorum unus erat clarus ille Sinnichius, vir doctissimus
quidem, sed amiqua morum simplicitate, non hac recenti versuti^.

Hic cum suae Facultatis de praedicta Bulla quetelas summo Pontifici
exposuisset, responsum accepit, Bullam Pii V. and Gregorii XIII. se tantum
renovari veluisse; sed ne quisquam nominatim carperetur, express vetuisse. Hoc
responsum and ipse statim ad Academiam suam scripsit, and aliquanto post in
Memoriali Cardinalibus oblato nominatim expressit; quod ab homine gravi factum
nemo suspicabitur nisi verum esset. Sed cum nihilominus multis calumniis Romae
lacerari Iansenium videret, paratum se professus est ad ipsius Augustinum in
campo Florae comburendum, si quid in eo ostendi posset ab Augustini and
Ecclesiae doctrina dissonum.

Sic ille annum and amplius Romae exegit, quoridie deposcens examen Iansenii,
ipsius adversarios quotidie lacessens; nec illo toto tempore quisquam qui cum
eo congredi vellet, inventus est: nec injuria quidem. Vix enim alium reperire
erat in Augustini doctrina peritiorem, ut testatur eximium illud opus Triados
SS. Patrum, Romae ab ipso vacivis horis compositum.

Urbano vita functo Cardinales Bullae confectores hunc Doctorem sibi jampridem
odiosum amoliri volentes, sesquihora post obitum summi Pontificis eum
accersunt, and omnis loco responsionis, Bullae anti-Iansenianae exemplar
authenticum tradunt. Mansit tamen Romae adusque Innocentii Pontificatum;
examenque Iansenii, and Bullae abrogationem petere perstitit; sed ut nihil
impetrari posse vidit ab eo Pontifice qui in ea conficienda affuerat, domum
reversus est.

Hic fuit primae in Iansenium velitationis exitus: sed non multo post long
gravior in illum belli moles incubuit, cum plurimorum Episcoporum Galliae
literis quas Iesuitarum concursationes extorserant, quinque Propositiones a
Corneto fabricarae, quae oblique in eorum epistola Iansenio tribuebantur, ad
summum Pontificem delatae sunt. Missi sunt Romam, ut jam diximus, ex utraque
part Doctores dissimillimo consilio. Alii Propositiones sine distinctione
damnati nolebant; alii eas confuse cum Iansenio censura notari deposcebant.
Instituta est ab Innocentio X. Congregatio ad hanc controversiam examinandam,
qualem optabant Iesuitae, qualem Augustiniani Doctores sugieb^nt. In hac omnia
clam peracta; nulla collatio, nulla scriptorum communicatio, permissa est. Erat
autem haec ipsissima Inquisitionis Congregatio. Hinc quibus habebatur diebus,
pro foribus extabat charta cum hac inscriptione: Die N. habebitur Congregatio
S. Officii. Ejusmodi inscriptio inde avulsa etiamnum Parisiis asservatur.

Praeterea jam Romae percrebuerat Legatos ab Academia Lovaniensi ad Jansenium
defendendum Doctores duos Madritum petiisse, ut commendatorias Regis Catholici
literas obtinerent: indeque Romam brevi venturos. Consultius and providentius
visum Jansenio in speciem parcere, ut eo securius oppugnaretur, quo tectius.
Igitur ne quis aperte ipsi patrocinari posset, percrebuit inter Consultores
odiosissimum quidem esse summo Pontifici Jansenium, utpote jam damnatum in
Urbani Bulla; non tamen proprie causam ipsius in Congregatione tractari: sed de
quinque Propositionibus inquiri. Ipsae Propositiones Inquisitioni oblatae sunt,
abstrahendo ab omni proferente, mandatumque Consultoribus, ut de iis prout
jacent, sententiam ferrent; quod express testatur in suffragio suo
Commissarius S. Officii, qui certe quid in nac Congregatione factum sit, vel
optime noverat.

Inde consecuti sunt Jesuitae. Primum quidem, ut non iniqui Jansenio
Consultores, cum inutilem sibi invidiam ex ejus defensione nollent accersere,
de Jansenio silerent, Propositiones in abstracto consideratas, in sensu gratiae
efficacis tueri satis habentes.

2. Ut Iesuitici Consultores, impune quidvis de Iansenio, nemine reclamante
dicerent, cum eorum commenta, quasi a causa quae tractabatur aliena, refellere
nemo curaret.

Habes igitur istius judicii formam qualis fuerit, Iansenii sensum nonnulli
Consultores, tametsi non ex mandato summo Pontificis, voluntate tamen sua
acriter insectati sunt, atque illi quas voluere fabulas imprimisque illud
necessitantis gratiae, and sublatae dissentiendi potentiae figmentum affinxere.
Contra Augustiniani Iansenii mentem nil ad rem pertinere rati, Augustinianam
tantum de gratia efficaci doctrinam optime defenderunt. Unus Wadingus negavit
Propositiones esse Iansenii; sed id obiter and aliud agens. Ita summus Pontifex
and Cardinales multos contra Iansenium loquentes audierunt, vix ullum pro ipso,
quamvis e Consultoribus quatuor aut quinque, and quandoque sex ab ipso starent,
ut ex ipsorum suffragiis patuit.

Atque haec sic esse gesta quemadmodum diximus, and certum est omnibus qui
Romae tunc erant, and istorum Theologorum suffragia nuper edita planissime
demonstrant. Nam si jussi essent Consultores de quaestione facti, utrum necne
Propositiones in Iansenio sint, sententiam promere, utique omnes de hac ipsa
sententiam dixissent; and tamen Consultorum pars maxima de Iansenio silet, and
Propositiones in abstracto considerat. Imo, ut dixi, Commissarius S. Officii
disette testatur proposita fuisse haec quinque capita ut praescindunt ab omni
proferente.

Sic igitur votorum tuorum factus es compos, mi Annute, nec aegre tibi fuit
Propositiones ipsas in sensu gratiae efficacis ab omnibus fere Consultoribus
orthodoxas and ab omni censura immunes esse judicatas. Sperasti enim fore quod
contigit, ut adversarios sub Augustini and gratiae efficacis defensione elapsos
sub Ianseniani sensus nomine insequereris.

Restabant adhuc amovendi molesti illi Doctores Lovanienses, qui si Roman
venissent, cuncta fortasse Iesuitarum consilia turbassent, sed ne venirent,
sedulo allaboravit Cardinalis Spada. Scripsit quippe ad Hispaniensem Nuncium,
ut anniteretur quo minus illi Doctores literas commendatorias a Rege Catholico
pro Jansenio impetrarent. Neque enim de Iansenio Romae, sed tantum de quinque
Propositionibus examinandis agi, nulla habita auctoris ratione. Paruit Nuncius:
interposuit auctoritatem suam: literas commendatorias pro Jansenio diu impediit
tanquam inutiles. Hac spe illi dejecti, and praeterea memores quam Romae nihil
paucis ante annis profecissent, in patriam re infecta regressi sunt.

Quis igitur jam mirabitur de Iansenio summum Pontificem and illos Cardinales
incommodius sensisse? Habitabat in illorum auribus Hallerius, tam magnae illic
fidei, quam istic parvae, sive nullius. Venditabatur octoginta Episcoporum
numerus, tanquam Iansenio adversus, nec Romae cognitum erat quibus artibus hae
subscriptiones extortae essent. Hibernorum declaratio, atque aliae ejusmodi
tantopere Parisiis irrisae, hic quasi magni ponderis testimonia summo Pontifici
clam ostendebantur. Ad haec Iesuitarum magna Romae gratia, magna fides. An illi
tantae pietatis Religiosi, fidei Catholicae columina, falsa Iansenio crimina
vellent imponere? Porro Augustiniani Doctores haec omnia occulte misceri
ignorantes aut parvifacientes, and praeterea Propositionum, non Iansenii causa
Romam ab Episcopis missi, secretis illis molitionibus nihil opponebant, nec
ullum pro Iansenio suffragium proferebant (poterant autem quamlibet numerosa
proferre,) quod nec ejus causam acturi Romam venissent, nec de eo omnino agi
existimarent. Nemo ergo aderat qui Iansenium defenderet, nemo qui se Ianseniani
hominis invidia vellet onerare; contra innumeri Iansenio nemine prorsus
refellente obtrectabant, and ipsum variorum errorum reum agebant. In his
tenebris quis Innocentio, qui quicquid in rebus Theologicis noverat, per alios
noverat, succensere possit, quod aliquid in Iansenio vitii esse crediderit?
Quem non humanae potius miseriae cogitatio subeat, qua fit ut istiusmodi
errores etiam bonis ac cautis saepe obrepant? Prorsus enim de Iansenio auditis
tot accusatoribus, non auditis defensoribus, judicans Innocentius, vix aliter
judicare potuit; poterat tamen, ut optabant omnes pacis amantes, vel omnino non
judicare, vel ejus defensoribus locum dare. Quod si non fecit, Hallerio and
Iesuitis imputandum est, qui nullam de sensu Iansenii controversiam esse,
talemque omnino esse qualis ab ipsis exhibebatur, constanter affirmarunt. His
ergo credidit Innocentius, cum illos calumniari non crederet. Inde haud dubie
conficiendae Constitutionis consilium cepit, in cujus praefatione, de qua certe
Consultores judicium minime tulerant, nomen Iansenii insereretur, eoque
temperamento, ut dubium esse posset, judicansne, aut sententiam suam, vel
potius Episcoporum Galliae opinando interponens, de Iansenio meminisset: quo
progredi vel regredi posset utcunque Constitutio sua populos ac Theologos
offenderet vel morigeros vel repugnantes.

ARTICULUS IX.
Audientia Doctorum Augustinianorum.
UNum hoc tantum conficiendae Constitutionis auctores male habebat, quod
Augustiniani Doctores constanter causam dicere, nisi praesentibus adversariis,
renuebant. Hinc valde imminutum iri cernebant Constitutionis auctoritatem, si
altera tantum part audita factum esse percrebresceret.

Ergo cum Augustinianorum constantiam pervincere illosque ad quandam audientiae
speciem pertrahere illis potissimum superesset, opportune accidit, ut
Christianissimi Regis Legatus bono animo Augustinianos Doctores obtestatus sit,
ne audientiam pollicenti summo Pontifici se sistere detrectarent; alioquin fore
ut multi suspicarentur ipsos causae suae parum fidere, eludendi judicii causas
captare: simul injuriam fieri summo Pontifici, si oblata ab ipso causae
audiendae facultas respueretur: postremo hac via long melius expetitam ab
ipsis collationem impetrari posse, si ejus necessitatem ex eorum oratione
summus Pontifex ipse condisceret: Eos esse Romae mores, ut quae poscuntur
malint a se beneficii loco tribui, quam violentis precibus extorqueri.

Haec atque alia, praecipue vero summi Pontificis reverentia, de cujus
promissis dubitare pietas and Religio non sinebant (Promiserat autem, ut
diximus quantam vellent, ipsis audientiam se praestiturum,) Augustinianos
Doctores impulerunt, ut sibi solis atque extra adversariorum conspectum
locuturis oblatam a summo Pontifice audientiam amplecterentur. Ergo se sistunt
summo Pontifici 19. Maii anno Domini 1653. De gratia efficaci disserit Lalanius
Vallis-crescentis Abbas, omnesque Propositiones ad eam revocari posse, and hoc
sensu veras esse perspicue demonstrat, in aliis sensibus falsas and haereticas
docet. Eandem materiam fusius prosequitur P. Des-mares, and ex Augustino
confirmat gratiae efficacis ad singulos pietatis actus necessariae doctrinam ad
fidem Ecclesiae pertinere. De Iansenio ne verbum quidem dixere, tum quia ejus
defendendi causa Romam non venerant, tum quia apud omnes Romae notum erat, non
de Iansenio sed de Propositionibus agi.

Prima illa audientia, necessaria quidem suae causae fundamenta jecerant: sed
vix adhuc illam ingressi, nulla Propositionum sigillatim excussa, nullis
adversariorum argumentis dilutis, cum aliis rursum accerserentur diebus, id se
praestituros sperabant. In quo te habemus assentientem, mi Annate, qui sic in
Cavillis page 35. Cum dicturi, inquis, essent de quinque Propositionibus,
coeperunt dicere de Jesuitis. -- Satyram illam excepit effusa in commendationem
S. Augustini and gratiae per se efficacis oration, DE QVIBVS NULLA ERAT
CONTROVERSIA, and post long a quatuor horarum fastidia compertum est nondum
coepisse dicere de tribus capellis. Sic igitur finem faciunt, ut qui se ad
prosequendam multis aliis diebus causam adornarent. Decedentes summo Pontifici
varia scripta offerunt: unum de prima Propositione: alterum de gratia efficaci:
tertium de Iesuitarum in Augustinum petulantia: quartum de variis Propositionum
sensibus: quorum alii haeretici essent, alii Catholici; in quo palam
contestantur semper illum sensum gratiae efficacis, quo Propositiones
tuebantur, a se defensum iri; ni diserte a summo Pontifice proscriberetur.
Accepit omnia gratanter summus Pontifex, illisque digressis collaudavit ipsorum
erud tionem and pietatem, and circumstantrbus Cardinalibus dixit: HI DOCTORES
NON SUNT HAERETICI, ut jactabatur. Itaque inflecti non nihil, and ad causam
diligentius cognoscendam adduci plerisque visus est. Contra tamen exultare
Iesuitici Doctores, quod adversarii sic tandem ad audientiam pertracti essent,
nec obscure illorum simplicitatem irridere coeperunt, qui alias audientias
expectarent; sive hoc praesensione quadam and augurio conjectarent, sive
consilia pridem fixa incautius enunciarent.

ARTICULUS X.
Quibus rationibus adductus summus Pontifex Constitutionem statim promulgari
jusserit.
MUltum plerisque Consultoribus, multum summo Pontifici arriserat
Augustinianorum oration: sed hoc ipsum Iesuitarum fautores callidissima oratione
in perniciem verterunt. Facile, inquie bant, illi Theologi in vulgari ac
tralatitio argumento se jactarunt: In gratiae efficacis sensu Propositiones
innoxias probant, quasi vero haec res agatur; ac non ipse summus Pontifex, ipsi
Consultores, ipse Hallerius hanc de gratia efficaci quaestionem sepofuerint. At
quod eas in aliis sensibus damnant, discat hinc Pontifex quam just accusentur,
quam tuto damnentur, nec se pingui artificio ab istis Jansenistis deludi
patiatur. Defendunt hic quidem Augustinum, at in Gallia Calvinum: Pro sola
efficace gratia laborare se simulant: at ipsorum asseclae nil istis
simulationibus utuntur, sed plenis buccis necessitantes gratias, ereptam
dissentiendi potestatem, absolutam praeceptorum impossibilitatem in Gallia
crepant. An si ut isti Pseudo-Jansenistae meticulosi Romae nuncfaciunt, gratia^
tantu^ efficacem in Gallia Jansenistae docerent, quisquam in eos tumultum
concitasset? An eas Propositiones accusavissent octoginta Galliae Episcopi
efficacis gratiae magna ex part defensores? An earum damnationem postulaturus
Romam venisset Hallerius, idem gratiae efficacis propugnator, and Jansenianorum
hostis acerrimus? Nimirum haec ficta Iansenistarum professio, quae
Propositiones in solo sensu gratiae efficacis tuetur, nec promulgandae
Constitutionis causam tollit, cum aliter in Gallia loquantur: and periculum
tollit, cum ipsos ostendat jam in sententia nutare and viribus ad repugnandum
carere. Cur igitur propter unum sensum, orthodoxum quidem, sed a nemine
impetitum, nec in damnatione periclitantem, dubitet summus Pontifex noxias
Propositiones proscribere; gliscentem slamman extinguere, Ecclesiae turbas
componere; Sedis Romanae auctoritatem amplificare; inimicam potestati suae
factionem ulcisci? Incolumem tantum volunt gratiam efficacem; age, age, in tuto
est; nec est cur illi timeant, quam impetit nullus. Sed quando hoc folum
petunt, nihil est cur illos iterum accersat summus Pontifex, ut ipsos rursum
audiat frustra die gratia efficaci declamantes. Damnant Propositones ut
haereticas in aliis sensibus; satis est; non repugnabant igitur Constitutioni,
qua perversi illi sensus proscribentur. Cur non igitur summus Pontifex
quamprimum se hac molestia and Ecclesiam hoc metu liberet? Cur non hanc
opportunitatem arripiat ut publicae tranquillitati and Romanae Sedis
amplitudini simul inserviat?

His persuasus est Innocentius: Augustinianos Doctores ultra non accersivit:
nullam Consultorum congregationem habuit (ut ipse fateris in Cavillis page 37.)
in qua saltem ex ipsis quaereret quid de Augustinianorum oratione sentirent.
Oblata scripta nemini communicavit, nec omnino inspexit: sed continuo conceptam
antea (ut ipse ibidem scribis) Constitutionem publicari jussit. Hac
Propositiones sine sensuum distinctione damnabantur: Jansenius oblique earum
auctor asserebatur.

ARTICULUS XI.
Augustinianos Doctores Roma digredientes multis Officiis prosequitur summus
Pontifex, iterumque confirmat de efficaci gratia and auctoritate S. Augustini
violanda nunquam se cogitasse. Quaedam aliae probationes afferuntur.
NOn minimum perculit Augustinianos Doctores tam imsperatus eventus. Nunquam
enim sibi in animum induxissent quatuor horarum spatio, quo vix insinuare
controversiae caput potuerant, conclusum iri promissam illam audientiam quantam
vellent. Certe enim long ampliorem volebant; nec est ullus qui in tam perplexa
causa non malit omnino non audiri, quam sic audiri.

Ut in malis tamen, hac se consolatione The Consolation here attributed to us
by Paul Irenaeus, was during this interval only in his conceit; for, from the
time that the Constitution was fixed up^, and almost as soon pulled down by the
same Officers, till our departure from Rome, we saw it not, and knew not
certainly what it imported. Nevertheless I leave what this Author has written
without any alteration, because it belongs not to me to meddle with the works
of another, and because though we had not this Consolation at this time, the
grounds thereof being unknown to us, yet we received the same a few days
after, when those grounds became manifest to us.
recrearunt; si minus illo judicio certa Ecclesiae pax esset allata, certe
violatam non esse veritatem, cum apud omnes constaret summum Pontificem non
attigisse materiam de Auxiliis, nec gratiam efficacem, nec particulares illos
sensus, ad quos quinque Propositiones revocaverant, qui nihil aliud quam
efficacis gratiae doctrinam complectebantur. Praeterea cum summo Pontifici and
scripto and voce denunciassent, nunquam se a quinque illarum Propositionum
particularium defensione disceffuros, nisi nominatim ab ipso and conceptis
verbis proscriberentur, manifestum erat damnatis tantum generali censura
Propositionibus, particulares illos censura probatos potius quam damnatos
fuisse.

Ne quid tamen dubitationis superesset, ipsum Constitutionis auctorem, antequam
Roma discederent, adiret statuerunt, quo certius ipsius mentem cognoscerent.
Accersiti sunt ad salutandum Pontificem die 13 Junii anni 1653. Ille vero eos,
non quasi damnatorum dogmatum defensores, sed quasi veritatis and Augustinianae
doctrinae vindices excepit, amplexus est, ornavit. Dixit summam cepisse se
voluptatem ex orationis ipsorum vigore, modestia, prudentia, doctrina. Ho
havuto gran sodisfattione del vigore, della modestia, prudenza e doctrina col
laquale havete parlato. An docte, an prudenter loquuntur qui haereses
adstruunt? Dixit illos plane persuasisse quod volebant. An porro haeresim
persuaserant summo Pontifici?

Quid multa? Generalibus illis testimoniis non contenti Augustiniani Doctores,
nominatim quaesierunt, an efficax, quam defenderant, gratia Constitutione illa
proscriberetur? Quid igitur ad hoc summus Pontifex? Audiant Moliniani.
Certissimum esse dixit: Qu sto e certo, nec Augustini doctrinam, nec gratiam
efficacem illo judicio violatam. Quid tibi videtur, mi Annate, an sic
loqueretur Pontifex cum iis quos aliquo errore crederet implicatos? non eos
potius ab haeresi retrahere studeret, praesertim cum palam professi essent in
eadem se semper sententia perstituros?

At forte haec omnia fingimus. Cave ne istud Romae dicas, ubi eorum quae dico
veritatem nullus ignorant. Cave ne apud doctos and eruditos qui haec inquirere
curarunt. Ecquod enim istorum testimonium illustrius, quam ipsius
Christianissimi Regis Legati epistola, cujus multa exempla in vulgus manarunt,
quam hic etiam attexi non erit inutile?

Excerptum ex Epistola Christianissimi Regis Legati, ad Comitem de Brienne, qui
Regi est ab interioribus secretis. Dat. Romae 16 Junii anni 1653.
Die Jovis 12 Junii, summo Pontifici dixi, Doctores qui vulgo Augustini
defensores dicuntur, multum cupere, antequam in Galliam revertantur, ad osculum
pedum admitti, and Apostolica benedictione donari. Respondit Sanctitas sua
sequenti die quibuscunque tandem negotiis distringeretur, tamen audientiam
ipsis sese daturum. Nec vero promisso defuit. Honorificentissimis verbis
Doctores istos prosecuta est, Sancti Augustini ac Sancti Thomae doctrinam,
necnon effieacis grutiae dogma decreto suo minime damnari confirmavit, omnesque
controversias eodem loci relictas dixit, quo sub Clemente VIII. and Paulo V.
relictae sunt: sed eum ipsimet declarassent de Propositionibus vel
Calvinistice, vel Pelagiane, vel Catholice sentiri posse, erroneas ac
temerarias judicari ideo debuisse, cum certo sensu haereticae essent. Omnis
enim Propositio in qua latere potest venenum, populis instillari nou debet, ut
nee in pascua ducuntur oves quae bonis and venenatis herbis permixta sunt, ne
incaute ab ovibus venenum hauriatur. Postremo summus Pontifex ipsos collaudavit
and gratias egit.

Cur igitur, mi Annate, quos collaudat summus Pontifex, lacerant tui? Cur summi
Pontificis Constitutione ad stabiliendum Molinam tam saepe abutuntur, vix
memores quam hoc severe summus Pontifex interdixerit? Nam cum paulo post
Constitutionem Jesuita Romanus tertiae propositionis censuram in Molinae
favorem detorqueret, per Eminentissimum Cardinalem Baberinum mandari curavit
Innocentius ipsi Generali Iesuitatum, ut talem suorum compesceret audaciam,
omnibusque Professoribus suis ediceret, ne quid e postrema Constitutione
adversus Sancti Thomae doctrinam, and efficacis gratiae ad omnia pietatis opera
necessariae dogma, elicere tentarent.

ARTICULUS XII.
Allata in Galliam Constitutione silent turbae, sed ad breve tempus. Nova
rursum contentio callide procuditur a Jesuitis de facto Jansenii. Haec
controversia in duobus capitibus sita. Fundamenta negatium propositiones esse
in Jansenio.
HAec fuit, mi Annate, victoriae tuae ratio, in qua paranda, praesto fuisse
tibi videtur Virgilianum illud: -- Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat.
Nunc operae pretium est attendere quo pacto cursum illius prosecutus sis, and
hoc Pontificio decreto adversarios tuos irretieris.

Adfertur in Galliam Constitutio tanto ambitu petita, tanto data recipitur ab
omnibus, siletur, propositiones ab omnibus rejiciuntur. Quid multa? Pacis
imaginem quandam vidimus. Interim missa a Doctoribus ab Episcopos a quibus
legati erant, distinctio illa sensuum summo Pontifici oblata, and a nemine
Romae improbata, ante Constitutionis promulgationem in lucem edita fuerat, ut
omnibus innotesceret quam illi nihil Romae nisi gratiam efficacem defendissent.
Hic si vos ullum concordiae studium, si qua fraternae caritatis cura tangeret,
tam promptam Augustinianis in damnandis propositionibus obedientiam
gratularemini, pacem Ecclesiae redditam gauderetis. Sed nusquam magis
aperuistis, nihil vos aliud in Constitutione ambienda spectasse, quam ut ejus
specie vobis adversarios vestros liceret ulcisci.

Supererat una de facto Jansenii contentio, quam multi in Constitutione
Innocentii nondum decisam existimabant. Quam levis, mi Annate, quam nihil fidem
attingens, quam nullo modo ad Ecclesiae aedificationem pertinens! Haec ipsa
privatis potius sermonibus, quam libris agitata statim evanuisset, nisi
fuissent qui foverent and exsuscitarent. Them tibi in ea Augustinianos
erravisse; tamen erat, aut nusquam veniae locus. Ubi enim nisi in ejusmodi
rebus locum habebunt Apostolicae voces: Veruntamen si quid aliter sapitis, hoc
quoque vobis Deus revelabit; quas toties usurpat Augustinus, ut id doceat: Qui
de capitalibus dogmatis consentiunt, in minutiorum controversiarum ramis, non
esse pressius urgendos, sed hortandos potius, ut eorum quae nondum capiunt,
intelligentiam a Deo poscant?

Hic fuit Apostoli, hic Patrum animus. At sociorum tuorum long dissimilis.
Dolebat illis adversarios suos accepta Constitutione, ipsorum se manibus
subduxisse. Ergo ut eos jam elabentes suis rursum casibus irretirent, inani
illa controversia avide arrepta tota Gallia clamitare coeperunt inutilem reddi
Constitutionem, and Jansenistarum artibus Pontificem eludi.

Sed obsecro, mi Annate, quid sibi volebant isti clamores, aut quid aliud quam
pravum sociorum tuorum animum indicabant? Quid enim? An inutilis est
Constitutio quae turbas componit haeresimque, si quae fuit, prorsus extinguit?
Ita prorsus vobis inutilis erat; hoc que rebamini; unum enim in illa petebatis
utilitatem, ut odii exsaturandi vobis facultas esset, Quod hanc vestram
cupiditatem non explet inutile dicitis. Igitur ex nugatoria contentione brevi
ingentem excitastis controversiam, dignamque quae Episcoporum conventus
exerceret. Haec quoniam clamoribus vestris in tantum abiit celebritatem, paulo
diligentius explicanda est.

Augustiniani Theologi quo pacto totum hoc negotium Romae tractatum esset non
ignari, in illa facti quaestione duo contendebant: I. Verba illa Constitutionis
quibus Jansenio propositiones oblique tribuebantur, judicii Pontificii vim non
habere; sed ad summum Pontificiae opinionis, quam ipse octoginta Galliae
Episcopis, vel potius Jesuitis credens, re indiscussa obiter significasset.

II. Ex Hallerii and Jesuitarum sermonibus, summum Pontificem durius Iansenii
mentem interpretarum esse, and quasdam sententias Iansenius putasse, quae
revera Iansenii non essent; ideoque in Iansenii quidem sensu propositiones
damnare voluisse, non tamen revera damnavisse; quia verus Iansenii sensus long
diversus esset ab eo quem tanquam Iansenii sensum in propositionibus
proscripserat.

Cur potius opinionem, quam judicariam sententiam in Constitutione de Iansenio
interpositam censerent, his argumentis movebantur.

Primo, Quod novum prorsus and inauditum in Ecclesia esset, alicui Scriptori
propositiones tribui, tanquam ex ipsius libro extractas, nisi totidem verbis
apud ipsum extarent. At quatuor saltem propositionum verba in Iansenio non
extare, cuivis inspicienti patet.

Secundo, Quod in singulis propositionibus damnandis nullum Iansenii mentionem
faceret, sed tantum in prooemio and clausula Constitutionis, quae ad
narrationem potius quam ad decisionem spectant.

Tertio, Quod nullum sine examine judicium fieri solet. At nemini Iansenii
excutiendi provinciam Romae mandatam; neminem de ejus sensu dicere jussum:
^opositiones ipsas in abstracto spectatas certissimum erat. Nil igitur
probabilitatis habere videbatur, ut de tanti viri tantique Episcopi libro and
grandi and ad intelligendum operoso, nemine audito qui in ejus defensionem
loqueretur, ex paucorum Regularium ociosis sermonibus pronunciare voluisset
Innocentius, praesertim cum Constitutioonis suae voces ita consulto
temperasset, ut non violenter in alium trahi possent.

Falsum vero sensum Iansenio Romae affictum, ideo sibi persuaserant, quod nihil
aliud in Iansenio deprehenderent circa propositiones quam gratiae efficacis
doctrinam a Pontifice non damnatam, sed potius probatam. Quare cum pateret
Innocentium in quinque propositionibus Jansenii sensum voluisse damnare, nec
minus certum esset, non damnatum esse gratiam efficacem, consequens erat
Innocentium per Iansenianum illum sensum aliud quoddam dogma intellexisse a
gratiae efficacis doctrina long diversum, cum illum rejeceret summus Pontifex
istam probaverit. Ergo cum exoticum illud dogma in Iansenio, tametsi ac^i
studio quaesitum deprehendere non possent, in eam opinionem venerunt, hoc
potius ex Hallerii Iesuitarumque commentis haustum quam in Iansenio inventum
esse.

Harum quaestionum nullum ad fidem pertinere palam est. Quid enim refert ad
fidem, an Pontificem censeam recte de Auctoris sensu judicasse, dummodo
existimem de fide ipsa recte sensisse, and cum ipsis fide prorsus consentiam?
Quid refert, credam necne, sensum illum quem damnavit Pontifex, in Iansenio
reperiri, dummodo idem atque ipse dogma, eundem sensum, eundem errorem quem
Iansenianum appellat, pariter damnem? Quid refert, an in Iansenio sensum illum
a gratia efficaci diversum possim detegere, dummodo illum, quicunque est, and
ubicunque sit, proscribam and execrer? Haec tamen and tu, and Iesuitae gregales
tui non intelligere simulantes, inde rursus novae dissensionis flammam
excivistis and hoc color de integro adversarios vestros, tanquam manifestos
haereticos insectari vehementius coepistis.

ARTICULUS XIII.
Alexandro VII. statum hodiernae de facto Jansenii quaestionis perverse and
mendaciter expositum. Hinc novissima ejus Constitutione praecipuum
controversiae caput omissum; illud decisum quod ad rem nihil pertineret.
MOrtuo Innocentio successit Alexander hujus nominis septimus, cujus magnae in
conficienda Constitutione parts fuerant. Hic suopte ingenio in Jesuitas
propensior, quanto plus ipsis fidei habuit, tanto ab istarum controversiarum
veritate cognoscenda longius absuit. Indico esse potest decretum ipsius, quo
Inocentii Constitutionem confirmare and facti quaestionem dirimere voluit. Ex
hoc enim perspici licer, statum hujus quaestionis prorsus ignotum ipsi fuisse.
Nam si postremam illam Constitutionem diligentius expendamus, and qualis
Pontificis in ea condenda sensus fuerit, exploremus, reperiemus ita putasse
summum Pontificem, Jansenii sensum esse certum aliquod dogma erroneum, de quo
inter utramque contendentium partem constaret. Hunc quosdam tueri, and damnatum
a summo Pontifice pernegare, quo sibi illum perpetuotenere liceat; atque ita
illos, dum de quaestione facti tantum litigare se simulant, revera tamen de
jure litigare, cum illud ipsum dogma adhuc defenderent, quod ab Innocentio
damnatum esset.

Hac opinione imbutus Alexander, nihil aliud sibi faciendum judicavit, quam ut
declararet, utpote intimarum Innocentii cogitationum conscius, ipsi propositum
fuisse ut Jansenii sensum damnaret, ac propositiones proscriberet, veluta
Iansenio excerptas, tanquam in Gallia de Innocentii voluntate ambigeretur. Et
quoniam in ea facti quaestione, qualis ipsi exhibita est, juris etiam quaestio
involvebatur, ideo durius increpavit illos qui de facti quaestione dubitarent,
filios iniquitatis appellans. Quo sane verbo nunquam mitissimus Pontifex in eo
uteretur, qui in mera facti quaestione nihil ad jus, nihil ad fidem pertinente,
in qua toties decepti sunt summi Pontifices, ab ipso modeste dissentirent.

Talem fuisse summi Pontificis mentem tota clamat Constitutio, de qua tria
dicere habeo.

Primum si probe intelligatur, nihil illam definire non modo si jus, sed etiam
si factum spectetur, quod non al qua ratione sit verum.

Secundo, Falsum prorsus esse, and malign a malevolis hominibus instillatam
summo Pontifici eam opinionem, qua ad condendam Constitutionem adductus est.

Tertio, Totam controversiam de facto Iansenii integram nec decisam esse
relictam.

I. Nihil falsi definivisse summum Pontificem, si jus and fidem spectes,
manifestum est. Damnat enim propositiones, and earum proprium sensum sed ita ut
gratiae efficacis doctrinam relinquat intactam. Secluso vero gratiae efficacis
sensu, omnes illae propositiones in all iis sensibus merito damnari possunt.

Ne in facti quidem quaestione quicquam dixisse mihi videtur, quod non omnes
verum agnoscant si quid voluerit Pontifex, altius inspiciatur. Nam cum putaret
in Gallia litigari, utrum Innocentius Iansenii sensum damnavisset, and
propositiones ex ipso excerptas credidisset, rectissime and vere declaravit,
propositiones in sensu Iansenii esse damnatus, ab Innocentio scilicet, qui
revera propositiones tanquam Iansenianas damnare voluit, sensumque Iansenii in
iis volutum credidit.

Veriorem and benigniorem hunc Alexandrinae Constitutionis intellectum puto.
Non enim ullam ad hanc facti quaestionem dirimendam Congregationem habuit, ut
in novis decretis condendis observari solet: sed ea tantum quae sub decessore
suo sacta sunt, tanquam testis fidelissimus narrat, cui sane ea quae vidit
novitque testanti fidem abrogari par non est. Vidit autem excuti propositiones:
fateamur excussas. Novit Innocentio mentem fuisse damnare Iansenium; fateamur
tale fuisse Innocentii consilium, and Alexandro prorsus succinemus. At si de eo
ambigi in Gallia putasset utrum ab Innocentio recte examinatus fuisset
Iansenius, utrum been a Consultoribus ipsius intellectus, utique decreto suo
haec controversiae praecipua capita decidisset; quod tamen Alexander omnino non
facit. Magna enim diligentia propositiones examinatas testatur, Jansenium
excussum non dicit, nec dicere potuit. Quam cautionem nemo fortuitam putet, and
exceptum agnoscat quod non expressum est.

Quia tamen haec interpretatio, etsi, ut dixi, religiosior, ac, si mentem
Pontificis penitus introspicias, verior; tamen ab approbatione populari
nonnihil abhorret; non existimem licere Theologo, qui Jansenium male Romae
intellectum putet, huic definitioni ita simpliciter subscribere, ut non
manifest appareat eum de facti quaestione adhuc dubitare; ne, si postmodum
urgeatur, ac dubitationem suam promere cogatur, in perversae calliditatis and
perfidiae suspicionem veniat; quam opinionem Sacerdotes ac Theologi omnes
longissime a se debent amoliri.

II Nec vero difficilius probatur, opiniones a veritate prorsus alienas summo
Pontifici de controversiis Gallicis instillatas. Nam ut ex ejus Constitutione
cernere est, credidit Jesuitis summus Pontifex esse nonnullos, quos idcirco
filios iniquitatis appellat, qui fidem ut testatur ipse, labefactent; illo ipso
videlicet dogmate defendendo, quod Janseniani sensus nomine damnavit
Innocentius. Hinc ad condendam Constitutionem ea se potissimum ratione
profitetur adductum, ut omnes fideles in unitate, non alicujus facti, sed
fidei, contineantur, quam ab illis Iansenii defensoribus callide violari
credidit. Atqui hoc falsissimum esse Augustiniani omnes facillime convincunt,
dum se profitentur cum summo Pontifice prorsus in fide congruere, and quidquid
in propositionibus damnavit, pariter rejicere: dumque adversarios suos
compellant ut vel unum assignent circa propositiones dogma, in quo a summi
Pontificis sensu dissideant.

Praeterea credidit Jesuitis Pontifex sensum Jansenii esse certum aliquod
dogma, quod prolatis his voc^bus eodem modo ab omnibus intelligatur. Hinc de
illo sensu quasi certo and minime dubio explicando non laborat. At hoc plane
falsum esse perspicuum est, cum in sensu Iansenii interpretando tota nunc facti
controversia posita sit, quem Hallerius and Consultores nonnulli ad
necessitantem gratiam and alia ejusmodi monstra pertrahere nituntur: contra
Augustiniani ad simplicem gratiae efficacis doctrinam revocant.

Postremo credidit, dubitari hic in Gallia, an Iansenium damnare voluisset
Innocentius: at de hoc nullus unquam dubitavit.

III. Ex omnibus autem clarissime demonstratur quod tertio loco posui, veram
facti quaestionem prorsus ab Alexandro non decisam.

Ambigebatur enim primo, number Innocentius opinando, an judicando propositiones
Jansenio tribuisset, quia judicii loco vulgo non habetur, quod sine praevio
examine summi Pontificiis obi^et pronunciant. At hanc dubitationem nullo modo
sustulit Alexander. Non enim docuit nec docere potuit Jansenii librum legitime
ab Innocentio examinatum; quo tamen omisso, omnis declaratio summi Pontificis,
opinionis, non judicii locum habet.

Ambigebatur secundo, an Iansenius revera docuisset, gratia necessitatem
afferri voluntati, dissentiendi potestatem tolli, justis mandata esse
simpliciter impossibilia, etiam in sensu diviso, etc. Quemadmodum volunt
Hallerius and Iesuitae. An intra vulgarem efficacis gratiae ac Thomisticae
scholae doctrinam hac in part stetisset, ut volunt ipsius defensores. Hanc
dubitationem quomodo aufert ea Constitutio, quae Iansenii sensum omnino non
explicat, nec innuit?

Si quaeras igitur, mi Annate, quomodo hanc facti quaestionem dirimere possit
summus Pontifex? Responsum habe: si Iansenii librum legitime examinari curet,
ac patienter audiat Theologos qui pro Iansenio loquivoluerint. 2. Si perspicui
and sine ambagibus assignet quid Ianseniani sensus nomine intelligendum sit,
and quid ille ab Augustino discrepet. Hoc donec ab ipso impetretur, semper erit
non injustae querelae locus adversus eos qui Iansenianum sensum explicare
detrectent, damnari sine explicatione imperiose praecipiant.

En tibi, mi Annate, caecae illius contentionis, qua jamdiu sine causa jactatur
Ecclesia, historiam pro rerum abundantia brevem; pro Disquisitionum nostrarum
modo, longiorem. Nec enim sum eam quam potui copiam consectatus, nec rursus ea
omittere volui, quae ad id probandum pertinebant, quod tota hac scriptione
specto, nullam de quinque propositionibus, seposita utrinque efficaci gratia,
vel esse vel fuisse controversiam. Et quoniam nonnullae adhuc cavillationes
supersunt, quibus simplicioribus imponere foletis, visum est, ne qua restet
difficultatis umbra, brevibus illas responsionibus ad hujus Disquisitionis
calcem elidere.

ARTICULUS XIV.
Quibusdam Molinisticis cavillis occurritur.
QUAESTIO I.
CUr ante damnationem quinque propositionum, eas Augustiniani ambiguas tantum,
uno sensu veras, altero haereticas dixere, nunc vero simpliciter haereticas
fatentur?

RESPONSIO.
Verborum significatio ex usu hominum; Ecclesiasticorum verborum intelligentia
ex usu Ecclesiae pender. Si quae sua sponte ambigua sunt, tota Ecclesia in
aliquam significationem confluente, ambigua esse desinunt. Vocem
Consubstantialis olim damnarat Synodus Antiochena contra Paulum Samosatenum:
eandem contra hac haeresi oppressa pro fidei tessera habuit Ecclesia contra
Arianos. Neque tunc causa^i licuisset hanc vocem per se ambiguam esse: consensu
enim Ecclesiae amotus erat malus ille sensus, cujus ex se erat capax, omnisque
ambiguitas dempta. Idem de propositionibus judicium fieri debet. Ambiguae
secundum se and aequivocae sunt, ut ipsa Consultorum vota demonstrant. Possunt
ad rectum sensum gratiae efficacis trahi possunt in malo and heretico sensu;
and quidem, ut judicavit summus Pontifex, congruentius accipi. Sic autem illas
damnavit Innocentius X. ut express efficacis and praedeterminantis gratiae
doctrinam censurae subduceret. Sic ipsius Constitutionem suscepit Ecclesia, ut
istiu^ doctrinae auctoritas, etiam fatentibus Iesuitis, maneret intacta. Non
igitur illa includi jam potest in propositionum sensu; quia damnatas voces ad
damnatum sensum aligat Ecclesiae consensus. Sublata est ergo omnis prorsus
ambiguitas. Excerpta enim ex illarum propositionum sensibus efficacis gratiae
doctrina, nihil jam in iis remanet nisi noxium and virulentum. Ergo ante
damnationem quia ambiguae erant, partim verae, partim falsae merito dicta sunt,
non ab Augustinianis modo, sed ab ipsis Romanae Inquisitionis Theologis, ab
omnibus Dominicanis, imo ab ipso Hallerio and sociis qui in collatione cum
Dominicanis contestati sunt, propositiones a se non impugnari in sensu gratiae
efficacis, ut supra vidimus. Post damnationem vero, quia sublata est
ambiguitas, recte item simpliciter haereticae dicuntur.

QUAESTIO II.
Cur nonnulli confessi sunt ante illarum propositionum damnationem, Iansenii
sensum in illis involvi posse, nunc iidem istud simpliciter negant?

RESPONSIO.
Etsi injurium sit ut singulorum dicta premant universos, facile tamen ex
dictis cerni potest, quam non ista inter se pugnent. Ianseniinus ille sensus
qui involvi in damnatione quinque propositionum poterat, nihil aliud erat, ut
ab Augustinianis pulchre explicatum est, quam gratiae efficacis doctrina. Quid
mirum igitur, fi subducto ex propositionum sensibus illo dogmate gratiae
efficacis Jansenianus pariter sensus subductus sit? Constant igitur illi sibi
pulcherrime; and qui ante damnatas propositiones, gratiae efficaci, sive
Janseniano sensui metuebant, nunc ipsi nihil omnino timent. Quomodo enim
Janseniano sensui metuerent, cum videant gratiam efficacem in tuto collocatam,
quam nomine Janseniani sensus intelligebant?

QUAESTIO III.
An sensus divisus per mutabilitatem liberi arbitrii explicatus, excludat
vulgarem ejus explicationem a Thomistis traditam?

RESPONSIO.
Cum negare non possent Moliniani, saepe ab Augustinianis usurpari vulgarem
illam distinctionem Thomistarum, sensus divisi and sensus compositi, hoc fuco
apud ignaros nostrarum rerum Consultores usi sunt, his vocibus, sensus divisi,
ab ipsis non designari idem quod vulgo Thomistae intelligunt, sed quandam
duntaxat flexibilit atem liberi arbitrii, quod substracta gratia possit male
agere, cum hoc durante gratia non possit. Hic fucus ita facile abstergitur:
Maxima Augustinianorum pars, non alio modo quam Thomistae interpretati sunt
sensum divisum: in iisque ipse Jansenius, and ejus Apologistae, Doctor
Sanbovius and omnes illius discipuli, ipsidemque Augustiniani Doctores Romam
missi. Unus quem viderim, vir quidem doctissimus eam flexibilitatem liberi
arbitrii uberius persecutus est, non ut aliquid Thomisticae explicationi
detraheret, sed ut aliqiud superadderet. Non aegre fatetur ille cum ipsa gratia
efficaci pacifice cohaerere dissentiendi potentiam, nunquam actu dissentientem,
quod Thomistis ad sensum divisum sufficit. Sed cum hoc minus haereticis
satisfaciat, plus aliquid dicere voluit, and id ostendere, quomodo gratiae non
modo in sensu diviso sic explicato, sed etiam magis proprie and quasi in sensu
composito resisti possit. Hoc sic ille confecit.

Gratia efficax ex Augustino est delectatio victrix. Victrix autem dicitur
quatenus aliam delectationem vincit. Vincit autem, quia validior and fortior
est. Sed fortior est comparata ad concupiscentiae vires, cum quibus confligit.
Ita si augerentur illae concupiscentiae vires, non jam superior, sed infirmior
esset; ideoque non vinceret, sed vinceretur. Ergo quia concupiscentia semper
augeri potest and inflammari vehementius, nullus est gratiae gradus in hac
vita, in quo non possit gratia vinci per validiorem concupiscentiam. Cur igitur
non vincitur? Quia, inquit, Deus hoc concupisentiae augmentum in iis quos
tentationis victores facere constituit, vel reprimit, vel pro majori
concupiscentiae ardore majorem charitatis ardorem accendit. Ita semper resisti
potest gratiae efficaci, nunquam tamen resistitur. Hanc explicationem quae
Thomisticae aliquid superadstruit, ideo magis amplectitur vir eruditus, quod
eam haereticis quodammodo magis censet oppositam. Illi enim gratiam semel datam
nunquam extingui in animo semel justificatorum censet: and sic salutarem
hominibus timorem detrahunt a gratia excidendi.

Hanc autem resistendi potentiam vocat ille quidem in sensu diviso, potuisset
tamen aliquatenus vocare in sensu composito, cum per istud concupiscentiae
augmentum, gratiae quae efficax ante fuit, aliquando reipsa resistatur. Sic
enim infirma Petri charitas victrix erat in ipso antequam mortis metu
percelleretur: accedente hoc timore victa est. Manifestum est autem sensum
divisum sic explicatum, Thomisticam notionem involvere, and aliquid amplius.

QUAESTIO IV.
An qui indifferentiam sensus divisi non adhibet ad conciliandum liberum
arbitrium cum gratia, ideo illam rejicere dicendus sit?

RESPONSIO.
Hoc arugumento nititur imperitissime Ricardus, ut probet indifferentiam
Thomisticam sensus divisi a Jansenio negatam. Recurrit, inquit, ad aliam
rationem conciliandae cum gratia libertatis. Quid tum? Ergo priorem tanquam
falsam repudiat. Ubi logicum illud acumen? Quam multa vera aliis veris
explicandis inservire non possunt! An quicunque sensus, quibusdam Scripturae
verbis accommodari non potest, ideo falsus in se and erroneus? Certum est
igitur in liberate hujus vitae reperiri indifferentiam illam potentiae a
Thomistis explicatam. Agnovit id Jansenius and lib 8. cap. 4. and uberius cap.
20. and 21. Sed utrum ad libertatis cum gratia consensionem adhibita sit ab
Augustino, alia quaestio est. Negat id Jansenius, sed non ideo indifferentiam
illam rejicit. Vult esse proprietatem inseparabilemlibertatis hujus viae; aut
si velis, esse de essentia libertatis, quatenus hoc nomine sola electionis
significatur libertas. Sed non vult esse de essentia generali libertatis, sicut
ab Augustino spectata est. Sed sive sit proprietas, sive essentia, certum est,
ut Jansenius agnoscit, eam and reperiri and requiri in hoc statu naturae lapsae
ad merendum and demerendum.

QUAESTIO V.
An gratiam sufficentem in abstracto, potentiam proximam in abstracto, etc.
definivisse censendus sit summus Pontifex?

RESPONSIO.
Aliquis fortasse sibi in mentem induxerit, id Annatum abstractionibus suis
esse consecutum, ut saltem a summo Pontifice gratiae sufficientes in abstracto,
potentiae proximae in abstracto, indifferentiae in abstracto sancirentur. Verum
etsi nihil hoc ad Augustinianos, tamen falsum est. Absit enim ut talibus
ineptiis fidem Catholicam inquinarit summus Pontifex, summus idem Catholicae
fidei vindex. Et certe cur eas ipsi tribuatis, causa nulla est. Primum verborum
istorum nulla in Constitutione mentio: Ergo ista verba nullo modo usurpanda
decrevit. Restat ut rem significatam ad fidem pertinere decreverit. Sed quae
tandem est res significata per gratiam sufficientem in abstracto, and cetera
ejusmodi? Vis dicam? Nulla. Vis probem? Nil facilius. Nomen enim illud
sufficiens, and cetera id genus, non univoce Thomisticis notionibus and
Molinisticis convenient; sed tantum aequivoce. At sicut univocorum una est
notio quae potest praescindi and in abstracto definiri: ita aequivocorum nulla
communis notio quae possit abstrahi and definiri. Exemplosit nomen, Taurus,
quod aequivoce convenit Philosopho, monti, astro, animali: Iam quaero, quid est
Taurus, quatenus abstrahit a singulis illis significationibus? Nihil omnino
praeter syllabas Tau, rus. Similis de gratia sufficient ratio est. Sua constat
significatio gratiae Molinianae, quam sufficientem dicunt; sua item
Thomisticae. At utrique, ut fatentur omnes, vox suffic^ens aequivoce convenit.
Abstrahe ergo illam ab utroque significatu, nihil remanet praeter sonum sensu
vacuum, quem ne quidem tibi reliquit summus Pontifex, qui ejusmodi verba in
Scholarum angulos relegavit, a fidei decretis longissime arcuit. Ridiculum ergo
ut summus Pontifex gratiam sufficientem qua sufficientem in abstracto
definierit, quia gratia sufficiens qua sufficiens, in abstracto nihil prorsus
est.

Quid igitur, inquies, definivit? Idem quod Concilium Tridentinum in illis
decretis quae a Jansenio violata querebamini. Non ergo vetat, imo jubet and
Religo and pietas, ut Innocentii Constitutionem omnes venerentur, and probent,
pariterque Alexandri VII. decretum amplectantur, quatenus nihil superadstruit,
and illos quos putavit Innocentius Jansenianos, cum ipsis proscribit erroribus.
Verum ut hoc damnare proclive est, ita in iis, quibus tribuuntur, invenire
difficillimum. Utut sit, nihil est quod de iis inveniendis laboremus. Haec ad
te proprie cura pertinet, mi Annate, tu Janseniani errories, Janseniani sensus,
fidejussor es, quandoquidem tibi Romae de eo creditum est.

Deteges igitur quando voles Jansenistas illos qui negarunt gratiae efficaci
posse dissentiri, qui necessitantem gratiam invexere. Nobis interim and
caeteris Ecclesiae fidelibus sufficit ut illos tuos Jansenistas, and illum
Jansenium tuum, quisquis fuit, ex animo damnemus, ut facimus.

Nonis Octobris, A. S. 1657.
PAVLI IRENAEI DISQVISITIO SEXTA; SIVE VERA METHODVS DISQUIRENDI An quinque
propositiones damnatae sunt in Jansenio.
PRAEFATIO.
QUaestionem per se levissimam, utrum propositiones sint in Jansenio, necne,
celeberimam hoc tempore fecit altercantium utrinque Theologorum tanta
contentio. Hanc etsi utilius fuisset vel ab initio non moveri, vel commotam
statim extingui: tamen illa in praesens propterea jam omitti non potest, quia
ex ipsa crimen haereseos, aut saltem inobedientiae, multis caeteroquin
probatissimis viris, conflatur. Atque illud quidem crimen sic quinque
Disquisitionibus depuli, ut confidam fore, tum ut mihi assentiantur aequi, tum
ut saltem taccant vel iniqui, ac mihi causam silentio tradant. Superest nuda
and ab omni dogmate avulsa facti quaestio, de qua non nisi primam propositionem
attigi, utinam etiam non attingere licuisset. Sed quoniam litem ut cum maxim
fervere perspicio, and tamen ea ratione a quibusdam tractari, ut finis
contentionis nullus sit, visum est saltem brevem and certam methodum tradere,
qua in alterutram partem expediti and ad exitum perduci queat. Omnino enim
ejusmodi sunt facti quaestiones, ut de iis diu nisi vitio disputantium contendi
non possit,

Verum in tradenda certa illa methodo inveniendarum, si modo sint in Jansenio,
propositionum, necesse fuit, falsas and fallaces methodos refellere; quarum
omnium quoniam in Morelliano libello nuper edito exempla reperi, ea non aliunde
quaesivimus. Itaque tam crebro bonum hunc Doctorem castigabimus, ut haec
Disquisitio, libelli ab eo nuper conscripti confutatio haberi possit; tantum
convitiis ejus nihil reponemus, saniorem ipsi mentem tare contenti.

ARTICULUS I.
Regulae generales verae methodi; fallacis notae. Principia per se nota vel ab
utraque part concessa.
IN omni disputatione primum videre est quid utrinque concedatur. Deinde quid
primum Reo ab Actore objiciatur, quod Rhetores intentionem vocant. Tum qua
ratione praecipuam illam accusationem depellat Reus, quod appellant
depulsionem. Ex hoc vero intentionis depulsionisque conflictu, status exurgit,
qui primam clare and enucleate constituendus, and resecatis omnibus istis
capitibus de quibus non certatur, quam accuratissime definiendus. Objicit
Miloni Appius; Clodium occidisti. Intentio est. Respondet pro Milone Cicero:
Occidi; sed recte, quia insidiatorem. Depulsio est. Hinc duae nascuntur
quaestiones, quibus continetur status: An liceat occidere insidiatorem? An
Clodius insidiator? Illa juris, haec facti.

Hoc posito, jam facile a fallaci dignoscitur vera and certa methodus. Illa,
unica tantum est, quae illud de quo quaeritur certis argumentis conficit, and
quae ex adverso opponuntur firmis probationibus repellit.

Falsa autem; non una, sed duplex. Nam vel illud probat de quo non quaeritur;
ut si non aliud tota oratione probasset Appius, nisi Clodium a Milone occisum:
vel de quo quaeritur fluxis and vanis argumentis adstruit.

Constituta methodo, ne disputatio fluctuet, certa and utrinque concessa
principia figi necesse est. Ejusmodi sunt quae sequuntur, de quibus tam
Molinistae quam Jansenii defensores facile convenient.

I.
Cum Augustino, Patribus, and antiquis Scholasticis, ut sentire nefas non est,
ita nec loqui.

II.
Augustini and Patrum, necnon S. Thomae and antiquorum Scholasticorum
locutiones, sensum habent a damnato propositionum sensu diversum.

III.
Ex sola locutioni Augustini vel antiquorum Scholasticorum non potest argui
quisquam vel ab Augustino, vel ab antiquis Scholasticis dissentire, vel ullum
haereticum dogma docuisse.

IV.
Scriptoris Catholici ambiguam locutionem, orthodoxi sensus and erronei
capacem, erroneo interpretari nefas est, si erroneus ille sensus express sit
amotus.

V.
Ambigua locutio bono sensu interpretanda est, si ab ipso scriptore ad bonum
sensum alligata sit: ut enim eg^egie Dionysius Carth. de sim. lib. 2. art. 8.
Cum verba alicujus Doctoris in uno loco inducta poterunt sic and sic exponi,
trahi, intelligi; videndum est ad quem intellectum ipsemet Doctor hujusmodi
verba sua alibi redigat and coarctet.

VI.
Nullus locus Jansenii reprehendi potest, nisi vel propter verba, vel propter
sententiam vocibus subjectam.

VII.
Damnatus in propositionibus sensus ante exortas propositiones scholis
Catholicis ignotus, ut in narratione sua testantur Episcopi.

VIII.
His principiis aliud addi potest, de quo jam diximus in secunda Disquisitione,
nimirum, non mutari propositionis sensum, cum definitiones vocum pro ipsis
vocibus subjiciuntur.

ARTICULUS. II.
Methodus imveniendae in Jansenio primae propopositionis.
QUia jam istam propositionem accurate secunda Disquisitione excussimus, unum
nobis hoc loco praestandum, ut tum impugnatoribus, tum defensoribus Jansenii,
ineundam sibi ad causam obtinendam methodum demonstremus.

Vtrinque concessum.
Convenit orthodoxam, and nullo modo Pontificia Constitutione violatam
Thomistarum doctrinam, qui docent, Justis quibusdam gratiam sufficientem
habentibus, sed ei renitentibus, non adesse gratiam efficacem, sine qua tamen
non habent omnia ad agendum necessaria, sive non possunt implere praecepta
ejusmodi potestate, cui nihil defit ad agendum necessarium.

Intentio Molinistarum.
Tradit primam propositionem disertis verbis Jansenius tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 13:
Aliqua Dei praecepta. etc.

Depulsio Augustinianorum.
Verba primae propositionis damnatae habet Jansesenius loco citato, sed sensum
illius damnatum non habet: quia locus Jansenianus ex circumjectis and annexis
ad eum sensum alligatur, qui nil contineat praeter vulgarem Thomistarum
doctrinam, toti Ecclesiae, praecipue vero summo Pontifici probatam, istam
nempe: Quibusdam justis gratiam sufficientem Thomistico sensu habentibus, sed
ei renitentibus, praecepta non sunt ita possibilia, ut ea sine alio auxilio
implere actu and effective possint, and deest illis gratia efficax, sine qua
non habentur omnia necessaria ad implendum praeceptum.

Cum certum sit hunc sensum esse orthodoxum; hinc exurgit

Unica quaestio.
Utrum hic sit verus Jansenii sensus, an alia huic loco sententia ab ipso
subjecta sit?

Vera methodus Augustinianis ineunda.
Postulat ut ipsi hunc and non alium esse sensum Jansenii comprobent; quod nos,
ni fallor, geometrica demonstratione conclusimus Disquisitione secunda. Contra

Vera methodus Molinistis ineunda.
Postulat ut p^obent non hunc, sed alium quendam erroneum sensum his vocibus a
Jansenio subjectum. Id nisi faciant, nihil agunt, nec quicquam omnino
promovebunt.

Exigitur Morellius ad istam methodam.
Iam videamus quid egerit Morellius, and quomodo primam propositionem in
Jansenio esse probaverit. Verba, inquit, illius in Iansenio reperiuntur. Quid
tum? Quis unquam hoc negavit? Quis non ultro concessit? De sensu solum quaestio
est. Quaeritur an damnatus a Pontifice sensus (quem certum est ex 7. Principio
VII PRINCIP. Damnatus in propositionibus sensus ante exortas propositiones
scholis Catholicis ignotus, ut in narratione sua testantur Episcopi.
a Thomistarum doctrina alienum esse) in Jansenio sit? De hoc quid dicis, bone
Morelli? Nihil. Quorsum ergo abit disputatio tua? in sumum. Quid meretut?
R^sum. Quis credetet hominem qui se Magnatibus venditat quasi doctum, and
istius praesertim controversiae peritum qui adversarios singulis versibus
probris and convitiis onerat, tantae incuriae esse, ^ut cardinem difficultatis
prorsus ignorant, and magno conatu quasi reconditum aliquod mysterium afferat,
quod centies ipsi, ne postulanti quidem, concessum sit: ipsum vero
controversiae caput ne verbo quidem attingat?

ARTICULUS III.
Methodus inveniendae in Jansenio secundae propositionis.
REsecanda primum and a disputatione amovenda quae inter utrosque litigantes
constant.

1. Verba ipsa secundae propositionis non sunt in Iansenio.

2 Orthodoxa est Thomistarum sententia qui docent efficaci gratiae nunquam
resisti; sufficienti, cum sola est, semper resisti in eo effectu ad quem
excitat. Hanc ipsam tamen gratiam quam sufficientem vocant, esse secundum quid
efficacem, and nunquam carere eo effectu ad quem divina voluntate ordinatur.
Sic enim omnes Thomistae, e quibus Alvarez disp. 80. Omne auxilium, inquit,
sufficiens comparatione unius actus, semper est efficax respectu alterius, ad
quem efficiendum decreto absoluto divinae voluntatis ordinatur: V. g. auxilium
sufficiens ad actum fidei producit efficaciter pias cogitationes and notitias
credendorum, and pia desideria habendi fidem. Et Silvius in 2. 2. q. 111. art.
3. Revera omnis gratia est efficax alicujus effectus ad quem proxime ordinatur,
and quem Deus absoluta voluntate intendit.

His positis, videndum quid afferant Iansenii impugnatores, quid reponant
defensores, ut ex illorum intention and illorum depulsione constituatur
quaestio.

Intentio Morellii and Molinistarum.
Docet, inquit, Iansenius variis locis omnem gratiam esse efficacem, gratiam
aegrae voluntatis non relinqui in libero arbitrio, sed invictissime facere ut
velit bonum; tollere omnem resistentiam; oppositos obices voluntatis
perrumpere; hominem Deo operanti per gratiam non posse resistere; nullam
gratiam effectu carere; gratiam and effectum reciprocari; hoc ipso quo effectu
homo destituitur, sequi nullam ei gratiam esse collatam.

Depulsio Jansenii defensorum.
Reponunt Iansenii defensores haec loca reprehendi non posse, nec propter
verba, quia tota Augustinianis locutionibus constant, etiam apud Scholasticos
usitatis; nec propter sententiam; quia talis est, ut etiam Iesuitis eam probari
faltem ut orthodoxam necesse sit: nempe: Quamvis sint gratiae quaedam
inefficaces, and quibus vere resistitur; tamen omnem gratiam eo sensu efficacem
dici posse quia nulla caret eo effectu ad quem absoluta Dei voluntate ordinatur.

Hinc colligunt ex VI. PRINCIP. Nullus locus Jansenii reprehendi potest, nisi
vel propter verba, vel propter sententiam vocibus subjectam.
sexto principio articuli primi nihil in iis esse reprehendendum, prorsusque
secundae propositionis nec verba nec sensum in Iansenio contineri. Recta quidem
ad metam ista tendunt, and nisi obstent Molinistae, etiam pervenient.

Quaestiones duae.
Duplex inde quaestio tantum exurgit.

Alia minus praecipua: An ista loca Augustinianis vel apud Theologos usitatis
locutionibus constent.

Alia capitalis: An sensum in Iansenio contineant toti probatum Ecclesiae,
saltem ut orthodoxum.

Methodus ineunda Molinistis.
Prorsus alterutrum conficiendum est Molinistis; vel voces illas non esse
Augustinianas, nec ullis Theologis Catholicis probatas: quod si effecerint,
Iansen^um tantum temeritatis and incuriae coarguerint: vel non habere in
Iansenio sensum illum quem ipsi tribuunt ejus defensores, sed alium quo nulli
prorsus gratiae ullo modo resisti statuatur: quod si praesterint, etiam
haereseos reum tenebunt Iansenium.

Expenditur ex illa methodo Morellius.
Quid ibi Morellius; quo pacto utramque quaestionem tractat? Quo pacto probat
ex Iansenio nullam esse gratia inefficacem; non resisti gratiae in eo effectu
ad quem disponit, ad quem excitat, ad quem allicit, ad quem dat posse quod
nunquam in actum exit sine gratia uberiore, eo modo quo Thomistae docent.
Audiamus quid afferat. Tacet, obmutescit, quaestionem ne cernit quidem. O
praeclarum patronum! O dignum Pontificiae Constitutionis vindicem!

Methodus Augustinianis ineunda.
Nunc lustremus an melius in causa sua stent Iansenii defensores, quibus hoc
efficiendum est:

1. Loca Iansenii quae arguuntur, Augustini aut aliorum Patrum gratiae
defensorum locutionibus constare, aut certe apud Theologos usitatis. 2. Nullo
modo sensum damnatum secundae propositionis continere. 3. Eo sensu accipi
debere qui toti Ecclesiae probetur.
Objecta a Molinistis Jansenii loca cum Augustini and Prosperi locis
comparantur.
Ad primum obtinendum solis se oculis advocatis egere dicunt Iansenii
defensores; adeoque objecta Iansenii loca cum aliis Augustini aut aliorum
Patrum locis e regione ita componunt.

JANSENIUS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 4. Gratiae sanae voluntatis in primi hominis
libero relinquebatur arbitrio, ut eam si vellet desereret, aut si vellet
uteretur: gratio vero lapsae aegrotaeque voluntatis nullo modo in hominis
relinquitur arbitrio, ut eam deserat aut arripiat si voluerit; sed ipsa est
potius illa postrema gratia, quae invictissime facit ut velit, and a voluntate
non deseratur.

AVGVSTINVS de corr. and gr. cap. 11. Nec illa gratia sani hominis parva erat,
qua demonstrata est etiam potentia liberi arbitrii, quoniam sic adjuvabatur ut
sine hoc adjutorio in bono non maneret, sed hoc adjutorium si vellet desereret:
haec autem tanto major est, ut parum sit homini per illam reparare perditam
libertatem; parum sit denique non posse sine illa vel apprehendere bonum, vel
permanere in bono, nisi etiam efficiatur ut velit. Prima gratia est qua fit ut
habeat homo justitiam si velit; Secunda plus potest, qua etiam fit ut velit. Si
in tanta infirmitate vitae hujus ipsis Relinqueretur voluntas sua, nec Deus in
eis operaretur ut vellent, inter tot and tantas tentationes voluntas ipsa
succumberet. Subventum est infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina gratia
insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter ageretur.



Notae quaedam.
NOTA. I. Insuperabilem, indeclinabilem illam gratiam quae dat velle, quae non
relinquit homini voluntatem suam, sed facit velle: quae non est similis gratiae
Adamicae, quam ipse deserebat cum vellet, ita necessariam ab Augustino statui,
ut sine ea dicat non posse hominem lapsum vel apprehendere bonum, vel permanere
in bono.

NOTA. II. gratiam quae relinquitur libero arbitrio, quam deserit homo cum
vult, nihil aliud esse Augustino and Jansen^o quam gratiam versatilem and
Molinianam. Semper enim eam opponit Augustinus efficaci quae facit velle; sed
hoc late infra probabitur.

NOTA. III. Non id nunc agi, utrum Jansenius cum Augustino sentiat, sed utrum
cum ^ugustino loquatur; quod certe qui haec loca inspexerit, negare nemo
potest. Fieri tamen posse non diffitemur, ut alienum ab Augustino sensum in his
vocibus inc^userit. Sed hoc factum probare debent Molinistae. Non factum vero
probant Jansenii defensores, ut infra ostendetur.

JANSENIVS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 14. Tota doctrinae Augustistini moles eo
collimat, ut Christiani credant, and qui possunt intelligant, non liberum
arbitrium esse quod reddat auxilium efficax, vel inefficax, and quod sit causa
cur hic and nunc Deusinfluat in opus, quod possit gratiae efficientiam seu
influxum in opus impedire, quod libertas illius causa sit, ut actus singuli hic
and nunc fiant.

Et in margin, Molinam, Lessium, Suarem, adscribit, quorum sunt verba quae
distinctis hic characteribus excusa sunt.

S. PROSPER carm. de Ingratis. At vero omnipotens hominem cum gratia salvat.
Ipsa suum consummat opus cui tempus agendi
Semper adest, quae gesta velit, non moribus illi
Fit mora, nec causis anceps suspenditur ullis,
Nec quod sola potest, cura officioque ministri.
Exequitur, famulisque vicem committit agendi.
AVGVSTINVS de gr. and lib. arb. c. 16. Certum est nos velle cum volumus; sed
ille facit ut velimus bonum. Certum est nos facere cum facimus; sed ille facit
ut faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati.

Ibidem. Ut in Deum credamus and pie vivimus, non volentis neque currentis, sed
miserentis est Dei: non quia velle non debemus and currere, sed quia in nobis
and velle operatur and currere.



Nota.
Morellium adhuc ut potui tuli, sed hic prorfus ferri potest, quem non puduit
Lessi and Molinae loca, distinctis apud Jansenium characteribus expressa, solam
gratiae versatilis doctrinam complexa, quasi fidem Catholicam a summo Pontifice
consecratam proferre, and in hoc Jansenium erroris arguere, quod Molinae
doctrinam dicat ab Augustino improbari. Nec est quod causetur commune esse
Thomistis ac Molinistas dogma: Posse liberium arbitrium gratiae influxum
impedire. Alio enim long sensu a Molinistis asseritur, alio a Thomistis. Isti
duplex genus gratiae admittunt, unum cui nunquam resistitur, aliud cui semper
resistitur in secundario effectu, id est, plena conversione, quam ista gratia
nunquam operatur sine uberiore auxilio. Hoc nunquam negavit Jansenius, imo
multis locis admisit. At vero Molinistae uniusmodi gratiam admittunt, quae cum
possit actu and effective sortiri effectum, nunc a libero arbitrio impeditur,
nunc non impeditur. Itaque a libero arbitrio pendere volunt quod gratia nunc
sit efficax, nunc inefficax. Hoc negat Jansenius, hoc ab Augustino improbati
dicit; hoc tota olim Congregatio de Auxiliis in Molina damnavit his verbis: Hac
propositio and doctrina Patris Molinae, quatonus docet efficaciam auxilii
divini pendere ab effectu liberi arbitrii humani, non autem ab ipso auxilio,
prout a Deo venit, and ex modo motionis divinae, videtur tradita a
Semipelagianis; ass^ritur autema Molina contra expressam sententiam sancti
Augustini lib. de corr and great. Hoc negant omnes pene Romani Theologi, quibus
ut blandirentur qui Romae quinque propositiones impugnarunt, and ne gratiam
versatilem and Molinianam adstruere viderentur, multis locis providerunt in
schedulis Consultoribus oblatis; and nominatim in hac propositione, de qua sic
loquuntur.

Non agitur de gratia sufficient versatili statuenda, quae modo effectum suum
habeat, modo non habeat; sed tantum in genere, utrum verum sit in statu naturae
lapsae nullam dari gratiam quae vere sufficiens sit.

JANSENIUS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 24. Gratia tollit omnem voluntatis resistentiam.

AVGVSTINVS de praed. SS. cap. 8. Haec gratia quae occulte humanis cordibus
divina largitate tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur; quia ideo tribuitur,
ut cordis duritia primitus auferatur.

Lib. ab Simpl. q. 2. Nescio quomodo dicatur frustra Deum misereri, nisi nos
velimus. Si enim Deus miseretur, ergo jam volumus: ad eandem quippe
misericordiam pertinet ut velimus.

JANSENIVS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 24. Gratiam Dei ita victricem statuit
Augustinus, ut non raro dicat hominem operanti Deo per gratiam non posse
resistere, sed e contrario Deum non quicquid voluntatem facturam praevidet,
sive absolute, sive conditionate, sed quicquid omnino voluerit in voluntate
operari, quam ipse magis habeat in sua omnipotentissima potestate, quam ipsa
voluntas. Quod probat illis locis quae hic e regione posita sunt.

AVGVSTINVS do cor. and great. c. 14. Deo volenti salvum facere, nullum hominis
resistit arbitrium. Sic enim velle and nolle in volentis aut nolentis est
potestate, ut divinam voluntatem non impediat, nec superet potestatem. De his
enim qui faciunt quae non vult, facit ipse quae vult. Non est itaque dubitandum
voluntati Dei qui in caelo and in terra omnia quaecunque voluit fecit, and qui
etiam illa quae futura sunt fecit, humanas voluntates non posse resistere,
quominus faciat ipse quod vult.

JANSENIVS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 25. Nulla prorsus effectu caret, sed eum in
omnibus in quibus datur, infallibiliter operatur.

AUGUST. sermon. 44. de verbis Domini. Agis si ageris, and been agis si a bono
ageris.

Ibid. Gratiam tanquam causam and operationem voluntatis bonam velut effectum
esse, ut Philosophi loquuntur, convertibiles and a se mutuo inseparabiles.

Lib. ad Simpl. q. 2. Nescio quomodo dicatur frustra Deum misereri nisi nos
velimus. Si enim Deus miseretur, jam volumus.

Ibid. Hoc ipso quo effectu bono destituitur, nullam ei gratiam collatam esse.

De praed. SS. c. 8. Si omnis qui audivita Patre and didicit venit, omnis qui
non venit non audivit a Patre nec didicit. Absit ut quisquam non veniat, qui a
Patre audivit and didicit.

Ibid. Qui credunt Praedicatore forinsecus insonante, intus a Patte audiunt
atque discunt. Qui autem non credunt, foris audiunt, intus autem non audiunt,
neque discunt.

Lib. de gr. Chr. c. 13: Qui novit quod fieri debeat and non facit, nondum a
Deo didicit secundum gratiam, sed secunddum legem; non secundum Spiritum, sed
secundum literam.

Ibid. Quando Deus docet, non per legis literam, sed per Spiritus gratiam, ita
docet, ut quod quisque didicerit, non tantum cognoscendo videat, sed etiam
volendo appetat, agendoque perficiat.

Lib. 2. operis ult: in Julianum. Cum verbis Doctor plantat and rigat, possumus
dicere, forte credit auditor; cum vero Deus dat incrementum, sine dubio credit
and proficit.

JANSENIVS tom. 3. lib. 2. cap. 32. Quae agit and peragit effectum.

S. Prosper. Ipsa suum consummat opus.



Ex his omnibus conficiunt Jansenii defensores, nihil in ipsis Jansenii
locutionibus esse reprehendendum, omnesque bono sensu accipi posse, eo scilicet
quo ab Augustino acceptae sunt: inde ejusmodi argumentum concinnant.

Argument I.
Omnes Jansenii locutiones quae circa secundam propositionem proferuntur, ex
Augustino desumptae, vel manifest Augustinianis aequivalentes sunt, tantumque
aliquanto molliores, ut patet ex ipsa inspectione.

Sed ex Augustinianis locutionibus nemo argui potest secundam propositionem
tradidisse, per III. PRINCIP. Ex sola Augustini locutione nemo argui potest
ullum haereticum dogma docuisse.
tertium principium articuli primi. Ergo ex istis locutionibus argui non potest
Jansenius tanquam secundae propositionis auctor: quod erat probandum.

Geminae notae in hoc argumentum.
Hoc argumentum duabus notis suffulciunt: prima est, Augustini locutiones esse
Jansenianis per se duriores. Nihil enim durius, si Molinistas audiamus, in hac
materia dici potest, quam gratiam a nullo duro cord respui; eumque qui non
facit quod non novit, nondum a Deo doctum esse per gratiam: sed per literam and
legem.

2. Augustinianas illas locutiones feres nusquam ab Augustino circumscribi and
contrahi, contra autem a Jansenio easdem phrases saepe ad sensum omnibus
probatum express alligari, ut infra probabitur. Rursus ab eodem haereticum
sensum ab iisdem express removeri: unde sequi aiunt long iniquius in
Jansenium secundae propositionis invidiam conjici, quam in ipsum Augustinum
conjiceretur.

Lemma Praeambulum.
Atque ita quidem illi summovent eos qui ex istis locutionibus secundam
propositionem eruunt. Sed ipsum sensum Jansenii validius adhuc damnato secundae
propositionis sensu segregant duobus argumentis, praeter alia superius posita
principia, hoc item lemmate subnixis.

Omnes superius allatae locutiones, in quibus contineri secundam propositionem
putant, ut multum ambiguae sunt. Possunt enim ad illam revocari doctrinam, toti
Thomistarum Scholae probatam: omnem gratiam tam efficacem quam sufficientem,
esse efficacem respectu proximi istius effectus ad quem ordinatur voluntate Dei
absoluta.

Sic enim explicati possunt omnes superius allatae Jansenii locutiones: Gratia
tollit omnem resistentiam, nempe quae impedit proximum effectum, non quae
remotum. Item nulla gratia effectu caret, nimirum proximo illo ad quem
destinatur voluntate absoluta, non remoto ad quem excitat: Gratia omnis agit
and peragit effectum proximum, non remotum.

Gratia est convertibilis cum effectu; distinguo, proximo non remoto, sive eo
propter quem datur voluntate absoluta, non eo ad quem natura sua tendit and
refertur voluntate Dei antecedente.

Omnis gratia est efficax, nempe proximi effectus ad quem ordinatur voluntate
absoluta, non ejus ad quem ex natura sua tendit.

Nulla datur gratia sufficiens, nisi sit efficax; distinguo, sufficiens omnibus
modis and ad agendum actu, sive Moliniane, verum est; sufficiens Thomistice,
cui semper dissentiatur, nisi adsit efficax, falsum.

Hinc claret omnes istas locutiones boni sensus capaces. Demus Molinistis etiam
malum admittere, quod jure negari posset, quia Augustinianas phrases, quales
istae sunt, ad bonum sensum Ecclesiae consensus alligat: Sed demus tamen
includi posse sub omnibus illis vocibus, and Catholicum sensum Thomistarum, and
haereticum damnatae propositionis, tamen concedant necesse est Jansenii
adversarii, nil in eis esse reprehendendum, si pateat ab ipso Orthodoxo tantum
sensu intellectas; hoc vero duplici argumento conficiunt ipsius defensores.

Argument. II.
Jansenius malum sensum qui in istas propositiones cadere poterat, express
removit, cum variis locis asseruerit, gratiae nonnumquam dissentiri: gratias
quasdam inefficaces esse: gratias quasdam in solis desideriis inefficacibus
haerere, and a concupiscentia superari. Loca in promptu sunt.

Primus locus.
Delectatio victrix (inquit tom; 3, lib. 8. c. 2.) quae Augustino est efficax
adjutorium, relativa est. Tunc enim est victrix, quando alteram superat: quod
si contingat alteram ardentiorem esse, in solis inefficacibus desideriis
haerebit animus, nec efficaciter unquam volet quod volendum est. En gratiam,
qua accepta in solis desideriis inefficacibus haeret animus.

Secundus locus.
Initio autem capitis 27, libri 2 de gratia Christi Salvatoris: Nec vero,
inquit, moveat quenquam quod CONSTET multos divinitus mente collustrari, imo
vero and in ipsa voluntate motibus divinae gratiae percelli, qui tamen ab ejus
interna suasione and inclinatione dissentiunt, ut propterea falsum putet
gratiam in eo cui datur, semper operari effectum ob quem datur.

Nota.
Locus iste ita manifestus Annato visus est, ut aliter elabi non potuerit, quam
causando non hanc esse Jansenii doctrinam, sed potius objectionem ab ipso
propositam quam refellat. Agnoscit igitur hanc doctrinam esse Catholicam, and
secundae propositioni contrariam. Restat inquirendum an hic locus contineat
Jansenii doctrinam. Hoc vero ita perspicuum est, ut mirum videri possit tam
absurdam cogitationem cuiquam incidere potuisse. Cuivis enim inspicienti patet
hoc afferri a Jansenio quasi Catholicum dogma cum sua sententia conciliandum,
cui repugnare in speciem videbatur. Explicare enim toto hoc capite contendit
quomodo utrumque verum sit, and a gratia saepe dissentiri, and tamen illam
semper eum habere effectum ad quem datur: velut si quis ita adversus
Calvinistas disputaret: Nec vero moveat quenquam quod constet Christum in coelo
nunc esse, nec inde exiturum ante supremum judicium, ut propterea falsum putet
eum in Eucharistia esse. His verbis utique non negaret Christum in coelo esse,
sed negaret ex eo sequi ipsum in Eucharistia non esse.

Talem esse Jansenii mentem and per se patet, and ex sequentibus verbis omnino
constat. Quemadmodum, inquit, inundatio divinae gratiae totam hominis
voluntatem secum instar impetuosi cujusdam torrentis rapit, sic ut omnia humani
cordis retinacula, quibus terrenis rebus irretitur, velut violenta quadam
tempestate dirumpat; ita lenis ille velut aurae tenuis afflatus, complacentiam
quandam voluntatis tenuissimam, rei tam pulchrae, quae simul objicitur
contemplanda, contemperatam suaviter impetrat, and celerrime quasi furtim post
se rapit.

Non potuit gratiam sufficientem Thomistarum clarius and significantius
exprimere. Hanc enim illi in istis velleitatibus, excitationibus, complacentiis
sitam docent. Nec refert quod negat Jansenius istam gratiam sufficere. Semper
enim hoc verbum, ut ipsemet monet initio libri 3, pro eo usurpat; quod sine
alio auxilio sufficit ad actu and effective agendum, nec gratiam efficacem
requirit. Ita cum ait, Haec gratia nullo modo sufficit ut homo Dei mandatum
operetur, idem est ac si dicat, cum hac gratia nunquam hominem Dei mandatum
operari sine uberiori auxilio; cum dicit, Non enim quaevis gratia ad quosvis
effectus inserendos sufficit, idem est ac si dicat, non quamvis gratiam ad
quemvis effectum reipsa actu and sine uberiore auxilio inserendum satis esse.
Quae phrasis tametsi ex usu communi and ex Augustino petita, and a Jansenio
multis in locis explicata, praecipue tamen Sholasticos induxit, ut ab eo omnem
gratiam sufficientem rejici putarent.

Postremo si quis inefficacis gratiae verbum ex Jansenii ore velit audire,
habes illud lib. 4, cap. 10; Gratia, inquit; nunquam est sufficiens (Moliniano
scilicet sensu' ut saepe monuimus) sed vel efficax vel inefficax. Satin hoc
est? Addit Jansenius: Ex inefficaci gratia operationem sequi non posse: id est,
ex perpetuo ejus loquendi more, superius a nobis in secunda Disquisitione
stabilito, fieri non potest ut ex auxilio inefficaci solo sequatur operatio;
quod de sufficient sua gratia millies Thomistae testantur. Cum igitur, ut
patet, erroneum illum sensum Jansenius excluserit, sequitur ex IV. PRINC.
Scriptoris Catholici ambiguam locutionem orthodoxi sensus and erronei capacem,
erroneo interpretari nefas est, si erroneus ille sensus express sit amotus.
quarto principio, ambiguas ejus locutiones non posse ad illum detorqueri, sed
orthodoxo potius sensu accipiendas. Quod erat probandum.

Argumentum III.
Idem Jansenius easdem locutiones aperte ad bonum and Catholicum sensum
alligavit, additis restrictionibus Thomisticis.

1. Fatetur non omnem gratiam plenum and integrum effectum obtinere; sed tantum
aliquem. Nulla, inquit, Christi gratia effectu suo caret. En propositionem
generalem: Sed omnis efficit ut voluntas velit and aliquid operetur. En
restrictionem.

Nomine autem voluntatis illius quam semper operatur gratia, non est
intelligenda plena voluntas, sed nonnunquam sola velleitas and desiderium
inefficax. Si contingat, inquit, cupiditatem ardentiorem esse, in solis
desideriis inefsicacibus haerebit animus. Addit Jansenius, effectum illum quem
semper efficit gratia, esse illum ob quem datur. Gratia, inquit, in eo cui
datur, semper operatur effectum ob quem datur.

Jam vero per voces illas, ob quem datur, manifest intelligit Jansenius eum
effectum ad quem destinatur voluntate Dei absoluta. 1. Quia cum voluntas Dei
nominatur, nisi quid obstet, intelligenda est absoluta, non antecedens, quae
nonnisi improprie dicitur voluntas, cum sit tantum velleitas, ut ait Sanctus
Thomas. 2. Quia gratiae dantur voluntate absoluta, non antecedente, ut ait
Jansenius lib. 3 de gratia Christi cap. 20. Hinc patet sententiam Jansenii his
verbis concludi posse: Gratia semper aliquem effectum operatur, eum nempe ad
quem ordinatur Dei voluntate absoluta.

Ergo debent eo sensu accipi omnes superius allatae ambiguae locutiones, ex V.
PRINC. Ambigua locutio bono sensu interpretanda est, si ab ipso Scriptore ad
bonum sensum alligata sit.
quinto principio articuli primi. Sed hic sensus est Catholicus, quia Thomistis
omnibus communis, ut supra constituimus. Ergo sensus Jansenii in omnibus illis
locis est Catholicus. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Corollarium.
Ex his omnibus constat, inquiunt, unam eandemque esse sententiam Jansenii and
Thomistarum circa gratiam tum efficacem, tum inefficacem, seu sufficientem.

Utrique admittunt gratiae efficaci proprie dictae semper consentiri; utrique
asserunt ex gratia inefficaci nunquam operationem sequi.

Utrique asserunt tam gratiam efficacem quam in efficacem, esse efficacem
respectu ejus effectus quem vult Deus.

Utrique gratiam inefficacem in imperfectis actibus positam docent.

Hoc tantum inter se differunt, quod cum duo in gratia inefficaci consideranda
sint, unum quod sit efficax respectu ejus effectus ad quem ordinatur voluntate
absoluta; alterum quod sit Thomistice sufficiens, and det posse a gratia
efficaci applicandum and determinandum respectu alterius effectus ad quem
excitat: frequentius illam Jansenius considerat, quatenus resertur ad illum
effectum respectu cujus efficax dicitur. Contra Thomistae frequentius eam
spectant quatenus refertur ad illum effectum respectu cujus dicitur sufficiens
vel inefficax.

Rursus Jansenius inefficacem gratiam vix unquam appellat sufficientem, non
quod eam neget sufficere notione Thomistica; sed quia semper hoc verbum usurpat
Moliniana and vulgari ratione apud omnes Patres usitata, and praecipue in
Schola sua Lovaniensi recepta, ubi id demum sufficere dicitur, quod
complectitur omnia ad agendum necessaria. Sic enim illi in justificatione
Censurae ann. 1586. cap. 13. Gratia ad conversionem sufficiens ipsa convertit;
quae vero non convertit, non sufficit. Hac notione recte Jansenius gratias
inefficaces sufficere negavit, quamvis id nunquam Thomistarum notione negasset,
ut testatur initio libri 3 de great. Christi cap. 1. At vero Thomistae ad
vitanda, credo, Molinistarum convitia, crebro gratias inefficaces sufficientes
dicunt.

3. Thomistae frequentissime cum gratia inefficaci hominem posse asserunt, in
actu primo scilicet, and in sensu diviso.

Contra Jansenius aliquando quidem dicit hominem cum illa posse. Nam de illa
voluntate inchoata loquens tom. 3, lib. 8, cap. 20. Velle, inquit, dat posse;
and fortiter velle, fortiter posse. Frequentius tamen hoc negat: quae verbi,
non rei discrepantia est. Affirmat enim posse, cum hoc verbum usurpat pro
potentio actus primi. Negat posse, cum accipit pro ea potentia cui nihil deest
ad agendum actu necessarium.

Quaeres, an concedi possit ex Jansenii principiis gratiam inefficacem dare
posse proximum and completum, itidem ut quidam Thomistae de gratia sufficient
docent? Distinctione hic opus est, quam multoties attulimus. Si posse proximum
accipis pro eo cui nihil deest necessarium ad agendum, ne quidem impulsio and
applicatio ad agendum: sic non dat posse proximum gratia inefficax, nec apud
Jansenium, nec apud Thomistas: at si accipis pro eo quod continet virtutem
integram, applicandam tamen auxilio efficaci; sic nihil vetat quominus illaesa
Jansenii doctrina, ^imo accurate vestigiis ejus insistendo, gratia illa
inefficax posse completum largiri dicatur. Docet enim ille gratiam efficacem
largiri tantum actum secundum; docet largiri tantum posse completissimum, quod
complectitur omnia ad agendum necessaria; docet largiri posse cum effectu;
docet ab Augustino gratiam Thomistarum facile admissum iri.

Diluitur Annatinum sophismae.
Ex his facile patet quo pacto retundendum sit Annati argumentum, quo Jansenium
a Thomistis voluit segregare. Gratia, inquit, sufficiens apud Thomistas caret
eo effectu ad quem dat posse proximum.

At nunquam gratia Jansenio caret eo effectu, ad quem dat posse proximum.

Ergo discrepat a Thomistis Jansenius.

Fallacia enim laborat minor propositio, quae exposito duplici hujus vocis,
posse, sensu detegitur. Nunquam caret gratia eo effectu ad quem dat posse
proximum, quod nihil aliud requirat ad agendum; verum est ex Thomistis and
Jansenio: nunquam caret eo effectu ad quem dat posse proximum actus primi, and
semper ab actu divisum; plane falsum est ex utrisque.

Sed ad istas argutias and similes alias semel and uno verbo incidendas, in
promptu habendum est quod superius secunda Disquisitione and tertia annotavi;
potentias illas non agentes in quo voluerint gradu adversariis esse
concedendas, dummodo nunquam sine uberiori auxilio in actum prodeant. Nec minus
illud ex Jansenio concedi potest, gratiam nonnunquam carere eo effectu ad quem
destinatur voluntate Dei antecedente. Cum enim ea voluntas semper feratur in
bonum absolute spectatum, consentire autem gratiae habeat rationem boni, utique
semper illa voluntate Deus velle censendus est homines suae gratiae non
resistere, sed illi plene consentire: improbat enim homines gratiae suae
resistentes, velletque illos ad se converti, quod quidem si non praestant, in
ipsis causa est, non in Deo. Prorsus autem sicut Thomistae docent, etiamsi
gratiae efficaci nunquam dissentiatur, dissentiendi tamen potentiam in
voluntate manner: sic instructa infirmioribus illis gratiis voluntas, etsi
nunquam iis plene consentiat, tamen vere consentire potest, nec defectu
physicae potestatis iis non consentit, sed quia mavult alii objecto; quo magis
delectatur consentire. Ille tamen status animae oreaturam magis quam Deum
amantis recte propterea vocatur infirmitas, imbecillitas, and impotentia, quia
nunquam contingit ut in eo statu sine ampliori auxilio recte agat, and quia hic
ipse status animae voluntary malo consentientis, and ideo bonum respuentis,
magna est infirmitas and impotentia respectu boni, non quidem antecedens, sed
consequens liberum consensum voluntatis malo amplius delectanti.

ARTICULUS IV.
Methodus inveniendae in Jansenio tertiae propositionis. Quae conveniant.
NEmo fere tam pertinax inter Molinistas quin libenter agnoscat summum
Pontificem neutiquam sua Constitutione generalem illam attigisse quaestionem;
Utrum libertas quatenus Deo competit, Christo, Beatis, hominibus and
daemonibus, postulet indifferentiam. Nam and Philosophica potius quam
Theologica est, and nominis plus fortasse quam rei, ut primarios Molinistas
sentire novi.

Rursus nec illud definivit Innocentius, Christum in iis actibus in quibus fuit
determinatus ad unum, ut ad diligendum Deum, non meruisse, contra quam
statuitur a Sancto Thoma. Non definivit, inquam, vel Christum Patrem non amare
potuisse, vel amando non meruisse, adeoque de quaestione illa generali
neutiquam pronunciavit, an libertas meriti and demeriti generatim quatenus
hominibus lapsis and Christo competit, postulet indifferentiam, and excludat
determinatam ad unum voluntatem. Hinc nominatim in propositione ad resecandas
illas generales quaestiones, fit mentio status naturae lapsae.

Constat 3. nec illud sanxisse summum Pontificem, ad merendum and demerendum
requiri indifferentiam Molinianam, quae potentiam ita expeditam ad utrumlibet
postulat, ut alterutrum possit reipsa and actu arripere sine novo auxilio. Late
hoc Disquisitione quarta probavimus ex scriptis Molinistarum. Hic sufficit
annotasse indifferentiam illam ab omnibus Thomistis rejici, quos sequi duces in
Theologia licet,

Constat postremo, satis esse ad omnem erroris suspicionem vitandam, illam
indifferentiam admittere, quam admittunt Thomistae.

Intentio Molinistarum.
Docuit, inquiunt; tertiam propositionem Jansenius tom. 3, lib. 6, ubi dicit,
nullam omnino voluntatem, quantumcunque ad unum determinatam, amittere
libertatem. Hoc enim intelligendum de liberate meriti and demeriti and de
statu naturae lapsae, a quo indifferentiam amovet, ut necessitatem invehat.

Depulsio Jansenii Defensorum.
Nec verba Jansenii reprehendi possunt, quia ex Patribus and Sholasticis
petita; nec sensus, quia hoc tantum in illis locis docuit Jansenius: 1.
Libertati in genere solam repugnare coactionem, quatenus hac etiam
comprehenditur necessitas naturalis. 2. Ad libertatem meriti and demeriti,
quatenus Christo convenit, non requiri indifferentiam. Non docet autem ad
libertatem meriti and demeriti in statu naturae lapsae non requiri
indifferentiam, imo potius statuit indifferentiam a liberate and a merito
hujus viae in hominibus lapsis esse prorsus indivulsam. Ergo non docuit tertiam
propositionem. Hinc oriuntur.

Quaestiones duae.
Alia minus praecipua: Utrum Jansenii locutiones de liberate e Patribus and
Scholasticis petitae sunt.

Alia capitalis; Utrum erraverit in sensu, sive utrum ab hoc statu
indifferentiam amoverit, etiam Thomisticam in sensu diviso.

Methodus ineunda Molinistis in tertia propositione.
Debent ostendere 1. Jansenium hic usum durioribus locutionibus, nec apud
Patres and Scholasticos usitatis: quod si evicerint, ipsum tenebunt
imprudentiae reum.

2. Omnem omnino indifferentiam ab ipso sublatam, etiam illam quam Thomistae
concedunt; hoc modo poterit in errore teneri. In quo ea danda laus est Annato,
quod unicam illam affricandae Jansenio tertiae propositionis viam non
ignorarit. Hinc in Jansenio a Thomistis damnato propterea docet ab ipso
traditam tertiam propositionem, quia tollit omnem indifferentiam, quam
Thomistae concedunt. Nec minus clare Hallerius and socii in eo summam
quaestionis recte constituunt, quod, inquiunt, indifferentia a statu naturae
lapsae sit inseperabilis, ut supra vidimus.

Expenditur ex ista methodo Morellius:
Aliquanto item proprius in hac propositione Morellius ad controversiae caput
accedit. Intellexit enim quaestionem esse scholasticam, utrum libertas in
genere postulet indifferentiam: quam definire summus Pontifex ne cogitavit
quidem. Ergo ut causam obtineat, illud adjicit: Jansenii discipuli, inquit,
consentiunt toto libro sexto agi de liberate naturae corruptae. Laudo quod
viam intellexit; in hoc non laudo, quod suo jure sumit illud ipsum quod probari
decuerat, non laudo quod id adversariis suis affingit, quod ipsi tam diserte
negant. Legate, quaeso, libellum qui anno 1654. adversus Annatum editus est,
videbit in eo late comprobari Jansenium hoc libro non de libertare hujus
status, sed de generali and naturali tantum disputasse, atque ut a generali
indifferentiam exclusit, sic ad statum hujus vitae prorsus necessariam docuisse.

At forte reipsa convictus dabit non hoc a Jansenii defensoribus agnitum, quod
ab ipsis agnosci fidentius quam prudentius affirmavit: sed tamen contendet id
ipsis agnoscendum. Verum id qui possit ab ipsis impetrare, cum tam asseveranter
a Jansenio negetur? Ex Augustino, inquit tom. 3, lib. 7, cap. 5, and Bernardo
asseruimus libertatem arbitrii (sed quam? An hujus status, an vero genericam?)
generalem, inquit, and naturalem non esse aliam, nisi a necessitate, per quam
patet eo^ solam coactionem intellexisse. At cum idem agit de liberate hujus
vitae, aliter se sentire profitetur. Sic enim inquit lib. 6, cap. 34. Inter
actum liberum and statum libertatis permagna differentia est: aliter Deus,
aliter Angeli viatores, aliter Beati, aliter damnati, aliter Christus Dominus
in via constitutus liber fuit, nec ullo pacto quae in uno statu libertatis
adsunt, aut etiam requisita sunt, ad alterum extendenda sunt. Hominum igitur
viatorum non solum coactionis expertem esse libertatem, sed etiam necessitatis
immutabilis voluntariae, cum Scriptura and Patribus and Catholica fide fatemur
perlibenter.

Quorsum ergo, inquiet Morellius, tam multis agit de liberate Jansenius, nisi
ut naturae lapsae libertatem explicet? Facilis nodus, sed in quo tamen non
miror Morellii ingenium haesisse, Genus praescindit quidem a speciebus, sed
tamen in speciebus est, Gradus sentientis, ut vulgo in scholis philosophantur,
rationem non involvit, and tamen sentiens in homine est, qui rationem habet,
non quatenus sentiens, sed quatenus homo. Similiter generica illa libertas quam
tractat and evolvit Jansenius, ut in Deo and in Beatis, sic etiam in homine
lapso est, nec involvit etiam in homine lapso indifferentiam quatenus libertas
est, sed illam aliunde individuo nexu habet adjunctam, quatenus libertas est
hominis lapsi and viatoris: sicut sentiens, cum non involvat in se rationem,
eam tamen quatenus in homine est, indivulso nexu habet annexam. Quamobrem qui
negatae in hoc statu indifferentiae Jansenium propterea reum agat, quod
indifferentiam ad genericam libertatis rationem pertinere neget, tam sit
absurdus, quam si quis a Philosophis hominem fingi criminetur rationis
expertem, quia negant eum quatenus sensu praeditus est, esse rationalem; five
quia rationem, specificum esse gradum volunt, non genericum. Atque ut illi hanc
criminationem facillime hac responsione depellerent ^ Non dicimus hominem esse
rationis expertem, sed negamus esse rationalem quatenus animal, quia hic gradus
in aliis invenitur sine ratione: Sic item Jansenius nullo negotio eos repellit,
qui negatam ipsi indifferentiam objiciunt. Non nego, inquit, hominem esse
indifferentem, at nego indifferentiam ipsi convenire per genericam rationem
libertatis, sed per specialem hujus status and viae conditionem, qua fit ut
nihil ipsi proponatur ad merendum and demerendum nisi per judicium indifferens,
ut aiunt Thomistae. Habet Morellius genuinam Jansenianae mentis explicationem,
qui hanc viam explicandae libertatis propterea arripuit, quod Augustini
interpretem professus, quae apud ipsum inveniebat, simpliciter debuit exponere.

Methodus ineunda Jansenii Defensoribus.
Primo docendum in objectis Jansenii locis nihil esse a Patrum and antiquorum
Scholasticorum loquendi modo alienum. 2. Sensum illorum locorum non excludere
indifferentiam, nec quicquam nisi Catholicum and orthodoxum complecti. Primum
exequuntur comparatis inter se Jansenii and Patrum Scholasticorumque locis ad
hunc modum.

Locus Jansenii objectus a Morellio t. 3. lib. 6. c. 6. Aperte consectaneum est
omnem omnino voluntatem, quantum cunque ad unum determinatam, nulla tali
necessitate, qua dicitur necesse ut velit, desinere esse liberam, quia non
desinit esse voluntas quae non nollemus.

Augustinus de Civitate lib. 5. c. 10. Si autem definitur ista necessitas
secundum quam dicimus necesse esse ut ita sit aliquid, vel ita fiat; nescio cur
eam timeamus ne nobis auferat liberratem.

S. Thomas q. 10. de potent. a. 2. ad 5. Dicendum quod naturalis necessitas
secundum quod voluntas aliquid ex necessitate velle dicitur, ut felicitatem,
libertati voluntatis non repugnat, ut Augustinus docet in 5. de Civitate.
Libertas enim vol ntatis violentiae aut coactioni opponitur.

Et 1. part. qu. 88. ad 1. Verbum Augustini est intelligendum de necessitate
coactionis, necessitas autem naturalis non aufert libertatem voluntatis.

Bernardus libro de libero arbitrio. Nec Deus caret libero arbitrio, nec
diabolus, quoniam id quod ille esse non potest malus, non infirma facit
necessitas, sed firma in bono voluntas, and voluntaria firmitas; quodque hic
non vult in bonum respirare, non aliena facit violenta oppressio, sed sua
ipsius in malo obstinata voluntas.

Jansenius lib. 16. cap. 24. Docet Sanctus Thomas opus esse laud vel vituperio
dignum, ex hoc quod est voluntarium, non coactum, tametsi sit determinatum ad
unum. Nam disputans utrum Christus peccare potuerit, cum sibi objecisset ex
Augustino, quod nullus peccat in eo quod vitare non potest, and proinde nullus
etiam mereatur, vel laudetur de hoc quod dimittere non potest.

Deinde subjicit loca S. Thomae quae habes e regione.

S. Thomas. Impotentia coactionis quae opponitur voluntario, tollit rationem
meriti and demeriti, non impotentia quae est ex perfectione in bonitate and
malitia, quia hoc voluntarium non tollit, sed ponit voluntatem determinatum ad
unum. Quod posse pecare pertinet ad laudem, est per accidens, in quantum
ostendit opus quod laudatur ex nessitate factum non esse. Sed quamvis
removeatur a Christo potentia peccan^i, non tamen ponitur coactio que
voluntario contrariatur, and laudis rationem tollit.

In 3. did. 23. art 4. Cum explicaret quomodo Christus mereri potuerit per
liberum arbitrium determinatum ad unum.

Dicendum, inquit, quod etiamsi esset Determinatum ad unum numero, sicut ad
diligendum Deum, quod non facere non potest; tamen ex hoc non admittit
libertatem aut rationem laudis sive meriti; and ita est actus sui dominus.

Jansenius lib. 6. de gr. Chr. cap. 38. Cum recensuisset Jansenius multa
Scholasticorum loca, summam ipsorum breviter ita colligit:

Habes, Lector, consensum admirabilem tot sanctissimorum and eruditissimorum
virorum, de quibus nulla unquam erroris in hoc argumento suspicio fuit.
Unanimiter constantissimeque docent voluntatem, hoc ipso quo rationalis
voluntas est, esse liberam, sua non posse privari liberate, nec voluntatem, id
est, vilitionem futuram nisi esset libera and in potestate, nullam
immutabilitatis, inevitabilitatis, vel quocunque voces nomine, sed solam
coactionis libertatem ei repugnare.

Loca e quibus Jansenius hanc conclusionem elicit. Petrus Capulcius in 2. disp.
7. Respectu amare Deum in Beatis, est sempiterna and libera electio.

Gabriel Biel did. 18. ad. 3. Actus beatitudinis est libere elicitus, and ita
contingens, etsi immutabilis and perpetuus.

Marsilius ab Inghen. Necessarium and inevitabile, non per naturam, sed per
gratiam non tollit rationem laudabilis.



Thomas de Argentina in 3. d. 12. Necessitas coactionis tollit rationem meriti,
necessitas immutabilitatis, proveniens ex perfectione virtutum, non tollit, sed
auget.

Scotus quodl. 16. Cum necessitate ad volendum stat libertas in voluntate. Nam
in eo est libertas volendi, quia delectabiliter and eligibiliter aliquid agit.

Richardus de Media-Villa in 2. did. 25. art. 3. Non obstante illa necessitate
qua Angeli diligunt bonum liberrime, motu dilectionis movent se.

S. Thomas. Etiamsi esset liberum arbitrium determinatum ad unum numero, ficut
ad diligendum Deum, quod non facere non potest, tamen non amittit libertatem
aut rationem laudis, sive meriti.

Alexander de Hales. Necessitas coactionis tollit liberum arbitrium, sed non
necessitas inevitabilitatis.

Guillelmus Parisiensis. Necessitas vel impossibilitas quae non aufert operi
quin sit voluntarium, hoc est, ex voluntare, quam impossible est non esse
liberam, nec culpam aufert.

Petrus Lombardus. Ubi non est libertas, nec voluntas.

Hugo de Sancto Victore tract. 2. cap. 4. Ex quo voluntas est, libertas est,
quia voluntatis est libertas; ubi autem non est libertas, nec voluntas.

Bernardus de libero arbitrio. Ubi voluntas, ibi libertas, and hoc est quod
puto dici liberium arbitrium. Ipsam enim voluntatem, quia impossible est de se
ipsa sibi non obedire, etitiam impossible est sua privari liberate.

Johannes Damascenus lib. 3. fidei orthod. cap. 14. Arbitrii libertas nihil
aliud est quam voluntas.

Augustinus 22. de Civit. Dei. cap. ult. Erit una in omnibus, and inseparabilis
in singulis voluntas libera, fruens indeficienter aeternorum jucunditate
gaudiorum.

Cerni licet nihil in summa istorum locorum a Jansenio collecta reperiri, quod
non istis locis extet; nihil ab illo additum de suo, multa etiam resecata
duriora; and tamen tam parum Ecclesiae, tam parum honori summi Pontificis
consulit Morellius, ut his non Jansenii, sed Patrum Scholasticorumque verbis
tertiam propositionem contineri contendat. Verum quid ipse sequensibus
argumentis respondere possit, haud satis video.

Argumentum. I.
Ex solis Augustini and Patrum and antiquorum Sholasticorum verbis, nemo potest
argui haereticam tertiae propositionis tradidisse doctrinam, ex III. PRINC. Ex
sola locutione Augustini vel antiquorum Scholasticorum non potest argui
quisquam vel ab Augustino vel ab antiquis Scholasticis dissentire, vel ullum
haereticum dogma docuisse.
tertio principio arriculi primi.

Sed haec quae profert Morellius, ipsissima sunt Patrum and Scholasticorum loca
and verba, sine ulla inflexione, quae fensum mutare vel tantillum possit, a
Iansenio repetita. Ergo etc.

Argumentum. II.
Doctrina in tertia propositione damnata, nulli, ut testantur Episcopi, ante
Jansenium cognita est. Atqui istorum locorum doctrina ab omnibus pene antiquis
Scholasticis tradita est, utpote ex ipsorum libris ne verbo quidem addito,
ducta. Igitur haec loca non continent tertiam propositionem.

Argumentum. III.
Vt detur ambigua esse locorum Jansenii verba, certe negari non potest quin
commode explicari possit sensu orthodoxo, adhibita levi distinctione. Nam quod
ait nullam inevitabilitatis, immutabilitatis, solam coactionis necessitatem
libertati repugnare, intellige de liberate generali, quatenus Deo, Beatis, and
hominibus convenit, non de propria hujus status. Iam extra aleam hic locus erit.

Quod ait docere Sanctum Thomam opus esse laud vel vituperio dignum ex hoc
quod est voluntarium, non coactum: Iam non metuet Molinistarum impetum, si
addideris, spectare hic rationem laudis and vituperii generatim, quatenus etiam
Christo convenit, qui caruit indifferentia in Deo diligendo, quo tamen ille
actu meruit; non autem proprium and specificum meritum hujus status, quod
nunquam ab indifferentia disjungitur.

Quod ait voluntatem non amittere libertatem ulla tali necessitate, quia
dicitur necesse est ut velit, tam orthodoxum erit si de liberate generali
intelligatur, quam si de statu libertatis in hac vita falsum.

Atqui Jansenius ambiguas istas locutiones ipse sano illo and orthodoxo sensu
interpretatur, ipse de generali se tantum liberate, non de statu libertatis in
hac vita agere testatur. Asseruimus, inquit tom. 3. lib. 6. cap. 5. libertatem
arbitrii Generalem and Naturalem, non esse aliam nisi a necessitate, per quam
intelligitur a Patribus sola coactio.

Et statim initio libri septimi: Hactenus, inquit, delaravimus Generalem
libertatis rationem, a qua dictum est l berum arbitrium in eo situm esse, quod
immune sit a necessitate coactionis. Ipse inseparabilem esse ab hoc statu
asserit indifferentiam potentiae, ut Morellio jam ostendimus.

Ergo haec loca malo sensu interpretari nefas est, per V. PRINC. Ambigua
locutio bono sensu interpretanda est, si ab ipso Scriptore ad bonum sensum
alligata sit.
quintum Principium articuli primi. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Argumentum. IV.
Malum istum sensum qui in istas locutiones intrudi posset, nempe quod a
liberate hujus vitae omnem indifferentiam excluserit, removit express
Jansenius, ut jam probavimus Disquitione tertia. Igitur h^c sensu illas
explicari injurium est, per IV. PRINC. Scriptoris Catholici ambiguam locutionem
orthodoxi sensus and erronei capacem, erroneo interpretari nefas est, si
erroneus ille sensus express sit amotus.
quartum Principium articuli primi.

Ergo nec verba, nec sensus Iansenii possunt reprehendi; atque ita nil in eo
nisi orthodoxum, per VI. PRINC. Nullus locus Jansenii reprehendi potest, nisi
vel propter verba, vel propter sententiam.
sextum Principium articuli primi. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Videat, quaeso, Morellius quam recte isti ad controversiae caput colliment,
non ipsius more inaniter sibi ipsi plaudentes, nec ridicule de prostratis
hostibus, quos ne attigerint quidem, more ipsius gloriantes, sed Iansenium
claris and manifestis ipsiusmet Iansenii locis ab ipsius calumniis vindicantes.

ARTICULUS V.
Excursio in Annatum super Iansenii sententia de liberate.
NE quid in hac materia difficultatis relinquamus, ad istius propositionis
calcem, breviter quaedam perlustrabimus, dum Molinismi res adhuc fluctuarent,
ab Annato scripta libro de incoacta liberate. Ibi enim futurae sortis ignarus,
and quid postulatura esset Societatis causa non praescius, alieniora nonnulla
ab illius utilitatibus posuit, illud que praesertim quod ait page 175.
Iansenium admittere Thomistarum indifferentiam: sed in eo sibi contradicere.
Fatetur, inquit, Jansenius ita convenire indifferentiam libero arbitrio, ut
quibuscunque positis quae ad agendum bonum and malum requisita sunt, possit
liberum arbitrium in hac vita facere bonum and malum, facere alterutrum and non
facere. Et iterum: Dicimus liberum arbitrium quantumcunque vehementi atque
efficaci gratiae delectatione praeventum atque determinatum ad faciendum bon^m,
adhuc tamen posse bonum non tantum non f^cere, sed etiam malum. Verum est enim
istud non in sensu composito, ut vulgo dici solet, sed in sensu diviso. Add
quod dicit eodem libro dum putat suam sententiam defendere posse eadem ratione
qua Thomistae: In libero arbitrio quantum cunque per gratiam praeparato atque
determinato reperi^i simultatem potentiae ad operandum and non operandum: esto,
non sit potentia simultatis. Et quod idem est: Qamvis duo actus contrarii sint,
and in eadem voluntate simul esse non possint; potestates tamen ad opposita non
sunt oppositae, nec sibi invicem, nec actibus oppositis; sed in eodem simul
subjecto sive quiescente, sive agente, simul commorantur. Vsitata est ista
dissidentium cogitationum pugna in Janseniana Theologia.

Hic primo animadverti velim fateri Annatum non usque adeo firmum in neganda
indifferentia Iansenium, ut non eam disertis verbis aliquando agnoverit.
Contradicit, inquit, sibi Iansenius, nunc admittit indifferentiam, nunc negat.
Igitur ex ipso Annato non minus probabilis est eorum sententia, qui agnitam a
Iansenio indifferentiam voluut, quam Annati qui sublatam contendit. Quodsi non
minus probabilis, hoc ipso fit etiam probabilior, quia benignior, quia in
Episcopum Catholicum religiosior est. Nam cum duae sunt de Scriptoris Catholici
sensu opiniones, quarum una reus erroris alicujus asseritur, alia errore
liberatur, nisi manifesta sit disparitas rationum, semper in judicando
amplectenda est benigna sententia; quod nisi fit, in illud Domini praeceptum
impingitur: Nolite judicare and non judicabimini.

2. Notandum admitti a Iansenio indifferentiam certis and conceptis verbis: at
nullum locum profert Annatus, quo sic clare negatam in hoc statu indifferentiam
vel ipse possit contendere. Quis igitur dubitet potiorem clarae and non
ambiguae affirmationis fidem ad purgandum erroris suspicione Iansenium esse
debere, quam obscurioris alicujus locutionis ad eundem crimine innectendum?

3. Non aliter fere probat Annatus tolli a Iansenio indifferentiam, quam
consecutionibus quibusdam, ex quibus indifferentiae excidium sequi dicit. At
contra claram and apertam Scriptoris testificationem afferre consecutiones,
ridiculum and injurium. Ecquid enim non tam saepe ejusmodi consecutionibus
Thomistas cum Calvino sentire arguit? Et tamen ipse negat Thomistas ideo pro
Calvinistis, pro libertatis inimicis habendos. Aliud est, inquit, videre quid
sentiant, aliud quid contra eos objiciatur.

Postremo, quod vel praecipuum est, pueriles, ridiculae, nullius roboris sunt
consecutiones illae, ex quibus negatae indifferentiae accusationes conflat
Annatus, ut ex illarum confutatione ad oculum demonstrabitur.

Annatinus Cavillus.
Non potest, inquit Annatus, a Iansenio admitti simultas potentiarum, quia
potestatem agendi conferri docet per victricem delectationem, sive in bono,
sive in malo: At simul non sunt victrices delectationes: Ergo nec agendi
potentiae. Respondeo, ludere Annatum in voce posse, and vulgatissimam in
Scholis doctrinam dissimulare. Duplex est enim potestas, duplex posse: alia
actus primi, alia actus secundi; alia quae interiorem virtutem notat, alia quae
etiam impulsionem and applicationem ad agendum involvit: ex hoc postremo genere
est victrix delectatio; impellit illa ad agendum, admovet, applicat, eo prorsus
modo quo Thomistae de physica predeterminatione sentiunt.

Dat ergo proprie dicendo actum secundum, primum supponit, tollit simultatem
sensus compositi, quo componuntur actus inter se, relinquit simultatem
potentiarum in actu primo, eo prorsus modo quo praedeterminatio physica. Eam ob
rem Jansenio gratia efficax dicitur adjutorium actus secundi, non primi; nec
dat posse alia ratione, nisi quia dat velle; dat ipsum actum, non quandam
separatam abactu potentiam,

Igitur si sermo sit de ipsis potentiis in actu primo spectatis, plena est apud
Jansenium simultas potentiarum; si de actu secundo, nec apud Jansenium, nec
apud Thomistas ulla simultas est, sed tantum successio: atque hoc est quod
aliquando Jansenius ait, non nisi subtracta gratia efficaci hominem posse male
agere, nimirum in sensu composito. Nunquam enim continget ut reipsa male agat,
dum aderit efficax gratia; at potentia ipsa male agendi prorsus eodem tempore
cum gratia efficaci consistit. Habet enim homo, etiam cum been agit, male
agendi potestatem, sed non habet male agendi voluntatem. Videat Annatus quam
facile fuerit illud ipsius, quo maxim se jactat, argumentum refellere.

Aliae Annati ratiunculae confringuntur.
Quid est, inquit, quod dicit Jansenius, non admittere se indifferentiam,
qualem admittunt recentiores Scholastici? Vin dicam, mi Pater? Non admittit
Jansenius indifferentiam qualem Jesuitae, quos molli recentiorum Scholasticorum
nomine appellat; Vide libri oras, non alios videbis quam Jesuitas adscriptos.

Pergit Annatus, and ita disputat: Admittunt ne illi aliam indifferentiam, quam
illa quam admittit Ecclesia? Ita prosus: admittunt Moliniani indifferentiam
recta front cum gratia efficaci pugnautem; admittunt indifferentiam quae
postulet non modo ut semper positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis possimus
agere and non agere, sed etiam qua cum omnibus illis ad agendum requisitis,
etiam cum ipsa gratia oppositus actus aliquando componatur. Hanc nunquam
agnovit Ecclesia. Sed solennis Annati mos, quae proprie in Societatem suam
dicta sunt, in omnes Theologos spargere, ad concitandam Iansenio apud omnes
invidiam.

Expressa est apud Jansenium, inquit Annatus, indifferentiae negatio, parall.
not. 79. dum Suarem, Bellarminum and Vasquez eo nomine accusat, quod gratiam a
imittant qua stante in libero arbitrio, possit arbitrium, indifferenter velle
and nolle. Nunquamne intelliget Annatus solos hic Molinistas a Jansenio carpi,
qui praesente sua gratia sufficient, non certo in alteram partem vergere
voluntatem dicunt, sed nunc gratiam rejicere, nunc accipere versatili and
instabili motu, sine ullo alio Dei auxilio? Hanc indifferentiam negat, rejicit,
damnat Jansenius, and quicunque cum Iansenio vestram illam gratiam versatilem
detestantur: atque ut ille Molinisticam respuit gratiam, sic illas locutiones
quibus a Molinistis exprimi solet, nempe ejus usum vel non usum in libero
relinqui arbitrio, posse illam arripi vel repudiari pro nutu, posse ei
voluntatem consentire vel dissentire, velle and nolle: quae locutiones licet
rectum habeant sensum in doctrina Thomistarum, and ideo determinatae and alli
gatae ad illorum sensum, saepe, ut jam late probavimus, a Jansenio probentur,
tamen quia in Molinistarum ore, imo in ore vulgi, nihil aliud significant nisi
gratiam versatilem quam pro nutu nunc accipit, nunc abjicit voluntas, nullo,
cum accipit, uberiore instructa auxilio quam cum abjicit; hinc merito sensum
istis locutionibus a Molinistis expressum explodit Iansenius.

Equidem miror tam tardum Annato ingenium fuisse, ut tam facilem verborum
disctepantiam conciliare nequiverit. Admittit indifferentiam Jansenius: negat
indifferentiam Jansenius: fatetur gratiae quamlibet efficaci vel consentire vel
dissentire posse voluntatem; negat idem in libero arbitrio relictam gratiam;
negat eam pro arbitrio recipi vel repelli. Si non ipse mentem suam
interpretatus esset, tamen injurium erat pugnam illam verborum non aliqua,
praesertim expedita and ad manum distinctione componere: sed prorsus
excusatione carent qui in illa ambiguita^e cavillantur, cum ipse sic praecise
definierit, quam indifferentiam oppugnet, quam admittat, ut nullum disputationi
locum reliquerit.

Definit indifferentiam quam oppugnat lib. 8. de gr. Christi cap. 20. Quandiu,
inquit, hic vivimus, semper inest indifferentia libero arbitrio, sed non eo
modo quo isti Scholastici (Jesuitae) putant, quos supra diximus, qui quocunque
modo arbitrium, sive gratiae, sive peccati delectationibus imbuatur, semper
existimant cum utravis ejus dispositione posse fieri ut utrumlibet velit, sive
bonum, sive malum, pro illa sola scilicet innata idifferentia voluntatis, quae
sub quacunque dspositione actum praeveniente sese sua liberate in utramvis
partem flectit.

Non potuit clarius Molinianam indifferentiam significare; quae cum quacunque
gratia non nudam potestatem actus expertem, sed ipsum contrarium actum
componit, qua voluntas ita potens fingitur, ut instructa sufficienti auxilio,
nunc se in alteram partem flectat, nunc in aliam reflectat. Hanc indifferentiam
oppugnarunt quotque in disciplina Thomistarum floruere Theologi; hanc revera
tanquam humanae superbiae inventum insectatur passim Jansenius: at illam
alteram Thomistarum, qua voluntas ita potest dissentire gratiae efficaci, ut
nunquam dissentiat, ibidem ultro fatetur admittitque, and late explicat
Jansenius.

Eodem, inquit, tempore quo voluntatis arbitrium sub gratia efficaciter eam
movente positum est; imo quo etiam actum voluntatis bonum facit, est in eadem
voluntate potestas illud non faciendi, imo peccandi: non quod cessatio ab actu
quem tunc elicit, aut actuale peccatum cum gratiae delectantis influxu possit
consistere, quod sensus compositus postularet: sed quia cessandi and peccandi
potestas cum eadem gratia simul in eodem volunnatis arbitrio conjungi potest.
Sic ergo voluntas quantumcunque gratiae suavitate capiatur, potest non agere id
quo rapitu^, quia veram non agendi potentiam etiam sub gratia rapiente retinet,
quamvis fieri nequeat ut ipsa non actio cum gratiae operatione in eadem simul
voluntate copuletur.

Habet Annatus ad suas argutias. Habet Lector unde judicet, utrum aequius sit
eam Jansenio haeresim tribui, quam disertis verbis ipse rejiciat; an vero
illius verba, ut multum ambigua, eo sensu intelligi quo ab ipsomet explicata
esse demonstratur.

ARTICULUS VI.
Methodus in veniendae in Jansenio quartae propositionis.
COnvenit inter omnes Theologos licere fine ulla erroris nota gratiam
vetsatilem rejicere, quae modo effectum habet, modo non habet. Constat 2.
orthodoxam esse Thomistarum doctrinam, qua negant gratiae efficaci unquam
resisti, licet semper resisti possit.

Intentio Molinistarum.
Docet Jansenius haereticos in eo fuisse Semipelagianos, quod dicerent gratiae
resisti posse vel obtemperari, quia vult gratia efficaci necessitatem afferri
voluntati, and dissentiendi potestatem auferri; quam doctrinam tradit lib. 8.
de haeres. Pelag. cap. 6.

Nota.
Nuspiam Molinistae quam in hac Jansenii accusatione, and in quartae
propositionis sensu sic explicando constantiores. Docent enim unanimi consensu
in hoc errorem Jansenii situm, quod gratiae efficaci dissentire posse
negaverit, quia necessitatem affert. Sic Hallerius and socii in illis scriptis
quae Romae Consultoribus obtulerunt; Thomistae, inquiunt, and Jesuitae
concedunt divinae gratiae humanam voluntatem consentire and dissentire posse;
hoc ipsum Jansenistae negant. Alibi: Exigendum a Jansenii defensoribus,
inquiunt, ut fateantur quod non sint haeretici qui dicunt liberum arbitrium Deo
moventi per gratiam efficacem dissentire posse. Et Annatus in praefatione libri
cui titulus est, Jansenius a Thomistis damnatus: Si gratia efficax, inquit, non
tollit libertatem, consequenter nec tollit indifferentiam; quod dicere
judicatur haereticum in illa propositione. Idem in responsione ad Ludovici
Montaltii Epistolam 17. praecipuum Iansenii errorem in eo collocat, quod velit
gratia necessitatem afferti voluntati. Postremo Morellius in eo etiam collocat
Jansenianum errorem circa hanc propositionem, quod haereseos accuset eos qui
dicunt gratiae resisti posse.

Depulsio Jansenii Defensorum.
Nec in verbis Iansenii quicquam reprehendendum, quia Augustiniana sunt; nec in
sensu, quia fatetur gratiae etiam efficaci resisti posse; fatetur ab ea liberum
arbitrium posse dissentire, licet nunquam dissentiat: fatetur non esse
haereticos qui hoc asserunt, imo haereticos asserit qui hoc negant. Sed eos
tantum Semipelagiani erroris insimulat, qui eidem gratiae nunc consentiri nunc
dissentiri pro solo nutu arbitrii volunt, sive qui gratiam Molinianam and
versatilem in Ecclesiam invehunt; nec alius est sensus omnium locorum quae ab
ejus adversariis proferuntur.

Quaestio.
An culpanda fuerint Iansenii verba, an sensus, sive an Iansenius gratiam
necessitantem admiserit, cui resisti non possit, quod improbandum: an vero
solam gratiam versatilem, quae modo effectum habet, modo non habet, rejecerit;
quod non modo licitum, sed laudandum est.

Methodus Molinistis ineunda.
Debent ad arguendum imprudentiae Iansenium ostendere duriora illius verba, and
minime Augustiniana. Ad eum vero haereseos accusandum docere debent gratiam
necessitantem, cui resisti non possit, a Iansenio admissam, nec solam Molinae
gratiam repudiatam, sed and efficacem cui resisti posset.

Expenditur ex hac methodo Morellius.
Sedulo cavit bonus Doctor ne quid nobis uspiam in se refellendo laboris daret.
Vix enim unquam ad usque controversiae caput pervenit. Quaere apud illum
argumenta quibus probet admitti a Iansenio gratiam necessitantem: quaere
rations quibus adstruat non solam a Iansenio rejici Molinae gratiam, sed omnem
omnino cui resisti possit, etiam efficacem. Altum ubique silentium reperies,
and Morellium inepti illius patroni semper similem esse, qui multis laboraret
ostendere Clodium a Milone occisum, nec ultra progrederetur.

Methodus Jansenii defensoribus ineunda.
Ut verba Iansenii innoxia esse demonstrent, ostendere sat est Augustiniana
esse: Ut sensum, doceant oportet solam in allatis locis gratiam Molinisticam
rejici, nec negari dissentiendi potestatem cum efficaci gratia cohaerentem.
Utrumque autem ita praestant: ac de verbis primo.

Locus qui objicitur Iansenio, extat lib. 8. de haeres. Pelag. cap. 6. In hoc
inquit, ergo proprie Massiliensium error situs est, quod aliquid primaevae
libertatis reliquum putant, quo sicut Adam, si voluisset, poterat perseveranter
operari bonum; ita lapsus homo saltem credere posset si vellet, neuter tamen
absque interioris gratiae adjutorio, cujus usus vel abusus relictus esset in
uniuscujusque arb^trio and potestate.

In hoc loco ea demum verba culpantur, quod erroneum esse ^icat Iansenius in
hoc statu admittere gratiam, cujus usus vel abusus relictus sit libero
arbitrio: atqui haec verba purgare nullius negotii est. Asserit enim Sanctus
Augustinus gratiam naturae lapsae non relinqui libero arbitrio. Nec ipsum,
inquit lib. de corr. and great. cap. 11. Adamum Deus esse voluit sine sua
gratia, quam reliquit in ejus libero arbitrio: tale quippe erat adjutorium quod
desereret cum vellet, and in quo permaneret si vellet, non quo fieret ut
vellet. Ecce quid sit gratiam relinqui libero arbitr^o, non dare velle, non
esse efficacem, pendere ab ipsius nutu, nunc deseri, nunc arripi, sine alio
auxilio quod det ipsum velle. Hujusmodi gratiam amoliri ab hoc statu nihil
aliud est quam damnare Molinae versatilem gratiam. At vero talem non esse
gratiam hominis lapsi, nec relinqui illam libero arbitrio, ostendit Augustinus
sequentibus verbis: Si in tanta infirmitate vitae hujus ipsis relinqueretur
voluntas sua ut vellent, inter tot and tantas tentationes voluntas ipsa
succumberet. Subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina
gratia insuperabiliter and indeclinabiliter ageretur.

Sed ut ipsam locutionem omittamus, quam satis patet ex Augustino sumptam,
sensum ejus ita vindicant: Verba illa Jansenii quae arguuntur, ut durissime de
iis sentiatur, ambigua sunt, and sensum tum Catholicum, tum erroneum admittunt.
Catholica erunt si sic accipiantur: Errabant Massilienses, quod admitterent
gratiam versatilem, cujus usus and non usus ita libero relinquebatur arbitrio,
ut sine alio auxilio eidem gratiae nunc consentiret voluntas, nunc dissentiret.

Rursus heretica erunt si sic accipiantur: Errabant Massilienses, quod dicerent
gratia non necessitari voluntatem, and dissentiendi potestatem ab eo non
auferri.

His positis, orthodoxum esse Janseniani loci sensum hoc duplici argumento
concludunt.

Argumentum. I.
Excludit and amovet diserte Iansenius malum illum sensum qui includi in his
verbis posset. Sic enim loquitur de great. Chr. lib. 8. cap. 21. Ecclesia
reprehend t in Calvino quod doceat gratiam ita movere voluntatem, ut non sit ei
liberum resistere: Augustino vero ita Deus m^vet voluntatem, ut quamvis
infallibiliter convertatur and operetur, posset tamen motioni Dei refragari,
aut obtemperare, seu, ut Concilium Tridentinum loquitur, illi dissentire si
velit. Multa alia loca jam attulimus, quibus illam dissentiendi potentiam cum
gratia efficacisimul consistere tradit Iansenius.

Itaque per IV. PRINC. Scriptoris Catholici ambiguam locutionem, orthodoxi
sensus and erronei capacem, erroneo interpretari nefas est, si erroneus
illesensus express sit amotus.
quartum principium articuli primi ambiguus ejus locus haeretico illo sensu
accipi non potest; igitur orthodoxo, qui solam Molinae gratiam erroris accusat,
accipi debet. Quod erat probandum.

Argumentum. II.
Verba quibus constant hic locus, saepe ab ipso Iansenio explicata sunt.

Primaeva libertas.
Passim enim declarat Iansenius, per primaevam libertatem a se intelligi
libertatem qualis in Adamo fuit, nempe voluntatem ita sanam ac robustam, ut
gratia efficaci quae daret velle, quae voluntatem impelleret ad opus, non
indigeret. En quomodo hunc primaevae libertatis statum expresserit, lib. de
great. primi hominis and Angel. cap. 14. In illo felicitatis statu velle and
nolle non ab ipso adjutorio, sed ab arbitrii liberate Deus peti voluit, ut
quocunque videretur se flecteret, sive applicando ipsum adjutorium ad
influendum secum, si vellet; sive non applicando, si nollet.

Adam per primaevam libertatem poterat perseveranter operari bonum.
Posse intelligit Iansenius, non illud Thomisticum a gratia efficaci
applicandum: sed hoc tantum quod omnia ad agendum necessaria complecteretur,
quodque in actum prodire sine novo auxilio non repugnaret. Hinc cum solo illo
adjutorio Angelos asserit in bono permansisse. Videndus totus liber de gratia
primi hominis and Angel. and praecipue cap. 14.

Ita lapsus homo per reliquias primaevae libertatis, posset saltem credere si
vellet.
Id est, homo lapsus sine gratia efficaci poterat ex Semipelagianorum mente per
solum illud adjutorium innocentiae and reliquias libertatis actu credere. Hinc
eorumdem errorem definiens tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 1. Proscripti sunt, inquit,
Massilienses, non ob aliam causam, nisi quia tale auxilium s^fficere putarent,
adeoque nullum aliud adjutorium ex part Dei esse necessarium.

Neuter tamen sine interioris gratiae adjutorio, cujus usus vel non usus
relictus esset in cujusque libero arbitrio and potestate.
Id est, gratia quae velle non dabat, tom. 1. lib. 8. cap. 6. Talis f^it illa
gratia, ut ejus usus in sua cuique voluntate relinqueretur. Non enim dabat
velle vel agere. Gratia quae non admoveret voluntatem ad opus. De gratia primi
hominis cap. 14. Non enim adjutor^um fac ebat influendo ut arbitrium vellet,
sed arbitrium volendo ut adjutor um influeret: Gratia cujus effectum saepe actu
impediebat voluntas, rursus eandem quoque reddebat efficacem. Applicatio,
inquit, ad influendum (statu innocentiae) libero arbitrio tribui debet, cujus
nutus facit ut istud adjutorium si null influat, cujus nutu plerumque fit and
semper fieri potest ut non instuat.

Ita ad verum Iansenii sensum inveniendum nil aliud opus est, quam varias illas
colligi notiones, and una proposi^ione concludi. Errabant Massilienses, quod
docerent non sic pec^ato originali laesam esse naturam, ut non aliqua illi pars
superesset robustae illius libertatis, a qua peteretur ipsum velle, non ab ipso
injutorio. Et ita sicut Adam poterat primae illius libertatis viribus actu in
justitia sine efficaci auxilio perseverare; sic hominem lapsum posse saltem
actu credere, nulla alia adjutum gratia, quam ea quae primo homini collata est,
quae non erat efficax, quae non dabat velle, quae voluntatem ad opus non
admovebat, sed contra ab ipsa liberate applicanda erat, ita ut pro nutu
dominantis voluntatis, nunc careat effectu, nunc fortitetur effectum.

His constitutis, sic breviter demonstratio conficitur: Haec propositio solam
carpit and rejicit gratiam Molinianam, quod sine errore fieri licet, ex posito
initio hujus articuli principio. Atqui haec propositio verum continer
Ianseniani loci sensum, ut ex subjecta explicatione istorum verborum ab ipso
Iansenio petita patuit. Igitur Iansenii locus solam rejicit gratiam versatilem
and Molinianam, quod orthodoxum est. Igitur ejus loci sensus orthodoxus est ex
V. PRINC. Ambigua locutio bono sensu interpretanda est, si ab ipso Scriptore ad
bonum sensum alligata sit.
quinto articuli primi principio. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Secundum locum quem affert Morellius, omitto, quia facilior est, and ex hac
methodo nullo negotio repelli potest. Manifestum est enim per illa verba quibus
abutitur, Cujus influxus in eorum libero relinqueretur arbitrio, solam
designari versatilem Molinae gratiam, non vero gratiam efficacem, quae facit
liberum arbitrium influere.

ARTICULUS VII.
Methodus inveniendae in Jansenio quintae Propositionis.
GRaviter and vere nobilis Scriptor quaestionem illam; An Christus pro omnibus
mortuus sit, factiosam vocat, and commovendis quidem imperitae plebeculae
animis idoneam; reipsa tamen apud eruditos futilem, imo nullam. Praecisis enim
quae utrimque convenient, nihil jam restat de quo certari possit, aut, si quid
restat, ita vanum ac inane est, ut de eo altercari ridiculum sit.

Quae conveniant utrinque.
Convenit orthodoxam esse eorum sententiam, qui praedestinationem statuunt sine
praevisione meritorum factam. Et quidquid cum ea opinione, quam de fide esse
asserit Bellarminus, necessario cohaeret; cujusmodi sunt illae Propositiones
consectariae.

Deus solis electis efficaci and absoluta voluntate ante praevisionem meritorum
regnum caeleste destinavit.

Illis solis Christus, cujus voluntas divinae semper consentiens fuit, aeternam
beatitudinem efficaci and absoluta voluntate optavit, oravit, meruit.

Nec Deus nec Christus ullam habuit efficacem and absolutam voluntatem salutis
reproborum.

Solis electis Deus and Christus efficacia adjutoria confer decrevit, quibus
certissime liberantur quicunque liberantur.

Nullis reprobis largiri Deus constituit efficax perseverantiae donum, sine quo
nemo salvatur.

Nullis reprobis confer Deus constituit gratias illas versatiles and
Molinianas, quibus ad salutem sine efficaci auxilio aliquando perveniatur, quia
nullae ejusmodi dantur in hoc statu.

Potest agnosci in Deo antecedens quaedam velleitas salutis reproborum, potest
item in Christo.

Christus voluit efficaciter morte sua multis reprobis gratias quibus
abutuntur, promereri.

Non necesse est ad sidem, fateri omnibus reprobis collatas esse gratias
sufficientes: patet exemplo excaecatorum and infantium, quibus tot Theologi
gratias sufficientes negant, ut agnovit ipse Hallerius and ejus socii in
scripto Consultoribus oblato super hac ipsa Propositione: Intactae
relinquuntur, inquit, difficultates quae occurrunt circa infantes sine baptismo
decedentes, aut infideles, aut obduratos. Nam qui dicit Christum non pro solis
praedestinatis esse mortuum, non dicit consequenter pro quolibet reprobo in
particulari mortuum esse; sed sufficit quod pro aliquibus saltem reprobis.

De prima part hujus Propositionis.
Duplex in quinta Propositione pars est: alia falsa, scandalosa, etc.
pronunciatur; alia etiam haeretica: utraque Jansenio tribuitur ab ejus aemulis,
utraque a Jansenio removetur ab ejus defensoribus. Nos, ut res tota magis
dilucescat, utramque partem separatim tractabimus, ac primo de ea part quae
falsa a Pontifice dicitur.

Intentio Molinistarum.
Docet hanc partem Jansenius, cum ait lib. 3. de great. Christi cap. 20. Nec
enim juxta doctrinam antiquorum, pro omnibus omnino passus and mortuus est, cum
potius hoc tanquam erroneum rejecerint.

Depulsio Jansenii defensorum.
Nec verba, nec sensus istius loci reprehendi potest; non verba, quia a Sancto
Augustino and Conciliis consecrata sunt; non sensus, quia negat tantum Christum
esse mortuum pro omnibus in sensu Moliniano and Semipelagiano, nempe quod Deus
det omnibus gratias sufficientes versatiles, a liberate arbitrii applicandas,
nec singulari quodam modo pro electis mortuus sit, quo non est mortuus pro
reprobis.

Methodus Molinianis ineunda.
Debent docere vel verba Jansenii auctoritate Ecclesiae carere, ut eum
imprudentiae incusent; vel alio sensu a Jansenio intellecta, quam quo ab ejus
defensoribus intelliguntur, nempe quod erroris etiam illam S. Prosperi
expositionem arguerit, qua dicitur Christus mortuus pro omnibus, quantum ad
sufficientiam pretii.

Expenditur ex ista methodo Morellius.
Utinam tam modestus esset Morellius quam parum molestus est! Nunquam enim vidi
hominem minus litigiosum. Ergo si quaeras quid de ea dicat controversia, uno
verbo accipe: silet.

Methodus Jansenii Defensoribus ineunda.
Debent vindicare tum verba, tum sensum istius loci Janseniani; quod illi sic
praestant: Primum ostendunt e regione Jansenianae laciniae loca Patrum and
Conciliorum easdem aut manifest aequivalentes locutiones complectentia.

Locus Jansenii tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 20. Ex quibus omnibus jam satis arbitror
patere, argumentum istud quo Christus pro omnibus passus and mortuus est, vel
redemptionem se pro omnibus dedisse dicitur, nihil omnino pro auxilio
sufficienti suppeditando facere. Nec enim juxta doctrinam antiquorum pro
omnibus omnino Christus passus aut mortuus est, aut pro omnibus omnino tam
generaliter sanguinem fudit, cum hoc potius tanquam errorem a fide abhorrentem
doceat esse respuendum.

Loca antiquorum ex quibus haec verba Jansen. mutuatur. Ecclesia Lugdunensis.
Catholica fides tenet, and Scripturae sanctae veritas docet, quod pro omnibus
credentibus and per gratiam baptismi ex aqua and Spiritu Sancto regeneratis and
Ecclesiae incorporatis vere Dominus and Salvator noster sit passus. De
infidelibus eadem constantia definit. Cesset haec nova and inaudita
praesumptio, ut nullus hominum, etiam impiotum, and apud inferos
irrevocabiliter damnatorum fuerit, pro quo Christus passus non fuerit. Cum pro
solis illis defunctis passionem sustinuerit, qui eum dum in corpore viveret,
fideliter venturum, and mundum sua passione redempturum crediderunt. Hoc itaque
est Catholicum, hoc fidei Ecclesiae ab initio commendatum.



Et utramque partem iterum inferius tangens, ac disputationem prolixiorem
concludendo complectens: Ex his igitur, inquit, d ligenter ac fidel ter
consideratis certissime ac clarissime ostenditur pro omnibus fidelibus Christi
qui fuerunt, aut sunt, velerunt, factam esse passionem Christi; pro corpore
Christi immolari corpus Christi. De his vero qui adhuc in infidelitate atque
impietate detinentur, manifestum est ex hac regula fidei, quod quicunque ex
ipsis per Dei gratiam fuerint ad fidem conversi and in Christo regenerati,
e^iam pro ipsis confitendum sit factum esse, quod pro omnibus fidelibus factum
constat. De caeteris vero qui in ipsa imp etate sua perserverantes sunt
perituri, si de Scripturae sacrae auctoritate, quod etiam pro alibus Dominus
passus sit, certissimis and clarissimis testimoniis nobis demonstrare potuerint
boni viri, qui talia definierunt, dignum omnino est ut credamus and nos. Si
vero non potuerint, cessent contendere pro eo quod non legunt. Pudeat eos
definire quod n^sciunt. Timeant statuere quod nullum Sanctorum Patrum, nullum
Concilium, nullum Apostolicae Sedis Ponti m, nullum Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum
decretum hactenus inveniant statuisse.

Et Concilium Valentinum cap. 4. De redemptione sanguinis Christi propter
nimium errorem qui de hac causa exortus est; ita ut quidam, sicut eorum scripta
indicant, etiam pro illis impiis qui a mundi exordio usque ad Passionem Domini
in sua impietate mortui and aeterna damnatione puniti sunt effusum definiant,
contra illud Propheticum: Ero morstua, o mors; ero morsus tuus, inferne; illud
nobis simpliciter and fideliter tenendum ac docendum placet, juxta Evangelicam
and Apostolicam veritatem, quod pro illis hoc datum pretium teneamus, quibus
ipse Dominus noster dixit: Sicut Moses exaltavit serpentem in deserto, ita
exaltari oportet filium hominis, ut omnis qui credit in ipso non pereat, sed
habeat vitam aeternam.

Qui neget Iansenii verba e Patribus sumpta, non stultus, sed plane caecus sit.
Hinc ejusmodi demonstratio conficitur.

Argumentum. I.
Ex solis Patrum verbis nemo argui potest scandalosam and falsam circa mortem
Christi doctrinam docuisse, ex tertio Principio. Sed hic Iansenii locus verbis
Patrum totus constat, ut inspicienti patet. Ergo ex illo non potest argui
falsam tradidisse doctrinam. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Sensum autem solita methodo tuentur. Ambigua, ut multum, aiunt esse Iansenii
verba. Boni enim sensus capacia sunt si sic explicentur: Christum non habuisse
voluntatem absolutam promerendi per mortem suam omnibus reprobis gratias
sufficientes Molinianas aut efficaces, quibus ab aeterno interitu liberari actu
and effective possent.

Falsum habebunt sensum si quovis modo explicatum de omnibus omnino hominibus
istam sententiam, Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, erroneam esse statuat.

Atqui, inquiunt, bono and Catholico sensu sua verba intepretatus est ipse
lansenius. Primum enim aperit quid intelligat per illa verba, pro aliquo morri,
and sanguinem fundere. Pro aliquo mortuum esse, inquit eodem capite, insinuat
voluntatem Christi quam habet ut ei mori sua Patrioblata and sanguis prosit. Et
clarius ibidem: Esse passum, crucifixum, mortuum, se redemptionem dedisse, vel
propitiatorem esse pro omnibus, plus aliquid dicit, quam nude pretium
sufficiens obtulisse pro iis. Illud enim indicat intention morientis pretium
pro illis oblatum esse, ut ejus oblatione placatus Pater eos reipsa deservitute
liberaret, non sub ista condition, si ipsi velint, qui nisi Deo donante non
possunt, sed ut velint and credant, potenter in eorum voluntatibus operando.

Voluntatem autem illam Christi quam requirit ut pro aliquibus mortuus esse
dicatur, significat esse veram and absolutam, ut patet 1. ex remotione
conditionis, Si and ipsi velint. 2. Quia sic se ipse interpretatur: pro veris
ovibus, vero populo suo absolute salvando semetipsum ded^t ac tradidit. Et
infra; Ipsorum liberationem a massa perditionis and salutem absolute voluit. 3.
Quia cum generatim nominatur voluntas, intelligitur absoluta: hinc generalis
Theologorum sententia: Christum nihil inaniter voluisse, nihil inaniter orasse;
quod ita apud Theologos certum, ut inter errores a Facultate Parisiensi
damnatos, qui in calce Magistri Sententiatum recensentur relata sit haec
propositio: Quod satis erat possib^le quod per voluntatem aut volitionem
creatam Christus aliquid voluit, quod nunquam debuit coenire.

Sufficiens autem illa gratia, quam negat omnibus esse collatam, est Moliniana;
quia initio hujus libri hoc sensu verbum istud semper se usurpaturum esse
professus est. Hoc posito, ita demonstratio concluditur.

Argumentum. II.
Haec propositio, Christus non est mortuus pro omnibus omnino hominibus, cum
intention and voluntate absoluta ut eis mors sua prosit; ut ejus oblatione
placatus Pater eos reipsa de servitute libetaret, potenter in eorum cordibus
voluntatem ipsam operando, vel ut eis largiretur gratias sufficientes, quae
nihil aliud ad agendum requirerent. Haec propositio, inquam, est orthodoxa ex
suppositis principiis initio hujus articuli. Sed haec propositio continet verum
sensum loci Janseniani; utpote expositione vocum ab ipso Jansenio facta tota
constans, per VIII,. PRINC. Non mutatur propositionis sensus, cum definitiones
vocum pro ipsis vocibus subjiciuntur.
octavum principium. Ergo verba ejus ut multum ambigua, hoc sensu orthodoxo
sunt interpretanda. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Argumentum. III.
Malus sensus qui cadere in haec verba poterat, ejusmodi est: Quocunque sensu
erroneum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse. Hunc
sensum amovet Jansenius, cum Prosperi expositionem qua Christus dicitur mortuus
pro omnibus, quantum ad potentiam pretii, sive sufficientiam; non autem quantum
ad applicationem and efficientiam, etsi Augustinianis expositionibus minus
appositam sentiat, tamen ut Catholicam and orthodoxam and Semipelagianis
oppositam esse testatu^. Nam hanc ipsam Prosperi doctrinam allaturus hoc
praemittit: Fabricarunt, inquit ibidem, Massilienses adversus rigidum illud and
peculiare propositum Dei, quandam generalem and indifferentem erga universos
voluntatatem: deinde ex illa sufficientem omnibus gratiam derivarunt. Quare
nihil mirum est si iisdem verbis idem proponamus antidotum, hoc est, si iisdem
argumenris quibus Massilienses usi sunt, easdem Augustini and Prosperi
solutiones opponamus. Et continuo ab illa ipsa Prosperi solutione orditur, ad
omnes homines pertinente. Ergo cum nihil absurdius sit quam Prosperum a
Jansenio Semipelagianum habitum esse, and Prosperi solutionem quam ipse
Semipelagianis opponit, Semipelagiano errore infectam, patet Jansenium non
omnes istius loci expositiones ad omnes homines pertinentes, erroris
Semipelagiani damnavisse.

Varias item sub finem istius articuli rations quibus Christus dici possit
mortuus pro omnibus omnino hominibus a Jansenio non abhorrentes indicamus.

Nota.
Si quaeras vero quam expositionem istius loci Semipelagiani erroris accuset,
breviter ex ipso Jansenio ibidem disce, eam esse qua sub vertitur divinae
benevolentiae propositum erga electorum salutem, tanquam Gentilium fatum,
libertatis excidium, necessitatis azylum, desperationis ignaviaeque barathrum,
praecepti, exhortationis, orationis interitus; illam esse, qua amoto peculiari
proposito erga electos, fabricatur generalis and indifferens erga universos Dei
voluntas: non illa antecedens quae cum gratuita praedestinatione cohaeret, and
ab ipso Jansenio admittitur, sed illa conditionata, qua Deus ipsos salvos vult,
si homines velint, per liberum arbitrium sufficienti quidem gratia motum, sed a
gratia efficaci non determinatum.

Illam esse qua sufficiens gratia in omnes derivatur, non ill^ Thomistica quae
cum praedestinatione gratuita, cum efficaci gratia placide consistit, sed
Moliniana, quae utramque destruit, and pro solo nutu liberi arbitrii sine
auxilio efficaci, nunc effectum habet, nunc non habet. Verum est hujusmodi
expositionem propriam Massiliensium a Jansenio esse existimatam. Verum est a me
quoque existimari; sed ita id existimo, ut non metuam ne Morellius and tota
Molinistarum natio hanc propositionem vel falsitatis vel scandali a summo
Pontifice notari curent; Semipelagianum est dicere, ita Christum pro omnibus
mortuum, ut nullum peculiare propositum and voluntatem habuerit salutis
electorum, sed omnibus citra delectum generatim salutem voluerit sub
condition, quae posset a libero arbitrio actu sine efficaci gratia impleri,
atque omnibus sufficientes gratias versatiles, quae modo effectum habent, modo
non habent, promeritm sit.

De secunda part quintae propositionis. Intentio Molinistarum.
Tradit Jansenius quintam propositionem, etiam quatenus haereseos damnata est;
quia vult, Christum pro solis electis mortuum esse, and pro nullis reprobis,
tom. 3. l. 3 c. 27.

Depulsio Jansenii Defensorum.
Loca quae objiciuntur Iansenio, ex Augustino and S. Thoma manifest mutuata
sunt: sensus item illorum orthodoxus est, and a quinta propositione disjunctus,
nempe solis electis absolata voluntate Christum beatudinem optasse, orasse,
meruisse: adeque ex VI. PRINC. Nullus locus Jansenii reprehendi potest, nisi
vel propter verba, vel propter sententiam vocibus subjectam.
sexto principio, nihil in iis est reprehensione dignum.

Quaestio duplex.
1. An locutus cum Augustino and S. Thoma Iansenius? 2. An senserit Iansenius
Christum nullo modo pro reprobis mortuum esse, nec ullum in ipsos ex morte
Christi gratiam defluere docuerit.

Methodus ineunda Molinistis.
Debent verba Jansenii ab Augustini verbis abjungere, ut verba reprehendant;
debent ostendere nullo modo ex Iansenii mente Christum pro reprobis mortuum, ut
sensum incusent.

Expenditur ex hac methodo Morellius.
Semper sui similis Morellius, paris ubique levitatis, affert tantum quaedam
loca Iansenii, sensum eorum non assignat, nec damnatae propositionis sensu
accipienda comprobat, cum manifest alio accipi possint. Ita que aerem
verberat, and ut simpliciter dicam, plane nugatur. Verum insigni hic argumento
cerni licet quam mala fide in hac contentione versetur. Nunc enim ex aequo and
Iansenium and Iansenii defensores insectatur, nec minus erroneum quintae
propositionis sensum ab ills defendi contendit, quam ab ipso Jansenio, and
tamen olim tam long ipsos hac in part a Iansenio segregavit, ut, cum quintam
illam propositionem in Iansenium conferret, immunes ab hoc errore ipsius
defensores agnoverit. Sic enim loquitur in libro quem inscripsit, Augustini de
gratia sententia, page 37. Ipsi, inquit, evidentia permoti, fatentur Christum
esse mortuum pro multis qui pereunt. Credunt enim ipsum mortuum esse pro
omnibus semel sanctificatis, etsi ad tempus tantum, nec in justitia
perseverantibus. Itaque patet ipsos sine ratione contra mentem Augustini and
contra suam hunc locum opponere.

Methodus Jansenii defensoribus sequenda.
Debent ostendere cum Augustino and Sancto Thoma loqui Iansenium, deinde sensum
ejus hunc esse in locis objectis, pro solis electis salvandis efficaci and
absoluta voluntate mortuum esse Christum, quod constat orthodoxum esse.

Primum igitur dicunt, allata ex Iansenio loca, quasi sensu cum quinta
propositione congruentia, manifest, si verba spectes, Augustinianis
locutionibus constare. Quod sic ad oculum demonstrant.

De primo loco Jansenii a Molinistis allato.
Postquam, aiunt, probasset Iansenius late, cap. 20. lib. 3. de great. Christi,
Christum esse mortuum pro tota Ecclesia toto orb dispersa, pro peccatis omnium
fidelium, pro justificandis temporaliter multis reprobis; ad jungit, quia solis
praedestinatis salutem aeternam Christus absolute voluit. Ideo saepe ab
Augustino locutiones illas Scripturae ad solos praedestinatos contrahi; quod
his Augustini locis confirmat Epist. 48. Christus propitiator est peccatorum
nostrorum, non tantum nostrorum, sea totius mundi; propter triticum quod est
per totum mundum. Et lib. 21. de Civit. cap. 24: Quid est omnium? Et eorum
scilicet quos ex Gentibus, and eorum quos ex Iudaeis praedestinavit, vocavit,
justisicavit, non omnium hominum. Et lib. 22. cap. 24. Apostolus de ipsis in
illud regnum praedestinatis loquens, qui proprio, inquit, Folio non pepercit,
sed pro nobis omnibus tradidit illum. Et mox illud addidit ex quo calumniandi
causam arripuit Morellius and Molinistae, Ne quis, inquit, forte suspicaretur
ita phrases hujusmodi affirmativas de praedestinatis intelligendas esse, ut
tamen alii justi, qui de beato illo numero non sunt, non excludantur, non uno
in loco invertit istiusmodi locutiones, ita ut eas negative efferendo dicat
Christum pro caeteris qui non sunt praedestinati, non esse mortuum, non semet
ipsum dedisse redemptionem. Hoc enim in Epistola ad Evodium sine ambiguitate
pronunciat: Non perit unus ex illis pro quibus mortuus est Christus: quod, si
nullus ex illis perit, inquit Janseniut, pro quibus mortuus est, profecto
quisquis perit, sive aliquando justus fuerit, sive non, non est pro illo
mortuus Christus.

Haec postrema verba arripit Morellius ut Iansenio quintam propositionem
affingat: sed facile unico illo argumento refellitur.

Haec propositio, quae Augustini est: Non perit unus ex illis pro quibus
Christus mortuus est; and illa Iansenii, Qui perit, non est pro illo mortuus
Christus; non duplex, sed una propositio est ex Logicae regulis conversa,
quibus pueri docentur propositiones negativas universales posse simpliciter
converti. Ergo locus Iansenii Augustiniana locutione constat. Ergo nihil in
ipsis verbis reprehendendum ex I PRINC. Cum Augustino, Patribus and antiquis
Scholasticis, ut sentire nefas non est, ita nec loqui.
primo principio articuli primi. Inde vero ad repellendam Morellii
accusationem, ejusmodi etiam argumentum conficitur.

Argumentum. I.
Iansenii locutio Augustiniana est; ut per se patet, sed ex solis Augustini
verbis nemo argui potest quintam propositionem tradidisse ex III. PRINC. Ex
sola Augustini locutione nemo argui potest ullum haereticum dogma docuisse.
tertio principio, quia illae locutiones sensum habent a propositionibus
diversum, ex II. PRINC. Augustini and Patrum locutiones sensum habent a damnato
propositionum sensu diversum.
secundo. Quod erat demonstrandum.

De secundo loco Iansenii a Molinistis allato.
Simili modo repellitur secundus locus, qui praeterquam quod Sancti Thomae est,
nihil aliud quam evidentem ex Augustini loco, and legitime ductam consecutionem
continet.

Affert enim primum ibidem Iansenius hunc Augustini locum:

Si de aliquibus ita Ecclesia certa esset, ut qui sunt illi etiam nosset, qui
licet adhuc in vita sunt constituti, tamen praedestinati sunt in aeternum ignem
ire cum diabolo, tam pro eis non oraret, quam nec pro ipso. Ex hoc loco and
alio simili ex lib. de corr. and gr. c. 15. hoc colligit Jansenius: Scivit
Christus quo quisque ab aeterno praedestinatus erat; scivit hoc decretum neque
ullius pretii oblatione mutandum esse, nec se ipsum velle mutare. Ex quo factum
est ut juxta sanctissimum Doctorem non magis Patrem pro aeterna liberatione
ipsorum quam pro diabolo deprecatus fuerit. Sed si quid pro illis rogavit
Patrem, pro temporalibus quibusdam justitiae effectibus rogavit, and pro iisdem
obtinendis obtulit pretium, fuditque sanguinem suum. Cujusmodi oblatio, quia
valde diminuta est, parumque reprobis, multum vero praedeninatis p^odest, ut
infra declarandum est; hinc fluxit ut passim in scriptis suis Augustinus
oblationem sanguinis and mortis, and orationem Christi fere ad solos electos
restringere soleat.

Hanc consequentiam rectissime ex Augustino ductam quis negare posset, aut quis
illarum propositionum catenam abrumpere? Si Christus oravit pro reproborum
salute, cum eos nosset ab electorum numero exclusos, pro iisdem oraret
Ecclesia, etiamsi illorum reprobationem nosset. Sed ex Augustino Ecclesia non
oraret pro reproborum salute si eos nosset. Ergo non oravit pro eorum salute
Christus qui noverat.

Sed verba ipsa Iansenianae propositionis, quatenu^ arguitur, habemus apud
Sanctum Thomam 3. part, q. 21. art. 4. Secundum voluntatem rationis Christus
nihil voluit, nisi quod scivit Deum velle. Et ideo omnis absoluta voluntas
Christi, etiam humana, fuit impletae, quia fuit Deo conformis; and per
consequens omis ejus oration fuit exaudita. Hic cum occurret Christum orasse ut
peccatum crucifixoribus suis ignosceretur, ita respondet: Dicendum quod Dominus
non oravit pro omnibus crucifixoribus suis, sed pro his solum qui eraent
praedestinati, ut per ipsum vitam consequerentur aeternam.

Sed quid ad purgandum omni erroris labe istam locutionem Iansenii aliam
auctoritatem querimus quam ipsiusmet Christi, qui se non pro mundo rogare
affirmat, sed pro his quos ipsi dedit Pater? Ex quibus ejusmodi demonstrato
conficitur.

Argumentum. II.
Haec verba Christ: Non pro mundo rogo, etc. Haec verba Sancti Thomae: Christus
oravit pro his solum qui ex ipso vitam consequuntur aeternam. Haec Augustini
doctrina: Non orandum pro eorum salute, qui ad aeternum interitum praedestinati
noscerentur, recatuum habent sensum; Catholicum, orthodoxum, a quinta
propositione diversum.

Sed Iansenii verba, utpote aequivalentia locis Augustini, Sancti Thomae, imo
Evangelii, eodem accipi sensu possunt. Ergo ex illis solis non potest elici
sensus haereticus quintae propositionis, ex III. PRINC. Ex sola Angustini vel S
Thomae locutione nemo argui potest ullum haereticum dogma docuisse,
tertio principio articuli primi. Probent igitur Moliniani ex aliis locis haec
verba alium in Augustino and Sancto Thoma, alium in Iansenio sensum habere, vel
fateantur se nihil agere.

Sic quidem Iansenii defensores quadam veluti exceptione adversarios suos sum
movent, sed ad causam penitus obtinendam solita methodo haec loca tum ad bonum
sensum express a Iansenio alligari, tum malum sensum qui in ilia iutrudi
posset express ab eodem removeri duplici argumento confirmant.

Argumentum. III.
Haec verba: Quisquis perit, non est pro illo mortuus Christus. Et illa item:
Non magis Partem pro aeterna liberatione reprobarum, quam pro diaboli oravit,
rectum and Catholicum habent sensum, si ita accipiantur:

Quisquis perit, eum ab aeterna perditione per mortem suam liberare non voluit
Christus absoluta volantate, nec aeternam illius salutem sanguine suo promereri
absolute voluit, uti nec eam a Patre absoluta oratione petiit; hunc sensum
rectum esse patet ex iis quae constate diximus initio hujus articuli.

Sed ad hunc sensum alligavit verba sua Iansenius, ut jam ostendimus. Primum
enim explicat quid intelligat per illa verba, Pro aliquo mori. Pro aeliquo,
inquit, mortuum esse vel fudisse sanguinem suum, insinuat voluntatem Christi
quam habet ut and mors sua Patrioblata and sanguis profit. Volun^tem autem
illam ibidem indicat esse absolutam. Electorum, inquit, liberationem ex massa
perditionis absolute voluit. Et paulo superius: Pro vero populo suo Absolute
salvando semtipsum dedit and tradid^t.

Igitur in Iansenii sententia Christum non esse mortuum pro aeterna salute
reproborum, nihil est aliud quam Christum non voluisse absoluta voluntate ut
per mortem suam reprobi salvarentur. Hic autem sensus orthodoxus est ex
supradictis. Igitur sensus verborum Iansenii est orthodoxus and a quinta
propositione alienus. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Argumentum. IV.
Malum sensum qui in illa verba includi posset, nempe quod non sit mortuus ad
ullam reprobis gratiam conferendam, express removet Iansenius. Testatur enim
mortuum esse Christum pro univers^ Ecclesia toto orb dispersa, pro omnibus
fidelibus. Dicit, fideles omnes sanctificatos in sanguine Christi, redemptionem
assequi; five in accepta redemptione perseverent, sive ab ea excidentes,
saenguinem Testamenti pollutum duxerint, in quo sanctificati sunt: Dicit omnes
temporales quibus exornantur reprobi gratiae effectus morte Christi promeritos.
Igitur ex IV. PRINC. Scriptoris Catholici ambiguam locutionem, orthodoxi sensus
and erronei capacem, erroneo interpretari nefas est, si eroneus ille sensua
express sit amotus.
quarto principio eus verba malo illo and perverso sensu explicari nefas est.
Quod erat demonstrandum.

ARTICULUS. VIII.
Notae ad majorem intelligentiam Jansenianae doctrinae circa mortem Christi.
DIximus summam doctrinae Iansenianae circa mortem Christi, hanc esse, pro
redemptione totius Ecclesiae Christum semet obtulisse, and pro gratiis
temporabilis multis etiam exreproborum numero promerendis, solis tamen
praedestinatis aeternam salutem, and quae cum salute necessario connexa sunt,
nempe efficacem perseverantiam absoluta voluntate promereri voluisse.

Haec sententia ex iis quae vulgo in Scholis venditantur opinionibus aliam
rejicit, alterius partem praecipuam amplectirur, minus praecipuam omittit
intactam.

Rejicit Molinianam quae Christum statuit sic omnibus reprobis gratias
sufficientes promeruisse, ut quod eas alii respuant, alii accipiant, non
discernenti gratiae efficaci, sed libero tantum arbitrio attribui debeat.
Haecilla sententia est, quam ut Semipeligianam exagitat. Ad hanc stabliendam
dicit afferri solitum, a Semipelagianis argumentum a generali redemptione
petitum, quod quidem erroris accusat in sensu Semipelagianotum; quatenus
videlicet volebant ex morte Christi ita generalem in bonos and malos gratiae
abundantiam defluere, ut reproborum electorumque discrimen ex liberi atbitrii
nutu, non ex divina praedestinatione penderet.

Amplectitur recentiorum Thomistarum sententiae partem long praecipuam, nempe
Christum absoluta voluntate solis electis salutem voluisse, meruisse, petiisse;
quatenus item fidelibus justis sufficientem suo sensu, sed indigam efficacis
auxilii potentiam, gratia interiori instructam conferri sentiunt: sed quatenus
ex iis nonnulli gratias sufficientes efficacis egenas in omnes homines
spargunt, nec probat nec improbat.

Rursus quod iidem in Deo antecedentem quandam voluntatem salutis omnium
admittunt; agnoscit and ipse. Ex quo consequitur long potiori jure admissam in
Christo.

Potro ista antecedens voluntas non eo solum pertinet, ut Deus abstrahendo ab
hominis lapsu, salutem omnium, quatenus homines sunt, optare dicitur; sed
generatim antecedens Dei voluntas fertur in id quod rectum, quod justum, quod
bonum secundum se est; ita quia rectum est hominem converti, poenitentiam
agere, bonitatem Dei non contemnere, gratias ejus non respuere, ad Sacramenta
accedere; haec omnia antecedenti voluntate censetur Deus velle, licet spectatis
fingulis circumstantiis, non decreverit singulis efficaces gratias confer,
quibus ad salutem certo perveniunt, sine quibus certo ab salute excidunt. Ergo
non eo solum nomine antecedenti voluntate Deus omnium hominum salutem optat,
quia omnes creaturas rationales ad beatitudinem fecit; sed etiam quia cum
permultas gratias vel externas vel internas in reprobos diffundar, quibus
injustum est ipsos abuti, iisdemque aditum ad Ecclesiam suam patere velit,
antecedenti voluntate velle censetur omnes ad salutem pervenire, quia vellet
ipsos obstinatos in malitia non manner, and oblatis sibi praesidiis been uti;
licet aliunde justitiae voluntate, spectatis omnibus circumstantiis, melius
esse judicavit illos malitiae suae relinquere, nec efficacia adjutoria
concedere, quibus solis humani cordis pravitas superatur. Hinc patet Deum
antecedenti voluntate and daemonum and hominum reproborum salutem velle; long
tamen aliter hominum quam daemonum. Cum enim nulla jam gratiae praesidia
daemonibus offerat, nec Ecclesiae aditum illis patere velit, aut sacramentorum
opem; consequenter nec illos gratia sua been uti vult, quam nullam ipsis hoc
tempore largitur. Contra vero, cum homnines adhuc in via sint, conversionem
illis and fincerum ad se reditum bonumqae gratiarum suarum usum, a quibus illos
minime arcet, optare voluntate antecedente putandus est, quorum nihil erga
daemones praestat.

Illa vero antecedens voluntis saepe in Christo fuisse videtur, ut cum super
Jerusalem fleret, and his verbis venturas ipsi clades deploraret: Flevit,
inquit Lucas, super illam dicens, Si cognovisses and tu, and quidem in hac die
quae ad pacem sunt tibi! nunc autem abscondita sunt ab oculis tuis, quia
venient dies in te, and circumdabunt te inimici tui vallo, etc. Ita gentis
suae, and in illa genre ommum quorum gerebat imaginem, reproborum ruinam
lamentatur Christus, and tamen absoluta voluntate divinae praedestinationis
decreto, quo ab illa sort Sanctorum separati erant, plane consentiebat. Nec
incommode quidam haec verba Christi in horto, Pater, si possibile est, transeat
a me calix iste, de humana illa velleitate intelligunt, qua objectam menti suae
reproborum damnationem deprecabatur.

3. Ex his patet quo sensu removeri debeat, and quo admitti possit in Deo and
Christo conditionata voluntas salutis reprobotum.

Nam conditio illa a Molinistis afferri solita, qua dicitur Deus omnium salutem
optare si and ipsi velint, subministrata ipsis gratia quadam sufficient, quae
nihil requirat ad agendum, fundicus ejicienda, utpote efficacia divini auxilii
prorsus indigna, and ab hoc statu penitus aliena, in quo, ut ait Augustininus,
si homini relinqueretur voluntas sua, ita ut ipsum velle gratia non operetur,
inter tantas infirmitates vitae hujus voluntas ipsa succumberet.

At aliusmodi conditionata voluntas, qua diceretur Deus omnes homines salvos
fieri velle, si and ipsi velint, non subministrata quadam ipsis versatili
gratia, sed quia vellet ipsos a pravitate and duritia sua resipiscere, and ad
poenitentiam reverti, a quo impediuntur, non extrinseca aliqua impotentia, sed
propria and culpabili perverfitate: haec, inquam, ratio conditionatae
voluntatis, cum nihil aliud sit quam antecedens voluntas, and, ut arbitror,
quam lex aeterna omnia justa praecipiens, omnia injusta vetans, divinae
praedestinationi nihil officit, nec Iansenio negata dici potest.

Patet etiam ex supradictis multis modis Christum dici posse mortuum pro salute
reproborum, etiam ex Iansenio. Notandum enim, mori pro aliquo dupliciter
accipi. Vel enim significat velle salutem alicujus, vel significat velle media
conferte adipiscendae salutis.

Rursus velle salutem alicujus dicitur Deus, vel antecedenti voluntate, vel
consequenti, sive absoluta.

Antecedens voluntas ^ursus vel Molinistice intelligitur, ut sit idem quod
conditionata illa quam rejicimus; vel Thomistice, ut nihil sit aliud quam ea
Dei voluntas qua Deus vult quidquid fieri justum and aequum est, quicquid per
se^ and absolute bonum est. Hanc convenire diximus cum aliusmodi conditionata
voluntate.

His positis, claret Christum multis modis dici posse mortuum pro salute omnium
omnino hominum, and maxim fidelium reproborum. Primum enim sufficiens pretium
pro omnibus obtulit. Deinde in nova lege sacramenta divinae gratiae fontes, and
quasi poculum quoddam, ut ait Prosper, immortalitatis Deus omnibus proponit:
and in veteri nusquam opem suam ex futuris Christi meritis defluentem
implorantibus subtraxit. 3. Antecedenti illa voluntate vellet omnes ad
Ecclesiam suam aspirare, a peccatis recedere, ad misericordiam suam confugere
4. Nusquam non hominibus quaedam adminicula salutis, nunc externa, nunc interna
concessit, quibus si male utuntur homines, propria pravitate male utuntur, and
contra antecedentem illam Dei voluntatem. Nam quia iniquum est homines sic Dei
beneficiis abuti, ideo hoc dicitur Deus nolle, quia non vult malum. Contra
autem, quia aequum est homines been illis uti, ideo dicitur hoc Deus velle. 5.
Magis adhuc proprie pro fidelibus reprobis, quia jus eis ad salutem aeternam
per baptismum dedit, a quo nonnisi vitio suo and culpa excidunt.

Hoc unum igitut reprobotum in infidelitate morientium nemini concessit, ut
voluntates ipsorum ad se converteret efficaci illa gratia, sine qua propter
obstinatam in malo hominum voluntatem, nihil unquam ab ipsis been fit.

Hoc unum item nulli fidelium reproborum concedit, ut efficax ipsis
perseverantiae donum largiatur. Et tamen hoc ipsum petentibus non negaret; sed
ut petant and ita petant ut tes tanta petenda est, occulto quodam judicio non
in omnibus opetari voluit, quamvis quod non petant, non ex defectu gratiae, sed
ex eorum depravatione nascatur.

Constat igitur solis electis aeternam salutem, and gratias illas efficaces came
aeterna salute nexas Deum destinasse, and Christum absolute and efficaciter
promereri voluisse. Et quia hic voluntatis modus maxim proprius; alius vero
non ita proprius, nec omnino reprobis utilis, hinc luculenter Petavius lib. 9.
c. 7. n. 9. Pluribus in Leis, inquit, Augustinus negat Deum velle omnes salvos
fieri, sed eos tantummodo qui praedestinati sunt ad viam. Et paulo post;
Quapropter utcunque de illa communi voluntate Dei statuatur, ac sive Augustinum
ex slimes quandam in Deo volantatem agnovisse, qui a universam hominum massam
l^berare and ad salutem provehere studuerit quantum erat in se; sive nullam
erga re robos talem habuisse concedas; nihilominus hoc de quo solo pugnamus ex
illius mente constabit, long diversam, electis salvandis ac lib^randis, quam
de reprobis in illo voluntatem extitisse. At ex ipso manifestum est sequi non
ex meritorum varietate dsparem in autrosque salvandos voluntatem extitisse; sed
cica electos absolutam and gratuitam: in reprobos vero nonnisi conditionatam,
and quam velleitatem vocant, tanquam ita concipi^tur: Vellem istos salvare,
nisi eos p^imi parentis culpa odi^sos and execrabiles fec^sset. Absolutam vero
de iisdem damnandis ob illud originale delictum, voluntatem and sententiam fu
sse. Et infra ex multis Augustini locis hanc consecutionem elicit: Igitur
Augustinus arbitratus est non omnes velle salvos esse Deum, sed quosdam nolle
salvos esse, non quia ipsi nolunt, sed quia Deus non vult, ut ipse diserte ait,
Epist. 107.

Postremo idem Petav^us de Valentini Concilii circa Christi mortem decreto ita
Ioquitur: Canone, inquit, 4. Valentini Patres reprehendunt eorum errorem qui
dicunt Christum pro omnibus imp^is quia mundi exordio usque ad Passionem Domini
in sua impietate mortui aterna damnatione puniti sunt, and statuunt. PRO EIS
TANTUM ID FECISSE QUI AETERNAM VITAM CONSEQUUNTUR.

Habent Jesuitae propositionem damnatae quintae propositioni plane
aequivalentem abuno ex suis pr^latam; Ch^istus pro iis solum sanguinem fudit,
qui aeternam vitam censequuntur. Nullam ejusmodi in toto Jansenii libro
invenire ita crudam possunt, ut fortasse quisquam suspicari possit librum
Petavii pro Jansenii libro Innocentio X. obtrusum fuisse. Nec tamen ita sum
inquus, ut Petavium propterea censeam errorem qui in illis verbis includi
posset, etiam tradidisse. Hoc solum Jesuitas monitos volo; si iniquum sit
quintam propositionem in Petavium conferri, apud quem saiutem extant illius
verba, quanto iniquius in Jansenium, ubi nec ipsa ejus verba comparent!

ARTICULUS. IX.
Conclusio.
HAEC sunt quae de methodo istius quaestionis expediendae in utramque partem
disputando censuimus. Quod si in Molinistarum rationibus referendis breviores
fuimus, credant hoc mihi velim, non ideo a me factum, quod eas consulto
dissimularim, sed quia non alias inveni quas assererem: in quo ipsorum est
aliqua culpa, qui cum tantum e re Ecclesiae judicent esse, omnibus persuadere
quinque propositiones e Jansenio decerptas esse, tantumque in auferendis ea de
re decrelis diligentiae ponant, contra in astruenda illorum decretorum fide, in
erudiendis hominibus indiligentissime se gerant. Haeccine provincia tot minutis
scriptoribus relinquenda erat, praesertimque Morellio uni omnium ad hanc causam
pro dignitate tractandam, ne quid gravius dicam, minime apto! Quamobrem etsi
parum honesta, providentior tamen Corneti ratio vldetur, qui suo suorumque
ingenio, and fortasse causae diffisus, quantum potuit semper sequaces suos ab
his scripti tandi consiliis de hortatus est. Scilicet sagaciter intellexit ille
Molinianus Achitophel quam je junum esset quidquid de hac controversia a suis
in lucem promeretur, quamque vix publici juris factum publico omnium contemptu
priusquam adversariorum scriptis exploderetur. Ergo ut eos qua valeret
aggrederetur, ad clandestinas se molitiones totum contulit; and nobile illud
quinque propositionum opus; cujus in Bibliotheca Anti-Janseniana auctor
perhibetur, idem primum and postremum esse voluit, laetus ac triumphans quod
una pagella plus negotii adversariis suis exhibuit quam omnes Jesuitae and tota
Molinianorum Scriptorum natio. Ergo hic unus vere sapit Molinisticas
utilitates, caeteri illi scripturientes mera somnia.

Ab his tamen, si tanta ipsos scribendo libido teneat, puto hac sexta
Disquisitione non mediocrem me gratiam iniisse. Certam enim ipsis and unicam
ostendi viam, qua expetitas illas propositiones in Jansenio possint invenite,
si quidem ibi sint; erraticos excursus in quibus sine fructu expatiantur
praecidi, nec ipsos de via errare passus sum. Alacres igitur eam ineant, si
quid suae causae confidant, and mihi gratulentur tam certae methodi
demonstratori. Nam quod Jansenii defensorum firmamenta latius paulo exposui, ad
ipsorum quoque rationem promovendam pertinebit; scilicet haec, quae quoquo modo
dissolvenda sunt, si ab ipsis ignorentur, nunquam ad exitum perduci quaestio
posset. Nunc autem nudum quasi Jansenistarum latus ostendi, quod ipsi feriant
and confodiant, si quid robore, si quid animo valent. Quod si non praestant,
jam sibi non aliis imputent, quod utrum in Jansenio sint illae propositiones
nec ne, tam multi dubitant. Fidenter hoc assero, quia vere; quamlibet multis
Episcoporum summique Pontificis decretis definiri curent propositiones esse in
Jansenio, nunquam ullam ab eruditis hoc pacto fidem impetrabunt, multorumque
potius diffidentiam augebunt. Non enim ad has persuadendi vias quisquam
confugit, nisi quem rations deficiunt. Alia prorsus facti quaestonum, alia
fidei ratio; in his auctoritas Ecclesiae valet plurimum, in illis autem ne
auctoritatem quidem suam interponere debet, sed illas ad praestitutos ipsis a
Deo and natura judices, sensus nempe rationemque remittere. Vere enim and
prudenter Habertus illustrissimus Vabrensis Episcopus in facti quaestione ab
Innocentio III. dissientiens, In hujusmodi, inquit, rebus ad verum semper
redeundum est. Ergo quantumcunque nunc Theologi novi servitii jugo premantur,
quantumcunque omnium ora intentaris terroribus obstruantur, erumpet tamen
aliquando oppressa libertas, intelligentque tandem reipsa horum consiliorum
auctores, vim, terrores, minas, parum idoneas ad persuadendas facti questiones
esse methodos, nec minus rationem cogi non posse, quam voluntatem.

VI. Kal. Decembris. Ann. MDCLVII.
FINIS.
THE. DECLARATION OF Monsieur SINNIGH Doctor of LOVAIN, (mentioned Part 6.
Chap. 1.) concerning some audiences which he had whilst he was at Rome, of the
Popes URBAN VIII. and INNOCENT X. and of some Cardinals, touching the book of
my L. the Bp. of IPRE.
An Advertisement touching this Piece.
IT WAS not my design but chance and necessity that I was obliged to retrench
this piece of the Collection from those which I had promised in my Iournal, and
to insert it in this place. I had not disposed of it in this manner, but
because not finding it among the rest whilst they were at the press, nor
knowing how to procure it timely enough to have it printed in its right order,
it was necessary to seek a place for it elsewhere. Yet it seems to have so
great affinity with what is treated of in this sixth Disquisition, as if it
could not have any more natural then this; and that chance has in this case
done what ought to have been done by choice and discretion.

IN nomine Domini, Amen. Anno Incarnationis Dominicae millesimo sexcentesimo
quadradragesimo septimo, indictione decima quinta, Pontificatus sanctissimi in
Christo Patris ac Domini nostri D. Innocentii divina providentia Papae decimi
anno tertio, mensis Frebruarii die vigesima secunda, coram me Notario publico,
and testibus infra nominandis constitutus ac personaliter comparens eximius
Dominus Johannes Sinnigh, sacra Thelogiae in Academia Lovaniensi Doctor and
Professor ordinarius, Collegii majoris Theologici Praeses, nuper pro part
ejusdem Academiae, and Illustrissimorum Ordinum Brabantiae ad Sedem Apostolicam
deputatus, affirmavit, and interposito juramento asseveravit, quod in audientia
quam a felilicis recordationis Urbano octavo summo Pontifice obtinuit die
vigesima sexta Novembris millesimi sexcentesimi quadragesimi tertii sub horam
nonam antemeridianam, idem sanctissimus Dominus Urbanus Pontifex vivae vocis
oraculo dixerit ipsi Domino Comparenti, praesentibus clarissimo D. Cornelio
Papio, and venerabili D. Petro Vercanteren, tria sequentia: primo se per Bullam
seu Constitutionem suam occasion libri. D. Jansenii Episcopi Iprensis, and
aliorum opusculorum super eadem materia utrinque editorum evulgatam, non aliud
intendisse quam confirmare Bullam Pii V. a Gregorio XIII. pridem confirmatam:
secundo, se cavisse ne ista sua Bulla seu Constitutione, ullus in particulari
sugillaretur cum expressione nominis: tertio, non fuisse intentionis suae per
istam Bullam seu Constitutionem procreate ullum praejudicium doctrinae B.
Augustini, and eos qui contrarium asserere praesumerent compescendos esse.
Cumque D. Comparens ad secundum replicasset mirum esse quomodo nomen Jansenii
irrepserit in Bullam contra praedictam cautelam a sua Sanctitate adhibitam,
sanctissimus D. respondit agendum esse de ea re cum D. Praelato Albisio
compilatore Bullae. Insuper idem D. Comparens similiter affirmavit, and
mediante juramento asseveravit, se die vigesima octava Aprilis millesimi
sexcentesimi quadragesimi quarti, auditum fuisse personaliter and verbaliter
cum praenominato clarissimo D. Papio a tribus Eminentissimis S. R. E.
Cardinalibus, Spada, Pamphilio, and Falconerio, assisten^ibus praefato Praelato
Albisio and Abbate S. Crucis in Jerusalem, nomine Hilarione, ibique inter alia
multa dixisse, se paratum esse sub beneplacito sanctissimi D. Papae, and
Eminentiarum suarum, ostendere imprimis omnia puncta doctrinae de gratia and
libero arbitrio inter Jansenium and ipsius aemulos modo controversa, coincidere
cum punctis olim inter Augustinum ejusque aemulos controversis: secundo,
argumenta quibus Jansenii doctrina modo ab aemulis impetitur, coincidere
argumentis quibus Pelagiani and eorum asseclae olim in Augustini doctrinam
arietarunt: tertio, calumnias quas modo ab aemulis Jansenius patitur,
coincidere cum iis quas olim in vita and post obitum passus fuerat Augustinus:
Paratum praeterea se esse ad comburendum public in campo Florae librum
Iansenii in eventum quo in praedictorum probatione defecerit. Addidit postremo
idem D. Comparens, and sub juramento similiter asseveravit, se haec eadem in
substantia repetiisse coram sanctissimo D. nostro Innocentio X. ad Pontificatum
jam evecto, idque die quinta Novembris ejusdem anni millesimi sexcentesimi
quadragesimi quarti in prima audientia ab eodem obtenta in porticu palalatii
Vaticani, ubi cum ipso ultra mediam horam deambulans circa horam tertiam
pomeridianam, prolixe super praemissis disseruit. Acta sunt haec anno,
indictione, Pontificatu, mense, die quibus supra, praesentibus in majori
Collegio Theologorum Lovanii Dominis and Magistris Ioanne Cuvelier, and Iacobo
Bodart Presbyteris and Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureis formatis, testibus ad
praemissa vocatis atque rogatis. Minutae hujus subscripsit idem eximius D.
Comparens juxta signaturam meii Notarii.

And below was written: Quod attestor ad praemissa Notarius. Signed thus: Walt
Vander VVaterfort Notarius publicus.
with a Knot.
The MANVSCRIPT concerning the affair of Monsi'r GRIMANI Patriarch of Aquileia.
The more I have read this Manuscript, the more considerable I have found it
for the clearing of the matters at this day controverted in the Church.
Wherefore not doubting but they who shall read what I say of it in Chap. 9.
Part 4. of the Iournal, will be contented to read it at length, I have thought
fit to place it at the end of this Collection.

The affair of the most illustrious and Reverend Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia,
judged in his favor in the Sacred Council of Trent, under the Pontificate of
our H. F. Pope Pius 4. September. 18. 1653. touching a letter written by the said
Patriarch to the Vicar of Oudene.
The Patriarch's Letter.
REVEREND VICAR, You write me word that the Preacher of the Collegiate Church
of Oudene has preached as a constant maxim, that He whom God has
predestined cannot in any manner be damned, though it come to pass that he
falls into sin; because how great soever his fall be, God rescues him from his
sin in such sort that he must needs be saved; and in like manner, he whom God
has reprobated, must needs be damned. Whereunto you add these former words,
That upon this there arose a great scandal and disturbance among the people,
and in your self, as if he had altogether denied our Free Will, whilst he
established Gods Election and Predestination. And being you tell me that you
were unwilling to do any thing for redressing this scandal, without first
knowing what I judged of it; therefore to satisfy what my place requires of
me, I find my self now obliged to acquaint you withal that God has given me
to know touching this subject by Reading the Holy Scriptures; that so I may
supply you with what contentment and consolation I can in this case. To bear
testimony therefore to truth, I am obliged to acknowledge that the Proposition
advanced by the Preacher and wherewith the people is scandalized, is true and
Catholic; namely, that the Predestined cannot be damned, nor the Reprobate
saved. Of which Proposition that I may the more commodiously bring you the
proofs, my purpose is to demonstrate to you in the first place by authority of
the Scripture, that Predestination and Reprobation depend upon God alone: Next
I shall show you that it cannot be hindered neither by God's will, nor by the
Devil, nor by our selves, nor consequently by any whomsoever; and this I shall
evince to you, as well by the authority of the Scriptures, as by evident
reasons and the Doctrine of S. Augustine; protesting to you that through want of
time and memory I cannot set down the thousand part of the truths whereby this
Catholic truth may be established.

But before all things it must be confessed, that if S Paul, that vessel full
of the Holy Ghost, writing to the Romans concerning Election and Reprobation,
after recital of sundry testimonies touching that matter, cries out at Length,
O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! it is very just
and necessary that we all make the same exclamation with him, and give glory to
God; which we are the more obliged to do, inasmuch as we are far from having
such light as that great Apostle. But because our Lord Jesus Christ, according
to truth of his unchangeable promises, has never left his Church deprived of
the illumination of the Holy Spirit, to the end this same Spirit might guide us
into the knowledge of all truth, and accordingly we having left to us who are
his members the seed of his Grace, lest without it we should remain barren and
worse then the Children of Sodom, he has preserved the Holy Ghost for our
consolation against errors and the enemies of Grace. It Is a firm truth which I
now confess, namely, that the predestined whom God has chosen according to
the good pleasure of his will cannot be damned; and in like manner, that the
Reprobated and Rejected cannot be saved. And to make you see that this is true,
S. Paul inspired by God, teaches the Church of the Romans and all the world
besides the deep secret of Predestination and Reprobation, in these words which
he delivers in the ninth Chapter, For all that are of Israel are not
Israelites: by which he shows us that the Predestination of the Children was
typifi'd in the person of Isaac who was the son of the Promise, to distinguish
them from the Reprobates prefigur'd in the person of Ishmael the son of the
flesh. And it is upon this account that he says to Galatians, speaking of those
two children, Cast out the bondwoman and her child, for the Son of the
bondwoman shall not be heir with the Son of the Freewoman. And to make the
Argument stronger, the Apostle proves the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation
in the persons of two Twins, of whom he says, that before they were born, and
had done either good or evil, that the decree of God might stand fast
according to his election, it was said of the one, not according to the merit
of his works, but according to the calling of God, that the Elder shall serve
the Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. You
see how clearly S. Paul shows that he not only acknowledges Predestination
and Reprobation, but acknowledges the same in such sort, that as he says
himself, God endures some with great patience, who are vessels of wrath,
reserved for destruction, to the end he may show his wrath and make his power
known, as also make known the Riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy who
are fitted for glory. Whence it is clear that S. Paul applies Predestination
and Reprobation particular and determinate to persons, as S. Augustine has
acknowledged in inumerable places of his works. Nevertheless we must not
persuade our selves that God may be accused of any kind of Injustice, being the
universal Potter, who of the same lump of clay is able to make one vessel for
honorable and another for contemptible uses. Wherefore it must be concluded
that Predestination and Reprobation come from God alone, as well because the
Scripture affirms it, S. Paul confesses it plainly in this and many other
places, as because it cannot draw its original from any natural principles,
being, as it is, wholly Divine and spiritual, and depending only on the free
promises which God has made to us. It is easy now to perceive that this
Predestinaton being an order established upon God himself, and not upon a
created thing, it cannot be in any sort hindered by himself, since he says by
the Prophet, I am God and change not: much less can he contradict himself;
which caused S. Paul to say, The gifts and callings of God are not subject to
repentance. And if the calling (I mean the internal) which the Apostle writing
to Timothy, terms holy, and says was made not in regard of our works, but
according to the decree of his will, be a thing of which God never repents,
then a fortiori must he never repent of the Election which he makes of us, it
preceding this calling. This caused the Lord Jesus Christ to say to his
Apostles, Rejoice not in that you do miracles, but rejoice that your names are
written in heaven. As if he should say, If you have a mind to rejoice, rejoice
not for things which you must shortly part with, how high and glorious soever
they be; but I show you a ground of joy which you shall never lose, because
your names are written in heaven; that is, one me rests and depends your
felicity, which can never fail you. S. John confirms the same thing in his
Revelation when he discribes the elected by the number of twelve thousand of
every Tribe, who were entered in the book of life, and he says they were
marked, not with any other mark then that of the blood of Jesus Christ; which
shows that they were no more to pass through Death, because otherwise his
revelation would rather fill our hearts with confusion and trouble then with
peace and consolation; and the fruit of the Redeemer's blood would not be an
assured and stable thing. Besides this, the Prophet says in Psalm 64. Blessed
is the man whom thou chosest and causest to approach unto thee, he shall abide
in thy house. And in sundry places of the Gospel, it is said, All these things
were done that the Scripture might be fulfilled. And this Scripture is no other
thing but the words of the Prophets illuminated by God. Why should we give
less to God then a Prophet who is one of his servants? God's Predestination is
nothing else but his Prophecy; that is to say, it is impossible things should
come to pass otherwise then he has foreseen them from all eternity. Besides
that by his forseeing things (I speak now of such as are holy and good) he
causes that they exist, through his mercy, goodness and supreme Justice. We
must not therefore wonder, that, as the Psalm, says the chosen and
Predestined cannot but be happy, because, it says, he shall dwell in God's
house; and this, as well because God has foretold it as for that he will also
cause it to be so.

As for Satan, certainly he cannot hinder this Predestination, because the
determinate number of the Elect, who could not be damned, was typifi'd by the
people of Israel, when God commanded the destroying Angel to slay all those
whose doors he found not marked with the blood of the Lamb. If then the dead
blood of animals had the virtue to preserve the people from bodily death in the
day of God's anger, why shall we not confess that the living blood of Jesus
Christ wherewith he has marked his children from all eternity has a much
greater and effectual power to deliver from the Eternal death of the soul all
those whom God has already appointed to be of the number of his children? This
is proved by the testimony of Jesus Christ, in S. John chap 10. where he speaks
of the sheep that are of his flock, and of those which are not of it. Our
Savior in that place says of those who are not of it. Ye belive not, because
ye are not of my sheep. But of those that belonged unto himself, he says, My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they follow me. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all; and no man is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. If you consider and weigh all these
words, you will be constrained to confess that God's elect cannot be damned,
as in like manner the reprobate cannot be saved.

But because I have, as far as the time permits, sufficiently proved by these
few authorityes and reasons, which yet are of great moment to such as will
consider them sincerely, that Election can neither be frustrated by God nor the
Devil; not by God, because he is not contrary to himself, nor by the Devil,
because our Lord Jesus Christ defends and maintains it with his blood; besides
that himself says in the 17. chapter of S. John, speaking of all his
Disciples, I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have given me. If
then the power of the Son be equal to that of the Father, and if the Father
never denied him any thing, because he always found in him the object of his
aquiescence or complacencies, who can say that there is any who can condemn the
Children of God? The Devil indeed may torment them, persecute them, and
sometimes too reduce them almost to Death; but they perish not, because God put
his hand under them, and raises them up. But our Lord speaking of Judas who was
a reprobate, says in the same place, None of them is lest, but the Son of
Perdition, that the Scripture (to wit the prophecy in the 109th. Psalm) might
be fulfilled. Certainly if the Scripture must be fulfilled, then it is necessary
that the Reprobate cannot be saved, because he is the Son of perdition; and the
Son can never vary from the nature he received from his Father. To which
purpose our Savior says, Ye are of your father the Devil, because ye do his
works. These are properly they whom God never looks upon in Jesus Christ with
an eye of divine mercy; such was Judas but not S. Peter; for our Savior looked
upon him, to the end he might not despair after he had so lamentably renounced
his Master.

It remains now that I show, that Predestination cannot be hindered or
frustrated on our part; of which this is the reason: Because when God elects
and predestinates us in Jesus Christ, he does it without being necessitated
thereunto; but by his own and free pleasure, to which none makes resistance; as
it is said by the Prophet, Lord who shall resist the heat of tsty countenance?
Moreover he elects us miserable men and not happy, poor and not rich, sinners
and not righteous, naked and not clothed. And because all this is done by
Divine goodness with a great and infinite love, he does not elect us barely to
abandon us afterward, and leave us free in the hands of our own counsels,
because he well knows that if he should leave us we should presently return to
our first state; but in consequence of his Divine election he gives us in time
all the graces which were included in that election. First, he prepares our
wills that they may be fit to recieve divine inspirations; he comforts and
strengthens us in temptations, that we fall not into perdition; he give us
faith, hope, and charity, to the end that with these weapons we may encounter
and overcome our enemies; and in a word he furnishes us with all his benefits.
Toward those whom Gods receives for his children, he deporteth himself as a
Master would do, who seeing a poor miserable man destitute of all relief,
knocked down in the high way, wounded and disserted by all the world, would be
stirred by natural compassion to take him up and make him his beloved and
faithful servant. It cannot be said that it is enough for this miserable person
that man has done him the favor to choose him for his servant, because for all
this, he might remain in the highway as much as ever exposed to his former
miseries. Certainly if he means to give him any true testimony of his
affection, he must not think it enough that he has chosen him for his servant,
but he must carry him into his house, cause his wounds to be dressed, give him
clothes, and do him new favors. But God's love is much more powerful then
man's natural affection; for this can express it self only in outward
benefits, but God not only gives us corporal goods most plentifully, but also
lifts us up even above heaven with the spiritual gifts which he is able to
bestow upon us, to the end that being clothed with a new spirit we may appear
in Gods eyes honorable servants; not ungrateful for the numerous benefits which
we receive. And this is the cause that these servants, who acknowledge
themselves to be of the number of his children, work always with love and not
with fear.

By these Reasons it is evinced that we cannot withstand God's Election. Hear
the authorityes of Scripture which confirm the same thing S. Paul in the first
chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians speaks in this manner; Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ; According as he has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love: Hav^ng predestined us into the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved: In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace; Wherein he has abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence: Having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself, etc. This
authority alone heard with the ear of the mind and not with that of the flesh,
is sufficient to resolve and clear all the doubt which can arise from the
Proposition advanced by their Preacher: and in truth, every one of these words
(since they are so many words of the H. Ghost) ought to be more valuable to us
then a thousand worlds, because we see appear in them so illustriously the
greatness, goodness, compassion and mercy of God toward us, and particularly
because thy give us to know, to our great comfort, that those who are
predestined and the children of God, can never perish, in regard they are
elected in Jesus Christ before the foundation of the world. Therefore he that
is Elected, is founded upon Jesus Christ; and who is founded upon Jesus Christ
can never fall, because Jesus Christ is the rock and unmovable foundation
against which the power of the Devil cannot prevail, as neither can it
prevail against the structure built up of living stones which is the Holy
Church and the determinate number of the Elect. This is further manifested by
the Parable of the House built upon the sand, which falls at the least blast of
wind, and that which is built upon a rock which cannot in any manner be shaken
by the most impetuous storms. Moreover S. Paul adds and says that God has
chosen us in Jesus Christ before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love. You see that Predestination regards
as its proportionate object the good and holy works which God prepares for us
that we may walk therein; to enable us whereunto, he has left in the Church
his Holy Spirit, which as a hidden but strong fire burns up all that it finds
impure and superfluous, and more and more enflames the hearts of his elect with
holy and chaste desires, so that they remain wholly cleansed when they are washed
from the pollutions of this world. There is none but may and ought to
acknowledge this Predestination of the Saints, whereof no other reason can be
given but the good pleasure of God's will, which S. Paul expresses in the
abovecited place, and S. Peter in the first chapter of the first of his
Epistles; and all the Prophets both of the old and new Testament have likewise
acknowledged this gift in the Elect, insomuch that the light of the Sun is not
more bright then that of these divine testimonies.

Let there be no mention therefore of those false, pitiful and forced
consequences by which some pretend, as is above observed, that Free Will is
destroyed by God's gratuitions election, and that man remains like a stock or
a stone; as S. Paul witnesses it fell out in his time, that what he preached
for the advantage of Grace, was construed to establish the liberty of the
flesh; as if it had been lawful for every one to do evil, that Grace might
become more abundant; which is a damnable inference. These are the consequences
drawn by those who are unwilling to give God all the honor which is due to
him, or would share half of what belongs to Christ alone, and who know not the
exceeding mercy which has been shown to us by the death of the Son of God, who
willing to manifest to us the deep misery of our bondage, exemplifyed in
himself what is the true liberty of his Children, and afterward taught the
same with his own mouth, when he says, If the Son make you free, you shall be
free indeed. Wherefore we ought to know that Predestination does not deprive
the Elect of their Free Will, but gives, procures and preserves the same to
them; it does not force or use violence to any man, but he causes the Will to
incline it self to good, and voluntarily and sweetly. Whence we see by
experience, that there is nothing in the world more free, or whose power is
greater than that of a good Christian, since his liberty extends over all
things, even to the death of sin and his own, and that nothing can do any
prejudice to him, provided, as S. Paul speaks, Christian liberty be not turned
into a Carnal liberty; and if it happen sometimes that he falls into sin, he
finds that saying of the Scripture verifyed in himself, that all things, even
sins too, turn to the advantage of those that love God. Now this I speak after
S. Augustine, and it must be taken in this sense, that the sins whereinto a
Predestined man has suffered himself to fall, serve him for an occasion to
recurre unto God whom he has deserted, to deplore and repent of his sin, and
to become better by it continually, always knowing more and more the death
which arises from sin, and the life which Jesus Christ gives. It Is true indeed,
in the Reprobate, Free Will is not at all serviceable toward the attaining of
eternal life, as S. Augustine writing to Simplician says, liberum arbitrium
plurimum valet; imo vere qu idem: sed in venundatis sub peccato quid valet?

And in a few lines after, the same Father says, Praecipitur ut recte vivamus;
sed quis potest recte vivere nisi justificatus ex fide? You see, this holy man
did not conceive as some do at this day, that it is a horrible thing to affirm
that Freewill is not sufficient to bring us to salvation; he is so far from it,
that he wholly condemns Free Will without Grace in reference to merit and
justification, as plainly appears throughout all his works. Let us likewise
forsake that fleshly Presumption, which makes it strange that our Salvation is
not in the power of our own Free Will; because those are happy whose salvation
is in the Hands of God, and they most unhappy who depend upon themselves: This
is what S. Paul teaches us from that passage in the 33d. chapter of Exodus, I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will
show mercy. Wherefore it is not of him that wills or of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. Yet must it not be said that the Apostle in this
place denies and impugnes the cooperation of our Will; but he referrs all the
glory to God who powerfully sollicites and invites the wills of those that
believe. Whence it is that he complains by the Prophet of that hardened people
which would not obey the voice of God who called them and desired to draw them
to himself and gather them under his wings, as a Hen gathers her Chickens.
It Is true, that as no other cause can be given of Predestination and Reprobation
but God's will guided by his ineffable justice, as S. Augustine speaks; so it is
our faults and iniquities which are the cause of our damnation; and this is
what the Scripture says in those words, Thy destruction is from thy self, O
Israel, but thy salvation is of me.

You understand all that I have written to confirm the first Proposition
whereat you took scandal, That the Predestined cannot be damned, nor the
Reprobate saved: and I could not do it better then by the word of God which
divides the spirit from the soul. But to the end that you and every one else
may be assured that I have cited the Holy Scriptures faithfully, I shall
hereunto add the sentiment of S. Augustine that pillar of the Church, taken out
of Sundry places of his works concerning this matter. And in the first place to
let you see that it is his opinion that the Predestined cannot be damned, nor
the Reprobate saved, see what he says in the Third Tome, in his book De fide
ad Petrum, cap. 25. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites omnes quos vasa
misericordiae gratuita* bonitate Deus fecit, ante mundi constitutionem in
adoptionem filiorum Dei praedestinatos a Deo; neque perire posse aliquem eorum
quos Deus praedestinavit ad regnum caelorum, nec quemquam eorum quos non
praedestinavit ad vitam, ulla posse ratione salvari: Praedestinatio illa
gratuita donationis est praeparatio qua nos Apostolus ait praedestinatos in
adoptionem filiorum Dei per Jesum Christum in ipsum. See now whether this H.
Doctor did not understand the above cited passage of the Epist. to the
Ephesians as I do, and confess that what is contained therein is not the
imagination of any man, but a truth dictated by the H. Ghost. Therefore the H.
Doctor does not hesitate in the matter, but says, Firmissime tene. He
confirms the same thing in his commentary upon the 69. Psalm, at the 28.
verse where it said, Let them be blotted out of the book of the living. And in
another place, writting against Julian, he has these express words Absit enim
ut praedestinatus ad vitam sine s^cramento Mediatoris finire permittatur hanc
vitam. And to conclude, let the 106. Epistle ad Paulinum Episcopum be read, and
according to the Maxims contained in those writings, it will appear what is to
be believed concerning those who belong to eternal life, and those who do not:
because by the authority of this great Saint, to whom the Church is infinitely
obliged, every one will bring the most attentive ears and eyes to read and
contemplate the verityes of the Holy Scriptures, by humbling himself and
praying God to discover to him the sense of the Scriptures. Wherefore since
the goodness of God has manifested to us in the Church so many ways the
predestination of the Elect, and the Holy Doctors and Preachers, amongst the
rest S. Augustine that great light and powerful mawl of heretics, having
always acknowledged it, I cannot but affirm with them that it ought to be
taught and preached in the Church: yet it must be spoken of with wisdom, to the
end it may be understood without Scandal and embraced; because we may
contemplate therein as in a living mirror, and understand and penetrate by
faith the high counsels of God, and what he resolved from all eternity
concerning his Son and his Members, both as to remission of sins and
preparation of glory for his Elect. By this means the spirit of Satan can
never draw a consequence as impious as false, which was heretofore broacht in
the Church by some corrupt members who separated from it, and is again revived
at this time: If God, say they, has Predestined some and Reprobated others,
it will undoubtedly come to pass that the former shall be saved and the others
damned. Whence they conclude, that whether they do good or evil, their
salvation and damnation will come to pass by necessity: and they make use of
these arguments for a liberty of continual sinning, since God, say they, has
already determined either to save or to damn them; and so they voluntarily give
themselves up to be abused by the Devil who transformes himself into an Angel
of light, that they may extinguish that word and seed by which he must be at
length overcome and wholly destroyed. Yet these wretches perceive not that if
God has manifested for his Church the great mystery of Predestination which
was hidden from ages passed, they ought rather to strive to make the holy
calling of God sure by his mercy and the means of good works, then to show by
their bad, that they are sons of the Devil, since if natural light teach us
that we never ought to offend such a friend as out of charity would, to recover
our earthly liberty, readily put himself into our place, and bestow his money
to repair our misfortunes; how can the uncreated light of the Holy Spirit but
teach us that being the Son of God died for the Elect, and says they cannot
perish, it is not lawful to commit evil wilfully by offending a friend so full
of goodness, and a brother so affectionate, upon an impious opinion concerning
Predestination; and like the perfidious Jews to crucify the Blessed Jesus for
our damnation instead of being crucified with him for our salvation! The
faithful Christian must never make profession of being a sinner, but he ought
to acknowledge before God and men that he is a miserable sinner, and with
continual repentance amend his bad life and reform his sins, because being
become a child of God by regeneration, he must never enter into the works of
the servants of sin; for he that commits sin is the servant thereof; and if it
happen that he fall sometimes, he must rise again with more vigor, and thus
every moment become a greater and more irreconcilable enemy to sin. As we see
in the world, a Child of great quality never betakes himself to the servile
offices in his Fathers house which belong only to the lowest vassals, and if
it sometimes happens that he put his hand thereunto, he presently draws it
away again because he understands what ignominy and damage would ensue to him
in case he should consume his life therein.

I am come to the conclusion of what I had to say to you concerning these
things, of which should I go about to speak as much as their dignity requires,
great labor and study would not be sufficient: I mean, to exercise one's self,
and not to manifest the truth, which is comprised in few words, because the
Lord has made a short work upon the earth. It Is sufficient to children that
the eternal Father discover his will to them by the least sign, because they
embrace it presently without many proofs; and to the end it may be preserved
in them, he has not left a more effectual pledge then that of his H. Spirit,
whom I most humbly beseech to dispel the darkness of our ignorance, and fill
the Elect with divine light, for which we are bound always to render infinite
thanks. This is all I have to say to to you. The Lord God comfort you.

From Venice the 17th. of April. 1549. John Patriarch of Aquileia.

The Apology of the most Illustrious Patriach of AQILEIA for the Letter
Preceding.
I. PROPOSITION.
He has preserved the seed of his Grace, to the end we should not remain
unfruitful; he has preserved the H. Spirit for our consolation against errors
and the enemies of grace.
ANSWER.
The name of the H. Spirit sent by the Father and the Son (who is the fountain
of truth, and in whom I have written those things which are written in my
little Tract of predestination) being first called upon, I explain the first
Proposition extracted out of the said Tract, and term these enemies of Grace,
who of what quality and condition soever they be, disparage and despise that
free gift of God, perverting the holy things of God to the desires of the
flesh; whom S. Augustine frequently impugnes, and whom I thought fit to
encounter in that Discourse. Moreover I call such the enemies of Grace, who I
hear write and teach that salvation can accrue to those whom God has not
predestined. And lastly, I term enemies of Grace not only the Pelagians who
live amongst us at this day, but also those who are gone, and whom S. Cyprian,
according to S. Augustin's testimony, overcame and routed long before they
sprung up.

II. PROPOSITION.
Predestination is of God only, both because the Scripture affirms the same,
and S. Paul teaches as much manifestly in this and diverse other places, as
because it depends not upon natural principles, being wholly divine and
spiritual, and depending only upon the free promise which God has made to us.
ANSWER.
Predestination is from God alone, because nothing has preceded in Eternity
God's will predestinating and reprobating. Therefore no efficient cause of it
can be assigned besides the divine Will. It is written in the 9 h. chapter to
the Romans, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Which place I understand
in the same sense as S. Augustine, S. Thomas and the Master of the sentences
understood it. And predestination is here taken absolutely, not for it effects;
neither is Free Will therefore destroyed but operates in its time and place
freely, meritoriously and without coaction, as I speak clearly concerning the
same in my said VVriting, so far as the scantnesse of the time permitted. Nor
do I deny that the goodness of God, who has purposed to show mercy or not to
show mercy, as I have noted in my Tract, is the cause why God predestinates or
reprobates. And lastly I do not reject the use of Free Will which serves to the
obtaining of sanctifying grace, when God gives the same to the predestinate, to
the end that using it well he may merit glory.

Which being so, it may be truly said that predestination depends only upon
the promises which God has made to us. Nor will there be any contradiction in
this, although predestination should be taken here for its effects which draw
their original and their force from the merits of Jesus Christ, which grace
conferres upon us in consequence of the Promises made to those that believe in
him. What I say concerning the promises, we learn out of the 11th. and 36th.
chapter of Ezekiel, the 32d. of Jeremiah and many places of S Paul's Epistles:
and S. Peter teaches us that all things which appertain to life and godliness
are promised and given us by the almighty power of God; so that good works
themselves are part of the promises which God has made to us. I will give you
an heart of flesh (says the Prophet) and will take away the heart of stone,
and will cause you to do, etc.

He has given us a strong assurance of his promises. God is become our debtor
because he has pleased to make his promise to us. We have therefore in the H.
Scripture a most ample witness of the Divine promises. Yet do not these
promises destroy Free Will or hinder from concurring meritoriously to good
works. S. Augustine in the third Treatise upon S. John is of this opinion; That
life Eternal is given us only by grace: which would be false, if S.
Augustine's words were not considered with reference to the original of this
life, because they would take away meritorious works. And S. Paul, Life Eternal
is a grace of God, and grace for grace. Which place he understands and
expounds, as the grace which God has done us in Electing us to eternal life,
being the cause of the grace which he does us in giving us good works which may
merit the same. This opinion therefore does not exclude Free Will, which, as I
said before, is established in my Treatise, much less good works, but rather
includes and requires above all things both Free Will and good Works.

III. PROPOSITION.
Speaking of the Reprobate, that he cannot be saved because he is the Son of
perdition, as our Savior says. The Son cannot disclaim the nature which he
has received from his Father; and therefore Jesus Christ says, Ye are of your
father the Devil, because ye do his works; and these are properly they whom God
never beholds in Jesus Christ with an eye of mercy.
ANSWER.
Our Savior call's the perfidious and obstinate, sons of perdition, all that
time the Jews were murderers and persecutors of the truth. Which place I
alluded to, and called them sons of perdition because our Savior so termed
them; Ye are of your father the Devil, because ye do his works. I say the same,
and no more. But they who are not destinated simply and properly to eternal
life, nor written in the book of life, although they may appear to be the
Children of God, nevertheless they are the Children of the Devil, by imitation
and not by substance, as S. Augustine speaks. This I said in reference to their
last end of damnation and final impenitence which God foreknows, and always
foreknew most certainly. I said that God never looks upon them with the eye of
his mercy though a most just and incomprehensible judgment; as I said it was
in Judas, whom Pope S. Leo in his Sermon of the Lords passion calls an
inconvertible man, (that is, one who could not be converted.) This is the scope
at which my words refer, and not to certain intermediate things, not to the
justification of the present life in which they may be for some time, and
during which God sundry times beholds Judas and other reprobates with his eye
of mercy, namely when they do well and are upright.

IV. PROPOSITION.
God does not elect us, only to relinquish and leave us in the hand of our own
Counsels, because he well knows into what condition we would soon b^ing our
selves; but in consequence of his election he makes appear in due time all the
gifts which were comprehended in his Election.
ANSWER.
If I knew sufficiently where the doubt concerning this fourth Proposition
lies, perhaps I should better explain my mind. My intention was to say, that
God bestows many gifts upon the Elect who by peculiar love are under the divine
care, as is seen by the following words where I say that God prepares a right
or good will for us according to the testimony of the Apostle, It Is God that
works in us to will and to do; and the rest which follows, to which I refer.
Therefore God does not leave his Elect destitute without Grace, nor in the hand
of their own counsels. Nor do I design hereby to contradict the saying of the
VVise-man in any wise, (for it would be ridiculous so to do) Deum reliquisse
hom^nem in manu consiliorum suorum. But all that I intended to signify by it,
is, that God leaves not Free Will in his Elect without assisting it by his
Grace, and that it being assisted thereby, happily performs all the things
which are enumerated in my Treatise. S. Augustine patronizes this opinion in
abundance of places. And I desire the Reader not to believe that I here make
Free Will to be necessitated or compelled; for this would be an injury to
truth. In the same Treatise I dispute against such as follow the false lights
of a perverse spirit and reason in the model which they form to themselves of
the holy gift of predestination; whilst through negligence and malice they
refer the greatest liberty of Free Will assisted by God to a shameful and
damnable necessity contrary to the express doctrine of all the Doctors, and
principally of S. Augustine, which Father is the most terrible to those kind of
people. Wherefore I conclude with the truth received in the Church and with
the authority of the same S. Augustine, That predestination does not take away
Free Will but rather establish it; as I have said expressly in my Treatise, to
which I refer the Reader.

V. PROPOSITION.
And in like manner cannot prevail against the structure built with living
stones which is the H. Church and the determinate number of the Elect.
ANSWER.
In this Proposition those things which precede and follow in my Treatise, must
be considered, because otherwise naked and mutilated clauses beget obscurity.
In confirmation of Predestination and its strength, I cited the divine
authority of S. Paul to the Ephesians, where that instrument of the H. Ghost
lays open all the benefits which God has prepared for the Predestinate. His
words are clear, and gave me occasion to say (as I did) that Satan cannot
prevail against the structure built with living stones, which Edifice is the
H. Church and the determinate number of the Elect. And what I said herein is
grounded upon the Parable taken out of the mouth of Truth it self. Who knows
not (as S. Paul says) that the Devil has no power against God's Elect?
Nevertheless it is not to be denied that the Devil sometimes prevails against
the Elect; for indeed he often prevails through their negligence and
corruption. But what is this to my expression which has reference to that
oracle of S. John, chapter 10. My sheep shall never perish; My Father which
gave them me is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my
hand: Therefore, against these Predestinate, who are the Subject of my
Treatise, I said Satan cannot prevail in that manner which our Savior and
other holy and Catholic Authors understand; yet do I not therefore infer any
necessity or compulsion upon the Free Will, as if it acted no more then a piece
of wood or a stone. I only touched this matter by the way, and could not speak
more largely off it in so little time; which was the cause that speaking of
this Edifice built with living stones, I called it the Church and the
determinate number of the Elect, yet not excluding the Universal Church, (which
would have been the discouse of an extravagant and senseless person denying the
clearness of divine light) since we are obliged to acknowledge and believe
firmly the H. Catholic Church diffused throughout the whole world under one
Head in Heaven, Jesus Christ (as S. Paul says) and under his lawful Vicar,
who is another Head on the Earth of the same Universal Church. But I thus
termed the H. Church, the structure built with living stones, because it may be
so called, although this Church be invisible; since S. Augustine calls it so in
the fifth book against the Donatists, and S. Bernard upon the Canticles, chap.
23. and 68. The Elect are gathered into this Church by faith, charity, and the
Sacraments, as in the visible and militant Church the Elect and the other
Faithful are united by the same bonds; and although some of them depart from
charity, yet if they fall not from the Catholic faith, they cease not to be
and to remain in the same Church.

VI. PROPOSITION.
And to enable us to do it, he has left his H. Spirit in the Church, which
with a secreet but powerful fire burns up what ever it finds impure and
superfluous, and more and more enflames the hearts of his Elect with holy and
chaste desires, so that they become most purified when they are cleansed from
the pollutions of this world.
ANSWER.
I proceeded in declaring the blessings and favors of God upon the Elect,
since the H. Spirit is given to them for the purging away of their sins, and
inflaming their minds with pure thoughts, which are the source of the good
works which flow forth to the sanctifying of God, so that they become most
purified. Which truth is not to be understood of all the Predestinate: but we
must believe that this is effected in some who may become most pure according
to the state of the present life, and may advance happily from virtue to
virtue, as S. Paul notes in his Epistles. S. Augustine uses the same word in
his first book de Trinitate when he says that the most purified minds
[purgatissimae mentes] are able to behold the Supreme Good. I say most
purified as to the affections of the will, and not only as to the thoughts of
the mind [quantum ad affectum, non selum ad intellectum] as S. Bonaventure
expounds it. But to conclude how I might say this, S. Thomas must be consulted
in scripto quarto super quartum sententiarum, where he speaks of Purgatory, and
explaines what it is to build upon the foundation wood and stubble; he that
compares the works of the perfect with those of the imperfect, and says that
venial sins are burned by the favor of charity, and that we must not say that
these sins are the wood and stubble built upon the foundation, because they
remain not habitually in them; adding that they are secure, and their remains
nothing to be purged in them. Now this my opinion does injury to no body,
because it is delivered with a condition, and comprehends not all the Elect, as
appears manifestly by the sequel and explication of the word; and should it
comprehend them all (though I have not affirmed so) what hinders but that I may
say that the Elect may become most purified, in the same sense that S. Paul
says there remains no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, and
when he requires of a man who would be a perfect Christian to put off the old
man with all its lusts?

VII. PROPOSITION.
These are Consequences drawn by those who will not give God the honor which
is due to him, or those who would divide what belongs to Christ alone, and know
not the abundance of his mercy which has been exhibited to us in the death of
Jesus Christ, who willing to show us the misery of our desperate bondage, has
showed in himself what is the true liberty of his Children, and taught it with
his own mouth when he says, If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed.
ANSWER.
I had before rejected the false Consequences which they attribute to Divine
Predestination; because things of the greatest truth may be perverted by such
Consequences. But now to detest the pride of men who extolling the strength of
nature more then they ought, pretend to do good works without the assistance of
grace; I speak against those who knowing not what they are without grace,
render not to God all the thanks which they ought. Now it is to God alone that
glory is to be ascribed, because the universal Church sings thus after S. Paul,
To God alone the immortal and invisible King be honor and glory. But to
understand how I spoke this, there is no more necessary, but to consider the
following words in my treatise, where I cite the H. Gospel, If the Son make you
free, you shall be free indeed. I say once again that it is to God alone that
glory ought to be given, nor can any place of Scripture be found wherein this
wholesome confession does not shine. The books of the Prophets are full of it,
and the whole Scripture teaches us nothing else. Moreover from this holy and
true acknowledgement all blessings arrive to us: the soul falls to reform it
self when it humbly considers and sincerely acknowledges before God it own
poverty and nakedness without his divine assistance. Nor is any thing
derogated from men if they make use of Gods grace to act well and to merit, as
S. Augustine witnesses, who says that to believe and to work are both our act
and God's; ours in regard of the liberty of Free Will, and Gods by reason of
the spirit of Grace. The time would fail me, if I should speak (...) that might
be spoken in this matter. Wherefore (...) shall be contented with those few
things which I (...), and refer my self for the rest to what is to be found
in the H. Scripture and Catholic Authors for confirmation of this my opinion,
which is more then I am able to transcribe.

VIII. PROPOSITION.
It Is true that in the Reprobate Free Will is not available to the obtaining of
salvation, as S. Augustine confesses, writing to Simplician in this manner,
Liberum arbitrium plurimum valet; imo vere equidem; sed in venundatis sub
peccato quid valet? And a little after, Praecipitur ut recte vivamus; sed quis
potest recte vivere nisi justificatus ex fide? Consider here that this H. Man
did not think it so horrible a thing as it is thought it this day, to say that
Free Will is not sufficient to effect our salvation.

ANSWER.
Having spoken most advantageously of Free Will assisted by Grace, as may be
seen a little before, I added (according to S. August^n's Doctrine after
subjoined) that it is not availeable in such as are sold under sin. This Maxim
and the like are found dispersed everywhere in S. Augustin's works; and I
understand the same Catholickly, as he did, because Free Will without Grace is
absolutely unable to do any good or meritorious action. Without me ye can do
nothing, says the Truth; It Is God which works in you both to will and to do,
as was above cited. Without preventing Grace we act no good, and without
justifying Grace we are not saved.

But to conclude, I affirm that in this Article I hold the same sense which the
H. Church my mother does, whose sentiment may be seen expressed in most
manifest words, in which she says and decrees in the second Council of Orange
chap. 6. 7. 13. and 14. And as in this Article, so in all I have and always
had the same judgment with the H. Church, (out of which I profess most
constantly there is no salvation to be hoped) to the praise of Almighty God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom as to the benefactor of all, and
particularly toward me, I most humbly submit my self. Likewise I submit humbly
and sincerely to our H. F. the Pope, and to the judgment of the Catholic
Church all that I have said in this short space of time, and in the vehemence
of my sorrow, having never had the least thought to recede from the sentiments
of the Church, which every one of her Children ought to hold in singular
respect and veneration. Blessed be God for ever and ever. Amen.

Ego Joannes Grimanus Patriarcha Aquiliensis superiorem propositionem ita
declaravi in nomine sanctissimae Trinitatis.

The Supplicate of the Ambassador of FRIULI sent to the most Serene Republic
of Venice, about the affair of the most Reverend Patriarch GRIMANI.
Most serene Prince, and most Illustrious Seigneurie,
WE, the most faithful subjects and servants of your Serenitie, sent to you
by the Reverend Chapters of Aquileia and Oudenay, by the magnifick City of
Odenay, and by the magnifick Deputies of you Country of Friuli, do with truth
assure you that for diverse years our Country, our Clergy and our City have not
sent their Agents to the feet of your Serenity about a more urgent, necessary
and laudable affair then the present, in which the honor of God, and the peace
and tranquillity of their consciences being concerned, we have judged the
present conjuncture of affairs most favorable for communicating their
grievances and needs to your Serenity, to this most Christian Republic, to our
most gracious Prince. It Is a most advantageous means, most Serene Prince, to
show with how great ardour and concord we all desire to testify a perfect and
filial obedience and affection not only to your Serenity, but also to the
spiritual Heads and Pastors whom God has given us; as we now desire to
testify the same toward the person of the most Reverend Patriarch John
Grimani our most dear and beloved Father, which we shall do with piety and
justice, well understanding that it is the will of God not only that we pray to
his divine Majesty for the health and prosperity of our Pastors, that we hear
them and that we obey them, but also that we have such care of them as good
children ought to have of their Father, and perform this duty with so much the
more zeal as our spiritual parents ought to be dearer and more venerable to us
then our corporal. Wherefore it is reason that when our head languisheth, we
suffer together therewith, according to the Apostle's doctrine, who to confirm
unity in the Church of God, and to take away Schisms and Divisions, enjoynes
and commands all Churches to have this cate and solicitude which we who are
members of it ought to have one for another, and particularly for our Head.
Wherefore confirming to the will of God in the needs which press us, and in so
important an affair, we confidently address to the feet of your Serenity, and
hope to receive such comfort from you as is agreeable to your goodness, our
devotion and the necessity of our Country. We represent therefore most humbly
to your Serenity, that thirteen years ago M. Leonard of Oudenay our
Compatriote, of the Order of S. Dominick (a man of great note and esteem, and
looked upon as a most learned and Catholic Preacher, and who had passed through
all the honors and offices in his Order) preaching in the Church of Oudenay
spoke something, out of good intent concerning divine Prescience and
Predestination; and that the grand Vicar of that time acquainted the most
reverend Patriarch therewith, who according to the custom of the ancient
Fathers and Pastors sent for answer to the Vicar and the Church, a Homily
concerning that Subject; conceiving that he should thereby better satisfy and
confirm the mind of his Vicar and of all those who had heard the said
Preachers expressions about this matter. This Homily was published and
registered in the Chancery of your Serenity at the City of Oudenay, and soon
spread abroad every where: since that time till the present we perceived not
that this act of the most Reverend Patriarch caused the least alteration
amongst us, other then what we have lately understood and find to be very
considerable and of very great consequence. For the report which your Serenity
knows to be spread lately concerning this Homily, being apt to cast infamy upon
the most R. Patriarch, diminish or quite ruin his authority, overwhelme him
with affliction and sorrow, and also being capable to give scandal and
confusion to our consciences (which would be a deplorable mischief, and
therefore requires to be prevented;) this whole Province would have accounted
themselves worthy to be accused of disobedience and ingratitude, if in so long
oppression of the innocence of a Pastor and a Prelate so dear to them, we
should not give your Serenity and all the world certain proofs of our good will
and obligations, both in reference to the affliction which we resent for that
of my L. the Patriarch, and to a thing more important, to wit, the inevitable
desolation which would befall us, if we should suffer this scandal to continue
longer in so miserable a time when all things are full of tumult and confusion.
This has induced us to make this Remonstrance to you with the more
earnestness, for that we know that faithful people are obliged to love and
procure tranquillity and peace, especially at this time when bad examples
instigate us to do otherwise. But setting aside the affection which we bear to
the most R. Patriarch for his merits and virtues sufficiently known to you,
which certainly is very great, and for which we would do all things possible to
be done by the good children, we have resolved not to be deficient in what our
Lord commands us with his own mouth; The Scribes and Pharis^es sit in Moses
Cha^r, do what they say. Truth it self, most Serene Prince, tells as that we
ought to hear our Pastors because they are the Fathers and Masters of the
people. And it is for this reason that S. Paul says, Remember those that are
over you, who declare the word of God to you; obey your superiors and be
subject to them: for they watch as they who must give account of your souls,
that they may do it with joy and not with sorrow; for this is profitable for
you. These are the authorities of God, to which it is necessary that we obey:
and to the end we may do it with more success, it is necessary that your
Serenity, who are guardians of the Holy Laws, favor and assist us. May it
therefore please your Serenity, to interpose as you shall think fit, that we
may be given to understand with assurance and by Sovereign authority, what is
the doctrine of our Patriarch and Pastor in that Homily; because so long as this
is undecided, we remain in sadness and in a scandal of very great consequence,
being surrounded on every side with Provinces and Nations who suffer themselves
to be led into other sentiments then those prescribed by our Mother the H.
Catholic and Roman Church, from whom we shall never depart, acknowledging it a
particular benefit of God's goodness that the Provinces and places subject to
the Patriarchal Superintendecy, and the most happy government of your Serenity,
are hitherto free from all the troubles which disturb the Church at this day.
If therefore the doctrine of the most Reverend Patriarch in this Homily be
good, let your Serenity consider how much we are obliged, and how greatly
charity ought to inflame our hearts, to procure (for the love we bear him) his
peace and tranquillity, and preservation of his honor and reputation, (all
which are things from which we may hope all sort of advantage, as without which
we must expect to be deprived of all spiritual consolation.) Your Serenity sees
that all these honest and equitable considerations have caused the Clergy, City
and all our happy Country account themselves obliged to do the same office
toward our Pastor, which we read to have been heretofore done by most devou^
nations toward theirs in the persecutions of Liberius Bishop of Rome, S.
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, and
many others, when the devotion of the people excited by the Holy Ghost
manifested their piety and affection toward their Pastors. We desire to
imitate them in their good actions, so much the more now the time presses us,
and we can no longer dessemble: because, most Serene Prince, if the Patriarch
be found innocent as he is esteemed by general consent, we discharge our duty
in the resentment which we testify of his affliction, so it is requisite we do
justice to our selves, in case his doctrine in the said Homily be worthy of
reprehension and condemnation: for so long as we remain in suspense concerning
the same, and the discussion of so important an affair is deferred, we cannot
but be always in danger of being deceived. Wherefore to prevent so great
mischiefs, and to procure perfect satisfaction to our minds, all the abovesayd
persons of your most faithful Province have with common consent sent us to
your Serenity, to the end that by the blessing of God and the intervention of
your authority, we may obtain the effect of our just demands and suffer no
evil, having committed no fault. Wherefore we most humbly beseech your
Serenity and this most happy and most Christian Republic, that seeing the
affair, time, occasion and all things permit, you will vouchsafe to write to
your most excellent Ambassadors renssiding at the Council of Trent assembled by
authority of the Sovereign Pontif, and the Holy Ghost, that they with diligence
and Christian benevolence make instance to those H. Fathers chosen out of the
most faithful and learned of all Christendom, to obtain of them, that after
they shall have considered with the eyes of Justice the words of my L. the most
R. Patriarch in the said Homily, they declare whether the same be conformable
to the sound doctrine of the H. Fathers of the Catholic Church; to the end
that by an assured and solid declaration of the H. Council we may quiet our
consciences, which cannot but be in agitation and trouble so long as our
irresolution therein shall continue. We hope this Remonstrance by which we are
so much obliged to you, will be very well pleasing to our H. F. Pope Pius 4 as
a Father full of prudence and goodness, who will be most joyful to see so holy
a conspiration in a whole Province affectionate to its Pastor; that he will
acknowledge that this affection as well as this demand being a pure instinct of
the H. Spirit (whose first Minister his Holiness is) will be worthy of his
approbation and good will; and lastly he will find consolation in understanding
the firm resolution which we have to live under the protection and true
discipline of the H. Roman Church our mother: Which thing we plainly and
faithfully manifest by our Zeal to render to our Pastor the honor and respect
which we owe to him. By this means we keep far from that Pest which uses to
give the sad beginning to unhappy heresies, when inferiors (as the B. Martyr S.
Cyprian testifies) obstinately and contemptuously withdraw themselves from the
Charity and obedience which they owe to their Superiors. And being thus stirred
up with pastoral care, he will be also glad to instruct us by his Authority and
that of the H. Council, in what manner we are to demean our selves in these
miserable times toward the most R. Patriarch. We have the more hope that he
will do this, because we speak of the Patriarchal See of Aquileia which the
Sovereign Pontifs his H. Predecessors style the first after the Sea of Rome. He
will not therefore suffer a member so important, so considerable and so near
himself to remain injured by the malignity of the times, if this member be
found alive and innocent; since were it languid or infirm, he would not fail
to comfort, heal and recover it, as God commands him by his Prophet. To
conclude most Serene Prince, we have judged this way the most easy and
ordinary, and that which may put an happy end to our distresses and the many
mischiefs wherewith we are threatened. Because the Sovereign Pontifs, (as S.
Gregory that great Pope oftentimes did) whose judgments are inviolable Laws in
the Church to defend the innocence and estimation of good Prelates, or else to
condemn the scandalous who would live contrary to the H. rules, have from time
to time convok'd Councils by authority whereof they have maintained their
innocence and reputation of good Prelates and chastised the temerity of bad,
stopping the mouths of all the world. And if our H. Fathers have assembled
Councils to this end, the same thing will be done more easily without any
inconvenience to the Church, now the most general and perfect Council is
assembled that ever was since that of Nice. It being equitable both in regard
to the nature of the affair (which was not brought upon the stage at this time
without some mystery) and in consideration of the interests of your Serenity,
and lastly in respect of the particulat qualities of the most R. Patriarch and
his family, that his cause be examined and terminated by the judgment and
authority of our H. Father and the H. Council. Which if it be not done in this
favorable occasion, former examples tell us that we must look to remain (to
our damage) in a perpetual and pernicious irresolution worthy of compassion in
it self, and of the H. Council's favor; to which in Case of need we are
willing to repair in order to manifest our faith, our charity and our
necessity, and that of our whole Province; and we hope to find there, by the
help of your Sublimity, all the favor and assistane which shall be needful to
so just and honest a cause as ours. As for our selves, most Serene Prince,
being we have performed this duty with the utmost integrity, and with singular
belief and firm hope that God will from above bless our endeavors, we
beseech you to accept of our Zeal and humility, and to favor our humble
requests (which imply nothing but affection and respect to the most R.
Patriarch our Pastor and well beloved Father) with the same judgment and
Charity wherewith your Serenety has continually and unanimously cherished him
and declared him worthy of all favor and of the greatest dignities: which you
will the rather do because we imitate our Prince in our good desires and
laudable intentions whilst we embrace what you have first solemnly approved by
your most grave and wise judgment. We have no intent in all this to defend the
cause of our Patriarch, which is known to you and all the world, as if it
needed our defense. We agree with what S. Augustine says, that the best cause
is that which is approved without needing to be defended; and that the best
established justice is that which is not supported by words but by the strength
of Truth. Nor do we aim to deliver him from oppression; this belongs to God,
and to Princes, whom he has particularly commanded to deliver the oppressed.
But the only scope of all this discourse and writing is to render an eternal
testimony of our respect to your Serenity, besides all that has been spoken
more amply and prudently by our Colleague. After which we have no more to do but
to recommend our Pastor, our Country, the safety of it people and our selves to
the Clemency of your Serenity, whom we pray God to preserve in perpetual
felicity.

The last day of July MDLXIII. The most Illustrious and Reverend Legates and
Presidents of the Sacred Council of Trent have by Apostolical authority chosen
the Fathers under written to deliberate with them concerning the abovesaid
Letters and Apology, namely whether the same be heretical or supected of
heresy, or so explicated scandalous; to the end they may give their judgments
thereof. The most illustrious Cardinal the Cardinal of Loraine and Cardinal
Madrutio. The most illustrious Ambassadors, the Archbishop of Prague, The
Bishop of Five-Kirke, the Bishop of Primistelot, and the Bishop of Auxbourg.
The Archbishops of Granada, Brague and Rege. The Bishops of Eureux, Sees,
Conimbra, Segovia, Modena, Livia, Arras, Campagna, Theano, Ipre, Namur, Leon,
Tortosa. The Abots of Clacivaux, Auxbourg. The General of the Augustines.
All which Fathers diligently examined the said Letters and Apology, and gave
their opinions thereof.

The Sentence of the most Illustrious Cardinal of Lorraine, touching the
abovesaid Letter, given to the most illustrious and Reverend Legates of the
Council.
I Have read the Letter of M. John Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia dated the
17th. of April 1549. to his Vicar of Oudenay in the Church of Oudenay, and his
Answers touching certain Propositions extracted out of the same Leter, which
your most illustrious and Reverend Lordships caused to be delivered to me in
your own presence by the Notary of the Council. And having first invoked the
name of Jesus Christ, and taken the Counsel of some very learned persons,
French Divines, and particularly of those whom the most Christian King sent to
this H. Council, to the end that might be assisted and helped by their learning
in so weigh y a cause; And having after hearing them diligently examined the
Writtings of the said Patriarch, I declare that I have found nothing in the
above mentioned Letter which is heretical, erroneous, or scandalous, or
suspected of heresy or error: That if some thing of obscu ity be found therein
which may give suspicion to such as are not sufficiently skilled in these
matters; the same may be all cleared and resolved by reading the answer of the
said Patriarch, as accordingly I conceive it cleared and resolved. Wherefore I
judge the said Patriarch free from all suspicion of heresy, error, or scandal.

The same Cardinals Letter to the Pope.
Most H. Father.
I Was lately called by M. M. the Prelates with twenty five most learned and
grave Fathers chosen out of all Nations to be present at the judgment of the
Patriarch of Aquileia concerning the accusation charged upon him touching
matter of faith, upon occasion of a certain letter which he writ to his Vicar
of Oudenay. Although the Question were very difficult, yet after a diligent
examination made thereof, it was found to be clear not only of heresy, error,
or scandal, but also of suspicion; and consequently the most R. Grimani was
adjudg'd innocent by general consent and without the contrary sentence of any
person. I have thought sit to write to Y. H. and give you an account of this
affair, according as I am obliged, to the end you may aquiesce in the
sentiments of these most learned and holy Fathers. Wherefore, I beseech Y. H.
to receive this Prelate, who has been found innocent, into your good grace,
and to give this satisfaction to the most Serene Republic of Venice, which
has been always so devoted to the service of Y. H. and the H. See, that since
it sees him absolved, it may also see him promoted to the Cardinalship by the
justice, liberality and favor of Y. H. Assuredly Y. H. will herein do a thing
worthy of eternal esteem, and highly oblige the Venetians, to whom being, as I
am, beholding in many respects, I shall account my self to have a particular
share in this benefit, if Y. H. pleases to add it to the many others which I
have received from you. I beseech Y. H. if I continue to be troublesome to you
by the length of this letter, The goodness of Y. H. toward all the world, and
your singular good will toward my self, and your last letters of the 7th of
August so full of paternal kindness to me, are the cause of it. In fine, I
conceived my self obliged thereunto by my great respect to Y. H. my affection
to your service, and in the inviolable fidelity which I have vowed and shall
ever keep to you.

Given at Trent.
The Letter of the most illustrius Legates to Card. BONOMEO.
Most illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THE Bishop of Tortosa (who is one of the Commissioners for the affair of the
Patriarch) being to go to Milan, to see the Duke of Sesse his Nephew, the
Ambassadors of Venice made their solicitations that the abovesaid Commissioners
might give their report and declare their judgment thereof before his
departure. Wherefore to satisfy these Ambassadors we were obliged to put off
the general Congregation yesterday in the afternoon, to dispatch this
particular one which lasted from one a clock till night. The Commissioners
whose names we send your most Illustrious and reverend Lordships were all
there, except the Ambassador of Poland, who was indisposed in the Country, and
they all gave their suffrages one after another according to their precedence.
All the sentences were uniforme, that in the Patriarch's letter there was not
one heretical word, nor any which might not be found in S. Augustine, S.
Prosper, S. Bernard, S Thomas, and other H. D. Whereupon they all concluded
that he ought to be acquitted of the calumny raised against him; adding
further, that it was not only their own judgment but also that of all the
Divines of their nations with whom they said they had diligently consulted upon
the whole matter. Nevertheless the Archbishop of Granada and the Bishop of
Segovia appeared a little reserved, saying they had not considered the cause
according to their desire; but so far as they had considered it then, they
judged that the Patriarch was to be absolved, with reservation to give a more
manifest declaration another time of what they thought of it, and desiring
first to see the sentences which were sent to Rome, which were accordingly
given them. Some also said that the author of the letter seemed little versed
in the Scholastic way, but that nevertheless he so fully cleared things in the
Apology, that there remained no scruple; when they had all ended giving their
sentences, we desired them to give us the substance of the same compendiously
in writing to the end we might consider them and frame our judgment to which
they all agreed. Your most illustrious Lordship sees now in what posture the
Patriarch's affair stands, and may give notice thereof to our H. Father. The
present being to no other end, we kiss your hands and humbly recommend our
selves to your Lordship. From Trent the 14. of August. MDLXIII.

Your most illustrious and most Reverend Lordships most humble servants,
Cardinal Moronius. Stanislaus Card. of Worms. Cardinal Simonetta. Cardinal
Navagero.


The sentence passed upon the above mentioned Letter by the most Illustrious
Legates of the Council of TRENT, under Pope PIUS 4. the 18th. of September
MDLXIII.
HAving invoked the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and having only God before
our eyes, with the advice and consent of other persons learned in Divinity, we
judge, attest and pronounce that the abovesaid Letter of the abovesaid most
Reverend M. John Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia joined with his Apology, is
neither heretical nor suspected of heresy, nor scandalously expressed. And
nevertheless that it is not fit to divulge the same, by reason of certain
difficult things which are handled and explicated exactly enough therein. We
affirm, declare, pronounce and sentence thus in the best form, etc.

The Letter of the most Illustrious Seigneurie of Venice to the most Reverend
Patriarch of Aquileia.
Most Reverend Father in Jesus Christ,
IT would be hard for us to express with what comfort and contentment we have
understood the just and honorable conclusion of which the affair of your most R
L. has had in the Sacred General Council with the universal consent of all
those holy and learned Fathers, and in presence of all the Ambassadors of the
Princes of Christendom. But you may well conceive the same by the Singular
affection which we have always born to you, and by the desire as well as the
firm and just hope which we have had that your innocence would be thus
acknowledged and manifest to all the world. Wherefore we extremely rejoice
with you both for your particular interest, and chiefly for our own, Your most
Reverend Lordship being not only born a Gentleman of our Republic, but of a
family so honorable and to which we have so many obligations. And being this
so high and so honorable and so sovereign Assembly has favored with its
praises not only the judgment but also the testimony which we gave to the
Pope, and where else it was needful, of your most Reverend Lordship, as knowing
very well the virtuous, religious and Catholic life which you have always
led, we have all grounds to desire and hope (as we shall do with all sort of
affection and reason) that God who is the fountain of justice and of all good,
having been pleased that the calumnies unjustly made against you, are
surmounted by the truth, you will also surmount the Obstacle which had been
laid against your most Reverend Lordship to the publication of that dignity
which the honorable qualityes of your person, virtue, piety and integrity have
caused you to merit and obtain. Given in our Ducal Palace the 29th. of
September, MDLXIII.

GRIOLAMO PRIVLI by the grace of God Duke of VENICE.
And on the backside it was inscribed, To the most Reverend Father in God, M.
John Grimani by the grace of God most worthy Patriarch of Aquileia.
FINIS.

