GOOD-ALE MONOPOLIZED, AND THE Tapsters persecuted: OR Justice, right, or wrong.
Printed by Rob. Goodfellow a bout Midsummer Moon. 1654.
WHen it shall be wisely considered, that we, of this most reverend City, are
become so notorious for asserting, and (in dismal wise) wrestling for that
dear liberty which our Ancestors (as they say) left us; and for defense of
which, we have had the honor to see (amongst other learned pates) the
pericranium of honest Legislative-Iohn so perturbed, and his more costly
vitalls dangerously hazarded: and that we are at length mounted to the
uppermost round of the ladder, to enjoy and entaile which preferment with a
succeeding plenitude of that inestimable Jewel hight as aforesaid. We cannot
but agree it most necessary to recommend to the next Election for preservation
thereof, a most worshipful person (amidst many others we might also propose)
whose modesty we believe is such, that he will not allow himself to be named
amongst the thousands of Israel. We shall therefore take the boldness to hang
him forth in effigy, with an inscription of his perfections, sufficient (no
doubt) to endeare him to the well-affected, and by which also you may (without
spectacles) discover his Worships face.

Be it therefore known unto, and understood by all manner of Brethren and
Sisters, that the person intended was a very fine and hopeful Gent. certainly,
when in his minority he thought it not inconsistent with his greatness (his
Father being born before him) to humble himself that he might be exalted, by
giving his pretty assistance to the grand Solemnities done in those innocent
days to his politic mother the place of his nativity: Daigning therefore to
ride or be carried (the terms in this case are convertible) in ludo
spectaculo, where yet the There are no other words to be found in Rider for a
Pageant.
Reader ought to be admonished, that our yonkers garb and countenance for the
time being was so apposite, and every little circumstance so contrived by the
Tailor and the Poet, as if it had been purposed for his glory. With what honor
and acclamations our stripling came off when the show was done, some Readers
may be presumed to remember better. However, with half an eye, might be seen
hereby, that our Lad was a spark of metal.

Well, Time (as says a modern Poet) that does all things, that makes botches
Pox, and plodding on does make a Calf an Ox, makes our Wight at length a
Soldier; Durante quo, to tell you by what exquisite hand his Buff Coat and red
Breeches (not forgetting his Feather) were fashioned, and the price, were most
injuriously to detain the Reader: It may suffice, that the Bark of this Cinnamon
tree was more worth then his body. Therefore instead of a Chorus, be pleased we
pray to suppose our Captain (for such he now is) equipped as aforesaid on his
march (like Iehu) to a most horrible, terrible, bloody battle, to be pitched far
in the West, we wot not where.

But by the way, to give some signal testimony of his Chivalry, and of the
great hopes his friends and followers might erect upon so infant achievements,
a lucky occasion offered it self, as shall in time be told: It fell out that
upon a Tuesday, about six weeks after Kersmas, when the Gunpowder Papists were
(without doubt) at their profane devotion, our Captain, as having no regard
thereof, or indeed the fear of himself before his eyes; but being seduced by
reading those wicked books of Chivalry voluntarily (although without a Squire)
and like a second Don-Quixot, exposed himself to be most lamentably
blind-folded with a Hempen or Flaxen Napkin, at the discretion of two sage
Damsels clad in white, and being immediately armed Cape, with a dreadful weapon
in his hands eclipped a Flayl^, did most furiously encounter, assault, skirmish
with, charge, and recharge the valiant Chanticleere, all this while sneaking or
lurking in a hole, and not daring to show more then his fearful Head and comb
to this no less valiant Foe, whom yet at length our Captain (maugre all this
^^eight) in single combat, and undaunted, made to breath out his last; whence
all upon the place concluded, that this Fleshing would (if his Spirit took not
rust) make him (in time) prove most terrible, as indeed it appeared by the many
slain afterward upon the place by his single valor, the story whereof (if any
such were) has been already communicated to the world in a Chronicle called
Mercurius Civicus: And that the same Spirit of destruction, both of men, women,
and children, remains still in him, is so notorious, that at his Dinners and
Suppers he breaths out nothing but slaughters.

Well, home we bring him now (and so you must suppose him) laden with Pig honor
and renown, where after some competent time exhausted in bleating his own said
achievements, he again humbles himself, and betakes to the old What lack you?
where we ought to leave him for a while. By this time you are charitably to
believe, that by the zeal and noise of his best affected Neighbors (joined to
his worships no little uncouth stickling in the affair) the several parcels, in
time, amount (according to London measure) to an Alderman: But because an Ald.
and a worshipful Justice are necessary concomitants, we forbear to tell you
that he was such.

These acquisitions and additions render him furious with a witness, and now he
lays about him more like a Madman then formerly, and on both sides, without
aim, deals his blows, and who would think it? For though he never had the
benefit of his Clergy, yet it must be allowed good, that, as before his Sword,
so now the word shall justify these slaughters. By this time it is not safe to
say why so? All Is Gospel we hold forth, and who dare us oppose shall find the
might by which we rule and reign has power to send the sawey contradicting
prater (no matter for his sense or truth) to lie by the heels, full 70. miles
(far enough) hence, where eighteen months are spent, by Tom Tell-troth the
Delinquent, in coining Petitions, with variety of choice Titles to this piece
of Supremacy for pardon, that at length (in good time) his Honors ears are
bored, he humbles now himself, and let us the Prisoner out, who as willingly
returns, as if he had never tasted a Grape brought from Canaan.

Our Capt. is erst a Colonel, and in a happy hour (be it spoken) had a Call to
be of the late Contenvion, where for his time he struts, you may imagine how,
and danceth gracefuly, to the Tune of Preferment, studying to keep Time and his
standing; but not knowing, or forgetting that the best way to rise is to lie
down in a Bed of Humility; his Brethren ere long (conscious to themselves of a
sufficient unfitness to govern) resigned their, and his greatness into the
hands whence they derivce it.

And now we bring him home again (yet a Justice) full sad and pensive (as if
Planet-strucken) at the loss of his late borrowed Plumes: But being returned to
the place whence he came, and finding that his malevolent Stars were not (for
which he has since persecuted the Astrologers) so true to him, as to give him
warning of the danger attending his late mistaken compliance with the
ill-affected, and at that time too, being without any Revelations or Visions,
his only work was to retrieve (if possible) the favor so unhappily lost, and
to obtain for himself once more to sit upon the Cushions of the Elect. To which
purpose we must allow, that no part of Machiavel (within his capacity) was le^t
unread, unpractised: But when it was found that all his mimical cringing and
Courtship more chargeable put upon the Royal Issue, amounted not to the gaining
for his Honorable Worship a finger-room at the Helm, he betakes to new
resolutions, viz. to act the very Great Turk himself in little, that was, to
transubstantiate his petty Principality (although of no certain Tenure) into an
Eu^opian Republique, to be gubernated by such thirsty Laws, as must needs
render him to posterity famous, for the only Promulger, and (according to the
new Dialect) the most exquisite iH^ter and Holder forth of Monkish obsoleted
abstinence, and a nice Reformer of indifferencies. And now as says another
reverend Author, Shall dunghill dogs confront the Helicon? Or shall his act want
Chronicles, then Pistol lay thy head in Furies Lap.

In the first place (his Throne being erected in no ignoble part of his
dominions, yet) finding that his beard was not like to contract profit enough
for both Justice and Clerk (to whom he allows they say 10. l. yearly salary,
and takes account of the profits) with a rabble of Rascals in red scarlet, and
most dirty Night-caps that now attend his Train, and buzz about his worship
with equal devotion to a sort of filthy Flies that are observed to do homage to
a Cowturd: The sad portent of this dismal and offended Comet had an immediate
and direful influence upon all the Red, Green, and Blue Latices, nay to the
very black pots and Cans within his Territories; and his zeal (hot as a burning
Pestle) is daily and prodigiously exhausted to the demolition, and to tall
extirpation (root and branch) of all the non-confiding (to advance the practice
of the Saintish) Tapsters of both Sexes, with all their wives, children, and
relations, unhappily inhabiting within the reach of his Talons, many of which
wretches are before this time either begging at others doors, or relieveable by
the slender charity of their several Parishes, on whom his Almightiness,
wisdom and Law too, has so great an influence, that an easy judgment may
guess their misery, when they are accounted by our Justice no less worthy of
destruction then Bell and the Dragon, and the great Whore, to whom all Nations
bow down and worship, and therefore fit, very wonderfully piously fit, to be
swept out by this B^^som of Reformation; this Physic, and disease of the place.

To tell the several executions of this sort, which his Worship is renowned
for, the several houses shut up, and L. have mercy written on their doors, by
reason of this pestilence, were an Herculean task, hic labor, etc. the stones
at his threshold having long groaned with the persecuted Petitioners tedious
and frequent attendance on this righteous Judge, to no other purpose then to be
undone, seem to be more mollifiable and malleable then his obdurate stomach,
although all the lenitives, with strength of arguments, not wanting a good
proportion of Divinity and morality, mixed and applied at all hou^es by the very
hands equal with him in power, have been carefully and daily administered. But
lest all this may seem a Romance, or a scandal to wound our Saint withal, take
a story or two for illustration.

They say (and we have it on good account) that a pretty black well trussed
musical Vintner, inhabiting South from the rays of this Blazing star, having
for good causes shut up that passage of his house that might give most offense,
was necessitated to entertain sometimes at the other door (and the change in
this case pleads antiquity) such friends as would come round about. Now he
possibly conceiving no great harm in pursuing the fashion, he (as others make
mixtures in Religion) only permitted, according to the advice given him, a cup
of English Ale to attend his Hippocrene: But the poor man was taken at it by
the fellow in Searlet, or he with the nasty nightcap aforesaid: The little Law
book is by our Justice searched, and the penalty in most barbarous manner
exacted. Another worshipful warrant is issued under band and broad seal, the
Constable (an enemy) employed in the execution. No respect to be given (so
says our Warrant) to Betty his wife, their six children, or any of them. The
darkest time of the night was fittest for this service. In short, Tom was haled
out of his bed, out of house, and the Center to which this line tended, was (we
must needs say) no worse a place then a Kings house, whither a knavish boy in
Paul's Churchyard sent 1. Iac. a fellow in a blew bonnet (inquiring the way)
thither, and was afterward kicked for his pains, because it proved to be a
goal called Bridewell. Thither, thither our merry Vintner is arrived, and
committed only for selling 2. penniworth of Ale or Bear for a penny, and
because his songs were not to the tune of Hannah's hymns, but thus says the
Law, and thus the great Executor thereof. Well, the malefactor is by the heels,
troubles all his friends to be Mediators, and offer sacrifice to the angry
Deity, pays 19. s. 6. d. (there is six pence saved) for Petitions contrived
with titles of the newest fashion to the offended. But the doom is past and
irrevocable, all intercessions are fruitless, for there was so much Wisdom in
the Sentence, that it might well be questioned if revoked. There our
wine-tapster is ordered to thrash h^mp, drink small beer, and sing (if he can)
till every minute of the month be out, for no other cause heard of then is
aforesaid and for that his wife was by ill luck some kin to the Justice.

The next in order was a very poor necessitous wretched old widow, who has
many small children, living South E. from the blazing star, having no other
visible way of subsistence for her self and them, but the sale to some of her
neighbors, and that but sometimes of a pot or two of Ale: to which employment
also she has been brought up, and has been licenced thereunto. There was not
any disorder or miscarriage laid to her charge: And who would not rather
imagine this poor soul an object of compassion, then a subject for so much
severity and so little justice. But see what a reckoning she is brought to.

Inprimis for selling a full quart of Ale for 2. d. 20. s. This was taxed and
levied by his Worship, borrowed and paid by the woman, though her whole estate
is not worth (in the judgment of charity) ten shillings. And was not, think
you, this 20. s. with many others, well distributed?

Item, For selling another pot of the same liquor called a default after
conviction) to be committed for a month to the house of correction, and her
children to be kept (in the mean time) by the Parish. This was also executed to
the full.

Item, For selling a flagon of Beer (to one of the Rascals aforesaid) for
three half pence, to be again sent to Bridewell, there to remain till the next
Quarter Sessions, where she now is this sixth day of the sixth month of the
first year of our Liberties aforesaid, beating hemp for her own poor
maintenance, and her said children are again disposed to the little mercy and
alms of the Parish. And this is the justice and judgment running down our
streets like a mighty river indeed.

To tell you how his Worships zeal was let slip against another poor woman for
only selling Porridge and Brewis to the Market people in Cheapside (we think
because they are liquid commodities) or to be particular in the cases of twice
40. within the territories and tortures of our Justice, reduced to most sad
conditions, even sequestered of their beings, were but to create an incredulity,
yet so it is.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratioze voluntas. No matter for their complaints
or their curses cast on the cause or on their stars, for designing them to live
near so much Law, and so little Justice. Nay, to add to their misery, none
dares relieve them for fear of some unheard of Law to commit them too for their
Charity.

With one story more we will take leave, and indeed leave it to your judgments,
whether so many yards of Zeal and Ignorance, with so much weight of Law and
Imperiousness, and so well mixed, are not a composition sufficient to qualify a
reasonable Gent. for a more proper employment, then a member: And because it is
very new, it shall be a Use of application.

In the road indeed to this worships Powdering-tub, there dwelt lately (and his
cottage stands there still) an honest (we dare not say good) fellow, and of the
sinful quality aforesaid, who in the minority of his understanding, was in have
blown up to a zelote, and swelled with so much mistaken choler, that taking the
Pulpit Alarm he handles his Arms, and like an especial Officer advances (in
no worse then his worships company) to assist the proud against the mighty:
Blows were dealt, and victory obtained, wherein our small Officer had his
share, though not at that time of the Reward: That comes anon. Well, returning
home he betakes like a sober man to his Blue apron again, maintaining
Hospitality for neighbors and strangers, and that in the very place where he
and his painful Wife have (with repu^ation) enough sojourned above fifty years.
And because his charity was somewhat extensive, our Martyr with some money of
his own (got by good husbandry, which should be encouraged) and some borrowed
by virtue of his better reputation. He erects in his own Parish a Monument of
his Fame, to the advantage (as will be confessed on all hands) of both rich and
poor inhabitants. Our justice is now concerned to pay this man Arrears. A brace
of most unspeakable rascally pedantick shreds, his neighbors, are both
Informers and Prosecutors. The crime discovered by a trick ex officio. His fac
simile is required to transcribe the last mittimus, which is done, and by this
time (because it was Quarter-day) the Delinquent is removed to the bottom of
the stairs at the end of the paved Alley, to the Kings house aforesaid, where
we leave him too, whistling to the wheel to the tune of Justice my Foe, etc.

And now let the world, (those especially for whom this is intended) judge
whether such a parcel of zeal and tyranny whom no cords of authority should
bind if he could help it, who thinks his Will the best Expositor and his Hand
the best executor of penal Laws, believing them to be Briars and Sprindges made
to catch every thing they lay hold on. One whom we may presume fears not God,
because he so hates his neighbors. In short, one in whom pride and
stubbornness is so rampant, that as he scorns the advice of his fellow
officers, so believes himself master of their understandings. Whether this
Gent. we say do not merit, abominably merit your suffrages at the next Election.

By Raphael Desmos, In behalf of his Brethren.

