Adoniram Byfeild Of the last EDITION.

OR, AN EXPOSTULATION with him concerning the Book by him lately published,
ENTITLED, The Reasons presented by the Dissenting Brethren, etc.

But chiefly touching his lame and imperfect Narretive of the proceedings of
the Commit for Accommodation at Westminster concerning Religion.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1648.

SIR,
HAving perused the Book by You newly published, under this Title, The Reasons
presented by the Dissenting Brethren against certain Propositions concerning
Presbyteriall Government, And the Proofs of them voted by the Assembly of
Divines sitting by Authority of Parliament at Westminster, Together with the
Answer of the Assembly of Divines to those Reasons of Dissent; I congratulate
your happiness in being Midwife to such a Work.

Howbeit I am bold to desire satisfaction in some particulars in your Title
page, as also in that later piece touching Accommodation, upon which all men's
eyes (you know) will, in this juncture of time, be most intent, and in which
more care and faithfulness would well become such an eminent Scribe: hoping
your candor and ingenuity will be my shelter against all impotent passions that
might raise a storm against me in your breast.

The Title Page seems to hold out the Trophies of the Dissenters over the
Assembly (not unlike that of Aeneas over Mezentius in his triumphant address
to Mars) in large Capitals, THE REASONS presented by the Dissenting BRETHREN
against CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS concerning PRESBYTERIALL GOVERNMENT, etc.
Scilicet. Mezenti Ducis exitvias tibi magne tropaeum
Bellipotens, aptat rorantes sanguine cristas: etc.
But the Answer of the Assembly comes after in a lesser Character, and lower
rank, having but two lines allowed it at the bottom, where it sits at the foot
of that gorgeous Title, upon a little tripod not half an inch broad, like a
petty in the School, that needs a Fescue.

Now verily, I should have thought it more honor for the Assembly to have led
the round, and that the Title Page should have ran thus, THE ANSWER of the
ASSEMBLY of DIVINES to the REASONS of the DISSENTING BRETHREN, etc. who being
but 7. might better have been thrust into the Trundle-bed of the two last
lines; then 50. or 60. men. This, in my poor conceit, (at which perhaps your
Beard will smile, to the hazard of a dry exhalation from beneath) had better
preserved the reputation of the Assembly, if that had been your care.

Men speak it out aloud, that Mr. Byfeild is become, if not a downright
Independent, yet, a strenuous Agitator for that Faction; and that he had not
kept such an Antichristian thing as a Vicaredge thus long, after his
illumination, but for the accession procured for him, while he was Probationer,
by the Grandees of the Time. So that I much fear, the world will, by this Title
page (which does so extremely cast the scale for the Independents,) be much
confirmed in that opinion of you.

If you say, It is meet that their Reasons which were first offered to the
ASSEMBLY, should be first set down: True, in the body of the Book, but this is
no reason why the Assembly should not have the upper side, in the Title Page.
No man, publishing an Answer to Another, but in the Frontispice he first gives
notice of his Answer, if he think it has the better of his Antagonist; as I
think you once thought of the Answers of the Assembly to those Troublers of it.

If you tell me, The Printer or Stationer had the ordering of that Title, I
think you dare not adventure to say so in the light, lest it should bring up so
much blood into your face as would proclaim the falsehood of such a poor
excuse. What Publisher of a book is so long in travail with any page of it, as
with the Title?

If you plead the Order of the Lords, which directs to that method: I say, 1.
That if your fellow Convert John Brown, and you had so pleased, the sense of
the Lords might have been so drawn up, as the honor of the Assembly might have
been better consulted or provided for. 2. I do not find you, in ought else, so
punctual in keeping to their order. They say, The Reasons against the third
Proposition, etc. You say, against certain Propositions. They say, (in
reference to that third Proposition, as you were (say some of credit) told
openly in the Assembly) as well those formerly printed for the use of the
Houses, as any other* Reasons and Answers never formerly printed. But you say
in effect, Reasons against other Propositions, as well as against that third:
for, you do accordingly publish them. And although you have been observed
lately to solicit some Lords for an enlargement, or at least for an
explanation of that their Order, wherein you could not prevail: yet have you
printed all the rest; for which, I thank you: only this I say, that it is not
for you to answer me in the point now between us, that you so draw up the
Title, because you would be punctual in keeping close to the Lords Order; for
you have transgressed it in a far greater matter. Shall I tell you what some
conjecture to be the cause of such a transgression? They say, you cannot forget
how much time those 7. men (especially that brazen faced piece of impudence,
that Protestant Jesuit, that Antilogorum P^^tifex maximus, your dear Brother
Philip) took up in the Assembly; and that had it not been for that passionate
and inflexible D. B. his endeavors to put a period to those debates, it is
verily believed those 7. Apocryphal Brethren would have held the Assembly till
this time, in going over and over, and a 1000. times over, the same things
again. Therefore you thought fit to give them so much room in your forebox, in
regard they took up so much time, and would willingly have taken more, in your
Assembly.

I hope it may be pardoned, if some other man beside T. R. and E. M. shall
print some piece thereof better then they have done, although not authorized by
Mris Harwards Husband, who received no power from you to empower T. R. and E.
M. to do what they have done herein already. And how comes it to pass, that
you have agreed to wipe the noses of the other two Scribes of the Assembly with
one single Book apeece? I have been told, that they took ten times more pains
in writing Copies for the Parliament, in entering the Originals into your Books,
etc. then you have done. But if they be your Servants (as men say they be) it is
not unfit the Master should take the benefit of their work, till they be out of
their time.

For my part, I could not, for a while, satisfy my self, why you should thus
deal with your fellow Scribes, till I was better informed of the Reasons,
which, if true, are of some weight. If they be false, I pray undeceive me,
because I had them from such hands, as I am apt, at present, to believe them.

It is said, that Mr. Byfeild has a lean Vicaredge (the very house whereof
cost him more, then the whole is worth) and he was to make use of such friends
to procure an Augmentation, as were likely to carry it. Hereupon he had the wit
to apply himself to Mr. Solicitor, who by good hap had a Maydservant to put off
to a young Stationer, who had as little to begin with as the Maid, perhaps
less. The Solicitor was willing to gratify Mr. Byfeild in his suit, if Mr.
Byfeild could find out any thing in the Assembly, that might be beneficial to
Harward. Mr. Byfeild told him, there was nothing in the Assembly, unless those
Reasons, and Answers, and Papers, since by him published. Hereupon, the
Solicitor seconded Mr. Byfeilds Petition which was preferred in the House of
Commons by the new German Bishop of Foolham; whereby an 100 li. per annum was
settled on Mr. Byfeld: and the other business was so discreetly managed, that
the Lords made an Order for printing of these things now made public. And
there went the Hare away from the other two Scribes. Howbeit, Mr. Byfeild can
plead that he received not one penny from the Stationer. And Mr. Harward, they
say, can make it out, that he received somewhat else with his wife, beside this
Copy: and so I see not why all parties should not be well pleased: for, they
must be.

But truly, truly, Sir, your faith is much questioned in the business of the
Accommodation Papers. For my part, this satisfies me, that you do not attest
them as you do the rest, with a Concordat cum Originali: nor indeed could you
do otherwise, you being no Scribe to that Committee, nor always present at the
Debates and Orders made therein: nor Honest Jeremy neither, who had little
skill what was rightly reported, and what not, he being no Member of that
Committee, if your enumeration of the Divines at page the 13th. be full.

Nor could you get any authentic original, but were fain to run up and down
among your new friends to get here a paper and there a paper to patch up
something, as it please the friends to the Dissenters Cause to furnish you; by
means whereof diverse things are wholly omitted, and others mangled, which makes
the whole very imperfect, and unsatisfactory to such as have had the happiness
to be acquainted with all the passages of that transaction.

That I may give you a taste, turn to page 17. of those Papers, where you shall
find these two gross slips, viz.

1. Your Copy runs thus, This Paper being read, and the day (you would have
said, a good part of the night) spent in explaining of it. And so you pass on
to the Order made in the close of that meeting, passing over all those
explanations about which so much time was spent. But Sir, the Dissenters did
themselves at last explain sundry ambiguous terms of their Paper then given
in, which explanations were taken sillabice in writing, at that time, and after
they had been read to them, and owned by them, were to be kept by the Chairman,
and are still extant. But the Independents had no reason to desire the
publishing of those explanations They exclude all but their own gang which
would, if known, make them a lean company.
: therefore, herein you had reason to suppress them, in case you had them by
you. But, we hope, one day to see them.

2. You set down that Order of the Committee, December: 4* 1945. thus.

It was Ordered that the rest of the Divines, Members of the Committee, be made
a Sub-committee to consider of the Paper of the Dissenting Brethren, given in,
and to meet first between themselves, then with the Dissenting Brethren, and to
prepare somewhat against the next meeting of this Committee, etc. But here you
grossly mutulate. For, in the original, after those words [then, with the
Dissenting Brethren] this clause is added [if there shall be cause,] which you
omit; for what cause, your self best know.

Sure I am, there was a noise all over the Town at that time, that when the
Sub-Committee of Divines that were to draw an Answer to that Paper, presented
their thoughts of it to the Committee, at their next sitting, Dec: 15. (as you
quote the time) the Dissenters fell a cavilling at the Sub-Committee for
bringing in an Answer, before they had met with them* according to the Order as
you are please to give it us: but it was answered out of the Original Order,
that the Sub-Committee were not necessarily to give them a meeting, because the
Order says it was only thus [if there shall be cause] of which the
Sub-Committee were best able to judge, in reference to themselves. This was
thought by the Committee, to be a good defense of the Sub-Committee; And the
Dissenters were thereupon ordered to give a R^ply thereunto by the Tuesday
senight following.

Sir, these are no small slips in a man so deeply trusted, and pretending to so
much integrity. I could tell you of many more in that last piece, which had you
faithfully and fully related, would have discovered much more to the world of
those proceedings, then your Dissenting Brethren would be willing that all men
should know. But, if I should here add any more, I should exceed the bounds of
a private Letter. I am assured, that not only the Scots Commissioners, but
some of your Assembly were very exact and diligent in taking the whole proceed
of that Committee, which since (as I am informed) is faithfully printed in
Scotland. May I have the happiness to get any perfect Copy, I hope it shall be
no Felony nor Treason (unless such as may be made so by Independent-club*law)
to disabuse the world, by making the whole truth to appear to all.

So, wishing you as much faithfulness as you need, my next wishes shall be,
that you may be again the same man you were when old Alexander of Scotland was
alive; and then that you may have as much happiness as you can desire, while
you continue in the truth. This, Sir, is the prayer of

May 15. 1648. Your very loving Friend, H. S.

FINIS.

