A BRIEF TESTIMONY AGAINST TALE-BEARERS, WHISPERERS, AND Back-biters, SHOWING
That where they are given ear unto amongst Friends, Neighbors, and Relations,
or in any Christian Society, such can never live in Peace, Concord and Unity.

For their Words are as Wounds, they Reveal Secrets, they Separate near
Friends: Therefore they are to be driven away with an Angry Countenance,

Prove. 25.23. By William Shown.

Printed in the Year, 1686.

A BRIEF TESTIMONY AGAINST Tale-bearers, Whisperers, AND Back-biters.
I Have often considered the end and tendancy of Tale-bearing, Whispering, and
Backbiting, and have observed the Evil Fruits and Effects thereof among
Friends, Neighbors, and Relations. And have found and concluded, that it is
impossible for any Society of People upon the face of the Earth, that give
countenance to any that are found in the practice thereof, to live or dwell
together in Love, Unity, Peace, and heavenly Concord or Agreement, which indeed
is the Glory, Strength and Crown of a People; and the contrary their Weakness,
Shame and Reproach, Confusion and Destruction also.

Therefore that they may be stopped, and their evil fruits and effects
prevented, I have a concern upon my mind, as a Testimony and Caution not only
against, them, but also against such as gives Tales, Whisperings, and
Backbitings, entertainment; that lends their ears unto them, that receives and
believes them, and lays them up in their minds, where they increase and
multiply against an evil Day.

For I say unto thee, whosoever thou art, that desire to keep clear of the
evil effects that attends Tale-bearing; thou must not only forbear to tell
Tales, but thou must also take heed how thou hear, whom thou hear, and
what thou hear. And if any come unto thee with a Story, Tale, or Relation,
consider the end and Tendency of what he says unto thee; and if it be
concerning a Person known unto thee, and what he says tends to the Defamation
or Disrepute of the said Person, and thou do not know of thy own Knowledge
that the things he says are true, thy Duty is to take great heed how thou
hear him, or entertainest what he says: But thou must say unto him, Friend,
I know the Person of whom thou speak, and I do not know that those things
thou speak of him are true. Therefore as I would be done by in the like
Case, let me know thy Name, Place of Abode, and Reputation; and I will at my
first Opportunity acquaint the Person thou speak off, what thou say of
him; and time and place shall be appointed, wherein I will hear you both
together. And if thou art not willing it should be so, what thou have told me,
I take no other notice of it but as a Tale of Evil Tendency, even to Wound,
Estrange, and separate Friends; therefore I will drive thee away with an Angry
Countenance, as a Back-biter, and Whisperer, whose words are as wounds, and
whose arrows fly in Secret, to hurt the Innocent; so doing, this Talebearer
will come no more at thee. If Thieves had no receivers they would not continue
Stealing; so if Tale-tellers had no Tale-hearers and Receivers, they would and
must leave off Tale-bearing: And according to an English Proverb, the Receiver
is as bad as the Thief.

It is the Duty of every Friend. Brother. Neighbor, and Relation, and of every
Member of a Religious Society, to be Tender and Careful of each others good
Name, and Reputation; and Diligently to watch against that Creeping,
Whispering, Backbiting Spirit, that sowes discord among Brethren, let it be
judged in every appearance of it, so shall Love, Unity, and good Neighborhood
be preserved and increased.

The Law of God by Moses provided expressly against Tale-bearing, Thou shall not
go up and down as a Talebearer among thy People; neither shall thou stand
against the Blood of thy Neighbor, Lev. 19.16. These two Evils are of a like
Nature and Tendency. Again, Thou shall not raise a false Report, put not thy
hand to the wicked to be an unrighteous Witness, Exo. 23.1. these two Evils are
also akin to each other.

Tale-bearing and false reporting who ever is Guilty thereof with a design to
Mar the Credit, good Name and Reputation of his Brother or Neighbor, is as he
that puts his hand to the wicked, to be an unrighteous Witness; and as he that
stands against the Blood of his Neighbor, For his words are as Wounds, and
they go down to the innermost part of the Belly. Prove. 18.8.

It is written in the Holy Scriptures, Psalm 133.1. That it is a Comely aad
Pleasant thing, for Brethren to live (or dwell) together in Unity; it is like
precious Ointment, as the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that Descended upon the
Mountains of Sion.

What is to Compare more Excellent? What more Pleasant, Lovely, and Amiable,
then to behold a People dwell together in Unity, in Love, and Brotherly
kindness. In this Heavenly Society, no Talebearer has any place, they are
Witnesses of the Truth of that saying, Prove. 26.20. Where there is no
Talebearer, strife cease.

It is not possible for Neighbors, Friends, and Relations, nor for any Society
of People to live together in Unity, Friendship and good Neighborhood, while
there goes up and down a Talebearer among them; a Whisperer and Back-biter
among them, they are numbered by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Roman's, Romans
1.29, 30. with the worst of Sinners; and the Testimony of Solomon is, That the
false Witness that speaks Lies, and him that sows discord among Brethren is
one of the Six things which God hates, and is an Abomination to him, Prove.
6.19. for indeed they are Authors of much Mischief, and are Inconsistant with
Peace, Concord, and Society.

And where these sort of Evil doers are entertained their words makes wounds
not easily cured; makes Breaches not soon made up and repaired, Seperate's and
Divides near Friends, so that they are not easily Reconciled again.

But where the Talebearer, Whisperer, and Backbiter, is shut out, brought to
Trial, Judged, or driven away with an Angry Countenance, all his designs are
defeated, Love, Peace, and Concord is maintained a Living together in Love and
Unity preserved; which indeed is a great Happiness, a great Comfort, a great
Blessing for Friends, Neighbors, and Relations to Enjoy.

Where envy and strife is, there is Confusion and every evil Work; a froward
Man sows Strife, and a Whisperer separateth chief Friends; but where Love and
Unity is, there is good order and every good work. And the seed of the froward
Man cannot take root in such, nor the work of the Whisperer take effect,
especially among such who keep in that love and unity by which they are known
to be Disciples of Jesus.

And those two Excellent precepts of Christ are by those who are his Disciples
indeed truly observed, in order to keep Love and Unity, and prevent the
Contrary, and the occasion thereof.

First, If thy Brother offend or trespass against thee, go to him and tell him
of his fault, between him and thee; if he will hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother, if he will not, take one or two more with thee, if he will not hear
them, then tell the Church or Congregation; if he will not hear the
Congregation, let him be as an Heathen or Publican.

Secondly, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do so unto them
likewise.

The true Observation of these two Precepts cuts off all VVhisperings, evil
Speakings, Back-bitings, Tale-bearings, and the uncovering the nakedness and
weakness of any Friend, Brother, and Neighbor, before he has performed his
Duty, as is set forth in the first Precept, which indeed tends to the
preservation of Love and Unity among Brethren, and the contrary tends to
Strife, Division, and Destruction.

No better Method can be laid down in a Christian Society to prevent a Breach,
and to maintain Love and Brotherly kindness, than what is contained in this
Precept, the neglect and Non-observance of this by many Persons and Societies
professing Christianity, has let in Animosities, Strifes, Debates, Division,
Disorders, and Confusion among them, so that they have been scattered as with a
VVhirlwind, and have received the fruit of their own doings in their own
bosoms, as might be demonstrated at large, throughout most of the Sects and
gatherings of People in Christendom, who only talk of and profess good words,
and good things; but the Jews, Turks, and Indians may compare with them for
good Works, yea, they have caused the name of God and the Christian Religion
to be blasphemed, scorned and slighted amongst them; even because while they
are talking of God, Christ, Love, Light, Holiness, Righteousness, and Religion,
they are envying, hating, biting and devouring one another, and sheathing their
Swords in one another Bowels, having turned that Royal Law, Do as you would be
done by, behind their backs, whereas indeed the obeying these seven words is
more than the Reading, Hearing and Professing seven times seven thousand words.

There is no Society of People upon the face of the Earth, though under the
Profession of Christianity it self, that have, can, do, or ever shall live
together in Love and Unity as true Friends and Brethren, further then they Obey
and Observe these two divine and Heavenly Precepts. And as they do, have, or
shall degenerate from the true Observance thereof, they do, have, and shall
fall into Strife, Enmity, and Division the Highway to Destruction. And many
have been Destroyed thereby, even after they have attained to a good Degree in
the Spirit of Love, Simplicity and Heavenly Unity, and all through
Disobedience, or neglect of those Precepts of Christ, which he once taught, and
now Teaches those who are his Disciples indeed to Observe and keep by the
Asistance of his holy Spirit of Love which is the Bond of Peace, and true
Foundation of all Heavenly Concord and Agreement.

And this Spirit teaches all that have it, and obey it, to be Circumspect and
take heed of Letting in evil Thoughts, evil Reports, Whisperings, and evil
Surmises against any Friend, Brother, or Neighbor, for it will eat like a
Canker; and if thy Brother, Friend, or Neighbor, has Trespassed against thee,
thou must not tell it first to others, if thou do, thou art in some degree a
Talebearer, and a Back-biter, and Transgresser of this Command of Christ,
which reaches all manner of Trespasses and Offenses that are private, and
relating to a particular Person, offended or trespassed against; which the
Church or Congregation knows not of, nor ought not, except thy Brother refuse
to hear thee.

But if any that is called a Brother, Sin openly, or is a Fornicator, is a
profane Person, is an Idolator, Drunkard, or Extortioner, etc. thou needs not
go to such a one and tell him his Fault, betwixt thee and him, nor to take
others with thee, nor to tell the Congregation this Precept does not concern
him, his Trespass is not only against thee, but against all he pretened to be
in Fellowship with, his wickedness being open and Manifest to all; he is to be
denied, and judged of all, and it is no Backbiting to speak the Truth of such
a Man to others concerned, though behind his back.

Every Member of a true Society who are gathered by the Spirit of Truth, and
lives in the Fellowship of it, they are furnished with Courage and strength to
defend each other, to Believe well, and Hope well, of each other against all
evil Reports, Tales and Storys that may be raised, and will let nothing in, but
upon good Proof, or clear Manifestation; and then tho it may bring Sorrow, yet
a Judgment is raised with Severity against the doing of Evil by such who are
under the Profession of good; such Hypocrites God will Judge to the uttermost,
their Damnation slumbers not, yet such there have been, are, and will be, under
the highest Professions outward that ever were, are, or shall be among men,
(until the Universal destruction of that grand Enemy of mankind.)

It is an excellent degree in Christianity to attain to that state in Love
which thinks no ill, such can speak no ill, nor do no ill against their Friend
or Neighbor, nor against any man; the Tale-carrier, Whisperer, nor Flatteter,
can have no place with such a one, his very Countenance drives them away,
having no part in him, can give no entertainment to them.

He that sees a Thief and consents to him is Guilty with him: Tale-bearers,
Whisperers, and Back-biters, and their entertainers, who defame and Rob a man
of his good Name, Credit and Reputation, are greater Thieves than those that
Rob a man of a little Money and Goods; as it is written, A good Name is better
than precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.3. A good Name is rather to be chosen than
great Riches, Prove. 22.1. He that raises a false Report and gets Tale-carriers
to carry it abroad; and these Tell-tales finds entertainers and receivers; Who
knows the extent of such things? And who can measure the evil fruit of such
doings? Such evil Seed meeting with ground suitable thereunto, grows and
increases amain, and according to the Phrase a man's Back is bitten, his
Credit wounded, his good Name stained and defiled, his Reputation impaired, if
not destroyed among such as are credulous of false Reports; and all this is
done as it were insensibly, sometimes before he knows any thing thereof.

It has not been without great cause that both God and men has given forth
Laws against such things. He that professes and obeys that Royal Law or
Precept of Christ, Do as thou would be done unto, cannot touch with these
things, nor show any favor or countenance to any that are found therein.

I shall now Answer one Question, and conclude this my Caution, Warning, and
Testimony against raising false Reports, Tale-bearing, and Tale-hearing, having
an aim for general Good therein, hoping what I have said may be of some service
for the stopping and preventing of such things which tend to the dividing and
destroying all true Friendship and Soeiety.

The Question is this; If a False Report be raised and spread abroad, received
and entertained as a Truth, being told so, and received so (as all false
Reports and Tales are under the name of Truth, which makes them the more
mischievous) what course is best to be taken in such a case, that I may do all
the right I can to the person concerned.

Answer, When the Report comes to thy ear, engage the person that brings it, to
bring forth his Author; and so let it be enquired and pursued until the first
Author be found, and then le^ sound Judgment pass thereon; and this will be a
means to stop and discourage Tale-bearers, Back-biters, and Whisperers. And by
so doing such will not again attempt to bring thee any more Tales. Also in so
doing thou will do as thou would be done by, according to the Law of God: if
thou do otherwise, the Law of God and Man is against thee, and thou art not
fit to be a Member of a Christian Society.

The Conclusion.
Now it being a Truth that Talebearing, Whispering, raising evil Reports, and
receiving and entertaining of them; and the neglect of observing those two
Precepts of Christ before mentioned, are of such pernicious effects and evil
tendency, as to reveal Secrets, separate near Friends, beget Strife and
Division, destroy Society and Friendship, make Wounds and Breaches, and as an
Unrighteous Witness that puts forth his Hand against the Blood of his
Neighbor, and worse than Thieves and Robbers, I say, seeing it is so, it
highly concerns all that would be accounted virtuous and honest, to keep clear
of these things; and to judge it in the least appearance thereof, not only in
others but in themselves.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere were Young People in the Primitive times that grew idle and wanton
(especially young Women) as went from House to House, and were Tatlers and
busy bodies, and medlers with other men's matters, and speaking things which
they ought not; also they were prone to delight themselves in costly Apparel,
and platting the Hair, and wearing of Gold, etc. all these things the Apostles
and Ministers of Christ were troubled to see and hear of them, and did exhort
and endeavor to persuade to the contrary; because it did not become Women
professing Godliness; and where these things are found now in, with, and upon
People, Young or Old, Male or Female, let them profess what they will) they are
infallible signs that they want the inward adorning of a meek and quiet Spirit,
that they are not like the King's Daughter, That is all glorious within; and
that the loins of their minds are not girded with the Girdle of Truth, when the
loins of their Bodies are girded with rich and costly Attire, and superfluous
vanities; and that the very Profession and Religion of such is vain, who have
not a bridle to their Tongues, and are not restrained thereby from Tatling,
meddling and speaking those things they ought not.

Now that all young people that profess the Truth may be kept and preserved out
of these evils, take the Counsel of Paul to Timothy, Flee all youthful Lusts:
follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with them that call upon the Lord
with a pure heart; if you do but obey this Exhortation (by the assistance of
the grace of God, to which you have been commended to be taught all good
Lessons) you can never fall into the aforementioned evils, nor any other, for
when you come into each others company, your words will be few, and seasoned
with Grace, and the Fear and dread of God will be with you, and you will set
him always before you, then will your discourse tend to the edifying each
other, then instead of meddling with other men's matters, or telling one another
Stories you will tell one another what the Lord has done for your Souls, from
the experimental work of his Spirit and Grace in your hearts, according to the
Manifestation and Working thereof. And you will take heed of boasting above
what you have attained there through, and of speaking of those things which
Christ has not wrought in you; so will you also be preserved from
High-mindedness and Conceitedness, which would lead to Pride your selves with
Knowledge, Openings, Visions, and Revelations which some of you may have had;
that you may not deck your selves with these things, which are all Good,
Pleasant, and Delightful in their Time and Season: Yet they are not for Food,
nor Raiment, all must receive their daily Bread from God; and their Clothing,
or Covering, must be his Spirit, (or a Meek and quiet Spirit) where this is
wanting, the woe from God will come, let the talk and Profession of Religion be
what it will.

The Eye, Mind, and Heart must be upon God, from whence every good and perfect
gift comes; and not upon the gift, least you deck your selves there with and
play the Harlot; as some in former Ages has done. And in this Age also, and
brought Judgment upon themselves to the utmost; even after they have been made
comely with his Ornaments, with his Gifts and Graces, Eat and Drank at his
Table, enjoyed his presence, and heard him Teach in their streets; yea, and
cast out many Devils in his Name: Yet have become shut out of his Kingdom, and
have wholly lost the way that leads there to. Again.

This has befaln many (especially young People) in my own knowledge and
remembrance, since God gathered us to be a People; for want of watchfulness and
keeping low in the fear of God; some has fallen by flying aloft in airy
Imaginations and Notions, being puffed up in their minds; and some by returning
again and going down into the Earth, like the Sow that was washed to the
wallowing in the Mire again.

Now that you and all may be preserved herefrom, and from all Evil, from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, I commend you in the first place to the Grace,
Light and Spirit of God, which has appeared to you and shined in you; and in
the next place in the sense thereof to read Paul's Directions to Titus 2. and 3.
Chap. Meditate and consider thereof and you may Receive profit thereby.

The Children of friends whose Parents has taken care to instruct, council,
and persuade them not only by Precept, but by Example in life and Conversation
to follow their steps, and to walk after them in the Self-denial, out of the
pomp and vanities of the World, out of the sinful lusts of the flesh, lusts of
the eye, and pride of life, which superabounds in the world; these Children
have had great benefit and advantage beyond what their Parents ever had; and
many Children, Sons and Daughters have made a good use thereof, and can bless
and praise God that they had such Parents. And these are come to the sense,
knowledge and understanding of the root of the matter in themselves, viz. the
Light and Grace of God within, the New Covenant and Law written within, and do
walk therein, and are taught thereby, to the praise and glory thereof.

But many Friends Children keep only in the form, in the outward Court, and
enters not within the vail, comes not to the foundation which God has laid, do
not know the work and operation of the Grace and Spirit of God upon their
hearts, minds and understandings, to wash, cleanse, and Sanctify their inward
parts: so knows not what it is to put off the Old man with his Deeds, and to
put on the New, and to be renewed in the Spirit of their minds, these grow not
in Grace, nor in the knowledge of the mysteries of God; neither are they
acquainted with the wiles and devices of the Enemy, Education and Tradition
being the chief ground of their Religion; these will wither like Corn upon the
house top.

There is another sort of Friends Children, who after they have come to years
and stature, have slighted and turned their backs upon their Parents, and upon
all their Counsel, Instruction, Persuasion, and Example. Also as to Religion,
and have chosen their own ways, walking after their own corrupt wills, casting
off the Yoke of Modesty, Temperance, Chastity, plainness of Speech, and
plainness of Apparel which they had been bred up in while young with their
Parents, and are gone into the superfluity of naughtiness that is in the world
(to their own ruin) in contempt, disobedience and dishonor of their Parents,
which has caused Grief, and made their hearts sad; and by so doing, their
hearts have become hard, unthankful, and unholy; and without natural affection
also toward their Parents, contemning, disregarding and disobeying the
Commandments of God: And all the Precepts and Exhortations, Blessings and
Cursings promised and threatened to the obedient and disobedient Children to
Parents, which are very many throughout the holy Scriptures; and all the bonds
of Nature that enjoins Children to Love, Honor, and Obey their Parents: such
Children are nigh unto Cursing, nigh unto a reprobate sense, out of which it
will be a Miracle if ever they return, Repent and be Converted.

It is a blessed thing when young People and Children Remember their Creator in
the days of their Youth; and come to live in the fear of the Lord, and to have
such Parents, Masters and Tutors as are ready to Teach them, Instruct them, and
put them in mind thereof, not only by Precept but by Example also; which
Blessings, if they slight, neglect and undervalue in their youthful days,
their sins multiply upon them; Ignorance, Darkness, and hardness of Heart
increases in them to that degree, that many times they become old in
wickedness in their young days; such if they perish, God and their Parents are
clear, and their Destruction is of themselves, because they have despised the
blessings of God, and the blessings of their Parents, who have had a tender
care of them; but when God makes them possess the sins of their Youth, then
will they cry out, Oh, that we had born the Yoke in our Youth: Oh, that we had
hearkened to the Voice of God in our own Consciences, and to the Voice of our
Parents: then should we not have Reaped such an evil Crop of our own Sowing;
And they shall then be made to confess tha^ God is Just, and Righteous in all
his Judgments, when they Receive the Fruit of their own doings, and feel the
Weight of their own Iniquity.

William Shown.

THE END.

