A Few WORDS Concerning the FAST Which God requires. The Antiquity, Necessity
and Universality of it.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Clarke, in George-Yard, Lumbard-street, 1680.

A few Words concerning the Fast which God requires: The Antiquity, Necessity
and Universality of it.
FIrst, God commanded mankind, (or our first parents) who were made Perfect,
Holy, Upright, Innocent in his own Image and Likeness; to Fast, or abstain from
eating the forbidden fruit: And while mankind kept this Fast, God was well
pleased with him, and he kept his state and dwelling place in Paradise,
enjoying the Light of Gods countenance; no Guilt, no Shame, no Fear, the
effects of sin was in being; the whole Creation was in their heavenly and
earthly order, without Rent, Schism or Jar: All was good, yea very good.

Now when mankind broke his this Fast, and eat that which God forbid him; which
was good in it self, though not for food, this let in all the Guilt, Fear,
Shame, Perplexity of Mind, Confusion, Distress and Misery, that has ever since
attended mankind in this estate, even to this our Day, Age and Generation,
among the whole bulk of mankind, of what Name, Nation, Opinion, Sect, Sort or
Fashion of Religion soever they be off: If they are found Eating the forbidden
fruit; breaking the command of God, not keeping the Fast that God required and
requires, let their Form and Worship be what it will, such cannot find
acceptance; in the day they eat they die: As to God; and they find that saying
true, When sin is finished it brings forth death.

Now all evil thinking, evil speaking, and evil doing; all Envy and Hatred,
Plots and Conspiraces to Murder and Destroy one another, received its life and
beginning in man, when he broke the Fast God commanded him to keep, and will
continue and remain until the Fast be kept again, until man comes to live in
obedience to the command of God: To cease from evil, and learn to do well; to
do that he should do, and leave undone that he should not do. And this I
testify from certain knowledge and experience, that this is the Fast which God
requires: And that it is possible, mankind, through walking in the Light and
Learning of the Grace and Spirit of God, may come into such estate while on
this side the grave; as to be able to keep this Fast, which God is well pleased
with: And is indeed the Fast which was pointed at, and Typified forth by all
the appointed Fasts under the Shadows, Dispensation of the Law; Testified of by
the Prophets, enjoyed and witnessed by the primitive Christians: God Almighty
Bless the Intentions and Endeavors of this present Parliament, in order to
this work, and Crown them with Success.
Which Fast did not consist in forbearing to eat outward Food, and to cease
from outward Labor, or in hanging down the Head, and walking Mournfully for a
time, or day, or in Reading over Prayers, etc.

But in short, To loose the Bonds of wickedness, Isa. 18. Zech. 7. from the 5
v. to 10. Mat. 6.16, 17, 18. ver.
undo the heavy Burdens, let the oppressed go free: Break every evil yoke,
give bread to the hungry, bring the poor into the house, cover the naked,
execute true judgment, show mercy and compassion every man to his brother;
Oppress not the Widow, Fatherless, Stranger and Poor; And let none imagine evil
against his Brother or Neighbor: This is the Fast the Lord did declare to be
his choice in the Prophets time, and his choice is the same at this day: And
this Fast is agreeable to the dispensation of Christ, or Gospel days we now
live in; being indeed the substance of the Doctrine of Christ, and the blessed
end of his Coming, and glorious appearance in and among mankind, To make an end
of sin; And to mortify the appetite, desire or hunger that sprang up, and
springs up in mankind after the forbidden fruit; the which being given way
unto, led and leads into the breaking that Fast which God commanded and
commands to be kept. And to bring in everlasting righteousness; destroy the
Devil and all his works, and restore, and redeem mankind into the Image of God
again; into Purity, Uprightness, Holiness, Justice, Righteousness, Equity and
Mercy, Love and good Will to all mankind: Those that are, here are in the Image
of God, and are keeping the Fast which God commanded, and his Soul delights in:
And in this state men are friends to God and friends to their Neighbor, and
Love and good Will abounds in each man to his Neighbor and Brother, though he
may differ in his understanding about spiritual things, and in the Manner and
Form of his Worship. For let all men take this for an infallible sign, that if
they find Envy and Anger arise in them against their Neighbor and Brother
about Religion, Worship and Sacrifice, that they are of the spirit of Cain,
that Religious Murderer, who slew his Brother, because he was more Righteous,
and his Sacrifice more accepted then his: Oh that none professing Christianity
might be found in this state.

For it is inconsistant with the Spirit and Nature thereof, (though not with
the Name and Form) to Hate, Envy and Persecute about Religion, Church and
Worship, to Inquisition and torture men's Bodies, ruin and destroy their
Estates in this World, about the things of the World to come, (or the Belief or
Opinion of them) who are found in this work, know not what Spirit they are of;
neither know they how to keep a Fast to God, nor offer a Sacrifice acceptable
in his sight; this is the word of Truth to all, let their Name, Form or Fashion
of Worship and Religion be what it will.

It is the Duty of every Christian to Fast and Pray; to Sacrifice a Fast unto
the Lord, To abstain from every appearance of evil, (not from outward Food, or
from one sort of Food, and eat another, and call that a Fast) Fasting and
Prayer God delights in, but Eating and Prayer, Sinning and Sacrificing, doing
that which should not be done, and leaving that undone which should be done,
his Soul hates: And because of these things his Judgments are near to be
revealed in this Age, as in Ages past, against all outside, formal,
hypocritical Professors of all sorts and sects who have good Words and fair
Speeches in their Mouths, but foul Deeds and evil Doings are found in their
Hearts and Hands. This is the great Sin of Christendom, which God will visit
for.

And God has opened the eyes of thousands and ten thousands in this Island, to
see, in some measure, as he sees, and to understand things aright; and such
are not, nor cannot be deceived with a Golden Cup, while the Wine of
Fornication is in it.

In the time of ignorance (it is written) God winked, but now he has opened
his eye, and his mouth also, and calls to all men every where to Repent, and
all such as walks in the light of the eye of God, and obeys his voice, they
come to know and witness a returning into Paradise, into the favor of God,
into innocence; uprightness and true holiness again, which mankind lost by
eating the forbidden Fruit, which God commanded and commands to abstain or
fast from; and these are the people that are in a capacity to keep a Fast
well-pleasing to God: And this is the blessed end of God in speaking to our
Fathers, to Moses, to the Prophets, and last of all by his only Son, even that
mankind might come to keep the blessed Fast which God ordained in Paradise; and
that he might no more hunger and thirst after the forbidden Fruit, but after
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Spirit, in which stands that Kingdom,
the increase thereof has no end (he that can receive it, let him;) for short
of this, all sorts of Profession and Religion is vain.

And among these people, the fruits and effects of keeping the Fast the Lord
chooses, shows forth themselves, being ready and willing to relieve the
oppressed, to take off the heavy Burdens, etc. as before expressed: And to and
among such the Light is risen out of obscurity, and the Darkness is become as
Noonday, and the Lord guides such continually, and satisfies their Souls in
drought, and their Bones are made fat, and are like the watered Garden, and
like a Spring whose Water never fails. These, and many more Blessings were
promised to such as kept the Fast which God chooses; And a remnant that are
come to the keeping of it, are living Witnesses that he is faithful that
promised, and has fulfilled the same, and can praise the Lord in the sense and
enjoyment thereof, though there be many sorts of Fasters in Christendom, that
know nothing experimentally of the fulfillings of these and many other precious
Promises, because their Fasts have not been of God's choosing or appointing, but
of their own; so the fruit and effect has been strife and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness, though under a solemn Form of afflicting their
Souls for a day, bowing down their heads, clothing themselves in Sackcloth,
and, it may be, cutting their Flesh with Whips too, accompanied with abundance
of other Acts voluntary humility, which finds no acceptance with God, but is
spread as Dung upon their Faces, being not the Fast, neither for matter nor
manner which he delights in. And this is found true by woeful experience,
throughout whole Christendom, whose Fruits and evil Conversation one toward
another, may compare with any Nation under Heaven, whereby the name of Christ
and Christianity (or the Christian Religion) is become odious to Jews, Turks
and Infidels: And a remnant that are Christians indeed, and are keeping a Fast
to God, are grieved to hear a great noise of holy Church, holy Fathers, holy
Scriptures, holy Traditions, holy Orders, holy Bread, holy Wine, holy Water,
holy Vestments and holy Places, while all lies in pollution, while all
unholiness abounds, especially among men pretending to holy Orders, who think
they do good service to Plot and Contrive the Ruin and Destruction of men's
Lives who cannot believe their Church to be holy as they say: This Cainish
murtherous Spirit is not only contrary to true Christianity, but also
inconsistent with humane Society, and the wellbeing of mankind; This is so
great a Beast of Prey, that it is not safe in these Protestant Countries to
suffer his Horns to grow strong, much less to have Crowns upon them; one great
end of Magestery being to take care that one man prey not upon another, And
nothing proves more ravenous, cruel and unnatural, than what is bred and
generated, through a false opinion of Religion, the ground indeed of many
Massacres, and much Bloodshed in Christendom.

Now in as much as God by his immediate hand of Power stirring in the Hearts
and Consciences of wicked men (who were Instruments in, and privy to the late
Bloody, Popish, Religious Plot) has so wrought, as to bring them to make some
Discovery of the same, whereby the Pit and Snare they have dug and laid, by
Council from the depth of Hell, is in some measure discovered, if not clearly
seen. This all true Christians cannot but acknowledge to be the mighty merciful
hand of Almighty God to the Inhabitants of this Island in particular, and to
all tender hearted well-meaning Protestants in Europe, for which great Mercy it
is their bounden Duty to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, who
has discovered the Danger, discovered the Pit and Snare (and brought to light
the hidden things of darkness) that they may witness a safe and full
Deliverance therefrom.

Now it is not enough to appoint a day for a Fast, and to make a Book of
Prayers to be read on that day, and to hear a few studdied Sermons, etc: this
is not that which God regards, but every particular is to breath and cry
mightily unto God, and every one is to turn from his evil way, and from the
violence that is in their hands; this is that which God took special notice of,
and had only regard unto in the Fast of the King and the Citizens of that great
City Niniveh. These were neither Jews nor Israelites, neither had they the Law
of God by Moses given to them, yet God had more regard to their Fast, then to
the Fasts of the Jews, who, notwithstanding their frequent formal Fastings,
continued doing evil; and these Assyrians. Gentiles, or Heathens, turning every
one from the evil of his way, found favor and acceptance in the sight of God,
this clearly shows that the just God is no respector of persons but in every
Nation those that fear him, and work Righteousness shall be accepted, and the
contrary rejected; let them profess as they will, and talk of being within the
Pale of the Church, and of the Apostolical Faith, and in holy Orders, and
Administrators, and Partakers of holy Ordinances, etc. all this talk is vain
and frivolous, if there be not a turning every one from the evil of his way.
This is the word of truth to all whom it may concern.
It Is said God saw their Works, and that they turned from their evil ways. This
is the principle part of the Fast that God takes notice of, where this is
wanting, all other circumstances as has been hinted before avails nothing;
this alone turns away the wrath and anger of God from a person or people, from
a City or Kingdom, even by turning every one from his evil way, which is no
less than a forsaking the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep God's holy Will
and Commandments; This is the Duty of every Christian, and all that are found
therein are keeping a Fast to God. Let all strive to exceed each other herein,
though of different Names, in different Forms, Disciplines, Ceremonies and
Circumstances, let all see that his heart is sincere to God, and that he stands
approved in what he does in the eye of the Lord, which runs to and fro through
the Earth, and beholds the Evil and the Good, which eye is nigh unto all men,
and sees the things done in secret, and causes them to be preached upon the
Housetop. Now this pure eye of God (or Light) in men, cannot behold Iniquity
(so as to approve of it) but condemns it, (if it be brought to it, as he that
loves it does,) and all those that are found working of it; let their Name,
Nation, Opinion, Profession, Form or Fashion of Worship be what it will; He
that does evil hates the Light, and Sin lies at his door, and his foolish heart
is darkened and hardened, for doing of evil does both. And he that has a hard
heart, and regards Iniquity, he has no Sacrifice to offer acceptable to God,
neither will he hear their Prayers, nor regard their Fasts, nor their solemn
Assemblies; so it concerns all to examine how they stand in the sight of God,
for God cannot be mocked, he sees the inside of all men's hearts, and their
secret intents and purposes are not hid from him. Blessed are all that walk
upright in his sight, according to the measure of knowledge and understanding
he has given to them, such alone are in the way to receive more and more of
his Mercies, Blessings, Riches and Fullness, until their souls are fully
satisfied therewith: Which that all may come to enjoy, is the breathing desires
of him who has good will to all men.

W. Shown.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN order to keep the Fast which God requires, let all people beware of that
Doctrine that is taught and believed by diverse Sects in Christendom, viz. That
it is unpossible to live without sin, or to abstain from eating the forbidden
fruit, while on this side the grave. Such Teachers and Believers are under a
strong delusion, believing a Lie, the high way to damnation; for mankind had a
being in this visible world, before sin was, and the best life he ever lived,
was without sin; when he began to sin, to break Gods command, to eat forbidden
fruit, then began his Misery, and as Sin increased, his Misery increased, as it
does upon all men at this day.

Now God in his universal love and pity toward mankind, did, and has ordained
means of Restoration, Renovation and perfect Redemption, from and out of that
which was and is the cause of all the misery and sorrow that does and has
attended mankind from the beginning of the world to this day, viz. Sin: And
this means is Christ Jesus the Son of the living God, in whom is Life, and the
Life is Light of men; which is sufficient to lead all that love it, and receive
him, out of sin, into a sinless state again, into paradise again, into the
favor of God again; which Christ is the power and wisdom of God, able to
destroy the Devil and his works; and to make an end of sin, which the Devil and
the first Adam began; and to save his people, not only from the punishment of
sin, but from the committing of it also: This is the Gospel of glad tidings to
all that are weary and heavy laden, and feel the weight and burden of sin, and
the loathsomness and stink of the dead body of it: And they are the only
Ministers of God and Christ that preach this Gospel to mankind; and the other
are the quite contrary, let their pretense be what it will, such never comes
themselves, nor brings others to keep the Fast which God delights in.

Now those that are come to the keeping this Fast, and are restored by Christ
Jesus into the heavenly Image man bore before he broke it, may be tempted as
Adam was, and drawn into sin after the similitude of Adams Trangression, if
they stand not in awe and dread of the Mystery and Power of God, who commanded
to forbear to eat, and gave, and gives wisdom and power so do: And take Christ
Jesus the second Adam for their living and heavenly example; who when he was
tempted in his great Fast, which he kept to God his Father, he did not Eat,
though tempted to Eat, beyond what the first Adam was, yet did not so much as
hunger in the time of it; but when the time of temptation was over, and the
Devil made to flee, he then hungered, and Angels came and ministered unto him.
This second Adam is to be followed by every true Christian, and the first Adam
what he did in breaking the Fast, in obeying the tempter, may serve as a
warning, least doing the like, the same reward of punishment follow.

Oh that all Kings, Princes, Parliaments, Magistrates and People in
Christendom, would consider, know and understand, that the pure Christian
Religion does not teach, allow nor admit that any man's Estate, Liberty, Person
or Life, ought to be ruined, tortured or destroyed, because they do not
receive, believe nor understand the same. No man can make or force his Brother
or Neighbor to be a true Christian; he that is not so, has and will have
punishment sufficient: It Is enough for Caesar (or the Civil Magistrate) to mind
the things of his kingdom, and to watch over those whose Opinions and
Principles leads them into Plots and Conspiracies, Massacres and Rebellions,
and all sorts of Violence, under the notion of advancing the kingdom of Christ,
his Church and Ordinances, and the holy Catholic Religion: Even these (let
their name be as it will) he that rules for God and the good of men, ought to
have an eye and care that they may not have power and opportunity to execute
the same.

THE END.

