THE Kings Supremacy ASSERTED. OR A REMONSTRANCE OF The Kings Right AGAINST The
PRETENDED PARLIAMENT.

By ROBERT SHERINGHAM M.A. and Fellow of Gunvill, and Caius-Colledge in
Cambridge.

C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Printed formerly in Holland, and now Reprinted by W. Godbid and are to be sold
by Richard Skeleton, and Richard Head, at (...)

TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES II.
By the Grace of God KING of England, Scotland, etc. Defender Of the Faith.
Most Gracious, and Dreadful Sovereign,
THE Pretended Parliament of England having their Agents lately in the Low
Countries, treating with the United Provinces about conditions of an offensive
and defensive war, my resolution was to have set out this Remonstrance in the
Dutch tongue for the satisfaction of those Provinces: but the treaty ended
almost as soon as I began to actuate my resolution; whereupon I altered my
purpose, and have now set it out in English for the satisfaction of your own
Subjects, hoping the truth being here clearly illustrated, may have some effect
upon their Consciences, which cannot but have great sway over them in ordering
and directing their Actions. Experience teaches that most men act less boldly
and resolutley, (especially where their lives must be engaged) when they act
against their Conscience, then when they are persuaded of the lawfullnesse and
justice of their cause. There has been more blood spilt by civil war in your
Majesty's dominions within the space of ten years, since those pernicious
principles touching the Supremacy of the People and lawfulness of resistance
have been instilled into men's minds by some who fetched their doctrine from
Hell to furnish the world with tragedies, then formerly in an Hundred. I
conceive the nearest and readiest way to reform such un-christian practices, is
to reform the Conscience; although I deny not but more sharp and violent
remedies must also be applied: for some have lost all sense of Conscience, whom
your Majesty, I hope, assisted by the almighty providence of God, shall reform
by the Sword. This is that which Religion calls for at your hands, now
oppressed by such a multitude, and confused swarm of Sectaries, that I should
think it impossible for so many men of several Religions to live together in
unity, did not the Likeness of their Nature and Manners reconcile their
affections, as much as their differences in Religion can alienate and estrange
them. And this is that which all your faithful Subjects pray for, who desire
nothing more in this world then to see your Majesty seated in your Royal
Throne, and able to protect them from the insolences of the Rebels, who make
their will their law, disposing as freely of men's lives and fortunes, as if
they had created them and given them their Being.

It is a rule in Optics, when a dark body is greater then a light to which it
is directly opposed, it casts a shadow in infinitum: Such a shadow (if the
continent were capable of an infinite shadow) will the dark body of the Rebels
cast upon the Kingdom of England, whilst it is interposed between your Majesty
and your loyal Subjects, depriving them both of your favorable Aspect, and of
your Light and Influence, without which they can look for nothing but a
continuation of their present miseries: for should the Rebels prevail and
prosper in their designs, what else can be expected, but that which is wrested
from others by Force and Violence, should be maintained by Tyranny and
Injustice? But whilst they wade in blood to places of preferment and command,
the Lord shall overthrew them in the midst of their course, as he overthrew
the Egyptians in the Red Sea; I usurp not the name of a Prophet, but I speak
as one believing God to be a faithful observer of his promises: He will not
always be deaf to the prayers and complaints of those that are oppressed, but
send them diliverance in his due time, and supply your Majesty with all things
necessary both to vindicate your own Rights, and free your People from their
oppression.

THE CONTENTS.
AN INTRODVCTION.
The beginning, raise and progress of the Rebellion raised by the pretended
Parliament. The Principles whereby they endeavor to justify their proceedings.
The Questions that shall be discussed,

THE FIRST QUESTION.
Whether the people and their Deputies in Parliament be Supreme and above the
King, or coordinate with him by the Laws of the Land.

CHAP. I. The State of the Question explained. CHAP. II. The Kings Supremacy in
general showed by the Statutes of the Land. CHAP. III. The Kings Supremacy in
particular showed by the Statutes of the Land. CHAP. IV. The Kings Supremacy in
general showed by the Common Law. That the English Monarchy is susceptible of
no alteration. That fundamental Laws ought not to be changed. CHAP. V. The
Kings Supremacy in particular showed by the Common Law. CHAP. VI. The Kings
Supremacy both in general and particular showed by Reasons depending upon the
Laws and Customs of the Land. CHAP. VII. Diverse objections made by the
pretended House, answered: The Kings Supremacy showed to be in his Person not
in his Courts. CHAP. VIII. Diverse general objections made by the Author of
the treatise of Monarchy touching the limitation and mixture of the English
Monarchy, and coordination of the two Houses, answered. The nature of absolute,
limited and mixed Government explained. CHAP. IX. Diverse general objections
taken from the testimony of his Majesty, Bracton and Fortescue, together with
the Presidents of Edward the second, and Richard the second, answered. CHAP. X.
Objections made against the Kings Supremacy in particular, by Mr. Bridge, the
Reverent Divines, and Other, answered.
AN INTRODUCTION.
The Beginning, Raise, and Progress of the Rebellion raised by the pretended
Parliament. The Principles whereby they endeavor to justify their proceedings.
The Questions that shall be discussed.
I Look upon the government of England, if the Laws might be restored to their
ancient dignity and authority, as inferior to none in the world. Parliaments,
whilst the King and Parliament have acted in their several spheres, and not
invaded the rights and privileges of one another, have always been the surest
means under God to unite their affections together, and to prevent those
dangers which by their mutual discord must of necessity have ruined both. Some
are so rash as to affirm, that all Transactions, Negotiations, and accords
between Kings and Subjects ought to be interdicted; not only depriving
subjects of the light and favors which they should receive from their Prince,
but Princes also of many commodities which they may receive by capitulating
with their subjects in Parliaments, where the whole kingdom being present,
either in person or by representation, may give the King, and receive from him
again, such reciprocal testimonies of love, that he may be assured his people
seek nothing more then the preservation of his life, honor, and Royal dignity;
and they, that their King endeavors no less to increase and maintain the
liberty, riches, and prosperity of his people And I am confident the last
Parliament had been as great as blessing to the land as ever any was in former
ages, had not the ambition, avarice, and malice of some interrupted the course
of the laws. But for this assembly of Traitors which has a long time called
themselves a Parliament, (sitting without the house of Lords, and secluding
from the house of Commons, all that would not be as cruel, barbarous, and
wicked as themselves) it is a disturber of the Kingdoms peace, an enemy and
destroyer of the people; and if we look upon their actions in their beginning,
in their raise, and in their progress, they may seem to have had always a
formal opposition to justice, and to have acted by some occult and specifical
quality not common to other Christians. There was indeed at the first beginning
of the Parliament, much murmuring and discontent amongst the people, partly
caused by the monopolies, and unusual taxation of Ship-mony, and partly
occasioned by the abuses of diverse Courts. Here the enemies of the
Commonwealth finding a spacious overture to enter into this Rebellion, began
to act their parts, and being too provident to loose such an advantage,
labored to exasperate the minds of the people, and to stir up those evil
humors which began already to appear. And although his Majesty offered all
just satisfaction for what was past, and the best security themselves should
in reason require that the like Disorders might for ever after be prevented,
yet these turbulent and factious spirits, being for the most part men of broken
fortune, and hoping to heal themselves by the ruin of others, opposed all such
motions, and would needs themselves become Chyrurgions to the state; and as
Chyrurgions are wont to smooth and stroke the parts which they resolve shall
bleed, so they began to smooth and stroke the people, promising them a new
light in matters of Religion, and that they would remove the grievances, and
sweeten the evils which affected the Common wealth: although in stead of
removing and sweetning them, they have almost made them incurable. By these
persuasions mixed with many pretenses of Religion they procured the people to
meet together in great multitudes, and in a tumultuous manner to assault diverse
of the Lords as they were going to the Parliament, and to drive them back
again, not permitting them to speak in the house when their speech was most
necessary for the service of the Kingdom. Although it was easy for his Majesty
to discover their intentions, yet the love he bare his people made him to
dissemble it, and to give way to their proceedings, hoping they might in time
be brought by his favors to mitigate and correct their furious practices; but
finding at last that his patience served for nothing else but to fortify and
encourage them in their malice, he thought himself obliged to take such ways
as he judged most convenient to stop the course of their proceedings, the
continuation whereof was like to bring so many mischiefs to the Commonwealth:
and seeing it was like to be prejudicial to the safety of the people as well as
to his own to stay longer in a place where there was neither security for his
person, nor liberty for any other then those factious persons to vote according
to the dictats of their own reason, he was forced to withdraw himself from the
Parliament to avoid the pernicious effects of those men's counsels which were
resolved the whole commonwealth should sink rather then themselves not obtain
those places of command and profit which they aimed at. The King being gone it
was not to be wondered if they which in his presence had the boldness to weave
such pernicious designs against the state, should in his absence endeavor to
corrupt the fidelity of his subjects, for having the city of London wholly at
their command, they neither wanted means nor opportunity to draw the people to
their faction, who by such artificial devices as they used were easy to be
ensnared: They told them that by resisting the King, they should not be
rebels, but an army authorized by those which were depositaries of the Kings
authority; that this resistance was an inspiration from heaven which promised
the restoration of their ancient liberties which, they said, had been so often
violated by the King: They made them believe that the authority of the King,
and the whole commonwealth, would be brought into confusion if they did not
vigourously oppose those disorders were growing upon them, and remove those
evil counselors from the King that did mislead and seduce him; and withal
they set out a Declaration promising to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
person and authority together with the liberties of the Kingdom, assuring them
they had no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness, or any way to alter the constitution of the government, or of
Parliaments consisting of a King, a house of Lords, and a house of Commons. But
now we see the effects contrary to those words and promises which were so
solemnly made to the whole Kingdom: for they have not only diminished his
Majesty's just power and greatness, overthrown the nature and very being of
Parliaments, but most traitorously deprived his Majesty of his life, and that
afte he had condescended so far as to satifie all their unreasonable demands:
which fact of theirs although it has been masked with many specious pretenses,
and colored with the fairest shows of justice; yet was it the most execrable
murder that ever was committed next that of our Savior Christ: and his
ambitious judge has gained this, that next PILATE, BRADSHAW of all such judges
shall by posterity be esteemed the chief. This murder of the King as it was
most unjust, so was it also most unseasonable considering the present
disposition of the Kingdom, whose strength being already too much weakened and
attenuated, ought not to have been further wasted and consumed by renewing the
war, which the death of the King did threaten. But such motions could work
nothing upon those which had long before resolved to make all other
considerations give place to profit and ambition: the people abused themselves
whilst they thought this factious assembly would be more careful and tender of
them then of the King: for they have not only brought a new war upon them
which might have been avoided, dashing them all against one another, but have
also themselves many ways barbarously afflicted and destroyed them: they have
made the scaffold the Gibbet, the prison, and the grave, the common places of
their rendezvous; and those which they have not devoured by their cruelty, they
devour by their unsatiable avarice; whilst they declaim against Kings for
oppressing the people by unjust taxations, they have themselves, as has been
computed by many, squeesed more in one year from the Commonwealth then all the
Kings of England have done since the conquest. The lawful Magestrates are
deprived of the liberty and honor of their functions; and such as are the
greatest enemies to justice are set up in their places; some are bereft of
their estates, others are driven out of the Kingdom and forced to seek a
foreign air, where they may breath more freely then in their own: The whole
Nobility, Clergy, and Commonalty walk desolately and mournfully up and down,
being no more like the men they were, then the skins of sacrificed beasts are
like their living bodies. And after all these indignities offered to the King
and people, they endeavor contrary to the laws to alter the government and to
pull up the very foundation of the Kingdom, calling their new frame and
structure a Free Estate, and themselves the keepers of the freedom of England:
Thus having guilt over this Idol of their own fancy, they force all men to fall
down and worship it; they whose virtue oblige them to refuse; are cast into a
furnace hotter then that of Babylon.

Seeing the body of the Kingdom devoured thus to the very entrails, I could
not withont horror behold such a miserable carcass so rent and torn in every
part, nor could I satisfy mine own conscience if I should not endeavor
according to my poor abilities to oppose the rage and sury of these men which
are grown so fat with the blood and spoil of others: My intention therefore is
reserving matters of fact to speak here of matters of right, and to show the
injustice of their cause, and discover the falsehood of all those Principles
whereby they endeavor to justify their proceedings; not doubting but I shall
so far convince the understanding of all those that shall read this ensuing
discourse, that they shall not hereafter enter into any combination with the
rebels, or continue with them in them in case they be already engaged, except
their hearts be hardened so far, as they dare act in matters of such
concernment contrary to their consciences.

The Principles and grounds whereby they endeavor to justify this present war
against the King are two; First they say that it is lawful for the people to
resist their sovereign and supreme governors by force of arms in case they be
Tyrants, and bent to subvert the laws and religion established, or by illegal
proceedings invade the lives, estates, or liberties of their subjects. But
there is some disagreement amongst them in the restriction and limitation of
their Principle; for some give free scope and liberty to all private persons to
resist, and with their swords in their hands to defend their lives and estates
against the unjust invasion of all Kings and governors whatsoever. Others do a
little stint the people and limit the bounds of resistance, permitting none to
have that power but subordinate Magistrates, or the people collectively taken
and their subsistutes in Parliament. Yet these content themselves with the same
particular instances brought by others, alleging little besides particular
examples, as the example of David who (as they say) would have resisted Saul if
occasion had been offered; The example of the Priests, who, (as they say)
assaulted Uzziah, and such like examples of particular men, which were neither
the people collectively taken, nor their substitutes in Parliament, nor yet the
greater part subordinate Magistrates.

But some have thought upon an other way how to make good their rebellion
confessing the former assertion to tend directly to the ruin and subversion of
government, and to be also contrary to the law of God: these proceed upon
another Principle, namely that supreme jurisdiction belongs to the people, the
King they say is major singulis but minor universis, greater and has more
authority then any one of his subjects taken by retaile, but taken in the gross
his subjects are greater and have more authority then he; and these agree
altogether in this that they teach all authority to be originally in the people
tanquam in primo subjecto creato as in the first subject immediately under God,
and from them translated to Magistrates; Yet these are also divided amongst
themselves about the extent and latitude of the power that may be translated;
for some of them say that the rights of soveraignity belong to the people by
the law of nature, and are so essential to them that they cannot be separated
or divided from them; they cannot be taken away by conquest, they cannot part
with them by consent, but under what form of government soever they live, by
what means soever established and set up, they have still reserved in them a
supreme jurisdiction over all Magistrates, by which they are authorized to give
a legal judgment upon all their actions, and to resume again their whole
authority when they shall see occasion, making a circle in government, and
granting a power in Magistrates to judge and govern the people, and also in the
people to judge and govern their Magistrates. Others on the contrary side say
that the people may lose the rights of sovereignty by conquest, or part with
them by consent, so that they shall not reserve to themselves supreme
jurisdiction over their Magistrates to judge juridically whether their actions
be legal or illegal; but the people of England (they say) have not de facto
parted with their authority in such a full degree, but are supreme by the laws
of the land, or at least coordinate with the King; for at the first coalition
of the government by paction and agreement made with the King they reserved to
themselves a part in the rights of sovereignty which they still hold by law.
This is their other Principle as destructive to government as the former, and
the authors and maintainers of them both agree well enough in their end, that
is, to stir up the people to rebellion: only they of the first rank would
persuade them they may lawfully do it by way of self preservation; and they of
the second by way of jurisdiction.

I intend now by Gods assistance to examine these mischievous Principles, and
to discover as well the falsity of them, as the dangerous consequences that
flow from them, which I hope to perform with such clearness, and evidence, that
the most harc-brain'd sectaries amongst them shall be convinced, if they will
but read that which shall be alleged against them.

Now that I may proceed in opening and clearing the truth with the better
method, I will divide the matter I am to handle into two parts; In the first
part I will speak of Supremacy, and here I will show that the King alone is the
only supreme head and governor of the Kingdom of Englan and that all the
people and their deputies in Parliament, as well collectively taken, as
severally, are his subjects and not coordinate with him: In the second part I
will speak of Resistance, and there I will show that the supreme Magistrates
and governors of any Kingdom or Commonwealth may not by their subjects be
resisted by force of arms upon pretense of tyranny or misdemeanour, or upon
any other cause or pretense whatsoever. I will begin with Supremacy, because
they endeavor now chiefly to purge themselves from the murders, and injustice
which they have committed by the authority of the people, whose supremacy they
say is sufficient to warrant their proceedings. At the first they denied not
the supremacy of the King, but as the keepers and guardians of it they raised
an army against him by virtue of his own authority, but having seized upon his
person and imprisoned him, it was then more conducible to their ends to avouch
the supremacy of the people: But whosoever have the title, they exercise the
power themselves, and as before they rebelled against the King, so now they
murder and oppress the people by pretense of their own authority, which as
their Deputies in Parliament they intend to manage as long as they can find
means to defend and uphold their tyranny. Now, although this pretended
Parliament are no more deputies of the people of England, then the Bantiti are
deputies of the people of Italy, who if they had as great a power would soon
have as great a right as these to govern under that pretense, yet for the
present we will suppose them such, and examine only their Principle by which
they labor to support their cause, that is, the Supremacy of the People. And
first I will show that the people and their deputies in Parliament are neither
supreme nor coordinate with the King by the laws of the land, as some of them
say; secondly, that they are not supreme by the laws of nature, as others;
thirdly, that the people never had in them any authority or jurisdiction at all
which they could give or resume again upon occasion, as they generally affirm.
And these particulars I intend to handle in three questions.

The first question shall be, Whether the people and their deputies in
Parliament be supreme and above the King or coordinate with him by the laws of
the land.

The second, Whether the people and their deputies in Parliament be supreme by
the laws of nature, and have always reserved a juridical power of judging
their magistrates, whether their actions be just, and of resuming authority in
case they be not.

The third, Whether authority be originally in the people, and translated by
them to Kings and other supreme magistrates; or in the Kings and other supreme
magistrates themselves immediately from God tanquam in primo subjecto creato,
as in the first created subject.

The KINGS Supremacy asserted.
The First QUESTION. Whether the People and their Deputies in Parliament be
supreme and above the King or coordinate with him by the Laws of the Land.
CHAP. I. The state of the Question explained.
THE first Question that shall come into consideration is, Whether the people
and their Deputies in Parliament be supreme and above the King or coordinate
with him by the Laws of the Land. The pretended Parliamentarians affirm the two
Houses to be coordinate with the King in the rights of Sovereignty; for the
Monarchy of England, they say is a mixed Monarchy, and this mixture is in the
power and rights of Majesty themselves, so that the King alone has not full
and plenary authority to perform all acts requisite to Government, but there is
in the Monarchy a concurrence of several powers belonging to several estates,
which being mixed together make up one whole and entire power, and those
several estates one supreme head of the Commonwealth. And although some of
them are so liberal as to allow the King a primity of share in this
coordination; yet others say that the superiority belongs to the two Houses,
the King being greater then any one of the Members of Parliament, but less
then the two houses collectively taken, who in the legislative power, which is
one of the principal rights of Sovereignty, have a greater Interest then He, in
whose breasts alone remains the final determination of Law; for they deny the
King to have a negative voice, as if his sitting in Parliament were a ceremony
and mere formality, and not an act of Majesty and Jurisdiction. This
foundation, as I think, was first laid by the fuller Answerer, but the
Treatiser, the Reverend Divines, and diverse others have added a superstructure
to it of many fine and new inventions of their own, which are not needful to be
here related, because they alter not the state of the Question; for they all
affirm the two Houses to be coordinate with the King in the rights of
Sovereignty, and the mixture of the English Monarchy to be in the power it
self. I will set down their assertions in the fuller Answerers own words.
Before we judge, says he, of what a Parliament can do in England, it will be
needful to know what kind of Government this of England is; we are therefore to
know that England is not a simply subordinative and absolute, but a
coordinative and mixed Monarchy; this mixture or coordination is in the very
supremacy of power it self, otherwise the Monarchy were not mixed: all
Monarchies have a mixture or composition of subordinate and under officers in
them; but here the Monarchy or highest power it self is compounded of three
coordinate estates, a King, and two Honses of Parliament. And again a little
after, he says, But you will say, what? is not the Parliament subordinate to the
King? Are they not all Subjects? I answer, the Parliament cannot be said
properly to be a Subject, because the King is a part, and so he should be
subject to himself: no, nor are the two Houses without him subjects, every
Member seorsim, taken severally, is a Subject; but all collectim in their House
are not. In his Answer to Doctor Ferns Reply he adds further. Although every
one and all the Members are Subjects, the Houses cannot properly be said to be
subject and coordinate too; they are the two membra dividentia, which must at
no hand admit coincidence: nay, though all the Members as parts, and put them
together too, are Subjects, yet all the parts of a whole taken all together are
not equal to the whole, the order, site, relation, union of the parts, whence
the formality of the whole results, being still yet wanting. These are the
fantasies of the pretended Parliamentarians, which are so gross and contrary
to Law, that the fuller Answerer seems to me to have been in a dream, when his
head was first impregnated with such conceptions; And although I cannot but
acknowledge that both the liberty and safety of the Nation consists in
Free-Parliaments, yet I cannot forbear to declare the Truth in such a time as
this, wherein Parliaments are abolished, and yet their Authority and Supremacy
pretended to maintain Tyranny and Rebellion.

I say therefore in opposition to these fantasies, first, that the King alone
is by the Laws of the Land the only Supreme head and Governor of England, and
that the people and their Deputies in Parliament, taken both collectim and
seorsim, as well collectively as severally, are his Subjects, and not
coordinate with him: there is no mixture at all in the rights of Soveraingty;
for in respect of the power it self, the Monarchy is absolute, simple, pure,
independent, without profanation of outward mixture, the King alone without
further influence from the two Houses having full power and authority to do or
cause to be done all acts of Justice. The King alone makes Laws by the asscent
of the two Houses, and if the two Houses are said at any time to make Laws, it
is by a delegate power and authority communicated to them from him, and not by
any power and authority which they have radically in themselves.

Secondly, I say that the King alone is not only invested with all the rights
of Soveraingty, but has them also so inseperably annexed to hs Royal person by
the Laws of the Land, that they cannot be separated from him by any Act of
Parliament, by any civil constitution, or pragmattical Sanction, by any Law or
Ordinance whatsoever; but in case the King himself should improvidently by Act
of Parliament agree to any thing tending to the diminution of his Royal
Dignity, it is then in the power of the Common Law to control such a Statute,
to make void all such acts as tend to the degradation, much more such as tend
to the annihilation of Majesty. Having thus opened the state of the Question, I
will now proceed to demonstrate the truth by Statutes, by Common Law, and by
reasons depending upon the laws and customs of the land.

CHAP. II. The Kings Supremacy in general showed by the Statutes of the land.
I Could both from Saxon and diverse other laws and antiquities show the Kings
of England to have ruled more absolutely, and to have anciently exercised a
larger Jurisdiction, then has of later years been exercised or challenged by
their Successors: but because many immunities and privileges have been granted
to the Subjects since their times; I will therefore confine my self to such
statutes as have been made since the giving of the great Charter. And, to avoid
tediousness, I will omit many statutes wherein the King is by both Houses
collectively taken acknowledged to be supreme: for they frequently in the
statutes style him, Our gracious Sovereign Lord the King. Our dreadful
Sovereign Lord the King. I will likewise omit many others wherein they
acknowledge themselves to be his Subjects, and that when they were in their
site, relation, order, and union, in which posture the fuller Answerer fancies
them to be coordinate: for such expressions run through diverse statutes, Most
humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty your faithful and obedient subjects
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this your present
Parliament assembled. In their most humble wise shown unto your Royal Majesty
your loving subjects the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons of this
present Parliament assembled. I will only allege such statutes as have been
made on purpose to declare to whom Supremacy and all power and jurisdiction
belong: for there has been diverse acts of Parliament made to that end upon
several occasions, wherein the Kings Supremacy has been acknowledged and
confirmed unto him.

In the four and twenty year of Henry the eighth an Act was made that no
Appeals should be used but within the Realm: the Reason alleged in the Statute
is because the King alone is the only Supreme head of the Realm, and is
furnished with plenary and entire power to do all acts of justice. Where by
diverse sundry old authentic Histories and Chronicles it is manifestly declared
and expressed that this Realm of England is an Empire, and has so been
accepted in the world, governed by one supreme head and King, having the
dignity and Royal estate of the imperial Crown of the same: unto whom a body
politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of people divided in terms and by
names of spiritualty and temporalty been bounden and owen to bear next to God a
natural and humble obedience, he being also institute and furnished by the
goodness and sufferance of Almighty God with plenary, whole, and entire power,
pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and jurisdiction, to render and yield
justice and final determination to all manner of folk resiants or subjects
within this his Realm. This clear testimomy of the Kings Supremacy, is thus
eluded by the fuller Answerer. says he, what is meant by governed by one
supreme head, such a one as is able to do all acts of needful justice, which
the King in his natural capacity cannot do (he cannot make a law) it must
therefore be understood in his full and entire politic capacity, which takes
in Law and Parliament; nor can it be said that by those words a body politic
compact of all sorts and degrees the Parliament is properly meant, but the
Kingdom at large.

King could signify the King and the two Houses of Parliament, yet in this it
must of necessity signify the King alone: 35. H. 8. cap. 1.
these words having the dignity and Royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the
same, can have reference to no other. Besides, in this Answer he contradicts
his own Principles: for if the two Houses be coordinate with the King, and have
power radically in themselves, not derived from him, they cannot be
comprehended under his politic capacity. Whereas he says the King cannot make
a Law, and infer from thence that the King alone without taking in the two
Houses has not entire and plenary jurisdiction, his inference is very infirm;
for it does not diminish Majesty, but redounds to the glory of it, Argum. l. 8.
c. de legibus.
to give laws to the people by the counsel and assent of wisemen: It has
been, and is for the most part the practice in absolute Monarchies, to make
Laws that shall bind posterity by general consent and agreement, which yet
does not deprive the Monarch of his power, or derogate any way from the
plenitude and entireness thereof. But I shall speak more of this when I come
to answer their objections. Whereas he says that by a body politic compact of
all sorts and degrees, not the Parliament, but the Kingdom at large is
properly meant, I know no man will contradict him. yet I say the two Houses are
comprehended under the Kingdom at large, and are representative thereof in
Parliament, and representatives cannot be the head, when the Kingdom at large,
whose Representatives they are, is but the body; And therefore here the fuller
Answerer has a little overshot himself; for if by the body politic, the
Kingdom at large be understood, then is the King major universis greater then
all the people collectively taken by his own confession.

In the first year of Queen Elizabeth another Act was made, wherein she is
declared supreme head of the Realm in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, and an Oath enjoined to be taken by diverse both Ecclesiastical and
Lay persons, wherein they were to acknowledge her supremacy, and to promise
faith and true Allegiance: the Oath was this, I A. B. do utterly testify and
declare in my conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only supreme
Governor of this Realm, and of all other her Highness dominions and
countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as
Temporal, and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate,
has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or
authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm, and therefore I do
utterly renounce and forsake all foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiorities
and authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear faith and
true Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and lawful successors, and
to my power shall assist and defend all jnrisdictions, privileges,
preheminences, and authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens Highness,
her Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed to the imperial Crown of this
Realm; so help me God and the Contents of this Book.

That this Statute was made to exclude a foreign power, and therefore all that
can be collected out of it is, that the Queen was above all forraigners, but
not above the People and their Deputies in Parliament.

Governor of the Realm: the words of a Statute, whatsoever the end was, are
always supposed to be true, and are pleadable in their usual and Gramatical
sense to all purposes. But was the Oath framed only to exclude a foreign
power, are they sure of that? When God shall make inquisition for blood, and
call the Reverend Divines, the fuller Answerer, the Treatiser, and the rest of
their Accomplices to account for all the murders, oppressions, and injustice,
whereof they have been the Authors and Abettors by stirring up the people to
Rebellion, and teaching them lies, they will be found to have broken the oath
of Allegiance, now his Majesty's rights have been invaded by the pretended
Parliament, as well as if they had been invaded by a forreigner. For the
Statute was made as well to declare who was the Supreme Governor of the Realm,
as to declare who was not; The Pope challenged no Superiority over the Queen in
Temporal matters, and yet in the Oath the Queen is acknowledged the supreme
Governor of the Realm as well in Temporal as in Ecclesiastical causes: This
had been very superfluous, if it had been composed and given only to exclude
the Pope; and was neither true nor a fit expression, if the two Houses had been
coordinate with her: neither had they sufficiently excluded a foreign power by
this Act, which, they say, was the only end was aimed at: for the Pope claimed
supreme jurisdiction over all in Ecclesiastical causes, as well over the two
houses as over the Queen; yet in this act provision is made for none but the
Queen: by the title of the Statute all ancient jurisdictions are restored to
the Crown; but there is no restantation of dignity or jurisdiction to the
people or to their substitutes in Parliament.

That the Queen is declared to be supreme in respect of particular persons, but
not in respect of the people collectively taken, or their Substitutes in
Parliament.

supreme Governor of the Realm, and the Realm includes the People collectively
taken.

Besides supremacy cannot admit of that distinction, for they that have any
above them or coordinate with them are not supreme, although they be greater
then any one in particular.

That the Queens supremacy was to be understood, in curia non in camera in her
Courts and not in her private capacity.

Lambert in his Discourse upon the high Courts of Justice, almost at the end of
his Book speaks punctually to this exception, Thus have I, says he, run along
our Courts of all kinds, and have said (as I was able) severally of these lay
and mixed Courts of record deriving them from the Crown their Original, and
drawing by one and one (as it were so many roses) from the garland of the
Prince; leaving nevertheless the garland it self un-despoiled of that her
sovereign virtue in the administration of justice: or as Bracton says well;
Rex habet ordinariam jurisdictionem, and omnia jura in manu sua, quae nec ita
delegari possunt quin ordinaria remaneant cum ipsc Rege: And therefore
whatsoever power is by him committed over unto other men, the same nevertheless
remains still in himself in so much as he may take knowledge of all causes
unless they be felony, treason, or such other, wherein because he is a party,
he cannot personally sit in judgment, but must perform it by his delegates. The
Kings authority then is as well in his person in regard of his private, as in
his Courts in regard of his politic capacity, and according to the Acts of
Sovereignty and Majesty only in his person; for a delegate power can not be
Supreme: not but that it is the same authority whereby he acts himself in
person, and his judges in his courts, but because it is not all the same
authority, but restrained in his Judges by commission, writ, or law.

In the first year of Edward the sixth an Act was made wherein the King is
acknowledged to be the Supreme head of the Church and Realm, and that all power
and authority was derived from him. Whereas the Archbishops and Bishops and
other Spiritual persons in this Realm do use to make and send out their
summons, 1 E. 6. cap. 2.
citations and other process in their own names in such form and manner as was
used in the time of the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the
form and order of the summons and process of the common law, used in this
Realm. Seeing that all authority of jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is
derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty as Supreme head of these Churches
and Realms of England and Ireland, and so justly acknowledged by the clergy of
the said Realms, and that all courts Ecclesiastical within the said two Realms
be kept by no other power or authority either foreign or within the Realm but
by the authority of his most excellent Majesty. Be it therefore further
enacted, etc. Is it not evident from hence that the two houses of Parliament
are subordinate to the King and that they have their power by derivation from
him, who is the fountain of all authority? These words seeing that all
authority of jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deducted from
the Kings Majesty, as Supreme head of these Churches and Realms of England and
Ireland, do clearly intimate the two houses to have no authority radically in
themselves, and to be no way coordinate with the Kings Majesty in the rights of
sovereignty.

For conclusion of this Chapter I will add one Act more made in the first year
of King James, wherein the two houses of Parliament collectively taken made an
humble recognition of their faith and obedience to him. We your most humble and
loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, do from the bottom of our hearts yield to the
Divine Majesty all humble thanks and praises not only for the said inestimable
benefit and blessings above mentioned, but also that he has further enriched
your Highness with a most Royal progeny of most rare and excellent gifts and
forwardness, and in his goodness is like to increase the happy number of them,
and in most humble and lowly manner do beseech your most excellent Majesty,
that (as a memorial to all posterities amongst the records of your high court
of Parliament for ever to endure of our loyalty obedience and hearty and humble
affection) it may be published and declared in this high court of Parliament,
and enacted by authority of the same, that we (being bounden thereunto both by
the laws of God and man) do recognize and acknowledge (and thereby express our
unspeakable joys) that immediately upon the dissolution and decease of
Elizabeth late Queen of England, the imperial crown of the Realm of England and
of the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent
birthright, and lawful and undoubted possession, descend and come to your most
excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly and lawfully next and sole heir of
the blood Royal of this Realm, as is aforesaid; and that by the goodness of
Almighty God, and lawful right of descent under one imperial crown, your
Majesty is of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, the most
potent and mighty King, and by Gods goodness more able to protect and govern us
your loving subjects in all peace and plenty then any of your noble
Progenitors. And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit and oblige
our selves, our heirs, and posterities, for ever, until the last drop of our
bloods be spent: And do beseech your Majesty to accept the same as the first
fruits of this high court of Parliament, of our loyalty and faith to your
Majesty and your Royal progeny and posterity for ever. This is a far different
strain from that which the present pretended Parliament have used to his
Majesty, who although bound both by oath and duty to have been as respectful
and obedient toward him, yet have they themselves after many insolences
committed against his person, most audaciously and unadvisedly taken away his
life, and procured others by defamatory libels to blast his credit, who
according to the trust reposed in them, cease not to traduce him, and by
malicious aspersions to stain his chiefest virtues, creeping like Snailes over
the sweetest flowers, and leaving behind them their slime and filthiness.

CHAP. III. The Kings supremacy in particular showed by the Statutes of the
Land.
THe Kings supremacy in general being thus confirmed by several Acts of
Parliament, I will now descend into particulars, and show his Majesty to be
legally invested with all the particular rights of sovereignty. I will begin
with the Militia, which is a right so essential to Majesty, that it can not,
nor ought not to be separated from it: For Majesty consists not in a bare and
empty title, but in the rights of sovereignty, which he cannot be said to
possess, who wants the Sword to protect the Scepter. It was confessed by the
pretended Parliament at the beginning of these dissentions, that the Militia by
right pertained to his Majesty, and therefore at the first they labored to
have it assigned to them by his own assent; but he opposing their unjust
desires, as knowing both his own and the ruin of his posterity would be the
necessary consequences of such a grant, they resolved seeing they could not
gain it by surrender, to take it by assault, and assisted by men of like
natures and inclinations, they seized upon his Majesty's forts and Magazins,
and have since exercised an arbitary and tyrannical power over the lives and
estates of all that pleased them not, and none could ever please them, but such
as are of the same humor and disposition with themselves. I must confess I am
amazed when I consider how confidently and desperately they have carried on
their designs in a case so contrary to law and justice; for they could not have
begun a war or contested with his Majesty about a matter more clear then that
of the Militia, which is a right so inherent in the crown, settled upon it by
the fundamental Laws of the Land, and confirmed by so many several acts of
Parliament, that although the pretended Parliamentarians have a great dextetity
in coining distinctions to elude the laws, yet they will not easily coin such
as shall serve their turn in this particular. In the seventh year of Edward the
first a Statute was made to enjoin all men to go to Parliaments, Treatises, and
general Assemblies without force and arms, wherein the Kings power over the
Militia is acknowledged. The King to the justices of his bench sends
greeteng. Whereas of late before certain persons deputed to treat upon sundry
debates had between us and certain great men of our Realm, amongst other things
it was accorded that in our next Parliament after provision shall be made by us
and the common assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all
Parliaments, Treaties, and other Assemblies, which should be made in the Realm
of England for ever, that every man shall come without all force and armor
well and peaceably to the honor of us, and the peace of us and our Realm. And
now in our next Parliament at Westminster after the said Treatise, the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of our Realm there assembled to
take advice of this business, have said that to us it belongs, and our part
is through our Royal seigniory, straightly to defend force of armor, and all
other force against our peace at all times when it shall please us, and to
punish them which shall do contrary, according to our laws and usages of our
Realm, and hereunto they are bound to aid us as their Sovereign Lord at all
seasons when need shall be. We command ye that ye cause these things to be read
before you in the said bench, and there to be enrolled. Given at Westminster the
thirtieth day of October. In another Statute made the eleventh year of Henry
the seventh, it is declared that all subjects of the Realm but especially those
that have by the King any dignities, gifts, offices, fees, or annuities; are
bound to assist the King in his wars against all rebellions, insurrections and
powers raised against him. And by the Parliament holden the fourth and fifth
years of Queen Mary an Act was made, wherein it was acknowledged that the Queen
and her progenitors had power and authority to oppoint commissioners to muster
and array the people and subjects, and to levy such a number as they should
think fit to serve them in their wars, and a remedy provided against the
abuses, that had formerly been committed by diverse who absented themselves from
such musters, and brought not their best furniture and array with them. Coke
lib. 7.7. B.
I will omit the statutes made in the 11. H. 7. cap. 1. and the 2. E. 6. cap.
2. by which it appears that the subjects of England are bound to go with the
King in his wars as well within the Realm as without: I will also omit the act
not printed made in the fifth year of Henry the fourth concerning the
commission of array, as also diverse other acts and statutes made to that effect
and purpose, because so much has been said about that subject already by his
Majesty, in his answer to the declaration of both houses of Parliament
concerning the commission of array.

Secondly the legislative power is another right of sovereignty, whereby Kings
and supreme Magistrates are enabled by just and necessary laws to provide for
the peace and safety of their people, and this is wholely and entirely in the
King, although he be limited in the exercise of his power so as he can not make
laws without the assent of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. And
this is that whith the pretended house have stood so much upon: because the
Kings of England desiring to rule their people by lenity, have out of princely
clemency condiscended so far as not to impose upon them (which they anciently
did as I shall show hereafter) any new law, or alter and repeal the old,
without their own consent, they from the premises would make the people believe
that their authority is equal to the Kings, and that themselves as their
deputies are coordinate with him: and not content with the share which they
unjustly challenged at first, they afterward laid claim to all, wholely
excluding the King, and denying him his negative voice, usurping and taking
upon themselves the whole power of making laws, whereas they have no other
interest or authority but what they derive from him: the Statutes declare this
in express terms, 5. R. 2. cap. 2.
for their ordinary style is, The King does will and command, and it is
assented in the Parliament by the Prelates, 7. H. 4. cap. 15.
Lords, and Commons. Our Sovereign Lord the King by the assent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal and the Commons in this present Parliament has
ordained. And that the meaning and true intention of these expressions is such
as I have said, 22. E. 3.
will appear by the resolution of the Judges, of which I shall speak hereafter.

Now that the King has a negative voice in making laws, and that nothing can
or ought to be esteemed an Act of Parliament without him, is evident by diverse
Statutes. In the first year of King James a Statute was made wherein the two
Houses petitioning the King, that the recognition of their duty and obedience,
as also of his Majesty's right unto the Crown of England, might be published in
High Court of Parliament, to remain as a memorial to all posterity, conclude
after this manner, which if your Majesty shall be pleased (as an argument of
your gracious acceptance) to adorn with your Majesty's Royal assent, without
which it can neither be complete and perfect, nor remain to all posterity
according to our humble desire as a memorial of your Princely and tender
affection toward us, we shall add this also to the rest of your Majesty's
unspeakable and inestimable benefits. But in the fifteenth year of Edward the
third, a Statute was made on purpose to make void an Act whereunto the King had
promised to set his Seal, and seemed to assent, (which by some for that reason
was esteemed a Statute) because he had not actually assented and set to his
seal. Edward by the grace of God, etc. to the Sheriff of Lincoln greeting,
whereas at our Parliament summoned at Westminster in the 15. of Easter last
past, certain Articles expressly contrary to the laws and customs of our Realm
of England, and to our Prerogatives and rights Royal were pretended to be
granted by us by the manner of a Statute, we considering how that by the bond
of our Oath we be tied to the observance and defense of such laws, customs,
rights, and prerogatives, and providently willing to revoke such things to
their own state which be so improvidently done; upon conference and treatise
thereupon had with the Earls, Barons, and other wise men of our said Realm, and
because we never consented to the making of the Statute, but as then it behoved
us, we dissimuled in the premises, by protestations of revocation of the said
statute if indeed it should proceed to eschew the dangers which by the denying
of the same, we feared to come, forasmuch as the said Parliament otherwise had
been without dispatching any thing in discord dissolved, and so our earnest
business had likely been ruinated, which God prohibit. and the said pretensed
statute we promised then to be sealed. It seemed to the said Earls, Barons and
other wise men that sithence the statute did not of our free will proceed, the
same be void and ought not to have the name nor strength of a statute; and
therefore by their counsel and assent we have decreed the said statute to be
void, and the same in as much as it proceeded of deed, we have agreed to be
adnulled; willing nevertheless that the articles contained in the said
pretensed statute, which by other of our statutes or of our progenitors Kings
of England have been approved, shall according to the form of the said statute
in every point, as convenient is, be observed: and the same we do only to the
conservation and reintegration of the rights of our crown, as we be bound, and
not that we should in any wise grieve or oppress our subjects, whom we desire
to rule by lenity and gentleness. And therefore we do command thee that all
these things thou cause to be openly proclaimed in such places within thy
Bailiwick where thou shall see expedient, witness my self at Westminster the
first day of October the fifteenth year of our reign.

Thirdly, allegiance or ligeance is another right of sovereignty due only to
Supreme Rulers and Governors; A coordinate Magistrate who has but a parcel
and share of authority, can not alone challenge all obedience from the people,
for all that are coordinate and have their shares in the rights of Sovereignty
jointly taken together make up one supreme head, to whom only allegiance or
ligeance is due. Now that allegiance or ligiance is due to the King and only
to the King will appear by several Acts of Parliament. In the first year of
King James, the Lords and Commons declared, that both the ancient and famous
Realms of England and Scotland were united in allegiance and loyal subjection
in his royal person, 1. Jac. cap. 2.
to his Majesty and his posterity for ever; In 34. H. 8. cap. 1. and 35. H. 8.
cap. 3. etc. the King is called the liege Lord of his subjects: and in the Acts
of Parliament of 13. R. 2. cap. 5. and 11. R. 2. cap. 1. 14. H. 8. cap. 2, etc.
subjects are called the Kings liege people. By other Acts of Parliament diverse
oaths have been framed and given to the people, the contents and effects
whereof were, that they should bear all faith and allegiance to the King and
his heirs: In the six and twenty year of Henry the eighth an oath was taken by
all the Kings subjects for the surety of the succession of the crown of
England, 26. H. 8. cap. 2.
the oath was this; Ye shall swear to bear faith, truth, and obedience all
only to the Kings Majesty and to the heirs of his body of his most dear and
entirely beloved lawful wife Queen Anne begotten and to be begotten, and
further to the heirs of our said Sovereign Lord according to the limitation in
the statute made for surety of his succession in the crown of this Realm
mentioned and contained, and not to any other within this Realm, nor foreign
authority, or Potentate, and in case any oath be made, or has been made by you
to any person, or persons, that then ye repute the same as vain, and
adnihilate, and that to your cunning, wit, and utmost of your power, without
guile, fraud, or other undue mean, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and
defend the said act of succession and all the whole effects and contents
thereof and all other acts and statutes made in confirmation, or for execution
of the same, or for any thing therein contained. And this ye shall do against
all manner of persons, of what estate, dignity, degree, or condition soever
they be. And in no wise do or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or
attempted, directly, or indirectly, any thing or things, privately or apertly
to the let, hinderance, damage or derogation thereof, or of any part of the
same by any manner of means or of any manner of pretense; so help you God, and
all Saints, and the holy Evangelists. There are two things observable in this
oath, first, that they swear inclnsive to bear all faith, truth and obedience,
to the Kings Majesty and his heirs, and only to them; Secondly that they swear
exclusive to bear faith, truth, and obedience, to no other either within the
realm or without, not to other persons, nor to other authority, by both which
clauses of the oath it appears, that the King, 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
and none but the King, can challenge faith and allegiance from the people.
Afterward in the eight and twenty year of King Henry the eighth the like oath
was enjoined to be taken by all his subjects touching his succession by Queen
Jane, for the former Act touching his succession by Queen Anne was repealed,
but the oath enjoined was otherwise the same; And in the five and thirty year
of his reign an other oath was framed, wherein, besides the contents of the
former touching allegiance due to the King and his heirs, some other additions
were inserted touching his Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes: because the
former oaths were not thought full enough to that effect and purpose; And these
oaths were extraordinary and imposed by special appointment: l. 35.
But besides these there is another ordinary oath of Allegiance which was first
instituted by King Arthur, l. 59.
and is mentioned amongst the laws of King Edward, and confirmed by the laws of
William the Conqueror; this oath cominueth still in force and should by the
law be given in every Leer. The order and form of it appears in Britton who
wrote in the reign of Edward the first, and compiled a book of the Statutes and
laws which were then in use; the effect of it is this: Coke lib. 7. in Calvin's
case.
You shall swear that, that from this day forward you shall be true and
faithful to our sovereign Lord the King and his heirs, and truth and faith
shall bear of life and member and terrene honor, and you shall neither know
nor hear of any ill or damage intended unto him, that you shall not defend so
help you almighty God. By this it is clear enough that allegiance is due to the
King: the pretended house on the other side is so far from having authority to
exact allegiance from the people, that they were all bound themselves by law to
take the oath of Allegiance before they were admitted to sit in the house; and
having every one taken the said oath how they should be absolved, none but
themselves can understand, whose common practice has been to play with oaths
as children play with toys and trifles, seeming rather to make them their
pastime, then to esteem them religious acts, or sacred obligations.

Fourthly to pardon the transgression of the laws, to remit treason, murder,
felony, manslaughter; to appoint subordinate Judges; to make leagues with
foreign Princes and States, all these are rights of sovereignty; and all these
are declared and determined by the Statutes of the land to belong to the Kings
Majesty. First the power of pardoning the transgressions of the law, and of
remitting treason, murder, felony, manslaughter, and such like offenses is
declared and determined to be in the Kings Majesty by a Statute made in the
twenty seventh year of Henry the eighth. 27. H. 8. c. 24.
Where diverse of the most ancient prerogatives and authorities of Justice
appertaining to the imperial crown of this realm, have been severed and taken
from the same by sundry gifts of the Kings most noble progenitors, Kings of
this realm, to the great diminution and detriment of the Royal estate of the
same, and to the hinderance and great delay of justice; for reformation whereof
be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that no person or
persons of what estate or degree soever they be of from the first day of July
which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1536. shall have any power or
authority to pardon, or remit any treasons, murders, manslaughters, or
felonies, or any utlaries for any such offenses aforesaid, committed,
perpetrated, done or divulged or hereafter be committed done or divulged by or
against any person or persons in any part of this Realm, Wales or the marches
of the same; but that the Kings highness his heirs and successors Kings of this
Realm shall have the whole and sole power and authority thereof united and knit
to the imperial crown of this realm, as of good right and equity it
appertains, any grants, usages, prescription, act, or acts of Parliament, or
any other thing to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. Secondly the power of
appointing subordinate judges is declared and determined to be in the King by
the same Statute. And be it also enacted by authority aforesaid that no person
or persons of what estate degree or condition soever they be, from the said
first day of July shall have any power or authority to make any justices of
Eire, justices of assize, Justices of peace or justices of Goal delivery: but
that all such Officers and Ministers shall be made by Letters Patents under the
Kings great Seal, in the name and by authority of the Kings highness and his
Heirs Kings of this Realm, in all Shires, Counties, Counties Palatine, and
other places of this Realm, Wales, and the marches of the same, or in any other
his Dominions, at their pleasure and wills in such manner and form as justices
of Eire, justices of Assise, and justices of peace and justices of Goal
delivery be commonly made in every shire of this Realm, any grants, usages,
prescription, allowance, act or acts of Parliament, or any other thing or
things, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. Thirdly the power of making
leagues with foreign Princes and States is declared to be in the King, by a
Statute made in the fourteenth year of Edward the fourth, which begins thus.
14. E. 4. cap. 4.
Whereas diverse and great offenses and attempts have now of late been done and
committed against the amities and leagues made betwixt our said sovereign Lord
the King and strange Prince. By this beginning of the Statute it is manifest
that the power of making leagues and contracting alliance with foreign estates
is a right belonging only to the crown. I could yet add diverse other acts of
Parliament to confirm this and all the other particulars above named, but I
suppose these which are already alleged are more then sufficient; there are
also other rights of Sovereignty which I could show by the statutes to be in
the King, but because there is no contestation about them, I will not fight
with a shadow; those above mentioned are the chiefest and inseparable from
Majesty.

CHAP. IV. The Kings Supremacy in general showed by the Common Law.
HAving showed the Kings Supremacy from the Statutes, I come now to the Common
law, which is the ground and foundation of it; for Statutes are but
declarations of the royal power, the power it self with the several
modifications and qualifications of it is more ancient then any statute, and
cannot be limited or restrained by an Act of Parliament in any thing that tends
to the derogation or diminution of Majesty: for the English Monarchy by the
common law is an absolute Monarchy susceptible of no alteration in the rights
and preheminences of Majesty.

First I say the English Monarchy is an absolute Monarchy by the Common Law
admitting no mixture in the rights of Sovereignty, the King alone being the
only supreme head and governor having none superior to him or coordinate
with him either singly, or collectively taken, this is expressly determined in
Sir Edward Cokes reports. If that Act of the first year of the late Queen had
never been made, it was resolved by all the judges that the King or Queen of
England for the time being may make such an Ecclesiastical Commission as is
before mentioned by the ancient prerogative and Law of England. Coke lib. 5. in
Caudreys case.
And therefore by the ancient Laws of the realm this Kingdom of England is an
absolute Empire and Monarchy consisting of one head which is the King and of a
body politic compact and compounded of many and almost infinite several and
yet agreeing members; all which the law divides into two general parts, that
is to say the Clergy, and the laity, both of them next and immediately under
God subject and obedient to the head; also the King head of this Politic body
is instituted and furnished with plenary and iutire power, prerogative, and
jurisdiction to render justice and right to every part and member of this body
of what estate degree or calling soever, in all causes Ecclesiastical or
Temporal otherwise he should not be head of the whole body. This is further
proved by Sir Edward Coke by diverse Precedents and Acts of Parliament, who
concludes his report after this manner. Fol. 40.6.
Thus has it appeared as well by the ancient common laws of this Realm, by
the resolutions and judgments of the judges, and sages of the Laws of England
in all succession of ages, as by authority of many acts of Parliament ancient
and of later times, that the Kingdom of England is an absolute Monarchy, and
that the King is the only supreme governor as well over Ecclesiastical persons
and in Ecclesiastical causes as temporal within this Realm; to the due
observation of which Laws both the King and Subject are sworn.

In the second year of King James in Hillary Term letters being directed to
the judges to have their resolution concerning the validity of a grant made by
Queen Elizabeth under the great seal, of the benefit of a penal Statute in
which grant power was given to the Lord Chancelour or Keeper of the great Seal,
to make dispensations when and to whom he pleased, after great deliberation it
was resolved, that when a Statute is made by Act of Parliament for the public
good, the King could not give the power of dispensation to any Subject, or
grant the forfeitures upon penal laws to any before the same be recovered and
vested in his Majesty by due and lawful proceeding: and the reason there
alleged is, because the King as head of the Commonwealth, and the fountain of
justice and mercy, ought to have these rights of Soverainty annexed only to his
Royal person. Coke lib. 7. tit. penal. Statutes.
Car quant un statute est fait pro bono publico and le Rey (come le test del
bien public and le fountain de justice and mercy) est par tout le realm
trust ove ceo cest considence and trust est cy inseparablement adjoyne and
annexe al Royal person del Roy in cy haut point de soveraigntie, que il ne poit
transfer ceo al disposition on poiar d'ascune private person ou al ascune
private use, that is, For when a Statute is made for the public good and the
King (as head of the Commonwealth and the fountain of justice and mercy) is by
all the Realm trusted with it, that confidence and trust is so inseperably
annexed to the Royal person of the King in so high a point of Sovereignty that
he cannot transfer it to the disposition or power of a private person or to any
private use. I shall not need to explain and amplify the matter by arguments
and inferences drawn from these reports for the words are clear of themselves,
and do expressly declare and resolve the Monarchy of England to be an absolute
Monarchy, the King alone to be the only supreme head and Governor of the whole
body, that is, of all the people, as well collectively as severally taken.

And hence it is, (namely in regard of the Kings Supremacy he being the only
head of the Kingdom, having no equal or Superior but God alone, whose
Vicegerent he is upon earth) that the Common law does by way of fiction and
similitude attribute unto him the Divine perfections. 1. H. 7.10.
Finch lib, 2. del ley. bap. 1. Roy est le test del bien public, immediate
desoubs Dieu, desuis touts persons and en touts causes: Et pur ceo entant que
il resemble le person del Dien, and port son image enter homes le Ley attribute
a lui en un similitudinarie manner, 7. E. 4.17. 21. H. 7.2. Coke 7. f. 7. B.
43. El. Coke 5. fol. 114. B. 4. E. 6.31. 5. E. 4.7. 2. H. 4.7. 1. H. 7.19.
bombre del excelleneies que sont en Dien, cest ascavoir SOVERAIGNTIE, tout
terre est tenu de de luy: null action gist verse luy car quis commandra le Roy?
POYAR, il poit commander ses subjects daler horse de Realm en guerr: poet fair
ascune foreine coin current icy per ses Proclamations. MAJESTY, ne poet prend
ne departer ove oscune chose forsque per matter de record si non soit chattell
ou tiel quia de minimis non curat lex. INFINITENES en un manner, 35. H. 6.26.
esteant present en touts ses courts, si come home poet dire en chescun lieu.
PERPETVITY ayant perpetuell succession, and ne unque mor. 10. El. 331. 35. H.
6.61. 4. El. 246.
PERFECTION, car null laches folly, infancy, ou corruption del sank est judge
en lui. VERITY, ne serra unque estoppe. JUSTICE, ne poet esse disseisor ne
fair ascun tort, id est, The King is head of the Commonwealth immediately
under God, over all persons, and in all causes; and therefore because he
represents the person of God, and bears his image, the law attributes unto him
in a similitudinary manner a shadow of Divine excellencies; namely
SOVERAIGNTIE, all lands are holden of him, no action lies against him, for who
shall command the King? POWER, he may command his Subjects to go out of the
Realm to War. He may make any foreign coin current here by his Proclamations:
MAJESTY, he can neither take nor part with any thing without matter of Record,
except it be chattel or such like, because the law regards not such small
matters. INFINITENESS after a Manner, being present in all his courts, and as
it were in all places. PERPETUITY, having perpetual succession, and being not
subject to dye; PERFECTION, for no laches, folly, infancy, or corruption of
blood can be judged in him; TRUTH, he cannot be estopped. JUSTICE, he cannot be
a disseisor or do any wrong.

There are also diverse prerogatives and privileges by the Common law belonging
to the King, and diverse Acts which the King may do, or not do, by reason of his
Supremacy: The King shall not in his writ give any man the style or title of
Dominus because it is unbeseeming his Majesty to use that term to any, he
being himself omnium subditorum supremus Dominus, the supreme and sovereign
Lord of all his subjects: and in this case although there be variance between
the Writ and Obligation, 8. E. 6.23. B. 11. E 4.2. 8. E. 4.2.
or other specialty, yet the Writ shall not abate, which it shall in other
cases, as if they vary in the name, or surname, or if they vary in the surn.

The King can hold land of no man, As. p. 1.18. Elizab. 498.
because he can have no superior, but on the other side all lands either
immediately or mediately ate holden of him as Sovereign Lord: for although a
man has a perpetual right in his estate, yet he has it in the nature of a
fee; and whether it comes to him by descent, or purchase, he owes a rent or
duty for it: and therefore when in pleading a man would signify himself to
have the greatest right in his estate, Littleton f. 3.
he says, Que il est ou fuit seize de ceo en son demesne come de fee, that he
is or was seized thereof in his demeasne as of fee; and if a man holds his
estate immediately of the King, as of his Crown or person, this tenure is
called a tenure in capite, because he holds it of the supreme head of the
Commonwealth.

If a man holds land both of the King and other inferior Lords whereby his
heir becomes a Ward, the King alone shall have the custody both of the heir
and land, the reason which is rendered in law is because the King can have none
coordinate with him, or superior to him. Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 10. Si quis in
Capite de Domino Rege tenere debet, tunc ejus custodia ad Dominum Regem plene
pertinet: sive alios Dominos habere debeat ipse haeres, sive non, quia Dominus
Rex nullum habere potest parem, multo minus superiorem. i. e. If any man
houldeth land of our Lord the King in capite, then his wardship shall wholly
belong to our Lord the King, whether he has other Lords or not, because the
King can have no equal, much less a superior. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 37. Si
aliquis haeres terram aliquam tenuerit de Domino Rege in Capite, sive alios
Dominos habuerit, sive non, Dominus Rex aliis praefertur in custodia haeredis,
and sive ipse haeres ab aliis prius fuerit feofatus, sive posterius, cum Rex
parem non habeat nec superiorem in regno suo; i. e. If an Heir holds land of
our Lord the King whether he has other Lords or not, our Lord the King shall
have the wardship of the heir, whether the heir were first or last infeoffed by
others, because the King has no equal or superior in his Kingdom. The law is
the same as well for whole Societies, Incorporated, and collective bodies, as
for Particular men; if a man should make the two houses his heir leaving them
lands holden of them by Knights service, if the same persons held also of the
King in capite by Knights service, the King alone should have the wardship and
custody of the heir and land, though first infeoffed by the others; and the
reason in law of this prelation is, says Bracton and Glanvil, because the King
has neither equal nor Superior.

By the common law there lies no action or writ against the King, but in case
he seiseth his subjects lands, 21. H. 7.2.
or takes away their goods, having no title or order of law, petition is all
the remedy the subject has, Stanford in his exposition of the Kings
Prerogative c. 22.
and this petition is called a petition of right: The reason which is given in
law for this is because the King is supreme and accountable to none but God.
Bracton lib. 1. cap. 1. Non debet esse major eo. (I. e. Rege) in regno suo in
exibitione juris, minimus autem esse debet vel quasi in judicio suscipiendo si
petat; Si autem ab eo petatur (cum breve non currat contra ipsum) locus erit
supplicationi quod factum suum corrigat and emendet, quod quidem si non
fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod Dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo quidem
de factis suis praesumat disputare multo fortius contra factum suum venire. i.
e. There ought not to be in his Kingdom a greater then he (that is, then the
King) in the exhibition of law, but he ought to be the least, or as it were the
least in receiving judgment if he desire it. But if it be desired of him
(because no writ lies against him) there shall be place for petition that he
would correct and amend his deed, which if he refuse to do, it is sufficient
for his punishent that he may expect God a revenger, for no man must presume to
dispute of his fact, much less oppose and resist it. And again lib. 4. cap.
10. Item inter caetera videndum est quis sit ille qui deijcit, Princeps s. ex
potentia, vel aliquis pro eo, vel Iudex qui male judicaverit, vel privata
persona. Si autem Princeps, vel Rex, vel alius qui superiorem non habuerit nisi
Dominum, contra ipsum non habebitur remedium per assisam, immo tantum locus
erit supplicationi, ut factum suum corrigat and emendet, quod si non fecerit,
sufficient ei propoena quod Dominum expectet ultorem, i. e. It is also to be
considered who it is that disseiseth, whether the King by his power, or some
other in his name, or a Judge who judges unjustly, or a private person. If it
be the King, or any other, who has no superior but God, there shall be no
remedy had against him by assise, only there shall be place for petition, that
he would correct and amend his deed, which if he refuses to do, it is
sufficient for his punishment, that he may expect God a revenger. This is all
the help which a subject has against the King, because he is supreme, and
bound to give an account of his actions to none but God, and this is the course
which the two houses of Parliament are to take by law in case the King
infringeth or is supposed to infringe the rights and liberties of the people,
as will appear by diverse petitions of right exhibited in former Parliaments.

Secondly I say, the English Monarchy by the common law is susceptible of no
alteration in the rights and preheminences of Majesty, I mean by any Act of
Parliament, or by any agreement of King and people: what a conqueror in a just
war, or what the people may do in case the blood Royal, which God prohibit,
should be extinct, is not now disputable: but so long as there remains a King,
or heir apparent to the crown, the rights and preheminences of Majesty can by
no act, agreement, stipulation, or covenant made between King and people be
severed and taken from the crown; should the King unwarily by Act of Parliament
consent to any thing prejudicial and derogatory to his Royal prerogative, such
Acts are void by the common law, and the Judges (being bound by oath to assent
to nothing that may turn to the Kings hinderance or damage) are bound to
declare them so, 23. H. 6. cap. 8.
and have done it de facto upon several occasions. By a Statute made in the
twenty third year of Henry the sixth it is ordained that no man shall continue
Sheriff of a Shire above one year, and that all patents from the King of that
office, for term of years, of life, in fee simple, or in fee tail should be
void any clause or word of non obstante in any wise put or to be put into such
patents to be made notwithstanding; 2. H. 7. Coke lib. 7. fol. 14.
now this Statute so far as it strikes at the Kings prerogative is by the
Judges of the land declared to be void, contrary to the express purview of that
Act, and all Kings since might with a clause of non obstante against the
manifest sense and words of that Statute have granted that office for life in
tail, or in fee. 11. H. 7.11. B.
Finch. lib. 2 fol. 22. Roy poet licencer chooses prohibit per statute, come a
coyner argent que est fait felony per un estatute, and devant ceo fuit loyal
a fair, car ceo est forsque malum prohibitum: mes malum in se, come a levier un
nuisance en le haut chemine, Roy ne poet license home a fair; mes apres que est
fait il poet ceo pardoner. Mes si lestatute dit, que son license sera void, la
le license aver' un clause de non obstante, cest assavoir, dire non obstante
ascune estatute al contrary, ou auterment nest bone: come le Statute 33. H. 6.
cap. 18. est, que grant del Roy deste vicount del ascun county pluis longement
quam per un an serra void; nient obstant que son patent aver un clause de non
obstante: uncore ove un cause de non obstante, tiel patent serra bone. i. e.
The King may license things prohibited by Statute, as to coin silver, which is
made felony by Statute, but was lawful before, for that is evil only because
it is forbidden, but that which is evil in it self, as to levy a nusans in the
high way, the King cannot license a man to do that, but he may pardon it after
it be done. But if the Statute say his license shall be void, there the license
shall have a clause of non obstante, viz. it shall say any Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding, or otherwise it is not good: As the Statute 23. H. 6.
c. 18. is that the grant of the King to be Sheriff of a Shire longer then a
year, shall be void, notwithstanding his patent shall have a clause of non
obstante, and yet with a clause of non obstante such a patent shall be good. So
likewise the King has a power to dispense with penal Statutes, and if such
dispensations should be prohibited or made void by Act of Parliament, Coke lib
7.37.
yet with a clause of non obstante, they shall be good, although it should be
provided in express terms that such dispensations notwithstanding the said
clause should be of none effect. By diverse Statutes it has been enacted, 2. E.
3. cap. 2. 4. E. 3. cap. 13. 14. E. 3. c. 14.
that no charter of pardon of the death of a man nor of other felony should be
granted; yet all these Statutes are by the common law made void, Stanford lib.
2.101.
because they cut off part of the Kings prerogative. So likewise to grant
letters patents of Denization is esteemed by the common law inter jura
Majestatis and insignia summae potestatis, Coke in Calvin's case.
and is so inseparably and individually annexed to the Royal person of the King
as it cannot be divided from it. That which I have hitherto said of the rights
and preheminences of Majesty, is to be understood of those rights and
preheminences that are so essential to it, as they cannot be separted without
the diminution or destruction of Majesty. As the power of the Militia, the
power of making laws, the power of appointing Judges, and such like Acts of
jurisdiction, as also the power of dispensing with penal Statutes, the power of
pardoning the transgressions of the Law, the power of prosecuting the law, and
such like supreme acts of justice and mercy: some of which rights and
preheminences cannot be taken away without giving a wound, others not without
bringing death, and dissolution to Majesty: yet there are other rights and
preheminences that are called privileges which are not so essential to
Majesty, but that they may by, special grace of the King be separated. Bracton.
lib. 2. cap. 24. Ea vero quae jurisdictionis sunt and pacis and ea quae sunt
justitiae and paci annexa ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Coronam and dignitatem
Regiam, nec a Corona separari poterunt cum faciant ipsam Coronam. Ea vero quae
dicuntur Privilegia, licet pertineant ad Coronam, tamen a Corona separari
possunt and ad privatas personas transferri, sed de gratia ipsius Regis
speciali. id est. Those things which belong to jurisdiction and peace: and
those which are annexed to justice and peace pertain to none but the Crown;
neither can they be separated from it because they make the Crown: But those
which are called Privileges, although they pertain to the Crown, yet they may
be separated from it and transferred to private persons, but not without the
special favor of the King.

It may seem strange that the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the House of Commons, which are virtually the whole kingdom, should not have
power to make what Laws they please, and to bind themselves and the whole
kingdom by them in things not repugnant to the law of God; yet if we consider
the ground of this restraint, we shall find it reasonable: for they which lay
the first foundation of a Commonwealth, have authority to make laws that
cannot be altered by posterity in matters that concern the rights both of King
and people: for foundations cannot be removed without the ruin and subversion
of the whole building: As for example, the division of things which is made at
the first foundation of a Commonwealth (whether the people took the country
they divide from the Inhabitants by conquest in a just war, or whether they did
first actually possess it themselves as being before empty and vacant) cannot
be altered by posterity, and a new division made without manifest injustice.
The Laws which they then make for the preservation of their right and propriety
in the said division, can not be disannulled by succeeding Parliaments, nor can
any particular man be deprived of his inheritance, which descends unto him by
virtue of that division, or of any part or parcel, or appurtenances thereof, by
any contrary law which shall be made by them; I speak not what Parliaments may
do by force, but what they may justly do; for they have not such an arbitrary
power, but that they are always in a moral subjection to the rules of justice
and natural equity. And in this case the Kings condition ought not to be worse
then the peoples, but his share and rights in the said division are as firmly
and unchangeably to be preserved, as the share and rights of particular men:
And both the King and people are obliged to this, not only by the rules of
Justice, and natural equity, but by oath, and by the municipal Laws of the
Land, l. 17.
to which they are both sworn. That the King is bound to this, appears by the
Laws of King Edward. Debet vero de jure Rex omnes terras, and honores, omnes
dignitates, and jura, and libertates coronae regni hujus in integrum cum omni
integritate and sine diminutione observare and defendere; dispersa and
dilapidata and amissa regni jura in pristinum statum and debitum viribus
omnibus omnibus revocare. i. e. The King ought by right to maintain and defend
all the Lands, honors, dignities, rights and liberties of the Crown, entirely
without diminution; and by all means to recall again those rights which are
lost and separted from the Crown. That the people are bound to this, l. 35. l.
56.
appears likewise by the Laws of King Edward, and of William the Conqueror,
who did a little enlarge the Laws of King Edward in this particular. Statuimus
etiam and firmiter praecipimus ut omnes liberi homines totius regni nostri
praedicti sint fratres conjurati, ad Monarchiam and ad Regnum nostrum pro
viribus suis and facultatibus contra inimicos pro posse suo defendendum, and
viriliter servandum, and pacem and dignitatem coronae nostrae integram
observandam, and ad judicium rectum and justitiam constanter omnibus modis pro
posse suo sine dilatione faciendam. Hoc decretum sancitum est in civitate
London, i. e. we will and command that all free men of our Kingdom be sworn
Brothers to defend and keep our Monarchy and Kingdom according to their power
against the Enemies of the same, and to maintain the peace and dignity of our
Crown entire, and to exercise right judgment, and justice according to their
power without deceit and delay. This Decree was enacted in the City of London.
By the civil law also the rights of Sovereignty cannot be separated from the
Prince, and the reason alleged is, because they are essential to Majesty.
Suprema jurisdictio and potestas regia, etsi Princeps velit, se separari non
possunt, sunt enim ipsa forma and substantialis essentia Majestatis, ergo
manente ipso Rege ab eo abdicari non possunt. Cabedo practic. observe. par. 2.
decis. 40. n. 8. Io. Andr. in addit. ad specul. tit. de jurisdict. c. Cum
Marthae. de celebrat. Missar. i. e. Supreme jurisdiction and Kingly power
cannot be separated from the Prince although he would himself, for they are
essential to Majesty, and cannot be abdicated whilst he remains King.

CHAP. V. The Kings Supremacy in particular showed by the Common Law.
I Come now to the particular rights of Sovereignty, which are all by the
Common law wholly in the power of the King. First, 19 E. 4.6. Coke 7.25. B.
the Militia is his by the Common Law, and to him it only pertains, to make
War with foreign Princes and Estates; as also to maintain the peace, to
suppress Rebellions, and to see justice executed at home within his own
Kingdom: Fleta lib. 1 cap. 17. Habet Rex in manu sua omnia jura quae ad
Coronam and Laitalem pertinent potestatem, and materialem gladium qui pertinet
ad Regni gubernaculum. i. e. The King has all the rights in his hand which
belong to the Crown, and to Temporal jurisdiction, and the power of the sword,
which belong to the Government of the Kingdom. So likewise says Bracton, lib.
1. cap. 8. Sunt and alii potentes sub Rege qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est robut
belli, sunt and alii qui dicuntur Vavasores, viri magnae dignitatis, vavasor
enim nihil melius dici poterit quam vas fortium ad valetudinem. sunt and sub
Rege milites, s. ad militiam exercendam electi. i. e. There are other great men
under the King which are called Barons, and other which are called Vavasours,
men of great dignity. There are also soldiers under the King chosen to exercise
the Militia. And in the beginning of his Book he says that it is necessary
this power should be in the King. In rege quirecte regit, necessaria sunt duo
haec, arma videlicet and Leges, quibus utrumque tempus bellorum and pacis recte
possit gubernari: utrumque enim istorum alter, us indiget auxilio, quo tam res
militaris possit esse tuta, quam ipsae Leges usu armorum and praesidio possint
esse servatae. Si autem arma defecerint contra hosts, rebelle, and indomitos
sic erit regnum indefensum: Si autem Leges, sic exterminabitur justitia. i. e.
In a King that governs well, two things are necessary, arms and laws, by
which he may be enabled to rule both in times of peace and war; and both these
help the need of one another, whereby both arms and laws may be preserved. If
arms be wanting against enemies, and rebels, the Kingdom shall be without
defense; if Laws be wanting, without justice. This is also evident from the
Tenures, whereby most of the chief men in the Kingdom hold their estates: for
all that hold in capite by Knights service, are bound for their fee to assist
the King in his wars, whenever they shall be summoned by him; whether it be
to suppress rebellion, or to resist a foreign invasion. And this has been
the known Law of the Land ever since the time of William the Conqueror, in the
fourth year of whose reign this right was confirmed unto him by Act of
Parliament: The words of the Statute are these, Statuinus and firmiter
pracipimus, ut omnes Comites, and Barons, and Milites, and Servientes, and
universi liberi homines totitu regni nostri praedicti habeant and teneant se
semper been in armis, and in equis ut decet and oportet, and quod sint semper
prompti and parati ad servitium suum integrum nobis explendum and peragendum,
cum semper opus adfuerit, secundum quod nobis debent de feodis and tenementis
suis de jure facere, and sicut illis statuimus per commune consilium totius
Regni nostri praedicti, and illis dedimus, and concessimus in feodis jure
hereditario. i. e. We will and command that all Earls, Barons, Knights,
Villeins, and all Freemen of out whole kingdom, be always well provided with
horse and arms, as it behooves them, and that they be always in a readiness
to serve us as often as need shall require according as they are bound by their
Lands and Tenements, and as we have appointed them to do by the Common Council
of our whole Kingdom, and for that consideration have given and granted them
lands in Fee for ever.

Secondly, The Legislative power belongs to the King alone by the Common Law,
the two Houses have authority granted them by the King to assent or dissent,
but the power that makes it a law, the authority that animates it and makes it
differ from a dead Letter, is in the King, who is the life and soul of the law,
by whose authority alone the laws command, and forbid, and vindicate, and
punish offenders. So says Bracton lib. 1. cap. 2. Hujusmodi vero Leges
Anglicanae, and consuetudines, Regum authoritate jubent quandoque, quandoque
vetant, and quandoque vindicant and puniunt transgressores. i. e. These Laws
and customs of England by the Kings authority do sometimes command, sometimes
sorbid, and sometimes chastise and punish transgressors. This was also resolved
by diverse Earls and Barons, and by all the justices in the time of Edward the
third: For one Haedlow and his wife having a controversy with the King, and
desiring to have it decided in Parliament, a reference being made to diverse
Earls, and Barons, and to all the justices, to consider of the business, it
was resolved that the two houses were not coordinate with the King in the
Legislative power, but that the King alone made laws by the assent of the two
Houses, that he had none equal or coordinate with him in his Realm, and that he
could not be judged by the Parliament. 22. E. 3.6.
Fuit dit que le Roy fist les leis per assent des peers and de la Commune, and
non pas les peers, and le Commune: Et que il ne avera null pere en sa terre
demesne, and que le Roy per eux ne doit estr. ajuge. i. e. It was resolved that
the King makes laws by the assent of the Lords and Commons: and not the Lords
and Commons, and that he could have no Peer in his own land, and that he could
not be judged by them.

The Common practice of the law confirms this as well as the resolution of the
Judges; for the breach of any Statute whether it be by treason murder, felony
perjury, or by any other way, is an offense against the Kings authority alone,
and pleas made against such offenses are called the pleas of the crown, because
they are done encounter la corone and dignity le Roy, Stanford les plees del
corone. lib. 1. cap. 1.
against the crown and dignity of the King. So that it is not the dignity and
authority of the Lords and Commons which is violated by contempt of the law,
but the dignity and authority of the King.

He may dispense also with such laws as forbid a thing which is not malum in
se, and pardon the transgression of others, as Treason, Felony, and the like;
which in reason he ought no more to do, then to dispense with the laws of
Germany, Spain, or France, or pardon the transgressors thereof, if they were
not made by his own authority.

Again it is an uncontrollable Maxim of Law, Ejusdem est leges interpretari
cujus est condere: None can interpret the laws, but the same power that makes
them: Now that the King calling the Judges to him has this power, is evident
by his exposition upon the Statute of Gloucester made in the sixth year of Edward
the first, extant amongst the printed Statutes, and following immediately after
the said Statute, in these words. After by the King and his Justices certain
expositions were made upon some of the articles above mentioned, that is to
wit, to the first article, for entries by disseisin, damages shall run from the
time of the Statute published. In the same wise, in writs of enter upon
disseisin in all writs of Mortdauncester. Cousenage, Aiel or Befaiel, of
intrusion by one act by any manner of writ, damages shall run after the writ
purchased against them that held by Statute, albeit their ancestors died seized
thereof, etc. Here we see to whom the interpretation of the law belongs, the
Judges by themselves have a power to interpret it judicialiter, they could not
otherwise proceed to judgment; but being called by the King, with him, and
under him, they have a power to interpret it authoritative as has been the
practice, and is the known law of the Land. But for the two houses (besides
that they can do nothing jointly together, unless the King does actually
concur with them) their structure is such that they are altogether incapable
and unfit to interpret law: For the power that interprets law must be always
existent to act as new occasions shall arise, which requires the exercise of
that power, which the two houses are not. And yet were they always existent,
both houses having a negative voice, upon any disagreement between them, the
interpretation of the law must be retarded, and all controversies depending
thereupon undecided: and this disagreement might perhaps endure for ever, and
so a final determination in such suites would be impossible. Now these are
inconveniences which ought not to be admitted in any commonwealth: for it
derogates both from the honor and wisdom of a Nation to be so molded and
framed, that justice cannot have a free passage in all contingencies.

I will yet add for the further clearing of this point, that not only the
legislative power it self, but the very exercise of the power also, so far as
it is essential to government is in the King alone; for he can by edicts and
proclamations provide for all necessary occasions, and special emergencies, not
provided for by fixed and certain laws; which is one of the most excellent and
eminent acts of the legislative power, and a sufficient remedy against all
mischiefs, in case the two houses should refuse to concur with him in those
things which concern the benefit of the Kingdom. He may also grant immunities,
liberties, and privileges, to any college, town, city, or incorporation, and
authorize the said communities to make such local Statutes as shall oblige
every member thereof so far as they contradict not the general Statutes of the
Land, which are all acts of the legislative power that he can exercise without
the concurrence of the two houses.

Now concerning the Kings negative voice, 12. H. 7.10. 4. H. 7.18. 7. H. 14.
Judge Jenkins fol. 18.
it is the known law that the King has a power of dissenting, and that no act
of Parliament can have any authority except either in person or under his seal
he signifies his assent.

Thirdly allegiance or ligeancy is due to the King, and none but the King by
the Common law, as Sir Edward Coke shows at large in Calvin's case from the
resolution of the Judges. By that which has been said appears, says he,
that this ligeance is due only to the King so as therein the question is not
now cui sed quomodo debetur. It is true that the King has two capacities in
him, one a natural body being descended of the blood Royal of the realm, and
this body is of the creation of almighty God, and is subject to death,
infirmity, and such like; The other is a politic body or capacity, so called
because it is framed by the policy of man (and in the 21. E. 4.39. B. is called
a mystical body) and in this capacity the King is esteemed to be immortal,
invisible, not subject to death, infirmity, infancy, nonage, etc. Vide Pl. Com.
in le Case de Seigmor Barclay 238. Et in the case del duchy 213. vide 6. E.
3.291. and 26. ass. pl. 54. Now seeing the King has but one person and several
capacities, and one politic capacity for the realm of England, and another for
the realm of Scotland, it is necessary to be considered to which capacity
ligeance is due, and it was resolved that it was due to the natural person of
the King, which is ever accompanied with the politic capacity, and the
politic capacity as it were appropriated to the natural capacity, and is not
due to the politic capacity only; that is to the crown or Kingdom distinct
from his natural capacity. In the same case a little after it follows. And
where diverse books and Acts of Parliament speak of the ligeance of England as
the 31. E. 3. tit. Cosinage 5.42. E. 3.2.13. E. 3. tit. Bre. 677.25. E. 3.
Statut. 2. De natisultra mare. All these and diverse other spenking briefly in a
vulgar manner ( for loquendum ut vulgus) and not pleading ( for sentiendum ut
docti) are to be understood of the ligeance due by the people to the King. For
no man will affirm that England it self taking it for the continent thereof,
does owe any ligeance or faith, or that any ligeance of faith should be due to
it; but it manifestly appears, that the ligeance or faith of the subject is
proprium quarto modo to the King, omni, soli, and semper.

Fourthly, the power of making Judges, and all such State officers as exercise
any jurisdiction, is in the King alone by the Common law, and can not, nor
ought not to be separated from him: for it is not reasonable that delegate
Judges should be substituted by any but those whose delegates they are; nor can
a King execute justice according to his oath (which next the Glory of God is
the chief end of Government) by a naked title only; His subjects may be vexed
by the rapine and exactions of unjust Judges, they may be wearied by delays,
exhausted by insupportable fees, oppressed many several ways, and the King in the
mean time must stand still and look on, if his hands be bound, and he disabled
from punishing their delinquencies and deputing others into their places. And
therefore this power cannot be disunited from the crown but ought to be de
jure, as it has always been de facto, a part of the Kings prerogative.
Bracton lib. 3. tit. de actionibus, cap. 10. Et si ipse Dominus Rex ad singulas
causas terminandas non sufficiat, ut levior sit illi labor in plures personas
partito onere, eligere debet de regno suo viros sapientes and timentes Deum, in
quibus sit veritas eloquiorum, qui and ederunt avaritiam (quae inducit
cupiditatem) and ex illis constituere Justiciarios, Vicecomites, and alios
Ballivos, and Ministros suos, quibus referantur tam quaestiones super dubiis,
quam querimoniae super injuriis. i. e. And if our Lord the King be not
sufficient to determine all controversies himself, he ought to select wise men,
fearing God, and hating coveteousness, and out of them constitute Justices,
Sheriffs, Bailies, and other officers, to whom controversies and complaints may
be referred. The practice of the law has always been the same since Bracton's
time, and all Judges and chief officers appointed by writ, patent, or
commission from the King. Hence it is that all patents and commission of
Judges, and other such officers, are determined by the common law at the Kings
death. Coke tit. discontinue de process, etc. part. 7.30. Al common ley per
demise le Roy le plea fuit discontinue, and le process que fuit agard, and nient
return devant le mort, le Roy fuit perde: Car per le breve del predecessor
rien poit estre execute in le temps del novel Roy, si non que il soit in
especial cases; car le mort le Roy, non solement les justices de lu^ Bank and
de lau^t, and Barons del exchequer, mes les viconts auxi, and eschetors, and
touts commissions de Oyer and Terminer, Goal delivery, and justices de peace,
sont determine per le mort le predecessor qui eux fist. i. e. By the Common law
all pleas were discontinued by the death of the King, and process awarded and
not returned before his death, was lost: for by the writ of the predecessor
nothing can be executed in the time of the new King, except it be in some
special causes; for by the death of the King not only the justices of both the
benches, and the Barons of the exchequer, but Sheriffs also, and Escheatours,
and all commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Goal delivery, and Justices of peace,
are determined by the death of the predecessor that made them.

Fifthly, the power of making leagues and contracting alliance, as also of
making war with foraign States is in the King alone. Coke lib. 7.25. Leagues
between our Sovereign and others are the means to make aliens friends, and
foedera percutere to make leagues, only and wholly pertains to the King:
wars do make aliens enemies, and bellum indicere belongs only and wholly to
the King, and not to the subject, as appearath in 19. E. 4. fol. 6.6. It has
been resolved by the Judges, 19. E. 4.46.22. E. 4. Fitz. jurisdiction last
placite. Judge Jenkins fol. 17.
that if all the people of England collectively taken should break the league
made with a foreign Prince, without the Kings consent, the league holds, and
is not broken. There are yet other rights of Majesty as the power of Coynage,
the power of granting letters patents of Denization, the power of dispensing
with such laws, as are dispensable, and the power of pardoning the
transgression of them, with diverse others, all which belong to the King by the
Common law; but because they are not called in question, I will pass them over.

CHAP. VI. The Kings Supremacy both in general and particular showed by reasons
depending upon the laws and customs of the Land.
ALthough I esteem positive Laws and customs more demonstrative then
deductions and inferences, yet these have also their weight and importance; I
will therefore in the last place add such reasons as shall sufficiently confirm
the Kings Supremacy, although the laws had positively declared, or the Judges
resolved nothing concerning it.

First, that power which is so under control that it can be annihilated at the
will of another, must needs be inferior to that power which does so overrule
and master it; Now such is the condition of Parliaments, that the King by law
can annihilate them at his pleasure; for they depend upon him quoad existentiam
for their existence and continuance: If it should be granted that Parliaments
are in actu signato by original constitution, yet the precise time of their
existence, and continuance, has always been at the Kings appointment, it
being in his power to call them and dissolve them when he please, so that they
must needs be subordinate to him and depend upon him for their operation, when
they depend upon him for their existence.

reverent Divines, answer, for the convention of Parliaments, the State has
authority in some eases to meet together in Parliament without a legal warrant
from the King, as if the King be a prisoner in the enemies hands, or
distracted; and have done it de facto in the infancy and minority of some
Kings: and for the dissolution of Parliaments, they say that they have heard
wise men affirm, that by law a Parliament can not be dissolved whilst there are
any petitions of grievances, or such matters of importance depending and
unfinished.

reverent Divines to have cited these wise men? Could they not as easily have
said themselves, that Parliaments could not be dissolved by the Kings command,
as they said they might be called without it? Perhaps they thought that such
notorious falsities would never pass currently amongst the people, if they were
not confirmed by the authority of wise men as well as by their own: yet I
believe the wise men they speak of were not so wise as Thales Milesius, but
whatsoever they were, their magisteriall dictates must not pass for law; for
both that which these wise men affirm, and that which they affirm themselves,
is manifestly opposite to law and truth. There was never yet since the first
foundation of the Monarchy a Parliament called without a legal warrant from
the King, nor can a Parliament be called without it; for the cases put by them
are altogether impertinent, and can not be supposed: the King according to his
politic capacity can not be a prisoner, or an infant, or distracted, but in
case his condition be such as make him incapable to guide and manage his charge
in person, as in case of infancy, or distraction, the law has made sufficient
provision who shall exercise the regal power in such occurrencies; if he be
prisoner in the enemies hands he may substitute others, or if he be so closely
kept as that can not be permitted, in such events also the law is not
deficient: but in all these cases nothing can be acted by authority inherent in
the people, but by the Kings authority, which can never be in prison, nor is it
subject to infancy or distraction; and Parliaments called at such time, by
those that have authority by law to exercise the Royal power, are called by a
legal warrant from the King; and without such a legal warrant they never were
nor can be called: It there have been any general Conventions without it, as
the reverent Divines (who should have done well to have quoted their authors,
and their words) assure us, their acts were never esteemed laws, nor such
Conventions, Parliaments. And that the King has a power by law of dissolving
Parliaments when he shall think it fit, has been always without controversy:
The two houses in the last Parliament, though thrifty managers of their
privileges, Modus tenendi Parliamentum 4. pars instit. fol 3.4.
never claimed an arbitrary power of sitting without the Kings assent: It is a
known Maxim of the law, Rex est Principium, Caput, and Finis Parliamenti. The
King is the Beginning, the Head, and the End of Parliament.

Secondly, he that last fashioned and reformed the English Monarchy obtained
the crown by conquest; he had it not by election as a gift and gratuity of the
people, but made his passage by the Sword: and Conquerours are not wont to
allow of such coordinations, or admit so many sharers in the rights of
Soveraigntie as it is phantasied.

that conquest is no good title.



that the conquest was not full and entire, but a partial conquest,
occasioning a composition and agreement, and so the government is specificated
according to that final composition and agreement, which was made.

and agreement, as they speak of, made between them; yet I will take the burden
of proving upon my self, and show there was not: for all the composition and
agreement which was made or reported to be made by any author, was a grant from
the conqueror that the Kingdom should enjoy the ancient laws and customs,
whereby it had been formerly governed, which were called the laws of King
Edward: this he performed, being moved by the petitions and instances of the
people, in the fourth year of his reign, wherein he confirmed unto them the said
laws and customs. Now amongst the laws of King Edward there is nothing to be
found that can give the least color or pretense for such a coordination as is
conceited, but on the other side the Kings supremacy is chiefly established by
the ancient laws of the land, for the common law was the same it is now,
before the conquest, and is the base and pillar of Royal power, as has
already been showed sufficiently: To which I could add many other things out
of the laws of King Edward wherein the King is declared to be a Monarch and to
be Gods vicegerent constituted and ordained to govern the Kingdom (which
includes the people collectively taken) and his Church, and to protect and
defend them (which is an act belonging only to supreme authority, and which
can not be performed without it) from injuries and oppression. (...). fol. 142.
Rex autem quia Vicarius summi Regis est ad hoc est constitutus ut regnum
terrenum, and super omnia sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, et regat, and ab
injuriosis defendat, etc. Vniversa vero terra et tota et insulae omnes, usque
Norwegiam, et usque Daciam, pertinent ad coronam regni ejus, et sunt de
appendicijs et dignitatibus regis, et una est Monarchia, et unum est Regnum, et
vocabatur quondam Regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum Anglorum. i. e.
The King because he is the vicar of God is ordained that he may govern the
Church and his Kingdom, and the people of God, and defend them from all
injuries, etc. But the whole continent and all the Islands ar far as Norway and
Denmark, belong to his crown, and are the appurtenances and dignities of the
King, and are one Monarchy, and one Kingdom, and it was anciently called the
Kingdom of Britain, now the Kingdom of England. By an other law of King
Edward all men within the Realm are obliged to take an oath of Allegiance, and
to promise fidelity to the King, Besold. de jurib. Majestat. cap. 2. number. 36.
Bornit. de Majest. c. 17.
which is a duty to be paid only to supreme authority. L. 35.
Ita debent facere omnes Principes, and Comites, and simul jurare coram
Episcopis Regni in (...) and similiter omnes proceres regni, and milites, and
liberi homines universi totius regni Britanniae facere debent in pleno (...)
fidelitatem Domino Regi ut praedictum est coram Episcopis Regni. i. e. So ought
all Princes to do, (that is, to take the Oath of Allegiance) and Earls, and
swear together before the Bishops of the Kingdom in a public assembly, in
like manner all the great men of the Kingdom, and Knights, and all the free
men, ought to do fealty to our Lord the King, in a full assembly before the
Bishops of the kingdom. To conclude this point; by the Laws of King Edward the
Crown has legibus solutam potestatem, Johan. Corvin. Breviar. cap. 11. Bisol.
cap. 2. de jur. May. Special. number. 41. Morla in Empocio juris tit. 1.
quaest. 2. Petra cap. 25.
which is a prerogative competible to none but supreme powers: by them the King
may dispense with the Statutes, pardon the transgression of them, and loose
whom he please from imprisonment wheresoever he goes by his bare word alone.
L. 19.
Habet etiam Rex alterius modi potestatem misericordiae super captivos;
ubieunque enim venerit in civitatem, vel burgum, vel castellum, vel villam, vel
etiam in via, si captivus fuerit, potest eum solo verbo solvere a captione:
Solutus tamen satisfaciat cui foris secit. Murdrator vero, vel traditor
hujusmodi criminosus, quamvis Rex iis condonaverit vitum and membra, secundum
legem nullatenus in patria remanebunt. i.e. The King has also another kind of
power of pardoning such as are in prison, for wheresoever he goes into any
City, Borrough, Castle, or Village, or also in the high way, if any prisoner
be there, he may by his word alone release him from imprisonment; yet he that
is so released, must satisfy those to whom he has made the forfeiture, but a
Murderer, Traitor, or any such notorious Delinquent, although, the King has
given him his pardon of life and Member, may not by Law remain in his Country.
The laws then granted by William the Conqueror did not deprive him of the
rights of Sovereignty, but did rather strengthen his Title, joining law to
conquest; for lest he might inconsiderately suffer his wings to be clipped,
before he made the said grant he caused all the Laws and Customs that were in
force in the time of King Edward to be written out, and then after good
deliberation, finding nothing in them prejudicial to his Crown and Royal
authority, he ratified and confirmed them, For whereas some of them say the
Fundamental Laws are not written (that so they might cover their fraud and
deceit, who pretending fundamental Laws are able to allege nothing out of
them) this is contrary to all the Histories, and Records of those times, which
testify that Willam the Conqueror commanded twelve of the wisest men to be
chosen in every County, who did upon oath declare all the Laws and Customs
which they knew, not adding or omitting any thing; Aldered Archbishop of York
who had crowned him, and Hugo Bishop of London, as Chronicon Lichfieldense
relates, writ them out with their own hands. Yet he granted not these Laws
without some emendations, Leges H. 1. c. 2.
as appears by the Laws of Henry the first, Lagam Regis EDWARD I vobis reddo
cum illis emendationibus quibus eam Pater meus emendavit, Consilio Baronum
suorum. i. e. I restore unto you the Laws of King Edward with those
emendations, which my father by the advice of his Barons added unto them. For
although he let the old foundation stand, yet he enlarged it, and added diverse
new dignities and preheminencies to the Crown; (...). fol. 151.
not wholely relinquishing the rights he had gained by conquest, as some
without ground or reason affirm, but joining the rights of law and conquest
together: And this was all done by consent and agreement of the people, and
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Thirdly, the two Houses of Parliament are but the Kings Counsel, according to
their usual style, both in our Statutes and Law Books; at first the Members of
the Pretended Parliament gave themselves no other name, and in propability
would have been longer content with it, upon condition, his Majesty would have
observed their counsels as Laws, and have acknowledged himself bound to obey
them: for they were willing then he should have had the title of a King, so
themselves might have had all the power and authority belonging to the Crown.
But the truth is, there is a great distance between Counsels and Commands:
Counselors are but subordinate officers, and may not impose their Counsels
for Laws upon those which they serve in that employment.

That the two Houses are called the Counsel of the Realm as well as the Kings
Counsel, and are trusted by the People as well as by the King.

And oftentimes in the reports of our Book cases, and in acts of Parliament
also the Crown or Kingdom is taken for the King himself, as in FITZ. NATVR.
BRE. FOL. 5. tenure IN CAPITE is a tenure of the Crown, and is Signory in
gross, that is of the person of the King, and so is the 30. H. 8. Dyer fol.
44, 45. a tenure in chief as of the Crown, is merely a tenure of the person of
the King and therewith agrees 28. H 8. tit. tenure Br. 65. The Statute of the
4. Hen. 5. cap. ultimo gave Priors aliens which were conventual to the King and
his heirs, by which gift says 34. H. 6.34. the same were annexed to the Crown.
And in the said Act of 25. E. 3. whereas it is said in the beginning, within
the ligeance of England, it is twice afterward said in the ligeance of the
King, and yet all one ligeance due to the King. So in the 42. E. 3. fol. 2.
where it is first said the ligeance of England, it is afterward in the same
case called, the ligeance of the King; wherein though they used several manner
and phrases of speech, yet they intended one and the same ligeance. So in our
usual Commission of Assize, of Goal delivery, of Oyer and Terminer, of the
Peace, etc. power is given to execute justice secundum legem and consuetudinem
regni nostri Angliae: and yet Little. lib. 2. in his Chapter of Villenage, fol.
43. in disabling of a man that is attainted in a praemunire, says, that the
same is the Kings Law; and so does the Register in the writ of ad jura Regia
style the same.

although the two Houses be the Kings Counsel, yet they are not chosen by
himself, the Lords are consiliari nati born Counselors, and the Commons are
consiliari dati Counselors given him by Election of the people.

and to the preservation of his people, and of their rights and privileges;
not that Counselors have authority over Kings, but because the matter of
their Counsels do morally oblige their consciences: but if their advice and
direction tend to the ruin of either, he may and ought to recede from their
Counsels; and such a King is not a tyrant, but such Counselors traitors by
the law. This is mysteriously represented to the Lords when they are first
preferred to that degree and dignity, by the usual solemnities then performed;
for if in stead of giving counsel for the King, they give counsel against
him, they are not only by the Statutes of the Land declared to be traitors, but
if the Statutes were silent, by a tacit condition of law annexed to their
dignities, and vayled under certain ceremonies used at their first creation,
they are to be condemned for such, and to forfeit their estates. Coke in Nevils
case lib. 7. fol. 34. Ceux que sont countees ount office de graund trust and
confidence, and sont create pur 2. purposes: 1. ad consulendum regi tempore
pacis: 2. ad defendendum regem and patriam tempore belli. Et pur c. antiquity
ad done eux 2. ensigns a resembler ceux deux duties: car primeremt. lour test
est adorn ove un capoe de honor, and coronet, and lour corpse ove unrobe in
resemblance de counsel: secundmt. ilz sout succinct ove un espee in resemblans
q. ilz serr. Foiall and loyal a defender lour Prince and pays: Donques quant
tiel person encout. le duty and fine de son dignity, prist non solemt.
counsel, mes arms auxi eneout. le Roy a luy de destroyer et de c. est attaint
per due course del ley, per ceo il ad forfeit son dignity per un condition
tacit annexe al estate de dignity. i. e. They which are Earls have an office
of great trust and confidence, and are created for two purposes, first, to
counsel the King in time of peace; secondly, to defend the King and their
Country in time of war; and for this cause Antiquity has given them two
ensigns to represent these two duties, for, first, their head is adorned with
a cap of honor and a coronet, and their body with a robe in resemblance of
counsel; secondly, they are girt with a sword in, resemblance that they shall
be faithful and loyal to defend their prince and country; when such a person
then against his outy and end of his dignity take not only counsel but arms
against the King to destroy him, and be attainted thereof by due course of law;
He has thereby forfeited his dignity by a tacit condition annexed unto it.

Fourthly the Parliament is one of the Kings courts, as is apparent both by our
Statutes and law books; 1. Iac. cap 1. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. Fieta lib 2.
cap. 2.
the two Houses therefore must derive all their authority from him: for the
King is a full sea of anthority, from whom all power and jurisdiction, by
commissions, writs, letters pattents, etc. as through so many channells, run
into all his courts; if the two houses have authority radically in themselves
by fundamental constitution, or if they derive their authority from any other
then the King, the court is none of his.

It is his Parliament, because an assembly of his subjects, convocated by his
writ, to be his counsel to assist him in making laws for him to govern by:
yet not his as his other courts are altogether deriving their whole authority
from the fullness which is in him. an assembly of his subjects, whereas he
faith they make laws for him to govern by, and that there is a fullness of
power in him, he does but complement with his Majesty; his suppositions and
principles agrees not with such expressions; for if the two Houses derive not
their authority from his Majesty, but have it radically in themselves, how is
there a fullness of power in him? if the jura Majestatis be divided amongst
them, he has not a fullness, but his share only of power: or how do they
assist him to make laws to govern by? they assist not him alone, but all the
three estates are mutually assistant to one another in making laws to govern
jointly, where their joint concurrence is necessary; or to govern in their
several charges, where they may act severally. Or lastly, how can they be
called his subjects? subjection is due to the three estates acting together, or
to either of them in their several places and jurisdictions, as well as to
him: for it is due to him in the administration of that power which belong to
him alone, so is it likewise to them by his principles, in things within the
verge and composse of their authority. And yet all that he says, if it were
consistent with reason, is not sufficient to make the Parliament his Majesty's
court, except it deriveth all authority and jurisdiction from him; it is not
enough that they are an assembly of his subjects; for in diverse foreign
Nations, Ecclesiastical persons are subjects to the princes they live under,
yet Ecclesiastical courts belong not to those Princes, but to the Sea of Rome;
nor is it enough which he adds, that they are summoned by his writ; for the
Judges of diverse courts, but chiefly of courts Christian, have sent out
citations and summons, in their own name, as the King does by writ, and yet
they are not the proprietaries of those courts; nor yet is it sufficient that
they are his Council; for his Counselors make it not his Court but his
Authority; It is authority that constitutes a court, and inables it to proceed
judicially; he which ownes that, is owner and Master of the Court.

Fifthly, Parliaments as they are now established, consisting of three estates,
the King, the Lords, and the Commons, are but of late existence; and therefore
such a composition and mixture of the said estates, as is pretended, can not be
by original constitution. It is granted that Parliaments otherwise are of a
long continuance, and may plead the prescription of many hundred years; for
although the word Parliament has been introduced (as is probable) since the
Norman conquest, yet a convention of that nature was in use in the time of the
Saxon Kings, who did seldom make laws without the counsel and assent of their
wise men; and this assembly was called in the Saxon language (...) a Council,
and (...) a Synod. It is granted also that the Commons were sometimes called
to such consultations, but that was a thing not necessary, or frequent, but
rare, aibitrary, and contingent. There were no certain persons designed by
law, whose concurrence was required to constitute a Parliament, but the King
used the advice of those only which he pleased to call unto himself, which
were always such as he thought most able to counsel and direct him, in the
matters that were to be consulted of, and whose assent was likely to add most
credit and estimation to the laws that were to be divulged. Sometimes he made
laws without the assent of others; for offa King of the Mercians, In vita
Offae 2.
as Matthew Paris relates, being at Rome, ordained that every Houshoulder in
all his dominions, (which were three and twenty Provinces, or Shires) that had
above thirty pennyworth of goods in the field, should every year pay a Penny
to the maintenance of the English School that then flourished at Rome, which in
those times was a great taxation. His igitur auditis Rex, quid dig ne tant a
benig nitati compenset, secum studiose pertractat. I andem Divina inspirante
Gratia, consilium inivit salubre, et in die crastina scolam Anglorum que tunc
Romae floruit ingressus. Dedit ibi ex Regali munificentia ad sustentationem
Gentis Regni sui illuc venientis, singulos argenteos, de familiis singulis,
omnibus in posterum diebus, singulis annis. Quibus, videlicet sors tantum
contulit, extra domos in pascius, ut trig inta argenteorum pretium excederet.
Hoc autem per totam suam ditionem teneri in perpetuum constituit, excepta tota
terra Sancti Albani, suo Monasterio bonferenda, prout postea coliata privilegia
protestantur. i. e. The King hearing this considered with himself how he might
recompense so great a courtesy; at last by Divine Inspiration very Sound
counsel was suggested unto him, and going the next day into the English School
that then flourished at Rome, he gave to the sustentation of such as should
come thither out of his own Kingdom a penny to be paid yearly for ever out of
every family by all whose goods in the field exceeded the value of thirty
pence. And this he made a perpetual constitution throughout all his dominions,
excepting only the lands, that were to be conferred upon the Monastery of
Saint Albane, as the privileges afterward granted do witness. This law
continued a long time in force, yet I find it not confirmed by act of
Parliament either in his own, or in the reigns of his successors: I find
only in the laws of some Kings, as of King Edgar, and King Edward, a strict
provision made for the payment thereof, L. 4.
because it was the Kings Alms, which reason does imply that it was not given
by the whole Kingdom in Parliament, L. 10.
but by the King alone. But yet in those times laws were made commonly by the
approbation and consent of the Nobles, Archbishops and Bishops, in a public
Synod or Parliament: Sometimes the Queen was present, sometimes the inferior
Clergy, and sometimes also the Commons, but that happened very seldom. I have
seen diverse Charters both in the Saxon and Latin tongue granted to Churches,
and Monasteries, confirmed by act of Parliament, and attested by the Members of
the same, yet amongst them all I have not seen so much as one, whereunto the
assent or name of any of the Commons is subscribed. I will here insert one, for
example sake, granted to the Monastery of Saint Albane by Ecgfride Son of Offa,
because it is but short, Auctar. add tament. and fol. 239, 240.
and extant in the last Edition of Matthew Paris, where any one that please may
see both that and diverse others of like nature. Ego Ecgfridus gratia Dei Rex
Merciorum, anno Dominicae incarnation is septingentesimo nonagasimo sexto,
Indictione quarta, primo vero anno Regni nostri: terram X. manentium nomino
Thyrefeld cum terminis suis. Domino meo Jesu Christo and ejus pretioso Marteri
Albano, liberaliter and eternaliter cum consensu and testimonio optimatum
meorum, in jus Monasteriale, pro anima m^a and parentum meorum
devotissimetribuo and libenter concedi, Sitque praedicta terra ab omui terrenae
servitutis jugo, semper aliena; atque eadem liberate sit libera, qua caeterae
terrae Monesterii beati Albani conscriptae atque concessae sunt a glorioso Offa
genitore meo.

Ego Cynedrid Regina consensi. Ego Vnwona Episcopus. Ego Weohthunus Episcopus.
Ego Beona Abbas. Ego Elfhun Episcopus. Ego Brorda Dux. Ego Wigbertus Dux. Ego
Wicga Dux. Ego Cutbertus Dux. Ego Ethelheardus Archiepiscopus cons. Ego Eobing
Dux. Ego Forthred Abbas. Ego Sighere filius Siger. Ego Esne Dux. Ego Cydda Dux.
Ego Winbertus Dux. Ego Heardbertus Dux. Ego Brorda Dux.
Conscriptus est autem hic liber, in loco qui dicitur Chelcyd, in Synodo
publico. That is,

I Ecgfride by the grace of God King of the Mercians in the year of our Lord
seven hundred ninety six in the fourth Indiction, and first year of our reign,
do give grant, for my own soul, and the souls of my Ancestors with the assent
and restimony of my Nobles, ten Hydes of Land called Tyrefeld with the Bounds
thereof, unto the Monastery of Saint Albane: and I exempt the said Lands from
all Services, and make them free with the same freedom which was granted to
the rest of the Lands of the same Monastery by Offa our father of glorious
memory.

This Charter was written at Chelehyd in a public Synod.

By this Charter it is evident, that Parliaments were holden in those times
without the Commons; for whereas it is specified by the King, that the
abovesaid lands were given cum consensu and testimonio optimatum, his meaning
is, that his grant was confirmed by the assent and testimony of Parliament; and
yet the word Optimates cannot be extended to the Commons, neither was his grant
confirmed by their testimony. In the prefaces likewise of diverse Saxon Laws
set out by Mr. Lambart the persons are expressed by whose counsel and assent
the said Laws were enacted; yet, except only in the preface of King Inas Laws,
there is no mention at all made of the Commons, but several Kings made most of
those Laws by the advice and consent of their Bishops, and wise men, which
were no other then their Privy Counsel; Mr. Lambart in his Archaion affirms
them to be the Nobility, and Commons, and to support his opinion he alleges
a passage out of the Preface of the Laws of King Elfred which is neither
material, nor saithfully cited; for there is no such passage to be found in
that Preface. But to make his error apparent I shall need no other
testimonies, then two precedents mentioned by himself, the first is of a
Parliament holden by Edwin K. of Northumberland the second of a Parliament
holden by Segebert K. of the East Saxons, whereunto they called their friends
and their wise men: for Edwine being instigated by Paulinus to embrace the
Christian religion, Beda Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 13.
answered (...) he (...) his (...) habban, that he would speak with his friends
and with his wise men in Parliament; which he did accordingly, and by their
assent, himself, his whole Nobility, and a great parr of the Commons, were
baptized. In like manner Sigebert held a Parliament whereunto he called his
friends and his wise men upon the like occasion, Beda Eccles. Hist. lib. 3.
cap. 22.
(...) hit (...). Then he held a Parliament with his wise men and friends, and
by their advice, did, and consent, received the Christian faith. From this I
gather that their wise men could not be their Nobility and Commons, as Mr.
Lambart supposes, if Parliaments had been then so molded as they are at this
this time: for all their friends must needs be contained under one of those
degrees, and in case his supposition were true, should not have been
distinguished from their wise men, which in all good construction they must;
for the words do evidently imply, that besides their wise men, they called such
other of their friends, as they thought, by reason of their prudence, or power
and prevalency with the people, were most like to assist them, and further
their designs. But whosoever their wise men were, although they were frequently
called, yet they were not all of them called always to make laws, for in the
time of Ethelstane diverse Laws were made by the Counsel and assent of the
Clergy alone, which we find amongst his other laws. Ic (...) minum (...) binnon
mine (...) mina (...) mina (...) etc. i. e. I Ethelstane K. signify to all my
Governors within my Kingdom, that by the advice of Wulfhelmus my Archbishop,
and all my other Bishops, and servants of God, for the forgiveness of my sins,
I have ordained, etc. And although laws were frequently made, Polydor. Virgil.
lib. 11. Hist.
and Parliaments holden, in the Reigns of the Saxon Kings, yet the people had
been so seldom called to such conventions in the time of Henry the first, that
Polydore Virgil says that institution may seem to have sprung from him. At
illud apposite habeo dicere, Reges ante haec tempora non consuevisse populi
conventum consultandi cansa (nisi perraro) facere, adeo ut ab Henrico id
institutum jure manasse dici possit. i. e. But this I can speak appositively,
that Kings before these times were not accustomed (except very seldom) to call
the people to their consultations, so that this institution may be said to have
had its first beginning from King Henry. This is certain the House of Commons
has been accustomed now a long time to give their consent in making Laws, but
how long is not certain; their opinion is most likely which think this custom
began to take place about the time of Edward the first. For there are probable
reasons which confirm, that Laws were made without the Concurrence of the
Commons long after the time of the abovesaid Henry the first, who, although he
did call them more frequently then any of his predecessors had done, yet he did
not bind himself to make laws always by their assent. But because it would
requite anintire treatise to speak sufficiently of this subject, and because it
can no way prejudice the cause in hand, if we grant Parliaments as they are now
molded to be by fundamental agreement, seeing the K. by the laws of the land,
and the said sundamental agreement, is invested, as has been showed, with all
the rights of Soverainty, I will lay by many advantages, and omit many reasons
and passages which I could allege touching this matter.

Sixthly, if the Nobility and people be then, and only then coordinate with the
King, when they are in their site, relation, order, and union, in Parliament,
as the fuller Answerer affirms; in time of Parliament the Kingdom should be
a Head without a Body: For if the King be part of the Head, and the whole
Nobility part of the Head, and all the people part of the Head too, where is
the Body? And on the other side in the vacancy of Parliaments, the Kingdom
should be a body without a Head: For if the Nobility and people be only
coordinate when they are in their site, relation, order? and union in
Parliament, after a Parliament be broken up, where is the Head? For as the
preservation of the whole consist in the order and union of its parts, so the
dissolution of it follows their separation and divorce. If this opinion then
were true, the Commonwealth should be a strange deformed Monster, for in time
of Parliament, when all the Body were a Head, it should be monstrous by too
much perfection; and our of Parliament, when two parts of the Head were fallen
into the Body, it should be monstrous by too little: In both cases it should
want that beauty and comeliness which consists in the harmony and proportion of
several parts.

Seventhly, if we descend into particulars, we shall find Parliaments to be so
molded, that their frame and composition rendereth the two houses an unmeet
subject for supreamacy; for the Militia, the power of making war or peace
with foreign princes, and most of the other rights of Soveraigntie, require a
subject perpetually existent; many occasional accidents may arise that may
call for present and sudden use of the supreme power, for which there can be
no provision made by bodies not existent.

Lastly if the people collectively taken be Supreme and above their King, there
should be in every Kingdom of the world many Millions of Kings, namely, All
the Subjects, and these many Millions of Kings should have but one Subject
amongst them all, namely, Their King.

I could add much more, both from the statutes, Common law, and reason, as
well concerning the Kings Supremacy in general, as concerning the particular
rights of Sovereignty: But I presume that which has been said is more then
sufficient, not only to satisfy all that are indifferent and neutral, but to
convince those that are most interessed, who shall not easily find shifts and
distinctions plausible enough to illude such clear testimonies of law. But God
only is able to change their hearts, and to make such impressions there as can
cause them to repent and turn from their evil ways; I shall pray continually
he would do it as well in regard of the peace and happiness of the Kingdom,
as of their own salvation, which I cannot otherwise hope they should obtain;
For whatsoever deceives them, and bears up their spirits for a time, repentance
at last, (if God give them grace) will prove their best fortune.

CHAP. VII. Diverse Objections made by the pretended House answered: The Kings
Supremacy showed to be in His Person, not in His Courts.
THE Kings Supremacy being made apparent I shall now proceed to answer their
objections, which yet are of that nature that they deserve more to be contemned
then answered: for in stead of Law they allege Bedas axioms, their own
fancies, and such other impertinencies, as one would think should sooner move a
man to laughter, then to be of their opinion. But because they shall not
complain that their objections are concealed, and because in answering them I
shall further confirm the Kings Supremacy, I will bring them all in order, not
suppressing or omitting any thing that has but the face of an objection, how
slight and impertinent soever. I will begin with that which is alleged by
them in several declarations, the sum and substance whereof, is that which
follows.

Kings Supremacy is meant in curia non in Camera, in his Courts not in his
private capacity. and to speak properly, only in his high Court of Parliament,
wherein he is absolutely supreme Head and Governor, from which there is no
appeal.

And if the Parliament may take account what is done by by his Majesty in his
inferior Courts, much more what is done by him without authority in any Court.

And it is preached to the people in the Kings Declarations, that by the
Supremacy is meant a power inherent in the Kings person, without, above,
against all his Courts the Parliament not excepted, whereby the excellent Laws
are turned into an arbitrary Government.

Argus Eyes will scarce be able to discover a word of Law or truth in all this,
every sentence seems rather to be a Sarcasme then to contain matter of
serious importance, wherein they deal with his Majesty, as the Jews did with
our Savior Christ, who having stripped him of his apparel, and used all the
spiteful and opprobrious terms they could devise against him, added at last a
mock to their other incivilities bowing unto him, and saying, HARLE KING OF THE
JEWS. The pretended House having likewise seized upon all his Majesty's
Revenues, and rights of the Crown, and offered him all the indignities they
could invent, do yet style him their King, and supreme Head and Governor, but
in such a manner, as they may seem, like the Jews, rather to do it by way of
derision then in earnest.

The Kings Supremacy, they say, is meant in Curia non in Camera, in his Courts,
not in his private capacity. As they fancy the people to have conveyed all
authority to the King, so they fancy the King to have poured it out again into
his Courts, as if he had no power, authority, or jurisdiction, adherent in his
person, but had committed all to his delegate Judges, or rather (which they say
is to speak properly) unto themselves: Manwood of sorrest laws part. 1.
whereas he has by law a royal and supiremenent jurisdiction above all his
courts, and may call causes out of them before himself, or hear appeals, and
reform their abuses when occasion require. Lambart. Archaion fol. 95. I shall
not need to repeat that which I have before this time opened, touching the
beginning of the Kingly power and authority, for the delivery of justice to all
the sorts, and in all the suits of his subjects, but I will confirm by proofs
drawn out of our country laws and lawyers that the self same general
jurisdiction is appropriated to all the Kings of this realm of England. Master
Henry Bracton that lived in the time of King Henry the third has in the ninth
and tenth chapter of his book these words following: Rex (and non alius) debet
judicare, si solus ad id sufficere possit, cum ad hoc per veritatem Sacramenti
teneatur astrictus, exercere igitur debet Rex potestatem juris, sicut Dei
Vicarius and minister in terra. Sin Dominus Rex ad singulas causas
determinandas non sufficiat, ut levior sit illi labor in plures personaspartito
onere, eligere debet viros sapientes, and timentes Deum, and ex illis
constituere justiciarios. The words do prove two things serviceable to this
purpose: first, that the K. only is to be the judge of his people, if he alone
were able to perform that office as well because he is within his own Kingdom
the Viceroy of God, (the supreme judge of the world) as also for that he is
thereunto bound by oath, taken at the Coronation. The second that albeit he do
(for the multitude of causes) substitute others underneath him, yet is he not
thereby discharged himself; for it is done ut levior sit illi labor that his
labor be the lighter, not that he should sit unoccupied; and least you should
doubt that so much is not comprised in that oath of his, one question therein
amongst others is this: Facies fieri in omnibus judiciis tuis aequam, and
rectam justitiam, and discretionem in misericordia, and veritate secundum vires
tuas: To which he answers, faciam: wherein the words judiciis tuis, and vires
tuas, do more properly denote his own doing, then the doing of his subalterne
justices; albeit their judgment be after a certain manner, the judgment of the
King himself also, from whence their authority is derived. Much like the words
of Bracton speaks King Edward the first in the beginning of his book of law
commonly called Britton: where after he had showed that he is the Vicar of God.
and that he has distributed his charge into sundry portions, because he alone
is not sufficient to hear and determine all complaints of his people: theu he
adds these words Nous volons que nostre jurisdiction so it sur touts
jurisdictions en nostre realm: issent que in touts manners de felonies,
trespass, contracts, and en touts manners de autres actions personals, on real,
ayons poer a render and fair render les jugements tiels come ils, afferont,
sans a uter process, par la ou nous scavons la droit verite come judges. We
Will, says the King, that our own jurisdiction be above all the jurisdiction
of our realm: so as in all manner of felonies, trespasses, contracts, and in
all other actions personalls, or realls, we have power to yield (or cause to
yield) such judgments as do appertain (without other process) wheresoever we
know the right truth, as judges. Neither may this be taken to be meant of the
Kings bench, where there is only an imaginary presence of his person; but it
must necessarily be understood of a jurisdiction remaining and left in the
Kings Royal body and breast distinct from that of his Bench, Marshalsey,
Common pleas, Exchequer. and the other ordinary courts: because he does
immediately after, in the same place severally set forth by themselves, as well
the authority of the Kings Bench, as of the rest of those his ordinary Courts
of justice. And that this was no new made law, or first brought in by the
Normin conquest, I must put you in mind of that which I touched before, out of
tho Saxon laws of King Edgar, where you did read it thus: Nemo in lite Regem
appellato, nisi quando domi jus consequi non poterit, sin juris summi onere
domi prematur, ad regem ut is id oneris allevet, provocato: Let no man in suit
appeal to the King unless he may not get right at home; but if that right be
to heavy for him, go to she King to have it eased. By which it may evidently
appear, that even so many years ago there might appellation be made to the
Kings Person, whenever the cause should enforce it. Hitherto Mr. Lambart; who
does afterward further prove this supreme and supereminent jurisdiction of
the King by diverse precedents and acts of Parliament. And although the Commons
in some other Parliaments have seemed to impugn this prerogative, yet here, as
he says, Fol. 125.
the Kings always most gravely and considerately repelled that sort of
attempt. The Kings supremacy then is inherent in his Person not in his Courts,
as the pretended House affirm; for his politic capacity can not be separated
from his natural, but what power soever he makes over unto his Courts, the
same and greater remains in Himself; His authority is not separated from him
by such a concession privitive but Cumulative, only as Civilians distinguish
in Concessions of like nature made by the Emperor, that is, He loses no
authority by Communicating it to others, but others, hold that which is
communicated together with himself. As God loses no authority by communicating
it to Kings, so Kings loses it not by communicating of it to their Courts. The
Civilians give these reasons for the ground of their law, not much different
from those alleged by Lambart out of Bracton and others. Credendum non est
Imperatorem ita fontes suos derivasse for as ut nihil penes se remanserit; sed
in quavis concessione semper authoritas and persona ejus excepta censetur: quis
enim tam stolidus ut alii benefaciendo seipsum consumere velit, cum etiam
Principis sit, and ad offitium ejus proprie pertineat jus dicere Knichen. d.
superiorit. territ. cap. 1. number. 518. Wurms. evercit. 3. number. 15. Rosental. d.
feud. cap. 5. conclus. 13. Pruckman. d. Regal. cap. 1. number. 17. Leipold. d.
Concurrent. jurisdict. quaest. 1. i. e. It is not to be imagined that the
Emperor should so empty his fountains as to leave nothing in himself; but it
is to be conceived that in every concession his own person and authority is
excepted, for who is such a fool to consume himself by doing good to others it
is also the essential property, and office of a prince, to do justice.

The pretended House proceed; And to speak properly only his high court of
Parliament wherein he is absolutely supreme head and governor from which there
is no appeal.

but not the King to be more or less supreme: nor is their expression improper
only, but also full of falsehood and deceit; for whereas they say there can be
no appeal from the high court of Parliament, they desire the people should so
construe their words, as to think the two Houses could jointly by reason of the
Kings virtual presence take cognizance of a plea, and give judgment upon it,
from which there could be no appeal; which had they spoke out their falsehood
had been transparent, for only the Lords House is a court of judicature, and
from thence appeals may be made to the King, who may and have reformed the
undue proceedings of that Court, Lambarts Archeion sol. 133.
for anno 18. Edward. 1. Bogo de Clare being discharged of an accusation put
against him in Parliament for some imperfections of form that were discovered
in the complaint, the King commanded him nevertheless to appear before
himself ad faciendum and recipiendum quod per Regem and ejus confilium fuerit
faciendum, and so proceeded to are-examination of the whole cause. Neither is
the former part of their words truer then the latter; the Kings supreamacy they
say to speak properly is only in his high court of Parliament. This in their
sense is false; the supreamacy of the King is no more in his high Court of
Parliament by reason of his virtual presence or politic capacity, then in his
other Courts, when he is personally there his supreamacy then together with his
Person is in the Court, not otherwise. For I have showed already in diverse
places that the rights of Soveraigntie are not only individually inherent in
his Person, but so inseperably also annexed unto it that they can not be
communicated to others by any grant or concession made by himself in private,
or by an act of Parliament. I shall now add, Lib. 7. in Calvinet case.
that their conceit is called in Cooks reports a damnable and damned opinion,
and has been at large confuted, and condemned, by all the judges, as is there
related; it was first invented by the Spencers, who to cover their treason,
said that homage and the oath of ligeance was more by reason of the Kings
Crown, that is, by reason of his politic capacity, then by reason of the
Person of the King: from which opinion they inferred these detestable
consequences. 1. If the King do not demean himself by reason, his Leiges are
bound by oath to remove him. 2. Seeing the King could not be reformed by suit
of law, that ought to be done per aspertee. 3. That his Lieges are bound to
govern in aid of him; all which were condemned by two parliaments, one in the
Reign of Edward the second, called exilium Hugon^s le Spencer. And the other
anno 1. E. 3. cap. 1. And indeed their conceit is so irrational, that it might
easily be prognosticated they would never make good Statsmen: For when the King
is not personally present in his Courts, he can be there by reason of his
politic capacity no other ways but by virtuall emanation; there can be in
them no more authority then is delegated and committed to his judges: now, it
is a common conception as evident as the first principles, that a delegate
power can not be supreme; The exercise of supreme authority in some
Commonwealths may, but the power it self can not be delegated. Kings may also
abdicate and resign up supreme authority but they can not delegate it. In how
general terms soever, say Civilians, authority be granted by the Concessour
to the concessary, supreme authority can not be comprised under those terms.
Quocuuque modo Regalium concessio fiat, nihilominus superius illud and
Majestaticum imperium, ea largitione nunquam censeatur comprehensum, sed potius
major semper, quam est concessa, reservata and retenta putetur potestas. cap.
Dudum. Hoc igitur de praebend. in 6. l. inquisitio. Et ibi De c. de solut.
Periginus de jure sisci, lib. 1. tit. ult. number. 33. Kniken. de jure territorii
cap. 1. number. 315. i. e. Which way soever Regalities are granted, it may not be
supposed that supreme authority is comprehended under such a grant, but rather
that a greater power then is granted is reserved to the Prince.

If the Parliament may take an account what is done by his Majesty in his
inferior courts, much more what is done by him without authority in any court.

if is well put in; they say not categorically they may take an account what is
done by his Majesty in his inseriour courts, yet they would have the people
think them to have such a power; and therefore they lay it down as a
supposition, which they seem to take for granted, although they know it to be
false: If they were a full and legal Parliament, they might indeed take an
account what is done in his Courts by subordinate Officers, but not what is
done by his Majesty, who as King can do no wrong; His authority is from God,
and if injustice be committed in his Courts, his Kingly authority is not the
cause thereof, but the corruption of his judges who abuse it; and his Majesty
may take an account of them either privately, or in his Parliament, but is not
himself accountable for their abuses. For although the judgment of his courts
may, and is termed in law the judgment of the King, yet that is to be
understood of the act it self, which cannot be effected without his influence
and concurrence; K. H. 7.4.
not of the obliquity and deviation from justice which is in it. Nor is he yet
accomptable to any but God for his perfonal actions; by the laws of the land
he cannot be obnoxious to any guilt, had he committed treason or any other
crime before he was King, by taking the Crown upon him all attainder of his
person is purged ipso facto. Enough has been said already to prove both the
Houses and the Members thereof, as well collectively as severally taken, to be
his inferior delegate, and subordinate ministers, that derive their authority
from him, and in case of grievance are to sue unto him by petition, which is
all the help the law gives in such exigencies; for they are so far from having
any jurisdiction over him in matters of misdemeanour, that they cannot take
knowledge of those cases wherein Majesty without disparagement may submit it
self to a legal trial, as in controversies of right, or of title to land, etc.
except he be pleased to have the business decided in that Court. In Haedlows
case before mentioned, it is resolved by all the Justices, that controversies
which concetn the King cannot be determined in Parliament; 22. E. 3.6.
and it is there added above what has been cited, that Kings may not be judged
by others then themselves and their justices, unques Roys ne serra adjuge si
non per eux mesmes and lour justic. And this is true, as it was resolved by
Scrope in the Bishop of Winchesters case, not only in respect of others, but in
respect of the Members of Parliament themselves: for although they are to be
tried by their own respective houses in things which concern the Parliament, if
the fact touch not the King; yet if it touch the King, and the case be
prosecuted by him, they cannot then take cognizance of it, except he thinks it
expedient, who has power if he please to try it in any of his other Courts.
Fitz. tit. coron. p. 3. E. 3. p. 161. Ceux queux sount judges in Parliament
sount judges de lour Pieres, mes le Roy naver Piere in sa terre demesne, per
que il ne doit per eux estre judge ne ailours fair son suite verse cestui qui
luy trespassa quam la ou luy pleist. i. e. They which are judged in Parliament
are judged of their Peers, (that is the Lords by the House of Lords, and the
Commons by the House of Commons) bur the King can have no Peer in in his own
Land, and therefore he ought not to be judged by them, nor to make his process
against him that offends, but where he please himself.

And it is preached to the People in the Kings Declarations, that by the
Supremacy is meant a power inherent in the Kings person without above against
all his Courts; the Parliament not exceped, whereby the excellent Laws are
turned into an Arbitrary Government.

It is no wonder if the Members of the Pretended House were more inclined to
hear what their own seditious Divines preached in Saint Margarets, then what
the King preached in his Declarations; yet I believe it had been better for
them if they had entertained his Majesty's Person and Declarations with more
respect and duty. However for the present may seem to have ruined him and his
people too, yet they which have mounted to places of dignity and profit upon
the dead bodies of the King and People, may find in the end, that Rebellion and
Murder sit not so high, but that vengeance and divine Justice sit above them.
As for the charge which they bring against his Majesty, it is partly false; his
Majesty never used such expressions as they pin upon him: where does he say
that he has a personal power above and against the Parliament? let any man
produce the words out of which he can force such a sense. Their Charge is also
partly vain and frivolous; for whereas they accuse him for saying his Supremacy
was inherent in his Person, they might as well accuse him for saying he was
King: Supremacy is an essential attribute of Majesty, and cannot be separated
without the corruption of its Subject; to say the Kings Supremacy is in his
Courts and not in his person, is not only to contradict the Laws, but the
Common principles of reason. This has been demonstrated in diverse places, yet
because occasion is offered again, I will hear add the resolution of all the
Judges made in the first year of Henry the seventh concerning this matter; for
a Parliament being then called, and both the King himself, and diverse of the
Members, being attainted of high Treason, it was resolved by the Judges that
the Attainder of the Members ought to be adnulled before they could sit in the
house: but touching the King it was resolved, that his attainder was adnulled
upon his admittance to the crown, because the King is personable, that is,
because his Kingly authority was inherent in his Person, by reason whereof he
was discharged of all guilt against the Laws. 1. H. 7.4.
Et donques fuit move un question que serra dit pur le Roy mesme pur ceo que il
fuit atteint, and puis communication ew entor eux, touts accordront, que le Roy
fuit Personable, and discharge de ascune atteind eo facto qil. prist sur luy le
Reign and ee. Roy. i. e. And then a Question was moved what shall be said of
the King himself, for he was also attainted, and after communication had
amongst them, all agreed that the King was Personable, and discharged from all
attainder in the very act that he took the Kingdom upon him and became King.
Nor is the other part of their charge less frivolous and vain, wherein they
accuse his Majesty as if he had committed a great crime in saying his Supremacy
was a power inherent in his person without and above his Courts, for as has
been showed, the King has not only an extraordinary jurisdiction where cases
can have remedy no where else, but ordinary also above all his courts wherein
he is but virtually present: Bracton. Sicut Dominus Papa in spiritualibus super
omnibus habeat, Lib. 5. cap 15.
ordinariam jurisdictionem, ita haber Rex in Regno suo ordinariam in
temporalibus and pares non habet neque superiores. That in Fleta is also to be
understood of the Kings ordinary jurisdiction. Lib. 1. cap. 17.
Potentia Rex omnes in Regno suo praecellere debet, quia parem habere non
debet, nec multo fortius superiorem in justitia exhibenda. The King ought to
have a superimenent power above all the rest in his Kingdom, because he ought
to have no equal, much less a superiout in exhibiting justice.

CHAP. VIII. Diverse general objections made by the Author of the Treatise of
Monarchy touching the limitation and mixture of the English Monarchy, and
coordination of the two Houses, answered. The Nature of Absolute, Limited, and
Mixed Government, Explained.
THE Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, the fuller Answerer, and other
Pretended Parliamentarians, have invented a new form of Government to delude
the People, which they tell them is the Government established in England;
namely, a mixed Monarchy, consisting of three Estates, independent for their
authority upon one another, all of them being coordinate, and having several
shares in the rights of Sovereignty, by the fundamental laws of the land. A
strange kind of Monarchy, not so much as heard of until these times, much
less established in England: for a Monarchy is the Government of one alone, as
the Etymology of the word imports; now to say, the Government of three
Estates, is the Government of one alone, does not sound half handsomely. Other
Authors have spoken of mixed Government, and mixed Commonwealths, but of mixed
Monarchy in that sense which they do, none but themselves have treated. For
according to the Verdict of other Authors, Besol. Synops. polit. doct. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
when Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, are melted and allayed together,
that which resulteth can take its name from none of the simple species or kinds
of Government, although the chief authority, or primity of share belong to any
one of the estates. Yet if they will needs have a mixed Government to be
denominated from that kind that has predominancy, they might with better
reason have called their new frame a mixed Democratie; this denomination
(besides that it is not so improper as the other, Democratie, implying the
Government of the people, but not of the people only, as Monarchy does of the
Monarch alone) is more agreeable to the quality and nature of their platform;
for the Kings authority being so inconsiderable as they make it, the people in
this mixture must needs be the predominant Element. The Author of the Treatise
of Monarchy who seems to give most to the King, although in terms he grants
him a primity of share in the supreme powet, yet in substance he would have it
placed in the two Houses, attributing unto them such authority, as they may
thereby make him deprivable at their pleasure. Now although the said Treatiser
seems to be a Poet rather then a Lawyer, having many new fictions, but
scarcely a word of law in all his treatise, yet because I cannot conveniently
reduce his objections to any of the other Questions that are hereafter to be
discussed, I will answer them in this place: But before I come to examine them,
that all things may be clear, and better understood, I will, for perspicuity
sake, speak a word or two of the division and several kinds of Absolute,
Limited, and Mixed Government.

I will begin with Absolute Government, of which there be three kinds; the
first is Absolute both in respect of power, and also in respect of the use and
exercise of it. In this kind of Government the Supreme Governors have perfect,
Absolute, full and entire power; and in the exercise of it are subject to no
limitation made by any humane law, paction or agreement, but are limited ab
externo by the laws of God and nature only, being otherwise left to the free
determination of their own wills. This is also called Arbitrary government,
not because such governors as have the free use of their power may do what
they please; for their power is bounded by the laws of God and nature, and may
not transgress and go beyond its limits: but because it is not bounded by any
humane positive law made to restrain and regulate it. The ends of Government
may be attained several ways in many particulars without breach of the Laws
of God and nature; now when a Governor is not directed to his end in any of
those particulars by humane constitution and appointment, but has an open and
free passage to act which way he please, his Government is Absolute and
Arbitrary. Amongst all the several kinds of Government this only is jure
Divino, as being more ancient then any humane law that could be made to direct
it, by virtue and authority whereof, humane laws were at first enacted; all
other sorts were introduced by the policy of men, yet lawful, humane
Constitutions serving to conduct power to its end; making as it were a furrow,
for it to pass in, and to contain it, which otherwise is apt to overflow its
bounds, and to degenerate into tyranny. The second is Absolute in respect of
the power alone; In this kind of Government the Supreme Governors have as
perfect, Absolute, full, and entire power as the former, their authority have
the same latitude, and all the same dimensions; but they are limited ab externo
in the use and exercise of it, either by original and fundamental
constitution, or else by laws made afterward by special grace and
condescension: so that although their power be perfect, Absolute, full and
entire, in all respects, and able to produce all the effects of Government, yet
they can not put it forth, and act by it according to their own free election,
or according to the full activity of it, but must act according to those
limitations made and granted by law. The third is Absolute in respect of the
exercise only; In this kind of Government the exercise of the supreme
authority is committed for a certain time, but the supreme authority it self
not translated, to one or more, who by virtue of the said commission may
exercise the power in an arbitrary manner during the time assigned them. Such
were the Dictators of the Roman Commonwealth, who ruled as arbitrarily all the
time of their Dictatorship, as the most Absolute Monarchs in the world, yet the
supreme authority remained in the Senate: And such are they who exercise Royal
power in the minority of Princes, whose Government is Absolute and Arbitrary.

There are also three kinds of Limited Government answereable to Absolute; the
first is Limited both in respect of Power, and also in respect of the use and
exercise of it; In this kind of Government there are always more Governors
then one, which are all Limited in the very essence and being of their power,
having none of them perfect, absolute, full and entire authority, but only
their several shares and proportion: neither can they act in an arbitrary
manner according to the full extent of that power which they have, but have a
certain rule set them by law. The second is Limited in respect of the power
alone; In this kind of Government as in the former, there are always more
Governors then own, which have all their Limited shares, yet may all act
arbitrarily either jointly together, or every one within the pale and limits of
his own authority. The third is Limited in respect of the exercise only; In
this kind of Government, the Governors are absolute in regard of power, but
circumscribed and Limited in the Acts of it.

As of absolute and limited so there are likewise three kinds of Mixed
Government suitable to the other; the first is Mixed both in respect of power,
and also in respect of the use and exercise of it. In this kind of Government
there is a mixture of several powers which compound and make up one perfect,
absolute, full and entire power; and also of several persons and estates, to
whom the said powers do radically and fundamentally pertain, which do jointly
concur in the administration and exercise of them. The Second is Mixed in
respect of the power alone; In this kind of Government several persons and
estates are mixed together in the possession of power, but one alone do
exercise all the acts of Soveraigntie. In this manner was the Roman
Commonwealth governed by Sylla; and by Dictators in the time of exigence and
necessity. The third is Mixed in respect of the exercise only; In this kind of
Government several persons and estates are Mixed in the exercise of power, but
one of the estates alone has the dominion, and propriety of it.

Now touching the Government of England, I have showed already that it is
Monarchical, that the Monarchy is Absolute, in respect of the power; that the
King alone has perfect, Absolute, full and entire jurisdiction, able if put in
action, to effectuate, and bring to pass, all the ends of Government: and that
all other persons, of all estates and degrees whatsoever, both Nobles, and
Commons, move in their several circuits and spheres of activity, by virtuall
emanation from him, and not by force of any power, authority, or jurisdiction
inherent in themselves. And indeed all Monarchies are Absolute in this respect;
that is, in respect of the power, for when the limitation is in the essence and
being of power, Monarchy is destroyed, not limited.

But yet the English Monarchy is Limited in respect of the use and exercise of
power, the King being obliged to govern according to the laws of the land,
which although they do not diminish Majesty in essentialibus, yet they do
diversely qualify, and modificate it. It is also Mixed in the same respect, the
King being obliged in some cases not to use his power without the assent and
concurrence of the two other estates. The pretended Parliamentarians, on the
other side, deny the English Monarchy to be Absolute in any respect; and
affirm it to be Limited and Mixed, as well in respect of the power it self, as
in respect of the use and exercise thereof, the two Houses of Parliament being
coordinate with the King, not only in the administration of power, but in the
possession of it. Yet they are not able to allege one syllable of law to make
good these strange novelties, but strive by indirect inferences to decieve the
people. Howsoever I will bring their objections, such as they are, and answer
them in order: and first I will bring their objections whereby they endeavor to
prove their pretended limitation, and then those whereby they endeavor to prove
their pretended mixture.

I conceive, and in my judgment persuaded, says the Treatiser, that the
Sovereignty of our Kings is radically and fundamentally limited, and not only
in the use and exercise of it: and am persuaded so on these grounds, and
reasons. First, because the Kings Majesty himself, who best knows by his
Council the nature of his own power, says, that that the Law is the measure of
his power: Declar. from Newmarket Mart. 9. 1641.
Which is as full a concession of the thing as words can express. If it be the
measure of it, then his power is limited by it; for the measure is the limits
and bounds of the thing limited. And in his answer to both the Houses
concerning the Militia, Speaking of the men named to him, says, If more power
shall be thought fit to be granted to them then by law is in the crown it self,
his Majesty holds it reasonable, that the same be by some law first vested in
him, with power to transfer it to those persons. In which passage it is
granted, that the powers of the Crown are by law and that the King has no more
then are vested in him by law.

Secondly, because it is in the very constitution of it mixed, as I shall
afterward make it appear, then it is radically limited; for as I showed before
every mixed Monarchy is limited, though not on the contrary: For the necessary
connection of the other power to it, is one of the greatest limitations, a
subordiuation of causes, does not ever prove the supreme cause of limited
virtue, a coordination does always.

Thirdly, I prove it from the ancient ordinary and received Denominations; For
the Kings Majesty is called our Liege, that is, legal Sovereign; and we his
liege, that is, legal Subjects. What do these names argue but that his
Sovereignty and our Subjection is legal, that is, restrained by law?

Fourthly, had we no other proof, yet that of prescription were sufficient: in
all ages beyond record, the Laws and customs of the Kingdom, have been the
rule of Government; liberties have been stood upon, and grants thereof, with
limitations of Royal power, made and acknowledged by Magna Charta, and other
public solemn acts; and no obedience acknowleded to be due but that which is
according to law, nor claimed but under some pretext and title of law.

Fifthly, the very being of our Common and Statute laws, and our Kings
acknowledging themselves bound to govern by them, does prove and prescribe them
limited: For those Laws are not of their sole composure, nor were they
established by their sole authority, but the concurrence of the other two
estates: so that to be confined to that which is not merely their own, is to be
in a limited condition.

England is mixed in the power it self, and that the Legislative power is not
in the King alone, but jointly in the three estates: If these principles were
true, his objections were material; but I have showed the contrary, and shall
yet show it further hereafter. In his other three objections he does not so
much as touch the question propounded; he lays down this conclusion to be
proved, that the Kings Sovereignty is radically and fundamentally Limited, and
not only in the use and exercise of it, but endeavors to prove no more then
that it is limited in general, without specifying whether radically and in the
essence and being of it, or in the exercise only. A Legal moderation and
limitation of Royal power, as far as I know, is denied by none, although the
Treatiser be pleased to lay a false imputation upon some Divines, because they
hold it not limited in the same manner which he has represented it: The Kings
Sovereignty to be radically and fundamentally limited, and not only in the use
and exercise of it, is, in the sense by him explained, to be so limited, that
his Majesty shall not only be restrained in the use and exercise of supreme
power, but shall also be stinted in his share of it, and have no more then a
single part, two other parts of the said power belonging to the other estates.
Now, that he may deceive the people, he makes a show as if he had gained his
purpose by proving the Kings power to be limited in general, whereas he knows
well enough that there is a great difference between being limited, and being
so limited by law. The Kings power to be measured and limited by law, includes
no more then that his power is of such a size and bigness as the law has
ordained; if the law gives him perfect, absolute, full, and entire power, and
limits him only in the exercise of it, this is a restraint and limitation
according to law, yet not in the essence and being of power. And indeed this is
the true and only limitation of Monarchy, whereby the Monarchs power is limited
ab externo by humane laws and constitutions, and not by the free and arbitrary
resolutions of his own will, and yet Monarchy preserved entire. But when the
rights of Sovereignty are divided and placed in several Estates which limit one
another, such a limitation is inconsistent with Monarchy. But the Treatiser
objecteth further aagainst this answer, that where the limitation of power is
only in the exercise of it and not in the power it self all acts of Government
are resolved at last into the arbitrary will of the Monarch: for although he be
limited in the exercise of power by Law, or promise, yet if he will contrary to
Law and Promise sinfully put it forth, his power is authoritative and may not
be resisted: this is the full scope and sum of that which he replyeth to
Doctor Fern with no small ostentation. A Legal restraint, Page 11.
says he, you seem to acknowledge; but such an one as resolve into the
aobitrary Will of the Monarch, as I have made it appear in my former Treatise,
which you will never be able to wipe off by this or any other reply. If this
Reply were strictly examined, it would appear far unworthy such boasts and
brags as are brought to set it out; but I shall only in brief show the
insufficiency of it, and so let it pass. First, therefore I say that we do by
this assertion no more resolve Monarchy then he resolves his mixed
Commonwealth, into an arbitrary Government. For although in a mixed government
every one of the estates has but a limited share, yet taken together they have
perfect, absolute, full, and entire power, which if they will contrary to law
or promise sinfully put forth, it is as authoritative and unresistible as if it
were in one man. He will grant, I suppose, the power of government to be equal
in all Commonwealths, and that there can be no essential but only an
accidental difference between them, for all Commonwealths have a sufficiency
of power to attain to all the ends of government, and to make provision for all
occurrencies, which cannot be otherwise limited then in the exercise: This he
confesses in another place; for disputing about the limitation of power in the
essence and being thereof, and having made an objection against it, in
answering the objection he says, such a limitation cannot be where power is
supreme, but for limitation to a rule and defined way of working, Page 23.
I cannot see how it withstands the end of Government, which is the same in
other terms that he confutes in Doctor Fern, and does expressly conclude that
the power of Government taken in sua latitudine can not be limited in the
essence and being of it, but in the use and exercise only; for, to be limited
to a rule and defined way of working, is to be limited in the exercise, but not
in the essence of power. If then allacts of government are resolved into the
arbitrary will of the governors where the limitation of power is only in the
exercise of it, does he not himself resolve his mixed commonwealth into an
arbitrary Government? But secondly, I say, that to limit power in the exercise
of it, is so far from resolving all cases into the arbitrary will of the
Governor, that it is the only way and means to restrain arbitrarinesse; the
limitation of power in the essence and being of it alone, is not sufficient to
restrain it; for when power is limited in its essence and being, and terminated
only within its own intrinsinque bounds, such a limitation is opposed to an
Infinite, but not to an Arbitrary activity. When the three Estates have all
their limited shares, yet they may all act arbitrarily according to the extent
of that power which they have, not only when they act jointly together, but in
the administration of their several charges, if their power be not regulated by
law in the exercise of it; it is not the limitation of power therefore in the
essence and being of it, but in the exercise, which denominates and constitutes
a limited Government. Power which is limited in the essence and being of it
only, although it cannot act arbitrarily in so great a latitude as when it is
entire and absolute, yet it may act arbitrarily within its own bounds if it be
determined only by the will of him that acts by it, and not by a certain rule
of law. Besides the former objections, the Treatiser in his reply to Doctor
Fern has added others which proceed upon one of their own principles, namely
that all authority and power is originally in the people, from whence he
infers that they may translate as much and as little, as they please to
their governors, and so limit their power in its being and essence. But
because they speak not de facto but de possibili, and because I shall handle
these things ex proposito in the third question, I will referr them them to
their due place.

I conceive it says the Treatiser, a clear and undoubted truth, that the
authority of the land is of a compounded and mixed nature in the very root and
constitution thereof, and my judgment is established on these grounds. First,
it is acknowledged to be a Monarchy mixed with Aristocracy in the House of
Peers, Answer to the 19. Propositions.
and Democracy in the House of Commons. Now (as before was made appear in the
first part) it is no mixture which is not in the root and supremacy of power:
For though it has a subordination of inferior officers, and though the powers
inferiur be seated in a mixed Subject, yet that makes it not a mixed
Government: for it is compatible to the simplest in the world to have
subordinate mixtures.

one Head: Where by one Head, he means not one by mixture, but one single
Person, one pure and unmixed subject, that has all power and authority alone.
The Treatiser, I conceive, has purposely omitted his words, that his sense
might not appear; but I shall cite them in the next chapter, and show the true
intention and meaning of them. Now, whereas his Majesty has acknowledged a
mixture, to infer from thence that he granted the mixture to be in the power it
self, because the other kind is not a true, but an improper kind of mixture, is
a strange and unusual way of argumentation. If his Majesty was in an error,
and apprehended that to be a true mixture, which is not, all that can be
concluded thereupon, is, that he misunderstood the true nature of mixture, not
that he granted the mixture to be such as they contend for, when it is evident
that a man deny a thing in terminis, there is neither candor nor ingenuity in
those, which will by consequences argue him to affirm it: Some accuse the
Roman Catholics of Idolatry, because they affirm such things, as in their
conceit seem by way of consequence to allow it, but no man was ever so void of
ingenuity as to dispute the question whether Idolatry be lawful, and then cite
them for Authors that maintain it to be lawful: In like manner some accuse
Calvine of Turcisme, because he affirm such things, as in their conceit seem by
way of consequence to justify the practice and religion of the Turks; but no
man was ever so unreasonable as to dispute the Question whether the Turkish
religion be the true Religion, and then cite him for an Author that maintained
it to be true; because it is evident that if those questions were propounded in
terminis, the Roman Catholics would deny Idolatry to be lawful; and Calvine,
if he were alive, the Turkish religion to be the true religion, what
consequences soever other men draw from their words. Yet the Treatiser deals
in this manner with his Majesty, for although it be evident, that his Majesty
denied, in terminis, the mixture of the English Monarchy to be in the power it
self, yet he argues him by consequences to affirm it: this to the Antecedent.
But secondly, the consequent is also false; the mistake is in himself, not in
his Majesty: why is it no mixture, which is not in the root and supremacy of
power? he answers, Though it has a subordination of inferior officers, and
though the powers inferior be seated in a mixed subject, yet that makes it not
a mixed Government; for it is compatible to the simplest in the world to have
subordinate mixtures: What if no government in the world be so perfectly simple
as to exclude all subordinate mixtures? it does not follow from thence, that a
subordinate mixture is no mixture. I shall also deny the very ground and
foundation of his argument; such subordinate mixtures, as are in the English
Monarchy, are not compatible to the simplest government in the world; for where
the government is arbitrary and absolute both in respect of power, and in
respect also of the use and exercise of it, supreme governors can put forth
all the acts of power and jurisdiction alone; they can make laws, raise taxes,
and exercise their whole power, according to the full activity of it, without
the concurrence of the other estates: and although they do often make use of
their direction and assistance; yet this mixture in the exercise of power
proceeds not from the constitution of government, but from their own voluntary
election, choosing this as the most conducible means to obtain the ends of
government. For although they may act according to the full activity of their
power, yet they cannot act in person at all times and in all places, nor is one
man's wisdom sufficient to meet with all the Events and accidents of
government, by reason whereof they are driven to seek a remedy against such
inconveniences as would arise frm these and the like causes; and if, when they
find no better they substitute others and give them authority to act with them
in the exercise of power, this voluntary mixture cannot have such an effect as
to denominate a government mixed, because it depend upon the immediate will of
the supreme governor, who may act without them, where and when he please: and
whether he acts with them, or without them, the frame of government is still
the same; for it is the constitution of a government that specificate it, and
causes it to be denominated mixed, or simple. There is a great difference then
between such subordinate mixtures, and the subordinate dinate mixture that is
in the English Monarchy, those are mutable, uncertain, depending upon the will
of the Supreme Governor; this immutable, certain, depending upon the
constitution of the Government: for whether it was effected by original
contract with the people at the first foundation of the Monarchy, or whether it
was established afterward by the voluntary grant and concession of some of our
Kings, or whether it was introduced by custom, the Government is now so
constituted, that the King can not make laws, raise subsidies, or exercise
some other acts of his power, without the assent of the two other estates; So
that the very constitution of the government is mixed in some respect, namely
in respect of the exercise of some acts of power, which happens not in
Commonwealths where the government is arbitrary.

Fern, against mixture in the use and exercise of power. Aristocracy and
Democracy, says he, are powers, not Persons, as well as Monarchy: Page 38.
therefore a composition of these three must be all of powers, and endeed this
Chimera of a mixture in the exercise of power is plain non sense, for a mixture
in the acts or exercise supposes a mixture in the principles of action, that
is in the very powers: a mixed act proceeding from a simple power, is such
Stuff that I never heard before.

Aristocracy and Democracy are powers not persons, as well as Monarchy; and
this he takes for granted, which is both an apparent falsity, and a Solecisme;
for Monarchy, Aristocratie, and Democratie, are neither powers, nor persons,
but forms of government equally relating to both, the words, according to
their etymologies, noting persons as well as powers; and when these are mixed
together, it is the mixture of persons, not of powers, that denominate a mixed
form of Government, as I shall show immediately. Secondly he says, that a
mixture in the exercise of power is plain non fence, for a mixture in the acts
or exercise supposes a mixture in the principles of action, a mixed act
proceeding from a simple power is such stuff that I never heard. Here in stead
of law he brings an Axiom, either of his own coining, or taken out of some
Author that writes De causa and causato, to confirm his mixture; such axioms
are no authentical proofs were they genrally true, which for the most part
they are not, but admit of diverse limitations: it is a very difficult matter to
prove what kind of Government is established in any commonwealth, by Bedas
Axioms, or the Axioms of any other Author; it had been more seasonable whilst
he he was mixing the rights of Majesty, if, in making his assertion good, he
had mixed a little Law with his Philosophy and Logic. But as his Axiom is not
authentical, so without diverse restrictions, it is not true; A mixed act may
proceed from a simple cause, the Sun does by the same power heat, resolve, and
harden, at the same time; for the virtue of natural Agents is diversely
modificated of the subject wherein it is received, and acts variously
according to the several dispositions thereof. And yet if his Axiom were
authentical, or true, it is not pertinent; the question is, whether the
mixture of several estates in the exercise of some acts of power be not a true
mixture, sufficient to denominate a mixed Government; how does it follow now
that it is no true mixture, because a mixed act can not proceed from a simple
power? If that were true, yet a mixed form of Government may proceed from the
mixture of several persons, and estates; for forms of government are no acts.
Besides, the Division of Government into simple and mixed, is made in respect
of the Persons, and Estates, not of the power, which remains the same under all
forms and changes of Government, and cannot properly and per se, but
improperly and per accidens be said to be mixed; for it is mixed only ad
mixtionem subjecti, when it is seated in a mixed subject, being otherwise the
same that it is in a simple: and when a simple form of Government is changed
into a mixed, or a mixed into a simple, the power suffers not the least
alteration, but is denominated simple or mixed, according as it is seated in a
simple or mixed subject. This is the Common assertion of all Authors, who do
generally teach the diversity of Commonwealths to arife from the diversity of
Persons, their simplicity and mixture, from the simplicity and mixture of
Persons, and estates; not from the diversity, or from the simplicity and
mixture of powers. Quoad imperium haud discriminamus species rerum publicarum:
Siquidem in qualibet Rep. deprehendere est summam legibusque solutam
potestatem; verum quoad eos pene quos imperium est, differentia reipublicae
formarum fieri debet, coque nomine aut Monarchicus aut Polyarchicus status est,
Polyarchicus status aut simplex, aut vero mixtus existit. Besold. tit. de Reg.
legit. Frederic. Tileman. Disp. Digest. 2. hes. 8. i. e. We distinguish not the
forms of Commonwealths by power, for there is a supreme power above the laws
in every Commonwealth; but the difference arises from the persons in whom the
power is seated: and in that respect the state of a Commonwealth is either
Monarchiall, or Polyarchicall; the Polyarchicall state is either simple or
mixed. Now where the several forms of government are totally mixed, that is,
where the mixture of the three Estates is both in the power and in the exercise
of it, there the simple forms of government are corrupted, and that which
results out of their mixture and corruption is another form distinct from them
all; which by authors is generally called a mixed Commonwealth: this kind of
government is always Polyarchicall, such a mixture being incompatible to
Monarchy. But where they are but partially mixed, that is, where the mixture
of the three Estates is in the exercise of power alone, there the simple forms
of government are not destroyed by such a mixture, but suffer only an
accidental change. This is a light mixture in comparison of the other, but as
great as is consistent with any of the simple forms of government, and as true
a mixture as the former; which although it does not totally corrupt, yet it
does manifestly allay the simplicity of a government: for where several
estates have interest by the constitution of a government in the exercise of
power, the government is not so simple, as where one of the estates alone have
all the interest.

Thirdly that power where the legislative power is in all three is in the very
root and essence of it compounded and mixed of those three; for that is the
height of power, to which the other parts are subsequent and subservient: so
that where this resideth in a mixed subject, that is in three distinct
concurrent estates, the consent and concourse of all most free, and none
depending on the will of the other, that Monarchy is in the most proper sense
and in the very model of it of a mixed constitution: but such is the state of
this Monarchy, as appears in the former question, and is self-apparent.

Pannormit. cap. gravem de fententia excommun.
Canonists, Bertol. in L. omnes populi ff. de justitia and jure q. 2. princip.
quoestiunc. 5. number. 20.
Civilians, and Suarez lib. 1. de legibus lib. 1. cap. 8. number. 9.
Schoolmen, nor is it to my knowledge contradicted by any, that the Legislative
power is delegable, Besold. de jurib. Majest. cap. 2.
that such a concurrence is no argumeni of Supremacy, or of such a mixture as
they would infer out of it: Arnisae doct. polit. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Some call it therefore apparens mixtura, because it seems to destroy a
simple form of government, and to make a mixture in the power it self, but does
not; though otherwise they acknowledge it to be such a mixture as does remit
the simplicity thereof. Grotius affirms to this purpose, Istam legislationem,
quae alii quam summae potestati competit, nihil imminuere de jure summae
potestatis; quod in Scholis dicunt, cumulative datam censeri, non privative. He
speaks this of laws made by general conventions, whose concurrence, he
says, does not in the least manner diminish the rights of Majesty. Such a
mixture of the three estates has been in other monarchies, which all men
acknowledge to have been absolute in respect of power: In the Persian
monarchy, how absolute soever, the other Estates had interest with the monarch
in the legislative power, as appears by that passage of Daniel, wherein the
Princes, Governors, and other officers of Darius sought to betray him by a
law. Then these Presidents and Princes assembled together to the King, Dan.
cap. 6. verse. 7, 8, 9.
and said thus unto him, King Darius live for ever, all the Presidents of the
Kingdom, the Gevernours, and the Princes, the Counselors, and the captains,
have consulted together to Establish a Royal Statute, and to make a firm
decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days
save of thee, O King, he shall be cast into the den of Lions. Now, O King,
Establish the decree and sign the writing that it be not changed, according to
the law of the Medes and Persians which alters not, wherefore King Darius
signed the writing and the decree. These Princes, Governors, and Officers of
Darius, had the same authority in making laws that the Lords and Commons have
in England; yet were not coordinate with the King: They had votum Consultivum
and Decisivum; these words, have consulted to establish a Royal Statute,
include both an act of Counsel, and an act of Authority and Jurisdiction.
Grotius says, they signed the Decree as well as the King, and that they had
this authority by the constiution of the Government: And the sequel of the
History does imply as much; In Dan. cap. 6.
for had the act been his alone, had he set out his Decree by way of Edict or
Proclamation, he might have altered it himself, as Ahasuerus did the Decree he
set out touching the destruction of the Jews: Esther 3.12, 13. and 8.10, 13.
but being made by the assent of others who had a concurrent authority with him
by Law, he could not alter it. I shall not need to instance in the Roman
Empire, or in other Kingdoms, for it is generally known that such a mixture
was in that, and has been, and is, in most other Monarchies. And not only
whole representative bodies, but diverse particular free Cities have the same
privilege; yet have not supreme authority. In our own Kingdom the
Common-Councill of every Incorporation have authority to make ordinances and
constituions within their own Liberties, for the good order and government of
their body. The Inhabitants of every Parish have authority to make Bylawes and
Ordinances amongst themselves for their own profit, where they have custom for
it; and for the public good, where they have no custom. Coke part. 5. in the
Chamberlain of Londons Case, tit. Cases de Bilawes and ordinances. Inhabitants
dun ville, sauns auscun custom poyent fair ordinances ou Bylawes pur
reparation del Eglise, ou dun haut voy, ou dascun tiel chose, que est pur le
bien public generalme^nt, and in tiel case le greinder part lier. touts sauns
ascun custom. Vide 44. E. 3.19. Mes si soit pur lour private profit them. comme
pur le bien ordering de lour Common de pasture ou semblables; la Sauns custom
ils ne poient fair Bylawes. i. e. The Inhabitants of a Parish without any
custom may make Ordinances and Bylawes for the reparation of a Church or of
the high way, or any other thing that is for the public good in general, and
in such a case the greater part shall bind the less. But if it be for their
own profit. as for the ordering of their Common, or the like, there without
Custom they cannot make Bylawes. Why does not the Treatiser and the Pretended
Parliamentarians conclude from hence that every man is coordinate with the King
in the rights of Sovereignty? for this is done by the Legislative power, and
this authority they have by the constitution of the Government.

But secondly I answer to the consequent, that the Legislative power is not
radically in the three estates, but in the King alone; for although their
assent be free and depends not upon his will, yet their authority is derived
from him: he should have proved his consequent, which he says appears in the
former question, where indeed he does confidently affirm the whole latitude of
the Nomothetical power to be jointly in the three estates, yet offers not to
prove it. But there is scarcely any man in the Kingdom, so much a stranger to
the Laws, but knows that the King alone has power to dispense with the
Statutes, and to abate their rigor where a mischief would otherwise ensue;
that he alone has power by edicts and Proclamations to order all affairs for
which there is no order taken by certain and perpetual laws; that he with his
Judges has power to declare the meaning of the Law, and to give an authentic
interpretation to statutes of ambiguous and doubtful sense. The King can
exercise these and all other parts of the Nomothetical power which are of
absolute necessity to government without the assent of the two houses, whose
concurrence is only necessary in making laws which shall bind posterity, and
may not be repealed without the consent of the people, as well as of the King.
The whole latitude therefore of the Nomothetical power is not jointly in the
three Estates, but the power only of making certain and perpetual Laws; and
when such laws are made it is the Kings authority that gives life unto them,
they having otherwise no power to obleige the conscience then as they are his
Commands. This has been sufficiently confirmed already, yet I will here
further illustrate the truth by the testimonies of Lib. 3. cap. 9.
Bracton and the Author of Lib. 1. cap. 17.
Fleta, who applying that passage of the Civil Law, Quod Principi placet legis
habet potestatem, to the King of England, say, That clause ought not to be
understood of every thing that is rashly presumed to be his will, but of that
which is justly determined upon good advice and deliberation by the Council of
his Magistrates, Rege Authoritatem praestante, the King giving it Authority,
and confirming it for a law: and from hence by an argument ab indecoro, they
show that the King ought not to do unjustly, Cum ipse sit Author juris non
debet inde Injuriarum nasci occasio, unde jura nascuntur, When he himself is
the Author of the Law, injustice ought not to spring from the same fountain
from whence the Law does spring. The Legislative power is in the King therefore
as in its spring and fountain, and in the other estates by derivation; they
have right and interest in the use and exercise of some parts of the power, and
may assent or dissent what shall be made a Law, but the power it self is
radically in him.

Now the Legislative power is either Architectonical or preceptive: the
Architectonical power is that which lays the materials of a Law, and it
consists in two things. First, in determining what is just, convenient, or
necessary; they to whom this power is committed, have no jurisdiction granted
them, but only and office and employment to deliberate and consult. Secondly,
in declaring and promulgating that to be actually made a law and enacted, which
upoo consultation is thought to be just, convenient, or necessary; they to whom
this power is committed; have a jurisdiction granted them to define
authoritatively what shall be a law. The preceptive power is that which makes
the law sacred and inviolable, and which gives it force to oblige the
conscience. It is evident by that which have bin said that not the preceptive,
but the exercise only of the Architectonical power is committed to the two
houses, they have votum consultivum and decisivum both authority to consult
what is just, convenient, or necessary; and also to decree what shall be made a
law: but this authority is derived from the King. Page 39.
The Treatiser in his reply to Dr. Fern seems to be unsatisfied with this
answer and does there dispute against it after this manner, my second argument
says he for radical mixture, is from the Legislative power being in all
three: He answers, that phrase is satisfied and explained by that conncurrence
and consent in the exercise of supreme power. It seems that invention of his
must serve all turns is a legislative power satisfied by a bare powerless
consent? I demand is that consent causal and authoritative? or merely
consiliarie and unauthoritative? And whereas I prove that they have an enacting
authority by that received and set clause in the beginning of acts; Be it
enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the authority of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament. He tell us a vote and power of assenting is a
great authority, I enquire not how great it is: I ask whether that be all;
whether that clause, which as expressly as words can, asscribes an enacting
authority to them, be satisfied by such a power of assenting. Here are many
words heaped together, yet not so much as one that touches the present
controversy: the question is not, whether the two Houses have authority, nor
yet whether they have an enacting authority; it is evident they could not sit
as Judges in the court without authority, nor enact without an enacting
authority: but the question is, first, whether their enacting authority spoken
of in the foresaid clause be only a power of assenting that such or such a law
shall be established, or a power that Commands and gives life and vigor to
the laws: Secondly, whether this power be radically in themselves or derived
from the King. To the first I say that it is only a power of assenting; 7 H.
7.14. and 11. H. 7.25.
for it has bin resolved by the judges that this clause which he alleges, Be
it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the authority of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, Lambarts Archeion f. 271.
is no more in substance and effect then that which was used anciently, The
King, with the assent of the Lord and Commons, establishes, the words
assenteth and enacteth being equivalent in this case. And to the second I say
that their authority is derived from the King, not radically in themselves; For
although this Treatiser knows not, or will not seem to know how to put a
difference between having an enacting authority, and having the Legislative
authority radically in themselves, yet the Judges did, and others do: For they
may enact by a delegate authority, that is, by having the use and exercise of
the Legislative power committed to them so far as is necessary to that act,
although it be not radically in them as their own. But now the Treatiser
Speaks not a word to either of these points, but shows only that they have
an enacting authority, which is a point not controverted. For their power of
assenting and laying the materials of a law, is an enacting power, although
their activity be not equal to the Kings; Subordinate Agents that are but
Instruments of an other, and work by a derived power, when they concur with
the principal and supreme agent have their causality in producing the effect.
And therefore whereas he demands whether their consent be causall and
authoritative, or merely consiliary and unauthoritative? I answer that it is as
causall and authoritative as if the legislative power were radically in
themselves, for he that works with an other man's tools is as much the cause
of the work as if the tools he uses were his own; whether the authority by
which they enact be the Kings, or radically in themselves, the effect will be
the same.

It may be further objected that these words, Be it enacted by the Kings most
excellent Majesty, and the authority of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, do imply distinct authorities, the authority of the K. and the
authority of the Lords and commons; for theadition of these words, And the
authority of the Lords and Commons, is improper, if laws be enacted by the
Kings authority alone. To this I answer; first, that there is nothing more
frequent when the K. acts jointly with his subordinate Ministers, then to
ascribe a concurrent authority to those that act with him, although their
authority be derived from him: for although his authority cannot be separated
from him privative as has been said, yet cumulative it may, that is, it may be
inherent in his own Person, and yet be in others too, as the light of the Sun
is inherent in its own body, and yet multiplied and diffused through the world;
Now when it is separated from him after that manner, it is commonly called
their authority to whom it is committed, because they are the seat and subject
of it. That light which the Stares derive from the Sun is usually called the
light of the Stars, and the Stars are said by the means thereof to concur
with the Sun, and to have a causality and operation upon inferior bodies; it
is no impropriety to say, The light of the Sun and the light of the Stars
inlightneth all the world, although the light of the Stars be derived from the
Sun. But secondly, what if it be granted that the Lords and Commons have
authority of their own distinct from the Kings authority? To speak my own
opinion freely, I think they have a distinct authority, I mean not Supreme
authority, but an authority derived from the King, yet distinct from his. He
that has but a delegate power, if it be committed to him for term of years,
term of life or perpetuity, he does by such a grant acquire an estate in the
said power, and an authority distinct from his that gave it him. As in an
Estate of lands wherein a man has a perpetual right in fee simple, or in fee
tail, his right is distinguished from the Kings right of whom he holds it, the
King having the demean of the Land, and the other the demean of the Fee: so
it is in an estate of power, and authority; if the King grants an estate of
power, authority, and jurisdiction, in fee simple, or in fee tail, for term of
years, term of life, or perpetuity, their rights in the said authority are
distinct; the King has the demean of the Power, the other the demean of the
use, the King has Dominium directum the other Dominum utile. And this is the
present case; the Legislative power is wholely and entirely the Kings, yet the
Lords and Commons have a perpetual right in the use and exercise of some part
thereof, so that the King cannot actually make a law, except they will also use
the authority committed to them, it being in their power to assent or not
assent, to use or not to use, the said authority. There is an authority then in
the Lords and Commons distinct from the Kings authority, which must necessarily
be put forth in the making of laws, yet not supreme, but subordinate to the
King, derived from him, and depending upon him. But this is more then can be
forced out of the foresaid clause, and I think more then is intended in it.

Fourthly, that Monarchy in which three estates are constituted, to the end
that the power of the one should moderate and restrain from excess the power
of the other, is mixed in the root and essence of it; but such is this as is
confessed in the answer to the said propositions.

Antecedent and Consequent are both false: The erection of Courts, wherein the
Judges have authority to proceed according to law, notwhitstanding the
personal and arbitrary Commands of the King, has always been esteemed a
strong and effectual means to restrain and moderate the excesses of Monarchy:
Yet the Judges cannot be inferred from hence to be coordinate with the King in
the rights of Soveraigntie, or to have a mixed power with him in the Government
of the Kingdom. But the Consequent has neither appearance nor shadow of truth;
Parliaments were ordained, that the other estates might consult with the King
about the weighty affairs of the Kingdom as often as he thought it needful,
and agree to such laws as should be found profitable and expedient: not that
they should quarrel and contest with him. It is true the two Houses do for the
most part in time of Parliament gain an opportunity to have grievances
redressed, because they may otherwise deny the King the assistance he desire;
but they have no authority radically in themselves to redress them or to
restrain and moderate his excesses by force of arms; nor were they constituted
for that end: If it should be granted that Parliaments are by original
constitution and agreement, and that the People have always given what laws
they pleased to the Conqueror as often as the Crown has been obtained by
conquest; yet in probability they could have no such end as this Treatiser
imagines, or to abuse the people, seems to imagine: had they purposed the
three estates, should moderate the excesses of one another in Parliaments, they
would never have granted the King authority to dissolve them at his pleasure,
whereby he might easily avoid and frustrate their intention. Besides
Parliaments are so tempered as it is imposible to attain to that end by such a
mixture; one of the estates, or any two of them, having no authority to make an
act of Parliament without the third, which way can they moderate the excesses
of one another by such acts further then the exorbitant estate shall be willing
to be moderated? Nor does his Majesty, as he imputes to him, any where
confess that three estates are constituted in this Monarchy to the end that
the power of one should moderate and restrain from excess the power of the
other, he should therefore have cited his words, that the Reader might have
judged of their sense.

These are the objections, brought by the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy,
which are partly taken out of the fuller Answerer, and partly invented by
himself. In answering them, to avoid needless Controversies, I have granted
that a mixed form of government is possible, although I be not ignorant that a
mixed government is but the invention of later times, and reputed impossible by
authors of chiefest note. I have admitted also that the King, the Nobility, and
Commons, are the three estates of Parliament, although I know this contrary to
the Statutes, wherein the three Estates of Parliament are declared to be the
Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons. I have insisted the longer upon these
Objections, because the Author of the foresaid Treatise is esteemed by some the
chief Advocate of that side. I intend not to derogate from the Author, who I
presume would have written more substantially had the case been capable of
defense; yet if a man may guess at his humor by that Treatise, he seems to
be much more inclined to assert new principles, then to show reasons how they
should be maintained. That he might illude the Laws wherein the government of
England is declared Monarchical, he lays down diverse positions to this
effect, that where a transcendent interest, Part 1. cap. 4.
or primity of share, is in one man, it is sufficient to constitute a Monarchy,
although the other estates have their shares also in the rights of Sovereignty,
and supreme Authority; but he does not so much as offer to prove this either by
law or reason, although it be contrary to the Common received principles of
other Authors, who teach that such a transcendent interest or primity of share
cannot make a Monarch. For such a pre-eminence is in some persons in the most
popular States, as in the Dukedomes of Venice and Genna, Besold. Synops. Polit.
doct. lib. 1. cap. 6. number. 4.
where the Dukes have a transcendent interest, and primity of share, above the
rest, and are Rectores and executores summique magistratus, having the
gubernative, and executive power in their hands, and excelling all other in
dignity and authority: Such preheminences therefore are reckoned amongst the
Simulacra imperii Regii, Clapmar. Dearcan. Rerump. tit. de simulacris Imperii
cap. 3. Vindication of the Treatise of Monarchy fall. 39.
being but images and shadows of Kingly government where full and entire power
is wanting. Again, that he might illude the Laws wherein the King is declared
to be Supreme, he says that a transcendent interest, or utmost Chiefty, is
sufficient to make good that title; yet he endeavors not to confirm this by
one instance, although it be contrary to the received signification of the word
when it has reference to power and jurisdiction: for in Law when a governor
or Ruler is called Supreme, the word Supreme is always opposed to subordinate
and not to less: amongst Lawyers he shall often find power and jurisdiction
divided into Supreme and subordinate, but never into Supreme, and less, if
that which is less be also Supreme and independent. But yet if his new
principles were granted to be true, he cannot by such shifts, in any plausible
manner evade the Statutes, wherein the King is declared to have entire, whole,
and plenary power, and to be so supreme that all authority is derived from him,
and wherein it is declared that all obedience is due to him, and to him only:
Will a transcendent interest make good all this? Is a Primity of Share entire,
whole and plenary power? Can all authority be derived from him that has but an
utmost chiefly? Is all obedience due to one of the Estates, where the mixture
is in the power it self, and supreme authority radically in the other? Surely
if the other Estates have Power, Allegiance and Obedience is due unto it; they
had as good challenge no power, as challenge no obedience.

CHAP. IX. Diverse general objections taken from the testimony of his Majesty,
Bracton, and Fortescue, together with the Precedents of Edward the Second, and
Richard the Second, answered.
BEsides the former objections, they urge the testimony of his Majesty, of
Bracton, and Fortescue; to which I answer in general, that the decision of
this controversy depends upon Law, and not upon the bare words and authority of
any. The words of Lawyers are to be regarded no further then they are approved
by law; for they are but men, and may be incited by passion or private interest
to speak or write what they ought not. I have therefore purposely my self
omitted all proofs of that nature, and although I could produce a catalogue of
Lawyers longer then a Genealogy to confirm the Kings right, yet I have cited
none but such as prove what they say by the laws, except only those that are
cited by themselves, which I had also omitted, but that I desire to make it
evident how far those Authors are from favoring their seditious opinions. And
if his Majesty out of a desire to avoid the effusion of blood used such
gracious expressions as were most likely to prevail with the people, and
consolidate their minds, they ought not in equity to prejudice the rights of
the Crown, although he had abdicated therein, some part of his authority, and
granted things destructive to his own prerogative. I have given this general
answer, not because his Majesty, Bracton, or Fortescue have affirmed any thing
in favor of their right, but to show the insufficiency of this objection in
case they had; but the truth is they have notoriously perverted the meaning of
his Majesty, as also the meaning of Bracton and Fortescue: And although I
cannot imagine any man so senseless as to believe his Majesty ever subscribed
to their judgment; or any that have perused the works of Bracton and Fortescue
so void of understanding as to think they were ever abettors of such
fantasies: yet that they may not exclaim for want of an answer I will more
particularly examine what they say.

Out of his Majesty's answer to the nineteen propositions they allege this
passage. There being three kinds of Government amongst men, absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all these having their particular conveniences
and inconveniences, the experience and wisdom of your Ancestors, has so
molded this out of a mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as
humane prudence can provide) the conveniences of all three, without the
inconvenienees of any one, as long as the balance hangs even between the three
estates, and they run jointly on in their proper channel (begetting verdure
and fertility, in the meddows on both sides, and the overflowing of either on
either side, raise no deludge or inundation) the ill of absolute Monarchy is
Tyranny; the ill of Aristocracy is faction and division; the ills of Democracy
are tumults, violence and licenciousnesse. The good of Monarchy is the uniting
a nation under own head, to resist invasion from abroad, and insurrection at
home; The good of Aristocracy is the conjunction of Counsel in the ablest
persons of a State for the publik benefit; The good of Democracy is liberty,
and the courage and industry which liberty begets -- the Lords being trusted
with a judicatory power, are an excellent screen and bank between the prince
and people -- by just judgments to preserve the law, since -- therefore the
power legally placed in both houses is more then sufficient to prevent and
restrain the power of tyranny -- since to the power of punishing, which is
already in your hands according to law. Thus far, and in this manner, his
Majesty is cited by the fuller Answerer, who that he might the better wrest his
Majesty's Speeches to his own purpose, has made many transitions from one
place to another, mutilating the sense, and leaving out that which should have
made his Majesty's meaning apparent. And from these words he makes diverse
deductions; his first deduction is, that his Majesty grants the Government of
England to be mixed in the power it self, 1. Deduction. Answer to Doctor Fern.
Page 1.
this he infers because his Majesty acknowledges a mixture, and it is no
true mixture he says, which is not in the very supremacy of power it self.

Majesty's true and real intention is such as I have there expounded; for
these words, The good of Monarchy is the uniting a Nation under one Head, are a
perfect Comentarie upon the former, and do clearly manifest, that his Majesty
asserted not the Head and Seat of supreme power to be a mixed subject, but
granted a mixture in the administration of power alone.

His second deduction is that the King grants the power of interpreting, 2.
Deduction. Reply to Doctor Fern. Page 34.
and giving final judgment of the sense of law, to be in the two houses; this
he concludes to be his Majesty's meaning, when he said, The Lords being
trusted with a judicatory power, are an excellent screen and bank between the
King and People by just judgments to preserve the law.

judicially in such cases as are cogniscible in the court, although they have
no power to interpret it authoritively, which is a prerogative belonging to the
King, calling his Judges unto him. But the best of all is, that he infers
from the words above said, both the Houses to have a power of declaring law,
for whereas his Majesty in the premises speaks only of the House of Lords, by
a trick of more then Presbiterian Legerdemain he has juggled the House of
Commons into his inference.

third deduction is that his Majesty grants the two Houses a power of
forcible resistance in case they should judge his actions tyrannical and
unjust; this he collecteth out of these words since -- therefore the power
legally placed in both Houses is more then sufficient to prevent and restrain
the power of tyranny. This he says cannot be made good unless the Houses have
a power of resistance; for tyranny cannot be otherwise restrained.

It is evident that his Majesty speaks not in this place of a forcible, but of
a legal way of restraint; Id possit quisquam quod jure possit, Every man is
said to have a power to do that which he can do by law, although he may be
hindered in the execution of it. His Majesty grants them not an absolute power
of restraining tyranny, but let that be taken in which goes immediately
before, and his words will bear no other sense but that they have a power of
restraining it, so far as humane prudence can by lawful and just ways
provide. Neither is forcible resistance a more certain means of restraining
tyranny then other legal ways less corrasive, if the Houses had a power of
resistance, they are not sure always to prevail; it is better therefore to
tolerate a mischief then to use a remedy which is worse then the disease, and
uncertain too. But they have by law a double power as effectual as forcible
resistance, they may inflict examplary punishment upon evil instruments, whereby
others may be afraid to take upon them such employments; and they may refuse
to give the King subsidies and other necessary assistance, if he refuses to
moderate his excesses. If a tyrant and his evil instruments be strong and in
no necessity, were it lawful to resist, and to levy war against them, the
success would be doubtful, the damage certain; and if the best happen, they
should but cure the Commonwealth of an Ague by giving it the Plague: But if he
be necessitated either by insurrections, or otherwise, to crave the assistance
of his Subjects, they shall then have liberty to execute their power upon his
evil instruments, or to make use of any other means the law has put into their
hands. Where Tyranny reigns such opportunities will in a short time assuredly
be offered; the best Princes cannot always suppress rebellions by the help of
their loyal Subjects, how much less can Tyrants be able to do it without them.
Such Exigencies being considered, I say the power legally placed in the Houses
is more then sufficient to restrain Tyranny, without a power of resistance.

Bracton. Rex habet superiorem Deum. Item Legem per quam factus est Rex. Item
Curiam suam, videlicet Comites and Barons. That is, Lib. 2. cap. 16.
The King has God his Superior, and the Law by which he is made King, and his
Court, namely, his Earls and Barons.

Bracton speaks not this himself, but supposes only that some might make
such an Objection; for these words, Sed dicere poterit quis, which go
immediately before, seem to agree with that interpretation, and to be appliable
to that which is here cited, and to all that follows in the same Section. But
because the words may also admit of another construction, and because I desire
to satisfy the Reader in every regard, I will a little more strictly inquire
into the sense and meaning of them, and show the insufficiency and weakness of
this Objection, if they could be proved to be his own; for it is evident that
these words cannot relate to any coercive power, or civil jurisdiction the
Earls and Barons have over the Person of the King, but to a directive power
alone, which their Counsels ought to have over him in governing of the people.
For as both Aquin. 2. Quest. 96. art. 5.
Divines and Cabedo part. 2. decis. 78. Number. 1. Navar. in Rub. de judiciis number.
100.
Lawyers usually distinguish, one may be said to be superior to another per
potestatem Coercivam, in respect of a coercive power, or civil jurisdiction he
has over him, by virtue whereof he may command what he please within the
extent of his jurisdiction, and force him to obey it, this is a Legal power and
superiority, which none but Magistrates have over their Subjects: or per
potestatem directivam, in respect of a directive power he has over him, by
which he ought in Conscience to be ruled, although he cannot by legal process
be forced to obedience; this is a moral power or superiority, which Subjects
may have over their Magistrates: for in this regard Masters are superior to
their Scholars, Counselors superior to those that are guided by their
Counsels, and the Laws superior to the Lawmakers. Bractons scope in this
place (if these words be spoken positively by himself, and not as a supposed
Objection) can be nothing else but to assert the Earls and Barons in his Court
to be Superior to the King per potestatem directivam, in respect of the
directive power their Counsels ought to have over him, which although they be
no legal commands, and cannot therefore civilly obleige him to obedience, yet
they do morally obleige his Conscience, when he is convinced that they are just
and necessary for the government of the Kingdom. These words cannot in any
other sense be reconciled to that which he says in other places, who when he
speaks of this Subject, does every where resolve the contrary; if the Earls
and Barons should be interpreted here to be his Superiors in respect of a
coercive power, and civil jurisdiction, whereof the places above mentioned are
sufficient instances; to which I could yet add more, if I thought it needful.
But it would be superfluous to illustrate and interpret this place by other,
when the words considered by themselves imply no more: for he makes no
distinction of Superiority, but calls God, and the Law, and the Earls and
Barons in his court, superior to the King after the same manner. Now it is
evident that God in this place is said to be superior to him, in respect of
the directive power his Law has over him; for although God has de jure a
coercive power and jurisdiction over Kings, and shall de facto after their
death dispose of them as their Judge, and in this life also does often restrain
them by his secret judgments, yet Bracton speaks not in this place (as will
appear immediately when the whole and entire period shall be cited) of either
of those kinds of jurisdiction, but of giving present and open judgment upon
the Kings fact and upon his charter, which is a jurisdiction that he exercises
not, but gives his Law only for direction, by which all Princes ought to be
regulated, both in granting their charters, and in the whole administration of
their power. It is also clear that the Laws of the Land are said to be
superior to him, in respect of the directive power of them, having otherwise
no force or influence upon him: Bracton therefore means that the Earls and
Barons in his Court are superior to him in the same respect, and not in
respect of any jurisdiction they ought to exercise over him. But if we look
upon the coherence of these words, and their dependence upon the precedent and
subsequent matter. Bracton's intention will more fully and easily be discerned;
I will therefore set down as much as is necessary to the present purpose, and
explain every clause of it, and show the relation and connection one thing has
with another, and let the Reader judge whether this testimony of Bracton does
not strengthen the Kings cause, and might not rather be alleged for him then
against him. Nec factum Regis nec chartam potest quis judicare, ita quod factum
Domini Regis irritetur. Sed dicere poterit quis quod Rex Justitiam fecerit, and
been, and si hoc, eadem ratione quod male, and ita imponere ei quod injuriam
emendet, ne incidat Rex and justiciari in judicium viventis Dei propter
injuriam, Rex autem habet superiorem Deum. Item legem per quam factus est Rex,
item curiam suam, videlicet Comites and Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi
socii Regis, and qui habet socium habet Magistrum, and ideo si Rex fuerit sine
frano. i. e. sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere. That is: No man may judge of
the Kings fact or his charter, so as to make void the fact of our Lord the
King. But some may say the King has done justice and well, and if so, by the
same reason that he has done ill, and impose upon him to amend the injury,
lest he and his justices fall into the judgment of the living God for the
injury. But the King has God his superior, and the Law, by which he is made
King, and his Court, namely his Earls and Barons, for they are called Comites,
as being Companions to the King, and he that has a Companion has a Master,
and therefore if the King be without a bridle, that is, without Law, they ought
to put a bridle upon him. If this passage be well considered, it will be clear
that Bracton in the words alleged, calls not the Earls and Barons superior
to the King in a civil and legal, but in a moral regard alone.

First he says: No man may judge of the Kings fact, or his charter, so as to
make void the fact of our Lord the King. How can the words alleged agree with
this, if their exposition be admitted? How can the Earls and Barons in his
Court be superior to the King, in respect of a coercive power or civil
Jurisdiction; when they cannot judge his charter or his fact? No man can have a
coercive power or civil jurisdiction over another, but he has authority to
judge him according to Law, and to force the execution of his Sentence.

Secondly he says: But some may say the King has done Justice, and well, and
if so, by the same reason that he has done ill, and impose upon him to amend
the injury, lest he and his Justices fall into the hands of the living God for
the injury. But the King has God his superior, and the Law by which he is
made King, and his Court, namely his Earls and Barons. Having declared what
power the Earls and Barons have not over the King, here he declares what power
they have. In case justice be not duly administered there are some, he says,
which may advertise him of it, and impose upon him to reform what is amiss;
and those he declares to be the Earls and Barons in his Court, who, as well as
God, and the Laws of the Realm are superior to him; that is, are superior to
him in the same manner, namely, by a directive power. For he says, not that
they should by constraint, but by admonition impose upon him to amend the
injury, using this reason, lest He and his Justices fall into the hands of the
living God, according to that which he says in the place before quoted, Cap.
4. p. 37.
Satis sufficit ei pro poena quod Dominum expectet ultorem.

Thirdly, he says: For they are called Comites, as being Companions of the
King, and he that has a Companion, has a Master. Here he gives a reason why
the Earls and Barons may be called his Superiors, namely, because they are his
Companions, and he that has a Companion, has a Master. This reason holds good
if he indevoureth by it, to prove them his Superiors in respect of a directive
power, and moral superiority, but is ridiculous if he should endeavor by it, to
prove them his Superiors in respect of a coercive power or civil jurisdiction;
for every one cannot be Superior to his Companions, in respect of
jurisdiction, and be a liege Lord, or Legal Master, over all the rest: But
every one may instruct Counsel and direct all his Companions, and be a moral
Master over them; in that respect all Companions may be mutually one another
Masters.

Fourthly, he says: And therefore if the King be without a bridle, that is,
without Law, they ought to put a bridle upon him. This inference which he
makes out of the former words does also confirm that Bracton calls them not
his Superiors, in respect of a coercive power, or civil jurisdiction; for
because they are his Companions, and so in a moral regard his Masters, they
ought therefore, he says, if he be without a bridle, to put a bridle of the
Law upon him; This bridle then must be a bridle of Law, and not a bridle of
their own ordinances; not a bridle of force, but a bridle of admonitions,
counsel and advice; they have no other means but such by Law to bridle the
King, if at any time he breaks out into violent and illegal courses. This is
the Scope of Bracton as is evident by the whole coherence and connection of the
matter; who was so far from allowing such fond conceits and imaginations as
they seem to suppose, that the contrary runs in one constant vein through all
his book: if they regarded the authority of Bracton, they would soon lay down
their arms, and sue to his Majesty for a Pardon.

Thirdly, they allege the testimony of Fortescue, who speaking of the King of
England, Fol. 25.
says: Prinipatu ne dum Regali sed and Politico suo populo dominatur. That is,
He governs his People not only by Kingly, but also by Politic power.

Fortescue implies in these words that the King ought not to make his Will,
but the Laws the rule of his power; not that others are coordinate with him in
the rights of Soveraingty. Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 1. and 3.
For power is either Despotical, or Politic. Despotical power is Kingly power
not moderated nor restrained by humane Laws and constitutions; Politic power
is Kingly power limited and restrained by humane and politic Laws. Now
Fortescue says: that the Kings power is not merely Despotical and Regal, but
Politic and tempered by law; and his intention is to show the difference
between the Common Laws of England, and the Civil Laws: The Emperor after the
power was translated to him from the Commonwealth by that Law which in the
Digest is called lex regia, until the custom of making Laws by the assent of
the people took place again, might command what he pleased. Quod Principi
placet legis habet potestatem, is a part of that Law: but the King of England,
he says, cannot altogether govern his people by such a power, but is obliged
to rule them according to the tenor of the Politic Laws and Constitutions of
the Kingdom; so that Politic power is here opposed to Kingly power taken in
its greatest latitude, and not to Kingly power moderated and restrained by Law.
But how does this concern the case in hand?

Parliaments, they say, have exercised a supreme power over the Crown of
England it self, to transfer it from the right Heir, and settled it upon whom
themselves thought meet to elect for their King. They cite two Kings which were
deposed, Edward the second, and Richard the second, and then conclude, that
those Parliaments which have exercised such jurisdiction over them must
certainly be above them, and the highest Sovereign power.

deposition of those Kings has been resolved Treason by all the Judges of
England; and yet if it had been legal, Coke institut part. 2. tit. treason.
the Precedents are impertinent, for those acts were confirmed by the Kings
themselves, and could never have been esteemed Acts of Parliament without their
own assent.

CHAP. X. Objections made against the KINGS supremacy in Particular, by Mr.
Bridge, the reverend Divines, and Others, answered.
THey have yet other Objections whereby they endeavor to prove that the
Particular Rights of Soveraigntie are divided from the King and placed in the
two Houses. And first touching the Militia. Mr. Bridge and the reverend
Divines, have found a device how the Parliament. may make use of that, and levy
war against the King by his own authority. They say, as Judges they may send
out Messengers or Sergeants at Arms for his evil Counselors, and in case
they refuse to appear before them, fetch them in as Delinquents by force of
arms; this is the sum of their Objection, but I will set it down in their own
terms. Suppose, says Mr. Bridge, a man be complained of to the Parliament for
some notorious crime, it is granted by all, that the Parliament has a power to
send a Sergeant at Arms for him, Mr. Bridges Objection.
and if he refuse to come, that Sergeant at arms has a power to call more, and
if the Delinquent shall raise twenty, or thirty, or an hundred men to reskue
him, then the Parliament has power to send down more messengers by force to
bring up the Delinquent, and if they may raise an hundred, why may they not
upon the like occasion raise a thousand and so ten thousand? And again in his
answer to Doctor Ferns reply. If the Parliament may send one Sergeant at Arms,
then twenty, then an hundred, then a thousand.

Sergeants at Arms at the same time within the Realm; now if Mr. Bridge can
show a way how out of thirty Sergeants at Arms an Army of a thousand, 13. R. 2.
Cap. 6.
or ten thousand may be raised, he shall be worthy to have a Statue erected to
his Memory.

The reverent Divines have in substance the same objection, The reverent
Divines objection.
saving only they are not so punctual for point of Law as to have their Army
consist of Sergeants at Arms; and they allege a case in Law to justify that
way of proceeding. Supposing, say they, the power of calling and dissolving
Parliaments wholly in the King ordinarily; yet there may be such power in them
so long at they do sit, to command arms to be raised for the suppressing of any
Delinquents, maintaining themselves with Arms even under the color of the
Kings authority, which I thus make good: If there be any such kind of power in
the very judges in their Courts at Westminster, for the whole Kingdom, and in
their several circuits for the shires they sit in, although themselves are made
Judges at the Kings will merely, and put out ordinarily at his pleasure, and
they can neither keep assizes at any time, nor keep any term any where, but
when and so long as the King pleases to give commission: If (I say) there be
such a power in the Judges and even in one of them, then much more in the whole
Parliament, which is unquestionably and undoubtedly the highest judicature in
the Kingdom, and has most power during their sittings now that such a kind of
power is in the Judges, I appeal to experience in the case following. A
private man has a suit with the King about land or house and the like, the
King has possession and some officer or tenant of his holds it for the King,
the Judges having heard the cause give sentence for the subject, adjudge him to
have the possession delivered him by the Kings Tenant or Officer; he refuses
and Arms himself to keep possession still, upon this, after due summons and
process of Law, a writ of rebellion shall go out against the Officer af the
Kings, even though he should pretend to keep possession still, by a command and
warrant from the King, and the Sheriff shall be commanded to raise arms oven
the whole posse Comitatus if need be to expel this Officer of the Kings, and
bring him to condign punishment for resisting the Kings authority in his
Laws. Here now is raising of Arms by the Kings legal authority, against the
Kings Title, and the Kings Officer, notwithstanding any pretended authority
from the Kings personal command and that Officer has a Writ of Rebellion sent
against him, and shall be punished by Law, for offering to resist the Law upon
any pretense (ask the Lawyers whether in sense this be not the Law, and
ordinarily practiced, save that the King do not command the contrary, but
whether that would hinder Law or not?) the Parliament may then in case of
necessity raise arms against the Kings personal command for the general
safety, and keeping possession (which is more necessary then the hope of
regaining) of the Houses, Lands, Goods, Liberties, Lives, Religion and all, and
this by the Kings legal Authority, and resisters of this are the Rebels in
the Laws account, and not the instruments so employed legally, though with
Arms by the Parliament.

him: when the King takes up arms they which attend upon his Person, or are
employed in other places about the same service, may not be molested or
troubled by process of Law, either in Parliament, or in any of his Courts, as
is declared and enacted by a Statute made the eleventh year of Henry the
seventh.

The King our Sovereign Lord calling to his remembrance the duty of Allegiance
of his Subjects of this his Realm, 11. H. 7. cap. 1.
and that they by reason of the same are bound to serve their Prince and
Sovereign Lord, for the time being, in his wars, for the defense of Him and the
Land, against every rebellion, power, and might reared against him, and with
him to enter and abide in service, in battle, if case so require, and that for
the same service what fortune ever fall by chance in the same battle against
the mind and will of the Prince (as in this Land, sometime passed has been
seen) that it is not reasonable but against all Laws, Reason and good
Conscience, that the said Subjects going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars,
attending upon him in his Person, or being in other places by his Commandment
within this Land or without, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing their
true duty and service of Allegiance. It be therefore ordained, enacted, and
established by the King our Sovereign Lord, by the advice and assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and authority of the same, that from henceforth no manner of person
or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the King and Sovereign
Lord of this Land for the time being, in his person, and do him true and
faithful service of Allegiance in the same, or be in other places by his
Commandment in his Wars, within this Land or without: that for the said deed
and true duty of Allegiance he or they be in no wise convict or attaint of high
treason, ne of other offenses for that cause, by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose or
forfeit Life, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, or any other things: but to be for that deed and service utterly
discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss.

As for the case that is put by them, it is very impertinent, and the whole
Objection made both by Mr. Bridge and themselves? full of erroneous passages
and mistakes, first they assume the two Houses to be the whole Parliament;
Secondly, they assume them to be a Court of judicature, Thirdly, they assume
the Judges to have a power of suppressing any Delinquents, and maintaining
themselves by arms: The two former assumptions are absolutely false, and the
latter true only in some cases, so far as they have order of Law; and no man
deny such a power to be in either of the Houses, they may force Delinquents to
appear before them in such cases, and in such a manner as the Law has
provided; for what is so done, is done by the Kings Command in Law, which is to
be obeyed before his personal commands. But they must proceed no further, nor
after any other manner then the King commands in Law: And first, although the
Kings bare Command be not sufficient to warrant his Tenant or others to resist
the sentence of his Courts, yet if the King in Person takes up arms and
grants Commissions to any to assist him, his Courts must then forbear all
process of Law, and desist from all further opposition, as is provided in the
foresaid statute. And secondly, although the King does not authorize the fact
in person, or by Commission, yet neither the two Houses in Parliament, nor the
Judges can make what Ordinances they please to raise arms, or employ their own
instruments to bring in Delinquents, but must proceed according to order of
Law, and commit the whole carriage of the business to such of the Kings
Officers as are appointed for that purpose, which are chiefly the high Sheriffs
of Counties, who are also confined by Law, and may not exceed their Commission.
For both in the case put by the reverent Divines, and also in all cases
whatsoever, if Delinquents grow so strong that they be able to resist the posse
Commitatus, and cannot be suppressed but by a War, and by the Militia of the
Kingdom, the Sheriff ought then to certify the Court thereof, and the
prosecution of the matter must be left to the King, to whom only it is reserved
to preserve the peace of the Kingdom in such cases.

Negative voice they urge the Oath taken at his Coronation, whereby, they say,
he is bound to give his assent to all Bills offered him by the Lords and
Commons. They have found out a form in Latin, which they say, was anciently
used, and ought now to be taken, the Form is this: Concedis just as leges and
consuetudines esse tenendas, and promittis pro te eas esse protegendas, and ad
honorem Dei corroborandas, quas vulgus elegerit, secundum vires tuas.

Resp. Concedo and Promitto.

The word, Elegerit, they say, may and ought to be taken in the future tense,
and does obleige the King to agree to all acts that shall be thought convenient
by the Houses. And to confirm this they allege a Heralds Book, wherein, they
say, the Oath is found so Englished. They allege also an ancient French Form,
wherein, they say, it is so taken. The Form is this: Sire grantes vous a tener
and garder les leis and customs naturelles, les quels la communaute de vostre
Royaume aur' eslue, and les defenderer, and efforceeer a l' honeur de Dieu a
vostre poiare.

Resp. je le grante and promitte.

Elegerit is Englished in the Preterperfect tense, and not in the future tense,
proposing no more unto the King, but that he would uphold and maintain the
Laws and Customs only which are actually then in use when he takes the said
Oath, not such as shall be offered him by the Houses. The words in the oath
taken by his Majesty following the usual presidents were these.

BISHOP. Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs
which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you uphold them to
the honor of God so much as in you lies?

KING. I grant and promise so to do.

The ancient Oath which is upon record, used in the time of Henry the eight, in
whose reign, they say, the Herald, whose Book they speak of, lived, was this:

That he shall keep and maintain the Liberties of the Holy Church, Book of Oath
Fol. 1.
of old time granted by the righteous Kings of England: and that he shall keep
all the Lands honors and dignities, righteous and free of the Crown of England
in all manner holy, without any manner of minishments; and the rights of the
Crown hurt, decay, or loss, to his power shall call again into the ancient
estate; and that he shall keep the peace of the holy Church, and of the Clergy,
and of the people with good accord; and that he shall do in his judgment
equity and right justice with discretion and mercy: and that he shall grant to
hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his power keep them, and
affirm them, which the flock and people have chosen; and the evil Laws and
Customs wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable peace to the people of his
Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power.

As for the French Form I cannot but wonder they should allege it; for it does
manifestly contradict that which they say and endeavor to prove by it, word for
word it is thus to be rendered in English: Sir, do you grant to hold and keep
the rightful Laws and Customs which the Commonalty of your Reaelm shall have
chosen, and to defend them and give them force to your power? Answ. I grant and
promise it. Who is there that understands the French Tongue, which sees not
that these words aur' eslue, shall have chosen which are put in the future
tense can have reference to no other Laws and Customs, but those only which
the Commonalty shall have chosen when the King takes the Oath; for the Form
should have run thus: quels la Communaute de vostre Royaume eslira, that is,
which the Commonalty of your Realm shall choose, if Laws which were afterward
to be made had been intended in the Oath.

But let it be granted that Elegerit ought to be taken is the future tense, yet
leges and consuetudines cannot relate to the Laws which shall be presented to
the King by the two Houses in Parliament, for the word vulgus cannot be applied
to the Lords.

Yet let that also be given them, the Oath binds him to protect and corroborate
only just Laws not all which they shall say are just; for it is evident
whether Elegerit be taken in the preter perfect tense, or in the future tense,
that by justas leges and consuetudines, it is implied, that he is not bound to
protect and corroborate all Laws and Customs, but only those which are just;
whereof he himself assisted by his Justices and Council at Law, who ought to
inform him were he wants information, is to be the Judge.

To conclude, let the word Elegerit and all the other words signify what they
please, it is not much important to their cause, for the said Latin Form was
never used to be taken. In the time of Henry the third, the Kings Oath
contained only these three things: Bracton l. 3. Cap. 9.
1. Se esse praecepturum and pro viribus opem impensurum, ut Ecclesiae Dei and
omni populo Christiano vera pax omni suo tempore observetur. 2. Ut rapacitates
and omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicat. 3. Vt in omnibus judiciis
aequitatem praecipiat and misericordiam: In later times the English Form above
mentioned, without any alteration importing their sense, has been used to be
taken many ages together. Now if they could show (which I believe they cannot)
that diverse Kings have taken the Latin Form they speak of, yet that is not
sufficient to prove a Custom, seeing the practice was formerly, and is at the
present otherwise.

Le Roy s'advisera, wherein they say he does not peremptorily deny his assent,
but only craveth time to deliberate upon it.

to be used de necessariis: Yet he may answer otherwise if he please, Judge
Jenkins Fol. 32.
Roy ne veult or Hollinsh. vol. 1. Fol. 108.
il ne plaist, are usual forms as well as that.

The Militia and the chief Officers of the Kingdom, they say, have been
disposed of in Parliament.

Presidents, I should weary the Reader with such impertinencies; sometimes they
allege a seditious speech of some of the Members for an Act of Parliament;
sometimes they say such or such a thing was done by Act of Parliament, and and
cite an Author in the margin, whereas no such thing is to be found in the said
Author; Sometimes they urge a President wherein the Houses denied to give the
King such subsidies and assistance, as he required to his wars, because the
said wars were undertaken without their assent, and conclude from thence that
the power of making war and treating with forain states belong to the two
Houses, when the reason of their denial was the miscarriages of the war, and
the mis-imployment of former subsidies, not that they challenged the power of
making war or treating with foreign states to pertain unto them. They thought
it would have been more convenient for the better carrying on of the war at
that time, if the King had undertaken and managed it, by their advice and
assent, but claimed no right in the said power. But supposing all that they say
true, and all their Presidents pertinent, I shall make these two general
Answers; first, I say, that if the King, as in conscience he was bound, did at
the request of the Houses discharge diverse corrupt Officers, and substitute
others into their places, or if upon just reasons and motives in the vacancy of
an office he disposed of it by the assent and approbation of the two Houses, or
ordered his war by their advice and direction, or if the two Houses had
challenged such a power as is pretended, this does not argue them to have a
right in the Election of the said Officers, or that the carriage and conduct of
the war depended upon their assent: it might be in the King, a free and
voluntary Act of grace not an obligation of law: or he might do it out of
politic respects to have their concurrence in some other matter; for although
He cannot be forced by law to grant all their desires, yet in wisdom, policy,
and conscience He ought to yield unto them when their desires are just, legal,
and Prudentiall; it has ever been dammageable to the King and for the most
part to the Kingdom also, when differences between himself and his two Houses
have not been fairly appeased.

Secondly, I say that if they were able to allege an act of Parliament wherein
such a Right were placed in them, such acts by the common Law of the Land were
void, for the Rights of the Crown are settled upon it by the fundamental
Laws, as has been showed, and cannot be separated by Act of Parliament. These
are all the Objections which could without violence be referred to this place;
The rest which depend not upon Law shall be answered in the other Questions, if
any thing be omitted that seems to justify their cause, let any man undertake
to answer me, and give me notice of it, and I doubt not but I shall be able,
through the assistance of God, to make a full and satisfactory reply unto him.
And this I shall desire of my Adversary, that when he makes use of any
authority he would cite the words at large, as I my self have done in all
material points, and not make references only in the margent, that the Reader
may judge of the scope and intention thereof, and be able to discern which of
us deals faithfully, and which of us engaged by faction strive to elude the
Laws, and wrest them from their genuine and native sense.

And thus by the Grace and Mercy of God, I have in part discharged my
Conscience, being bound by all the bonds both of divine and humane laws to
oppose and withstand, as far as I am able, the false doctrine, and principles,
which Wolves in Sheeps Clothing endeavor daily to infuse into men's minds. I
shall easily avoid, I presume, the usual calumny incident to those which write
upon this Subject, as namely, that under the pretext of promoting the Apostles
doctrine of obedience, they intend by flattering Princes, to promote their own
private interest. I would to God the condition of his Majesty and the Kingdom
were such as they might have some colur to lay that imputation upon me. But I
am not ignorant that I might soon have advanced my own interest by adoring the
pretended Parliament, who dispose of all men's estates and fortunes at their
pleasure, pretending as much right to all his Majesty's Kingdoms, and to all
the power and glory thereof, as the Devil did to all the Kingdoms of the
world. For that, Luke 4.6.
say the Members, is delivered unto us, and to whomsoever we will, we give it,
And I know they use to distribute their favors liberally to those that will
fall down and worship them. But how poor soever my condition is, I have no
inclination to buy my interest at so dear a rate; I had rather perish in the
performance of my duty then be confederate to their Sacrilege, and other
Impieties, or not render my country that service which I owe it, for whose
liberty I would willingly Sacrifice not only my own interest but my Life. I
should be no good Englishman if I did not desire a better subject to discourse
upon then the miseries of the Kingdom, and if by being silent and turning a
way mine eyes, I could help to quench the Flame that audacious and factious
Spirits have kindled in it, I should have abstained from writing at this time:
But the Danger and miserable condition thereof calls for action to all those,
which had not rather see all things managed according to the appetit of those
Incendianies and Firebrands of the Commonwealth, then hazard themselves and
their own interest for the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom. I could wish
that all whom it concerns would seriously consider, that the Fat and Riches of
the the Land was the Patrimony and Inheritance of their Ancestors, and may be
of their Posterity, if their own fears and negligence gives it not their
enemies. I could wish also that the pretended Parliamentarians would seriously
consider their own condition, whom I esteem of all men most miserable: To speak
my desires, I wish unfainedly the Salvation of them all; but to speak my
thougths, I conceive more hopes of the honest Heathen, then of any man that
shall dye a Rebel, or not make Restitution of all that he has gained by
oppression and injustice.

Soli DEO Gloria.
FINIS.

