portrait of Gaston Iean Baptiste de Renty Gaston Iean Baptiste de Renty

Seig.r de Ci^^^ Baron de ^^nad^^s

Mourut a Paris le 24 d'Avril del'An 1649. (...) de sonage.



THE HOLY LIFE OF MONr. DE RENTY, A LATE NOBLEMAN OF FRANCE, And sometimes
COUNCELLOR TO KING LEWIS the 13th.

Written in French by John Baptist S. Jure.

And Faithfully translated into English, By E. S. Gent.

London, Printed for John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader:
SUch nourishment as the reading of vain Romances, or the Lives of
Secular-Love-Knights (though these only fained) supply to the earthly
principle in us, our carnal lusts and ambitions, set upon fading glories and
beauties; the same do the Histories of Saints, and person; enamoured of heaven,
administer to the other celestial principle in us, the H. Spirit, which (more
or less) inhabites in every one, who is, more than in name, Christian: These
books it is that set us all on fire, and suddenly transform us into the same
holy inclinations we read in those Christian Hero's; so much would we love so
much would we do, so much would we suffer; and if I may apply the Apostles
words spoken of the Lord, unto his holy followers, We beholding, as in a glass,
the glory of these Saints of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirits of the Lord; whilst both the sweet
consolations which such have found in Gods service (sweeter than honey, Psalm.
19.) allure us to a virtuous life; and their treading the way before us in the
observance of the most difficult precepts of the Gospel, and in the enduring
all the hardship (as our inexperience a^counts it) of the Christian warfare,
both shows us it faifible what God commands and invites us to follow their
conquering travels. Yet notwithstanding the great effects such writings
frequently produce, many aspersions and exceptions intervene, which to many
Readers render them fruitless; whilst either we question the truth of the
relation (as when the Historian, living some ages perhaps after such holy men,
and no eyewitnesses of their actions, is supposed to compose his relations
(much what) out of some uncertain traditions and hear-says; or being
contemporary with them, yet such pieces having run through the hands of some
ages not so pure, are imagined to be corrupted, and many falsities interposed
and mingled with truth) Or, allowing the truth thereof, yet, they being the
Histories of such as lived long ago, in times of a quite different complexion,
and in some (as we fancy) more holy age (when the first fruits of Gods spirit
in the early times of the Gospel, were more vigorous, and his favors in
cherishing the infancy of Christianity more eminent, and men's piety, by mutual
examples, more inflamed, we think them no pattern for us, born in the worst and
prophanest times: Or yet further, if they be modern histories of our own days,
yet they being ordinarily narrations of persons first cloistered and sequestered
from the negotiations of secular affairs, or also of such, whom this world
forsook, before they applied themselves so intensively to the other, in their
being born of mean parent age, or to small, ^r no temporal fortunes, we think
them no fit pattern, at least, for our condition of life, when born to the
management of a fair estate, the support of a noble family, and engaged,
perhaps also, in the duties of a conjugal life.

For these causes (dear Reader) I have employed some spare hours to present
thee with the most pious and exemplary life of one who was no retired or
cloistered person, but who practiced the rules of perfection in a secular and
married condition, with the ordinary worldly impediments of wife, children, and
estate, dependent on his care, remaining all his days surrounded with the
ordinary temptations that such a life affords, without being engaged therewith;
walking in the midst of these flames, which set on fire so many hearts, without
being singed at all, or touched by them; and holding this pitch, that cleaves
so fast to others fingers, in his hands, without being defiled: one who
abandoned secular inveiglements, not in the ordinary and easier way, by
rem^ving his person from them, but only by removing them from his thoughts: of
whom I may say, as the Apostle of himself (the words a little inverted) That he
was possessing much, and yet as having nothing; well known, and yet as unknown;
not using this world and yet as using it; as living in the world, and yet dying
to it; lastly, one who had no advantage for this, of any felicity of times
beyond ourselves, who though for eminency of Christian graces and communication
of divine favors, he may seem to contend with the ancient Saints, yet lived but
the other day, and dyed not nine years ago, April 24. 1649. lived in a
neighbor Country France; and spent a good part of his life in the chief City
thereof, Paris, and there no obscure person, but by his birth of a very noble
family (see cap. 1.) and in it the heir to a flourishing estate; and besides
this, honored with the dignity of being one of the Kings privy Council; so that
all his carriage and actions are easily discoverable, if any thing related here
should be either feigned or amplified, and the penman thereof a religious man
of note, is there yet living to bear the shame of publishing such lies, who
divulged within some years after his death, this copy of his life, in the same
place where he acted it.

As for his Letters which the Author has often inserted here, to discover to
the world the interior of his soul (which cannot be known to others, but only
from our selves) know, that in most of these his humility (and that upon
command) disclosed such things only to his Confessor, and that he only
privately whispered in his ear, what is now divulged abroad, that he relates to
his spiritual Father with much transport and ravishment (as who can possess
such a treasure, and say nothing of it) the great power of the present Grace of
God in him, much after the same manner, and with the same modesty, as one
recovered of a great sickness, (for the state of Sin is a great Disease)
rejoycingly would tell his Physician of the present good Habit, and Temper, and
Health, of his body: That his otherwares much evidenced Sanctity, will
sufficiently persuade his veracity in these relations.

Lastly, That they are not his Letters entire, but only some pieces extracted
out of them, as best suiting to the Authors purpose: His Letters, doubtless,
containing also in them the Confessions of his Sins (which in his Confessors
absence, he was necessitated to present for some time only by Letter) and many
Complaints [of his Infirmities and Defects, with consults for a remedy thereof.
But it became not the secrecy of a Confessor, nor the civility of a Friend, to
discover all these; ner yet the Readers benefit, to know them: Since the
Perfections of our Brethren, set before us, do nourish our Humility, suppress
our Pride, and inviteour Imitation: But their faults divulged, advance our
Self-Conceit, and breed Security: Though for this Honorable Person, you may
presume no great faults or blemishes could dwell with so great Mortifications,
so many good Works, such excessive Devotions, and his Exterior Holy Practices,
do sufficiently testify a great purity of mind.

Amongst which Practices, though perhaps some things may occur, that to some
Readers may give offense (according to men's several Principles and Persuasion
in Religion) yet, I thought it better (doing the business only of a
Translator) to let them alone; than, by cutting them out, both to give occasion
to those who allow such things, to blame the omission; and to those who
disallow such things, to suspect them to be more, or of worse consequence, than
they are: Especially, when these may serve to provoke you, whoever think your
selves more illuminated, to a Pious jealousy: Whilst you consider, that if he
arrived to so high Christian Graces and Perfection, supposed by you to be
darkened with some Errors, how much you ought sooner to attain the same, as
enjoying more truth; and so proceed to employ your self, not in scanning and
disputing the things here disliked, but in imitating those approved: Lest
perhaps Error be said to bring forth more Piety than Truth; and whilst you say
you see, your Sin remain to you more unexcuseable.

THE AUTHORS ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
MY dear Reader, I am in a word or two to give you notice of three things,
concerning the Contents of this Book. The first is, that whereas truth is the
principal part of History, you may be confident that it is here exactly
observed; because, whatsoever you shall find here, is almost all of it
extracted out of the Originals, and the rest out of Authentic Copies there,
where things were attested by such as were eyewitnesses, and persons beyond
exception.

The second is, that though we often make use of Monsieur de Renty his own
Letters, as witnesses of what he was, yet ought ye not at all therefore to
suspect the truth of what they relate: Because first, his eminent virtue has
rendered him most creditable in every thing he said, though it were of himself;
besides, these his Letters are for the most part directed to his spiritual
Guide, to whom he did with much confidence unbosom the things belonging to his
conscience, and gave account, as he was obliged, of each thing that past in the
interior of his soul: And God, who best knows to choose the fittest means to
bring his ends about, having designed the publishing of this life, whereby to
leave to all faithful men a pattern of perfect a Christian, did so dispose of
things, that this his Director dwelling for several years out of Paris, he was
obliged to acquaint him by Letters with his interior dispositions, they
becoming, by this means, much more perfectly discovered unto us, than any
otherway they could. And lastly, we are indeed incapable of knowing any thing
of a man's interior, but by his own declaration; and that which we understandin
Saints of this nature (which yet makes up the principal of their sanctity)
comes by no other way than their discovering and opening it to some one, and he
afterward to the public: And therefore either Monsieur de Renty himself must
have manifested the secrets of his heart, and revealed what was hidden in his
soul, or he must have remained for ever locked up and unknown to us; although
assuredly, neither thus has all of him been by himself manifested or related.

The third thing is, that being willing to obey the decree of our holy Father
Urban the 8. dated the 1^ of March, 1625. and that other, in explanation of the
former, dated June 5. 1631. where it is ordered, that those that publish the
lives of any person of great virtue, do declare and make protestations upon
several heads. I therefore protest, that my intent and design in setting forth
this work is, that the matter thereof should be no otherwise understood, than
as grounded upon the testimony and faith of men, and not upon the Authority of
H. Church; and that, by the name of Saint, which I several times attribute to
Monsieur Renty, I mean only, that he was endued with virtue far exceeding the
common sort, and do use this word only in that sense that S. Paul gives it to
all the faithful, and not to put him in the number of Saints canonized, which
to do, belongs only to the Holy Sea.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.
PART. I.
CHAP. 1. HIs Birth, Infancy, and youth, page 1. Chap. 2. His marriage and
course of life to the age of 27 years, page 10 Chap. 3. His entire change and
call to high perfection, page 17 Chap. 4. His virtues in general, page 24 Chap.
5. The source from whence those virtues flowed. page 30
PART. II.
Chap. 1. HIs Penances and Austerities, 37 Chap. 2. His Poverty of spirit, 47
Sect. 1. His outward Poverty. 48
Chap. 3. His Humility, 54 Sect. 1. His Humility of heart, 58 Sect. 2. The
pursuit of his Humility of heart, 67 Sect. 3. His Humility in his words, 77
Sect. 4. His Humility in his actions, 75 Sect. 5. His love of a private and
retired Life, 84
Chap. 4. The disesteem he made of the world. 88 Chap. 5. His partience, 94
Sect. 1. A pursuit of the same subject, 100 Sect. 2. His Domestic crosses, 107
Chap. 6. His Mortification, 112
PART. III.
Chap. 1. HIs application to our Savior Jesus Christ in regard of his
neighbor, 121 Chap. 2. His Charity to his Neighbors in general, 126 Sect.
1. His charity to the poor, 133 Sect. 2. His charity to poor sick men, 140
Sect. 3. More concerning the same charity and the success thereof, 145 Sect. 4.
His zeal for the salvation of his neighbor, 150 Sect. 5. More of the same
subject, 154 Sect. 6. A continuation of the same subject, 167 Sect. 7. Certain
other qualities of his zeal, 173 Sect. 8. Two other qualities of his zeal, 179
Sect. 9. The success which God gave to his zeal, 186 Sect. 10. His grace in
assisting particularly certain choice souls, 193 Sect. 11. His great skill in
Interior matters of the soul, 199
Chap. 2. His outward behavior and conversation, 209 Chap. 3. The conduct of
his business, 215 Chap. 4. The excellent use he made of all things, and the
application he made to the Infancy of our Savior for that purpose, 228 Sect.
1. A pursuit of the same subject, 235

PART. IV.
Chap. 1. HIs Interior and his application to the Sacred Trinity, 244 Chap. 2.
His Faith, 250 Chap. 3. His Hope, 255 Chap. 4. His Love to God, 259 Chap. 5.
His great reverence and fear of God, which wrought in him a wonderful purity of
Conscience, 271 Chap. 6. His great reverence to Holy things, 276 Chap. 7. His
Devotion to the Holy Sacrament, 267 Chap. 8. His Prayer and Contemplation, 292
Chap. 9. The state of his Mystical Death and Annih^lation, 312 Sect. 1. More of
the same subject. 317 Sect. 2. Continuation of the same subject, 328
Chap. 10. Of his Corporal Death, 335 The Conclusion of the Work, how we ought
to read the Lives of Saints, 346
ERRATA.
PAge 88. l. ult. for some, read from, p. 90. l. 2. for, a boot of hay-ropes, r.
a bottle of hay, p. 91. l. 15. for, possessing it all, r. possessing it at all.

THE HOLY LIFE OF Monr De RENTY, etc.
PART. I.
CHAP. 1. Of his Birth, Infancy and Youth.
SO great and glorious were the virtues and good deeds of the late deceased
Monr de Renty, that I can begin my discourse no otherwise than by ingenuously
confessing my disabillity to set them out as they deserve; not even so much of
them as appeared outwardly to the eyes of men, and much lefs the inward
Treasure that lay hid in his Soul, though that be the principal; Yet
notwithstanding undertake I must to write something thereof, as not able to
deny the requests of many persons of Piety and quality, who well knowing that I
had enjoyed the happiness of his acquaintance in a singular manner, for diverse
years together, even when he was in the very height of the glory of his
Virtues; and that so great a Treasure, so much concerning the glory of God and
the publicue good (as this excellent and perfect Christian life of his was)
ought by no means to be buried in Oblivion, did judge me in a sort obliged to
prevent so great a damage.

Come we therefore to the business, for the greater Glory of God, who is
admirable in his Saints, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who replenished this
rare man, with his Graces, and abundant communication of his Spirit; and let us
do it in the strength of that Divine assistance, which as I stand in very great
need of, so I humbly beg it with all my soul.

Monsieur de Renty draws his Original from one of the most Noble Houses of
Artois, which is that of R^nty, famous for its An^iquity, for its great
Alliances (and in particular, to the House of Crowy, whence came the Dukes of
Arscot, and Princes of S^may) for the Honorable Employment of its Ancestors,
and their Noble Acts in Arms and Battles; and above all, for its Piety, a great
testimony whereof was left in the year, 1570. by Wambert, called the good Count
of Renty, and Hamburg his Lady, who were not contented only to found and
richly endow within their Territories, an Abbey, under the name and protection
of St. Denis (which had the blessing to have a Saint for Abbot; to wit, St:
Bertulphe) but went on, increasing more and more (like the Morning light) in
virtue and good works, and built besides that, three other Churches, one
dedicated to St: Peter, another to St. Martin, and the third to St. Wast.

Monsieur Renty, was the only Son of Charles de Renty, and Magdalen of
Pastoureau, who also descended by her Mother from the same House of Renty. He
was born at Beny in low Normandy, in the Diocese of Bajeaux, in the year of
Grace, 16^^ having the Poor to present him at the Fon^, God so ordering it by a
particular Providence, that the Poor should be Godfathers to him, who
afterward during his life, should be a Solicitor, Protector, and Father of
the Poor. He was at the Font named Gaston, and at Confirmation, John Baptist,
being brought up where he was born, till he was between six or seven years of
age, and then by the Lady his Mother, was he brought to Paris, and lived there
with her about two years, till he was put into the College of Navarre, and
from thence sent to Caen, to the College of the Jesuit Fathers, having with
him for his conduct, a Tutor, being a Churchman, and besides him a Governor,
who unhappily proved an Huguenote, and might in ^he sequel, have been notably
prejudicial to him in corrupting his faith and manners. But God out of his
singular and paternal care of him, as intending to make him one day a great
instrument of his glory, and of the salvation of many souls, preserved him from
the pernicious intents and endeavors of that dangerous man, and became himself
his Governor, which occasioned him since then to say, that God from his infancy
had been most gratio ^ to him, and (as David says of himself) had been hi^
keeper from his mothers womb.

As he had naturally a very good wit, piercing reach, and great judgment, so
was he very notable and famous for his progress in his studies; from the which,
notwithstanding he was taken at the age of seventeen, and put into an Academy
(as they call their Schools of Gentile Exercises) at Paris; where he showed
himself most dextrous and accomplished in all the Exercises there taught: but
that which most of all pleased, and, as I may so say, charmed him, was the
Mathematics, which he applied himself to with such diligence, that he deprived
himself of all sorts of divertisemenis (which youth is given to) and therein
attained to such proficiency, that he understood them perfectly, and composed
therein some Books.

But the time being now come, when God was minded to go closer to the work he
had in hand, and to dispose this choice soul to the execution of those things,
which he was designed for, it pleased him so to order it, that a Stationer, to
whom Monsieur de Renty often repaired to buy such Books as he stood in need of
(for satisfying the curiosity and ardent desire he had of knowledge in all
Sciences, suitable to his condition) did one day present to him, the famous
little Book of the Imitation of Christ, and desired him to read it; but he
having as then, his mind taken up with other notions, made no account of it
for that time. The Stationer having brought him another day some Books that he
had need of, presented the same again to him, and with some earnestness,
besought him to be pleased to read it: thereupon he yielded, and read it, and
was thereby so enlightened and touched (as before him, a great multitude of
persons of all sorts had been) that entertaining now no other thoughts or
affections, he resolved to mind seriously his salvation, and give himself up
to God; so that amongst the great fruits and signal victories obtained by that
book, we may well reckon for one, this work of grace and change, wrought upon
Monsieur de Renty, who also from that time forward, had that Book in so great
love aad esteem, that he always carried it about him, and made use thereof on
all occasions.

The gracious effect which the reading of this Book wrought in his soul, was so
great, that it bread and enkindled in his heart, the thought and desire to quit
the world, to consecrate himself entirely to the service of God, and to make
himself a Carthusian, although he could not but see himself, to be an only
Son, the Heir of a great Estate, and endowed with qualities and perfections,
that did open to him a way to the splendors of the world: And as he was
naturally resolute, firm, and constant, succored by the Divine affistance (to
whose will and pleasure, he gave up himself as an absolute Sacrifice) after he
had duly examined and ordered his design, he put himself upon the execution,
which passed in this manner:

Being one day upon Nostre-Dame Bridge, with the Lady his Mother, he desired
leave to go forth of the Coach, to buy something, which being granted, he stole
presently out of her sight, and slipping with cunning and diligence from street
to street, he gets out of Paris afoot, in the month of December, the year,
1630. and takes the way to our Lady of Ardilliers; and a few days after this
escape, advertised his Father thereof by this following Letter:

SIR,
I Nothing doubt, but this alteration will bring with it some affliction to
you; the first motions of Passion being not in the power of men, and indeed
nature also enclining us, to bemoan the loss of what she loves: But fince that
there is something of God in this business, I most humbly beseech you to lay
aside all passion out of your soul, and consider that in it which is on Gods
part. Thus it is, Sir, that after I had combated two years with my self, and
resisted all the enspirations that God had given me during that time, I was at
last constrained to break off so long a delay in the quitting of the world
avowing, that I have not strength enough to undertake the working out my
salvation, in a place, where is practiced the contrary to what I would effect:
this is too perilous a matter for afceble person, that has a desire to march
on sure ground; and therefore I have judged, that it would be more to the
purpose, to strangle the evil in the birth, than to stay till it become greater
and I not able afterward to master it: For so unlike are the maxims of the
world, to those of Jesus Christ, that I cannot at all believe, a soul that
fears to offend him, can live long in it, and especially at the Court; but that
she shall soon be forced to abandon it, when she shall see herself obliged to
comply with the corruptions of the time; which would not beseem me now to talk
of, since for a good while ago, my design has been, rather to hide and bury in
oblivion its fooleries, than to recall them into my memory. I am minded
therefore to unwinde my self out of this Labyrinth, although I know it will be
said, that I might well enough enjoy the world, and and yet keep my self frow
its enormities. I confess it, but let a man consider what comes after, a man
must resolve then to be the table talk of the Rabble of our Masters of the
Mode, that will give out, that one's a Bigot Pecisian, a sour Fellow, not fit
for discourse and company, a very burden to the world, with a thousand such
like sayings, whereof I have had already but too much experience. In effect, a
pleasant thing it would be to see a young man of my inclinations enter the
Court, and there act the Reformado, should you, Sir, but see it, would not you
your self, in good truth, be the first to laugh at me for my labor.

I therefore humbly beseech you, to consider what a grief it would be to a
Father, to see his Son in the Court and great Meetings, there only to be
contemned, and set at naught: not but that for all this, a good Conscience
counts it a great honor to suffer all these things for Gods sake: but I believe
it will make more for your contentment, that I retire my self; for at the Court
a man must live as at the Court; and being not able to serve two Masters, I
conclude with the G^spel, that he that serves God, ought to follow and attend
on God.

I have always seen this practiced in the world that when one has a quarrel
with another, that man's friend is so far from offering his service to his
adversary, that he even shuns his company and convers^tion; in like manner, God
and the world being in terms of hostility, I should believe it a great offense,
not to do that for God, which I would be sure to do for a friend, which is but
a mortal man: And seeing when we love a thing, we go not about to search out
just the contrary to it; so the means to avoid sin, is to fly the occasions of
it; and shall it be said, that for so wretched a thing as to make a little
show, and to be talked of, a man should endanger the loss of his soul? No, no,
and they that think so now, will be of another mind, when they must give an
account to God, for what is past; then it will be, that they will know what it
is to live well or ill, but then it will be too late; and therefore leaving the
dead, to bury their dead, according to the small illuminations we have, let us
labor to reform our life, and to do something for the love of God, who has
told us so expressly, and so often, that we must deny our selves, for sake all
and follow him: which thing, I believe, you would not be willing to gainsay.

You are the cause of my demurring and retardment, and since the time of my
daily praying for this retirement, I have had many thoughts of your affliction,
which yet for all that, will soon be mitigated, when you shall consider, that
God does all for the b^st, and that it may be, he has sent you this
tribulation to produce out of it some good effects.

I leave this to his secret dispensations, and beseech you to believe, that I
am able to serve you, at least, as much in this new Profession, as in that
which you had designed me to, God give me the grace to do it. I acquaint you
not yet with the place where I am, fearing least now at first, your passion
should cause you to come hither, but within a short time, when I shall know the
state of things a little better, I will not fail to g^ve you notice. In the
mean while, I shall uncessantly pray him, whom I am resolved to serve, to abide
with you, and make you know, how passionately I am, Sir,

Your most humble Son, and most obedient Servant. Gaston de Renty.


Thus you have the Letter he sent to his Father, wherein we may read his
Spirit, his Devotion, and the pure and solid Illuminations, that already shone
in his Understanding.

His Father extremely afflicted at his absence, sends abroad every way to seek
him; and God, who gave him this desire, though not to take effect, would so
have it, that he was found at Amboise, although in disguise, having changed a
Gold-lac'd Suit, into a poor man's habit. He was brought back thence to his
Father at Paris, who thought it not amiss, to carry him along with him to his
Castle or Manor House of Beny, where he was put upon exercises suitable to his
birth, wherein he gave proof of so much virtue, so much wisdom, and good
conduct, that (although but nineteen year old) he was chosen by the Ballywick
of Vire, to be a Member of the States of Normandy, then assembled at Roan,
(Monsieur de Languevill being President) where he spoke so pertinently and
prudently to business, that the three Estates remained not only satisfied
therewith, but even also astonished.

After these exercises of Nobility, he employed himself in the rebuilding of
the Church of Beny, in such sort as we see it at this day; and being far from
such divertisements as are used by Nobles of his age and condition, he rose
ordinarily at four a clock, and then went softly (without waking the Groom of
his Chamber) into his Closet, to say his prayers; and from thence at five a
clock to the Church, and to his building, whence he returned not till about
seven or eight a clock at night, causing some meat to be brought him thither,
and continually busied with the workmen. We cannot doubt, but that such an act
of a person of his quality and age, and with such fervor, was most acceptable
to God, and acquired many great graces; seeing (in order to such) one heroic
action does more prepare a soul, and render it more capable, than a great
number of small and common ones.

CHAP. 2. His Marriage, and course of life, to the age of 27 years.
ALthough the estate of a Religious Life (as faith teaches, and the Church
has defined) is much more perfect than that of Marriage; yet as the perfection
of a man, consists not in the estate he has chosen, but in doing precisely and
eminently the Divine will, in what condition soever his providence has placed
him: God, that he might not altogether deprive Monsieur de Renty of the glory
and merit of a Religious Life, inspired him with the will, design and
endeavors thereto; but yet having resolved to propound him to all married
persons within the Church, as a perfect and complete pattern of all virtues,
needful to the estate of Wedlock, it pleased him to call him to that condition,
of which, he said, he had so much of assurance, that he nothing doubted thereof.

At the age of 22 years, he espoused Elizabeth de Balsac of the house of
Entragues, daughter of Monr de Dunes Count of Gravilie, a Lady of great virtue,
whose modesty hinders me to speak more of her, and will hinder me through the
whole course of this History, from giving her, before men, part of that glory,
which she has deserved in many of the good works of her husband, hereby
reserving for her, the greater glorybefore God.

Such Marriages as are made in the fear of God, and reverence of the Sacrament,
are always watered from Heaven with Spiritual Benedictions, and usually with
Temporal also; among which as children are esteemed the principal, so was their
marriage blessed with five, of which four that remain alive (two Sons, and two
Daughters) make us hope that they will show themselves according to their
capacities, worthy Inheritors, much more of the virtues of their Father, than
of his wealth and possessions.

In this estate he lived, till the 27th year of his age, with the modesty,
wisdom and conduct, found in virtuous persons of his quality and condition of
life, employing himself in pious and laudable exercises, and making of visits
abroad, so far as Civility and Decorum required of him; wherein, his great
prudence, amiable sweetness, rare modesty, mingled with well-besitting gayery
and lightsomeness, with gentile and very witty passages of discourse, rendered
him very acceptable, yea, and made him to be looked upon, loved, and caressed
by the lare King Lewis the just, even to the raising up against him the envy of
some, who, after the narrowly prying into him, could find nothing to object,
save only that he was young. But he ever preferred before all things, the
glory of God, and his own salvation, avoiding with great care, all occasions of
sin, and heedfully shunning those Rocks, whereon those of his condition and age
do usually split and miscarry, saying the office of our Lady, and sometimes
that of the Dead, with other Vocal Prayers, and performing all other things
requisite for his Salvation, which is indeed the business, for which God made
us, and keeps us here on earth, and notwithstanding all this, which the
greatest part of men, have least in their thoughts.

As by his birth, he was to wear a Sword; so now (that Nobles and Gentlemen may
behold him as a mirror for their Instruction) must we draw him from home, and
the exercises of Peace, and look upon him in Arms; and in that War; which
(notwithstanding all our prayers for diverse years) yet still continues, seeing
we daily stir up and blow this fire with our Transgressions.

And first of all for his skill: Monsieur de Renty understood perfectly all the
parts and functions of the Discipline of War, by reason of his good wit, and
particular study therein, which made him admired in the Councels of War, and
other Meetings, and that by the most ancient and experienced Captains, among
whom was the Duke of Weymar, who was astonished, that so young a man, with so
little experience (as his age could allow him) should be able to speak so
knowing in things of such difficulty.

For his Conduct: as God had given him naturally great prudence, and
(notwithstanding all his activeness) a well settled judgment, so he exercised
it very well, foreseeing and providing for such things as need required. In the
War of Lorrain, commanding a party of Horse, of about Sixscore, of whom more
than sixty were men of good birth, they arrived two hours within night at a
Village, where they found the houses all empty; so that being forced to quarrer
each one as he could find, Monsieur de Renty met happily by a singular
providence of God over him, in his quarters, a poor old Woman, the only
creature left in all the Village, as not able to fly away with the rest, being
ready to dye with hunger and sickness; he comforted this poor woman, and
assisted her in this extremity both for soul and body; insomuch, that being
sensible of her obligations to him, she enquired of him, whether he was of the
Troops of the King, or of the Duke of Lorrains: To whom he, out of prudence,
gave not a direct answer; but asked her, why she made that question? Because,
says she, if you be of the Kings party, you must be gone presently, because
the Cravats would come thither infallibly in few hours space, and cut them all
in pieces: This advice he communicated to the rest of the Commanders with him,
who all of them judged it fitting to horse suddenly, and be gone to the body of
their Army. The thing proved very true, for three hours after they were gone,
the Enemy came on purpose to charge them, which they might have done, without
suffering one to escape, by reason of their great number, the time favorable,
and themselves fresh, setting upon men harrass'd out, and tired with the pains
of a long march. Thus God watches over them that fear him, and for their
sakes, many others also: This lodging might have fallen to the lot of some one
less deserving such a favor from God, and that would not have made use of it
so prudently.

For execution of business, he was not at all defective therein, having a body
strong and robust, a spirit active, generous, and resolute, not fearing any
danger.

But for an Additament hereto, as it were the soul to the body, and light to
beauty, we find in him the fear of God, Piety, and Uprightness, without which
Nobility has but a false glister, power is destructive, and War brings with it
mischiefs horrible; and without number. Monsieur de Renty all the time of his
being in the Armies, performed constantly his Prayers, and other Exercises of
Devotion, when he came to his quarters, if there were a Church there: His first
care was to visit it, and to do his devoir to our Lord; if there were any
Religious House, he took up there his lodging, and (that he might not incommode
them) for himself alone, when the Army staid any time in a place, while many,
and much elder than he, past away their time in Gaming, Drinking, Rybaldrie,
Swearing, and other Disorders, he contained himself within the bounds of his
usual wisdom, avoiding all these base and vicious actions, and entertaining
himself in Exercises of Virtue and Honor.

In every place where he had any power, he wholly employed it to keep off
disorders: He forbad peremptorily his men the treating ill of their Hosts that
entertained them, or giving them occasion of complaint; and he never took
horse, but he made come before him, them with whom he quartered, to tell him
themselves, if any had done them wrong; and if he found that any of his, had
offended, he forthwith saw it remedied, and did them right. One day being
mounted, and ready to depart, having made this enquiry of his Hostess, and she
complaining, that one of his Servants had stolen a shirt, he caused them all
forthwith to come before her, that she might find out the Thief; which being
done, and one of them confessing, that he had it upon his back, he
incontinently ordered, that he should be stripped of it before them all, and it
restored to the woman, notwithstanding many persons of quality, thought it very
harsh, and opposed the business: But he always kept himself firm to Justice,
and said, he would by no means endure any Thieves. If all that have commands,
dealt in this sort, as they ought, people would not stand so much in dread of
their Soldiers, as of the most cruel of Enemies; and God, who is the Lord of
Hosts, would afford more blessing and success to their Arms.

But as the passage most dangerous to Nobility of making Shipwreck of their
Salvation, is falling out, and Duels, so God was pleased that his Servant
should meet with this perilous occasion, to teach all Gentlemen, and those that
wear a Sword, how they ought to behave themselves therein. Being in the Army,
he he had a falling out with a punctilious Gentleman, which coming to the
knowledge of the Chief Officers, he made it appear, that this Gentleman had no
reason at all to be agriev'd at him; which thing they judged also to be very
true: But the other party, not acquiescing in this determination, appealed ^o
that judgment, which according to the unhappy Maxim of the World, his Sword,
could yield him, and challenged Monsieur de Renty to Duel: who returned this
answer to him that brought the challenge, that the Gentleman was in the wrong,
and that he had given all satisfaction which in Justice he could desire: But
this not contenting this untoward spirit, he persisted in his perilous design,
to make him meet with his sword; to which, finding himself much pressed, he
made an answer, which is so much the more considerable, in that he was so
young, and had not as yet a reputation, but was to get it by Arms: The answer
was this, that he was resolved not to do it, since God and the King had for
bidden; otherwise, he would have him know, that all his satisfactions he had
endeavored to give him, came from no fear of him, but of God, and of his
displeasure; and that he would go every day after his wonted manner, vvhither
the necessity of his affairs called him; and that if he did assault him, he
would make him repent it. This quarrelsome man, seeing he could not provoke
him to an open Duel, found one day the means to meet him, and so to make him
dravv his Svvord, where, by the just judgment of God, this other came very
ill off; for he and his second being hurt, and disarmed, got nothing for their
rashness, but shame and sorrovv? But then this true Christian Gentleman,
instead of doing them more harm (as he might) led them to his Tent, caused Wine
to be given them, their vvounds to be dressed, and their Svvords to be restored
them. And joining to Charity and Generosity, both Humility and Modesty, as his
greatest ornaments, he kept the thing ever after in secret, never opening his
mouth concerning it to any, as some would have done (out of vainglory) and,
which is more to be vvondred at, he never afterward spoke word thereof to
his man, who was present, and served him for a second in this Assault; to
whom also before the deed, when he savv himself forced to a defense, he gave
charge by no means to kill.

This was not the only difference, but he had others also, with some of the
Neighbors, or at least good cause to complain of them; to which business, he
brought all that Prudence, Patience, and Charity could contribute, and always
came off most happily; and he was wont to say to his Domestics, concerning his
own differences, or theirs, that there was more of courage and generosity to
bear any injury for the love of God, than to requite it with another; and to
suffer, than to revenge, because the thing was far more difficult; that Bulls
themselves had courage enough, but that it was a brutish courage; whereas that
of ours, should be reasonable and Christian.

CHAP. 3. His entire change and call to a high Perfection.
MOnsieur de Renty having lived to the age of 27 years, it pleased God to touch
him now more closely; to enlighten him more clearly, and to call him to that
high Perfection, whereunto, by the faithful cooperation which he yielded to
this call, we have seen him to arrive; that like a great Torch or Luminary, he
has spread his beams far and wide, to Paris, and in all places where he has
been. This came to pass at a Mission made by the Fathers of the Oratory, some
six or seven Leagues from Paris, whither he went on foot, and where he made a
general Confession, with all the care, that those take, who desire to do it
exactly. And so great graces did he receive in this new call of his, that he
marked this time, as the beginning of his entire Conversion to God, and perfect
Consecration to his Service.

In pursuit of this change, as he knew, that what good desire soever one has
to advance toward Perfection, the way that leads thither was hard and full of
dangers; and therefore not to stray out of the way, and be lost, of necessity
one must have a good guide: so God out of his singular Providence, for his
Sanctification, provided him one, and such a one indeed, as his need required;
and that was the Reverend Father de Condrien, General of the Oratory, a
Personage of profound Science, of great Piety, and of high capacity for matters
Interior, who had the conduct of him for some twelve years space (to wit, as
long as this Father lived) and that with great care, and affection
extraordinary, as so excellent a subject deserved; who made, by his means, such
a notable progress, that it caused him to say to a certain person, that
Monsieur de Renty would one day be a great Saint.

The way he took, in effect was this following; not to speak of his Penances
and Austeri^ies (which are the first combats of a person well converted, and
called to great matters, of which we shall treat hereafter) he withdrew himself
altogether from the Court; he bad adieu to all employments of Vanity and
Ambition, to be taken up in those entirely, which might glorify God, and help
his Neighbor, he renounced all visits of pure complement, and unprofitable: He
set his mind to the exercise of Prayer, and therefore said every day the Great
Office, rising even in the night to say Matins, and after, made an hour of
Meditation; insomuch that he continued every night two or three hours in
prayer, and that in the greatest rigor of winter: Every day he made two examens
of his conscience, with an exact search into his smallest faults; one in the
morning before dinner, and the other at evening. He confessed twice a week, and
communicated three or four times: He went one day in a week to visit and
instruct the poor sick people of the great Hospital de Dieu. Another day, those
of his own Parish; and a third, the Prisoners; and, in the rest, he used to
meet at Assemblies of Piety.

But in regard he had more care and zeal for his Children and Domestics (as he
was obliged) and well knew to distniguish Commands from Counsels, and
Obligations from Voluntary Devotions, he ordered, that every evening, by the
sound of a bell, they should be assembled, to make together their Examens, to
say the Letanies of our Lady, and other Prayers: Every Saturday he made them,
in presence of his Lady, a Discourse upon the Gospel of the Sunday following,
to imprint in them the Principles and Instructions of matters of their
Salvation, from which, they reaped much edification and profit.

But that which was highly exemplary, was the order he kept in his journeys;
which was thus, There was as much regularity therein, as in a well reformed
Religious House: In the morning, before setting out, they heard Mass; as soon
as in Coach, and beginning to go, the first thing done, was the saying the
Itinerarium, which he never omitted, how short soever the journey was he made;
next, was the singing of the Letanies of our Lord, then followed some
Meditation; after that he said a part of the Divine Office, which being done;
he entertained the company with some good discourse, and such as raised them up
sweetly to God: Beholding the spacious extent of the Country, he would speak
of the immensity of God; upon the presenting of any beautiful object to their
eyes, as any Summer House for delight, any Meadow enameld with flowers, any
River winding pleasantly about the land, he would discourse of the Beauty of
God, or of Paradise, forming such acts of virtue upon it, as touched the very
heart; approaching near to the place where they were to dine, he made the
Examen, and being come thither (as also where he was to lodge at night) as soon
as out of Coach, and before he entered the Inn, would he go to the Church,
where if the door was shut, and no man found to open it, he kneeled down at the
door, to render his devoir to the holy Sacrament; afterward, he enquired if
there were any Hospital in the place, to the end he might go thither, and
exercise his Charity.

Being in his Irin, the first thing of all he did in his chamber, was to cast
himself on his knees, and to worship God, to pray with great affection for all
persons that entered that place, and for pardon of all disorders that had been
there committed: When he saw any thing written upon the walls or chimney, that
offended modesty, he defaced it, and in place thereof, writ words of
Instruction in Piety, and the way to Happiness, and endeavored always before
departure, to give some good advice to the servants of the house, and to such
poor of the place as he could meet with, that so by the example of our Lord, he
might not pass through any place, without doing some good in it.

After dinner, when up in Coach again, he made some recollection, and applied
himself to his Interior, for some little time; then entertained some
recreation, which was grave and modest; afterward, with the company, sang the
Vespers; which done, he wished them to refresh themselves a little, and use some
innocent divertisement, in which, to render it Christian and Holy, he interwove
some touches of Piety: Often he caused them to sing with him the Articles of
our belief in French; which to that end, he had caused to be set in Music:
About four a clock, they sung the Compline, afterward he made by himself some
mental Prayer, and being come to his Inn, his Exercises were the same with
those of the morning; and this was the rule he observed in his journey. If that
saying of the Jews be true, that a may man be known, in sickness, at the table,
in play, and in a journey, we may easily judge by what has been said already,
how much must needs be the virtue of this great servant of God.

As the end of Marriage is to have children, and of Christian Marriage to
render them virtuous, in order to Eternal Happiness; so he took very great
care, both by himself and others, to make his children such; and for that end,
to engrave deeply in them the fear of God, to disaffect them from the esteem of
the world, to let them know, that the Maxims of it are much contrary to the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, and that true Nobility consists in virtue. Behold here
his thoughts of this matter, as he wrote them to a certain Lady.

For the Education of Infants, God, having distinguished their conditions,
seems to teach us, that there ought to be a difference between the nurture of a
Peasant, and that of a Gentleman; who being born to wear a Sword, must not,
without doubt, be put into a Cloister for the fitting of him to it: but so
great corruption is now among us, that all the principal Instructions that
either we, or any we set over them, do give them, serve for nothing but to
kindle a fire infernal of vanity in their hearts, where there is not but too
much already, pushing youth on by Paganish examples, to put up and endure
nothing, to aspire always to that which is most aloft, and for the climbing up
thither, to make use of such means as are most approved by the world, although
they be forbidden by God himself.

But if they go not thus far; yet at least, do they not quite choke in the
heart of a young Gentleman all Christian Principles? For example, you know how
these Duels infect the minds of our youth: Now tell me, how many are there,
who would be content, that their children being grown up, and challenged,
should refuse to fight? and much less would be content, were they sure they
should come off without harm, and get the better? but what will this come to at
last, that we never make to them any discourse expressly tending to the
cordemning of Duels, and showing the mischievous effects of them; which yet we
ought to do so much the oftener, and that to the bottom, inasmuch as their
inclination, the example, esteem and honor of the world, does engage and
incite them to these quarrels; if perhaps youth let fall any spark of this
furious hot coal, which is naturally in us, some one will, it may be, in a
kind of smile, and by the by, Oh that is not good! God forbid such a thing:
yes, but take notice, I pray you, whether you use no more earnestness than this
to prevent your sons having crooked legs, and a misshapen body; you use no more
earnestness than this, to have him well taught to dance and fence. Such were
his Sentiments in this matter.

As for his Domestics and Officers, that he had under him, he recommended to
them in a special manner Justice, Charity, and Sweetness, to do good to all,
and ill to none, as far as they were able; and to one of them who had been
transported with cholar, and committed some excess in a Churchyard, he wrote
as follows:

I have heard with grief, what you have done, and although I cannot believe all
the Circumstances that are told me, yet I daily meet with enough to make me
know that your passion has got the mastery; if I looked upon you only for my
self, and proper interest, I should desire you might exterminate all those that
would wrong me; but so the case stands, that both you and I must live like
Christians, or assuredly be damned, if we have not this belief and desire, lets
be Turks and Barbarians professed. Knew you but how much such actions are
displeasing to God, what scandals and damage they bring to men, your heart
would be changed forthwith, and God grant it may: my Goods, Blood, and Life, I
offer to him, to obtain you this Grace, on which depends your Salvation; but I
pray you as a brother, and command you as a Master, to repair the wrong you
have done to God, to an Holy Place, and to your Neighbor; I had rather my
house were ruined (for me) than you should fall again into such an extremity, I
must regulate my thoughts and desires of preserving my estate, by my
Conscience, and the love of God, who gave it me. I assure you, that our
guidance in this world is difficult, considering the wickednesses of the times;
and though one may sometime hinder the oppression of the we^k, and withstand
injustice by courses extraordinary; yet where there is a mixture of our own
interest, it behooves us to have recourse coordin^ry ways; as first, that of
mildeness; secondly, that of Justice and Law; and if that prosper not, to
employ our patience: Then is the time, that we ought to practice such a virtue;
I make no great account of certain Devotions for fashion, but I respect the
Maxims of the Gospel, which teach us no other way than this.

CHAP. 4.
SECT. 1. His Virtues in general.
BEfore I speak of the Virtues of this man of God in particular, I must say
something of them in general (as it were the Groundwork) and I have two things
to say:

The first, that among all the Persons of Piety that I have known, I have not
seen any whose Virtues have been, in my opinion (all things considered) more
solid, more strong, and more accomplished, than were his. I speak thus much of
him, for that I have been intimately acquainted with him many years, even to
his death: so that when I fancy and figure in my mind all the severals of his
carriage, both interior and exterior: I cannot but conceive him, as a most
eminent Idea and Pattern, and look upon him, as a Model of a Perfection
Consummate; wherein, all they that have had any thing to do with him (who were
not a few, by reason of his many employments for the good of his neighbor)
will easily accord with me, and witness assuredly, that I say nothing too much.

The second is, that we cannot better learn what we desire to know of him, than
from himself, and that by an account which he gave to his second Director, a
Religious of the Society of Jesus, who succeeded the Reverend Father de
Condrien; and who had told him, it was necessary for him, to know his
dispositions, and the course which he observed. Behold here then what the
Original gives us, though somethings be left out, because they are set down in
the Chapter aforegoing.

I have delaid some days, after the command I had to set down the employing of
my time, for the better discovering of some things therein; but I find nothing
there of strict order, or which can well be set down in writing, because all
consists in a kind of self abandoning, and following after the order of God,
which causes in a manner continually diverse things, but all upon the same
bottom

For my outward and more Corporal part of my carriage, I usually rise at five a
Clock [we must remember what goes before, that this was after he had spent part
of the night in Prayer] at my awakening, I enter upon my bottom of
Self-Annihilation, before the Majestic of God; I unite me to his Son, and
Spirit, to render him my homages: Being risen, I take Holy water, I cast down
my self, and adore the blessing of the Incarnation, which gives us access, and
reconciles us to God: I deliver up my self to the Holy Infant Jesus, to be
entered into his Spirit: I salute sometimes my good Angel, St. John Baptist, St.
Teresa, with some other Saints, and afterward I recite the Angelus.

He says [sometimes] not that he failed out of oblivion or inconstancy, being
extremely exact and faithful in the continuance of his Exercises of Devotion;
but out of the force of an active application, and sometimes passive, that he
had to God, which kept him from any other diversion.

I cloth my self, which is soon done, and after pass to the Chapel, through a
little Parlour, where over the Chimney. I have set an Image of the Holy Virgin,
holding her Son, as the Lady of the House; I kiss the earth before her, and
say, [Monstra te esse matrem, etc.] I devote my self to her service entirely,
with the offering up of my Family, Wife, Children, Domestics; and I have
practiced this offering of them to her a long time, that by her means they all
may be perfected for God; and rising up, I say to her, Matter incomparabilis or
a pro nobis.

After that I enter into the Chapel, where I cast my self down, and adore God
abasing me before him, and making me the most little, most naked, most empty of
my self, that I can; and I hold me there by faith, having recourse to his Son,
and to his Holy Spirit, that whatsoever is his pleasure, may be done by me, and
so I abide. If I have any Penance to do upon half an hour after six, I do it,
and then I read two Chapters of the New Testament, barcheaded, and on my knees.

At seven a clock, I go up to a Closet, where there are three Stations, the
first to the Virgin, the second to St. Joseph, and the third to Teresa, to all
which I render my little Devoirs; and afterward, I give place to my affairs;
but if there be no business urgent, I prostrate my self before God, till the
time that I go to Mass, staying at the Church till half an hour after eleven,
except on those days when we dine some poor people, for then I return at eleven.

Before dinner, I make the Examen of the morning, and some Prayers for the
Church, for the Propagation of Faith, and the Souls in Purgatory: after that, I
say the Angelus: I dine at twelve, and in that while, have something read; half
an hour after twelve, I spend an hour with them that have business with me, and
that is the time I appoint for that purpose: Afterward, I go forth, whither the
order of God shall direct: Some days ore ordered and assigned for certain
Exercises, therest are reserved and unlimited from one week to another: Now if
it fall out, that I have nothing to do, I pray in a Church, but happen what
will, I endeavor not to fail to visit every afternoon, the Holy Sacrament, and
to spend about evening, an hour in Devotion: About seven a clock, when I have
made some vocal prayers, we go to supper, during which time, one reads the
Martyrologie, and the life of the Saint for the day following: Supper being
done, I talk to my children, and tell them something for their instruction: At
nine a clock the bell rings to Prayer, which all my Family is to be present at;
which done, each one retires, but I keep me in the Chapel in Meditation till
ten; and then I go to my Chamber, recommending my self to my God (according to
my Bottom of Self-Annthtlation) to the Holy Virgin, my good Angel, and other
Saints: I take holy water, and lay me down in bed, where I say the de Profundis
for the dead, and some other little Prayers, and so endeavor to repose. And so
you have in some sort the order of the day as to my Exterior.

But for the order of my Interior, I have not, as I may say, any; for since I
left (it will be a year^ the Holy Week next) my breviary, all my forms have
left me, and now instead of serving me^^s means to go to God, they would become
hinderance: I bear in me ordinarily (but with many infidelities so great in all
this, that I am about to speak of, that I write it not without regret, because
I am nothing but vice and sin:) I bear, I say, in me ordinarily, an
experimental verity, and a plenitude of the presence of the most Holy Trinity;
or indeed, of some Mystery, which elevates me by a simple view to God, and
with that, I do all that the Divine Providence enjoins me, regarding not any
things for their greatness or littleness, but only the order of God, and the
glory which they may render him.

For the Examens; and things done in Community (which I mentioned before) I
often cannot rest my self there: I perform indeed the Exterior, for the keeping
of order; but I follow always my Interior, without making any change there;
because, when a man has God, there is no need to search him elsewhere, and when
he holds us in one manner, it is not for us to take hold of him in another; and
the soul knows well, what it is which bottoms it more clearly, what unites it,
and what multiplies and distracts it.

For the Interior therefore, I follow this Attractive, and for the Exterior, I
see the Divine Will, which makes me to follow it, and which carries me to
govern my self according to it, with the discernment of his Spirit, in all
simplicity: and so I possess, by his grace, in all things, a great silence
Interior, a profound Reverence, and solid Peace: I confess me, usually on
Thursdays, according to the order that has been given me, and communicate
almost every day, as perceiving my self drawn thereto, as also to stand in
great need of it. In a word, the Bottom which has been showed me to stand on,
is to render my self to God through Jesus Christ with such a purity, as has in
it operation, to worship God in Spirit and Truth, after a manner altogether
stripped and naked, and of loving him with all my heart, with all my soul, and
with all my power, and of seeing in all things, and adoring the conduct of God,
and following it. And this only abiding in my soul, all other things in me are
defaced and blotted out: I have nothing of sensible in me, unless now and then
some transitory touches, but (if I may dare to say it) when I sound my will, I
find it sometime so quick and flaming, that it would devour me, if the same
Lord; who animates it (though unworthy) did not restrain it: I enter into an
heat, and into a fire, and even to my fingers ends, feel that all within me
speaks for its God, and stretches it self forth in length and breadth in his
Immensity, that it may there dissolve, and there lose it self, to glorify him.
I cannot express this thing as it is, I do not make a stand upon any thing that
passes in me, but fall always into my nothingness, where I find my act of
purity toward God, as above.

He concludes afterward in these terms:

I beg your pardon, my Reverend Father, if this thing here be so ill ordered: I
have set it down, as it has happened to me, I should be very happy, if you
could know all my miseries, for you would have them in great commiseration.
This was the writing he gave to his Director.

They that shall read it, will judge, without doubt (if they understand it
well, and penetrate to the bottom, the sense of his words) that very great were
the Virtues, and highly raised the perfection of this excellent servant of God;
and by so much the more ought they to judge so, as they may assure themselves,
that he has not a jot exceeded in the report of the things which concern him;
but rather that he has diminished them; being by grace (and indeed by nature
also) extremely reserved, and most considerare in whatsoever he said, and
especially in speaking of himself.

SECT. 2. The Source from whence these Virtues flowed.
IF now we will examine the Principal of those Virtues and Perfections, and the
Wellspring whence they issued, we shall find that it was, from the intimate
Union which he had with the Lord Jesus Christ, whereunto he always above all
things, gave up himself.

His sage and illuminated Director, the Reverend Father de Condrien, knowing
that the Union with Jesus Christ, is the foundation of our Predestination,
Justification, and Sanctification, of all the grace and glory which we can ever
have; that Jesus Christ being the way, whatsoever is out of this way, can be
nothing else but wandering; that he being the Truth, whatsoever is nor
conformable thereto, is nothing but lying; that he being the Life, whatsoever
lives not by this life, nor is quickened by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, is not
alive, but of necessity dead: he did therefore that, which ought always to be
done with great care, by all Directors of souls, which was to make him to know
the importance, and the necessity of this Unon, to fix him strongly and
constan^lie to Jesus Christ, for the Government of his Interior and Exterior,
to put him this Way, to bind him to this Truth, and to Unite him to this Life.

Monsieur de Renty followed exactly this conduct, and therein made a great
progress, which he went on in perfecting to his death, with mavelous
improvements, so that as the last touches which the Painter gives to his
Picture, are far different from those of the first rude draughts; or, as the
Sun has more of heat and light, as he advances higher in his carreer, and
approaches to Midday, than when he but newly rises: In like manner, the
applications, the ties, and the unions which this excellent man in his latter
years had with Jesus Christ, and the actions which he either did for him, or
received of him, were quite other from those at his beginning; for he was then
wholly consummate in Jesus Christ, he had, as it were, passed into him, and he
carried him, as it were, in a livelie manner in his soul, in his thoughts, in
his affections, in his desires, in his words, and in his works.

Hence it was, that he had no other object before his eyes, but Jesus Christ,
that he thought not but of him, that he loved nothing but him, that he spoke
not but of him, that he wrought not but for him, and always after his sampler,
that he read not but the New Testament, which he carried always with him, and
endeavored by all means possible to engrave the knowledge and love of it in
all hearts.

Wri^ing to his Director, the year, 1646. concerning his dispositions, he sent
him these words among other:

To speak to you of my Interior, I feel my self not to will, but God, and in
union with our Lord Jesus Christ, to yield him all my homages: This is the
fullness of my heart, and I feel this well, when I sound it.

He said this to him in another Letter:

I am in great necessity of Jesus Christ, but I ought to tell you by an
acknowledgement of the Mercy of God, by a certitude of this truth, that I feel
that he is more ruling in me, than my self: I know for all that, that of my
self I am but sin, but withal, I experiment my Lord in me, who is my strength,
my life, my peace, and my All, I beseech him to become our plenitude.

Moreover, in another thus:

I find, my self, said he, much troubled what to send you, because all things
become razed out of my mind as soon as passed, and I cannot retain within me
anything, but God, and this in a kind of a hoodowink'd blinded manner, with a
naked faith, which faith making me know the evil bottom which is in my self,
gives me notwithstanding great force and confidence by way of abandoning [and
Self-Rejection] upon our Lord Jesus Christ in God. I have found this morning a
possage in S. Paul, which I believe our Lord has put into my hand to express
my self by, seeing it is the very truth of what I experiment: Fiduciam ^urem
talem habemus per Christum, ad Deum; non quod sufficientes simus cogitare
aliquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis; sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo est This
boasting we have by Christ to Godwards; not as if we were sufficient to think
any thing of our selves, as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God.

It is about a fortnight since these words were put upon my spirit, without any
contribution on my part, or of any thing that might renew the Idea's of them,
quaere venam aquarum viventium [seck the vein of living water] and just as they
were expressed to me, my spirit (like as when one comes up a River, to its
Springhead) was to seek Jesus Christ from the beginning of his Pilgrimage, to
the point of his Glory; when set down in his Throne at the right hand of his
Father, whence he sends his spirit to animate his Church, and enliven those
that are his: I saw that there indeed was the Source, whence the springs of
living waters do flow to us, and that thither we were to make our addresses.

I could report here more such touches, with which his letters to his Director
were besprinkled: but I believe I have given enough for the present, to
evidence his disposition toward our Lord, and his union with him.

When he wrote to other persons, he always insened something of our Lord, to
excite them to bind themselves to him, and to propose him to themselves in all
things, as a model of their actions.

One while he writes thus,

Let us forget all, to think of this faith which makes alliance between God and
us through Jesus Christ, who is come to publish this truth, which he has
sealed with his blood, and which he will consummate in his glory, at that time
when we shall appear to have been faithful in following his Spirit. Let us go
after, and with Jesus Christ to God, for he is our way.

Another while thus,

It Is a thing admirable, that it has pleased God to seud us his Son, to the
end that we may not look on him any more as our Creator only; but also through
the alliance that we have with him, we may call him Father. He is therefore our
Father from this time forward, and it is certain, that he considers us as his
children in the person of his Son Incarnate: But the thing of importance, is a
firm aniting of our selves to this Son, contiruing that life of his upon earth;
within this of ours, by the direction of his Spirit.

Thus also in another Letter,

Let Jesus Christ be in each of us our bond, our soul, our life as he is our
pattern: Lets take a nearer view of this Holy Original, enter into his
Principles, lay hold on his desires, execute his works, and let men know that
we are Christians.

Writing to another, he spoke thus,

I adore and bless with all my heart, our Lord Jesus Christ, for that he opens
you his heart, to possess wholly yours: he will make it to dye, and will reduce
it to a Holy Poverty, which shall cause you to taste the true Life, and
complete Riches, and to avow that it is a great mercy to belong to Jesus
Christ: I beseech him to bestow on you his most sanctifying graces, and that we
may beth dye well, and live well, by his Spirit: Let us enter into this Spirit,
which will give us the Sentiments, and the Energie of the Children of God: All
other presence and application to the Divine Majesty which is not by this
union of the Soul to Jesus Christ is only of the creature toward the Creator,
which carries indeed respect, but gives not the life and approaches of children
toward God their Father, where being united to the Interior operations of
Jesus Christ, we find there, the affections of true children; which we can^
not have, but by being united to the true Son.

Let us end with that, which a person, to whom he unbosom'd himself,
confidently in this matter, reports of him: This rare man, said he, appeared
touched with a very tender and fervent love toward our Lord Jesus Christ: I
have observed, that his Conversations and Discourses did shoot always at this
mark, to imprint in souls the knowledge and love of our Lord with true
soliditie. In discourse with him, I had often from him these words:

I avow that I have no gust in any thing, where I find not Jesus Christ; and
for a soul that speaks not of him, or in which we cannot taste any effect of
grace, flowing from his Spirit (which is the principal of operations, both
inward and outward, that are solidly Christians) speak not to me at all of such
a one: Could I, as I may so say, behold both miracles and wonders there, and
yet not Jesus Christ, nor hear any talk of him, I count all but amusement of
spirit, loss of time, and a very dangerous Precipice.

And at several other times he said.

Let us love Jesus Christ, let us unite our selves to his Spirit and Grace,
miserable sinner, as I am, who love him not, yet should I be much joy'd at
least, to see my defects supplied by others that love him fervently; but I am
too unworthy to obtain a matter so great, and wherein my self do bear so small
a part.

Seeing then this faithful servant and follower of Christ Jesus had so strong
an application, and intimate union with his Divine Lord (as it is easy to
gather from what has been spoken) we cannot but ascribe to this application
and union, all his virtues, which we are going now to speak of in several; and
to look upon them, as effects of this cause, streams of this Fountain, and
branches of this Stem.

PART. II. His Virtues in particular, and first, the Virtues which did perfect
him in regard of himself.
CHAP. 1. His Penances and Austerities.
AS our flesh and senses are by their nature, and more by their corruption,
very opposite to a Spiritual Life; and among the enemies of our weal and
perfection, none more importunate or more violent than they: so God uses when
he intends to elevate any to the accomplishment of virtue, and to make them
Saints, to inspire in them, at the beginning of their conversion, a spirit of
Penance, and mortification of their bodies: Monsieur de Renty being destined by
God to this glory, and quickened by this Spirit, encounters his body with
rigorous Austerities, thereby to reduce it to its duty, and hinder it from
annoying him in his Interior Exercises.

He begins therefore to fast every day, making but one meal, which he continued
diverse years, until he was enjoined otherwise, and to take more nourishment, to
be the better able to undergo the great labors he undertook for his neighbor.
Some days in the week, he wore an iron Girdle, set with a double rank of long
prickles, and a bracelet of the same: on other days he disciplined himself
rigorously, and at some times wore haircloath, having continually on his breast
a brass Crucifix, reaching to the bottom of his stomach, the nails whereof
being very sharp, entered into his flesh.

When he went into the Country, and was come to his Inn, he would go into the
Kitchen, to eat there, if it might be, among servants, and other mean persons:
and that for two ends, both there to mor^ifie his body, and to speak some good
thing to those poor people: and when night constrained him to take his chamber,
he dismissed his servants, to lie in other rooms, and himself past the night in
a chair, or cast himself on a bed, in his clothes, and boots, which was his
custom till death.

Being come to Amiens, where I was, and a Lady (one of the chief of the Town)
having prepared a stately bed in a brave Chamber for him, in honor of his
virtue and cuality, he was much troubled, and would not at all use it, but laid
him down upon a bench, and the day after, as being much ashamed, complained to
me of the Lady for it: so that to enjoy the blessing of lodging him at her
house, she was fain to change his chamber and bed, and to accommodate him after
his own mode; that is to say, where he might not be so much at his ease.

His Mortification in diet was very great, eating little, and always of the
worst, as not forgetting that our misery came not, but by eating of delicious
fruit: Dining in company on a Fish-day, one of the guests that noted his
actions, observed, that all he eat, was some Pears only, and that with so
great modesty and recollection, that one might easily discern, that his mind
was on God, and not upon his meat.

When one of his friends, a man of piety, at Caen, entertained him one day at
dinner with some little ceremony as a person of quality, he ate very little,
and became much mortified and ashamed, as he declared afterward, that
Christians should be Feasters; adding, that a little would suffice, and what a
torment it was to him, to be where there was so much cheer, as a thing quite
contrary to the poverty of Christ; who notwithstanding should be to us for our
rule: He would tell his friends, that a little bread, a little lard and butter,
was sufficient.

Hereupon, his friends acquainted with this grace of Mortification in him, took
no more thought concerning his diet, knowing his best entertainment to be the
meanest fare. The perfection of a Christian life, and the fulfilling of Gods
will, was to him (after the example of our Lord) as most exquisite and
delitious meat and viands; and when any gave him opportunity, or left him to
his liberty, to practice this Mortification, it pleased him exceedingly. Often
at Paris, when some deed of charity had drawn him far from home, that he could
not return to dinner, he would step in (all alone or unknown) to a small
Victualling-house, or some Bakers shop, and make his dinner with a piece of
bread, and a draught of water, and so very gay and cheerful, go on with his
business.

And what he pracrised for the mortifying of his gust, was in like manner done
for his other senses, the sight, the hearing, the smell, and the touch. Being
come to Pontois, on a very cold day in winter, and lodging at the Carmelite
Nuns, he desired earnestly the Nun that was the Doorkeeper, to have no fire
made, nor bed prepared for him; and after he had discoursed with some of them,
he old the last, that he must go make some little visits (and that was to visit
the Prisoners, the poor that were ashamed to beg, and to employ himself in some
other deeds of charity, which he never forgot at any time, how little soever
was his leisure) He returned about nine a clock at night, when the Nuns went to
say Matins, and without taking any thing to eat, went into the Church to his
prayers, which he continued till eleven a clock, and then retired into his
chamber, not suffering a fire to be made for him, although by his own
confession, the cold did incommode him very much.

He constantly kept a vigilant eye over himself in every time, place, occasion,
and even in the meanest things, for the mortifying of his body; daily putting
it to some hardship, or at least hindering it from sense of pleasure: And to
that end had found out some very notable and ingenious inventions; so bearing
continually about him the mortification of the Lord Jesus in his body: that the
life of Jesus might live and shine forth in it, well knowing, as the same
Apostle elsewhere says, That those that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lust thereof:

And to say the truth, the more a man is full of one thing, the less room there
is for its contrary; the more one sinks into darkness, the further off from
light; and, as we said above, there is nothing more opposite to the Spirit,
than the flesh: so must we of necessity conclude, the more a man pampers his
flesh, the more does he indispose and estrange himself from the life of the
Spirit.

Thus this illuminated person dealt with his body, as with his enemy, out of
the design he had to lead a life truly spiritual. Whatsoever might content and
flatter his senses, was insupportable to him; whence it happened, that one day,
there slipped from him this word to a confident, that God had given him a great
hatred of himself: and this was advanced so far by his fervent and unsatiable
desire of mortifying himself, that beside the moderation that his Director was
obliged to lay upon him, a famous person of our days, the Carmelite Nun of the
Covent of Beaulne, Sister Margaret of the Holy Sacrament, who lived and dyed in
a fragrant odor of Sanctity, with whom he was most intimate in the bonds of
grace, did out of divine light she had in that matter, much reprehend him for
it; and gave him her advice in the business, whereunto, for the confidence he
had in her (and that not without good cause) being willing to yield, he
remitted something of his rigor, although not without complaint: which he
testified to a person thus, in writing:

I know not, said he, why one stould strive to keep in so lazy a beast, that
stands more in need of the spur than bridle.

For all he was thus held in, he left not off the war which he made with his
body, in each thing he could (but without transgressing the Orders he had
received) till he thereby came to such a point of perfect Mortification, that
his body became, as it were, dead, and insen^ble in all things; which now in a
manner made no impression upon his senses; eating without gust (himself saying,
that all meats were to him alike) seeing, as it were, without sight, so that
after he had been along time in some Churches, most richly adorned with stately
ornaments, and those before his eyes; when one asked, if they were not very
fine? he answered plainly, that he had seen nothing: By reason of his
Mortification, he had no pain nor trouble at all from those things, which make
other men so fret and take on, who are alive to themselves, and enslaved to
their bodies: neither was he only without pain, but (which as Ar^stotle says,
is the highest perfection of a virtue) he took great pleasure therein, which
came not to him so much from abundance of sensible consolations (which may
sweeten Austerities to an unmortified man) but from the ground and bottom of
virtue entirely acquired and possessed.

CHAP. 2. Of his Poverty.
SECT. 1. Of his Poverty of spirit.
ONe of the most great and admirable Virtues that shone in Monsieur de Renty,
was this, that in the possession of riches, he was utterly disingaged from the
love of them, and possessed in a most high degree (as we shall now declare) the
first of the Beatitudes, which pronounces, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; of grace in this world, and of glory in the
other.

A truth, which served him for a powerful attractive, to endeavor the gaining
of this rich treasure: Whereof writing to a person of Piety, he thus said:

I was the other day touched in reading the eight Beatudes; and upon this word
Beatitude I took notice, that in effect there were no other Beatitudes but
these; for if there had, our Lord would have taught them, and therefore those
ought to be our whole study: But what shall I say? we ground not our selves
upon them, nor desire the grace to do it; but run after the Beatitudes of the
world, and our own Concupiscience, quitting that which is clear, and given us
by our head Christ Jesus, to be in a state of hurley-burley and confusion, and
consequently of trouble, danger, and unhappiness.

It was not to these kind of Beatitudes that he ran, but to those of the
Gospel; and in particular to the first, concerning which, lets hear what one
says of him, a person very credible, and of his intimate acquaintance. I never
sew m^n, said he, in so perfect a poverty of spirit, nor in so ardent a desire
to feel the effects of it, as was he: And in the fervor of his desire, he said
to me,

Procure by your prayers, that we may change this form of life, when will you
labor with God, that this may be? this habit, and this wealth, is to me most
painful.

I have talked since his death with a Father, to whom he had communicated his
inclinations, to leave all; who told me, that one day he desired of him with
many tears, and on his knees, his advice in the matter; and that he was never
more surpised, than to see Monsieur de Renty at his feet, and in these
sentiments of poverty: And I have heard him say, that the touch from God, to
separate him from the creatures, and to make him quit the manner of living
suitable to his birth, was so powerful over his soul, that if another touch
from the same hand had not kept him back at the same time, he had abandoned
all; and according to the example of S. Alexis, had gone to live a poor life,
as he did: but that God, that imprinted this desire of poverty in him, did
hinder the effecting of it, to keep him in the state wherein he had placed him;
which was to him no small cross, because the desire torments and afflicts the
soul in proportion to its vehemence, when it cannot arrive to the possession of
the thing desired: But because he was absolutely conformable (as it was his
duty in all things) to the will of God, he bare this cross, as contrary as it
was to his affection, with great peace, and a perfect submission to what God
had ordered.

Another witness of like authority, gives him this testimony. He told me, said
he, often, in the confidence we had together, that he was ashamed when he
entered into his house, to see himself so well lodged in this world; and that it
was one of his greatest afflictions to have so much wealth, and to be so much
at ease, that he should be ravished to see himself reduced to bread and water,
and to get the same by labor, and the sweat of his b^ows. Having one day asked
him, how he could be so quiet amongst all the fa^idious accidents and
incommodities that he suffered: He answered me, upon condition that I would
keep it secret, that through Gods mercy, he found himself in a disposition of
peace, and state of indifferency in affliction, as well as in joy; and that he
had no sentiments any more of fear or desire of any thing. And of this, my self
has seen the experience in some difficulties, where the better part of his
estate ran a great hazard, without any appearance of the least commotion in
him; and his words were:

Seeing God has given me the management of this estate, I will do to preserve
it what shall behove me, and then it is all one to me, what success shall
follow.

Another reports thus: He had the Evangelical poverty in its perfection, being
in^irely estranged in spirit and thought, in heart and affection from all the
wealth of the world: and he told me, that he fealt no greater cross, than to
have riches; and that he should be extremely glad to be a beggar and unknown,
if it had been the will of God. Hence it came, that he bare a kind of holy
envy toward the poor, that he deemed them very happy; that in beholding them,
he said sometimes with sighing (but with a sigh that one might see came from
the bottom his heart) Ah! that I am not as they! that he honored, loved,
caressed, and kneeled before them, not only in humility, but in esteem of
their estare, in its disposing us so much to the perfection of the new Law, and
resemblance it has with Jesus Christ.

Being one day visiting the poor in the great Hospital of Caen, he was seen
bare headed, and on his knees, upon the floor of the great Hall, beating in a
Mortar some Drugs for the use of the poor sick people; such was the respect and
honor that he bore to those, for whom he labored, that it put him into that
posture.

But for an end, let us hear him tell us himself his sentiments upon this
matter; and although he speak of himself, lets make no scruple to believe him,
as being a person most worthy of credit. Behold therefore what he wrote to the
Nun abovementioned:

Sister Margaret of the Holy Sacrament: my most holy Sister, I have it in my
heart, that the Holy Child Jesus [the Infancy of Jesus, was one of the
Mysterie^ to which more particularly and profitably he applied himself, as we
shall see in its due place] would have something of me, which he has a desire
I should beg of him, and dispose my self for the obtaining of it: And I avow to
you, that the more there comes to me of the riches of this world, the more do I
discover the malignity the eto affixed, and that they produce nothing but
garboil and trouble, and afford not much means of doing good: My heart is most
strongly carried to an effective st^ipping my self of all, and to follow him
alone (seeing he is my way) as being the most poor and depressed amongst all
his followers. But that I know, that it would be a presumption to believe my
self capable of this estate, and a temptation to put my self upon it, being at
present, related as I am, I ^ould pant and sigh thither ward very much: that
which I will draw hence is this, that being ignorant of the coursels of God, I
cannot tell how he will dispose of me for the future: and I offer my self up to
whatsoever it shall please him, knowing, that with him, I can do every thing;
as without him, I have neither the power nor will for any thing. My most dear
Sister, I have great need of doing penance, and to be humbled, I am greatly
ashamed of my condition, and of what I am; I have the commodity and abundance
of all things of this world, but my family, and estate of things permits it not
to be otherwise: and I see the Churches and the poor upon whom I would bestow
it all, at least, as much as I may in justice part with, or else to be poor, as
the poor are, so that I may be no more ashamed of being better provided than
they.

Thus you have his thoughts, which by Gods permission are come to light, to
make us see, what grace can do in a heart well disposed, and to what a pitch
arrives this perfect Poverty of spirit.

SECT. 2. His outward Poverty.
THe high esteem and affection which this great servant of God had of the
forsaking the goods of this world, being not able to contain it self within the
Interior of his soul, appeared outward and visible in a thousand effects, and
carried him on, to the poverty Exterior in all ways possible: for, not to speak
of the great Alms he gave to the poor (far different from the course of many,
who though full of riches, yet never think of using them according to Gods
rule) he divested himself of very many things, to be impoverished as much as he
could: for he parted with some books, because richly bound; wore no cloa^hes,
but plain, and close together; used no gloves, what season soever, or at least
a rare thing it was to see him have any; in effect, he had his hands so
employed in deeds of charity, that little leisure he had to keep them within
gloves: He carried no silver about him, but for Alms, and good works, growing
daily richer in this Exterior poverty, and effective diminishment of what he
had. I have seen him at first in Coach with a Page and Lackey, afterward in
Coach with a Lackey without a Page, then without Coach on foot with a Lackey;
and in fine, alone without Lackey; and in effect without himself.

Speaking one day to a Confident of Evangelical poverty; he told him, that God
had given him so ardent desires to possess it, that being not able (by reason
of the bonds that withheld him) to abandon his goods, as he had often wished,
for the better following of the most (not rich, but) poor Christ Jesus, made
poor for us, he endeavored to pass with as little as he could, and to cut off
for his person, not only superfluous, and the very commodious, but also
whatever was not precisely necessary: That walking alone in the Fields, his
consolation was, to be there in liberty, to live as he pleased: But that after
all, he was not able to find out a better cure for the fervor of his desires,
than to despoil himself as much as he was able, of the property of all his
goods, and to account himself no more than a Trustee and mere Steward in regard
of his family, considering himself in the possession of them, no otherwise,
than a poor man that received his necessaries from God by the hand of his wife.

The forementioned person speaks of an Heroic action which this excellent man
did; of which see here an account more at large in a Memorial, which I have
under his own hand.

I make a resolution in the presence of my God, to have care of Reparations, of
Manufactures, of Highways and Causeys, with the goods that he has given me to
dispose of; and this so much the more, as he shall give me the grace, to make a
total dismission and resignation to him of my self, and of what I have, at this
next approaching Feast of his Nativity, and to put my self into such a
condition, that he shall be the Proprietary and owner, and I the steward and
servant only, to distribute the same, in readiness to yield it up at the least
notice of his will: By his grace therefore, I acknowledge this day, that being
from hence forward in a Plebeian and underling condition among Christians, I
ought to apply my self to these businesses as far as there shall be need, and
occasions permit; namely, to labor in them, even in the lowest employments
that are, as to remove rubbish, to play the Mason, and the like; since by his
grace I have skill in some of these Arts: And I ought to make as much account
of these employments, as of those of assisting souls; not looking upon the
things as they are in themselves, but on the will of God, and what he requires
of me: I beseech the Lord from my heart to pardon me my failings herein, to
this time: I make this present Memorial, upon the sight which he has given me
of them, this fifth of November, 1643. to serve me as a remembrancer of my
Obligation.

This was his resolution and promise: Now let us look upon the performance. He
made a building at Citry, which was one of the Demesns he had in Bry; and the
better to observe with what purity of Conscience, sublimity of thoughts, and
disingagement of affection, he applied himself to it, I shall set down what I
had in a Letter from him corncerning it, May 8. 1648.

Blessed for ever be our great God, by Jesus Christ, and by all the righteous,
that are filled with his Spirit. I believe the order of God requires of me
outward labor, among many other workmen, seeing necessity thereto obliges me
(as Father of the Family) about a house, considerable for my children, which
was like to fall, having not been inhabited for a long time. I avow to you, my
heart does much long after another Edifice, than that which is built with
materials of stone: But I look upon this my work, as a part of Gods justice,
who destined the first man after the fall, and all his children to labor; and
thereupon I revere it, and apply my self thereto with a good heart and courage,
though with some Mortification, from the nature of this penance, that relates
so little to the life of the Spirit. We know some of our ancient Popes, who
were great Saints, condemned to keep Mules, and I that am a great sinner, and
deserve hell, and so mercifully dealt with, that I am not sent, but to the
stone Quarries, not into the banishment and penury of our first Christians, but
into those grounds that go for my own. Often in a day I think, that this Labor
is unacceptable; and to what purpose, say I sometimes, so many houses, which we
must leave so soon, and which themselves will come at last to nothing? I am
humbled for the work, but not for the application of my self to it.

In that of the 19th of July, thus he said, upon the same subject:

The time that I live here in this place, I count very dear, regarding it as
ordered by God, for the doing of a little part of the penance due to my great
sins. If grace did not uphold me with this consideration, I should be much
tormented, in a labor so ingrate, and so limited, as to build in the house of
a secular, and bestow my time upon this work, which requires assiduity: But I
have a feeling, that the order of God is in it, and by his motions I quit the
state of Mary, to take that of Martha, accepting this humiliation with
Self-annihilation, and with contemplation of the Divine Justice.

That which makes me the more to know that there is of Gods order in it, is
this, That from time to time, both Holidays and Sundays, the mercies of the
Lord are so great to me, that I resent more of retribution from him in one
instant, than the patience and humiliation of a sinner could merit in all his
life. He opens himself so to me, that my hardness is mollified, and makes me
melt into tears; my eyes are so full of them, that very often I have much ado
to keep them in, pierced as I am with love, with reverence, and with
acknowledgement of the effects of his goodness, which he renews in me by his
inlightning presence, and manifestation of his inexplicable conduct, which I
cannot utter.

I understand hereby, that we are to reckon among graces this, following the
order of God, and not that of our own, by a singular and private spirit of
pride, pretending the glory of God, that we may dispense with our selves
(though we perceive it not) from laboring in things mean and painful in our
conditions, which notwithstanding our Lord blesses, not according to the
choice we make, but according to their agreement to his order: And our
faithfulness draws not its worth from doing this or that, but from an exactness
in doing that which he requires of us, giving up our selves wholly to his good
pleasure. I see there is need of a great death to our selves, and a great depth
of Self-annihilation, to follow so purely the conduct of grace, and not to be
for own forms, but those of God.

In another of the 12. of August, thus he says:

I daily continue my toiling here, which takes up much of my time, and almost
all; but I dare not look aside, but only abase and submit my self to the
Divine Ordinance. It was a work very gross and mean, for Jesus Christ to
converse with men, who had more of rudeness, than these stones I deal with, and
more of opposition to his purity, than they have to my workmens hands: And yet
he suffered all, he bore all, and in fine, converted but a few: I beseech you,
obtain for me a part in his obedience, and his patience to the orders of God
his Father.

And writing to one of his friends, he spoke to him in this sort:

I am here in this Country, in the midst of four or five companies of workmen,
to repair a Mansion House on the Demesne of my Family, which was ready to fall:
What can our spirit act in this work, which following the Spirit of Faith,
ought to be a Pilgrim and Stranger upon earth? without doubt it groans much,
not at the order of God, but after its own Country, in the midst of its
occupations, as things opposite to its liberty. We must do penance by
laboring, it is so decreed by God, upon the first transgression.

These were the Meditations which this excellent man had, while he was
building, and which all Christians, who are made to settle, not on earth, but
in Heaven, in an Eternal Mansion, ought to be enlivened with, when they are
about the like works.

CHAP. 3. His Humility.
POverty followed the Austerities and Mortification of the body, as having much
connection with them; and Humility follows Poverty, yet considering withal, that
(according to S. Austine) the poverty in spirit spoken of by our Lord in the
first Beatitude, is nothing else but humility: in very deed, there is no people
in the world more poor in spirit, than the truly humble, because they account
themselves to be nothing, to have nothing, to be able to do nothing, and to be
worth nothing, to be the refuse and off-scourings of the earth, and to have
need of every thing, not assuming any praise to themselves for any thing
whatsoever. Monsieur de Renty came to this pitch, and possessed this Virtue in
a most Eminent degree.

And in truth, if Humility (as the all Saints tell us) be the foundation of
Virtue, God having a design to raise up in him a magnificent and sublime Palace
for Virtues and Perfection, it was necessary the foundation should be laid very
low, and his humility be very profound: He was rooted in this virtue so
solidly, that it was a thing wonderful; and therein, performed a number of so
remarkable actions, that those persons who lived many years with him, and
singularly well knew him, have assured us, that it were impossible to relate
them all.

He had in an excessive esteem this important virtue, he loved it with all his
heart, desired it with extreme ardor, prayed urgently, and conjured his friends
to beg of God, and obtain it for him: And as we see the stone descend with
violence, and the waters fall down impetuously; the same motion made he toward
Humility, as to his center.

Out of this Sentiment, he wrote thus to one of his Confidents:

Have pity on me, I am more unfaithful than any creature of the world: Upon my
knees, I beg of you to believe it: If our Lord did not show me what I am,
Lucifer would not be a little rich; but this benign Lord shows me daily,
through his mercy, my Nothingness, it is thither his grace leads me.

To another he wrote thus:

All my resolution is in these words of David, Elegi abjectus esse in domo dei
mei [I have chosen to be little and abject in the house of God.]

To another also thus:

I am carried to demand of God a life much humbled, suffering, and unknown to
men: I find a great attraction thither.

And I have a Paper written with his own hand, and all of it with his blood,
which contain these words:

I give you my Liberty, O my God, and beg of you that Nothing, which every
Christian must arrive at, to rise purely toward you.

Gaston Jean Baptiste.

Dominus Jesus semetipsum exinanivit usque ad mortem crucis, propter quod et
Deus exaltavit illum. This 3 of December, 1644. Amen.

Our Lord Jesus emptied himself to death, even the death of the cross;
wherefore God also has exalted him.

You see here his inclination and attractive, and not without good reason; for
considering first, that he had propounded to himself our Lord as a pattern for
his life, with a determinate resolution to follow him in whatsoever he could.
And that secondly, Humility is the proper Virtue of Jesus Christ, as S.
Bernard, after S. Paul, calls it: he therefore embraced this Humility with his
whole affection, gave himself up to it with all his forces, and practiced it in
its urmost latitude, as we are going now to see, by that which follows:

But before we behold him in the actions of this Virtue, let us listen to what
he teaches, and the light he gives us concerning it.

Humility; said he, he is the Basis which carries and upholds the whole work of
God in us, it makes the creature so naked, and so separated from it self, that
it leaves it not the power to make any cast of an eye upon it self, but renders
it so taken up in the greatness of God, that it becomes lost, in reverence of
him, in self-abasement and annihilation. This is the grace of Christians in
their Pilgrimage, who divested and spoiled of all, esteem themselves but a
Nothing, and very puff of being, which haivng nothing but what it received from
God, has no instinct or inclination, but for God: Its a brave humility to see
nothing in ones self but Nothingness; and he that sees not there nothing, sees
not there any thing at all. So the soul which sees nothing in it self, finds
nothing in it self to bottom on; and by this means, always points toward God,
like a needle touched with a Loadstone, that having been encombred with all
sorts of trash and trifles, and afterward disingaged of them, would forthwith
turn toward her North, and thitherward remain always fixed, although the
tempest of the sea and winds, should turn upside down the Vessel.

Thus have we his disposition, and the aspect of ae soul truly humble,
beholding nothing in it self, and God in his Majesty.

SECT. 1. His Humbleness of Heart.
HUmility may be divided into three sorts; The Humility of the heart, of the
words, and of the works; And seeing the humility of the heart, is the principal
and true one, of which alone, our Lord gave himself a samplar, and of which the
two other are but the effects, if they be true: or otherwise they are but only
shadows and phantasmes of Humility; therefore we begin with that of the heart.

And this we say consists, in the humility of the understanding, and of the
thoughts, of the will, and of the affections, to be well acquainted, and know
truly, what a man is of himself, and that he is mere Nothingness and sin; and
in consequence of this knowledge, to take up most mean and low opinions of
himself; to judge himself unworthy of all esteem and praise, to abase himself,
and love his own abasement. A thing most excellently performed by this perfect
follower of Jesus Christ.

He had so low an opinion of himself, that it would be a difficult thing to
unfold it; and although he had most rare qualities, natural and supernatural,
yet he saw nothing in himself, but as we have said, the Nothingness, and the
sin: And out of a true and sincere persuasion, he thought himself the most
unworthy of all men; assuming that title in some of his Letters, but the name
which usually he gave himself was, Sinner, and A great Sinner, which he
repeated very often, and with a spirit truly humbled.

That which I have noted in him for the space of six years, wherein I have had
the honor of his acquaintance (said a person worthy of belief) was a most
profound humility, which kept him in a perpetual self-abnegation before God and
the creatures, but after such a manner, as I have never seen in any man
whatsoever, although I have been acquainted with most holy souls: The greatness
of God humbled him, even to an abyss or immeasurable depth;

And is there (said he, one day to me) any thing great, in the presence of that
Greatness? I see my self there so little, so little, and nothing.

And afterward being elevated to God in this Sentiment of littleness, he said:

A mote in the Sun is very little, but yet I am far less in the presence of
God, for I am not any thing.

Afterward humbling himself in another sense, he said,

Alas, I am too much; I am a sinner, and Infidel, an Anathema through my
crimes.

And besides, he wrote to the same person thus:

Methinks I break my self in pieces before God, as when I stamp an egg in
pieces with my foot upon the ground, and I be spoken of, that I have so much as
a name, is a strange thing.

This so exceeding base opinion which he had of himself, made him say oftener
than once, and ready to weep, that he was much astonished at the goodness of
men, in suffering of him; and that he could not enough wonder, why every where
they threw not dirt at him, and that all the creatures did not bandy against
him. This same opinion had persuaded him, that it was much boldness in him to
speak, and that men showed great mercy toward him in enduring his conversation,
which he believed was very burdensome.

I have seen him very often (says a person of piety, that well knew him)
humble himself even to the center of the earth, while he spoke to me of God,
saying, it was not for a man of his condition to speak of him, but that he
ought rather to contain himself in silence: And so, he spoke not of God,
without some particular inducement that our Lord gave him, either for the
necessity of his neighbor, or for some other good which God would draw thence
for his glory; keeping a distance from this discourse out of humility, as if he
had not known how to speak two words of him. In a Letter to another, he said:

Let us live as we are in truth; what place can we hold before God and his
Saints, but that of Nothing? with amazement, that we are endured, being a
Nothing of all good, and a compound of all evil.

This humility of heart, was general in him, because he practiced it in each
thing, there being not the least thing that served him not for an abasement. He
abased himself much, in the consideration of the feebleness of our nature;
whereof he wrote to me one day this sentiment:

It concerns me to tell you one thing before I end, which keeps me in a
mavelous disesteem of my self, and makes me resent, how little confidence
there is to be had in man: it is this, that when S. Peter and the Apostles make
the greatest profession of their fidelity to our Lord, our Lord then minds
them of the infidelity they would commit, saying to S. Peter, that he could not
follow him whether he went. S. Peter answers him, Why cannot I follow you now?
I am ready to give my life for you. Thou give thy life for me (replies our
Lord) I tell you in truth, the Cock shall not crow, but thou shall deny me
thrice: S. Peter not understanding these words, continues in the protesting of
his fidelity; and upon occasion of the apprehending of our Lord, draws his
sword, and sheaths it not again, till our Lord commands him: He follows him,
and forsakes him not, thus apprehended; but yet afterward, he denies him upon
the bare word of a maid servant.

The apprehensions of these weaknesses, which come to me not by search or
study, but by Divine enlightening, and by the impression which they make in me,
keep me wholly in annihilation, without any affiance in my self, which I place
altogether in God and his Son our Lord: This condition would keep me in a
mavelous littleness, if I were faithful therein: I have some instances, when
methinks my whole body is crushed, bruised, annthilated, and my interior much
more.

To another person he wrote:

Pity it is to see man and his infirmity, it is sometime important, that he
have experience of what he is, that he may neither forget himself, nor the
place which he ought to hold, ut non glorietur omnis caro in conspectu ejus,
[That no flesh might glory in his sight] that being abased, nullified, and
rendered as a thing that is not at all, Jesus Christ may be in him, the life of
grace and holiness, waiting for the time of our redemption; that is to say, the
entry into his glory, and as it is written, he that glories, let him glory in
the Lord.

And to another thus:

The state of our poverty, and the sight of our miseries, makes us know the
need we have of grace, and settles the soul upon the Nothingness of her self,
and the persuasion of her inability to all good; and in this truth, that she
never has been, nor can be, but retardment and diminution to the operations of
God in her.

The knowledge of his faults and sins, humbling him strangely (as indeed they
are the most just, and greatest causes a man can have of humiliation) made him
write one day to me thus:

I assure you, I lack for no matter to make me humble, and to labor in good
earnest, to correct my self, although with patience; for I experiment and see
clearly, that though we labor and wish earnestly to get out of our
imperfections, our Lord sometimes leaves us there a long while, to make us know
our weakness, and to humble us.

He desired to be advertised of, and reprehended for, his faults, and we shall
see now what he observed therein, at the beginning of his call to this high
perfection. It came to pass, that a person which was much below him, had order
from his Director to advertise him, if he saw any thing in him that was
contrary to perfection, when this person gave him notice of some failing,
though very light, and indeed but of the shadow of a fault, he listened thereto
with respect and thanks, and humbled himself for it, as if he had committed
some crime; and he accused himself, when he thought he had made any failing,
upon his knees, saying, he was a miserable sinner, and that he had committed
such a fault, which yet often, very hardly could one discern to be any. This
exercise, as being most wholesome and efficacious, was very useful to him, for
the making of a great progress; for our nature, by reason of its feebleness,
has need of such props to walk uprightly, and not fall.

If his imperfections and his sins humbled him, his excellent qualities, and
the graces which he received from God, did the same also: And the same things,
from which the greatest part of men draw nothing but vanity, served him for
motives of self-abasement: The Spirit of Jesus Christ, wherewith he was
enlivened, extremely estranged him from the Grandeurs of the world, making him
not only contemn them, but also to be ashamed thereof; so that he took
occasions of abasements from his own condition, because so high in the world,
and from the secular advantages which it gave him; which made him often to
groan before the Majesty of God, and to say, that he was in a condition very
low and plebeian, according to the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and that he had
great confusion to see himself in that estate.

From whence it came, that being born a Gentleman, of so good rank, as we have
said, he renounced his Nobility, and gave it into the hands of our Lord, who,
in return, imparted his own to him (as he made it known to a holy soul;) that
is to say, his love, which by its proper force; transforming man in God,
divests him of himself, and leaves nothing in him but God alone, there living
and reigning; and by this means, raises him thus Deified to the highest degree
of Nobility that he can mount to: Hence it was, that he endured with pain, that
one should call him Monsieur; and he said sometimes smilingly, among his
familiars, I am a fine Monsieur, it is well for me; and in his Letters, he
complained that they treated him as in that quality: And in one of them, giving
another [course] or carreer to his humility, he said,

Believe me, I pray you, it is great pity of me, I take again the Monsieur,
which I had rejected, my pride must have these her Appendixes, rather than
deceive your Candor, which else perhaps make you mistake in me, a piece of
glittering glass for a Diamond.

Out of his humility it was, that he would not bear the title of Marquess
(which was due to him, as proper to his house, in regard the Emperor, Charles
the fifth, had erected Renty into a Marquifate) and he suffered only that of
Baron of Renty, by which he was commonly called.

For the graces and gifts of God, as they were received in a soul well
disposed, so produced they most excellently their true effect, which was to
abase and elevate the soul both together, to raise it to God, and to abase it
to it self. And first, his humility made him hide as much as he could the gifts
of God, and so has robbed us of the knowledge of a thousand brave actions,
which might have been very serviceable to this History.

Secondly, when he received any favor from God, or that one rendered him any
honor, the light whereby he saw the Nothingness of the creature, and the
discernment he was endowed with, in distinguishing the precious from the vile,
and that which is done on Gods part, in all-good things, from that which man
brings thither of his own, was the cause, that in those things he assumed no
share at all; but referred all to God, as to the true Source; and so in the
management of these great goods, which God enriched him withal, he had always
his hands clean, without doing wrong to God, or touching that which appertained
to him; and for himself, he kept quite out of sight of all vanity, which slides
most subtly and most easily into a spirit, that abounds in riches of heaven,
as well as those of the earth, if he look not very close unto it.

Nor would he therefore, that any one should consider him, in what he said or
did; but regard God alone therein: He wrote thus to one that much desired of
him a visit.

I cannot bear, but with pain, the account you make of my visits and society:
Let us look much upon God, let us bind our selves strictly to Jesus Christ,
that we may learn of him a profound annihilation of our selves. O my God, when
will it be, that we shall have no more a sight upon our selves, when we shall
speak no more of our selves, and when all vanity shall be destroyed.

And he wrote to another:

I beseech you not to regard in me, save my infirmities, and a depth of
wickedness, and pride very horrible that is in me, that is it, for which I shall
have need that all the world talk to, and punish me.

In the third place, he esteemed himself most unworthy of the graces and
favors of God, and believed there was not one of them, how little soever it
were, but was far above his merits; and for the great ones, he was so full of,
they did put him to a Nonplus. He wrote to a confident:

The gifts of God are sometimes so great, that they put us, as I may so say,
beyond our selves (and if it were possible we could find the means to recoil
our selves further off, than beyond Nothingness) we should do it. You see among
men, that when one receives a gift that bears some proportion to him, he
renders thanks and acknowledgement to the giver for it; but if a Prince be
Liberal to a poor man, according to the Grandeur of his own power, whether it
be a sum of money, or a place, you shall see this poor man recoil, and say,
Alas, my Lord, I think you know me not, I must not have so much, I am unworthy
of it: In like manner, there are blessings that go beyond our expectations,
capacities, and which make us see what we are, without daring to lift up our
eyes toward them, their brightness does so much dazzle, and their greatness so
much astonish.

In fine, he humbled himself always for the favors of God, because he thought
that either by his sloth, he was not answerable to their extent; or that by the
sole misery of nature, he used them, and made them lose some part of their
force, as it happens to Plants of the Levant, which removed into a strange
soil, do not retain their virtue, but degenerate, and savor of the earth, they
are removed to: And if the spiritual things of nature are allayed and corrupted
in their passage through our senses, how much more reason is there to think,
that the Divine and spiritual things of grace, will there become enfeebled and
altered. These considerations rendered him most humble, even in the greatest
gifts of God, and in things of most sublimity.

SECT. 2. The pursuance of his Humility in heart.
AS the affections we bear to any thing, are always founded upon the esteem we
make of it; so Monsieur de Renty, esteeming himself so low, so little, and
nothing, in consequence thereof, did extremely abase and vilipend himself
within his heart: This he did in every thing, and one of his strongest
inclinations, according to grace (which is a great token of the Spirit of God
in a soul) was to be always condemning of himself.

He wrote to his Director:

I have at the same time two apprehensions, quite contrary; the one, to avow to
you, with thankful acknowledgement to God, that he fills me with effects of his
goodness, and impressions of his Kingdom; and the other, that I am more
disposed to condemn, than to regard my self; for upon the whole, what I do is
pitiful.

Another time, after some speech to him of many great enlightnings and
excellent sentiments which God had communicated to him; he told him,

I rest not upon all this; I told you only what is past, to render you an
account, not making use of my judgment, but to condemn my self for vices,
suspending it as to other things, and committing it to God.

He wrote to another Confident:

I know not what will become of our business, one must not speak a word in
sweetness and patience, but I shall lose my credit somewhat; if this could be
thoroughly lost, it would be great justice: Alas, if no body endured me, and all
the world condemned me, my pride perhaps would be humbled.

Carried on by this Spirit, he had an ardent desire (though always with his
ordinary tranquillity, and giving himself up to the orders of God) to receive
some disgrace:

If I were to wish any thing, it should be, to be much humbled and nullified,
and to be treated as an offscouring by others: This would be my joy, but I
believe I deserve not so great a favor.

This desire carried him to such a point, that had he not been withheld with
the consideration of greater good, he had done strange things, to be
disesteemed and receive confusion: Out of this sentiment and abundance of his
heart, he said thus to one:

I should have great pleasure, if it were permitted me, to go naked in my shirt
through the streets of Paris, to make my self disesteemed, and taken for a fool.

Whence we must observe two things: the first, that God gives sometimes to holy
souls, some thoughts, affections and desires, so raised above the common pitch
and humane reason, that they may seem extravagant; as this here which he gave
to Monsieur de Renty, and which was, before him also, in our founder S.
Ignatius. The second is, that we must not at all put in execution such desires,
till before hand, they have been well examined, and justly weighed in the
balance of Charity, and edification of our Neighbor.

This burning desire which he had to be diesteemed, made him seek for, and love
his own abjection, and when it came, to take it, not only with patience, but
also (which is the highest step that one can mount in humility) with joy. He
gave an evident and notable testimony thereof in the first journey he made to
Dijon, whither a suit that he had with the Lady his Mother, and which to him by
an extraordinary dispensation of God, was one of the greatest exercises of
patience and humiliation, that he underwent in all his life (of which I shall
speak more at large in the following Chapter) had obliged him to go: for thus
he wrote to his Director the 24. of July, 1643.

I am at Dijon now, seeing God is so pleased; where I have learnt by the
prejudicate opinions, that were entertained concerning me, what it is that God
would draw from my journey; which is, that I lead a life secret and unknown to
men in the spirit of penance. The bruit which they had spread concerning me
was, that I was a Bigot, and had nothing but artifices and shows of devotion,
for the coloring of my naughtiness; that indeed I have kept my self much
private in my closet, out of fear to give, by coming abroad, rather scandal,
than any example of virtue: I have found a generality that solicited against
me, though such as from whom I had good cause methinks, for diverse good
reasons, to hope for a prop, than from any other, but have found the quite
contrary: But so also, as God hereby has done me many favors. I have been to
see them, where I have received humiliation, with great joy: I have been very
wary of opening my self in any thing that might recommend me unto them: I have
only done in my business what truth required, and for any thing else, I made
it matter of confusion and humiliation, as I ought to do: I shall be here, I
believe, as one excommunicate, and the Scapegoat of the old Law, chased into
the wilderness for my enormous sins, for which I am of opinion God would have
me do penance, not by mere pain only, but by such, as withal brings shame and
confusion with it: I tell you this, to render you some account, not dwelling on
it any longer; my sole scope being to love God, and to condemn my self.

SECT. 3. His Humility in words.
THe Humility of heart in which Monsieur de Renty was deeply rooted, produced
in him the Humility of speech, which hindered him ever from speaking any word
that savoured of vaunting, or that carried the least tincture of arrogance, and
esteem of himself, or which was uttered in a haughty manner, or in a tone
imperious or conceited; but on the contrary, they were all of them tempered
with humility and modesty: and as he deemed himself to be indeed a sinner,
lazy, ungrateful, perfidious, ignorant, so did he set forth, and qualify
himself with these names and titles: We have seen hereof already something
before, whereto we will add also this, which he writ to a certain person:

I am, to speak the truth, but an Idiot, a poor Layick, and a sinner.

Writing to a Priest, he said:

What do I (an unclean one, and a Plebeian in grace, and in condition) in the
Church, who live in a state that Jesus Christ refused for himself? I speak to a
Priest, and to the anointed of the Lord, my God; if I should make a reflection
upon my self, what should I be before my own eyes? What am I then before thine,
and those of thy servants?

He wrote to another person:

I thank you for those Devoirs of Devotion, which you have tendered these 24 and
25 days last past, for a thing so base as my self, who deserve no room, but
among the children of Adam, that deceive all the world and who have reason to
fear the anger of all the children of God, if the prayer of his son upon the
cross had not implored forgiveness for his persecutors.

And to another also:

Seeing I am born with so willingly, and that you persevere to desire this of
me, I beseech my Lord, in the hand and disposing of whom I would be wholly,
that he make use (if it please him) of this miserable Rush, for the giving you
some consolation, in the life of his children, and the ways which may lead you
to the inheritance.

He writ a great number of Letters, and it is a wonderful thing, that there is
not among them so much as one, wherein he does not villifie himself, and which
carries not with it some touch of humility; and he did the same too in all his
conversation: For although he had a design to annihilat himself the more, and
to do that which generally speaking, is conceived to be the best (except in
occurrences where virtue obliges us to practice the contrary) to speak nothing
of himself at all, neither good nor ill, yet was to him almost impossible to
retain himself from it, in regard of that exceeding low opinion and disesteem
he had of himself; whereupon when a Confident of his, said one day to him, This
was not well done to speak so ill of your self, he presently smote his breast,
avowing, He did ill.

Its true, that a man may speak ill of himself through pride, upon design to
skim off to himself by this false humility, a little glory, and to get some
reputation of an humble person; but when all is done, we find not that the
proud are much subject to this fault, at least thus much we shall find, that
it is very hard to speak of ones self from so great depth of humility as did
this man of God.

Who indeed spoke of himself very ill, and in terms of great confusion, and
very often; but yet notwithstanding, without molestation or annoying of any
one, and in such a manner, that we might evidently see, that he spoke from the
bottom of his heart, and as he thought: And that which is yet more wonderful,
he had such a grace in speaking ill of himself, and to his confusion, that many
have marked, and experimented, that the words of humility and confusion which
he said of himself, did imprint the same disposition in them that heard him,
bringing into their souls the same effects of self-lessening, and sentiments of
of humility.

When by the particular motion of the Holy Ghost, he spoke of such graces and
mercies as God had showed him, it was always with an humbled and self-annulling
spirit, He wrote to a person thus:

I am no other than a sinner, have pity on me, adoring for me the goodness of
God, and of our Lord; who, to speak in the terms of the Gospel, turns in
sometimes among sinners: I can tell some news of that with Zacheus, but I am
confounded, for not producing in all my life, that which his love and gratitude
made him do in a moment.

And to another:

I beseech our Lord to keep me very low, before him, and before you; for I
ought to bear the shame of my crimes in all places, seeing I am altogether
miserable; yet so as without ceasing to join with you in saying, Misericordias
Domini in aeternum Cantabo [I will sing of the mercies of God for ever.]

When he spoke of pious persons, joined with him in exercises of Charity, he
used often these terms:

If I may be so bold, I pray you salute them from me, I esteem my self very
happy to be the last of that company, I am altogether incapable and unworthy of
it (and yet notwithstanding he was the bringer about of it) I shall be
condemned by you all, if you have not pity on me, and redeem me from my
miseries.

SECT. 4. His Humility in his actions.
AFter the humility of the heart and speech, comes that of action; which
Monsieur de Renty practiced in an excellent manner: We have already seen it in
diverse passages, we shall see it again in many other, and particularly when we
speak of his patience, and of his charity toward the poor, and the sick: But
besides all this, I shall not doubt to say, that he was continually attentive
to all occasions of Humility, so that none of them escaped him, without being
made use of.

Since his special vocation to the service of God, he would not suffer they
should carry him any more a cushion to the Church; but, to be there hid and
disregarded, he mingled himself among Mechanics and mean persons; where he was
often crowded and incommoded, as not being known, which he endured with great
delight: He kept himself always as much as he could (with the humble Publican)
at the lower end of the Church: And at Di^on, in the Church of the Vesulines,
the Nuns that attend at the grate, spied him at prayers at the lower end of the
Church, with his arms bent in form of a cross, when the people were gone that
stood there with him; yea, and often he said his prayers before the door, when
it was shut, that he might not, said he, put any to the trouble of opening it
to a poor sinner. When he heard high Mass in his Parish, he went always to the
Offertory, together with some poor man, and was seen sometimes with the same to
accompany the Holy Sacrament through the streets, when no man of note was there
but himself only.

During the war at Paris, he went himself to buy bread for the poor, carrying
it through the streets, and as much of it too as his strength would permit. As
also at the same time, when he did the charity to a Monastery of Nuns, as to
take in custody their Church plate, he pressed them very much, to let him carry
to his lodging (which was almost two miles thence) and on foot as he was, a
piece very great and weighty; but as he had the humility to desire it, so had
they the discretion not to permit it: When they desired him at the same
Monastery, that when he was pleased to do them the favor to visit them, he
would come in his Coach, by reason of the distance, and incommodity he received
in coming: He answered pleasantly, that he loved not to make use of a Coach,
because that smelt something of the Monsieur, and that he must endeavor to
make himself in every thing very little; He went therefore thither on foot, and
returned the shortest days at five or six a clock at night, all alone, and
sometimes in thawing weather; when being told of the great pains he took, he
made answer, that our Lord humbled himself, and took toilsome pains for the
good of souls, in a far other manner sure, and that he was his pattern.

Being one day to go see a person of very great quality, about a business which
much concerned the glory of God, he would not use his Coach, although he were
to traverse in a manner all Paris, and that when it poured down with rain, but
go thither on foot; one motioned, that he would at least let a cloak be carried
by a Lackey, to take it when he came thither, and not present himself before
that person in a Cloak altogether wet, and speak to him in such unseemliness,
but he yielded not; yet to accommodate his humility with decency, he cast that
cloak above his own, and past through the streets, so far in this humble
equipage; and afterward in the Noblemans house, laid aside the wet cloak, and
appeared in the other ordinary one of his own.

But behold here another effect of this humility, whereof he wrote to his
Director the 20 of December, 1646.

It behooves me now, says he, that I render you an account of a business that
passed the other day: Madam, my Lord Chancellors Lady, sent me a packet of
letters, wherein I found some from the King with all the Seals and formalities,
wherein I was made Councellor of State, but my thoughts were not taken up at
all with the business. I sent her word, that I would assume the honor to see
her, to thank her, for that my Lord Chancellor vouchsafed to think of me; that
I honored more than so, that which had the mark of the King, and which came
from their hands, than not to receive it with all respect: But I most humbly
begged one thing of her, that living in a kind of plain and vulgar manner, as
I did, she would be pleased to take in good part, if (with all acknowledgement
premised of my exceeding obligations to them) I did not accept those letters,
and that the business might sleep without noise: some represented it to me as a
thing worth thinking on, for that a Committimus might be very necessary for me,
in some sort of occurrences; and that a pension of 2000 livers per ann. [ about
200 l. Sterling] would afford me ability for the giving of more alms. To the
first point I answered, that by the goodness of God, I had no need of it; and
that often, the Committimusses prove a great vexation to those upon whom they
are executed: That this should be our work, to bear our own little ordinary
crosses, without laying extraordinary ones upon others. And for the second,
that God having given me more of riches, than I had need of, I thought I was
not obliged to augment them, but to keep me in my little way of living: you see
how we stand as to this business.

Whereupon let me tell you, that this thing cannot be affected so, but that I
must take upon me also the quality of a Councellor of State, and must have a
dependence upon the State, as a Pensioner of the King. Now by the paper that
some while ago I sent you, you may see that I have given up my worldly Nobility
to God, and this thing here, would derogate much from it; and moreover, it
would be a step to an engaging of me I know not where, which now I see not, nor
will see, having other things to six my eyes on. My disposition toward affairs
of that nature, is to have no share at all in them: if per-force, and without
my seeking, they come upon me, I shall count it a real cross, which our Lord
will in such a case give me strength to bear. To conclude, Elegi abjectus esse
in domo dei mei, and absit mihi gloriari nisii in cruce domini nostri Jesu
Christi [I have chosen to be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, and God
forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ.] So
have you the inclinations I find in my self.

This was that he writ to him, concluding with these words, which carry with
them another touch of humility, and much wisdom:

I have been willing the business might be concealed, for the avoiding of
Ostentation, which is found often in the refusal of things that have something
of luster, and give occasion of talk.

And thus he carried himself in that conjuncture; but notwithstanding, sometime
after, he was constrained by good advice, in consideration of a business that
much concerned the glory of God, and relief of the poor, to accept of these
letters, and that quality, and to make use of it.

In a paper he wrote to the same person, I find this that follows, which makes
much to our purpose:

Walking one day this Lent through the streets of Paris, much be-dirted, and
very poor to look at, I bore in me the resentment of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.13.
when he says, That he was as the scum and offscouring of the world: I
returned (in my mind) blessing for reviling, and the rest of that passage, so
much as fell under my passive obedience, both actually receiving illumination
to understand it, and strength to execute it: I know well how much neatness and
new things, even to a boot, even to a glance, and a look, do hurt, if one take
not good heed, the simplicity and dignity of this Christian self-vilifying. And
I saw that it was a great temptation for a man to think to preserve his estate
of Grandeur and note, in hopes to be thereby more exemplary, and have more
weight and authority for the service of God: This is a pretext that our
infirmity makes use of in the beginning, but perfection draws off at last to
Jesus Christ, who was humbled upon the Cross, and made the lowest of men: What
an honor is it to keep company with Jesus Christ, so lovely, and so little
followed, in his ignominies, and his humiliations: it is one of my errors,
that I have not yet well begun it.

The great knowledge and mavelous sense that he had of these truths, and of
the lowliness of Spirit (whither ought to tend and come the true children of
God, and perfect followers of Jesus Christ) made him often to say:

Let us be little, and very little: Oh this holy littleness, it is a great
matter.

From this Spirit it was, that he loved low and mean things, and shunned
whatsoever it was that outwardly carried splendour with it; whither he knew,
that nature (in a secret reflex upon it self) is always carried, and even in
things most spiritual and holy: as on the contrary, Grace (as being the grace
of Jesus Christ) carries to things of no reputation, such as he embraced.

And he avoided, out of the fame thought, whatever it was that held of the
extraordinary; and said, that in exercises, wherein there appeared even most of
perfection, as in observing Fasts and other penances more than others, there
was not in them sometimes so much, as in the common exercises; for the meanness
of which is recompensed with the mortification of our nature; which nature very
often seeks its self in the extraordinaries, and the singularities; being much
pleased to have something above others, and so be thought of and spoken of,
with the more esteem.

He kept the same guard upon his speech, that he might not in discoursing of
spiritual things, and the highest mysteries, make any use of terms magnifick
and pompous, or of words new and uncouth; and if it fell out, that he uttered
any such, he showed it was with pain, and because he could not express himself
otherways; insomuch, that neither in his actions, nor in his words, would he
have any thing that made appearance of Grandeur, or of singularity.

It was moreover an act of humility and wisdom in him, to make esteem, and to
speak with advantage, of other men's carriages for their Interior, although they
were far below his own, saying, that we ought most carefully take heed, of
speaking like the Pharisee, I am not as other men. And writing to me one day of
this subject:

God forbid, said he, that I should believe, there is any thing singular and
extraordinary in me, although I ow him extreme acknowledgements for his
infinite mercies.

But among all the effects and testimonies of his humility, the manner of his
carriage toward his Director, ought, without doubt, to have place in the first
rank: He did nothing, were it of never so little consequence, that concerned
himself, without his conduct; to him he propounded the thing, either by word of
mouth, if he were present, or if absent, by writing, clearly and punctually,
desiring his advice, his pleasure, and benediction upon his resolution: These
were his terms, and that with so much humility, respect, dependence, and
submission of his own sense, as was admirable; and after, without return or
disputing, he followed simply and exactly his order, even as much as could be
done, in a well reformed Religious order, by the most resigned and obsequious
novice.

His director having written to him something concerning his perfection, he
answered him in these terms:

I beseech you believe, that although I am most imperfect, and a great sinner,
if yet you do me the honor and favor to send me a word of what you know to be
necessary for me, I hope, with Gods help, I shall profit thereby: I pant not
after any thing, but to find God, and Jesus Christ, with as much simplicity,
as verity: I pretend to nothing in this world, but this, and out of this I
desire nothing.

See what a submission here was: although he had (which makes the marvel) an
excellent and most clear spirit; and was endued with so high prudence, and
great insight in each thing, that he was consulted by word of mouth and by
letters, from diverse places, by a very great number of persons, of every age,
sex, and condition, both of Secular and Religious.

For the practicing so highly this submission, he fixed his eyes upon our Lord
(who in each thing was his model, and his light) in that submission which he
rendered to S. Joseph, wherewith he was extraordinarily affected. Being one day
at the Carmelite Nuns of Pontoise, praying in their Church, and opening himself
in this matter, to a person to whom with prudence and charity he might do it,
he thus told him:

It is true, that I have received this morning a grand favor, in the
weditation on the subjection and dependency which the son of God was pleased to
render to S. Joseph, to whom he was subject and obedient in all things as a
child to his Father. Oh what an honor and grace was it to this Saint! but Oh,
what a virtue and selfannihilation in, Jesus Christ! that the Son of God, being
equal to his Father, should be subject to a creature, and submit to a poor
Carpenter, as if he had not known how to demean himself? I am given to
understand, how by this example of the Son of God, we are highly instructed
(and after a manner worthy such a Master) concerning the dependence which the
Creatures ought to have upon God, and concerning the strict obligation which
engages us to submit to the Sovereign power which he has over us; and to the
direction of men, in such sort, that our heart may not have repose but in this
subjection, united to that which Christ Jesus renders to a Creature: O how
profound is this mystery, and how it teaches me!

This said, he continued a while after without speaking, as if he had been
wholly taken up with the greatness of this grace: and the person to whom he
spoke, having told him that he felt some communication of this grace, he fell
down on his knees, and so did that person also, and both of them praying,
adored Jesus Christ, in this estate of dependence and submission to a creature,
devoting themselves to him for imitation.

SECT. 5. His love of a private and retired life.
WE place also as an effect of his humility, the love he had to a private and
unknown life; for he loved it not only for its affording him more time to
attend upon God, and communicate more with our Lord, who was the dear object of
his heart: but the more, for having thereby the means, to fly from the esteem,
the honor, and the praises of men, and to be blotted out of their minds, and
remain in oblivion to all the world.

Being pressed with this love, he said, that if God had not tied him to this
state, wherein he was, he should have gone into some strange and remote
Country, to live there in obscurity the rest of his days; that he wished not
to be known by any one in the world, that it was not expedient that one should
know so much, as that he was there, and that it would have been a singular
pleasure to him to be banished from the hearts of all men, and unknown by all
the creatures; whereunto he contributed, on his part, all that he could, not
doing any thing that might bring on acquaintance, and gain affections; and it
was noted, that the more he advanced in light and graces, the more strong grew
the Bent he had [plant] to this hidden life and desire to be unknown, as he
witnessed five or six months before his death.

He beheld herein our Lord, and he example that he gave us of this life, not
having appeared for the space of thirty years, but once only in the Temple,
although there was no danger on his part, to be frequented by men; and one
would think also, he might thereby have done them much good, in cultivating,
polishing, and sanctifying them, by his conversation, and by his words, being
indeed come into the world on purpose to teach them. He cast also his eyes upon
God, whom the Prophet calls a Secret God, and who effectually has kept himself
hid a whole Eternity within himself, and who through all the discoveries that
he has made of himself, which is showed abroad, is nothing near answerable to
what is still undiscovered within him. These were the models after which this
servant of God and illuminated soul, fashioned himself.

In a Memorial written the fifth of March, 1645. which he gave to his Director,
to render him an account of that which passed in his Interior, he said:

One time, being in the street, where coaches passed to and fro, and not
knowing whether I ought or no, look on them that were in them (because it was
in a place of my acquaintance) and whether this would not give some occasion of
talk, to see that I went in that manner on, not looking at all aside; I had on
a sudden upon my spirit, but after a manner that I cannot doubt but it was of
God, Trouble not thy self about being known; and, Stand not upon knowing: These
two words gave me so great light and force, that I dwelt more than eight upon
this Contemplation, That herein consists the greatest aids of the life
spiritual, and I have it daily for a ground.

It is certain, that since the greatest part of our evils and imperfections
come from a desire to be seen, and to see, this amusement must have in it great
venom against the advancement of a soul, although she often perceives not the
damage, nor feels the hurt that comes from it. That which defiles our actions
of Piety, is, that self-love makes one glad when they are known and observed;
men show always the most fair, and hide the foul, and insid^; and all the
outside is so composed, that the mind is often more taken up about that, than
about God: And very few there are, that have not a great part in this vain
eying and regard, passive and active, of the creatures. O how these words
wrought in me a great separation from the world! what purgation and, and what
purity is it, to be upon the earth, and there see naught but God! O how
(undoubtedly) such a one would live, as if he were not known, without caring
what the world says or thinks, without desire of taking or receiving any part
there, of knowing or being known of any, neither by name, livery or visage, but
according as our Lord did: How one would march naked, pure, and free of spirit:
I was then in t he midst of the streets, and of noise among crouding and
justling, in such tranquillity, so united to God, and so much taken up by him,
as if I had been in a desert; and since that time I go thus through the
streets, yet with liberty to look upon what I should see, but without being
fixed to it. And these words are again sent into my spirit in necessary
occurrences, and they keep and conserve me in God, I am for all that very
unfaithful to this Grace, but the center and the ground of it is not blotted
out of me, and this renders me more culpable, Thus we have what was in his
Memorial.

Let us end with what he wrote to a Lady, 1643. upon this business, of a life
that is secret, and retired from communion with the creatures, to whom he said:

Let us encourage our selves, to lead this life unknown, and wholly hid from
men, but most known to and intimate with God, divesting our selves, and chasing
out of our mind, all those many superfluities, and those many amusements, which
bring with them so great a damage, that they take up our minds, instead of
God: so that when I consider that, which thwarts and cuts into so many pieces,
this holy, this sweet, and amiable union, which we should have continually with
God, it appears that it is only a Monsieur, a Madam, a complement, and
talking; indeed a mere foolery, which notwithstanding does ravish and wrest
from us the time that is so precious and the fellowship that is so holy and so
desirable: Let us quit this, I pray you, and learn to court it with our own
Master, let us well understand our part, our own world (as we here phrase it)
not that world, I mean, which we do renounce, but that wherein the children of
God do their duties to their Father.

CHAP. 4. Of the disesteem he made of the world.
THat great affection which he bore to an obscure life, was an evident mark of
his disesteem of the world; for if he had esteemed it, he would not have
desired to quit it: Now to say to what height he mounted in the disesteem of
it, is a thing very difficult: It Is enough for us to know, that he had it in
extreme contempt, by observing (as abovesaid) how he renounced, as far as in
him lay, all that the world could promise, and could give him; and wherewith it
uses to enslave and captivate men; how he degraded himself of his Nobility,
how he yielded up his goods, and stripped himself of their property, as no
otherwise to use them, than in quality of a poor man; withdrew himself from
pleasures, rejected the honors and dignities to which his birth and excellent
perfection gave him very great overtures; how he floured all its allurements,
trampled under foot all its glories, He beheld for this end, our Lord as his
pattern, who from his entry into the world and birth, made an open profession
of an absolute contempt of the world; because (as he said) he was not of the
world.

I find written by his own hand, in a Memorial which he gave to his Director,
this rare and solid illumination some our Lord in this matter.

Being, says he, in the month of November, 1644. in a Chapel, richly
Wainscoted, and adorned with very excellent Sculpture, and with Imagery, I
beheld it with some attention, having had some skill in these things, and saw
the bundels of flowers diluces, and of flowers in form of borders, and of very
curious workmanship; it was on a sudden put into my mind, The original of what
thou see, would not detain thee at all in seeing it. And I perceived, that
indeed all these, and those flowers themselves (and not in picture) would not
have taken me up; and all the ornaments which Architecture and Art inventeth,
are but things most mean and low, running in a manner only upon Flowers,
Fruits, Branches, Harpies, and Chymaera's, part whereof are in their very being
but things common and vile, and part of them merely imaginary; and yet man (who
croucheth to every thing) renders himself amorous, and a slave of them; no
otherwise, than as if a good workman, should stand to copy out, and counterfeit
some trifles and sopperies. I considered by this sight, how poor man was, to be
cheated, amused, and diverted from his Sovereign good: And since that time, I
could make no more stand to consider any of these things; and if I did it, I
should reproach my self for it; as no sooner seeing them in Churches, or
elsewhere, but this is presently put upon my spirit, The original is nothing,
the copy and the image is yet less, each thing is vain, except the employment
of our selves about God alone.

And in truth, a Christian who is nurtured and elevated for so great things, as
the possession of God, and Eternal glory, ought to undervalue all that which is
is here below, yea, how resplendent soever; with much more reason, than a great
King will reject a boot of hay-ropes (to which hay indeed, the Prophet compares
all worldly glories) in comparison of his Crown and Kingdom. This was the cause
that employed this servant of God, to animate a Lady to the vilifying of the
world, by writing to her in this manner:

I shall tell you, that seeing we are not Christians, but by the tie, the
dependence, and the life, we have of Jesus Christ, I wonder how it comes about,
that a thing so little as man, drawn out of nothing in his first original,
infected with his first Parents sin, and the addition of his own, raised to so
high a degree of honor, as the alliance of Christianity gives him, in being
one only Christ with the Son of God, in being his brother, and a coheir with
him in the life to come: I wonder, I say, how, after such admirable
Prerogatives, man can esteem the world, and make any account of its vanities?
Shall he have his heart here, and be a man of this world, after these
considerations? The things of the earth, whereof death also will quite strip
us, and for ever, shall they fill our hearts, in that little time we have to be
here, to work out our salvation, to obtain the treasures prepared for us, and
to render thanks to God for his mercies? should we not make appear to God and
men, a faith that is altogether lively, in quitting freely the things of this
world, its honors, false, or at least not profitable, its establishments
perishable, its opinions extravagant, and all that, which will pass away like a
dream? even as we see our great Grandfathers are gone, and there is no more
memory of them, their risings and settings, their contentments and
displeasures, which did stick so close to their hearts, and which they had so
much pain to accommodate to the Law of Jesus Christ, and to the genius of their
times, all this is vanished away. Is it not true, that we have cause to think
them to have been out of their wits, if they considered any other thing but God
in their ways? The same thing will happen to us, each thing will pass away, and
God alone will abide: O how good it is to be fastened to him alone?

He encourages the same Lady in another Letter, thus:

Courage, all is well, we must dye to the world, and search out the obstacles,
that it brings to our perfections, to condemn them; and to live in the world
(in the Apostles sense) as not living there at all; possessing it, as not
possessing it all: Let us drive stoutly out of our minds the complacence and
affection to our brave houses; let us ruin the delights of our gardens, let us
burn our Groves, let us banish these vain images which we have of our children,
hiding secretly in the love of them, that which is but indeed our own self-love
(though we seem dead to it) and it makes us desire, esteem, and approve in
their persons, that which we condemn in our selves; to wit, the luster and
glittering of the world.

I know there is a difference of conditions, but all ought to reject these
entailments (as men account them) upon great birth and noble blood: I mean,
these principles of aspiring to the highest, and entertaining no sufferings:
such principles as these, our children carry from that birth we give them; but
it behooves, that the second birth, which we procure them from Jesus Christ, do
repair these disorders: Let us take from them this vanity of mind, all these
stately demeanors, and the examples of these Grandees in story, whose
punishments are as eminent in hell, as their presumption has been glittering
on the earth; for otherwise it will be found, we shall conduct them to no
better end.

In another Letter he explains to her, what he had said concerning her Houses
and Gardens, and which without this Explication, would seem to be very harsh:

My design, said he, was not that you should demolish your walls, and let run
into a rude wilderness your gardens, to be more at liberty for God: I
understand my speech, of the disingagements and the ruins which must be made
in our minds, and not be executed on things insensible, and which have no
worth in them, but in form. When I say, we must set all on fire, my thoughts
were of following that admirable spirit of the Apostle, who would that we have
poverty among our riches, and divestment in the midst of our possessions; he
means, that our spirits be truly purified and separated from the creatures,
which we really make our solace; because a Christian that tends to perfection,
does himself great wrong in dwelling upon these amusements, and entertaining in
his heart other inclinations than those of Jesus Christ, who saw all the world
without destroying it; but withal, without applying himself to it; the business
of his Father, and his glory, was his life; the windings of rivers, and the
ornaments of fields, were to him but things of feeble consideration, and not
matters of employment. Hither it is that I would have one come, and desire no
more.

It is, in effect, thus, That we must contemn the world; whereunto God carries
us, and to bring us thither more efficaciously, he permits by turns, and often
that we receive therein disgraces, and meet with pain and trouble; as when a
man sets thorns in a way, to make men take another: The which Monsieur de Renty
knowing very well, see what he writes thereof to a certain person:

God has his ends through all these contrarieties; which is, that those that
are his, should be yet more his, in affiance, in recumbency, in life, and in
all: The brute of the world, and its turning upside down, are advantageous, to
make known its spirit, its confusion, its vanity, to them that are not of it;
and who being in the spirit of death, wait for nothing more there, than for
death; bringing forth in the mean while, the effects of life eternal, which is
a kind of advancement out of mortality, whilst we are in it.

CHAP. 5. Of his Patience.
QUestionless the humble man is patient, because he esteems himself worthy of
the evil he suffers, and of much more also: And if we will search into the true
cause of our impatiences, and drive up to the spring head, we shall find it to
be our pride, and the esteem of our selves. Monsieur de Renty being most
humble, as we have seen, was also by consequence most patient, as this Chapter
is going to relate.

And now at first, when I am thinking of it, there comes into my mind, the
description that Tertullian makes of patience, representing her with a visage
sweet and calm, a forehead serene, without all show of frowning or sadness; a
carriage always equal, few words, and a contenance such as one sees in persons
innocent and assured: Now they that knew him, will say, that this is the very
portraicture of him in his native colors, as being the very image of Patience
to the life, having all these qualities in a very high degree. He had also many
other interior qualities necessary for this virtue; for those now mentioned
concern only the exterior.

Persons that had lived a very long time with him, and had studied with care
all his actions, never heard him complain for any thing whatsoever, neither for
sickness, nor loss, nor in any other occasion of sufferance; but they always
observed in him, a constancy immovable, a patience invincible, and which
passed often into joy, with an eveness so great and so mavelous, that he
spoke not one word higher than another, nor used any gesture, which might argue
a spirit over eager or forward.

In his second journey to Dijon (which he made with the Lady his wife, and the
late deceased Countess of Chastres) the second or third day, he was assaulted
with a violent Rheumatism, which put him into pain all over his body, and being
to lie down in bed, as need was, he went thither quite stooping, supported by a
staff, and by a person that led him: In this voyage he suffered extreme pain,
without saying ever a word, or making the least complaint: These Ladies
perceived it, seeing him grow wan and pale as a clout, and afterward in a
moment all on fire, and although they told him, that surely he was very ill, he
answered nothing to it, nor embraced the easement of talking of his grief,
which naturally the sick desires; but entertained them with discourses of the
excessive dolours of Jesus Christ, and what a favor it was from God, when a
soul suffers for him; but in terms so full of sweetness, and with so much of
love and zeal, that the company was affected with great devotion in hearing him.

These two Ladies not able to get out of him, what his pain was, and desiring
much to know it, they requested the Prioress of the Carmelites of Dijon
(supposing she might have more power with him than themselves) to ask him
concerning it; which she did: To whom he answered plainly,

My pains are great, even to crying out, and swouning; but although I feel them
in the greatest extremity, yet through Gods grace, I yield not up my self to
them, but to him.

He told her moreover, that being led into his Chapel of Citry, and set down
upon a bench, by reason of his sickness, the bench broke, without any
appearance at all to him, that such a thing could happen, and that he believed,
the evil spirit had broken it, to move him to impatience, making him to fall
untowardly:

But by the mercy of God, I was no more moved thereat, said he, than you see me
now, although the pains that surprised me were very sharp.

A man had need have great command of himself, and be very patient, to be able
in like occasions, not to be moved at all, and to keep himself in the same
posture of spirit, as if nothing had happened.

I had the favor, said this good Mother, to be with him about two hours, while
he was exercised with these great torments, which I saw him bear with so much
calmness and modesty, without stirring at all, and talking just no otherwise,
than if in going out of the Speak-house, he had been in perfect health,
whereas, God knows, he was in great pain, resting upon a staff, and going
twofold: All our Nunnery was much afflicted to see him in this condition; and
it was the motion of some, to make a vow for his health to the Lady of Grace
(whose Image here they honor) believing that the Mother of God, would not deny
them it, both for the veneration that this servant of God rendered to this
Image, as also for the great obligations our house had to him. The whole
Society made the vow upon the day of her Nativity, after Mass, whereat Monsieur
de Renty was present, but, by no means, being able to kneel. The vow was
accepted; for after that night he came without staff into the Parlour, and a
few days after, he could kneel down, and was grown well within the nine days of
the Vows continuance: They keep the staff in the Covent, in devotion and memory
of this grace; and he in acknowledgement of the benefit received, sent a Heart
of Crystal in a Case of Gold, to hang about the Neck of the Virgin.

Having lost a Son whom he dearly loved, he endured this sharp affliction
without saying a word, save only in testifying his perfect submission to the
orders of God, and with so much patience, as might justly render it an action
Heroical.

Often had he great exercise of patience in the works of Charity, which he
rendered to his Neighbor; not only enduring hunger, thirst, heat, cold, wet,
weariness of body, and other outward pains, inseparable attendants on the
employments he had, but also contempts and reproaches.

While he was employed on certain set days in an Hospital, in catechizing poor
Passengers, a certain man that was there settled, was offended at this action of
humility and signal charity, in a person of that condition, looking upon it, as
an encroachment and intrusion upon his office, and came to find him out, as he
was in the midst of the poor, instructing them, and gave him, in their hearing,
diverse injurious and offensive words, to discourage him from coming again.
Monsieur de Renty seeing this man take on so against him, heard him without
being moved, and patiently enduring his contempt and outrages; after all, makes
answer, with much humility and respect, that he desired to teach those poor
people, which he saw to have great need of it; that he was not willing to come
on any such days, as he would take, but seeieg that he would not be at the
pains himself, he prayed him not to hinder a good work: This did not satisfy
the man at all, but he comes four days together into the Hospital, to drive out
Monsieur de Renty, as soon as he began the Catechism, doing it instead of him;
which this most courteous Nobleman endured all the time, with an admirable
patience.

He practiced this virtue with great care and conduct, through all the things
of this life, whereof there is not any but will give occasion of patience; so
that whatsoever happened, general or particular, though it checked and justled
his nature, his body, spirit, judgment, will, inclinations, desires, designs,
and those of the best sort, every thing that concerned him in what way soever,
he endeavored to improve it toward grace and perfection, and possess his soul
in patience and tranquillity, receiving and suffering all without any
alteration, or being either exalted or dejected by them.

Praying to God before the Holy Sacrament (says he, in a memorial under his
own hand) a poor man came to me to beg an Alms, at that time I applied my self
to recollection, when men use to receive such interruptions with some
contradiction; and the word it self implies as much; for we call it, The
importunity of the poor: It was given me in this instant to understand, that
if we were well enlightened, we should not count our selves importuned, or
hindered by any person or thing; because we should regard the order of God,
conducting all things to our advantage; that as it behooves us to suffer with
patience the distractions interior, so ought we to endure the exterior, and
that the vexation, unquietness, and impatience, which these little accidents
cause in us, come from our ignorance and immortification.

It is not for all that though, but we may shun the occasions of trouble: but
when they come, we must look upon them as ordered by God, receive and bear them
with all sweetness, humility and reverence; and so though they come and
interrupt us, the order of God is not interrupted in us, but we follow it; and
this indeed is the treasure, and the great secret of the life spiritual, and (I
may so say) a Paradise upon earth.

True it is, that nothing troubles us, but through our own fault, and all the
vexations which we either resent within, or vent outwardly, when any one
crosses, hinders or diverts us from doing any thing, have no other source, but
the disorders of our too much engaged spirits. And for the better stifling of
these passionate risings, and keeping our hearts in peace, we must mark this
well: that if one hinders us from doing one good work, he thereby gives us the
means of practicing another. A man (suppose) draws you away from prayer, or
from reading, hinders you from the executing of some good design you had for
your neighbor: It is true, but he puts you withal into a condition of
exercising patience, which in this conjuncture, will be better, more acceptable
to God, and more efficacious to perfectionate you, than all those other
actions; for in them there was found your own will, but in these, there comes
in a Self-abnegation, wherein consists your perfection: for the fullness of God
is not; but in the emptiness of the creature.

SECT. I. A pursuit of the same subject.
THis great patience in Monsieur de Renty, did flow from the high esteem he
made of sufferings, which if well understood, are no other than well-springs of
life eternal, than mines of gold, celestial riches, than participations of the
Cross of our Lord; which Cross God has appointed the cause of our happiness,
and of all the good that we shall ever possess; and consequently whereunto
every one must have some ligament or nail to affix him, who will be saved.

To one that suffered, he wrote thus:

God fashions you for himself, uniting you here below to Jesus Christ's
sufferings: Ah! what a great favor is it! and greater than we are aware of.

And to another:

What a blessing is it that God makes you suffer? whilst the world laughs! if
those of the contrary part had (as you have) their eyes open, they would see a
ravishing wonder; your self to laugh in suffering, and themselves to weep for
not suffering: you have a favor which they contemn, because they understand it
not, and poor miserable men, they count themselves happy, in what is their
misery.

This great opinion which he had conceived of sufferings made him desire and
thirst after them, and to say in the ardor of his wish, with that holy woman
(to whom he bore so great devotion) either to dye, or to suffer. He wrote to
one thus:

I see that in a manner, every thing is unprofitable in this life, but to
suffer; every consolation, every sweetness and joy, is an overhasty scisure of
the recompense which is not due to Criminals, who sojourn not in this world,
but to be purged, and do penance there; to which business, pleasures and joys
bring some allay, and hinder, without doubt, the penance from being so full,
and the soul from arriving to a higher degree of perfection: Not that I deny,
but that these things may sometimes be necessary, in regard of our infirmity;
which has need to be upheld, for the better enduring its mortifications.

The year, 1647. the 30 of April, he wrote thus to his Director:

I have always before my eyes my feebleness, and that little which I render to
God for his favors, which keeps me in abnegation; but yet with great affiance,
which carries me to love, to docility, and to obedience; but love and obedience
that inflames me more to suffer with our Lord: This is my greatest longing and
attractive; because in every other thing we are receivers from God; but in this
here (although we receive the grace to suffer) yet the suffering is that which
we can properly give to God, and is the greatest gage and proof of our love.

But it is not for all this reasoning aforesaid; that I should choose and bring
sufferings upon me, but I feel my self inwardly inclined toward it, and stay
there. It is about a fortnight since that I had such a kind of
acknowledgement, and such a love to our Lord, suffering and offering himself to
God his Father, and knitting us to himself to be but one and the same
sacrifice, that I felt my self in an instant, and during that instant, glued to
the Cross by such an alliance of love, as is inexplicable, and whereof the
vertve continues with me to this present.

In a Memorial that he gave him the year, 1648. in Lent, concerning his
dispositions: he said,

It is come into my mind, that the way to make me keep a hard Lent, would be
to set me at a good Table, and oblige me to make good cheer, to cast me among
the brave companions of the world, to prattle and laugh, and to lead me into
walks, and meetings of young gallantry; for this would be to me a little hell;
yea (without speaking of the sin that might be there) the very thought of it,
makes me tremble; for it is true, that Solitude, fastings, and other things,
which are called Penances, are my attractives or allurements.

And afterward, he very wisely adds:

Although I have this feeling, I cease not to know what I am, and in all my
inclinations and desires, I take heed not to beg to suffer the least thing; and
when I happen to do it of my self, I revoke it afterward, as having done
foolishly: I have too much experienc of my weakness; I give my self only to my
God, for every thing he desires of me, from the top of heaven, even to the
bottom of hell; by his order I will all, with him I can do all, and that which
is ordered by him, is always accompanied with his grace.

This great servant of God enlightened and touched with these illuminations and
contemplations, stirred up to patience all those that he dealt with, and
persuaded them to knit and unite themselves intimately to our Lord suffering
and crucified. He wrote thus to one afflicted:

I beseech our Lord to fortify you more and more with his graces; and that the
more he imprints in you the characters of his passion, the more he may make you
grow in the holy use of your suffering to accomplish perfectly in your person,
what S. Paul says, Absit mihi gloriari nisi in cruce Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, [God forbid that I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ.] I assure you, it is a great shame to a Christian, to pass
his days in this world, more at ease, than Jesus Christ here passed his. Ah!
had we but a little faith, what repose could we take out of the Cross.

But if all have not this grace, how much ought they to whom it is given, to
cherish it, seeing it is a mark of the high degree of glory, that they one day
shall possess: for who doubts, but that in proportion, as we shall be conformed
to the death of the Son of God, and to his pain, we shall in the same degree,
be to his glory, and receive the recompense thereof in bliss.

And afterward teaching him the way of well-suffering, he gives him this
advice, which contains all the secret.

But the beauty of suffering is in the interior, in the holy dispositions of
Jesus Christ, who is (and it is a thing to be well marked, and always studied)
as well the model as the head of all sufferers.

And to another, out of the same thought, he said:

It is a great favor to suffer: All the worlds deceived, supposing this a
common favor, it is very rare: It is true, we may say that many suffer, but of
them there are very few, that suffer in the dispositions of Jesus Christ: very
few, which suffer with a perfect resignment to what God ordains concerning
them; very few, without some inquietude, and dwelling in their thoughts upon
their pressures; few that give up all events to the conduct of God, without
making reflection thereupon, for to employ themselves entirely in his praise,
and to give way, by our acquiescence and submission, for him to exercise all
his rights and power over us.

He fortifies and encourages, in this sort, a Lady much in pain.

Few understand the secret of Christianity; many call themselves Christians,
and few have the spirit thereof: many in their prayers and ordinary affairs,
look up to heaven; but in their important actions, they are children of nature,
not looking, but on the earth, whence if they life up their eyes to heaven, it
is but to complain, and pray him to condescend to their desires, and not to
show their acceptance of his: They give some small things to God, but will
retain those which their love ties them to; and if he separate them from them,
it is a violence, and a dismembring which he must make, and to which they
cannot consent; as though the life of Christians were not a life of sacrifice,
and an Imitation of Jesus Christ crucified.

God, who knows our wretchedness, takes from us, for our greater good, the
cause of our evil, a Parent, a Child, a Husband, that he may by another evil,
which is affliction, draw us to himself, and make us see, that all these
alliances; and connexions to whatsoever it be, that separates us from him, are
so many obstacles, of so great importance, that one day, in the face of all the
creatures, we shall confess, that the greatest mercy that he ever did us, was
to free us of them: It is a wormwood-bitter only to the mouth and taste, but
wholesome to the heart; kills the old Adam, to make alive in us Jesus Christ;
it is a great winter, which is the assurance of the beauty of the other
seasons: But we must beware, that what is given us out of favor, we take not
as a thing by chance, or a misfortune; for this would be to turn the remedy
into poison, and to receive the grace to chase it away.

Let us enter into the holy and adorable disposition, which was always in Jesus
Christ, to suffer willingly, for the honor of his Father, and for our
salvation. Is not this a strange thing, that men knowing, that the way which
Jesus Christ past through to glory, was ignominy, pain, and the cross, yet they
that call themselves his disciples and followers, should expect, and beg of him
for themselves another way to walk in? Is the Disciple greater than the Master?
and if the head willingly passed that way, what remains for the members? ought
not they to follow him? Let us therefore go after him, and suffer after his
model: Blessed be sickness, the loss of honor, of riches, of goods, and of the
nearest things, and the separation from all creatures, which hold us bowed
toward the earth, if it set us straight, and make us lift up our eyes to
heaven, and to enter into the designs that God has over us: Blessed be the
plague, the war, and the famine, and generally all the scourges of God, which
produce these effects of grace and salvation in us.

I conclude in these words which he sent to another person:

While we live here, it is our season of patience, where faith and hope would
be unprofitable, if all were clear, and nothing caused us to suffer: It is in
the obscurity of this desertion, and in all the sorts of trials, as well from
within as without, that those virtues are established in our souls, and that
they make us hope wall of our salvation.

SECT. 2. His Domestic crosses.
THe greatest exercise of patience that Monsieur Renty ever had in all his
life, was that which was given him by the Lady his Mother; who, whether she
were angry, that he was so forward in devotion, always among Prisons, always
among Hospitals, always employed in actions low and abject, in the eyes of the
world, far beneath, as she thought, his birth, and that she should have been
glad to see him in glistering and glorious employments, wherein his Ancestors
had appeared: or were it, that she was pushed thereto by some evil counsel, or
otherways. So it was, that she gave him (and for a long time) matter of
suffering; and one may say, that as she contributed much to the making him man,
so she contributed much to the making him a perfect Christian. The case was
thus, The Lady pretending to great rights in the goods which her deceased
husband had bequeathed to her Son, did demand the same of him; who with great
submission and respect, gave her all that he believed was her due, and over and
above; but she not content therewith, demanded more; which her son finding, by
advice of learned Counsel, that it could not be done without wrong to his
children, did remit the business to Arbitrators, and agreed for the
satisfaction of his mother, that she should chose them all, as she pleased,
persons of ability and honesty, of her acquaintance, and such as he knew not at
all, to determine what he might give her, without prejudice to his conscience:
When they were chosen, he went to find them out, and prayed them to content
the Lady his mother in every thing, that might lawfully be done, without having
regard to him, which was a request altogether extraordinary, made to Judges, by
one of the parties, and which well makes appear, the affection and the honor
which Monsieur de Renty bore to his mother, and how far he was from seeking his
own interest.

The day being come wherein these Gentlemen were to give their sentence: whilst
they were employed in the framing of it, the said Lady was in one chamber of
the house, and her son, with Madam his Lady, and a Gentlewoman, in another,
where the employment of her most virtuous son was, to pray to God for a success
of the business, to his glory, and the procurement of peace; and for this end,
he caused them to say with him some hymns, till the time that there was brought
him the award, to sign it; which was read to him, and which he heard with great
calmness of spirit; and although it was not advantageous to him, and that there
was a notable forfeiture on them that should not stand to it, he signed it
without dispute, or endeavor, to get better terms.

Upon this, believing that his mother would be fully satisfied, with what had
been decreed, when he returned to his lodging, he caused to be sung Te Deum
Laudamus, beginning it first himself, and from his heart, in way of
thanksgiving for this conclusion, which he supposed would be a bond of peace
between his mother and him, and a means of living happily with her, the rest of
his days: But God (to purify and refine him yet more, and to lay a cross upon
his shoulders, which he bore diverse years in a most holy disposition) permits,
that the thing should not take effect, according to his desire; because his
mother not accounting herself satisfied with this advantage which these
Arbitrators had given her, found our a way to appeal from the award, yet
without being obliged to pay the forfeiture for refusal, and to sue him for her
pretended right, at the Parliament of Dijon. Her son did all that was possible
for him, to make her alter this design, and to sweeten her heart toward him;
and; for the bringing of this about, he had recourse to remedies supernatural;
he made long prayers, and joining penance thereto; he fasted with extraordinary
rigor, and macerated his body with great austerities, hoping God would have
regard to these actions, and to the sincerity of his intentions.

After he had thus prepared himself for some time, he went to his mother, and
cast himself on his knees before her, with a reverence, humility, and
submission able to mollify the most obdurate heart; the which thing he did,
not for once only, but often, and with abundance of tears; and begged of her
with the most efficacious words that he could make use of; that she would be
pleased to take him and all his family unto her, and entertain them as she
thought meet; and after that, she might dispose as she pleased of all the goods
that his father had left him.

She would not consent to this humble and reasonable request, but persisted in
her resolution to go to Dijon, and sue him there; which he perceiving, though
he might, by an expedient presented to him, have crossed that, and never stirred
out of Paris, yet out of respect to her, and to comply with her in this
business, would not make use of it, but determined to go thither, and did so.

And this he did, out of a disposition to confusion and debasement; which
indeed he met with to purpose, finding men's minds prejudiced against him, with
a persuasion of great injury, for one that made profession of so high piety, to
deal so with his mother, which he endured, that he might be partaker of the
reproaches, and honor the self-abasement of the son of God, who came into the
world for our sakes, in the similitude of sinful flesh, and appeared as a
criminal, although he was very Innocence it self: And so passed he here, for a
guilty person in this business, though he was not at all in fault; but on the
contrary, exercised therein, actions of Heroical virtue, of which you shall now
see some of them.

A person of piety, and Superior of a Religious House, acquainting him with
all the evil and strange reports which were spread abroad of him in Dijon,
where none were to justify him, being a mere stranger there; he heard it all
without any sign of passion, but with admirable calmness, elevated himself to
God in heart and words, and humbled himself before him; whereat she was much
edified. She demanded, after this, whether there had been put in, any injurious
papers against his mother, as was reported. He answered, No; though Proctors
and Advocates sometimes say more than one would have them, yet that he had seen
all the writings, and found them all drawn with that respect, which was due to
a mother.

She asked him also, if he was not afflicted at her manner of proceeding
against him, seeming very harsh and extraordinary.

He said, No, because I so much adore the order of God over me, that I cannot
be afflicted at that which he permits to befall me: I am a great sinner, and
therefore not only my mother, but all the world have just cause to take part
against me.

In brief, he was never heard to make any complaint of hard usage from his
mother, but continually laid the blame upon his sins.

The same person adds in a Memorial, how that diverse seeking out ways of
accord, had the greatest trouble in the world to make her join in it, every day
inventing new difficulties, even when it was believed that all had been given
her, whatsoever she desired; and that in the midst of these delays from day to
day, herself said to Monsieur Renty, Sir, I shall willingly say the Te Deum,
when once I hear your business ended: And one day, when they believed Articles
would have been signed, without retracting (on which day notwithstanding, all
was broken off) he came with a pleasant countenance, to desire her to say the
Te Demm.

It is now the time to say the Te Deum, said he, since you had the goodness to
promise it: And may I be so bold, as to desire to say it with you? O what a
great and wise God have we! who knows well how to do all things as they ought,
and when they ought; not according to our precipitations, but to his order,
which is our Sanctification.

Hereupon he said the Te Deum, with a spirit so elevated to God, as gave
sufficient evidence of his being wholly filled with him.

And afterward said:

Its well, though nothing be done, yet it was very meet to say the Te Deum, to
render thanks to God, for that he has done his own will, and not that of a
finner, unworthy to be heard or regarded.

This action filled me with admiration (wrote this person) and so much the
more, because the business was believed to be broken, without hopes of making
up again. And I no less admired his silence, in a business that touched him so
near, in that he never spoke word to me of it, nor of his mother; save only to
desire, that they both might be recommended to God: And from the beginning,
that I had the honor to speak to him, when I gave him notice of the offers
that diverse persons had made us to ferve him, he thankt me most heartily for my
good will (with great acknowledgment toward those persons) and without
speaking any more thereof, he fell upon discoursing of God; never after opening
his mouth about that business, which evidenced a wonderful disengagement, and
death to every thing, though of never so sensible an interest.

There past also many other things at Dijon, and since at Paris, during these
differences, even to the death of his mother; yea, and after, which required an
extreme deal of patience, and which he practiced in an Heroical perfection,
even to the astonishment of those who were acquainted with the business.

But it is enough, of this matter we have spoken sufficiently, and I doubt not,
Monsieur de Renty, who is now (as his eminent virtues give us sufficient ground
to believe) in the place of perfect Charity, does approve of my design, in not
speaking more thereof, and of using reservedness toward that Lady, to whom all
his life, he bore so much love and respect.

CHAP. 6. Of his Mortification.
WHat we have spoken hitherto in this Second Part of the Austerities, of the
Poverty, Humility and Patience of Monsieur de Renty, makes appear evidently, to
what height he was mortified, and that he was a true grain of that mysterious
wheat mentioned by our Savior, which by dying, brings forth much fruit; yet
besides all this, we shall touch here some other effects of his Mortification.

The grand secret of Christian-life, consists in the destruction of what our
nature has in it vicious, the better to give way to grace, in crucifying the
old man, that Jesus Christ may live there, who has taught us, that this is not
acquired but by continual Mortification; and to that end, has told us, that if
any man does not take up his Cross, and that daily, he cannot be my disciple.

This excellent Scholar of that great Master, having well learnt his lesson,
employed all his care in the beginning of his Conversion, to mortify himself
in every thing, to subdue his passions, to regulate his motions Interior and
Exterior, to annihilate his desires, and to dye to all the inclinations of
corrupt nacure, with so great faithfulness and constancy, that as soon as he
perceived her to carry him to any thing with some imperfection, and that his
natural will inclined one way, he did the quite contrary: And he told an
intimate person, that having undertaken the endeavor to oppose his nature in
each thing, by the grace of God he had always surmounted it; insomuch, that in
all things he proceeded with a spirit of death, and continual sacrifice, making
no further use of his passions, senses, nor of any thing in him, but with an
eye always open, to hinder the operations of malign nature, and whatever she
brought thereto of her own, following the conduct of our Lord, saying, that a
man must disengage himself from himself, and every creature, that God only may
be his object.

And accordingly he performed it exactly; for when in his sickness he endured
most sharp pains, he was so taken up with God, and abstracted from them, that
he thought not of them. It was impossible to find a man more reserved, in
speaking of that which troubled him than he: For as he knew, that nature is apt
to seek and comfort it self, in discoursing of that which hurts her, so he
deprived her of that satisfaction and content, lifting up in the mean while his
heart to God, and offering him his pain, without otherwise dwelling upon it;
being glad that Gods work went forward, that the body of sin was in destroying,
and his sacrifice advancing.

He that is baptized (said he) ought to be dead in Jesus Christ, and to lead a
life of suffering, and in this suffering, of application to God, let us march
on to our end, which is sacrifice in each thing, in the manner that God will
have it, upon the bottom of obedience to his orders, and of the annthilation of
our selves, in the imitation, and by the Spirit of Jesus Christ: Let us be so
many Victims, entertained, and taken up with these Interior dispositions and
sentiments, that Christ had from his conception to his death, and to the last
period of his offering up.

Hence it was, he had often in his mouth these words, Sacrifice, Union, minding
to say thus, that we ought to study and enforce our selves to dye in each thing
to our selves; and for the attaining thereof, to sacrifice to God our spirit,
our judgment, our will, our thoughts, our affections, our desires, our
passions, and all in the union, and after the manner of Jesus Christ.

In these apprehensions, he wrote to a person, that he had great devotion to
these words, which the 24 Elders sang in the Revelations, to the Lamb, which is
our Lord, prostrate before his Throne, Thou have made us Kings and Priests, and
we shall reign upon the earth: In that this divine Lamb causes that God
establishes his Kingdom in us, by reigning in our souls, and in our bodies, by
his grace, that we are Priests, to offer up our selves to him in sacrifice; and
that by this means we shall reign for ever with him, in the land of the living:
So that this excellent man, in all occasions where it behoved him to deny
something to his nature, and to dye to himself, cast his eyes upon this estate
of sacrifice and of victime, to offer up himself to the glory of God, by the
pattern of his Son our Lord.

This great and continual care which he had to mortify himself in each thing,
brought about, that he had so tamed his passions, so regulated the motions of
his soul and body, so changed his inclinations, and subdued his nature, that at
length he came to such a point of Mortification, passive, and of death, that he
felt no more in the spirit any opposition to any thing painful, and was not
mortified with any thing whatsoever: From thence came it, that writing to his
Director, concerning his disposition, he said, that he understood not that
which they call Mortification; because that where there is no contradiction nor
resistance, there is no mortification; and when there befell any thing of a much
mortifying nature, and would have touched him much, if he had been as yet alive
to himself, if any familiar person spoke to him of the pain thereof; he said
smiling, that the thing went well, and that we must gain upon our selves, that
nothing may mortify us any more, and that we be, as it were, insensible to
each thing.

He came to this pass, not by the goodness of his nature, nor by a kind of
stupid indifferency, which sometimes is found in certain sleepy spirits; but by
his labor and virtue, which had made this blessed work in him, and had changed
his nature; for they that knew his youth, report, that naturally he was of a
swelling, hasty, haughty, and jeering disposition; which he had so corrected,
or to say better, annihilated, that in truth it was admirable, insomuch that he
was become moderate, staid, patient, humble, and respectful, in a degree of
consummate perfection: So that if we consider him well, a man may say, that he
was of a disposition quite contrary, and diametrically opposite, to that which
he brought from his mothers womb; teaching us by an example, so assured and
illustrious, that a man may prevail much over himself, if he endeavor it
sincerely, and that, whatever vice he has, he may at last rid himself of it,
if he force himself; according to those words of our Lord, The Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

And therefore, he recommended in a special manner this holy courage, and the
necessity of self-enforcement; as being that by which we may measure what
profit we have made in true virtue, and a means also absolutely necessary for
the gaining of perfection. He wrote to a person that practiced devotion, thus:

O how much to be feared is it, that we cheat our selves with the name and the
appearances of devotion, relying much on our exercises of piety; which, it may
be, are barely performed, and in speculation only, never coming to the
practice, nor to the conquest over our selves. In the morning we worship Jesus
Christ, as our Master and Director, and yet our life all the day following, is
not directed by him; we look upon him as our pattern, and imitate him not; we
take him for our rule and guide of our affections, and yet we do not sacrifice
to him our appetites; we make him the model of our conversation, which yet is
never the more holy; we promise him to labor and get above our selves, but its
no more than in imagination. The truth is, that if we know not our devotion,
rather by the violence and enforcement we make upon our selves, and the
amendment of our manners, than by the multiplication and simple usage of
spiritual exercises, it is to be feared they will be rather practices of
Condemnation, than of Sanctification. For after all to what purpose all this,
if the work follow not? if we change not our selves, and destroy not that which
is vicious in our nature? It is no otherwise, but as if a builder should pile
together many materials toward making of a brave Edifice, and yet never begin
it. And yet we see the work of Jesus Christ is almost reduced to this pass,
amongst the spiritual persons of these times.

He said to another, that the love which a Christian soul was obliged to bear
to he virtues which Jesus Christ has taught us, ought not to end in the simple
sentiments of esteem and respect toward them, whereby souls of the common sort
are easily persuaded, that they have done their duty; but therein they deceive
themselves, for that our Lords will is undoubtedly, that they make a further
entry into the solidity of his Divine practices, specially in Mortification;
Patience, Poverty, and Renouncement of our selves; and that is the cause why
there are so few souls truly Christian, and solidly spiritual; yea, even
sometimes amongst the Religious, was this, that men contented themselves to
make a stand at this first step.

I will end this Chapter, and this Second Part, with a Letter which he writ to
his Director, who had thought it fit for him to visit a person that had great
need of succor and instruction for some spiritual dispositions, which he
performed with much success and benediction.

This Letter dated the 14 of May, in the year, 1647. will make us well see the
great disengagement that he had from himself, and his perfect Mortification
attended with gifts inestimable, and his great light whereby he clears and
explicates matters of great subtilty: The tenor is as follows:

For the person whom you know, and the visit I made him, it is God and your
direction that has done all: I am so much afraid to mingle therein any thing
of mine, that going to the place where he is, yet I perceive I shall not visit
him, without a new order from you, or that he much desire it: I have not since
that time, so much as sent any commendations to him, considering with my self,
that we must keep the man reserved, and in great sobriety: And I thought it fit
to cast all this upon you, as my guide in the business. Ha Father, the great
imperfection of souls, is the not waiting enough on God, the natural
disposition struggling, and not brought into subjection, comes in with fine
pretexts, and thinks to do wonders; and in the mean while it is that which
sullies the purity of the Soul, that which troubles its silence, and turns
aside its sight from Faith, from Affiance, and from Love; whence it happens,
that the Father of Lights expresses not in us his Eternal Word, nor produces
in us his Spirit of Love.

The Incarnation has merited all, not only for the abolition of our faults,
but also for all the dispositions of grace, whereunto Jesus Christ is minded to
^ssociate us; of which this is the principal (and was in him so far as he was
man) to do nothing our selves, but to speak and act according as we receive,
knowing that we alone are not to do the work; but that the holy Spirit, which
is the Spirit of Jesus, and which governed him in all his ways, is within us;
which would stamp upon us his impressions, and give us the life, the life real
and experimental of our faith, if ballasted and held back by patience, we would
but wait his operation. This is it in which I feel my infirmity, and yet
whither I find a great attractive: I see that which I cannot utter, for I
possess that which I cannot express: And the cause (Father) why I am so brief,
comes both from the imperfection of my natural disposition, and from ignorance,
as also from a great largeness of the Divine goodness, which works in me that
which I cannot utter. The effect of this is, a fullness and a satiating of the
truth and clearness of the magnificence of God, of the greatness of Jesus
Christ, and of the riches which we have in him; of the most Holy Virgin, and of
the Saints; one sees here all praise and adoration, and comtemplates them
within. I tell you here of many things me seems, and yet all this is done with
one draught so simple and so strong in the superior part of the Spirit, that I
am nothing diverted from it by any exterior employments: I see all, I
understand all, and I do (though it be ill) all, that I have to do. This is
that I present you with, to receive therein from you instruction and
correction.

Thus we see the admirable benefits that come from perfect Mortification, and
the delicious fruits that are produced from this mysterious grain of wheat when
it is dead.

PART. III.
CHAP. 1. His application to our Lord Jesus Christ, in regard of his Neighbor.
WE have observed in the first part of this History, that the grand exercise of
Monsieur Renty was, to apply and unite himself to our Savior, and from that
union, and his example, to derive all his virtues and good works: This was the
general course he held in them all, to mould himself after him, for the
composition of his Exterior and Interior, never taking his eye off this Divine
Copy, but endeavoring to draw each line exactly, and pensil his true
lineaments, making him his native and perfect Original.

This was the scope of all his designs and cares, and particularly of his
charity to his neighbor; for which, he propounded our Savior as his grand
Exemplar, marking what he had done, and what he had suffered for men, weighing
those affections and tendernesses he bore toward them, how he sought after,
and conversed with them; how he instructed, comforted, and encouraged them,
sometimes reproving, otherwhiles bearing with their infirmities, and at all
times carrying them in his most dear embraces, and most intimate enclosure of
his heart.

He pondered what he had delivered concerning this virtue of charity, that it
was it, that he had established as the ground and perfection of his new Law;
having left us this one command more expressly, which with special propriety he
had termed his own, and the execution whereof he had enforced above all other:
he much thought upon it, how that this Master had charged us to love our
neighbor, according to the model, measure and fashion, that he had loved us:
And finally, that he had made this virtue, and no other, the distinctive
character betwixt such as possessed his Spirit in truth, and those that had it
only in appearance.

Wherefore having well-weighed these actions and doctrines of our Savior, and
resolved to do his utmost, to render himself a good Christian, and his perfect
Imitator, he determined as far as he could, both to embrace this doctrine, and
follow his actions, and to love his neighbor with the bent and spirit of of
such a divine Master.

Writing to Sister Margeret, a Carmelite of Beaulne, he said:

I sigh after my Savior Jesus, desiring to imitate and follow him whither he
pleases: I beseech you by your prayers, obtain for me his Spirit, to be my
life, my whole life: sigh and groan for me after my God, that I may be wholly
for him, in his Son, that I may follow him, and not live, but by his Spirit.

And to another person, he writ thus:

I have so great a view of the love, and of all the effects of the love of the
most Holy Soul of our Lord, that this Interior, so full of clemency, bounty,
and charity, makes me conceive far otherwise than ever, how that we ought to
live of this Divine love, even in our deportment toward men, and how in
effect, it is in him, that the whole Law is accomplished in its perfection.

Furthermore to the same party, thus:

Since God has manifested himself to us by his Son, and has admitted us,
through him, into his grace, and made us partakers of all his actions, both
toward God and man, how can we ever quit this his dear Son? He that has Jesus
Christ, has a key which opens many doors, it discovers unto us large
prospects, it enricheth us with vast treasures, and breaks open the prison of
man's heart, as being too strait for his Immensities.

And to the same, thus also:

Ah, how good is that desert! when after Baptism we are conducted thither with
our Lord, by the Spirit of God: Thence it was that our Savior came out to
converse with men, to teach them, and work their salvation: Since therefore we,
together with him, make up but one Jesus Christ, as having the honor to be his
members, we should live his life, take on us his Spirit, and walk in his steps.

This was the ground that made this perfect Disciple apply himself with all his
power to this admirable Charity, which we are now coming to speak of at large,
endeavoring in all the commerce he had with men, to unite himself most
intimately to our Savior, rendering himself up as an instrument to be guided by
his hand in the helping of others: beseeching him to breath upon him this
Spirit of Charity, recommended so much to us in his word, but more in his
actions; and to inflame him with this divine fire, which he has kindled in the
midst of his Church, to be wholly burnt and consumed with it: he consulted him
in all his doubts concerning it, begging of him to inspire, what, and how, and
when, he should speak and act for the good of his neighbor, and that in him,
and by him, these might all be done.

He looked upon men, not according to their natural qualities, their beauty,
nobility, riches, dignities, and wordly honors, but according to their more
noble relations, and those common to all; viz. as creatures divine, the lively
images of God, created to praise and love him to all eternity, as dyed and
purpled in the blood of Jesus, brothers and coheirs with him, his purchase and
inheritance, bought with the price of his life, and a thousand dolours; and who
therefore must be infinitely dear unto him, and most passionately beloved of
him.

In this capacity it was, that he beheld men, loving and applying himself to
their necessities, and he arrived by the purity of this conduct to so far
perfection, that as on the one side he was extremely useful to his neighbor,
and received therein wonderful blessings from God; so on the other, this
communication with them, did not distract, nor bring any prejudice to himself,
but very much good. There are that advise them, who have to do with others in
the matter of their salvation, especially with such from whose converse any
danger may arise, to consider them as bodies without souls, or as souls without
bodies, and as pure spirits. The counsel is good, and some make profitable use
of it; but Monsieur Renties view was, to look upon God and Jesus Christ in
every man, and to consider, that it was they that demanded succor of him, and
prepared his thoughts to talk to them, and perform what was necessary for their
souls and bodies, believing truly, that it was to God and Christ, that he
rendered these assistances and service. And this same thought is much to be made
use of, that we may do good, and take no hurt from others; otherwise, we shall
hazard ourselves, and do little good, for when we proceed upon the inclination
and motives of nature, the effects have a relish of their cause, proving no
more but natural, or vicious, or at most indifferent; viz. loss of time, light
discourses, amusements, engagement of affections, which carry in them much of
sense, and degenerate afterward into something worse, whereby instead of
purifying one another, a man pollutes and undoes himself: He that will conduct
souls to Christ and God, must of necessity carry them through such ways as lead
thither.

CHAP. 2. His Charity to his Neighbor taken in general.
HAving a purpose to speak of his Charity, which his man of God had toward his
Neighbor, I shall speak first of it in general, and say thus much, that it was
so great and enlarged, that it seemed to have no bounds; in that he loved not
only all Christians and faithful people, but even all men, not excepting any,
because he beheld motives in all of them of a true charity, and sincere love,
looking upon them as creatures of God, and his chief Workmanship, for whom our
Savior became man, and laid down his life, whom he loved and desired to save;
these all he likewise loved, and labored their good: Thy Commandment, says
David, is exceeding broad; the same dimensions he prescribed to his charity,
loving the present and absent, domestics and strangers, good and bad,
esteeming all according to their degree, honoring all, speaking well of, and
doing good to all, and ill to none.

There was not any considerable public good work done either at Paris, and a
great way off it, wherein he had not a great share. There was no undertaking
there, that rended to the honor of God, or good of man, of which he was not
either the Author, or Promoter, or Finisher, and very often all these together.
He was one at all the meetings for Piety, and in many as the soul and primum
mobile, he kept correspondence through the whole Kingdom, concerning works of
charity, received from all parts letters, desiring his advice in all
difficulties that occurred, in the erecting or advancing of Hospitals,
Seminaries of Religion, Places of Devotion, Fraternities of Virtuous Persons,
agreeing to associate together for the better applying themselves to their own
and others salvation, and for the managing of all sorts of good works.

One of good report, writ thus concerning him, from Caen; Monsieur Renty was
our support and only refuge, in the execution of all our designs, which
related to the service of God, the saving of souls, and relief of the poor and
distressed: To him we wrote continually, as well for the settling of our
Hospitals, and houses for receiving of loose women converted, as also for the
suppressing the insolence of some Heretics, who showed contempt of the blessed
Sacrament too openly. Finally, we received counsel and succor from him in all
like occasions; in which he expressed a great zeal for the glory of God, and
extirpation of vice: Since his death, we have not met with any to whom we could
have the like recourse about the things of God.

Another from Dijon wrote thus: We cannot but acknowledge the great benefit
this Province has received from Monsieur Renty, wherever he came; wherein he
has wonderfully advanced all works of Piety. We may truly say, that his days
were filled with the plenitude of God; and we believe, that he scarce lost one
minute of time, in which he either spoke not, or acted not something tending to
his service.

He applied himself to the necessities of the English, Irish, and captives in
Barbary, and of the Missions into the Levant; he took very great pains for the
good of the Hospital at Marcelles, for the relief of Galley-slaves, and
contributed much to the advancing of the affairs of new France in America: he
had a design likewise to purge all Trades and Manufactures from corruptions
that had grown upon them, to rectify and sanctify them, that men might live
upon them like Christians; which thing he, together with others, had happily
begun, and perfected the same in two of them, as shall be showed hereafter.

Moreover, as one of the great effects of Charity is Concord and Union, so had
he a wonderful care to conserve, increase and perfect it in himself and others;
wherefore he lived in perfect amity with all the world, with Seculars,
Ecclesiastics, and Religious, esteeming, respecting, and speaking honorably of
them all; and when any difference fell out among them, he was greatly afflicted
for it, endeavoring by all means, to pacify and unite their spirits, and to
accord their divisions; knowing, that the God whom we worship, is a God of
peace, who would have us live in peace, and that never any discord comes from
him, but from the Devil, the sower of Tares; that nothing is more opposite to
the spirit of Christianity, that spirit of Union and Love, than Division and
Schisms in Charity, making us not live like brothers, but strangers and
enemies; that instead of profiting in virtue, we multiply and increase our sins
and vices: The spirit of the new Law, is a spirit of such perfect Charity, and
intimate Union, that (as St. Paul says) it makes no distinction, as to the
heart of Jew nor Gentile, of Barbarian nor Scythian, of bond nor free, but
Jesus Christ is all to all, to unite, and close, and oblige them all in
himself: According to which this true Christian writes thus, in one of his
letters:

The words which we ought chiefly to imprint upon our hearts, are those of
mutual love, which our Savior bequeathed us in the close of his Testament;
this love should inspirit all Christians, to perfect them in one, and cause
them to live and converse together as brethren and children, yea, as one sole
child of God.

And because this Union with Christ our Savior, to whom we all belong, is the
best and most necessary disposition in such as are employed about the good of
their neighbor, to the end that they may receive from him both light and
strength, to enable them according to his purposes, together with his saving
Spirit, to assist and ground them in all virtues, and especially such as
qualify a man for that purpose; therefore his utmost endeavor was, to unite
himself intimately to him, and in all things to act by his Spirit, and to
acquire these virtues, and render himself perfect in them.

These virtues are set down by St. Paul, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, upon which he made frequent reflections, and long meditations; and
although he carried always the New Testament in his pocket, yet that he might
read and consider them often, he wrote them down with his own hand, carrying it
apart about with him: The Contents whereof were, Charitas patiens est: benigna
est:
Charitas non aemulatur: non agit perperam:
Non in flatur, non est ambitiosa:
Non quaerit quae sunt sua: non irritatur, etc.


Charity is patient, full of sweetness, envieth not, is not malicious nor
hurtful, is neither vain nor ambitious, seeks not her own interests, is not
froward nor choleric, thinks no ill, but interprets all to a good sense,
rejoices not at the faults of others; but on the contrary, takes great content
in others well-doing, suffers much, believes all things, not out of
feebleness of spirit, but out of goodness and holy simplicity; if its neighbor
mend not presently, hopes always that he will, and in the interim bears all
things from him.

These are the virtues in which he must be particularly exercised, that will
deal profitably with his Neighbor, without which he labors in vain; for
experience will show him, that after much time and pains, he shall profit
little; for the more any one is filled from God, and animated by the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, the more shall he advance holiness in himself, and good in
others; yea, though his words be few and ordinary, for that our employments
receive not their force, from the hands that acts them, nor our words from the
mouth that utters them, as from the disposition of the heart, and the Spirit
that animates it.

Now as bare Virtue alone, is not sufficient to complete a man for this design,
but one must also have a capacity thereunto. So this charitable man, besides
that capacity wherewith God had abundantly furnished him, as well of a great
wit, piercing, solid, well disposed, resolute, laborious and constant; as of a
body well made, of a good grace and presence; and besides the Sciences and fine
knowledge which he had learnt in his youth; he had also by his own industry and
travel (being good at every thing) learnt several things, not only for his own
use, but to teach them to others, whereby to help themselves, or make some
other use of them; as, to let blood, to make medicines for cuting of wounds, to
compound remedies for several diseases, of which he had books writ with his own
hand, which he communicated, abasing himself to learn the meanest skills, which
might any way be useful to others.

One day in Paris, he carried a friend with him to a poor man, who got his
living with making hots and wicker baskets, in a cave; into which he entered,
and in the presence of his friend, finished a hot which he had begun some days
before, with design, having learned the thing, to teach it to some poor people
in Country, to help to get their living: he left the hot, and a piece of money
to boot for teaching him, with the poor man, which indeed deserved to have been
reposited in some Cabinet of Rarities, or rather in some place of Devotion, as
a glorious Monument of an Heroic Charity.

Understanding when he was at Dijon, that the Religious Veselines, whom he
affected very much, provided, out of Charity, Drugs and Medicines for poor
people; he was much pleased with it, and to improve their good work, taught the
Sisters belonging to the Infirmary, to make some excellent Compositions, which
had very great virtue against several maladies, preparing them, dispensing and
boiling them himself, stooping to the meanest and most troublesome labors, as
much as could be done by any servant, holding his head for a long time over the
smoke of those medicines, which sent forth no pleasant fumes, before a great
fire, not desisting till all in a sweat, without any word or sign at all of
complaining of what he suffered. The Religious desired him to suffer the lay
Sisters to help and assist him, but his mind was so set upon it, that they
must let him alone, and give place to that fire of Charity, which inflamed him
all within, and which sweetened unto him, or rather consumed all the the pains,
the outward material fire could inflict; yea, and moreover he urged them out of
great prudence, to acquaint him with the hours of their devotions, and set
times of their meetings, that he might not divert them from these, being a
punctual observer of the time they appointed him, that he failed not one
minute, though with much difficulty, considering his several other employments,
to which he stood engaged.

The like he observed in all other things, insomuch that he took upon him all
shapes, transformed himself into any figure, condescended to all
accommodations, for the good of his neighbor; and all these by virtue of this
celestial fire, which melted and cast him wholly into the mould of Charity, his
thoughts, words, actions, and each thing in him was charity, which made him say
one day thus, in a letter to one of his great Confidents:

Methinks my soul is all Charity, and I am not able to express with what
ardency and strange expansion I find my heart to be renewed in the Divine life
of my new born Savior, burning all in love toward mankind.

SECT. 1. His Charity to the poor.
FIrst of all, concerning his Charity and affection to the poor, I shall say
this, that Jesus Christ was not only the fountain from whence this grace did
flow, but also the motive and object, in that he beheld him in them, and him
chiefly he imagined to assist and serve in their persons: so that his thoughts
stayed not upon their torn and ragged habit, nor upon their vile and despicable
outside, which naturally displeases the eye, offends the smell and other
senses: But passing further, he beheld within and under these, with the eye of
faith, our Lord Jesus Christ present and dwelling in them, whom he esteemed as
his native images, loved and valued by him: And as he burned with an ardent
affection toward our Lord, so he loved tenderly the poor, succored them with
all his might, and left nothing unattempted for their sakes: With these eyes,
and not those of nature, must each one behold the poor, that will love them
indeed, and have bowels of compassion, and a true resolved and constant Charity
to toward them.

In the second place, resolving to give you this Charity by retail, we will
begin with that which he exercised in his house; where from the year, 1641. he
invited to dinner poor men, two in number, and at first twice every week, on
Tuesdays and Fridays; but five or six years after, finding himself much engaged
in other services, for the honor of God and good of his neighbor, he reduced
them to one day, which ordinarily was Thursday, and then invited three; which
he ordered in this manner, willing to join his Spiritual Alms with his Corporal
(an important secret, to be learned and practiced by all charitable persons,
each one according to their capacities) he sought out such poor, as seemed to
him to have greatest need of instruction; wherefore during his abode at Paris,
after his morning devotions, he went to S. Anthonies gate, and there took up
such as were newly arrived, whom courteously saluting, he brought home, and if
it were winter, brought them to the fire, always making them sit down; and
afterward, with a cordial affection, which appeared in his countenance and
whole deportment, and with a mavelous grace, he instructed them in what was
needful for them to know, in the mysteries of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation
of our Lord, and Holy Sacrament. He likewise instructed them how to make
Confession, and to communicate worthily, and in brief, how to live virtuously;
this done, he gave them water to wash, set them down at table, where himself
served bareheaded, with exceeding great respect, and set the dishes before them
with his own hands, brought in by his children and servants, in which his Lady
also had a great hand, enjoined silence to others whilst they were eating,
providing that they should feed freely and familiarly: after dinner dismissed
them with an Alms, himself waiting on them to the gate, with very great
reverence, and some wholesome discourse.

He must be very much a Christian, that could do in this manner; and a Nobleman
of his age and quality, who stoops to such services, must have his eyes very
strongly fixed upon his Savior, otherwise such offices will go down with much
difficulty. Its true indeed, a Courtier will make no scruple, but rather a
point of honor and delight, to wait upon his Sovereign, disguised in rags or
some poor habit; but then he must be well assured it is the King, and no other.
Many persons of quality in Paris, and elsewhere, being present at this so holy
and Christian an action, were much taken therewith, and encouraged to imitate
it, at least in part. This laudable custom he continued to his death; and when
his occasions would not permit him to perform it in his own person, his Lady
did the same to so many poor women.

His other custom was, on that day in the week that Christmas day fell upon
every year, to invite a poor child of ten or twelve years old to dinner; and
on the day of the Epiphany, to invite a woman with a sucking child, in honor
of the mystery of that day; likewise one Midsummer day, in honor of S: John
Baptist his Patron, he invited twelve poor people, waiting upon them himself;
and on Maundy Thurday did the like, after he had washed their feet.

Besides these, and several other Charities and Alms at his own house, he
endeavored the general relief of all the poor in Paris, and all other places
thereabouts, as much as possible; busied himself to understand their wants,
studied ways of remedy, and carefully prosecuted them; and what he could not
accomplish himself, he commended to others, spoke for them, begged for them,
bought necessaries for them, and carried them with his own hands; studied to
establish settled courses of living, for men and children that were destitute;
and when he could not at present provide for them abroad, he kept and
maintained them at his own house, until he could conveniently put them forth.

He was the first that thought upon and motioned some relief for poor English
Catholics, driven by persecution out of their Country, engaging persons of
quality in the purchasing of Lands for their Subsistence, and having brought it
to perfection, himself undertook the charge of distributing one part of this
Charity; which he performed monthly, going to them a foot, and commonly alone,
having made choice of those quarters which were most remote, where entering
their chamber, he saluted them with tenderness and compassion, and after in a
very civil and respectful way, he gave them their allowance, lapt up in a paper
privately. One day in his return from this employment, he spoke to a friend on
this manner:

Certainly these are good Christians, who have left all for God, where as we
live in plenty, whilst these content themselves with two Crowns a month,
having parted with thousands for their conscience, and endure with patience
such considerable losses: O Sir, Christianity consists not in words or shows,
but in deeds.

Furthermore, this wise and charitable man, joined with his care of the poor,
one consiberable point of prudence; viz. after his visits and survey taken of
their wants in gross, he examined in particular as well their spiritual as
corporal necessities, and endeavored in the first place to mark their
inclinations, their passions their ill habits, what vices were predominate in
them, what were their chief infirmities; that like a prudent Physician, he
might apply fit remedies, duly exhorting them to live like Christians, and to
make a sanctified use of their poverty.

As to their temporal necessities, he considered each ones capacity, industry,
trade, and employment of each: if Tradesmen, he considered what was necessary
to set them to work, what tools or materials, which accordingly he provided,
either buying new ones, or redeeming their own laid at pawn; bought materials,
giving them provision of bread for two to three days, and procuring them work,
and that not only for themselves, but their wives and children, and afterward
bought some of their work, and bestowed it in Alms upon others, took order for
the quick sale of others commodities, encouraging them to take pains, and avoid
idleness, coming from time to time to visit them, and see if all went well with
them.

To these we may add, his Charity to poor Prisoners, whom he visited,
comforted, and relieved, mediating and procuring their liberty, when he found
it expedient for the good of their souls: For one day he returned this answer,
to some that made suit to him for the release of him whom we are now coming to
speak of:

We often get men out of Prison, who make use of their liberty to the dishonor
of God, and their own destruction, for whom it had been better they had
remained in durance.

This being first considered, he afterward labored for their enlargement with
great affection; of which I shall now give a pregnant proof.

There was in Low- Normandy, a Prisoner for diverse years, who was both
innocent, and in great extremity; several persons had endeavored his freedom,
but without success, by reason of a potent adversary: The business was
commended to Monsieur Renty; who after a just information of the case,
undertook the matter, chose an honest man, a Master of Requests, where the
cause depended, to make report of it to the Counsel; commended the prosecution
of it to his own Advocate, went in his own person often to see and solicit
it, undertaking for the charge of the whole business.

Notwithstanding all this, perceiving the cause to hang long, and the Prisoner
to languish in misery, he changed his purpose, writ to his adversary in his
behalf; requested that the business might be referred to him, promising to make
a journey into Normandy, and there to accommodate the matter to his content.
When he came thither, he presently set up a Mission in his Parish of Beny; from
whence taking along with him one of the Fathers of the Mission, he went to the
Town where both patties were.

When his coming was noised in that place, all the streets were filled with
people, blessing God for his coming; and understanding the occasion thereof,
professed, that none but he could accomplish that business, or put an end to
that poor man's misery, praising God that had chosen such a holy man, with a
thousand good p^ayers for him. He went strait to the Prison, where the Father
made an exhortation to the Prisoners, to strengthen and comfort them, which he
seconded with his Alms; after which, he promised the poor man to go to his
adversary, to induce him by arguments, and persuade him with entreaties, to
grant his enlargement; in the mean time, that he should pray to God to bless
his endeavors, and should rest in hope, that by some means or other, with Gods
grace, he should be delivered.

Thence he went to the other parties house, whom he treated with all persuasive
means, returning back to the Prison to receive information upon some
difficulties that occurred betwixt them; where finding all the Prisoners
together at their usual devotions, he waited till they had done, though it was
very late, toward seven a clock, having two leagues to go after that to his
own house, where it was ten a clock at night before his return: having at
length taken instructions from his Prisoner, he went back to the other party,
with whom he came to such an agreement, that this poor man, after nine years
Imprisonment, and a world of misery, by his solicitation and Charity, was
released, whom he obliged to come to Confession and Communion to the Fathers of
the Mission, and render thanks to Almighty God for his deliverance; and to
assist him further therein, according to his custom of adding Charity to
Charity, he maintained him eight days at his own house, discoursing with him
every evening, and exhorting him to a good life; and at his departure,
persuaded him to go see his adversary, whom he found now as sweet and as
tractable; as before he had been incensed against him. And since that time,
being made Priest, he was one at the Church of Beny, to say Mass for the
intention of his Deliverer.

SECT. 2. Of his Charity to poor sick men.
IF his Charity was thus great toward the poor, certainly it was far greater to
such poor as were sick; for in them he beheld a double object of this most
excellent Virtue, Poverty and Sickness, both which conjoined, did kindle a
redoubled flame in his compassionate affections.

We scarce read of any thing in the lives of the greatest Saints of this
subject, which he did not practice: It was of such an extent and progress, that
not content to assist them in one or two ways, they found in him, and that
often in one visit, a Benefactor, a Physician, Apothecary, Chyrurgion, Pastor,
Father, Brother, Friend and Servant, comforting them every way, and in such
fashions as have not formerly been known or practiced, especially by persons of
his rank and quality.

In the year, 1641. he learnt to let blood, and other parts of Chyrurgery, he
endeavored to know how to make all sorts of Medicines; and to that end,
consulted with a Physician, by whom he was instructed in some principal things
of this Art; wherein his design was not the bare knowledge, but the practice:
When ever he went abroad either in Town or Country, he carried about him a
Chyrurgeons Box, and several Powders, for the cure of most ordinary diseases:
These he used with great dexterity and confidence, yet prudently enough, never
advancing rashly beyond his skill in cases of difficulty.

In his visits of the sick, he never shunned any service necessary for them,
and in his power to perform; as, making their beds, helping them to bed, making
their fire, washing their dishes, setting in order their little household stuff,
fitting every thing; hoping hereby to win upon the affections of those poor
people, the better to comfort, and exhort them to patience, and draw them to
God with more facility. He was seen one Day at Dijon (which place was an ample
Theater of his virtues, for many months of his abode there) without his Cloak,
with a potsheard in his hand, begging fire at ones door, for a poor sick body.
In which Town, after he had once or twice visited sick folks, in company of
such as showed him their dwellings, he returned often alone to the same,
exercising toward them greater and more humble acts of Charity, than when in
company, succouring and relieving them both by day and night.

In the year, 1640 visiting several sick folks in S. Paul's Parish in Paris, he
met with a Religious woman, who had the care of them, coming out of an house,
whom he asked what she sought there? who answered, Jesus Christ, and that she
came now out of a chamber, where there was great need of Charity. He was much
taken with that answer; replying, that he sought him also: And so both went to
that house, where there were many sick persons, whom notwithstanding he had
already the same day visited, made them broth, given them their breakfast, and
made their beds.

This good woman led him to several other places, where he instructed the sick,
and gave them Alms, and afterward he continued this holy exercise in her
company, setting apart for it one day in the week, which commonly was Friday;
on which he made his visits, let them blood, wiping his hands not with any fine
linen, but with any dish-clout that came next hand; administering proper
remedies for their diseases, assisting and serving their necessities, but
chiefly their spiritual ones, comforting and encouraging them, preparing them
for a good Confession, and worthy receiving. Informing himself in each Family,
whether God was served there? whether any quarrels or differences were amongst
them? which he was careful to take up, especially amongst poor folks, whom when
ever he met with them, though in the streets, he would admonish of their fault,
and endeavor to accord them.

Finally, he never left such places, without providing for all their
necessities, which he took notice of with incredible Charity, sweetness and
respect; dispensing with other business, that he might have sufficient time to
hear all their complaints with invincible patience.

In all his journeys, as soon as he alighted, he went to the Church, to adore
the blessed Sacrament (as we have mentioned elsewhere) after which, he enquired
if there were any Hospitals in that place; whither (if the time would permit)
he failed not to go, visiting their sick, enquiring if sufficient care was
taken for them, administering what remedies he could, with his hand, by Bleeding
and Medicines, and with his words, in sweetning their pains, by good discourse
and encouragement, and with his Alms.

In the great Hospital of Paris, this honorable mention has been made of him,
We have seen Monsieur Renty frequenting this Hospital for twelve years together
and upwards, with wonderful diligence; both at his entrance and departure he
went to the Church, where he remained sometime before the B. Sacrament, which
thing did excite devotion in all those that saw him, both there at his entry,
he offered up all his actions to our Savior, and begged such graces of him as
were needful: And at his going out, begged a blessing to render his endeavors
successful; this done, he went into the rooms, bestowing himself and his
Charity amongst the sick, from two a clock till five, directing and comforting
them in all their necessities. We have seen him dressing and making clean their
soars and ulcers, many times kissing the feet of the sick, assisting to bu^y
their dead. Moreover, he taught the Religious women that waited on them, to
make some ointments they knew not formerly, and made them himself before them
in the place. Commonly he came thither alone, sometime in company of some
Noblemen of good quality; who encouraged by such an example, strove to imitate
it in some sort, and to have a part in such holy actions.

Neither did he only visit the sick; but they likewise sought him, and would
find him out where ever he came, if they were able to go abroad. At Dijon they
would come to him in troops, for all sorts of sicknesses and distempers. In the
year, 1642, going to his estate in Normandy, he spent about four months in
these works of mercy, administering Physic and Chyrurgery to all sick of that
Country, in such sort, that from all quarters they came to him, and in such
multitudes daily, that one could scarce come near him. This puts me in mind of
that we read of our Savior, how from all parts they brought to him all that
were sick of all diseases, to be healed by him; which seems to be represented
in some measure by this his servant and true disciple, in that the sick, the
weak, the lame, or otherwise in firm; came to him from all sides; and we have
seen him compassed about with a throng of them, some to be let blood, some for
his ointments, some for his powders or other medicines; some for counsel or
consolation, some for an alms, or for ease in some case or other. Treating all
with the like diffusive Christian Charity, with the like bowels of pity and
compassion, the like spirit of love, as wherewith the Son of God, of whom he
received it, had pity upon us. And stood in the midst of them, with the like
goodness and patience, endeavoring to do good, and minister comfort to them
all.

SECT. 3. A further prosecution of the same Charity, and the success.
BEyond all these, his Charity yet ascended higher, even to the care and cure
of such diseases as were very troublesome, and which to nature carried much
horror and aversion along with them.

At his Castle at Beny, he entertained poor people infected with scall'd heads,
lodging them in a chamber fitted and furnished for them; where himself visited
them, plucking off their scabs with his plasters; attending and feeding them
till their recovery. At Paris likewise he visited the same in the Suburbs of S.
Germains (which was their usual abode) carrying them some collections of Alms,
joining Humility also with his Charity; forasmuch as he has been seen standing
in the midst of these noisome sick folks bareheaded, attending to a Sermon
which he had procured for them.

A credible witness testifies thus of him: I have seen Monsieur Renty in his
Hall at Beny, dressing a Cancre, which a man would not look upon at some
distance without aversion and horror: which he (having mastered all such
squeamishness of nature) did handle with pleasure and respect.

During his abode at Dijon, he met with a Wench, who had been taken with the
Soldiers, by whom she had gotten the foul Disease; some charitable people had
persuaded the Religious Nuns, the Vesulines, to take her into their care, who
lodged her in a poor neighbors house, Her body was in a very sad condition,
even nothing but ^ottenness, casting out such a stinking infectious smell, that
none could come near her; and the house she lodged in, were ready to turn her
out of doors, so that she was in a forlorn condition, had not the Superior
there, a woman of great virtue, bethought herself to confer with Monsieur Renty
(to whom she bore a very great respect) about the means of relieving this poor
creature.

This good man's Charity, like a perpetual motion, giving him no rest or truce,
not for a moment, carried him instantly to visit this poor creature, and to
provide for her extremity: In the first place, he hireth a woman to attend her,
and deals with her Host to keep her there: after this, he provides her
Dyer-drinks, and Physic proper for her disease, brings her broths his own
self, with all other convenient nourishment; stays by her a long time at each
visit, and whilst she was in a sweat, wipes her with his own handkerchief,
using the same himself afterward, a thing more admirable than imitable:
Moreover, having as great a care of her soul as body, instructs and comforts
her, taking the pains once in a day to read her a Lecture out of some Book of
Devotion; enduring with much courage and delight all the difficulties of
trouble and inconvenience, that so noisome a disease could present, by its
stench and rottenness: at all which, his heart leapt, as if it had been
entertained by some delicate perfume, which was, no doubt, the sweet odor of
Jesus Christ, whom he looked upon in these poor people (as we have said before)
which perfumed all their infections, and caused him to find delicacies in the
greatest loath-someness.

In fine, by his care, he retrived this poor creature from misery, and the very
jaws of death, brought her into the state of a good Christian; insomuch, that
she spent the rest of her time very virtuously; and when ever she came to the
Monastery of the Vesulines, she could not hold from relating, with great
f^eling; the unparalleled Charities of Monsieur Renty, together with her deepest
obligations, which she every where published, with the highest recognition of
her gratirude to so worthy a person.

Neither were these generous acts of his Charity, enclosed within the walls of
Dijon, several other places and Hospitals bearing witness of the like, which we
have heard from diverse, and have good cause to believe. To which we may add his
ardent desire for the erecting of an Hospital for the infected with the Kings
Evil, there being none such in Paris, nor in all France.

Thus did this great servant of God employ himself about diseases, and those
the most noisome. And now let us consider what blessings and success God gave
to his endeavors and Medicines, which will appear little less than miraculous.
Being in low Normandy, much busied amongst his sick people, men were astonished
to see how he cured all diseases, even the most desperate and extraordinary;
and that with remedies sometimes, which scarce appeared to have any thing in
them; which made those that took notice of them apt to believe, that the cures
were wrought, not so much by any natural power of the Medicines, as by Grace
and Miracle.

The same opinion they had at Dijon, of the cures he wrought there, that they
were healed by some way supernatural. To which purpose, I cannot let pass, the
discourse he had with the Prioress of the Carmelites, a great Confident of his,
whom he visited often, to whom he related, how a little before, a woman in
childbed, had been sick unto death, and given over by all the Physicians, whom
he visited notwithstanding, and tried whether in so great extremity, his
remedies might minister any ease.

I went to her (said he) and made up the best Medicine I had, yet such, as I
could not imagine to have so great a virtue, as to cure that disease: What
then? having no better, I prayed to God for his blessing upon that, if it might
be for his glory, and the good of the Patient. God did it; for coming to visit
her again, I found her well recovered.

The Prioress asking him, if he did thus often? he answered:

Yes, when he was desired it; for these being poor people, have no other help,
neither have I any better remedies: I know my Savior is not tied to Medicines;
we must have faith in him, where we can do nothing our selves; and that out of
his bounty he has bestowed on me.

She replied, but this is then a miracle?

And does not he work miracles for us every day? said he.

And do you such for the poor? said the Prioress? To which he answered with
great humility and well beseemingness in these words:

My Lady Prioress calls that a miracle, which our Lord has wrought; for my
part, I have no share in it, but only by bestowing on the poor such as I have,
make what you please of it; all my reflection thereupon is, only to return
praise to my Savior Christ when the cure is done.

If the Holy Scriptures command us to honor the Physician for our necessity of
him: Undoubtedly, those are much more to be honored, who proceed in their
cures, not so much according to the method and direction of Galen and
Paracelsus, as that of God.

SECT. 4. His zeal for the Salvation of his Neighbor.
THis part of Charity will appear greater and more ardent in Monsieur Renty,
than the former, as being the most sublime and noblest degree of it, as says
S. Thomas. And the first, in regard of its object the Soul, which is
incomparably more excellent than the body. And secondly, in regard of the
things bestowed in this way of Charity, which infinitely surpass those other,
as much as an eternal possession in the heavens, conveyed by the one,
superlatively exceeds bread, silver, health, supplied by the other: Wherefore
his holy prudence clearly perceiving a difference, was transported with far
other affections to the one, than to the other.

And being continually inflamed with the love of God, and his Son Jesus Christ,
uncessantly sought all ways, and used all means, to make them known and
beloved, both here and eternally, by all men; preventing what he could any
offense, or sinning against them, daily pondering with himself, the
inexplicable goodness and tenderness of God toward the souls of men, which
have been so dear to him, and cost him such an invaluable price. He entered into
the same affections, loving, and desiring their salvation, according to that
Model.

This zeal of his was admirable, having all the qualities to render it perfect:
Being in the first place universal, extended to all in France, out of France,
yea, all the world over: Insomuch, that he said to one of his Familiars, that
he was ready to serve all men, not excepting one, and even to lay down his life
for any one upon occasion: He earnestly desired to convert, to enlighten with
the knowledge of God, to inflame with his love, to sanctify and save the whole
world, if it had been in his power; of which Paris being, as it were an
Epitome, he went through all the quarters and streets of that vast City,
searching out what he could remove or bring in, for the glory of God, and
salvation of souls: And the same Spirit of God that conducted him in this
inquiry, blessed his endeavors, and gave him the favor to rectify what was
out of course, to confirm the wayering, to strengthen what was in order, to
root out vice, and plant virtue: Which he did in so many several ways, as a man
would think it impossible; but what cannot a man do, that is zealous,
disinterested, and full of God?

He performed what possibly he could, in his own person, not sparing any cost,
nor losing one minute of time; and wherein his power and strength of body or
mind, falling short of his desires, proved deficient, he engaged others:
Whereupon, he procured Missions at his own charge, in his own Countries of
Normandy and Brie; and by joint contribution of others, erected the like in
many other Provinces, where he had no Land; as, in Burgundy, Picardy,
Chartrain, and elsewhere.

And here it will not be amiss to take his own words concerning these, out of a
Letter my self received from him, relating to a Mission in his Lordship of
Citry in Brte.

The M^ssion was begun here on Whitsunday, a day that brings with it an
extraordinary benediction: the peoples hearts are touched with great sense of
repentance, which they manifest by abundance of tears: Many restitutions and
reconciliations are made, common and public prayers are made in Families,
swearing and cursing are redressed. And this Reformation extends it self to
three or four leagues round about us. Amongst many others, there came a young
maid, whose life had been very v^cious, who returned home a real Co^vert,
giving an ample testimony of her repentance, relinquishing her former
acquaintance: Whereby I find, that this was the very end; for which my Savior
brought me hither, and engaged my abode in this place.

These operations of grace, filled him up with unspeakable joy, which often
distilled into tears, for having to do in that which made for the glory of God,
and benefit of souls. We have it from an eyewitness, who has seen tears stand
in his eyes; and demanding the cause, received from him this answer:

I profess they proceed from that excessive joy I take to see so many touched
with remorse, evidencing their conversion, by making restitutions, by being
reconciled to their enemies, burning their idle and vain books, ^uitting their
former occasions of sin, commencing a life altogether new.

We have seen him likewise in the Church of Citry, so transported with zeal,
that he has swept the Church, carried out the dirt himself, rung the bell to
assemble the people thither.

In all his Missions, he commonly employed some Secular Priests of his
acquaintance, living in community, and settled at Caen for those employments:
who have quitted themselves herein with great benediction, and notable success.
He writ diverse Letters to their Superior, earnestly entreating and conjuring
him, to promote this business seriously and heartily; giving him account of
what Missions were established, and what were in a hopeful way, what he had
done in them himself, and to whom else he had spoken; with such courses as were
to be taken to make them effectual.

The year he dyed, this was written in a Letter to the same person, concerning
a Mission he had projected in the Town of Drieux, of the Diocese of Chartres:

I have solicited soveral persons, to join in setting up a Massion every year,
and I shall go my self along with it as often as I can, to serve and obey your
orders, in visiting the sick, and giving alms to the needy: And for the same
design, to assemble some companies of people whom God has wrought upon by your
preaching: Since God gave us a heart thereto, we have brought others to have a
hand in it; and my Wife, with two others, bear their part in it, imitating
herein St. Mary Magdalen, Joanna, and Susanna, of whom St. Luke says, that
they followed our Savior and his Disciples, ministering with their substance,
for the preaching of the Kingdom of God. We shall endeavor to perform this
without noise or show, taking a private lodging apart for the purpose. Be
pleased (my dear Father) to be our Father and Guide, and assist us in Autumn,
if you can, to break the bread of life to those, who with great humility desire
it of you. I beg of your Reverence with tears, to give ear to our request, who
are touched with the necessities of our poor brethren, and the love of Christ,
who desires to unite us together in one heart, even his own; that therein we
may live in the presence of God. My dear Father, I commit this charge to your
care, it being only in the power of his holy Spirit. to render yours, and the
endeavors of other Fathers successful: I trust he will hear us, and that we
shall see abundance of his mercies. I attend your sense, both for the thing and
the time: and in the mean time, you may, if you please, keep the thing secret
between us.

SECT. 5. Of the same Subject.
WE have already declared, how he kept correspondence all over France, and
elsewhere, concerning great undertakings, and important affairs, for the glory
of God, and good of his neighbor. He further obliged in all places, as much as
he could, several persons, to join together, and assist one another, in the
work of their own, and others salvation. And procured Assemblies of Piety for
diverse uses, of which he wrote thus, in one of his Letters, 1648.

I am now returned from Burgundy, where my journey has been full of
employment, in helping the setting up of several companies of men, and women
also, who have a great zeal for Gods service.

In a Memorial from Caen, we have these words, Monsieur Renty has settled here
many Assemblies of devout persons, whom he advertised to meet once a week, and
consult about relief of the poor, and the preventing of offenses against God,
which has succeeded marvellously. Moreover, he advised diverse Gentlemen of the
Country, to meet together from time to time, to encourage one another in the
way of Christianity, and make a Profession against Duels.

He writ to a Superior of one of the Missions in these words:

I was united in Spirit to you on Sunday last, which I conceived to be the time
of opening your Mission. If you think I may be any way useful, in forming some
little body of Gentlemen, and Societies in that City, as we have already
performed in little Villages and Towns, I most humbly entreat you to believe,
that I shall employ my utmost in it, though happily I may do more hurt than good.

When he came to Amiens, where I was, the precious odor of his virtue and
sanctity perfumed the whole City: for in less than a fortnights space, he
performed so many, and so great things, in visiting Hospitals, Prisons, and
poor people that were ashamed to beg, with several other acts of Piety, as were
wonderful. In two only journeys which he made to that place, parley as well by
his example, as by his Conversation and Advice, he engaged several considerable
Citizens, in these Exercises of Charity, which they embraced with good courage
and alacrity, and have continued in the same inviolably.

It was his earnest desire and design to plant the Spirit of Christianity in
all Families, and to engage people of all conditions, to serve God in good
earnest, having special care of their Conscience. He desired to be able to
instruct Fathers, Mothers, Children, Masters, Mistresses, and Servants, in
their respective duries, aiming herein at their mutual benefit; seeing we can
put little confidence in such, who truly fear not God: For he that once comes
to falsify his faith to his Sovereign Lord and Savior, will not stick, as we
may well believe, where the interest of Honor, Pleasure, or Profit does bias
him, to do as much to one who is but that Lords Servant: Wherefore he
endeavored the planting of virtue in all, as the best Promoter of the Service
of God, the Salvation of our souls, and the common utility of all relations.

To which purpose he drew certain rules for Gentle men and persons of quality,
and likewise for Lady and Gentlewomen. Since those that are above others in
place and dignity, are seen at a further distance; and their example makes a
deeper impression of good or evil, than that of the vulgar. These I met with,
written by his own hand, which deserve to be inserted here, as a testimony of
his zeal to do good to the Public.

Certain Articles, to mind all persons of quality, of their Obligations to
their Families, their Tenants, and in their Lordships.
[ For the better understanding of these Rules, the Reader must know, that the
Lords in France have in several Manors, the power of Justice, as well Criminal
as Civil; and for that purpose have their Judges and Subordinate Officers in
their Courts.]

THe first and most important obligation, for the conduct of a family, is good
example; without which, the blessing of God cannot be expected: It is therefore
meet, that all the Domestics, from the highest to the lowest, give good
example of modesty, as well in the Church as in their particular Places and
Offices, that by the excellent harmony of their outward behavior, it may
appear that God is the primum mobile within them.

For Officers.
1. The Lord of the Manor ought to inform himself, Whether his Judges and
other Subordinate Officers belonging to his Courts, behave themselves well in
their places: and he ought to procure for this information, and redress of what
is amiss, persons of known ability and integrity.

2. He ought to examine with prudence and privacy, what complaints shall be
made by the people, of injustice or bribery.

3. Whether they observe the Rules and Laws of his Court.

4. Whether they frequent Taverns on Sundays and Holidays, or in time of Divine
Service.

5. Whether they observe the Precepts of the Church, in forbearing to travel
and work on those days, without real necessity.

6. Whether they punish public crimes; as, Blasphemy, Usury: etc. and whether
the Laws be put in execution against Drunkards, Fornicators, and Oppressors of
the poor: Whether they banish lewd women, who procure manies ruin, and cause
so much mischief:

7. Whether there be any such Libertines, who scoff at Religion and Priests, or
eat flesh on days prohibited.

8. If some notoriously wicked person be found in the Lordship, it will be
convenient to begin with him, if it may be; that the rest may understand, that
no quarter is to be given to vice; and that it may appear to all the world,
with what firm resolution you proceed, in what opposition to Libertines: There
is need of zeal and severity, and yet withal, sometimes of Clemency, where
there is promise of amendment, with appearance of repentance.

9. A Chief Justice may upon good information, without form of Process, commit
a man to Prison for 24 hours, with bread and water, for blasphemy, or any other
notorious vice: and afterward admonish him, that if he continue, he shall be
proceeded against, according to form of Law.

10. Some persons are reclaimed sooner by a mulct of the purse, than by
corporal punishment; such are to be fined without rem^ssion, when found guilty.

11. Scandalous offenders ought to be deprived of the privileges and favors
of the Court; yea, and are to be burdened in taxes, and other cases, where
they are in a common condition with their neighbors; that they may understand
thereby, that they speed the worse for their v^cious life. On the contrary,
virtue is to be cherished, and countenanced with privileges, and public
favors, and protection.

12. Offices ought to be bestowed gratis, that thereby fit and able Officers
may more easily be chosen, and be prevented from the least pretense of Bribery
and Injustice.

13. Lords should give good example, by refusing presents from their Tenants
(for freeing such from common services) or from those who have business
depending before them, or from the poor; showing themselves disinterested,
noble and uncorrupted; whereby their Authority may be preserved, and both their
Officers and Tenants kept in strict obedience and respect.

For Royalties.
1. They ought to recommend it to the Gentlemen their neighbors, and observe
it themselves, not to hunt or hawk unseasonably, to the prejudice of poor men's
corn.

2. They ought not to introduce any such custom upon Country people, of
keeping their Hounds.

3. That Coney-warrens be not maintained or erected, to the prejudice of their
Tenants, except such as are of ancient standing.

For payment of Taxes.
1. They are to take care, that the rich lay not the burden upon the meaner
sort.

2. That their Officers and Bailiffs be not unnecessarily multiplied, to the
burthening of their Tenants.

3. That they set not Lands at too high rents, upon pretense that by their
power, they can remit their taxes: A thing very much to be considered, by
reason of some privileges Lords have in this kind, whereof the excess tends
to great injustice.

4. That the taxes be equally assessed, according to men's abilities; it being
usual with Assessors, to receive money of the meaner sort, to return them
insufficient and non solvent. To prevent which, they should give order, that
the tax be laid so justly, that what returns are afterward made of
insufficiency in any, be imposed upon the Assessors themselves.

For the Church.
1. It were convenient for the Lords, often to visit the Pastors, that the
people might thereby take notice of the respect they give him, and learn
thereby their own duty: And likewise to know of them, if any abuses be
committed, to be remedied by the Civil power (of which there are some things
mentioned in the Articles for Officers) and in particular, what reverence is
observed in the Church; whether the people are attentive at the prone, whether
they send their children to be catechized, and come themselves; at which also,
you and your family shall be present.

2. Whether the Church stock be improved, and the Churchwardens quit
themselves well in their accounts, clearing them at the years end; and that the
Churches stock be not made use of, for paying of taxes, or other public
charges; and in case it be so, to prevent such abuses, by complaint to the
Bishop.

3. To review the former accounts, and provide necessaries for the Church, a
Chalice of silver, a decent Tabernacle for the B. Sacrament, with comely
Ornaments.

4. To learn of the Curate, who are the poorest in the Parish, to take a note
of them, and consider them in the first place.

5. I would never take place of the Priest, especially in sight of the people.

These are such Instructions as I have collected rudely, and think fit to be
observed; besides which, the bringing in of Missions is most excellent, for the
planting of the Spirit of Christianity in the hearts of the people, to which
every one should contribute their best assistance.

Moreover the Gentlemen of the Country, shall do well, to meet once a month,
to confer about their duty, and encourage one another in the service of God,
who may also settle in Villages, petty Societies of well devoted persons, to
take care for preventing abuses, and the occasions of sin, and to relieve and
comfort poor people, who are ashamed to beg.

There might be found also a way, to settle amongst good Women, an association
of Charity, for instructing, comforting, and succouring the poor and sick: But
above all, a company of pious Clergy, who may meet once a month, to confer
about the faithful discharging of their weighty function; upon which depends
the universal good of the people.

Certain Directions for Ladies and Gentlewomen.
THe way of God is to cause grace to superabound, where sin has abounded: The
first woman brought death into the world, and the Virgin Mary has given the
Church occasion to sing, that it was a happy fault, since by it was occasioned,
our alliance with her Son, and his union with the Deity: But this is not all,
for if the first woman brought so much evil into the world, it seems to have
pleased God, to make use of women, for the reparation thereof; having by his
wisdom ordained, that they should have the education of children, and care of
the family; whilst men, being of a stronger constitution, are more employed
abroad; they, more sedentarily disposed, attending within doors, where they
have the knowledge, and oversight, and conduct of all.

From whence it follows, since all orders of Clergy, Nobility, Magistracy, and
people, are raised out of private Families, as their common Nursery; that to
this Sex is deputed by God, a business of the greatest consequence in the
world; viz. The nurturing of souls in the spirit of their Baptism, preserving
them unspotted tables, to receive the impressions of Gods will, and holy
vocation, to what future estate he shall design them, for his glory, and their
own eternal good: Wherefore it highly concerns them to make frequent
reflections upon this, since the greatest good, and most eminent evil of
mankind, in part, depends on them, for which they must render one day a strict
account.

1. Wherefore they ought to take great care of the education of their children
in their tender years, correcting by virtue and a gentle hand, what nature
discovers in them reprehensible: Remembering that for the most part, vice grows
up, through their esteeming it to be little, and out of taking pleasure in
whatever they see children do; by which compliance, their errors grow up with
them, until heat of blood and youth, render them incapable of correction.

2. That they be vigilant in instructing their domestics, shutting the door
against all blasphemy, impurity, all unlawful games and pastimes, and other
vices.

3. To prevent that their Servingmen haunt not Taverns, and oppress not others.

4. The Mistress of the house must provide, that her servants be carefully
treated and tended in their sickness, that she visit them in her own person,
even being as our brethren, and fellow servants of the same God and Father of
us all: And at all other times, make provision for their necessaries, that they
be not tempted to pilfer or murmr.

5. Let her also endeavor, not only in her own house, but also among her
neighbors, to bring in the custom of common prayers at night; and if her
husband be absent, let her supply his place, in calling them together, and
praying with them.

6. Let her and her children be continnally in some employment, that their
lives be not unprofitable, or their family brought up in idleness; remembering
the Apostles rule, that he that will not work, shall not eat; which thing
prudently ordered, will prevent many inconveniences.

7. Let her often visit her poor neighbors, to comfort and encourage them in
virtuous living.

8. Let her take into her ear the repairing of the Ornaments and Linen of the
Church, lest the holy mysteries of our faith be undervalued, where decency is
neglected.

9. Let her show great recverence to the Clergy, not regarding the meanness of
their birth, but the dignity to which Jesus Christ has advanced them: Hereby,
both putting them in mind of their honorable function, and the people, by her
example, of their duty.

10. Let her entertain Visitants, with the spirit of Hospitality, great
Charity, and Christian Civility, taking opportunity thereby to do some good,
not losing precious time in frivolous discourses.

11. Let her keep no obscene or immodest pictures in her house, much less
permit her danghters or herself to appear such, by going naked. Avoiding
likewise all curious and phantasticul fashions, which are evident signs of
impenitent hearts, and breed nothing else, but the nourishing the soul in its
corruption, and the averting it from God.

These are the Directions he left under his own hand, for Ladies and
Gentlewomen. Moreover, he studied for a long time, how to reform Trades, and
free them from those abuses and corruptions, which in process of time they had
contracted, and so to sanctify them, that some at least in each profession,
might live like the Primitive Christians, in such sort, as to make all their
gain common, deducting only sufficient for their own necessary maintenance,
and bestowing the rest upon the poor.

And at length God so blessed his endeavors, that he found some Tradesmen of
the same mind and spirit; so that at this present, there be two companies in
Paris, one of Tailors, the other of Shoo-makers: and of these in two several
quarters of the City (and the like at Tolose) who live and do all in Community:
They rise, they go to bed, they eat and work together; morning and evening they
say their prayers together, and at the beginning of every hour in the day,
exercise some act of Devotion; as, singing a Psalm, reciting their Chaplet,
reading in some book of Devotion, discoursing of some head of the Catechism:
They call Brothers, and live accordingly in very great unity and concord.

Monsieur Renty was the chief Agent in establishing this business, and with the
help and assistance of some Religious persons, drew up Rules, for the ordering
of their Spiritual Exercises. They chose him their first Superior, in which
Office he had a very particular care of them, visiting them frequently; and
when he found them upon their knees at any of their Spiritual Exercises, joined
with them, not permitting them to rise to salute him, or interrupt so good a
work, making himself, as it were, one of the Brotherhood.

Moreover, besides these Tradesmen, living in Community, there were a great
number of others, of all Professions, that came to him for advice, instruction,
and assistance: Whom he treated with wonderful respect and Charity, most
affectionately discoursing with them, answering their quaeries, resolving their
doubts, and instructing them what they should pursue, and what avoid, in their
Vocations, for the saying of their souls.

SECT. 6. The Continuation of the same subject.
HIs zeal carried him on to endeavor the good of all sorts of persons. He had
a particular inclination to prevent the danger that threatened young Maids, who
wanted subsistence, and to reclaim such as were fallen. And indeed it would be
too great a task to recount all his actions of this nature, and the number of
those Maids, whom he placed forth, and contributed toward their maintenance;
some in houses erected for such purpose, others in the Monastry of St. Mary
Magdalen, and others with devout Ladies, who addicted themselves to this kind
of Charity: Which is so highly commendable, as that which does not only save
such women as are in peril of shipwreck of their honor and virtue; and retrive
such as have already lost both: But likewise does prevent the destruction of
many men, and the committing of many enormous sins and disorders.

We mentioned before, what is recorded of his Charity in instructing the poor,
at the great Hospital in Paris. And now I shall relate how he behaved himself
in that of St. Gervaise; where passing by, one day, in the year, 1641. he
enquired to what Charities that place was devoted. To which answer was made,
that they lodged poor Travelers: He was much pleased with this Institution;
and perceiving withal, that so great a number of poot that lodged there every
night, wanted instruction, he found himself moved from God, to perform that
Office: And shortly after, came to beg of the Superior, with great humility
and submission, leave to Catechize them in the evening, when they were
assembled together. To which the Superior willingly assented, without any
knowledge of him, who would not tell his name, but concealed himself for the
space of six-Moneths.

He undertook the employment, and performed it with great content, because
every night he found there new comers, whom he duly Catechized and instructed;
coming thither commonly alone, and on foot, both Summer and Winter, in ^ain and
snow, without light, in the dark. After Chatechism ended, he caused them to
kneel down with him, to examine their Conscience, and sa^ their Prayers, then
sung the Commandments with them, and distributed some Alms. This (...) he
continued for many years, till some Eccle(...) persons, moved by his example,
undertook (...), and continued it to this day with great (...).

(...) and renderness of heart was exceeding (...) poor people, whom he had
never seen (...) also with such humility, as cannot not easily be expressed.
When he met any one at the Hospital, he saluted them with great respect, and
put them before him, talked with them bareheaded, and very reverently. If at
any time they kneeled to him, he did the like to them; and continued on his
knees, till they rose first. One of them observing him diligently, and knowing
him to be Lord of the place where himself lived, was deeply affected, to see
these things; and came and fell down at his feet. Monsieur Renty did the like
to him, continuing in that posture for a long time, resolving not to rise,
before the poor man. He used to receive them in his arms, and embrace them with
tender affection.

These actions proceeding from a person of his birth and quality, and produced
by the holy Spirit of God, wrought wonderful effects:

And that first, in these poor Passengers, who astonished at such ardent
Charity, joined with suth profound humility, were exceedlingy moved thereby,
insomuch, that tears of Devotion were seen flowing from their eyes, and
themselves falling down at his feet, with signs of repentance for their sins,
and a design of a better life; begging his counsel and assistance therein, and
beginning it, with going to Confession and the Sacrament the next day.

Secondly, in those Religious women that belonged to this Hospital; who taking
fire at his example, resolved to do the like, in daily serving the poor,
teaching them their Prayers and Catechism, with the ten Commandments, which
offices they had never done before. Together with many other good things,
conducing to their own attaining to perfection, and the better governing of
their Hospital: which he infused into them, and they do still continue with
great Devotion; he having several times told them, that he hoped in time, to
see God greatly glorified and served among them; as we see it is come to pass
at this day, and may truly affirm, that this gallant man has contributed not a
little to so much good done there, both within doors and without, and doubt
not, but he has already received the reward thereof in Heaven.

But let us further consider some other effects of his zeal: Going one day with
a friend to visit the holy place of Mont-Matre, to which he had great Devotion;
after his prayers said in the Church, he retired into a desolate place of the
Mountain, near a little spring, which (as it is said) St. Denis made use of,
where he kneeled down to his prayers; which ended, made his dinner of a piece
of bread, and draught of water: Grace being said, he took out the New
Testament, which he always carried in his pocket, and read a Chapter upon his
knees, bareheaded, with extraordinary reverence.

In this juncture of time, came thither a poor man, saying his Chaplet.
Monsieur Renty rose up to salute him, and fell into a discourse with him
concerning God, and that so powerfully, that the good man striking his breast,
fell down upon the ground, to adore that great God, making such evident
appearances of the great impressions that were wrought upon his Spirit, that
struck Monsieur Rexty and his friend with much astonishment.

Immediately after this, came a poor Maid to draw water at the well: Whom he
asked what she was? She answered, a Servant: But do you know, says he, that
you are a Christian, and to what end you were created? Whereupon he took
occasion to instruct her, in what he conceived necessary for her to know; and
so to the purpose, that she confessing her former ignorance, told him
ingenuously, that before that hour, she had never thought of her salvation; but
promised from thence forward, to take it into serious consideration, and go to
Confession.

Let us still proceed a little higher, on the same subject: In his return from
Dijon, after his first journey thither, accompanied with two noble pious
persons, about some four leagues: He stopped three or four times by the way, to
Catechize poor Passengers, and one time went far out of his way, to do the same
to some laborers in the field, instructing them how to sanctify their work
they were about.

A young Maid in Paris, having been very cruelly used by her Uncle, fell into
so great disorder and desperation, that all in a fury, she accused our blessed
Savior to be the cause of her misery, in abondoning her to the barbarous usage
of such a man, without releiving her. In this horrid plight of conscience, she
went to receive the Sacrament, several times in a day, at several Churches,
that she might not be discovered: And this upon design, to do despite to our
Savior, to provoke him to finish her destruction, as it was begun, letting her
to fall into the abyss of misery and hell for ever.

Monsieur Renty advertised of this sad accident, and considering the great
offense against God, and mischief of this poor creature, was transported with
zeal speedily to find her out: Which after eight days pursuit from several
Churches, at length he did, meeting with her in the very act of Communicating:
Taking witnesses, he conveyed her to an Hospital for Madfolks; where he took so
great care both of her soul and body, that she returned to herself, and gave
ample testimonies of her conversion and repentance for those horrid enormities.

Neither did his zeal reach only to those that were near him, but such also as
were absent, and far remote; to whom he had no other relation, but what was
contracted by his alliance to our blessed Savior, and his own Charity.
Understanding the news that was current some years since, of a War the Turk
designed against the Knights of Malta, and to besiege the Island; he so far
interested himself in their danger, that he recommended it twice, by Letter, to
the prayers of Sister Margaret, Carmelite, of the B: Sacrament at Beaulne, whom
he deemed to have great power with God. His first Letter runs thus:

I commend to your prayers, and of the holy Family, the Order of the Knights of
St. John of Jerusalem, which is at this present in great danger, and with them
the whole Christian World, What that common Potent enemy of our faith will do,
I know not one. Our little Jesus, who is all love and power, knows how to
vindicate his own glory, please you therefore to commend it to him.

In the second Letter thus:

I beseech the Omnipotency of the holy Babe Jesus, to preserve his children
under the Cross, and to purify them for his own work. This is it, which I
request for our Brethren of the Order of St. John Baptist of Jerusalem.

SECT. 7. Certain other qualities of his zeal.
THe design of advancing the Salvation of men's souls is attended in this world
with much doing, and much suffering. It is necessary therefore for him that
undertakes the task, to fortify himself with courage and patience: And both
these, were most eminently in Monsieur Renty; being in the first place, full of
courage, resolute and laborious, employing his body, as if he had two more in
reserve, when that was spent, dispatching more business in one half hour, than
others would have done in many days: Very stout he was to undergo any
difficulties, and withal, very quick and decisive.

A certain Lady of note, made him her executor, having disposed in her will
very much to pious uses: He was informed that her friends, being persons of
eminent power, were displeased therewith. To which he replied with a truly
Christian courage and magnanimity, I never moved the Lady to bestow any of her
estate this way; but since her Piety has prompted her thereunto, I shall spare
no pains therein, nor be dismayed with any power that shall oppose it: My care
shall be to perform her will, and for other things I take no thought; for if it
come to a matter of Law, I shall be ready to plead it, both in behalf of the
poor, whose Solicitor I am; and for her sake also, in her state of sufferance,
if she be yet therein.

His zeal was ever still backed with courage, without the least haesitancy,
where the honor of God, and good of his neighbor were concerned. Entering one
day, some Gentlemen engaged in a quarrel, with their swords drawn, and in
fight, and to kill one another; he resolutely threw himself in the midst of
them, laying hold on those who seemed most outrageous. They begun to quarrel
with him; but finding him resolutely bent to part the fray, and to hazard his
own life, for the saving of theirs, were suddenly pacified, and listened to his
sober counsel, who took up the quarrel upon the place.

Meeting with a man whom some Huguenots had perverted, and taken along with
them to Charenton; who was resolved likewise to force his wife to the same
place and opinions: He fell into discourse with him, endeavoring, at least, to
prevent any such violent course with his wife. The man entertained him very
rudely, both with neglect of his advice, and obloquy. But this holy man
suffering his cholar and fury to spend themselves, brought him at length, by
his wonted sweet behavior, to a calmer temper convinced him of his blindness
and erours into which he had thrown himself headlong, and after several visits,
confirmed him in the Catholic verity. Finally, meeting with the principal
party that perverted him, threatened him with the Law, in case he persisted in
his course; having respect to others also, whom he had dealt withal in the like
kind; Thus his zeal frustrated the others designs, and established this Family
in their former Religion.

Secondly, his zeal was accompanied with unparalled patience, a virtue very
requisite for him, that would render himself capable to do good to others,
seeing he must endeavor to win their hearts, at which he is to make his first
entrance, applying himself to their inclinations and humors, which in very
many prove difficult and untoward; and not following his own, but subduing his
passions, and renouncing his own will, insinuating himself after a sort into
their dispositions, and being, as it were, changed and metamorphosed into them;
as St. Paul says of himself, waiting long and patiently for their conversion;
and attending (without being tired or discouraged, notwithstanding that he
finds by all his travels, he wins but little ground) the times and the moments
wherein they may profit, and yield to his motives; all which qualities are not
acquirable, without great violence offered to ones self, without much
suffering, and great mortification. To whom therefore may well be applied these
words of our Savior, That grain which thou sowest, if it dye not, remains
fruitless; but if it dye, it sprouteth, and brings forth much fruit. To the
end therefore that we may bring forth fruit amongst men, we must dye to our
selves, and with this holy man, be endued with zeal and patience, to bear with
meakness, and great pains of body and mind, in those charitable employments;
undergoing the importunities, complaints, passions, the repulses, the contempts
and in juries which often are met with in the business.

One day he visited a person, who out of jealousy and a groundless suspicion,
had cruelly used his wife, and given her a wound with a knife; who
understanding his business, entertained him very coursly, lifting up his hand
to strike him, belching out uncivil language, and offering to thrust him out of
doors. Monsieur Renty took all this patiently, not replying one word: But after
some time, he drew near again, and embraced him, and accosted him with such
soft language, that he was persuaded by him at length to go to confession,
which he had not done in twelve years before; and in sine, reconciled him fully
to his wife, and so lived and dyed a good Christian.

Another time he went to see a poor old man that lay sick, whom he boarded with
his ordinary discourse of things concerning his salvation: But the old man,
whom age, sickness, and want, had rendered very crabbed, instead of listening to
him, fell into passion, telling him that he understood those things better than
he; and if he would hearken, he would instruct him himself. Monsieur Renty
answered, with all his heart; and after a great deal of patience and attention,
prudently taking advantage from some things in that impertinent and weak
discourse, to convince and inform him better, proceeded so happily, that he
brought him to go to Confession, and the rest of his days to take great care of
his souls health:

We may add hereunto, his wonderful discretion concerning the faults of
others, wherein he exercised great parience and courage: Patience, I say, in
bearing with them, and courage in admonishing and correcting them.

A certain zealous Ecclesiastical person, did by Letter request his advice and
assistance, in redressing some scandalous faults that were committed near him,
and remained unpunished. To whom he answered, he must have recourse to God by
his prayers, to procure of his goodness, illumination for those sinners, and
grace to mend their lives; adding withal, how hard a thing it was, to redress
such evils; for our Savior himself, whilst he was upon earth, did not take
away all sins, and so must we be constrained to leave many behind us, which
God permits sometime to be, as well for the exercising and purging of the
good, as for the punishment of the bad.

The same party advertising him of two other things; the one, of some
considerable faults he had noted in a Priest, that took upon him the charge of
souls: The other, how a Canon had struck one of the Fathers of the mission, who
had reproved him deservedly for a fault. To him he wrote back thus:

I humbly thank you for your pains in informing me of what passed concerning
the Missianers. Ye are all fellowservants of one God, and know how to reverence
those graces of God ye see in one another; neither are ignorant, how that St.
Peter, though an Apostle, and full of graces, was found culpable, as St. Paul
tells us: We must therefore excuse the faults of our neighbor, and lay them
under our feet. The work of God that acts in the heart, receives its
testimony from a self-annihilation, manifested by the Patience and Charity of
the Saints in Exterior actions: Beg ye the increase of these graces for those
that want them. It was very scandalous for one Priest to strike another; but we
know, that Priests put our Savior to death, and we have too many in these days
of that Function, who hold more of the old Law than the new, which consists
in the alliance and union of Charity with Jesus Christ.

His patience likewise in bearing with the faults and imperfections of others,
was very exemplary, still extennating them with some word of mitigation, and
excusing and covering them with Charity, if it were possible. Being told of one
that had put a cheat upon him in a business of small concernment, belonging to
his Lawsuit at Dijon, he straightway covered the fault, and by an act of
humility said, it is I that continually cheat my God; then changed the
discourse to another business: In this he looked upon the example of God, and
his Son our Savior, who infinitely hating of sin, and shedding his blood for
the destruction of it; notwithstanding, daily do suffer such an innumerable
multitude of most enormous sinners, with so great patience and forbearance:
Neither was this his patience and connivance at faults, without the design to
correct them, as much as he could, which he managed with great prudence and
courage.

When ever he intended to reprove another, he commonly in the first place
accused himself, the better to dispose their spirit, by the example of his own
humility, and the setting forth of his weakness, to receive his sayings; and
afterward requested the same Christian office from them back again: All which
he performed in such a graceful way, that there be many who received good, and
retain the memory of it to this day.

Having one day a design to admonish one, he began a discourse of that unity of
spirits and freedom of hearts, that ought to be amongst Christians, in telling
one another the very truths. For want of which, we are ignorant of them, and so
grow gray in our vices, and carry them along with us to our graves. And
therefore, that he should hold himself extremely obliged, if any one would
perform toward him this charity. The other finding his heart exceedingly
softened with this discourse, besought him to deal freely and plainly with him,
in telling him, whatsoever in him he saw amiss, which thing then he did.

When he had to deal with stubborn sinners, his language was sharp and severe;
knowing when it was fir to yield, and when to reprove sharply. And his counsel
to a friend concerning a third party, was this:

Take heed of humbling your self before that man, such abasing of your self in
this case, will both prejudice him, and the cause of God. Reprove him severely
and roundly.

He put a great difference betwixt Christian patience in our own concernments,
and fortitude, requisite in the things of God, and the good of our Neighbor,
and for the worthy preserving of our just Authority.

SECT. 8. Two other qualities of his zeal.
THese two qualities likewise accompanied his zeal, Freedom and prudence: For
although his great Humility, of which we have formerly spoken, has robbed us
of the knowledge of many, and most profitable things he did, and caused him to
conceal many of his inward graces, and outward actions, yet did his zeal bring
many of them to light, and compel him to manifest them in a sincere,
charitable, and holy simplicity; where he saw it necessary for the glory of
God, and good of his neighbor; as we may gather from some Memorials we have
from him. According to which necessity, and that spirit of Charity, sometime he
spoke directly of himself, and sometime in a third person (as S. Paul of his
own Revelations:) To which purpose, see how well and fitly he wrote, in the
year 1649. to a virtuous Lady:

Give me leave, Madam, to declare unto you my thoughts, concerning that liberty
we ought to use, in communicating freely the gifts of God bestowed on us, to
such persons as may reap fruit from them; not stifling within our selves what
we receive from above, whereby we obstruct a second fruit which God expects
from his graces: Which is, after our receiving good from them, to communicate
them to others, with charity and discretion: Improving them, like good seed
sown in good ground bringing forth abundance of fruit. I wish that we would
consider our selves, set in this world, as a Crystal, which placed in the
middle of the Universe. would give free passage to all that light it receives
from above: And that by good example, by a high estimate set of virtue, by
discountenancing of vice, by comforting others, by pious convease, we would
impart those talents we have received from heaven, to all creatures; and this
without disguisement, or the least claim of propriety. Giving obedience and
passage to them, as the Crystal to light.

Furthermore, that all those honors and commendations which we receive from
below, should freely pass through us again up to God, without making any stay
with us. No otherwise than the Crystal transmits the beams of several torches
set under it, purifying, and darting them, more sparkling toward heaven: for
this indeed is our bounden duty, to render unto God, all that honor and praise,
we receive from men, who alone is worthy of all honor and glory. And who has
therefore bestowed upon us such things as are praiseworthy; not that the
praise thereof should rest upon us, but pass through us toward him, that he may
be blessed and praised in all things.

Moreover it is observable, if nothing be opposed to the Crystal, to receive
that light which passes through it, it appears not at all: And though the Sun
bestows his beams from above, and the torches their flames from below, yet
these, for want of a reflection, remain only imperceptible in the Crystal. In
like manner, though we receive the heavenly light, and abundance of graces, if
we make no approaches to God and our neighbor, by rendering to the one what is
his due, and to the other what is Charitable; it may be we have a light, but
that is only in our selves, and hidden under a bushel: Which being so straightly
confined, cannot produce its effect of communication, and is in danger in a
short time to be choked and extinct.

Consider also, that when the Sun shines upon a clear Crystal, there is not
any corporeal thing more capable of that luster, or that receives its beams,
with so great splendor. Moreover, betwixt it and the Sun no light is seen, but
after it has past through the Crystal, it becomes bright and glorious, and
also burns according to the figure to which it is disposed: To show us, that
what passes betwixt God and us, is a work only of the Closet, which ought not
to appear abroad until it has passed through us to others.

Let us then suffer our selves to be penetrated by the graces of God, that
after their beams have lightened and warmed us, they may afford the like to all
about us: Let us imitate that clear Crystal which composed of solid matter,
yet gives free passageonely to the light; let us, like it, be impenetrable to
all, but what proceeds from God, and returns to him. Let us not, as we commonly
do, descend to the appetites of sense, and lust inordinately after earthly
things, which is to cast dirt upon the Crystal; whereby that which is clear in
it self, by reason of that filth that invirons it, is no more capable of light,
than is the dirt upon it: And if we will restore it to its former transparency
and penetrability, we must wash it well: I mean, our polluted souls, in the
clear waters of repentance.

Let as finally, ^ffer up our selves to our blessed Savior, that we be not
defective in the right use of his graces which he bestows upon us, neither for
our selves, nor for others, that we bury not his talents: Imitating likewise
herein the Crystal, which is first penetrated by light only, and then
seattereth it abroad: Let us appear without a Mask before the face of all the
world, speaking aloud, both by the mouth of our actions, with the Spouse in the
Canticles, My Beloved is mine, and I am my Beloveds; and by our example and
diligence, increase the number of those souls that thus love, opening and
making plain the way of love: For ever blessed be the God of love, in whom I
am, etc.

By this Letter we may perceive, that notwithstanding the design of his
Humility to hide those gifts and graces he had received: yet his zeal often
caused him to bring them to light, when the glory of God, and good of his
neighbor might be promoted thereby. And yet this he managed with admirable
prudence, that though his zeal was free, yet not so indiscreet, as to be its
own Herald upon every appearance of doing good; but was very circumspect,
weighing all circumstances of time, place, persons, and necessity. Wherefore in
the same Letter, he gave this sage advice to that Lady, touching the order and
measure which are necessary to be observed in this communication:

To some we must lay open our hearts more freely and exactly, to others more
reservedly, keeping aloof off, and beating about the bush; to others altogether
locked up, concealing those secrets from them, in whom we see no disposition at
all to make good use of them.

One of the most necessary qualities of this zeal, whereby to render it
profitable, and prevent many miscarriages, is, that it be well seasoned with
discretion and prudence, to consider things well, and execute them in the best
manner: To foresee, and prevent mischiefs, and redress them in time, when they
have happened, applying such efficacious remedies, as may have as much of
sweetness, and as little of acrimony as may be. And in desperate cases, or
where the cure would prove worse than the disease, to suffer, and dissemble
them; as we do in those of the body; viz. blindeness, lameness, and
crookedness; souls having sometimes some certain defects, which are, as it
were, incorrigible; which God suffers often, thereby to save and perfect
through humility, those that are infected therewith; and others likewise who
deal with them, by their patience and charity.

Thus was Monsieur Renty both by grace and nature very prudent and advised: His
zeal made up with all these perfections, and guided its self every where with
these illuminations. One writing to him to procure a pardon for a young
Gentleman who had committed murder, his mother promising in lieu of that favor
eight hundred pound Sterling, to be employed in works of Piety and Alms. In his
first answer, he desired to be informed, whether the party was truly penitent
for his fault. In the second he writ thus:

I cannot persuade my self to stir in this business, because it would seem,
that under the pretense of Alms, impunity is aimed at: I am not willing to foul
my hands with the price of blood. In a word, although others undertake the
business without scuuple, and I see very considerable Alms that would come of
it; yet for all that, I cannot afford my assistance. The Divine Providence will
never forget his holy poor ones.

One great point of prudence requisite in a zealous man, is not to overthrow
his body with excessive travel, nor overcharge his mind with too much
business, which by their number and weight may choke his devotions: but so to
have a care of the salvation of others, as not thereby to neglect his own: but
according to his strength to proportion, what ought to be, both to the one and
other. Concerning the first of these, he expressed himself thus to a Clergy man,
upon occasion of some distemper he had contracted with extraordinary pains in
his Mission:

Give me leave, Sir, to deal plainly with you, in telling you, that amongst
those many cares I have for you; this is not the least, that I would not have
you impose too much upon your self; and for want of moderation, to render your
self altogether unserviceable. The enemy usually takes no small advantage of
such free and well disposed natures. You are not herein your own, but a man for
the whole world; and, with St. Paul, a debtor to all men; preserve yoer self
therefore, not so much, I mean, by making much of, but by forbearing to destroy
your self by labors and travel: I am told how greatly your endeavors are
blessed; give me leave from that interest my self challenges therein, with all
humility and respect, to admonish you thus much.

Concerning the second, touching our own salvation, he had a special regard
hereto, managing those affairs which belonged to the good of his neighbor, by
the rules of a well ordered Charity, which in this case begins at home;
indispensably performing all his Exercises of Devotion, and reserving a
considerable part both of the day and night for his conversing with God, and
prayer; yea, as he passed to and fro in the day time in the streets, he often
went into the Churches remaining there whole hours together, before the B.
Sacrament, when his occasions would any way permit; and especially toward his
latter end, as his employments increased, so was he in continual recollection;
from which neither his business, nor any exterior objects did distract him:
Whereupon a most familiar friend asking him, whether in that great throng of
business, he observed his usual two hours of prayer. He answered, when I can, I
keep three hours, sometimes four or five; but when occasion is offered to serve
my neighbor, I easily quit them, for God of his mercy has given me the grace,
to be inseparably with him, even in the crowd of business.

SECT. 9. The success which God gave to his zeal.
GOd endued this his servant, with such a powerful virtue for the good of his
neighbor, that not only his words and actions, but even his very presence,
made impression upon others for their eternal good. So that one familiarly
acquainted with him, said, that he believed him to be endued with an Apostolic
spirit; for as the Apostles received the grace, to inkindle the life of Faith,
and fire of Charity, and set up the Kingdom of God in all Countries and places
where the Divine Majesty sent them; in like manner was Monsieur Renty, even
far beyond the bounds of his condition, filled with grace, and assisted by
Divine Power, in all the Cities, Villages, Private houses, as well Religious as
Secular, whither the Divine Providence conducted him, to enlighten men with the
knowledge of God, and his Son Christ Jesus. To inkindle in their hearts perfect
Charity, and bring them to a good life. In all which he was exceedingly blessed
with happy success, as shall be showed hereafter.

Being one day at Paris, in the time of Lent, going to a poor man's house, to
exercise some of his ordinary acts of Charity; and hearing a great noise of
people, singing and dancing in the next house, he left his poor man, and went
in thither, and looked upon them; who were so surprised and astonished at his
presence, that they presently quitted their dancing and singing: And he fell
into a discourse against those disorders and dissoluteness in that holy time of
Lent, with such fervor, as drew tears from their eyes, and wrought so
effectually upon some of them, that the next day they went to Confession.

Another time, he visited a poor maid, who being abused by a young man, and
gotten with child, was lest in great necessity; whom he found plunged in so
deep a melancholy, that she had resolved to make away herself; yet by the
grace and power, which God gave to his good counsel, he comforted her dejected
spirits, and brought her into such a condition, that she went to Confession.
After this, he went to seek out the young man, who at the first onset, behaved
himself very ill, contemning his wholesome advice: But after several arguments,
enforced from the danger of his soul, and other threatenings of Gods Judgments
hanging over his head, he melted into tears, promising to do whatever he
pleased to command him; insomuch, that by his advice, he was reconciled to God
by true repentance, and to the maid by wedlock, and since that time have led a
good life together.

During his abode at Amiens, a poor woman had undone herself by selling salt (a
thing forbidden in France, under heavy penalties) and being taken in it: Who
thereupon fell into an excessive sadness and grief, retaining also such an
hatred against them that had reduced her to this misery, that she could not be
persuaded upon any terms to forgive them; whereby she became incapable of the
Sacraments, in the extremity of her sickness. Monsieur Renty was brought to
her, in the company of two or three other persons, who talked with her a long
time without any success. Insomuch, that seeing whatever he said prevailed
nothing, fell upon his knees in the middle of the room, inviting the company to
do the like; and after some few prayers, bespake the sick party, saying, and
will not you join with us, to beg mercy of God? To which she yielding, he
caused her to repeat after him word by word, certain acts of repentance and
charity; by which she found her mind so strangely altered, that she appeared
quite another woman; and openly professed, that she did forgive them from her
heart: And receiving with much meekness all his instructions, prepared herself
to the worthy receiving of the Sacraments.

Being one day at the great Hospital in Paris, instructing the sick how to
dispose themselves for a general Confession; one of the Religious women
entreated him to speak with a person that was newly brought in thither; who had
been without any cause at all, run through the body with a sword, and was so
incensed against the party, that he could not endure with patience, any should
speak of forgiving him. But no sooner did Monsieur Renty urge to him, the duty
of a good Christian in such a case, with other speeches to pacify and sweeten
his spirit, but he was appeased, and said, he forgave him with all his heart;
adding, that he was ready both to see and embrace him, expressing moreover,
very much sense of Piety.

Certain Abbots, and other Ecclesiastics of quality and virtue met at Pontoise
to settle a Mission: Monsieur Renty, who was very intimately acquainted with
the most part of them, came to visit them; where, according to his usual
custom, without speaking thereof to any one, he went to the prison, and meeting
there with a most obstinate sinner, who had continued so along time, and
neither by entreaty nor threatening, by fair means nor foul, nor by any other
means which the Mission could use, be brought to Confession.

The Mission sending for Monsieur Renty to dine with them, word was brought,
after much search for him, that they might happily meet with him at the Prison;
where he was found sitting at the table with the Prisoners, for whom he had
provided a dinner, discoursing lovingly with them, comforting and stirring them
up to a good life. Amongst the rest, the foresaid party in particular, upon
whom he had the greatest design; to whom he spoke with so much power, dealing
with him so discreetly, or divinely rather, that he brought him to his bent,
working in him a resolution effectually to change his life, and make a good
confession of all his sins: which gave a just occasion to one of the Mission to
say, That Monsieur Renty had accomplished that in three days, which others would
have had much ado to have brought about in three years.

I omit many others of the like kind, concluding with this one, which seems
very remarkable. He was requested to visit a devout woman, who was tormented
with excessive pains both inward and outward, and had great need of comfort and
direction; who received so great relief from his instructions, that within some
few days she writ as follows, The effect which I found by the conference I
had with this worthy servant of God, was such, that as soon as I had gotten
victory over my self to speak, and lay open my heart unto him, straightway my
blessed Savior communicated his goodness so powerfully to me, that I was even
peirced by the effects of his presence: I found also a very particular
assistance from the blessed Virgin, whom this holy man did invoke at the
beginning of our discourse. And I can assure you of a truth, that I was
sensible of much comfort and ease of my affliction; insomuch, that his speeches
had so great an influence upon my soul, and wrought so effectually that I have
continued ever since in a good condition. And though my pains are not abated,
yet I find such an alteration in my self, that I seem to be no more my own,
but all that is within me, breaths after nothing but the Execution of the
will of God, and the accomplishment of his good pleasure at any rate. And
though nature suffers some difficulty in it, yet she must now learn to yield to
grace, and make resistance no longer. My torments are not changed, and yet I
profess to suffer nothing, because I am very well content to suffer: And
although my inferior sensitive part is much pained, yet my superior part
cannot; nor indeed is it capable of suffering, by reason of its conformity to
the will of God. All my care, during this time of resignation of my self to
sufferings, is to make good use of my affliction, and endeavor after solid
virtue, with a perfect abandoning of my self to the will of God.

Behold here the blessings of God upon his endeavors, for the good of his
neighbors; which working such strong impressions upon their hearts, to bring
them to God, almost always accompanied his labors: At which indeed we ought
not much to wonder, if we consider him as a happy instrument, fastened and
united to the Lord of hearts, and Savior of souls; singly aiming at the glory
of God, and good of others, and sparing nothing he conceived necessary
thereunto. To which purpose his custom was, before he undertook any such
business, to give himself up to our Lord (they are his own words) to speak by
his Spirit, and in his Power.

And this Lord (who desires infinitely the salvation of man) finding him so
well disposed, and fitted to his hand, used him for noble employments, and
furnished him with suitable graces and favors, even to work wonders. Which may
serve both for the instruction and shame of such, who by their calling are
designed for the procuring of the salvation of men, and yet through their own
fault, do it with so little profit.

I find moreover, that God gave him sometimes beforehand knowledge and
foresight into the affairs which he would have him do, thereby to prepare him
to undertake them without fear, and to acquit himself well therein. Being at
his house in Citry, at the latter end of the year, 1642. he had a secret
intimation from God, that at his return to Paris, he should find a new
employment about the poor, and should be much taken up therein: Which fell out
accordingly; two days after his arrival there, certain persons coming to advice
with him, about a course to relieve such poor as were ashamed to beg,
throughout that City, entreating him to take it into his care; which he did
accordingly, undertaking for his share, to visit the fourth part, and
distribute there alms according to their necessities, which was a sufficient
employment for one man, to take up his whole time, though he had no other
business; which yet he performed, notwithstanding the multitude of his other
occupations; so that we may say, that according to humane reason, and without a
special assistance from God, he could never have been able to have done and
suffered such great matters: But God, who has given us a limited strength of
body and mind, can as easily heighten them, when, and how he pleases.

One day he said to one of his great Confidents with much humility and devotion:

I have been this night bathed all over in tears, by a view which our Lord has
given me. At which words making a stand, remaining sometime recollected in
silence, and transported with that grace he had received; afterward he went on,
saying, that whilst he was at prayer, he understood that there was a great
employment assigned him for new France in the Indies.

Which afterward fell out, and chiefly in the building of a Church in the
Island of Mont-real: In which noble design, other pious persons, whom God had
chosen thereunto, joining with him; He by his cares; counsels, credit, and
liberality both of his own, and what he begged from others, was highly
serviceable.

Sometime he received beforehand, not so great light of his business, but only
a bare knowledge, and present impulse of doing something, without any further
discovery: As, when he was much pressed in Spirit to go to Pontois, without
understanding any reason for it, having at the same time much employment at
Paris; yet with obedience to the inspiration, without debating he undertaketh
the journey; where unexpectedly he met with a Nobleman of great quality, from a
Province far distant; who came thither, conducted by God, to ask of Monsieur
Renty, and receive from his mouth instructions for his souls health, and how to
serve God perfectly, which he had little known, and less practiced: Which thing
Monsieur Renty then taught him; professing at his return from thence, that he
could give no account, what afterward became of the party, or how he lost him

SECT. 10. His grace in assisting particularly some choice souls.
THough this great servant of God, had an excellent faculty in assisting all
men for the good of their souls; yet was he more eminently happy, in some
particular choice persons, to whom our Savior had assigned him, for the curing
of their imperfections, to make them march on apace, and that through the narrow
way of virtue and perfection. But because the greatest number of these are yet
living, whose modesty I dare not offend, I shall speak something only of some
who are dead; and chiefly of one person, which may serve as a taste of all the
rest.

This was the Countess of Chastres; who being deeply in the affections of this
world, according to the custom of most young Ladies of her quality; it pleased
God, out of his infinite love to her, to bring her before her death, from those
vanities, and conduct her by the thorny strait-way, to the paths of virtue and
high perfection; for which great work Monsieur Renty was assigned from God: He
inspiring the one, to request assistance and counsel, and the other to afford
it; and this with so happy success, that within less than a years space, her
advancement herein was so notable, that he himself was astonished at it: For in
that short time, she became so perfectly disingaged from all those petty
conveniences and accomodations, which our Ladies (flattering themselves)
pretend still to have need of; that one presenting her with something of that
nature, wherein she had formetly taken delight, she returned this answer, which
may serve for a good lesson to us all (especially if we consider, that she was
well known, to be of a very delicate, tender complexion, and very sickly) how
apt we are to multiply necessities, I thank God, I have quitted this, and far
more other things. for the love of God, and yet find no want at all, It is
true, that nature of her self is dainty, and prone to flatter her self, upon
the pretense of necessities, which she is willing to apprehend much greater
than truly they are; and often makes them such, by her imagination.

God endued him with great grace and light, to discern her proper way, and to
persuade her to follow it; to advance her in the paths of solid virtue, and to
teach her by degrees to dye to herfelf; to support her in great interior
afflictions, and to instruct her very effectually, in what was most proper for
her present condition; he being accomplished with all the qualities of a fit
Director, and she on her part, perfectly resigning up herself, to believe what
he said, and force her self to put it in execution: A thing very requisite in
those, that resolve to make use of the conduct of others to good purpose. She
received his counsel, with all the resignation she could, imagining our Savior
to speak to her by his mouth; which really was not without cause, if we duly
consider the passage I shall now relate.

The Lady speaking to him one day, about procuring some relief of a most
pressing excessive pain, with which her spirit was afflicted; and not finding
any comfort from whatsoever he said, she was moved to cast herself down upon
her knees, to deliver up her own will to our Savior, and by a perfect
resignation, to enter into what designs his good pleasure had decreed
concerning her; which she did accordingly: And after rising from her knees, she
no more beheld Monsieur Renty, but in him our B. Savior, shining with a very
great splendour, and saying to her, do what my servant directs thee: Which
words, at that very instant, wrought such a wholesome and divine effect upon
her, that her pain vanished, she remaning filled with God, in joining a perfect
tranquillity of spirit, accompanied with a lively repentance for her sins, and
an absolute contempt of the world, and of herself.

Though this happy intercourse betwixt him and this Lady, accompanied with such
signal blessings from God, had contracted a strict and perfect amity betwixt
them, yet he was very wary, wise, and reserved in his addresses, visiting her
only when the work of God did require, and making no longer stay nor discourse
with her, than what was precisely necessary: Which the Lady thinking to be a
little harsh, bemoaned to a friend, whom she knew to have some power with this
holy man, in these words, Monsieur Renty does extremely mortify me with his
civilities and reservedness. I have great need to see him often, and yet cannot
obtain it: yea, when we are together, he will not sit down, except it be when I
am sick, or that I am not able to stand any longer; and always with his hat in
his hand. I beseech you tell him, what out of that great respect I owe him, I
dare not my self, what pain and inquietude I suffer, to see such his carriage
toward me, who ought be continually under his feet.

The party acquainted him with thus much, and received this answer:

I proceed in this manner, because my duty to God, and to the Countess of
Chastres require it; and moreover, since my Savior does oblige me to treat
with her, I must do no more than what is necessary, and so retire, to which
this posture is most convenient. If we sit down, we should forget our selves,
and talk more than is needful, and perhaps pass on to things unprofitable:
Wherefore we both ought to stand upon our guard. I being a lay man and a
sinner, do not speak to her but with great confusion, though I know it to be
the will of God, and am certified by several pious and judicious men, that it
is my duty.

Those that undertake the conduct of souls, ought seriously to ponder this
prudent answer, and persuade themselves, that the business consists not in
speaking much to them, but in disposing them to speak to God, and in making
them fit for God to speak to them; to beget in their souls the substantial
Word, his Son: And after wholesome counsel given, consonant to their state and
disposition, in putting them upon its execution with good courage; virtue
consisting not in words, but deeds.

Thus you have the course he took in directing this Lady; who thereby arrived
to great perfection, making most excellent use of all her great sufferings of
body and mind; attaining to so great contempt of the world, that she dyed with
a design (notwithstanding her great infirmities and sickness) to become a
Carmeline, in the Monastery of Beaulne.

And that we may have a taste of his skill in conducting several other persons
of great virtue, let us consider these following Rules of great Perfection,
which he gave to them; and which, without doubt, were drawn from his own
private observation.

I have protested in the presence of the blessed Sacrament, that I will live
according to the Maxims and Counsels of Jesus Christ; and to that end:

1. Never to desire or endeavor, directly or indirectly, to increase my
fortune in riches or honor, neither to consent to any advantages, which my
friends would procure for me, unless in obedience to, and advice of my Ghostly
Father and Director of my Conscience.

2. To study the contempt and hatred of worldly riches and honors, to speak of
them no longer according to the flesh, but according to the spirit of
Christianity; and for the better establishing of its Maxims in my soul, to
avoid, as much as I can, the conversation of such, as are guided by contrary
Rules.

3. To entertain no Suit in Law, either as Plaintiff or Defendant, until all
possible ways have been used for an accommodation, without any humane respect:
In which I will submit to advice.

4. To cut off all superfluities, as well in what concerns my own person, as
my family, that I may be the better enabled to assist the poor: For the better
execution whereof, I will once every Month, after Communion, examine my self
therein, as strictly, as if I were then to give an account to God.

5. Never to contest, but to yield to all the world, as much as I can, both in
point of Honor, Precedence, and of Opinion, Dispute, and of another Will,
which I ought to prefer before my own.

6. To shun all delicacies, not to do, or desire any thing, upon the motive of
pleasure; nor to admit of any such thing, unless it be joined with necessity,
or condescension to my neighbor, or the health of my body, or the refreshment
and relaxation of Spirit.

7. To bear with patience, Contempt, Injuries, Contradictions, Losses,
Oppressions and Affronts.

8. To do all, that with discreet zeal I can, to hinder others from offending
God, or blaspheming his Holy Name, or detracting or slandering their neighbor.

9. To avoid and reject all kind of tenderness and delicacy for the ease of
the body; yea, to diminish and cut off, as much as I can, such commodities and
conveniences as may be forborne, without danger of health.

10. To receive with all readiness and charity the requests of my neighbor,
and to supply his necessities, in what I can possibly, by my self, or by others.

11. To perform the duty of Fraternal correption, with all Charity and
Humility, in the most prudent manner I can, and to receive it most willingly
from others.

12, Once every Month, at least, I will examine my self upon the faults I have
committed against these present Resolutions: And once a year many may mere
together, to renew this Protestation, and advise together of the way and means
to accomplish it.

SECT. 11. The great skill he had in the Interior matters of the Soul.
WE must of necessity confess, that the knowledge of Interior things is most
difficult, and that the discerning of Spirits, is, without contradiction, the
most obscure of all Sciences: And to be acquainted therewith, requires eminent
grace from God, and a light no less, than what flows from the Sun of
Righteousness: For, if the skill of curing the body be difficult, and only
conjectural, by reason that we are guided therein by Exterior Signs, which
often prove ambiguous and equivocal (whereupon the most, expert Physicians,
find themselves frequently mistaken, and prescribe quite contrary remedies)
how much more must the skill of governing Souls, in the matter of their
salvation, which are spiritual and remote from sense, yea, and supernatural, be
attended with great difficulties, and involved in wonderful obscurity.

But Monsieur Renty proved very skillful herein, having received a wonderful
light from God, to search out the mysterious secrets, and understand the most
abstruse windings of Souls, in which his own experience was no small advantage
to him: His more than ordinary light served him to discern truth from
falsehood, the safe from dangerous, the motions of a good spirit, from those of
the evil one, to bring disquieted souls to their repose, to fortify and en
ourage them, to disengage them from all worldly things; and to unite them to
our Savior Jesus Christ, and by him to the Divinity, to be guided in all
things by his holy Spirit.

I shall here present you with a taste of this excellent skill, and some beams
of this Divine light in these matters, which I found amongst his Papers, under
his own hand, which may give great insight into the mysteries of a Spiritual
life.

There be (says he in those Papers) three kinds of elevations and groanings
of the Soul after God, about which she ought constantly to be busied, to enable
her to accomplish the Precepts of our Savior; that is, to pray always, and
never to slack this holy Exercise, lest she fall into oblivion of God, and
after that into sin.

The first is the elevation and groaning of the Penitents, who begin at the
Purgative way. The second is of the Believers, who have proceeded to, and do
practice the Illuminative. And the third is of the Perfect, who are arrived at
the Unitive.

The first are exercised in the renouncing of sin, and the vanities of the
world, in bewatilng their former life, and seeking God, sending forth from the
depth of fear and revexence, their groans and sighs to him, which is the
beginning of life eternal.

The Believers seek after the knowledge of his will, by his Word, which is his
Son, desiring to conform their lives after his example, who is our Way, our
Life and Truth: And this is the progress of this life. The Perfect groan in the
presence of God, after an Union with him, in imitation of our Savior,
exercising it by acts of love, and so fulfilling the first and great
Commandment, in which consists the perfection of our life here below.

There are some Souls in the first estate, who renouncing sin, and quitting the
vanities of the world, receive great sensible consolations from God, and taste
ravishing delights. But if they endeavor not to pass on to the second, to
understand and practice the will of God in his Son, the Devil will soon deceive
them by this bait, causing them to rest in the complacency of these gusts: So
that not making progress in Christ, who is their way, they will wander into
bypath, to the danger of a precipice: Their condition being a kind of
imperfect, floating self-denial, and desire to be for God, to do his will, and
love him with a false Interior peace, upon which they rest, and whence
afterward, they degenerate into a very dangerous condition, because they are
not truly grounded upon Jesus Christ, whom God has appointed for our sole
Guide.

But if after they are thus purged from the gross affections of the world, they
be not likewise purified from themselves, giving up all to Christ Jesus, with a
serious resolution to imitate him, and enter into his Sacrifice of
Self-annihilation: Instead of receiving the Spirit of God, they shall confirm
themselves in their own; and forming to themselves false illuminations, shall
be guided by their own sense, and by what their own corrupt nature suggests to
them, as glittering and pleasing, with great danger of falling headlong into
the errors of the Enthusiasts; who persuade themselves, that every thing that
occurs to their fancy, comes from God: Out of an opinion, that they neither
will, nor seek, nor love any thing but God, and so become little or nothing at
all sensible of the checks of their own Conscience.

If you observe those that begin their Spiritual life in this manner, you will
find them to have little faith or dependence on Christ Jesus. And if you ask
them what they desire, or whetherto they tend? they will answer in general, To
whatsoever God will have. It will be necessary to set these right, and if they
be not too far gone with these gusts, and sensible consolations, to carry them
to desine indeed what God will have, but desire it according to the model of
our Savior, and the precepts of his Gospel (which he has left us as his Will
and Testament, and to be our Light, and the Rule of our inlightnings.)

We have many who rest in this first step, being yet esteemed and admired, even
by persons who pass for spiritual, and of on by their Ghostly Directors,
calling this the my stical way. In which notwithstnading, the decaitful spirit
of Nature and the Devil, play their game, under the mask of these dark
illuminations, of these false peaces, of these quaint terms, high words, and
mysterious notions, of these volumes of spiritual writings (the fruits whereof
are for the most part in the paper) from whence it is seen so often, that those
who have begun well, and with much purity, do fall afterward into gross
faults; whilst Property and Self-pleasing steal into the soul in the room of
Christ Jesus.

We have others, which heed no other thing than the preaching of John Baptist,
by their Austerities and Pennances, setting up there rest here, without
proceeding on to Christ Jesus, to receive his Spirit; relying upon an inward
satisfaction and confidence in their mortifications, and sticking there.

Others, so stay upon Jesus Christ only, as if he had no Father having
affectionate devotions to his Humanity, and much led by the sensible, go no
further. They know Jesus Christ but not Jesus Christ, God and man, who is our
Life, Truth, and Way.

Others build all their hopes upon the Blessed Virgin and other Saints, and
their particular Devotions to them; which are very good, when they are grounded
upon repentance for their sins, and a true conversion of the soul: But these
grossly deceive themselves, by hoping of succor from the Blessed Virgin and the
Saints, or of having any communion in their merits, when they quit not their
own vicious courses.

These three estates, thus understood and distinguished, afford great light in
the conduct of souls; whereby to understand their beginning, progress, and
perfection, with the deviations they are subject unto. And every one of these
estates, has its proper work, its sufferance, and its prayer.

The work of the first estate of beginners and Penitents, is to find out all
that inclines to sin, that obstructeth our salvation, or withdraws us from
God, to avoid it. Their Cross or Sufferance is, to bewail their offenses, to
mortify their passions, and subdue their body^n any thing that makes it rebel
against Reason and the Spirit; and also to punish the irregular motions of
Concupiscence. Their prayer is, to beg grace and strength, for their
performance of these things.

The work of the second, namely, of Believers, is, to study Jesus Christ, his
Life and Doctrine: Their Cross is, to bear the troubles that befall them in
imitation of our Savior; to suffer contempt and persecutions, which attend all
such as follow him, Their prayer is, to beg his Life, his Spirit, and his frame
of Soul, to act interiorly and exteriorly after his model.

The work of the third and Perfect one, is, to do each thing by the Spirit of
Christ, through their union with God: Their Cross is, in bearing with, as they
ought, ought, the corruptions, darkness and stupidity of this world, as also
persecution for righteousness, which thing shall never be wanting. Their prayer
is, to ask continually, a more abundant participation of the Spirit of Christ,
a more intimate union with God, a greater dying to themselves, a more faithful
improving of his grace and talents received, with perseverance to the end.

Moreover, in the first estate, we must labor hard, in resisting of sin, in
vanquishing our passions, and renouncing vanities; which young beginners cannot
do, without many repeated acts, much violence to themselves. But those to whom
God has given an entrance into the two other estates, do it easily, with a
simple and facile guidance of their spirit, not diminishing their acts of
humiliation, but hindering the oppression and trouble thereof.

In the second estate, is requisite on our parts, a vigorous correspondence in
following Jesus Christ, not acting any more from our selves, but in him, in
singleness of heart; and, enduring with patience and longanimity, the purging
and purifying of our spirits by Jesus Christ. In which work, we must be
content, to suffer many secret tempests, and inward tumults, arising from the
reluctancies of our old habits, and our spirit stirred up by the motions of
nature, full of many images and impressions. And finally, be content to lose
our very souls with much patience, that we may receive them again, clothed
with Christ Jesus.

In the third estate, is contained a work of Passion, that is, of Prayer; where
the bounty of God does all, as it were, the soul tasting a certain experimental
satiety of the presence and truth of God, and of his love in Jesus Christ, in
which she reposeth. She finds herself often absorpt in the joy of the
greatness, the power, the goodness, and the infinite perfections of God, of the
alliance with his Son; his love, his manner of conversation, and the admirable
effects, which the participation of his Spirit produces, joying in the
possession of these good things, with a tranquillity, content, and vigor,
surpassing all sense and expression.

A good progress through the two former estates, makes way for the third; where
we must be careful, considering the uncertainty and mutableness of our natures,
to use great industry, to be sure of going forward, and of repeating also what
we have done, the better to ground our selves, and repair our losses.

Thus we have his insight into spiritual things, evidencing the great
advancement of his illuminated Spirit, which God had enlightened in more than an
ordinary manner, declaring unto him the designs he had upon souls: Giving him
to penetrate into the obscurest recesses of their Consciences, and to discover
what was most secret and hidden, to speak with words not studied and
premeditated, but which were inspired, and put into his mouth at that hour,
which proved most powerful and effectual.

In the year, 1644. A maid, whom God had endued with pious affections, was
desirous to become a Carmeline. She communicated her intentions to Monsieur
Renty, begging his advice. Who at first, finding some difficulties in the
business, judged it fitting for her, to think no more of it. Notwithstanding
afterward, God inspired him at his prayers with a very great certitude, that
it was his will, she should proceed in the business, maugre all difficulties,
pointing out to him the very place where the thing should be done. He informed
her thereof, which she hearkened unto, with due respect, as if Christ himself
had spoken unto her, and commanded her to enter into that Monastery, where she
remains at this very day.

In the year, 1647. having visited a person afflicted with great pains, who had
need of such a man as he, he writ thus to his Director:

I have been with the party you know of, and have told her what I thought
convenient to her condition. Our Savior enlightened me to discover to her, his
good pleasure concerning her, how that this sad and dark condition was not
sent, to bring her to a stand and trouble at it, but to facilitate her way to
perfection, and carry her without amusement, to our Savior Christ Lesus, who
is our Sanctification.

I acquainted her, how we ought to lay this sure foundation, that our selves
are nothing, but infirmity and misery it self: So that when any one tells us
thereof, he tells us no news: And that God from this insufficiency of our
selves to all good, means to extract that excellent virtue of Humility and
Diffidence of our selves, obliging us thereby to go to his Son our Savior, to
find strength in him, and remedy for all our miseries. I was much enlarged
upon each thing which she told me; and God gave her so great a plenitude of
light and grace, that she spoke mavelous things touching the operation of the
Holy Trinity in her, with other excellent notions, manifesting a very
particular assistance of his Divine Grace. In this estate I left her.

Concerning himself he adds thus:

As concerning my self, I have not much to say, only I find within my self,
through the mercy of God, a great tranquillity in his presence, through the
Spirit of Christ Jesus, and such an inward experience of Eternal Life, as I am
not able to express. And this is that, whither I am most bent and drawn: Yet I
find my self so strangely naked and barren, that I wonder at the condition I
am in, and by which I discourse: For in my addresses to this party, I begun my
speech, not knowing how to pursue it; and after the second sentence, I had not
the least foresight of what should be the third, and so of the rest: Not but
that I seem to have a perfect knowledge of the things I speak in such a manner
as I am capable of it: But I only utter what is given me, and in the same way
as it is communicated, I communicate it to others. Which done, there seems to
remain nothing in me, but the foundation from whence it springs.

He grew to so high a reputation in this knowledge of soul matters, joined with
extraordinary graces, that many Ecclesiastical persons, and many Superiors of
Religious Orders, and well governed Communities, thought themselves very happy
in communicating with him, and following his advice, in matters of great
weight; being assured by undoubted signs, that he was replenished by the Spirit
of God. And very many, both Ecclesiastics and Seculars, of each Sex and
quality, even such as were arrived to great perfection, sent to receive his
instruction and assistance, in the conduct of their spiritual affairs.

In the year, 1641. he began particularly to apply himself to this way: But of
all the employments our Savior called him to for his service, there was none
wherein he met with more pain, or more contradiction of his Spirit, than in
this, judging himself most unworthy and incapable, resolving to proceed no
further in it, notwithstanding his several impulses thereunto, without asking
counsel: Which counsel, after good examination of the business, was this, that
he ought to undertake it, and that it was the will of God. To which he
submitted with exceeding great confusion and shame in himself, manifested by
his countenance, words and behavior, in his communication with the parties
that asked his advice, yielding to their requests with very great humility and
reverence; as all those can witness who knew him: And they likewise assuring
themselves, that God resided, spoke, and acted in him, and by him, remained in
his presence with great respect, and relied most confidently upon his conduct.

And God made it evident, by his blessing and wonderful success upon his
endeavors, that his actings herein were perfectly agreeable to his will:
Teaching us hereby, that he has no need of us for the execution of his
designs; and that he serves himself of whom he thinks good, and many times of
such a one, whom he finds well disposed, passing by those whom their vices
render incapable: And the best preparation to be employed by God in great
affairs, is, to abandon our selves wholly to his designs, and become very
little in his own esteem, as this holy man was.

CHAP. 2. His outward behavior and Conversation.
UNdoubtedly a man's outward composure, and the whole economy of his
conversation, is of great consequence in the service of our neighbors, either
to further or hinder our design for their salvation, being that which only
lies open to the eye, and makes the first and strongest impression upon their
spirits; and either wins, or alienates them, according as it is well or ill
ordered.

Whence it came to pass, that Monsieur Renty, who had an ardent desire to
assist his neighbor, and to procure to that purpose at any rate, whatever
might be requisite thereto; did whatever he could, for the well composing of
his exterior, keeping his demeanor, gestures, motions, looks, words, silence,
and other parts of his Conversation, in such a harmony, as he conceived most
suitable to draw his neighbor to God: which he managed with such advantage,
that we may say with truth, and the allowance of all that knew him, that in
this point of good outward comportment, he was admirable, and that no man of
long time has been seen to go beyond him.

He was very modest, always calm, and inviolably equal. Amongst all the things
which I have observed in the deceased Monsieur de Renty (says a sufficient
witness, who was iutimately acquainted with him) his rare modesty, and great
equality in his behavior and deportment, gave me the first and most pregnant
Idea's of his Sanctity. There was something in his looks, that carried so much
reverence in it, that one might easily judge thereby, that he was always
actually in the presence of God.

In every place, condition, employment whatsoever, the same in his looks,
gesture, words and actions, whether alone, or in company, with friends or
strangers, rich or poor, before his children or servants, yea, even before his
Lacquey, in the field or town, at the table, and every where.

We may freely avouch, that completely Master of himself he must be, that
possesses such an immutability: At which it is impossible for any to arrive,
who applies not himself continually to the presence of God, and has not
absolutely conquered his passions and interior motions: For easy it is,
amongst so many encounters, which daily present themselves from without, to
have our spirit discomposed, put out of frame, and be transported, and dis^over
its irregularities by cholar, word or gesture, or some other sign.

And such a constant equality is more admirable, when it is found in such a
person as Monsieur de Renty, who was not Phlegmatic by Complexion, but
Choleric, hot, and of an active spirit; but the exact and perpetual care,
force and watch, that he had over himself, held and preserved him in this
Exterior deportment, so excellent, and divine, and so suitable to one that is
to work good upon others.

That which pleases me most in him (says another very credible person in a
Memorial) was the great recollection, and intimate union with God: attended
with such a mavelous peace and trancuillity of mind, that it shined forth in
his countenance, and begat a kind of devotion in the beholders. This union
methought, was ever in him, without any sign of distraction, any levity, any
word not necessary, no complacency in company, or any humane respect, ever
forced him to scatter his spirit, or to quit his union with God; not but that
he was most full of civility, but so, as to look more within himself than
without.

And indeed, this continual presence of God (says the same person) did so take
him up, that no accident, object, or any thing rare or extraordinary, could
divert him. I never saw him admire those things the world usually does, nor fix
his eyes upon any curiosities whatsoever. His gate in the streets was in a
recollected, modest, and equal manner, without gazing here and there, that a
man might see Jesus Christ was his way, his employment, his all, and nothing
else.

Being one day importuned by a friend, out of curiosity to go see a great
Personage, esteemed for a Saint, and to have the gift of miracles. He replied
with his wonted sweetness, Our Savior is in all Churches in the B. Sacrament,
and him we may visit.

And seeing the business of speech and silence, make up a great part in a good
or bad conversation; let us see how this holy man, so zealous of his neighbors
salvation, behaved himself in both.

He was very reserved in his speech, and that both from nature and grace, and
indeed he could not have been so prudent a man, had he been a much speaker;
since the Scripture makes it the proper character of prudence, to speak little;
and, that in the multitude of words, there shall not want sin.

In the intercourse of visits, and all Assemblies of Devotion, where it
concerned him to speak, he did it in his course, with a mind and demeanor
intent and ^ecollected, with words short, but material. He was never seen
forward or eager to speak, or in speaking, or to do it with a higher tone than
ordinary, whatsoever was his haste, if he made any report, or gave account of
business, he did it so briefly, and in words only necessary and pertinent,
that a very hard matter it would be (as one said of him) to find one that
spoke better, and yet less than he.

Things that were vain or unprofitable, or the news of the times, were never
the subject of his discourse, but always something good, and the Kingdom of
God, in imitation of our Savior; and where this discourse was diverted to
worldly business or trifles, he either took leave of the company, or stole
away, without saying any thing.

And when he talked even of good things, it was with moderation; saying, that
there was much need of sparingness and sobriety, when we speak of God and good
things; and that it was one of the greatest amusements that troubled him, when
he was amongst spiritual persons, to hear them often spend precious time, in
talking of virtue at large, and without s^uit, departing from such Conferences
with dry, empty, and dissipated spirits: Whereas the secret of Christian
virtue, consists not in speaking, but in doing, and that substantial word of
God is only one, and this sufficiently efficacious, to produce the holy
Spirit, and in its unity, to work mavelous things.

His conversation moreover, was in a true and high manner humble, respective,
affable, officious, obliging, and cordial; Patient he was, in suffering the
ignorances, rudenesses, imperfections, cross humors, and other faults of his
neighbors; prudent in applying himself to their dispositions, and passing by
many small matters, without seeming to take notice of them at all.

And so profitable and edifying was his demeanor, that wherever he came, his
very looks and modesty, his words, his silence, and all his Exterior
comportment, cast forth a fragrancy and sweet persume of Virtue, Devotion and
Piety, and made a good impression upon the spirits of others. His very presence
charmed many into recollection; the very sight of him was enough to bridle any,
and his acquaintance have confessed, that their knowing that he was in the
Church, has wrought more attention in them at their prayers; and some of them,
eight days after their having enjoyed his company, have felt in themselves the
effects of grace, in an extraordinary attraction and devotion toward God.

Wheresoever he came, he was flocked unto from all parts, out of that reverend
esteem they had of him, and the desire of those consolations they were sensible
of, in his presence. Notwithstanding, when he perceived any value set upon
himself, or any applause of what he did or said, he was deeply humbled in
spirit, testifying by his carriage the discontent of his soul, hanging down his
head, casting down his eyes with deep silence, during such commendations, with
a grave and set demeanor, expressing his inward affliction, which begot respect
and edification in the beholders,

For conclusion, I shall add one thing very remarkable, and which shows how
perfect and accomplished he was in his conversation, namely this, that his
extraordinary way and fashion of converse, of dealing and treating with others,
and of his devotion, was not checked, blamed or condemned by any, but approved,
prized and commended: so that generally all had him in esteem, reverence and
love, and said of him in proportion, as was said of his Master Christ, He has
done all things well. Such a general approbation as this, and in one that dealt
in so many and difficult businesses, must needs be very rare, and argue a most
prudent and advised spirit.

And as these things got approbation, so his humility, his honesty, his respect
to each one, even the lowest, his affability, charity, patience, and other
virtues, gained him the hearts of all; yet as it is a perilous thing to be so
much esteemed, praised and approved by all, so God, by a wise and divine
counterpois, to secure his virtue, and keep him from tripping in so slippery a
way, did permit, that from whence he should have received the most esteem,
approbation, and satisfaction, to wit, from the Lady his Mother, he found the
quite contrary, and that in a way most strange and afflictive to him, as we
have seen before.

CHAP. 3. His conduct of his business.
IT is without contradiction, that few men in Paris, or in all France, were so
much employed as he, in the affairs that concerned the service of God. For
which he was furnished with great strength of body and mind, to manage so
great and several businesses without difficulty, with great tranquillity, order,
and content; husbanding his time to the best advantage, disparching one
speedily after another, and sometimes many together. He has been seen to do
three things together, without trouble or mistake. And at other times (when
pressed with many dispatches at once) to read Letters, give Audience, and write
Answers to different persons, all at the same time, of which he has quitted
himself handsomely and well.

In one of his Letters, he wrote thus:

It is very true, that business finds me out from all parts; insomuch, that I
am often enforced to read, write, and do business all at a time. A little
assistance would do well, though I have many sharers; however, let not that
trouble you, for I dispatch as much at present as I can, the rest in due time,
without encombring my self therewith. Our Savior does graciously bestow on me
a peace of mind in all this, so that I am not at all distracted with it.

His order was, seriously to consider of things, before any resolution; and if
after his own sense given (to which he was not at all espoused) he found
another reason to be better, he quitted his own. A thing very necessary to men
of business, yet rare to be found: since if we take not heed, we all idolize
our own judgment, and falling in love with our private light, are dsirous to
be leading men, affecting to see our own opinions crowned.

Having composed rules for a Society of Pious persons, and digested them
thoroughly, he presented them to be examined by some virtuous persons, from whom
he admitted with great humility, some corrections, cancelling them with his own
hand, requesting that they might be put in other terms, more proper than his
own.

After he had resolved on any thing, he showed himself prompt, firm, and
constant for the execution; not quitting it, till he had brought it to the end
it should be. Not like those, who hot at first, grow presently cold, and begin
many things well, but finish nothing. Sometime when he had brought a thing into
a fair way to perfection, he committed it to a friend to finish; not out of any
inconstancy of spirit, but to gain time for the undertaking and doing of more:
And withal, that herein he might avoid the honor of it. Out of his great
humility, passing that to another, which would exercise his humility, in
letting another have the praise, which redounds more to him that happily ends a
good thing, than to him that begins it.

In all affairs that concerned the service of God, he had an unmovable
constancy, and undaunted courage, never flagging or yielding up himself. And
besides the force of his words, there appeared in his countenance an
extraordinary assurance (although his ordinary deportment was always sweet and
quiet) which particularly appeared in all meetings; where he manifested so much
spirit, and God invested him with such a force, that those that beheld him,
felt themselves struck with an awful respect. When he spoke and gave his
opinion, his proposals carried so much light in them, his judgment so much
solidity, his reasons so great force (he taking every thing in its due place,
and observing each juncture of time) that all were constrained to acquiess in
his determination.

But if any approved not of his advice, or disputed his reasons, he knew how to
enforce them with such arguments, especially where he had any authority in the
Assembly, that at length they yielded. But if they chanced to make another
reply, he gave not one word more, but his very silence, and the steadiness of
his countenance, and his other carriage, restrained any further dispute. And
the meeting ended, he would go to that party, and crave his pardon with great
humility: Sweetly informing him, that what he aimed at, was not to make good
his own opinion, but for the cause of God, to which by duty he was obliged: But
in other things, that he was most ready to yield to every one.

We meet daily with those spirits, that are very inconstant in business, doing
and undoing every hour, very indecisive and mutable: But he was of another
temper, quick-sighted to penetrate into a business, judicious to determine it,
and constant not to vary in a resolution well grounded; so that his word was
his law, and was taken by others as current as an obligation.

When his presence was requested at any consult, he would be punctual at the
time appointed, that none should stay for him: Where taking his place (and that
the lowest, if it were possible) his demeaner was so modest, and composed, that
all were edified by it. Listening to others with great attention and
seriousness, as if he had no other business. And after his opinion given, very
brief and material: his presence being no further useful, he would take leave;
being a great husband of his time, since other business for Gods service, still
attended him else where.

And notwithstanding the throng of business, and though never so important, he
quitted not, for them, his Exercises of Piety, nor his care of perfection,
which he preferred before all other his affairs; knowing, that as wholesome
meat, taken immoderately, does hurt, and instead of strengthening the stomach,
weakens, and suffocates its natural heat: So these Exterior employments, even
the most holy, if a man surcharge himself, bring much prejudice, and extinguish
the ardour of Devotion. Wherefore he was careful not to over-burthen himself
with them, being very vigilant that they should not distract and dissipate him,
nor quench the Interior motions of the Spirit, nor secularize his soul, but
ferve only as means to elevate and unite him more to God.

In the multitude of business, he was still recollected, and as much alone in
great meetings, as the Hermites in their solitudes: which might be gathered
from his modesty, and composed countenance, evidencing his application to his
Interior, and his union to God, from whom he drew light and strength, for the
managing and prudent ordering of these bu^nesses. One day he wrote thus to his
Director:

My recollection hinders no business at all, but rather furthers it. For
without it, I should have a solicitous desire of doing all my self; whereas I
act now in a most serene way, in which I have no share; for it is our Lord that
does all.

In another Letter thus:

Finding my self one day much burdened with divers-business, I had a desire to
draw off my mind wholly, and at the same instant I found it. Since which time
they create me no trouble, and I dispatch them more readily without thinking of
them. This grace has been often renewed to me (although in several manners)
which I acknowledge to be very great because it preserves me disingaged, even
in the multiplicity of business.

And notwithstanding he never omitted any thing of prudence or industry, for
the effecting his business, yet the success he expected much more from Gods
benediction, than from his industry, or any humane endeavors; knowing well,
that what was undertaken for the service of God, and good of his neighbor, was
to be accomplished by his grace: Wherefore in every thing he had a great
recourse to prayer, instantly commending all his exercises to God, and in all
employments and choice of persons which he made use of, his eye was more upon
grace than nature, or any Exterior abilities.

And knowing that the affairs of God are not without their difficulties, but
meet with great oppositions, even sometimes to be overturned, he was armed with
patience in the undertaking, to suffer with courage, not starting at the
greatest dangers, but still hoping of the success. If they miscarried at any
time, he rested well satisfied, after all fair means attempted on his part.
Thus he writ to a friend:

It is a great infirmity in our humane nature, that she needs applause in
matters of grace: Wherefore I look at it as a great favor from God, when I
have the honor of executing any enterprise, solidly undertaken, and well
approved of and acknowledged, to proceed from the Spirit of God, by those to
whom he has committed in his Church the judgment of such things;
notwithstanding the accomplishment of it meets with many crosses and
contradictions.

In another thus:

We may take up good and holy designs, and God does often inspire them; yet
when he is pleased to permit a contrary event, we must adore his secret will,
which brings with it, more of mercy in the crossing of them, than if they had
succeeded to our comfort. We should always be jealous over our own spirit, that
it fix not upon any thing.

And again thus:

The sweet Jesus has his designs, which he conducts by such means, as we would
not at all make choice of; and the reason is, because he would thwart our
wills, and abate our dependancies upon earth: And therefore often thwarts he
our just undertakings, being more jeolous of the Sacrifice of our hearts, than
of any thing else, how specious soever.

But the principal rule which this holy man observed in these affairs was,
never to look at them in themselves, but in the will and design of God, and to
proceed in view of this. Whence it came to pass, that he applied himself to
business, not as appearing glorious, pleasant, or profitable, but as agreeable
to the will of God, to which he submitted his own; making poor and mean
employments equally considerable, and sometime preferred before greater: Hence
he took up things cast aside by others, undertook charities out of the road,
and not taken notice of, applied himself to such poor as were in a forlorn
condition, believing, that herein there was less of nature, and more of grace:
And never thrust himself into a business without the will of God, and when it
did consist with that, he was not hasty or precipitant, but let things go on
kindly and sweetly, according to the pace of his Providence, and the course of
his good pleasure.

The like we have of him, in Memorials from diverse places: It was not his way,
to begin or finish any thing, according to the motion of his own will, but of
the Spirit of God, as far as he knew it. If after he had undertaken any thing,
he felt his inward motion to cease, he ceased also the pursuit. He had no
private design or project whereby he steered (although he knew the things he had
to do) but attended on the express order from above; which he received either
by a light in his understanding, or by an impression in his will, or by some
other way, that gave him as great a certitude, as any can have in the like
occurrences where upon a familiar friend, asked him one day, whether he would do
such a thing at such a time? He answered,

Know you not that to morrow is not mine.

And at another time he said;

I see five or six things, which of necessity must be done; but I cannot tell
you, which I would dispatch the first, nor when, nor how, for through the mercy
of God I am indifferent to all things.

He writ thus to his Director:

I hope to be at Paris about the end of September, where I shall receive your
orders to come to you, when I may be lest troublesome: Where I shall be ready
for what my Savior shall appoint by you. I forecast nothing, but only to obey
and follow his conduct by your appointment, and in every thing the best I can:
I find by experience, that when I think to do most in any place, there I do
nothing at all. This has taught me to go divested of all design; and when I
think least thereof, and abandon my self to God, then he does the more;
wherefore I will leave the doing to him, and to you in him.

Going one day in the holy Week, accompanied with a friend, to receive a most
royal and liberal sum of money given by the Queen of France, in behalf of the
Church of Canada; and passing by a Church where they were singing the Divine
Service.

Let us, says he, dispatch the will of God, it would be a great comfort to be
present at the Church, to hear the praises of God; but let us pass on, since
this is more in concurrence with his holy will.

The same party reported of him, that he had observed several persons wondering
at his extraordinary recollection, and such an intimate union with God, in one
man, who had so great employments, but he was above them all, affixed only to
God, and to the execution of his will.

He gave this counsel to a certain friend, who had great designs for the
service of God, but such as at that time were not seasonable.

Let us not apply the days business, but to the day. Your intentions are pious,
but you must resign the future to God, and be willing for the present, to love
and follow what he makes appear to be his will, and to keep your self still
before him as a ready Sacrifice, together with our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the conclusion of this Chapter, I shall produce a Letter to his Director,
upon the same subject, in the year, 1648. full of light.

I will tell you, said he, what passed yesterday within me, by which you may
understand my present condition: Hearing the Gospel of the Assumption of our
Lady, which speaks of Martha and Mary, most of the sent^ments I formerly had
upon that subject came presently into my mind; to wit, that prayer and
converse with God, are much to be preferred before all Exterior exercises,
though never so holy; seeing that Martha bufied about so holy and excellent a
service, was reprehended for her trouble, and Mary commended for her recose.
This word, Turbaris erga plurima, Thou art troubled about many things, has
besteaded me along time, to draw me off from outward things, and also from
inward, though good, if not absolutely necessary, as visiting and instructing
the poor, or reading or writing something of devotion, and the like: And I
understood it expedient at that time to quit them, the better to betake my self
to Interaloperations, and arrive at the laying down of our own will and
vivacity, to attend wholly to the Divine appointment, following it in prudent
simplicity, by the Spirit of Christ, which enlivens and lives in those that
hearken to it with respect.

But you must know, that for these three or four months which I have spent in
Low-Normandy, I have been, as it were, continually employed in Exterior works;
as conferring with all sorts of people, taking care of the sick that found me
out, removing from place to place, reconciling differences, new building a
great Church, which was to be plucked down and enlarged. For which I was forced
to draw out several platforms, and make the very models (in which formerly I
have had some insight) by reason of the want of Architects in that place,
calling to mind my old notions, and busying my self wholly in it. Yesterday,
after my mornings work, hearing the same Gospel read, and these words in
particular, Turbaris erga plurima, Thou art troubled about many things; a
certain Interior light came upon me, and it was said unto me, Non turbaris
erga plurima, Thou art not troubled about many things; giving me to understand,
and that in a very evident manner, that the things we are employed upon
according to the Divine order, whatsoever they be, do not create us any such
trouble, and I discovered clearly (at least as I thought) that Martha was not
reproved for doing a good work, but for doing it too solicitously. Our Savior
intimating to her by these words, Turbaris erga plurima, that her business was
done in trouble and inordinate agitation of spirit, though the end was very
laudable. That the priucipal business consists in hearing the Eternal Word,
even as his own humanity, whether in working or preaching, or any other
employment, received its motions from the Divinity. A me ipso facio nihil,
sicut audio, hoec loquor, I do nothing of my self, as I hear, that I speak,
said he. In like manner ought we to take our directions from Jesus Christ, who
is the Word of Eternal Life, and act nothing with disturbance, but all in peace
by his Spirit.

I received hereby a great support, in the performance of these petty Exterior
offices, to which my duty obliged me, and made no difficulty at all, to yield
up my self, to this holily-disordered Divine Order. In which I perceived, that
it was Gods will I should perform these petty things, which could not be done
without me. For these three months I have not, it may be, spent three or four
hours at my prayers upon my knees together, out of the Church; and should I
perform them at all, no otherwise than on this fashion, I should but very ill
discharge my ^u^y.

It is certain, that I have discharged it ill enough yet I understand that God
is pleased in the midst of these employments, to which he has appointed me, to
make me sensible of his presence and power, in uniting my soul to himself by
certain intimate ways, and that the outward work may be performed by the hand,
whilst the soul solaceth herself in that real alliance of Sons with their
Father, by the Spirit of the Son, who admits us into his communion, together
with that of the blessed Virgin, the Angels and Saints, yea, and of the whole
Heaven, if you will. Such a wonderful expansion of soul can our Lord give,
when, and how he pleases.

I enjoyed at the same time, such a sensible impression of God, yet excelling
all sense (as being acted in the more noble part of the Soul; viz. the Spirit)
that if I had been thrown like a boul, I could never have lost the sight of my
God. All things are here transitory, for our Lord turns this boul in a strange
manner, when it pleases him. And these d^verse turnings are done for the souls
advantage, whereby she is fashioned for every occasion, that she may do nothing
for or by herself, but all for God, and according to him.

Moreover, I evidently see, that a person whom God employeth in these low
affairs, if he follow them with the same fidelity, as if they were greater,
keeping his station, by obed^ence and self-denial, is as acceptable to him, as
he that is occupied in the noblest functions: The work it self making not the
difference, but the faithful execution of it, by submitting to his good
pleasure. Will nothing please you but to convert a thousand worlds, and bring
all souls to God? you shall be content to carry stones, and sometime to sit
still and do nothing. The S^crifice of Patience is both well pleasing to God,
and comfortable to our selves. And I believe it is without comparison more
rare, to find a soul faithful in patience, and content to do no more than God
would have him, than faithful in actions which appear abroad.

I know well, that God does all in all, but this Sacrifice of Patience, and of
C^ssation, is more commendable in a heart, who has the love and zeal of his
honor, and in pursuit hereof, is hurried on to action, and has need of
greater force to withhold it from doing, than to incite it. This kind of
Cessation seems to be nothing at all available for the nourishment of such
zeal; and this hunger and thirst after righteousness, which would devour the
four quarters of the world, is reverberated like the fire pent in, which
circles and works about, until it find a vent by this consideration, that God
is all-sufficient in himself, and has no need of us for advancing of his
glory: that we receive more honor from our employments than he service, being
so impure, that we blemish every thing we meddle with, and rob it of some
luster, and prove often not only unprofitable, but endamaging servants. I have
one word more to tell you, that you may direct me in it; which is, that I am
really ashamed and confounded in my self, that I do no more for God;
considering his dignity, h^s love, his gifts and communications, by the
alliance of Jesus Christ and his Spirit: Which indeed, together with the sense
of my great imbecility for any thing that is good, of my sins and miseries,
would work my extreme torment, did I not bethink my self of his allsufficiency
in himself, and that he does with us as he pleases, in keeping us in obedience
and profound annihilation.

Thus far his Letter, wherein are many good things to be learnt.

CHAP. 4. The excellent use he made of all things, and his application to the
Infancy of our Lord for that purpose.
IT must needs be, that Monsieur Renty made excellen use of all accidents that
occurred to him, and generally of all creatures, to attain to such a height of
perfection; whereof this usage of them (as much as is in man) is undonbredly
the prin^ipal means to which all others are subordinate, otherwise, and without
it, unp^ofitable and mere hinder^n^es.

True it is, that God has placed in the bosom of each thing, as in riches,
poverty, honors, disgrace, health, sickness, good and evil, a secret virtue,
and moral cap^city to advantage us in our salvation, and to be instruments of
perfection, even as so many cords to draw and unite us to himself; but all
this, according to our us^ge of them. For b^ing well used, they produce good
effects; but contrarily, abused, instead of uniting us to God, they estrange us
further from him, rendering us more imperfect and vicious, and instead of
advantages, prove the instruments of our ruin. Wherefore he being well
instructed in this grand secret of Spiritual life, employed all his care to
practice it perfectly. Which that we may better understand, it will not be
amiss, to follow it to the Springhead. The holy man had continually in his
heart, making it the principal conduct of his devotions (as we have mentioned,
and may be easily deduced from the series of this History) to unite himself to
our Lord Jesus Christ) and that upon good grounds: Since out of him (as says
S. Peter) there is no salvation; God having chosen him, the sole Mediator of
Redemption, and the repairer of our miseties; loving no creature in the world
but him, with a love of perfect amity: Whereupon, by S. Paul, he is styled the
Son of his love and good pleasure, and we alone are accepted in and through
him; who are found beautiful and shining with glory, when we are united to him,
and out of him we appear deformed, hideous, and most abominable, being indeed,
without him, filled with sin, and his enemies. Wherefore every man is so far
dear and amiable to him, as he stands united to his Son, which is manifested in
the Blessed Vi^gin and his Apostles; all our actions pleasing him, so far as
they are united to him, even as each member of our body participates of life,
according as it is animated by our soul.

Having therefore perfectly learned this fundamental truth of Christianity, his
study was, to unite himself to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to copy him forth as
his Rule and Law for the regulating of his Exterior and Interior; adoring him
daily under this notion, applying himself with great reslection to his words,
actions, designs, and the several mysteries, receiving from each of them great
enlightnings. Thus he writ to me one day upon the mystery of his Incarnation:

I have had the grace diverse times, very intimately to understand that
ineffable mystery, hidden with God from all ages, and manifested now to the
Saints (according to S. Paul) which is the alliance he has contracted with us,
in Jesus Christ. This knowledge produces in me as much astonishment as love.
And (to tell you my sense of it) a man possessed with these verities, remains
no more a man, but becomes annihilated, and all his desire is to be lost and
melted, on purpose to change his nature, and enter into this Spirit of Jesus,
to act no less in him than by him.

I have conceived such great things of our Saviors Humanity, united to the
Divinity, as cannot be uttered. How has this alliance of the Divinity, most
deeply abased the sacred Humanity into a self-annihilation, and a sacrifice of
love, upon the sight of the greatness of God? What an honor is this to the
Humane Nature, to be thus predestined? and, What a glory to us to be chosen
and called to an entrance into his favor, and a rising to God, and the
everlasting enjoyment thereof through him? It would spend me this whole day to
write to you, the view that I have had of the wisdom and bounty of God,
touching this mystery of Love, which he has opened unto us in his Son.

And though he was truly devoted to all the mysteries of our Lord, yet in a
most special manner to that of his Infancy: The occasion whereof was thus;

Being constrained to make a journey to D^jon, by reason of a suit of Law
beforementioned, he heard much talk of Sister Margaret of the blessed
Sacrament, a Religious Carmeline of the Covent of Beaulne, on whom our Savior
had conferred particular favors, who led a life very extraordinary, grounded
upon true and solid virtue. And as our Lord has several ways to sanctify a
soul, and fit it for his sacred purposes; so he was pleased to exercise this
choice woman absolu^ely in the mystery of our Saviors Infancy, and through
that pipe, to convey into her soul, a torrent of grace and extraordinary gifts,
not only for herself, but others; as may be seen in her life, now in writing,
by a person most worthy of such a work. Monsieur Renty had a desire to go to
Beaulne, being but seven leagues from Dijon, to recommend himself to the
prayers of this holy Virgin: And though when he came thither, he neither spoke
to her, nor saw her (she having, by a particular conduct of our Savior, been
retired for thirteen years from the speech of any secular person) yet
notwithstanding, he received much benefit from his journey; as he expressed in
a Letter writ back from Dijon, to the Prioress of that place.

I want words to express the mercies I received by my journey to Beaulne.
Sister Margaret has marked me out, in the holy Infant Jesus, such a divesting
of my self of all worldly things, that it appears to me my rendezouz, where I
must strip my self naked of all things else.

The year after, he made a second journey; where God having altered her
resolution, for speech and converse with others, he had the happiness to
discourse with her, and contracted at that time, a very intimate alliance of
grace, receiving great gifts by means thereof. The chiefest and source of all
the rest, being, that our Savior engaged him, as he had done her, in a more
particular devotion to the mystery of his Infancy, and imprinted in him the
lineaments of the like Graces and Spirit.

This holy man (whose judgment may be highly esteemed by us, considering his
extraordinary insight into spiritual matters) greatly valued this Religious
woman, approving exceedingly her directions, and testifying how great a
blessing he reckoned her acquaintance, and what benefit he had reaped from her,
even after her death. To which purpose he writ thus to me the eighteenth of
June. 1648. the year of her death.

The holy Infant, sweet Jesus, has taken to himself our good Sister Margaret,
whose death was consonant to the dispositions of her life, and miraculous
graces. I have received from her, since her death, great comfort: That grace I
re^eived, according to my present estate and weakness, to enter into the
Infancy of our Savior, has since been renewed to me, and I have understood it
more solidly.

About a month after, I received these lines from him.

I had yesterday; by the singular bounty of God a view of his Divine Majesty,
of S. John Baptist, and Sister Margaret of the B. Sacrament. so clearly
represented to me in my spirit, that I cannot suspect the truth of it. O what
effects were produced by their presence, and what love by these sights! I am
wholly renewed in my respects; to that great Saint my Patron, and to that
glorious servant of God, who honored him very much, whilst she was living; and
from whom, without doubt, since her death, she has begg^d to be my Protector.
It is m^st certain, that the work of God in her, was one continued prodigy of
grace, and a masterpiece of his hand.

But let us return to his application made to the Infancy of our Savior,
chiefly begun, in his second journey to Beaulne. Of which we may understand
something from this Letter, written to a Father of the Oratory, Confessor to
the Carmelines there.

I must needs tell you, that upon my first journey which I made to you, above a
year ago^, I brought back with me, a great esteem and devotion to the Infancy
of our Savior, but I was not yet well settled in it. I attempted it from time
to time, but could not yet make it my principal food. Since which the holy
Infant, by a supernatural grace, has manifested and opened himself to me; and
now I find every thing in him, and am remitted thither for all.

And to the Prioress he writ thus:

I must acquaint you, that the holy Infant Jesus, will grant me the favor to
apply my self p^rticularly to his honor, to give my self to him, and to his
holy disposit^ons; ordering my life, and the sacrifice of my self, by the
conduct of his Spirit.

In order hereunto, he cousecrated, and gave up himself thereto, in these
terms; a copy whereof, written with his own hand, and in his own blood, he sent
to Sister Margaret, which is kept with great devotion in that Covent. And
another, something more enlarged to his Ghostly Father, to which he wrote his
name only in blood, in these words.

To the honor of my King, the Holy Infant Jesus.
I Have consecrated my self this Christmass-Day, 1643. to the holy Infant
Jesus, offering up to him my whole Being, my Soul, my Body, my Free Will, my
Wife, my Children, my Family, the Estate which he has given me, and finally,
all that I am concerned in; having beseeched him, to enter into full
Possession, Property, Jurisdiction, of all that I am: That I may live no more,
but in, and to him, in the quality of a Victim, separate from every thing of
this world, and challenging no more share thereof, than according to the
applications which he shall give, and shall allow me. Insomuch, that from
henceforward, I shall look at my self merely as an instrument in the hand of
the holy Infant Jesus, to do whatever pleases him, in great Innocence, Purity,
and Simplicity, without reflection or return upon any thing whatsoever, without
taking share in any work; without having joy or grief from any thing that
arrives, not looking upon things in themselves, but in his will and conduct,
which we will endeavor to follow by the appearance and presence which we shall
render his Cratch, and to the Divine States of his Infancy. I therefore this
day lose my own being, to become wholly a slave, subsisting upon the holy
Infant Jesus, to the glory of the Father, and of the Holy Ghost.

This I signed, into the hands of the most blessed Virgin my Mother, my
Patroness, and my Protectress, and in the presence of S. Joseph.

Gaston Jean Baptist.


And as he did with an entire heart, consecrate himself to this holy Infant, so
did this, bestow himself freely on him; revealing it particularly to Sister
Margaret of the B. Sacrament, that he should from thenceforward be guided and
animated by the Spirit of his Infancy; and that he was descending to him, to be
his Master, his Light, and his Intelligence: And showing her one day his heart,
he said, See here the habitation of my Servant.

Upon which, she wrote to Monsieur Renty, how the Infant Jesus had bestowed
himself upon him, to be a Spiritual and Celestial Air, for him to breath
constantly; even as his body breathed this Material Air, and that his
Innocence, Purity, and Simplicity should subsist in him instead of himself;
destroying in him, what his nature had, corrupt and polluted.

And herein he made so large a progress, that she often saw him within a beam
of light, so penetrated and filled with the grace of this holy Infancy, like a
sponge in the Ocean, even absorpr in that abyss of infinite riches, beyond his
expression. And he himself writ, concerning it, to a person, in these words:

The Divine King of the Cratch, the holy Infant Jesus, does so accumulate his
favors upon me, that I beseech you to thank him: They are inexplicable.

From this time, his custom was, every Eve of the 25 day of each Month, to
enter into his Chapel, at ten a clock at night, and there to remain in p^ayer
till midnight. He adored the precious moment of our Saviors birth and entrance
into this world, performing certain acts of Devotion before the Image of his
Sacred Infancy; which further he honored, by inviting a poor child to dinner,
entertaining him with wonderful great respect. And during all that time that he
celebrated the voyage of the Infant Jesus into Egypt, and return to Nazareth,
he had to dinner every day three poor folks, for the honor of Jesus, Mary, and
Joseph, during which time, he would never ride in a Coach, though his business
often called him to painful and troublesome journeys afar off on foot, and at
length he quite gave over the use of a Coach.

After he had engaged himself in this devout application, to the Infancy of our
Lord; and being filled with his grace, and animated by his Spirit, had received
thereby wonderful impressions and illuminations. His Ghostly Father desired of
him, to write down his conceptions of that Divine Mystery, and wherein chiefly
that grace consisted; which begat this ensuing Letter, in the year, 1645.

You have laid your commands upon me, to set down in writing, wherein consists
the grace of the Infancy of our Savior, so far as I understand it. This
Adorable Lord, has renewed in me this morning two Con^eptions, which he had
given me a Month since, three days one after another, by which I shall be able
to express what I conceive of it.

Being at my prayers, in the Church, about a Month ago, I fell into some
inward inquietude about my Devotion to this Infancy, by reason that my Spirit
was possessed with this thought, That a Christian should regard our Savior
entirely, from his Incarnation, to his Glory, where he sits at the right hand
of his Father, and from whence he sends us his Spirit. And that we should make
our addresses to all these mysteries, according to our necessities; and
therefore to tie our selves to one particular, were to send up maimed
Devotions, and to limit the extent of Verity and Grace. After this, I went to
receive the B. Sacrament, abandoning my self wholly to my God, according to my
usual custom. A little while after the Communion, I saw (by an enlightening) our
Savior entire; that is, all his mysteries, from his Incarnation, to his state
of Glory, where he resides at present, governing us. And in particular, the
Greatness and Dignity of this mystery of his Infancy; and withal, I was
instructed, that this mystery is our Port, and our Address, for to obtain our
Consummation in glory: That this is it, to which we must direct our selves, and
here stay our thoughts, and that it would be temerity, to proceed to other
mysteries on the same manner. I saw it rashness to desire and demand orosses
for our selves, since it is the work of Gods grace to conduct us to them, and
uphold us under them: I saw it rashness; to desire Mount Thabor; that is, high
illuminations. Finally, that we ought not presently to address our selves to
those other mysteries of our Savior, but only to this of the Infancy, which
brings us into the ignorance, the separation from, and in applacation of things
of this life, making no further use of them, than as they are given us for
necessity, which keeps us in great silence, and produces a Mortification of
the Exterior man, whilst the Interior is busied in contemplating the most
holy Soul of our Savior, continually employing it self in looking up toward
his Father, in his Love, in zeal of his Glory, in the Offering of himself, and
in the obedience to proceed forward, in all innocence, and purity, and
simplicity, to all his other estates, through which his Father had appointed
him to pass.

I found then, that for the happy conducting of our selves through all
conditions, whether of light or darkness, of Thabor or Calvary, we must, for to
receive and improve grace, begin at the Infancy, which teaches us our first
lesson of Abnegation, to be taught of God, of silence and innocence, without
any regard or pretensions to our selves; but with the same spirit of submission
and obedience, that this blessed Babe Christ Jesus there practiced and taught
us:

This light and knowledge has established me more than formerly in this
mystery, finding there my bottom, abiding there with attention and reverence,
to do what shall be commanded me afterward. For the soul does not raise it self
by it self to any thing; but on the contrary, does empty herself, resting still
in her own littleness, with great recognition of what passes, and with the
simplicity of a pure resigned aspect. O Father, how guilty shall I appear
before God, in answering so little to the greatness of his gifts! It is my
grief, and a great one, as he well knows.

Some three days after, these words of S. Paul, were unexpectedly suggested
unto me, Hoc sentite in vobis, quod and in Jesu Christo, etc. Let the same
mind be in you, as was in Christ Jesus: But chiefly was I affected with these
words, Semetipsum exinanivit, formam servi accipiens; He emptied himself,
taking upon him the form of a servant; and those that follow, Factus obediens
usque ad mortem; Being made obedient, even to death. And light was given me to
understand, how that these words carry with them, the proof of that which I had
contemplated three days before, of the right way and proceeding of this my
Savior, who in his Infancy humbled himself, even to the form of a servant, and
all the rest of his life, to death, being obedient to the Cross, following the
decrees of his Father, not by election, but by submission and patience. This
second view confirmed me further, and after another manner in this mystery.

The Infancy therefore of our Savior, is an estate, where we must dye to all
things; and where the soul, in Faith, Silence, Reverence, Innocence, Purity and
Simplicity does attend and receive the orders of God, making it his daily work
in Abnegation; neither looking before nor behind, but being united to the holy
Child Jesus: Who with an absolute Resignation, received orders from his
Father, for his visitation by the Shepherds and Wisemen, for his Circumcision,
going up to Jerusalem, flying into Egypt, his return back, his journey to
Jordan to be baptized into the Wilderness to be tempted, for his Preaching; and
finally, his Death upon the Cross, Resurrection, Ascexsion, and Consummation in
Glory. Thus, Father, ought we, methinks, to follow Jesus, our Model, in these
steps, through the grace of this Infancy.

This is it, he wrote to his Director, concerning this Mystery, and why he
chose it before others; and which appears also in a Letter to another.

For this reason, ought we to address our selves to the Infancy, rather than
the Cross, or any other Mystery, because he emptied himself (as says the
Apostle) of his own good pleasure, and chose the Manger, but not the Cross, to
which he was conducted by his obedience. To teach us, to choose, of our selves,
Annihilation; and after, to suffer our selves willingly, as little children, to
led into Egypt, the Desert, the Cross, and the Crown.

Besides these solid enlightnings, relating to this Mystery, he had moreover,
others, touching the three Verrues of Purity, Innocence, and Simplicity; in
which chiefly consists the spirit of this Mystery, and which it produces in a
soul that is united unto it. Thus he expressed uimself concerning them:

I have beheld my soul upon the Bulwark of Innocence, and upon the Foundation
of Death, Annihilat on, and Nakedness, to live in Divine Purity, with the holy
Infant Jesus.

But because this is somewhat obscure, he writ thus more clearly, to his
Director:

I have v^ewed my soul upon its Situation of Death, Annihilation and
Nakedness; that is to say purged and stripped out of its self, and of every
creature: For when the soul is suspended, as in a desert, from beholding any
thing at all, and without any prop to rest upon God draws her straightway to
himself, by the cords of pure love which he lets down from heaven (as says
S. Katherine of Genoa) and this cord is no other, than the Infant Jesus; in
union of whom we ought to render unto God, all the rights of a perfect
Sacrifice, which in Purity, Innocence, and Simplicity, is sacrificed and
consumed for his glory. It has often been declared to me, and this is my very
basis (as far as my infidelity may permit me to say it) that I ought to act no
further, save by the conduct of the Infant Jesus, having still before me his
sacred actings, his unspotted love to his Father, his sacrificing himself for
his Glory, and the destruction of sin; his submission to all his Decrees, which
he understood distinctly, waited upon with patience, and executed in their
several seasons: In the Manger, in his flight into Egypt, in his thirty years
Concealment, in his travels till his death; acting nothing by his own, but
according to the perfect will of his Father. Whereby I am taught my duty, to
work in the same purity of spirit (...) For the conservation of which,
Innocence and Simplicity are communicated unto me, like two Bulwarks to uphold
me therein.

Innocence is one Bulwark of this Purity; or if you please, a bright Crystal,
through which I behold all things without offense; that is to say, without
receiving infection from them, so that the vices and disorders of men do not
fix or make any impression upon me. This Innocence carries me forth to my
neighbor with exceeding great benignity and sweetness, and is an incredible
relief and succor to me in all employments, by reason of the multitude of
mischiefs and sins I daily meet with; it being my Saviors pleasure I should
fly to this for remedy against them. Innocence therefore applies it self to
what is before me in all my actions, to the end that Purity should receive no
trouble in its operation; that is to say, in the respect it has toward God.

Simplicity is the other Bulwark and Guard of Purity, and has its influence
chiefly upon what is past and done, separating my soul from all duplicity, and
multiplicity, and reflections upon what has been done or seen. Thus is my soul
happily enclosed betwixt two Bulwarks, and two Walls; whereof the one, viz.
Innocence, preserves her against the present and the future; the other, of
Simplicity, from what is past and behind her.

Happy are those souls, that are called to this Mystery, and to be acquainted
with, and enjoy God, made man, in the Manger: From which, no doubt, they
receive great blessings, in the penetration and possession of the Purity,
Innocence and Simplicity of this Divine Babe; in the same manner as men find
it more easy, to obtain favors on the Birthday, or Coronation of a great
Prince, than at other times.

Thus this man of God, and Infant of Grace, declared his sense touching these
three Virtues, and such the noble and divine uses which he made of them: Purity
having influence on his intentions, ruling in all his Interior and Exterior
actions, so that thereby he singly aimed at the glory and interest of God: Just
as an infant works simply, according to nature, in looking, crying, hearing,
eating and sleeping; performing all these purely, according to natures
principles, both for the efficient and final cause of each of them. In like
manner, does the child of Grace, produce all his actions by the instinct of
Grace, and has it for his ultimate end, purely aiming at Gods glory, in
imitation of Christ Jesus, who behaved himself in the same manner in the
Manger, toward God his Father; even as a sucking child by innocence he
looks upon every object, with a pure and innocent eye, not engaged upon any
thing, but abstracted and free from all malice, all impressions of their
Species or Idea's, much more from all pollution from them; like as the Sun
shines upon a dunghill, without taint or imperfection.

Simplicity quitted him from all multiplicity, engagements, reflections upon
his own Interest, Complacencies, Vanity, passion of Joy or Sadness, from any of
his own Performances or Speeches, from Praise or Dispraise, or from the Vices
of the Times, Places, or Persons he conversed with, to receive any pollution
from them; no otherwise than a newborn child beholds a Pageantry which
passes before it, which is forgotten as soon as removed.

Lastly, Purity directed his eye in a straight line to God, pretending to
nothing but his glory, in any thing that man had a hand in.

And this proceeding of his, all ought to imitate, if they desire to make
progress in Virtue, and arrive to perfection; and particularly, those that
treat much with their neighbor in the negotiation of his salvation, that they
may do it with more advantage to him, and with no damage to themselves.

PART. IV. His Virtues, whereby he was elevated and united to God.
CHAP. 1. His Interior, and his Application to the Sacred Trinity.
ALthough what we have hitherto said of the Heroic Virtues, and famous Actions
of Monsieur Renty, which had respect either to his own perfection, or the good
of his neighbor, is very remarkable: Yet the principal and more admirable, is
that which remains: viz. The state of his Interior, and his communication with
God.

So David says, that the Kings-daughter is all glorious within; and the Holy
Ghost sets forth in lofty expressions, the Spouse in the Canticles, for the
beauty of her face, and of her whole body; But it adds, that nothing could
sufficiently be uttered concerning the hidden graces of her Soul, and
Interior, which were far more charming and attractive; even as the chief
excellencies of our B. Savior, consisted not in his Exterior, or in those
things he did either for himself, or for men; but in the intimate union he had
with God, and those actions he produced in the profundity of his Spirit toward
him: In like manner, our perfection consists not, in our good works, which
appear outwardly, nor in the exercises of Charity, Humility, Poverty, and the
like Virtues open to the eye, but in the application of our spirit to God, and
our union with him by the acts of virtue, and chiefly of the three Theological
ones. It consists, I say, in honoring and adoring him in the Temple of our
souls; in performing to him there, the Sacrifices of a lively Faith, upon the
Altar of our Understanding; in offering up the Holocausts of perfect Hope, and
ardent Charity, upon the Altar of our Will; and in a total subjection of our
spirits to his, and an union of all our faculties with him; whereby we become
purified, sanctified, and deified, proportionably, as the blessed Saints are in
heaven, where this perfection is completed.

This was Monsieur Renties practice, whereby he had a true feeling of S. Paul's
words, Your life is hid with God, through Jesus Christ; concerning which, he
expressed his thoughts thus to a friend:

There is nothing in this world, so separate from the world, as God; and the
greater the Saints are, the greater is their retirement into him: This our
Savior taught us, whilst he lived on earth, being in all his visible
employments united to God, and retired into the bosom of his Father.

His principal care was, incessantly to cultivate and adorn his soul, to unite
it intimately to God by the operations of his understanding and will; to give
up himself, with all his strength, to this hidden and divine life of Faith,
Hope and Charity, of Religion, of a mystical Death, and entire Abnegation of
himself.

Some years before his death, his particular attractive was, the contemplation
of the B. Trinity, being the last end in which all must terminate: Whereof he
gave this account to his Spiritual Guide, in the year, 1645.

I carry about with me ordinarily, an experimental verity, and a plenitude of
the presence of the Holy Trinity.

And in another Letter thus;

All things vanish out of my fancy, as soon as they appear, nothing is
permanent in me but God, through a naked faith, which causing me to resign my
self up to my Savior, affords me strength and confidence in God the Trinity;
in that the operation of the three Divine persons is manifested to me in a
distinct manner; viz. The love of the Father, which reconcileth us by his Son;
the Father and the Son who give us life through the Holy Spirit; the H. Spirit
which causes us to live in in Communion with Jesus Christ; which works in us
a mavelous alliance with the Sacred Trinity, and produces often in our
hearts by faith, such inward feelings, as cannot be expressed:

He writ also to a confident friend, and one that was much devoted to this
Sacred Mystery;

How that the proper and special effect of Christian grace is, to make us know
God in the Trinity, uniting us to the Son, who causes us to work by his
Spirit. And to say the truth, we are consecrated by our Baptism to the worship
of the B. Trinity: Therein we are consecrated to his Glory, receive its Seal,
and put on its Badge and Livery; to manifest to us, and to all the world, that
we are perfectly and absolutely its own.

He writ to the same party in the year, 1648. on the same subject.

The Feast of the blessed Trinity, gives me this occasion to write, that we
may renew our selves in the honor and dependence we have upon this
incomparable Mystery: I desire to join hearts with you, to adore that which we
are not able to express: Let us melt into an acknowledgement thereof, and
fo^tifie our selves by the grace of Faith, through Christ, to be perfected in
this adorable Mystery. Infinite things might be spoken, which my heart
resenteth, of the latitude of this grace, but I cannot utter them: I beseech
you, let us adore God, let us adore Jesus Christ, let us adore the holy Spirit;
which Spirit discovers unto us the operations of love and mercy of these
Divine Persons in us, and let us make good use thereof.

The same year he clearly expressed his condition and the manner of wholly
applying himself ^o^th, Sacred Trinity; how that his soul was most entirele
united to the three Divine Persons; from whence he received illuminations, that
surpassed all humane understanding; how he lived perpetually retired, and
locked up, as it were, with the Son of God, in the bosom of his Father: Where
this Son became his Light, his Life, and Love, and the holy Spirit his Guide,
his Sanctification and Perfection; how he did bear within himself the Kingdom
of God (which he explained by a resemblance of what the Blessed enjoy in
heaven) by virtue of that view and transcendent knowledge of the sacred
Trinity, which was communicated to him; and that pure Love by which he felt his
heart inflamed, and, as it were, transformed into God, in whom he possessed a
joy and repose beyond all expression: That in this estate he had a conformity
with the Son of God, by a participation and fellowship both in his Beatitude
and Sufferings, which he endured here below, and that by his holy Spirit were
accomplished in him, the mysteries of the whole Pilgrimage of our Savior in
this world; rendering him as a daily sacrifice to the B. Trinity, breathing
after the Resurrection, and his perfect Consummation in Glory. Such was the
disposition of this holy man toward the B. Trinity, in which he passed his
latter years, and in which he dyed, finishing his sacrifice; and was often wont
to say, That when a man is called up hither, he must abide there without any
changing.

Being guided this way, and treading these paths, he made an admirable
progress to the highest pitch of perfection attainable in this life, each
Person in the sacred Trinity working in his soul, wonderful impressions of
grace, sealing him with their particular characters, and sanctifying him in an
extraordinary manner.

The Father kept him always retired and recollected in his own bosom; where he
bestowed upon him a large share of his own infinite inclination to communicate
himself to others, and of this blessed Celestial Fecundity, in begetting
children, not of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit; enflaming his heart with a
paternal and maternal love toward mankind, from whence did flow, that
unparalleled charity whereof we have spoken.

The Son transformed him into a lively image of God, through the resemblance of
his own perfections: bestowing on him a filial spirit, to acquit himself
toward him in all his endeavors, with that singular reverence, says,
confidence, love and obedience, as is required from a Son to a Father; bringing
him into such a condition, as that God spoke to him Interiourly, producing in
him his word, accompanied with such power and strength, as was able to touch
men's souls, and work in them the blessed fruits of salvation.

The Holy Ghost (that infinite pure and reciprocal love of the Father to the
Son, and of the Son to the Father) cleansed him from all the impurities of
self-love, and self-seeking; enflamed him with a perfect love toward God,
taught him the way of spiritualizing all material things, of sanctifying all
indifferent things, of extracting good out of all evil; and finally, of leading
a life truly spiritual, after the grand pattern of our Savior. This he
expressed in brief, in a Letter to his Director, writ in the year, 1647.

The Divine goodness works in me, that which I am not able to express: I
possess even the B. Trinity, and find distinctly in my self the operations of
the three Divine Persons.

CHAP. 2. His Faith.
THe better to take this Spiritual Life in pieces, we will begin with his
Faith, the prime Theological Virtue; which Gulielmus Parisiensis calls the
Primum Vivens of the soul; and S. Paul, the first step we make in our advance
toward God.

This blessed man studied with particular care a solid foundation in this
virtue, knowing the incredible consequence thereof for a spiritual life, and
how all other virtues depend on it, as on their Root, their Rule, and Measure.

O how good a thing (says he, in one of his Letters) is it to live of Faith! I
seem to understand this Virtue every day better and better: Those that are
established in this, the life by which the just live (according to S. Paul) are
at length completed to Perfection, and enjoy here the first fruits of glory.

He possessed this grace in so high a degree, that he was more ascertained of
the presence of God, of the verity of the mysteries of our Faith, than of the
shining of the Sun. He truly lived by Faith, this was the path in which he
walked, working all by the spirit thereof: Hereby he looked upon things not
only with his corporal eyes, but with those that pierced deeper, considering
them, not according to their present or past condition, or the order of nature;
but their future and eternal, according to their relation to grace and glory;
regarding nothing, but as it was, or might be, a means of ^^s own, or others
salvation. All his works were performed by the hand of Faith, which proves
strong and effectual; which more willingly handles Ulcers, and the loathsome
soars of poor people, than gallants do Sattins or Velvets.

The pure and vigorous Faith of the primitive Christians (said he) caused them
to act without those conveniences and necessaries which we stand upon (which
indeed argue the decay and weakness of Faith) such heroic actions, as we only
now admire; these assuredly lived by Faith, without any form and composition of
their own proper spirit, in great Simplicity, Efficacy and Verity.

Being fortified by this Faith, he was wont to say, that he felt no difficulty
at all, when our Savior sensibly deserted him for a time, and sent him great
aridities; attributing all those inquietudes, impatience, and anxities, which
we labor under, in this estate of privation, to the want of this grace. I have
taken out of one of his Letters, what he writ to this purpose.

We seldom meet with persons addicted to prayer, that can behave themselves
prudently under Interior derelictions; or that can have patience to wait for
some time at the door of sensible consolations and enlightnings, without making
a forcible entry; that do not chafe themselves, and cast this way and that way,
and seek by their own means to procure them; seeking for another support than
that of Faith, which alone should suffice any spiritual man: These sensible
gusts are but sent as supplements of the littleness, and cordials for the
faintings of faith: But the just should live by faith, and upon that foundation
rest himself in expectation of our Savior with patience: Our inconveniences
arise from hence, that we are a people of little faith, to discern things by
its light, although we often pretend to know more than really we do.

To another he writ concerning this point (upon the subject of the Centurions
faith) thus:

Where shall we meet with a Faith comparable to that of the Centurion? Alas,
what a shame is this to our Spiritual persons, who talk much of Faith, but
indeed have little more than the sound, scarce any thing of the truth and
effect thereof? how few are there that can bear the afflictions of spirit or
body, with a naked Faith, and such a simplicity, as sooketh remedy only from
God, and makes use of patience, when comfort does not appear so soon as
expected: We all covet to enjoy Jesus Christ sensibly, and that he would come
to our houses, to cure our anxieties: And for want of these sensible comforts,
the Spirit runs and wanders on all hands, seeking repose, but finds it not,
because indeed it is not to be found in her action, but only in her sacrifice
made in Faith, which brings down the Spirit of Christ, which is our strength
and life, in the midst of troubles, and of death. The Centurien was ashamed and
confounded that Christ would come to his house, his Faith mounting far above
these sensible signs: Whereupon he is honored with the name of a true
believer, and so propounded to us for a pattern.

Monsieur Renty being animated by this spirit of Faith, made no reliance upon
any thing that came to him by an extraordinary way; resting neither upon
Visions, Revelations, inward Motions or Miracles, but soully upon a pure and
naked Faith, to carry him to God.

These following lines he writ to his Director, touching a business of great
importance:

I send you a Paper, which I received three months since, from a person of
great virtue, whom you know; which she had kept for me, not daring to trust it
ith any others: That which confirms me in the opinion I had of her solid
virtue is, that she never told me any thing, to which I did not find my self
predisposed Interiourly: This is as a seal to confirm my former resolutions
concerning this, without building any certainty upon the thing it self: for we
should be emptied of all reliance upon any thing, and of all reflections,
following in simplicity of Faith, without dispute, that which our Savior does
to the soul for the time present, be it concerning this or that.

Going to Beaulne, where Sister Margaret of the B. Sacrament resided (famous
for many miracles, which God had wrought in her, and a person very worthy to be
visited) he said, That he would neither desire to see her, nor speak with her;
only if our Savior should make known unto him, that such was his will, he
would endeavor it, otherwise he would not seek any occasion for it.

Another time being at Dijon, when the blessed Sacrament was exposed, some
friends inviting him to draw near to the Altar; he replied, That he had no need
of sight for to believe, and that his Faith went further than what his eyes
could show him.

Hereby we may understand the great Faith of this man of God; and undoubtedly,
it was with her eyes that he beheld every thing; and by her hands, that he
accomplished all his actions, and ascended to such a perfection of all Virtues;
from whose example we may learn the directest way to attain thereto; which is,
steadfastly to believe the verities of Christian Religion, and be perfectly
persuaded thereof: As on the contrary, the very source of all our sins and
vices, and generally of all the mischiefs in Christianity, is the weakness of
Faith, whereby we are neither thoroughly convinced of those sacred Mysteries, nor
guided in our affairs by the Rule of Faith: It was our Saviors advice, Noli
timere, tantummodo creed; Fear not, only believe: If thou believe firmly,
thou shall be delivered from all evils, and be accomplished in all virtue.

CHAP. 3. His Hope.
A Strong Faith, by a moral necessity, produces a firm Hope and Charity: A
true belief in God, what he is in himself, and what he is to us, will work in
us a strong affiance in him, and ardent charity toward him. As appeared in
Monsieur Renty, who being well grounded upon a firm Faith in God, had likewise
an undaunted confidence in him, and an inflamed affection to him.

This confidence was built upon the knowledge and experience of the Power,
Goodness, Mercy, and Bounty of God, and of the infinite Merits of our Savior:
And being grounded upon these two Pillars, he hoped all things, and believed
that he could accomplish every thing. He used to say, that when he looked at
himself, there was nothing so little, wherein he apprehended not difficulty;
but when he looked upon God, he could think nothing impossible to himself: And
this distrust of himself was not a disheartened and Lazy Humility, but
courageous and magnanimous, as is requisite in those, who undertake things
necessary, though not conscious of any ability of their own for the performance.

He writ to a person concerning these two grand points, which indeed ought to
hold the balance of all our actions even before God.

The diffidence you have in your self, makes me very intent upon the good of
such a condition, and upon the sure foundation thereof, which the Church
desires we should ever conserve, placing at the beginning of every hour of the
Divine Office, this Virsicle, Deus in Adjutorium meum intend, Domine ad
adjuvandum me festina; O Lord attend unto my help, O Lord make haste to assist
me: Whereby we learn, that the soul is in continual danger of a Precipice, if
not sustained by that infinite mercy, which he is daily to invoke, for her
preservation from ruin: And really, we should continually fall, if we were not
continually supported; therefore the Church has divided her Office for the
seven parts of the day, in that the number of seven comprehends all time: the
world being created under this number, to teach us, that we should at all times
retain this Diffidence of our selves, and Confidence in Gods assistance.

This Hope of his, was so great, that in all affairs he relied not upon his own
prudence, conduct, care, credit, providence, or any humane contrivancies, but
on God alone; saying, That after we have done our duty, with great Diffidence
in our selves, we ought to attend wholly on him, and wait his time, without
pressing the business; or entrenching upon his Prerogative. And thus he writ to
a friend:

As for my children, I leave them in the hands of the Holy Infant Jesus,
without determining any thing concerning them, not knowing what will befall to
morrow: He gives me great confidence in his protection, which renders me
altogether blind, without wishing any thing, but being ready for his will in
every thing.

Guarded with this perfect confidence, he feared nothing, but remained firm and
resolute against all accidents and encounters: He walked securely in all
places, at all times, in the streets, in the fields, by day and night,
traveling through Woods and Forests that were bruted to be dangerous, and
frequented by Robbers, without fear, without other defensive weapons than what
his confidence in God did arm him with, carrying about him so much goodness, he
was above all those frights, which nature is subject to, not moved with sudden
alarms or accidents; so that we may call him, The Christian without fear: And
to say the truth, there is nothing deserves (...) fear but sin, since nothing
else can hurt us; all other things prove, in fine, advantageous, if we make
good use of them.

One day a scaffold, on which he stood with the workmen, erected about his
building, fell down, and hurt some of them; with which he was not amazed, or
moved at all, for his own particular. His spirit remained unmovable, and in
the same constancy, being firmly settled upon him that is not subject to a
change or alteration.

A friend told him one day, that he was fearful to walk in the evening without
a sword, in the streets of Paris, and that he desired to be quit of that
timerousness, yet could not satisfy himself, to be found unarmed in case of an
assault, entreating his advice in the business: Who told him, that of a long
time he had left off the use of a sword; and that after he had commended the
business to God by prayer, he should follow his inspiration; assuring himself,
that his protection over us, is much according to our relying upon him.

These words were found in one of his Letters to his Director:

My soul being armed with Confidence, Faith, and Love, fears neither the Devil,
nor Hell nor all the stratagems of man; neither think I at all, on Heaven, or
Earth, but only how to fulfill the will of God in every thing.

He has been noted to do very notable things through the strength of this
Virtue, even at such times, when he has been afflicted with great aridities in
his Interior.

In our aridities and privation, of the sense and feeling of grace (says he,
in a Letter to a friend) is manifested an heroic abnegation of our selves to
the will of God; when under Hope, believing against Hope we show our selves to
be true sons of Abraham, Isaac shall not dye, though the knife be at his
throat; and in case the true Isaac should, in fine, be crucified, it is but to
make us conformable to the Cross, and cut of our ashes to raise us to a true
and better life.

Thus likewise he writ to his Director:

I have a very clear insight into the great want I have of my Savior: him I
behold in his riches, and my self in my deep poverty; him I look upon environed
i^ power, and my self in weakness; whereby my spirit being filled with content,
by the impression of these words, Quid est homo, quod memor es ejus? What is
man, that thou art mindeful of him? does rest upon a total abandoning of its
self into his bounty.

These words, Longanimiter ferens, bearing patiently, have dwelt long upon my
spirit, though I did not at first remember whence they were taken, or what they
meant: only this, that I must wait with patience for the commands and approach
of my Savior, without putting my self forward by my own inquest or endeavors,
but rest with faith and reverence, begging his grace, and hope in him: But a
few days ago, taking up the New Testament, in opening the Book, I did light
upon the sixth Chapter to the Hebrews, where the Apostle speaks of Faith and
Patience, whereby we obtain the promises; qui fide and patientia haereditabit
promissiones; who by faith and patience shall inheret the promises; and to
prove this, brings in the example of Abraham, and sic longanimiter ferens
adeptus est repromissionem; and so waiting patiently obtained the promise: This
passage touched me to the very heart, and relieved my languishing; together
with another passage of S. James, which presented it self to my eye at the same
time, Patientes igitur estore fratres, usque ad adventum Domini, ecce agricola
expectat preciosum fructum terrae, patienter ferens; Be patient therefore, my
brethren, till the coming of our Lord, behold the husbandman waits patiently,
till he receive the fruit of the earth: Hereby I was settled in peace, upon the
solid foundation of Hope and Abnegation.

As this incomparable Virtue enricheth the soul that is perfectly stated in it,
with a profound repose, a solid joy, a wonderful courage, and sets it aloft
above all Terrestrial things, with a generous contempt of whatsoever the world
esteems and desires, giving it a taste of the pleasures that are Eternal (as it
is not difficult for him that has assured hopes of a glorious Kingdom, to set
at naught a Pad of straw;) so did it communicate to this holy man, all these
excellent treasures, and imprinted in his soul all these noble reflections.

Whereby he was incited with all his strength, to encourage others in the
pursuit of this Virtue, knowing by his own experience, the inestimable benefits
thereof, understanding it to be our Lenitive in all disasters, our staff and
stay in all weaknesses, and our secure haven in all tempests; instructing them
continually, how that God, to the end that he might drive us into this Port,
and cause us to rest in it, does frequently permit us to be assaulted with
temptations and trials, the deeplier to engage us to have recourse to him,
begging his aid and succor, and relying upon him with confidence. The like
instruction he gave to a certain person, upon occasion of the Apostles
amazement, when they beheld our Savior walking upon the waters, and took him
for a Chost.

Think you this was without a special providence, that our Savior suffered his
Disciples to go alone into that ship, and permitted a contrary wind to arise?
Who knows not, that in the same manner he fashions the souls of the faithful,
by his absences, and by their trials, that he may afterward manifest his
power, upon the seas and tempests, quickening thereby our Faith, and showing
himself to be the Messiah and true Deliverer of the world: But, observe we, how
many Christians in their sufferings, are affrighted, with the Apostles, seeing
our Savior marching on the waters: Every thing makes them afraid the winds,
the waves, yea, even Christ himself (that is) the anxiteies of their spirit,
their own disputings, and also those good coursels that others give them for
their establishment upon Christ Jesus, before God: All this appears but as a
Ghost to amaze them, unless Christ himself graciously appear yet more unto
them, to comfort and strengthen them.

Shall we always want confidence, thus to think Christ a Phantasm? Shall we not
address our selves to him in all our necessities, as to our Lord and Deliverer?
The Jews brought all their sick folks to him, and he cured them: What, is he
become a greater Physician of the body, than of the soul? No, no, our little
Faith, our little Love, our little Confidence, is the cause of our
languishings, and unfruitful anxieties of spirit: Let us go strait to him, and
all will be cured.

CHAP. 4. His Love of God.
SEeing the Love of God is without contradiction the most excellent and perfect
of all virtues, and that which principally, and above all the rest makes a man
a Saint; we cannot doubt, that this holy man was possessed thereof in a very
eminent degree, and that he loved God with all his heart. This Love he founded
upon his infinite perfections and favors; which may be perceived by what he
writ to his Director in the year, 1648. concerning this Queen of all Virtues.

Our Glorious Lord has from time to time, with his resplendent beams, shone
upon my soul quickening her therewith; which have appeared in such several
manners, and have wrought such great things in a short time, as would take up
far more to write them, which really I am afraid to undertake or begin. They
all concenter in this one point, the love of God through Jesus Christ, his
communication of himself to us by the Incarnation of his Eternal Word, and ours
to him through the same Word, becoming our brother, conversing with us, and
erecting, as it were, a mutual society, that we may be all one in him, and
experimentally feel what the love of God is toward us.

In all that I read in the Scripture, I neither understand nor find any thing
else but this Love; and perceive clearly, that the very design and end of
Christianity is nothing but it, Finis autem praecepti est charitas de cord
puro; The end of the Law is love, out of a sincere heart: And this is acquired
by Faith in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle says in the following words, Fide non
ficta; by faith unfeigned: Which uniteth and binds us to him; whereby we
sacrifice unto the Divinity, our souls and our bodies, through his Spirit,
which conducteth us to the complete end of the Law, to deliver us up to God,
and bring down him to us, in charity, and a gracious inexplicable union, to
whom be praise for ever, Amen.

My heart was this mor^ing enlightened with a great Charity, upon these words,
That we are set in this world to know, and love, and serve God: Which gave me
to understand, that the true effect of the knowledge of God, is to annihilate
our selves before him: for this knowledge coming to discover unto us, that
infinite Majesty, the soul abaseth and emptieth it self, through the deep
sense of fear and reverence, according to the measure of this discovery: And
this is the first step of the soul in this estate.

Next he love of God manifested to us in the giving us his Son, begins to
affect us with love: And as the former view of his greatness contracted us in
fear, so this his love in Christ Jesus enlarges and elevateth us to love God
in him and to conceive some good desires according as his spirit breathes in
us: And this is the second step.

The third is, to serve him (that is) by putting this love into practice by
good works: For these desires are but blossoms, and these good works the fruit:
I could say much on this subject, if I could express my own feeling of it: For
here we find all in all; that is, God revealed by Jesus Christ, loved and
served by his Spirit. This Divine Lord sets up a blessed Society, and a Kingdom
in our souls, wherein he rules and reigns there by love unspeakable and
eternal.

Writing to another person, he expresses himself thus:

I give thanks to our Lord, for that he has disposed you to a perfect
Abnegation of your self: This is done, to lead you into the pure estate of
love; which without that, cannot be pure; in that our love to God consists
not in receiving gifts and graces from him, but in renouncing all things for
him, in an Oblivion of our selvee, in suffering constantly and courageously for
him.

Thus did he express the nature of Love, not to consist in taking, but giving;
and the more and greater matters we give, the more we manifest our Love: This
Love carries up the Lover, according to the measure of its flame, continually
to think upon his Beloved, to will what may please him, to study his interest,
to procure his glory, to do every thing that may work his contentment, and to
be extremely apprehensive of any thing that may offend him.

Accordingly, he being all on fire with the love of God, was perfectly sinsible
of these effects: All his thoughts, words, and works were the productions of
this love; for notwithstanding he practiced other virtues, yet they drew their
original from this Furnace of Charity, which in him was the beginning, and
motive, and end of all: which he testified to his Confidents frequently, and in
words so enkindled with it, as were sufficient to warm the most frozen hearts.
I have observed (says one of his Confidents) this Divine fire so ardent in his
blessed soul, that the flames thereof have burst forth into his Exterior; and
he has told me, that when ever he proncunced the name of God, he tasted such a
sweetness upon his lips, as could not be expressed; and that he was even
pierced through with a h^avenly suavity. To another he write about 9. or 10.
years ago that he could nor conceal from him, how he felt a fire in his heart,
which burnt and consumed without ceasing.

Another of them assures, that he has often seen him enflamed with this Love
of God, that he appeared even like one besides himself; and how he told him,
when these transportings were upon him, that he was ready to cast himself into
thefire to testify his Love to God: and in one of his Letters to a friend, he
concludes thus.

I must now hold my peace, yet when I cease to speak, the fire within, that
consumes me, will not let me rest: Let us burn then, and burn wholly, and in
every part, for God: since we have no being but by him, why then do we not live
to him? I speak it aloud, and it would be my crown of glory, to seal it with my
blood, and this I utter to you with great freedom.

In a Letter to another thus: I know not what your intent was, to put into your
Letter these words, Deus meus, and omnia; my God, and my all: Only you invite
thereby, to return the same to you, and to all creatures. My God, and my all;
my God, and my all; my God, and my all. If perhaps you take this for your
motto, and use it to express how full your heart is of it; think you it
possible I should be silent upon such an invitation, and not express my sense
thereof! Likewise, be it known to you therefore, that he is my God, and my all:
And if you doubt of it, I shall speak it a hundred times over. I shall add no
more, for any thing else is superfluous to him that is truly penetrated with my
God, and my all: I leave you therefore in this happy state of Jubilation, and
conjure you to beg for me of God, the solid sense of these words.

Being transported with this Love of God, it wrought in him an incredible zeal
of his honor, which he procured and advanced a thousand ways: Which may be
understood partly by what we have already writ, and several other which are
unknown, because either they were wholly spiritual, or concealed by him even
from his most intimate friends, The 12 of March, in the year, 1645. he writ
thus to his Director, upon this subject:

One day being transported with an earnest desire to be all to God, and all
consumed for him, I offered up to him all I could, yea, and all that I could
not: I would willingly have made a Deed of Gift to him of Heaven and Earth, if
they had been mine. And in another way, I would willingly have been the
underling of all mankind, and in the basest estate possible; yea, and if
supported by his grace, I could have been content, to have suffered eternal
pains with the damned, if any glory might have accrew'd to him thereby. In this
disposition of a calm zeal, there is no sort of Martyrdom, no degree of
greatness or littleness, of honor or disgrace, that passed not through my
spirit, and which my soul would not readily have embraced for the advancement
of his glory: Here a man would be content to be a King, to govern all; or the
meanest Beggar, or most miserable Wretch, to suffer all for him; and this
without reason, through an excess of reason. It is an impossible thing to
understand, how in so short time the soul should wish such different things,
and a large discourse would be too narrow to declare one circumstance thereto
belonging: All I could do in this condition, was to give up my liberty to God,
writing the Deed in paper, and signing it with my own blood.

See here the zeal of a man, all on fire with the love of God, where likewise
his conformity to his will, an infallible mark of this love, is very
observeable. Those persons who knew him perfectly, report, that this intimate
union of his will to Gods will, was one of his singular graces; and himself
declared, that he was constantly in this blessed frame, to which he had applied
himself more particularly for several years, in which he made it evidently
appear, that the object and end of all his actions, was the Divine will, into
which his own was wholly absorpt.

He writ thus to one concerning the sickness and death of the Countess of
Castres, to whom he had (as we have formerly mentioned) a very near relation,
founded upon grace.

I must tell you, that during my absence from the Countess of Castres, my heart
was tenderly sensible of her pain, knowing that she suffered very much: But my
desire submits to the Order of God, and when that is signified to me, he gives
me grace to obey. Coming to Paris, I received the news of her death; when I
resigned my self wholly to God, attending his good pleasure for what would
follow.

Another time he writ thus to his Director:

I have been held these three weeks with a seavour, together with a defluxion,
and an exceeding great weakness; and my frame of spirit during this condition,
has been a simple prosecution of, and adherence to the will and pleasure of
God: I discover nothing in particular worth writing to you, saving that I have
a heart ready to receive any afflictions that can befall me. I desire whatever
is decreed from above, and beg it with all my heart.

We have set down before, how that in the year, 1641. one of his children whom
he dearly loved, departed this life. When the news was brought him, he spoke
not one word, nor showed the least disturbance, but absolutely submitted to the
order of God, corresponding thereunto in a perfect reconciliation of his own
affection to the child, and his great loss of him.

At the end of the year, 1643. his Lady fell desperately sick, even to death,
being left of all her Physicians, speechless, and without sense; but he,
notwithstanding the deep resentment of such a heavy loss, and a business that
touched him to the quick, manifested such an absolute conformity to the will of
God, as brake forth into these words:

I cannot deny, but my nature is deeply affected with the sense of so great a
loss, yet my spirit is filled with so wonderful a joy, to see my self in such a
state, as to give up and sacrifice to my God, a thing so near and dear to me,
that if civility did not forbid it, I would make appear outwardly, and give
some public testimony of my readiness thereunto.

By this heroic deportment, he evidenced that the will of God was so
absolutely his, that he not only willed that which he willed, though never so
difficult, but that he willed it as God does, that is, with much pleasure and
content: for so God does not simply will and act things, but wills and acts
them with infinite it delight, being in himself most infinitely happy. But
pleased God to restore his Lady to her health, with respect (as we may piously
imagine) to this heroical carriage of his faithful servant; as likewise to avow
he made to our blessed Lady, for the obtaining thereof.

Neither did his conformity only go thus far, but advanced further yet, even
to things of a higher consideration, referring to his perfection and salvation;
for notwithstanding that he earnestly aspired to Holiness, and endeavored
thereafter with an unspeakable courage, fervor, and diligence, yet all this
was with an entire resignation of himself to the designs of God, concerning
himself

For opening his case to this Director upon this point, he writ thus:

My present condition consists in an adherence of my will to whatsoever God is
pleasad concerning me, and this I am sensible of from the bottom of my soul: I
have of late undergone very great aridities of spirit (except some few
intervals) where all is said open, and my soul resigneth herself to God in an
inexplicable manner, from which she remains full of certainty and of truths,
which will not easily vanish, though they cannot without difficulty be
unfolded,

Having writ and signed with his own blood a Deed of Gift of his Liberty, as we
have mentioned before, he writ thus to the same person concerning it:

From that instant, God has bestowed upon me such a conformity to his will,
that as I acknowledge all things to be guided by his hand, so likewise I
receive every thing from it.

And to another intimate friend he writ thus:

The party (meaning himself) has, since that time, felt such a wonderful great
conformity to the will of God, that he can will nothing, but what God wills;
neither can he understand how any man should will any thing else: this makes
every thing pass smoothly and currently.

This disposition of spirit made him look upon things, not in themselves, but
as contained in the will of God; and this he gave as a chief advice to attain
to perfection.

It behooves a soul (says he) to give up it self to God; walking on in
simplicity in all its operations; applying it self to every thing, not for the
thing it self, but in order to the will of God, not engaged at all to it, but
to God, obeying and honoring him in every thing.

And from this perfect subordination to the will of God, sprung his admirable
Tranquillity of mind; and from this fountain, flowed those rivers of peace and
profound repose, which he possessed in so great perfection; that from the most
sudden surprizals, his spirit was not altered one jot, neither were his
inferior faculties of body put into any disorder, as himself acknowledges.

For thus he writ to me one day:

I comprehend not that thing you call Mortification: If one lives in this
estate of Conformity; for such finding no resistance in his spirit, is not
capable of it: Who so wills whatever God wills, is daily content, let what
will happen.

CHAP. 5. His great Reverence and Fear of God, which produces in him a most
admirable purity of Conscience.
ONe of the most excellent dispositions of the soul, in her Interior life, is
that of great Reverence in the presence of God; as the Scriptures mention, that
the Angels continually abase and cast down themselves with Reverence before his
Sacred Majesty: And Monsieur Renty was deeply affected with this noble part of
Devotion, speaking to God with so great Reverence, as it proceeded into
trembling.

And this unspeakable respect unto Gods Greatness, caused him often to walk in
the fields bareheaded, in the heat of the Sun or any other unseasonable
weather: And being asked by a near friend, what it was that kept him in such a
constant awfulness, and how he attained to that wonderful Reverence he bore to
God, in all places, in all employments, and at all times. He answered, The
sight of his glorious Majesty, which continually seems present by me,
produces in me this effect, keeping me in exceeding great awe, with a deep
sense of his greatness, and my own vileness, and nothingness, in comparison of
him. A mote in the Sun you will say is little, but I am far less than that
before God, being indeed nothing.

Writing to his Director, June 1. 1647. he says:

I have been busied all this last month in studying my own baseness, I am
seized with great confusion, accompanied with exceeding Reverence before God,
as one that has his eyes cast down before the Throne of his Majesty, not
daring to look up.

And to another person he writ thus:

Let us behave our selves in the presence of God, as the men of the world do
before their Prince; who not withstanding they be men of spirit, and have their
heads full of weighty business, yet stand bare in his presence, and with modest
and humble behavior, forbear to speak, not listening to any thing but what he
speaks, forgetting all other business: And all this they are obliged to by
civil respect, and pay this duty to one, perhaps, inferior to themselves in
natural parts. How much more should the Holiness, the Majesty, the Infinite
Greatness of God, ravish us from our selves, and work in us a most profound
Reverence.

Behold here what wonderful deep sense of his own vileness, this holy man bore
in the presence of God; which indeed well becomes, not only sinners, but the
holiest men upon earth. He that beholds the Sun from a valley, when it rises
and appears upon the point of a high mountain, thinks him that stands above, to
be near it, and that he is able almost to reach it with his hand, when the same
man notwithstanding, beholds it at a vast distance above his head; and though
in reallity he is nearer it than the other in the valley, yet within such a
small proportion, as scarce deserves to be named, in respect of the total
distance.

In like manner God, in his Greatness, his Majesty, and all his Infinite
Perfections, is so far above, not only us that are most imperfect, but even
all those that are arrived to the top of the greatest perfection, that all of
us must debase and cast down our selves, with a most profound annihilation in
his presence.

This great respect he bore to the presence of God, together with his ardent
love toward him (of which we have spoken in the former Chapter) imprinted in
him a horrible aversion to the Teast thing that might offend him; as likewise,
a wonderful purity of Conscience. His Confessors report, that he excelled
herein even to astonishment; and that the Prince of Darkness had very little in
him. He told a familiar friend one day, that it much afflicted him when he was
to confess to any others besides his ordinary Confessor, because they not
understanding his condition, could not so well apprehend him; and that he was
often troubled to find something to confess to them.

And this purity will be best known to us, by its contrary; viz. his sins,
which he was accustomed to send monthly to his Director, a Letter, who lived a
great distance from him; and these were sent by common messengers, signed with
his one hand, which were subject to be intercepted; an evidence of an heroic
humility, in a person of his quality.

Take here what he writ November 27. 1646.

I purpose, if you allow of it, to put my self into a regular course, to give
you an account of my state the 25 day of every month: And then coming to his
faults he says, For my faults, I give you here a few, which I can remember, of
those many, I have committed.

Upon two several occasions, I spoke two words passionately to my servants.

I omitted twice to recite the prayer, Angelus Domini, through forgetfulness.

In another Letter to him, he writ thus:

I am as blind (or rather more) in espying my faults, as in other things:
Only in general, I have a deep sense of my misery; and I can say, that I am
not ignorant of my unworthyness, and that lamentable corruption which sin has
wrought in me; the sad effects whereof, have been these this month, Speaking
with one about a deed of Charity; which was, to dispose of some Orphans, for
their education in the true Religion, I named inconsiderately two Gentlemen
their Kinsmen, who had refused to be employed therein.

I mentioned the fauls of a certain person, to another, that knew of them
before, upon design to make him understand, that he was in a better condition:
But my Conscience presently reproached me, that it had been sufficient to have
spoken of the good conditions of this party, without mentioning the evil of the
other: In which I confess I meddled too much in that affair. In sum, I am a
s^ragler from God, and a ground overrun with thorns.

In another:

My fauls are as one great heap, which I feel in my self obstructing the light
from God, I am strangely remiss and ungrateful: I assure you I find much in my
self, to confound and humble me.

Having been employed a whole day in taking up a business, and in the evening
seeing one come intr the room, who was reputed by the company, to have
maintained an untruth, I said inconsiderately, and for want of care, Behold the
man that maintained that falsity.

In another:

I am sensible of my fault, in mentioning a trifle, not without some vanity;
viz. that I had been the means of placing a servant in such a great family: I
had a motion within me, not to have spoken it, and yet it escaped from me; of
which I am exceeding sensible, because I should have been faithful to the
spirit of God.

Also I took place at the table of a Priest, I made great difficulty of it at
first, but I knew not how I ^ielded not to the Priest, but to a person of
quality present, that pressed me to it.

Lo here some faults of this servant of God, which questionless discover the
great purity of his Conscience, which was so bright, as to show these failings,
which in some manner, might pass for perfections: or much like those spots
which curious eyes discover in the stars.

And truly, these may demonstrate, to what height of Purity and Innocence, a
soul that is watchful over herself, may arrive: Seeing a Gentleman of his birth
and age, in a Secular life, and the throng of so great employments, attained
hereto; only if we use the like diligence, and be faithful to the Spirit of
God, the only means to attain to this perfection.

CHAP. 6. His great Reverence to Holy Things.
MOnsieur Renty did not only carry a great Reverence to, God, but likewise to
all things belonging to his Service, and to all Holy things; which sprang from
that sense of Virtue and Religion imprinted in his soul, producing the like
fruits Exteriourly.

In the first place, he had a singular respect to all Holy places; and it will
be very hard to reco^n, with what Respect and Devotion he beh^ved himself in
Churches. At his entrance, his demeanor was exceeding modest, and religiously
grave: He never sare down there, nor put on his hat, not so much as in Sermon
time; he would abide there as long as possibly he could, and has been
observed, upon great Festivals, to remain there upon his knees for seven or
eight hours: He was very silent in the Church, and if any person of any
condition spoke to him, his answer was short; and in case the business required
longer time, he would carry him forth, or some other way free himself thereof.

Secondly, he used great veneration to all Ecclesiastical persons, even to the
meanest; but the Reverence he gave to Priests was wonderful. He would never
take the upper hand of them, without extreme violence, as appears by that
passage in the former Chapter. Whenever he met them, he saluted them with
profound humility, and in his travel, would light off his horse to do it, and
render them all honor possible. When they came to visit him, he entertained
them cordially, with exceeding great respect, at their departure, waiting on
them to the gate; and if any dined at his table, gave them the upper place,
which civility he observed to his own Chaplain.

When any Mission was in any of his Lordships, he entertained the Missioners
apart, where they were served in plate, when other Gentlemen and persons of
quality that visited him, were only in pewter, waving herein all humane
respects. A Nobleman and his Lady came one day to him upon a visit, accompanied
with a Priest, that was Tutor to their children. After he had received them,
observing the Priest at the lower end of his Hall, with some of their Retinue;
quitting civilly the Nobleman and his Lady, he went down to the Priest, showing
great respect to him, as to the most honoatable person of the company.

In fine, his opinion of the Priesthood was so venerable, looking upon it as
the most potent means for procuring the glory of God; that he said to a friend,
That he had a design to enter into that Order, if God should ever bring him
into a condition capable of it.

And as he had this singular Reverence toward them, so likewise had he an
earnest desire that they, and generally all Ecclesiastical persons, should
understand the excellency of the condition, to which God had called them,
leading a life agreeable to their Dignity. He writ to his Director in the year,
1645. upon occasion of several Ecclesiastics of his acquaintance, who
correspond not to their Profession and Obligation; that his heart melted into
sorrow for them, and that he prostrated himself before his Savior, and begged
with tears for some Apostolic Spirits to be sent amongst us our poor Fishermen;

Give us, O Lord, our poor Fishermen, I often repeated; I meant the Apostles.
But this word ran much in my mind, not being able to use any other; and my
spirit wronght much upon these words, Pescheurs and Pecheurs, Fishermen and
Sinners. I look upon these men, simple indeed in their Exterior, but great
Princes in their Interior, whose life and outward appearance vile, in the eyes
of men, and estranged from the pomp of the world; converted souls, by their
Sanctity, by their Prayers, by their V^gilance and restless Labors: And herein
I discover a great mistake ordinary in the world; which believes, that outward
greatness and pomp, is the way to keep up ones credit, and render him more
capable to do good to his neigbours: But we are foully mistaken, for it is
grace that has power upon souls, and an holy and humble life, that gains
hearts.

With the same spirit he bewailed much, the hasty and irreverent reciting of
their Office in many places.

Being this day present at Divine Service (says he in a Letter to me) many
words therein put me in mind of the holiness thereof; and yet I could not
without much grief, take notice of some chanting it hastily, without devotion
or spirit, and others hearing it accordingly: Good God, what pity is this!
where is our faith? My eyes were ready to run over with tears, but I forced my
self to refrain them.

In the third place, he had a great respect and love to Religious Persons, and
all such as dedicated themselves to the Service of God, encouraging and
assisting them with all his might.

This Letter he writ to one, that was assaulted with great combats.

I must needs let you know, the tender resentment I have of those tempests, and
present storms that you endure: I know no reason, why men should alarm you
thus, nor that you have done any thing against the Gospel, which is the only
thing they should condemn you for: I believe it will be very hard for them, to
gather a just cause of reproach from your design. For my own part, I do not
wonder at these crosses, its sufficient to know, that you belong to Jesus
Christ, and do desire to follow him, reckoning contradiction to be your portion
in these days of your flesh. Be you only firm in your confidence upon our
Lord, suffering no storms from without to trouble you, or obscure that light
that has guided and pressed you to this business. I pray God deliver you from
the reasonings of flesh and blood, which often multiply upon us in such
matters; assuring you, that if you give not car to them, God will manifest
himself unto you (that is) he will comfort and fortify you, in faith, and in
experience of the gifts of his Holy Spirit.

To another he writ thus:

Blessed for ever be the Blessed Infant Jesus, for the happy entrance of those
two devout souls into Religion, which you mention: I shall rejoice exceedingly
in their perseverance, the best argument of their effectual calling. If the
other party you know of, had a little more confidence and courage, to break her
fetters, it would be a great step for her: And sur^ly, there is not need of so
much prudence and deliberation, to give up our selves to him, who to the
Gentiles is foolishness, and to the Jews a stumbling block. This world is a
strange cheat and amusement, insinuating into, and infecting every thing. God
has no need of our good parts, nor of our rare qualities, who commonly
confounds the wisdom of the wise by little things, which he chooses. Blessed be
that littleness, which is held for weakness, and yet overthrows all the Power
and Prudence of flesh.

Treating with some Religious Persons, he seemed, as it were, rapt on a sudden,
with the consideration of their happy condition, speaking to them thus:

O how happy are you my Sisters!

After which, falling upon a discourse of their Vocation, he spoke so
effectually, as wrought in them, an ample acknowledgement of their obligation
to God, and a courage to proceed in well doing.

This following Letter he writ to a Gentlewoman newly entered into Religion, who
next under God, did owe her calling to him.

I thank my Savior with all Reverence, for those good dispositions to your
Profession, signified in your Letter. I understand, and am sensible of abundant
grace wrought in you, whereby I assure my self, of a noble pregress I am to
expect, from the bounty of God; who is to that soul, that gives herself to him,
Merces magna nimis; Her exceeding great reward. You have made a leap which puts
you in a new world: Blessed and adored be God, who in the fullness of time, out
of his wisdom and love to a soul, sends his Son unto it to redeem ^t from the
Law of Servitude, and translates it into the Adoption of his Sons. This has he
now wrought in you, in a more special manner, and the excellentest way that
could be. You was never united to Jesus Christ, as you are now, by your holy
Profession: You had heretofore something to give, that was never before
engaged, and he something to receive, that was not formerly in his possession:
But now all is given, and all is received, and the mutual donation is
accomplished: No more Self, no more Life, no more Inheritance, but in Jesus
Christ: He is all, in all things, until the time, that (according to the
Apostle) he delevering us up all, and wholly to his Father; his Father also
shall be i^ Jesus, and in all his members, all in all, for ever. Amen.

Fourthly, he had a very great Devotion to all the Saints in Heaven, but more
partifulatly to S. Joseph, and S. Teresa; whom in the year, 1640. he chose for
his Patroness; and above all the rest, to the Saint of Saints, the B. Virgin;
in testimony whereof, he dedicated himself to her Service at Ardilliers, then,
when he designed himself for a Carthusian. And in the year, 1640. he desired to
be admitted into the Society erected to her honor, in the house of the
professed of the Jesuits of S. Lewis; and for many years, he wore a seal upon
his arm; with her Image graven, wherewith he sealed all his Letters. We have
likewise mentioned, how he gave to an Image of Nostre-Dame de Grace, a heart of
Crystal, set in Gold, to testify to that Admirable Mother (as he used often
to style her) his love; and that with this heart, he resigned up to her his own.

Finally, this man of God, most entirely honored and loved the Spouse of
Christ, his Holy Church, reverencing every thing that came from her, making
great account of all her ceremonies, saying, That he found a certam grace, and
particular virtue in the prayers and customs of the Church: conforming himself
most readily to her practices. Being present commonly at High-Mass in Paris, he
would go to the Offering amongst the people, and ordinarily with some poor man:
He assisted at ceremonies, where it was rare to find, not only men of his
quality, but far meaner persons; as, the consecrating of the Fonts in the Holy
Week, at long Processions, in all extremities of weather.

Upon which occasion, he writ one day to a friend:

Our Procession goes this day into the Suburbs, and since our Savior has
favored us with this great mercy, to be of this little flock, we ought to
follow his standard; and I take it for a signal honor, to follow the Cross,
which way, our holy Mother, the Church, leads us; there being nothing in her,
but what is glorious, since she acts in every thing, by the Spirit of Religion,
in the presence of God; whereby she unfolds great mysteries, to those that are
humble and respective.

From which expressions and actions, we may infer, that he being a man of such
quality, and taken up with such a multitude of business, had a very reverend
esteem of all the ceremonies of the Church, otherwise he would never have
rendered such Obedience and Honor to them.

And though it be most true, that he highly honored these ceremonies, yet he
desired likewise, that by the Exterior pomp that appeared to the eyes,
Christians might be led on to the Interior, and more Spiritual, complaining,
that the outward Magnificence wherewith Churches are adorned, do often stay and
amuse them, and instead of carrying them on to God their chief end, diverts
them from him. To this purpose he writ thus to a friend:

We should take notice of that simplicity, in which the Divine Mysteries were
conveyed to us, that we may not be held too long with the splendor, in which
at this day they are celebrated: These thoughts came into my mind, in hearing
the Organs and Church Music, and beholding the rich Ornaments used in the
Divine Office; we must look through this state, at that spirit of Simplicity,
Purity, and Humility, of their primitive Institution: Not but that these are
holy and useful; but that we should pass through it to the Simplicity and
Poverty of Bethlehem, Nazareth, Egypt, the Wilderness, and the Cross.

But above all, he was singularly devoted to an union of spirit and affection,
and universal communion of all good things, whith all the faithful, in all
places of the world; and to be admitted into the communion of Saints, being an
Article of our Creed, very dear unto him.

Wherefore he highly valued all, of each Nation and Profession, without
espousing any particular spirit, or interest, to respect one above others, to
magnify one, and derogate from another: He honored all Ecclesiastics
Secular, and communicated with them concerning all his Exercises of Charity for
his Neighbor: he gave great respect to all Parish Priests, was very
serviceable to him of his own Parish: he frequented the Societies of the
Religious, loved and made use of them for direction of his conscience.

And notwithstanding the great variety, and several orders of them in the
Church, yet was not his heart divided, but affected with an equal esteem, and
approbation, and a general affection to all, according to their degree, being
guided herein by one Spirit; viz. that of Christ Jesus, which enliveneth all
the faithful, as members of his body; in the same manner, as out bodily
members, notwithstanding they be different, in sight, figure, and offices, are
knit together, and all perfectly agree, because they are all quickened by the
same soul: All misintelligence and disagreeing is a sign of two spirits that
rule there; and division is the principle of death.

Concerning this communion of Saints, he one day suffered some difficulty:
Whereupon he writ this excellent Letter to his Directo^:

I find experimentally, a real union both in light and faith with the party I
mentioned, which is more than palpable, giving me assurance, that we are all
one. Upon this occasion I shall acquaint you, in what manner my mind has been
busied these few last days, and is yet full of it; and to the end my relation
may be more intelligible, I shall take the matter somewhat higher.

The operation I have found in my self for these two or three years, has
constantly held me fixed in the pursuit of our Savior Christ, to find in him
Eternal-Life before God the Father, through the influence of his Spirit; of
which I have from time to time given you account: And now I confess to you,
that though for that time I also honored from the bottom of my heart, our B.
Lady, the Saints and Angels, and have been desirous to express it upon all
occasions; yet so it was, that their presence and their commerce was obscured
in, and, as it were, very remote from my soul.

I assure you, that those thoughts has frequently run in my mind; saying thus
within my self, I so much honor our Lady, and some other Saints and Angels,
and I know not where they are: I lifted up my heart easily toward them, but
there was no presence of them at all, at least, such as I now perceive it. Some
months ago, I possessed an opening, and a light in my soul, accompanied with
powerful effects, concerning love and dear union with God, making me to
conceive inexplicable things of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (who is
perfect Charity) not by the reasonings and discourses of the understanding, but
by a single view, most by one touch penetrating the heart with love: And I
beheld, how the Son of God our Savior, came to advance us by his Incarnation,
into this love, uniting himself to us, whereby to reduce us all into this
intimate and sweet union, until he shall have completed us all in himself, to
be made, all of us, one day, all in God, after he has delivered up his Kingdom
to his Father, Ut sit Deus omnia in omnibus; That God may be all in all: And we
enter into this blessed union, with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Some ten or twelve days since, being in my morning prayers, on my knees, to
pray unto God, I perceived in my self, that I could find^ no entrance unto him,
only I kept my self there much humbled, but the sight of the Father, the
access to him of the Son (with whom I ordinarily converse, with as much
confidence, as if he were yet upon earth) and the assistance of the holy Ghost,
seemed at a strange distance, withheld from me; and I perceived an unworthiness
in my self, so great, so real, and so penetrating, that I could no more lift up
the eyes of my soul to heaven, than these of my body.

Than was i^ given me to understand, that I had really that unworthiness which
I felt. But that I must seek my entry to God, and to our Savior, in the
Communion of Saints: Whereupon I was on an instant possessed with a wonderful
presence, of the respect and love, and union of the B. Virgin, the Angels and
Saints, which I am not able to express, nor to utter the greatness and solidity
of this grace: For this union is Life Eternal, and the Ecclesiastical Paradise;
and this union is both for the Saints in Heaven, and those on earth, which I
have almost always in full view and presence.

From thenceforward I understood, that we were not made by God, to be alone,
and separate from others, but to be united unto them, and to compose with them
one divine total: Even as a beautiful stone, fitted for the head of a column,
is altogether unprofitable, till it be settled in its place, and cemented to
the body of the building, without which it has neither its preservation, its
beauty, nor its end. This meditation left me in the love, and in the true and
experimental connection of the communion and communication of Saints; yet with a
due order of those to whom I am more united, which is my Life in God, and in
Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the contents of that Letter.

CHAP. 7. His devotion to the Holy Sacrament.
ONe of the greatest Devotions of this holy man, was, that to the H. Eucharist,
considered both as a Sacrifice, and as a Sacrament; of which he had ever an
incredible esteem, honoring it with all possible reverence, and affecting it
with tender love, blessing and praising God for its institution, and exciting,
both by his word and pen, the whole world to do the same.

He was accustomed to say, that it was instituted, to stay and place our
Savior, God and Man, in the midst of us, to obtain for us, all the benefits of
grace, whereof we are capable here, and to dispose us for those of glory. That
the great design of God, in the Incarnation, the Life, Death and Resurrection
of his Son, was to convey unto us his Spirit, to be unto us Life Eternal; which
Spirit he has taught us by his Word, merited for us by his Death, and does
more confer upon us from his estate of Glory. And the better to convey this
unto us, to cause us to live thereby, and dye in our selves, he gives himself
to us in this most Holy Sacrament, dead, raised up, and glorified, to produce
in us, by the operation of his Spirit, these two effects of death and life.

He was not only present every day at Mass, but took it for a great honor to
serve the Priest himself: He received every day, if not hindered by very
important business, or some pressing occasion of Charity. And as the honor we
render to this B. Sacrament, consists not in often receiving, but in
communicating well and perfectly; he took all care thereof, that could be
expected from one of so holy life, and eminent Piety.

He spent many hours, in prayers, upon his knees, before the Blessed Sacrament.
And being once asked by a friend, How he could remain there so long? He
answered, That there he recreated his spirit, receiving from thence refreshment
and new forces; and yet sometimes he encountered with some trouble in that
Devotion, which may be gathered from this Letter to his Director, dated the 27
of June, in the year, 1647.

I have been very poor all this month, I know not whether I was ever so
lumpish, both in spirit and body, as I was upon the Festival day of the Blessed
Sacrament. I was present at Service, at Procession at Mass, at Communion, heard
the Sermon, at Vespers, and Compline; but like a very beast, not knowing how to
demean my self, either kneeling, or standing, I was in a kind of restless
condition of body, and very wandering and distracted in spirit; only I knew
well, that in the bottom of my soul. I had a desire to honor God through his
Son Christ Jesus.

After Compline, I found my self so dull and heavy, that seeing my self unable
to remain before the Blessed Sacrament, for I fell all along, I resolved to
try, whether upon retiring, and refreshing my self a little, I should be any
better: But for all that, I found my self more tired and discomposed in body
and mind, than if I had had the courage to have lain there still all along
upon the ground.

Hereupon I reflected upon what I had formerly read, in a Paper you sent me
concerning a certain virtuous person, afflicted with the like stupefaction:
Whereupon I rose up, and set my self under the Crucifix, before the Holy
Sacrament, determining to honor my Savior in all conditions and tempers.
Being thus upon my knees, by the Divine assistance, I got the victory over my
self, and my spirit was enlarged: Whereupon I received from the Blessed
Sacrament this illumination, That to become Bread (which has relation to that
Mystery) I must first be ground, like the corn, than kne^ded with water, and
lastly, baked in the even. And that this was the right way to be incorporated
into that mystical Bread, our Lord and Savior; and at the same instant that
this was revealed unto me, I felt in my self, a vehement desire to be thus
dealt with, which has remained in me ever since. And now I understand, that to
enter into a Spiritual estate, we must, like the corn, before we be sent to the
mill, be first threshed, and winnowed from our earthly impurities, and that the
grain is not fit for use, till it be pure, and that it becomes not fruitful,
till it first dies in the ground.

The meditation upon this material Bread, has taught me great Mysteries
(during this Octave) of the Heavenly Bread in the Sacrament; viz. how that
Jesus Christ, being bruised and broken in his Passion, gives himself to us for
food, to the end that we might set forth and express, his Death, his Lnve, and
Virtues in our life. And in this condition I now find my self much in love
with Jesus Christ, desirous to be wholly to him, and to render unto him in my
affliction, this which he has given me, and my goods, and my body, and my
soul, and my time, and my eternity. I have a great thirst upon me to serve him,
and other longings, which I reserve to communicate, until I have the happiness
to see you.

This his singular affection to the B. Sacrament, caused him to write in
Capital Letters upon a Chimney piece, in his Castle at Citry, Blessed for ever
be the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar: This made him walk on foot, to visit
all Churches within two leagues round about him, to see in what decency the B.
Sacrament was reserved there; and to bestow in several parts, a great number of
silver pixes, to keep it in, upon poor Parishes; and Tabernacles likewise,
which he made, and gilded with his own hands, having a great dexterity in all
such Manual works. Of which he writ something to me, the 26 of September, in
the year, 1646.

Since Advent, I began a work, which I have designed this long time; viz. at
such times, as my urgent occasions will give leave, which commonly is after
supper, till prayer time, to practice some handicraft work; where having all my
tools, I make Tabernacles for the B. Sacrament; and if I finish but one in a
month, my time will not be ill spent; for they may be serviceabe to some poor
Churches that want them.

Guided by the same zeal, in the year, 1641. he cast to set up, in his Parish
of S. Paul, a company of devout Ladies, every one in their turn, to spend an
hour in prayer every afternoon, before the Sacrament. He wrote a short Treatise
of the conduct of this Devotion, and the grounds of undertaking it; the chief
whereof was, upon the consideration, that our Savior being continually in this
adored Mystery: to give himself to us, it was therefore but reasonable, that
some persons should be present in the Church, to render to him their homage,
and honor, and correspondent to that his desire, of giving himself to us. This
Treatise he presented with all humility and due respect to his Parish Priest,
for his consent, and the putting it in practice, if he thought it fitting;
which was done accordingly, and continues to this day with great edification
and profit; and succeeds so happily, that the like institution is taken up in
several other Parishes and Towns; as at Dijon, where Monsieur Renty erected it,
at his first journey thither, with great zeal and courage, overcoming several
difficulties and oppositions against it.

He likewise excited several persons in his Parish, to accompany the Holy
Sacrament, when it was carried to the sick; in such sort, that a great company
of men and women, were seen to follow our Blessed Savior, with lighted
torches; where he attended likewise with great diligence, notwithstanding his
daily employments, spending for a long while almost all the morning in this
Holy Exercise, in all seasons of heart and cold.

One day, amongst other, being very foul, and he much distempered with rheum,
he was wished to forbear that time, being so very incommodious for him to walk
bare-headed, to the great prejudice of his health All which moved him not a
jot, but he went cheerfully through these difficulties; and which is very
observable, at his return was cured of his rheum.

Another time, accompanying the H. Sacrament, a coach with six horses passed
by, without stopping, or saluting the same; whereupon he, suspecting them to be
ill-affected persons, and much offended with their impiety, stirred up with
zeal, to defend the honor of his Master, adventured to admonish them of their
duty; and casting himself before the horses (with much hazard to his person)
stayed the coach in its career, and engaged the persons to do reverence
thereto, by staying till it was past; which heroic action, caused great
admiration in all the beholders.

CHAP. 8. His Prayer.
THis Chapter, and the next, contain some things in them, that cannot so well
be expressed by way of History, by reason that things of such difficult nature,
must be dilated upon, to make them intelligible.

In this Chapter we shall speak of his Prayer, which we may fitly term the
large channel which conveys the gifts of God into our soul; the most certain
means for procuring of help, and all graces requisite to our salvation, the
most universal instrument, whereof we serve our selves in our spiritual life,
to perform all the functions thereof for our advancement in the Purgative way,
for rooting out vices in the Illuminative way, for the practice of virtue; and
in the Unitive, for arriving unto an union with God, in which consists our
perfection. All the Saints that ever were, have set so high a value upon this
Divine action, that quitting, as it were, all other affairs, they have passed
their days and nights in prayer; many having left their Crowns and Scepters,
and retired into Monasteries and Solitudes, to have the honor to converse with
God more secretly, and for longer time.

Monsieur de Renty enlightened by their beams, and treading in their steps, gave
himself to this exercise, with such care and di^igence, that we may aver, this
to have been his ordinary employment, and his whole life a trade of praying.

I mean not here his vocal Prayers, having spoken of them before: I affirm,
that his affection was exceeding great to mental Prayer, understanding well the
necessity thereof, as that whereby we come more intimately to know, and reap
the benefit of all Christian verities; which until they be known, are not at
all beneficial; and the utility thereof, to learn a man what he is, and enable
him to exercise the real acts of virtue, in the inward life and spirit of them;
elevating the soul to a familiar conference with God; an honor more
incomparably glorious, though but for one quarter of an hour, than is the most
intimate communication with the greatest Monarchs for whole years together;
like as we esteem it a greater honor, to discourse freely and familiarly with
a King, the space of one hour, than many years with a Peasant.

Moreover, he well understood the different manners of this Prayer, and how it
ascends by four steps. The first is Prayer of Reasoning and Discourse. The
second, that of the Will and Affections. The third, that of Union or
Contemplation; which divides it self into two branches; viz. in Contemplation
active or acquisite, and Contemplation passive or infused; which passive
Contemplation, is the fourth and highest round of this ladder of Prayer.

Prayer of the Understanding, and of Discourse, or Meditation, is an
application of the Spirit, to understand some virtues of his salvation, which
he apprehended not before; reasoning and discoursing thereon within himself,
ruminating upon its causes, effects, and circumstances of time, place, manner,
and persons belonging to it, to draw from thence arguments of good life; going
from one circumstance and point to another, from the causes to their effects,
and so backward, which is called reasoning; and, because our mind is quick and
ready in this operation; not only nimble to go, but run in it, therefore it is
termed also discourse.

He began at this step, and made some stay upon it, where indeed every one
ought to begin, and rest, until he is called by God to another; because the
most proper and natural way, that God has given men, to come to understand
and affect any thing, is that of Consideration and Reasoning; wherefore each
one must serve himself herewith, till he be advanced higher.

The ordinary subject which he took for these meditations, were the Life,
Passion, and Death of our Savior: Which without all contradiction, is the most
profitable of all others, since he is set before us for our pattern; in the
imitation and expression whereof consists our perfection, and life eternal.

After some time, having been faithful in this first stage, he passed to the
second, that of will and affection, being called with an Amice, ascend
superius; Friend, fit up higher: Not unlike a Scholar, who becoming a good
proficient, is set up to a higher class of deeper learning. For he spent not
all his days in Grammar, but studied to proceed from one Science to another,
till he arrived to perfection.

This Prayer of Affection, is a familiar and passionate treaty betwixt Christ
and the Soul, wherein very little or no discourse is used; or a sincere
communication with God, as present and resident within us; in which the soul
quitteth all reasonings and disputes, and by a simple direct contemplation, and
thinking upon God, is carried on to him, and enflamed with the desires of
praising, blessing, adorning and glorifying him, with several elevated acts of
grace, oblation, petition, and above all, of Love, the Queen of other Virtues,
most acceptable to, and most glorious in the sight of God, most advantageous to
our selves, enabling us with power, to surmount all difficulties, to practice
all good works, and uniting us more intimately to God.

This, I say, the Soul performs without discourse, in regard that the
understanding being sufficiently furnished with light from her former
meditations, has no need to study new arguments or motives to produce love,
and other necessary affections, but may serve herself of the former store.

The way to practice this, is first of all, to retire into the secret cabinet
of our heart, applying our selves to God, who resideth there, not by reason and
discourse, but by faith, steadfastly believing his Divine presence, with all his
perfections: And in order to this firm assurance, to present our selves before
him, with profound reverence and adoration, abasing our selves, out of respect
to his infinite greatness, and the sense of our own vileness, in the light of
those words of David, Domine, quis similis tibi? Quid est homo quod memor es
ejus; Lord, who is like unto thee? What is man that thou art mindeful of him?
or that he should dare to appear before thee?

Keep your self before him with these affections of Reverence and Humility, and
remain there for some considerable time, the better to imprint them upon your
soul; for such time will be very well spent, and continu^ it yet longer, if you
find your heart dilated and melted with these affections.

After this, shutting out all ruminating, and reflection upon the subject you
desire to be employed upon (as for example, suppose it be this, that God is all
in all, and your self are less than nothing, that he is your Sovereign Lord,
and ultimate end, that he has a particular care of every thing that concerns
you, that our Savior dyed for you, and the like) employ your self hereon by
faith, in a most simple naked manner, reiterating acts of a lively faith, of
such a truth, which the Church has taught you; and after this, an act of Hope,
or of Praise, or Thanksgiving, or Contrition for your sins, or of any other
passion the soul shall be more disposed to; but especially of love, taking care
that these affections have an influence upon your will and manners, to produce
in them a happy alteration.

These are the directions we are to observe in this second degree of Prayer,
which therefore is called Prayer of Gods presence, and of Faith, and of
Affection.

Wherein also two things are carefully to be marked: First, that it is not
requisite in this prayer, to exercise at the same time several passions; but
rather one, as Hope, Love, or any other, well-grounded and prosecuted is
sufficient: And the rea on is plain, because so long as God gives to the soul,
the grace to produce acts of any one virtue, in such a manner, as that she
finds herself disposed and pressed thereto, and to exercise the same with
ease, this is an evident token, that it is his will that she should serve and
honor him, should sanctify and perfect herself by the same; and that she
ought to continue therein, so long as she finds that succor graciously
assisting her. Moreover, on the souls part, it would argue want of discretion,
to quit so good and profitable an exercise, so powerfully supported in it, and
it made so easy to her, by that Divine assistance; and fall upon another, that
is likely to prove difficult, for want of the same assistance: Whence we may
conclude, that we ought not to change our exercise of Piety, so long as God
supplies us with sufficient grace to attend it.

The second is, that we should reiterate many actof the same virtue; as of
Faith, Hope, Love, or (which is better) continue and hold on the same act;
thus, to acquire a rooting and establishment of these virtues, which is not
gotten but by vigo^ous and effectual reiteration of their acts; as, a nail is
not driven up to the head, with one blow, but must be stricken hard and often.
And so it is with virtues, whose force and sound profit, consists in their
having a well-rooted and grounded possession of the soul; whereas, they are
worth little or nothing, till they are habituated therein; even as the tree
brings forth neither leaves nor fruits, until it has taken deep rooting.

The same thing is to be done for any moral conclusions, which are drawn from
these acts (that is) to double and redouble them, till they be fixed and made
effectual; as for example, after some repeated acts of Faith, that God is your
first Principle, and that of your self you are nothing, and that all your hope
is in him, and our Savior; say with your self, once, twice, and twenty times
over, with affection, and a quiet, but vigorous application; if I believe this
great truth of God and my self, why do I attribute any thing to my self? why do
I not humble and abase my self under him? why do I not love him, upon whom all
my good depends? why do I not look upon my self, and all creatures in the
world, as nothing? If I hope in God, and my Savior, why then do I fear any
thing else? is not here ground enough to live with confidence and joy? what is
he that can molest or trouble me? Live then, O my soul, in tranquillity and
repose, as this same hope does oblige thee. These acts thus redoubled, and
repeated with constancy and vigor, will without doubt produce great effects in
the soul; which is the fruit that this Prayer of Affection should bring forth.

Herein did Monsieur Renty exercise himself for many years, reaping thereby an
inestimable treasure of spiritual riches.

This Prayer (says he in one of his Papers) is not by discourse and reasoning,
but by a loyal love, tending always to give more, than to receive. The
obscurity of Faith is of greater evidence to the soul, than all the
illuminations she can procure^; which faith she ought to use with Reverence and
Thanksgiving, not with Complacency or Affectation: Here needs no stretch of the
Spirit, this Prayer never offends the brain; this is a state of modest
deportment, in which the soul keeps herself in the presence of God; expecting
what his spirit shall please to infuse into us, which we receive in simplicity,
and in considence, as if himself spoke to us.

The ordinary dispositions with which he entered into this Prayer; were first, A
profound Reverence, and an abasing of himself in Gods presence, whose infinite
Majeste held him in a deep sense of his own meanness, saying, that we ought to
consider our selves before it, as little, and less than the smallest Atoms.
Secondly, A strong and absolute Confidence in his Infinite Goodness and Mercy,
which bearing up his Humility, and the sense he had of his own vileness, made
him still hope all things.

He exhorted all of his acquaintance, that were capable of it, to use this
kind of Prayer, as the most excellent, profitable, and easy of all others;
since it puts not a man to the labor to consider, nor penetrate into, or
discourse of any subject; but is easy for all sorts, but chiefly for the
unlearned, who herein have need of no more, but a simple belief, applying
themselves thereto with Affection.

He counseled men to give themselves more to the operations of the will, than
the speculations of the understanding; and that place of S, Paul to Titus,
where he exhorts us to live in sobriety, he expounded of the sobriety of the
senses, and chiefly of that of the Spirit, to cut off in our prayers
multiplicity of notions and discourse, and to proceed therein by Faith.

In effect, the mystery of faith is incomparably transcendent above all the
Science and Discourse of the most quaint and sublime wits; for as every thing
is but visible by his own light, a Torch by his, and the Sun by the Sun; things
of glory by the light of glory, so those of grace by the light of grace;
whereof the most perfect, without doubt, is that of Faith. Reason is bestowed
upon us for the discovery of natu^al things, and Faith for Supernatural and
Divine: With men we discourse by Reason, and with God by Faith; and since God
is at an infinite distance above man, and Grace above Nature, we may well
conclude, that Humane discourse of the finest th^ed, is too heavy for that high
pitch, which can soar no further than natural Reason can conduct it.

Moreover, whatsoever notions we have in this world of God, and things
spiritual, they are in some degree deceitful and false, not representing things
as they are really; since our spirit conceives nothing here below, but what
has passed through the senses, where spiritual things are refracted, and
receive much earth, and come to us distorted and disguised: But it is Faith
alone that represents them in their real entities.

There are but two indubitable lights, on which we may rely, and which surpass
all others in excellency, which sanctify and deifie our understanding,
elevating it to its first principle, and o^iginal of all verity; which is the
Divine Intellect; that is to say, the light of Faith here, and the light of
glory hereafter: These two being participations of that knowledge which God
himself has, which demonstrates the dignity and perfection of Affective
Prayer, which quitting Discourse, proceeds by Faith.

Neither did he make long stay upon the former way of Prayer, but passed on
further, ascending to that of Union and Contemplation; which was bestowed upon
him in a very high degree. Holy men speaking of this Contemplation, the
sublimest degree of Prayer here upon earth, make thereof two sorts, Acquisite
and Infused: The latter is, that which God alone produces in the soul, to
which she contributes nothing, but a simple consent, to receive his operation;
which is also called Contemplation Passive. The former is, that which man,
assisted by Gods grace, may acquire by his own labor, and exercise by his own
industry, and is therefore called Active.

The Infused, has so absolute a dependence upon God, that its given when, and
to whom he pleases; who also takes it away, which we cannot hinder, no more
than all the men in the world, with all their strength, put together, can stay
the Sun from rising and setting. But all are in some measure capable of the
other; and it is a single contemplation of God, or any other subject, without
discourse, sweetly moving the will with holy affections, and particularly with
that of Love: It is a quiet, pleasant operation of the soul, setting her in
full view of her object; a silent prospect of Faith, accompanied with
Reverence, Esteem, Gratitude, Confidence, and chiefly with Love,

When you visit a sick friend, beholding him in bed, suffering extremely,
tossing and turning, tormented, and groaning; and this fight of such a loving
friend, touches you deeply with the sense of compassion, with an earnest
desire to comfort him, and a sympathizing in his suffering, this is
Contemplation; for you behold all this without reasoning, with one direct view,
which affects you, and makes these impressions upon you. So when you behold our
Savior praying in the Garden, with his face to the earth, all over in a bloody
sweat; or bound at the Pillar, covered with stripes; or nailed on the Cross,
dying betwixt the extremities of pain and infamy; and this serious, but simple
attention, without any formal discourse, affects you with compassion and
admiration, with compunction for your sins, with hope and love: This is
Contemplation. Again, when Mary Magdalene sits at our Saviors feet, listening
to his blessed words, with the ear of faith; or looking up to him upon the
Cross, and believes this to be the Son of God, her Redeemer, who pardoned her
sins, obliged her with so many favors, testified so great good will to her,
and now suffers so much for her; and when from this spring there flows from
her a torrent of tears, out of the bowels of Love, Gratitude, and Contrition:
This is Contemplation.

The use then of this Contemplation, Active and Acquisite, consists, in entering
into the bortom of our souls, and there in the presence of God quitting all
sense and discourse, applying our selves by faith, and affections of the will,
to some one of the Divine perfections, or some mystery of our Savior, viewing
it with attention, and the eyes of Faith, of Reverence, Affiance, and Love,
without reasoning, and also without multiplying a quantity of different
affections at one time, fixing our selves upon this attentive and affectionate
regard, which also ought to be so naked, and abstracted from all solicitude and
reflection upon any things else, as wholly to forget them, as much as is
possible; to be taken up wholly, and busied in listening to our Savior, with
Mary Magdalene, who sitting at his feet, spoke not one word, and though blamed
by her sister, answered nothing, thinking only upon hearing and attending on
our Savior.

The soul in Contemplation must be silent to all creatures, and speak only
with God. The soul uses to speak to the creatures four ways; by her
Undestanding, in thinking of them; by her Will, in affecting them; by her
Imagination, in forming images of them; by her Passions, in desiring them: and
all this she does without language, or the help of her Exterior senses.

So that the words she utters, are thoughts which she places upon them, and
affections which she conceives, and Idaea's which she forms, and desires
which she produces toward them.

On the contrary, the soul is silent, and speaks not a word, when she cease
to apply herself to them by these faculties; and when she is not busied about
them by those operations, but cease from all acts that relate to them;
insomuch, that having no commerce with them, she remains in such a state, as if
there were nothing else in the world but God and she, to whom alone she
speaks in this mystical silence, of which S. John is understood, when he
speaks of a silence in heaven, that is, in the soul, when she converseth with
God by her understanding, and by her will, producing acts of Faith, Hope, Love,
Adoration, Blessing, Glorifying, Thanksgiving, Union, and the like.

And she is yet further silent, from time to time, neither speaking at all to
him no not after this noble way, and with this Divine language, but is
listening and attending to his speeches, which sometime may be articulate, but
these intelligibly only to herself; but more frequently are illuminations, by
which he enlightneth her understanding; and certain impressions and motions,
with which he teaches her will, saying with David, andiam quid loquatur in me
Dominus Deus, will hearken what the Lord says within me; and praying with
Samuel, Loquere Domine, quia audit servus tuus; Speak Lord, for thy servaut
hears.

Our Savior teaching his Disciples to pray, told them, and us in their
persons, Orantes, nolite, multum loqui; when you pray, use not many words;
which he meant not only of the words of the mouth, but likewise of
understanding, and other faculties; Speak not much, but hearken diligently: He
likewise calls himself Verbum, the Word, because he must be listened unto, and
that deservedly; wherefore he says to the soul, Audi Filia; Hearken, O my
Daughter.

And Father Avila, who has writ an excellent Treatise upon those words, gives
this for a weighty advice, that we should go to prayer, to hear rather than to
speak; who also told Lewis of Granada, that writ his Life, how that when he
went to his holy Exercise, he used to bind and tie up his understanding, like
a fool, to the end that it might not talk much. We have certain souls, which in
their prayers, talk all, as conceiving, that the mystery consists in talking
much to God, and employing still their faculties in working, without
considering, that what God shall speak to them, will be far better and more
profitable than what they can speak to him; even, as in our converse with other
men, we use not to talk continually, but after a few words, hearken to what
they speak: So in our prayers to our Savior, let us after our speaking to him,
attend with silence to what he shall say to us. This is the course of active
Contemplation, and prayer of Union; where we must mark its difference from
prayer of Discourse, and prayer of Affection; in that these two faculties of
the soul, the Understanding and Will acting all these three sorts of prayer:
The Understanding acts more than the Will in prayer of Discourse; the Will more
in prayer of Affection (where is to be noted, that those who begin this prayer,
are not in the entrance thereof, ordinarily, without son discourse; but yet
such as go on, diminishing (...) little and little, till at last it quite
cease; and no^ also, that in the beginning, they have great variety (...)
affectionate acts, but toward the end but few.) In the prayer of Contemplation
or Union, the Will has the mastery over the Understanding; but with more sim
plicity than in the prayer of Affection: Besides, i^ this God acts more, and
man less; therefore the operation here is more spiritual, more pure, and divine
therefore he ought to attend in peace and affiance the action of God, without
disturbing it.

Whereupon Monsieur Renty used to say,

That it was the great imperfection of many souls, not to attend sufficiently
to God; the natural faculties being too busy, and not subjecting themselves to
him, upon specious pretenses, thinking to do wonders; whereby indeed they
hinder him from working in the soul, whilst he finds it in a state of
agitation and inquietude; whereas it should be in tranquillity and silence, to
receive his operations.

But some may say to me, that he conceives this cutting off Discourse, and this
using of a naked Faith, and so great simplicity of operation, can do little,
but rather loses time. To whom I reply, that it is quite the contrary, and
time very well spent; for whilst we quit the operations of sense and discourse,
we dismiss that which keep us at a distance from God, who is infinitely above
all discourse, and much more above sense; but going on by faith, and the
affections of the will, we approach near to him.

Monsieur Renty clears this doubt in one of his papers, saying;

Some will say, often there occurs nothing to me in such prayers, and I fear to
spend my time in idleness: But know, that you lose no time at all, when by
losing your self, you are sound in a state of Reverence and Affiance in the
presence of God, to make your course toward him; nor can he dislike such a
behavior. Another will say, but I have had many distractions, and find my
self afflicted with great aridities, and many other inconveniences. I answer,
persevere still, notwithstanding all these difficulties, in your view, of Faith
and Reverence, and in your Affections, as much as you can, and keep your self
shut up in the cabinet of your heart: Suffer the noise of all these tempests
without, without heeding them; after the example of Noah, who in the midst of
his Ark, was quiet, as his very name imports, whilst winds and waves beat upon
him on every side. Those things are but necessary, and serve to purge and
dispose the soul for the operation of God upon it; even as green wood puffs and
sweats out its humidity, before it can burn: So, let these distractions, and
all sorts of imaginations assault us, as it pleases God, but let them not
trouble or hinder us from this holy exercise, only let us, diverting our mind
from these miseries, when we perceive any, continue peaceably, and without
noise, this our Sacrifice, with assurance that we shall not wait long before
our Lord come unto us.

And himself, when finding himself in such sterile condition, would cry to God
out aloud, when he was alone, I am yours, O my God, in despite of all these
distractions and aridities: I am yours, and will continue so without reserve;
you have created me, and I will love you for ever.

Sometime he would write with his finger upon the ground, and sometime upom his
breast; saying,

I am content with every thing that proceeds from the will of God, and with
what he appoints for me: I ask nothing else, I will never trouble my self to
procure consolation, or to be freed from aridities, my resolution is to bless
God at all times.

To this purpose he writ to his Director:

I am now and then an hour or two at prayer, and nothing occurs to me: Sometime
I am troubled with distractions, aridities, and lassitude; but however it comes
to pass, I never end, but with a desire to begin again; and often this
lassitude of body is relieved, and vanishes by an inward strength, which is
given me, and which disposes me to continue my Devotion out of the time and
place of prayer, even in the midst of converse and business; and I tell you
sincerely, that notwithstanding I perform every thing so ill, yet I find
little difference of times for prayer, being recollected continually.

To another intimate friend he writ thus:

I was the other day three or four hours in the Church with great aridities,
nothing occurring whereon to fix my self: Behind me I overheard a good
servant of God saying his prayers, with the Gloria Patri: I presently offered
up to God that which I heard him say; whereupon of a sudden, it was discovered
to me, that when the soul is alone in the desert, where she has no creature to
rest upon, God casts down from heaven his line of love, to draw her up
toward him; and something to that effect I felt in my self; and though nothing
did occur to me, yet when I end prayer, I could willingly begin it afresh.

And thus much for active and acquisite Contemplation.

As for the passive and infused, as it depends absolutely on God, so has it no
other rule but his will and good pleasure, to communicate himself to a soul,
illuminating the uderstanding with transcendent light, and replenishing the
will with strong affections, especially that of love: Even as Moses, that
perfect pattern of all Contemplation, to make himself fit to ascend Mount
Sinai, there to converse with God, quitted his herds, and flocks, his people
both great and small, his brother Aaron, and even Joshua his servant, who was
continually with him, and then went up alone to the point of the hill, where he
entered into the dark cloud, in which God was, as the Scripture says, and abode
there forty days in Contemplation, and intimate converse with his Sacred
Majesty; So must we, quit sense, reasonings, all sensible and intellectual
things, to be admitted into true Contemplation, which is transacted within the
clouds of faith (where certainly God is) and by faith in our illuminations and
affections. And here is to be noted, that all these sublime contemplations and
favors, must terminate in a ready disposition of the soul, to the will of God,
to render it carefully observant of his commandments; even as all those of
Moses were, for the receiving of the Tables of the Law, and the putting them
into his hands; which yet were afterward broken, to teach us by a figure, that
the soul, notwithstanding all those dispositions and helps to sanctity, is
subject to failings, so feeble and near to precipice are we, with all these
illuminations, unless God sustain us.

The Spouse in the Canticles, inviteth souls in these amorous words, Comedite
amici, and bibite, and inebriamini charissimi; Eat and drink, my friends, and
be inebriated, you that are dearest to me: Where by eating, which breaks and
cheweth the food, is meant meditation; by drinking, which swalloweth liquid
things, prayer of affection; and by drunkenness, active contemplation, or
rather passive; which produces the same effect in the soul, as drunkenness in
the body, viz. loss of reason, oblivion of all things, and mirth.

Monsieur Renty was drawn, up thither by God, and elevated with Moses, to the
top of the Mountain of infused contemplation. Thus he writ to his Director in
the year, 1645.

I have not had this long time any use, neither at prayer, nor almost at other
times, of the understanding, nor of memory; I neither see, nor feel any thing,
have neither gust nor disgust of any thing, only find my will lively, and
ready for every thing, that shall be showed it by God, and for God.

In another Letter to him thus:

I find for some time, that my prayer is no more regular: I possess the Sacred
Trinity with a plenitude, of verity, and clearness, and this with such an
attraction so pure and so vigorous in the superior part of my soul, that my
outward employment create me no diversion at all.

And another time he writ thus:

Jesus Christ works the experience of his Kingdom in my heart, and I find
him there my Lord and Master, and my self wholly his: I discover now a greater
enlarging of my heart, but so simple, that I am not able to express it; save
only thus, that it is a simple, but most real sight of the Trinity accompanied
with praising, blessing, and offering up all homage thereto: All which is done
so silently, that it causes no noise below, neither can it be discerned in the
higher part of my soul by parcels, so as to be expressed, except it be by
reflection: Whether I utter my self well to you, or no, I know not.

This blessed man, thus united by contemplation to God, the supreme verity,
received abondant light, both for himself and others, upon all subjects; but
especially those he had for the understanding of the holy Scriptures, and
especially the New Testament, and therein the mysteries of our Savior were
admirable.

Thus in a Letter to his Director:

Upon one word I shall read in the New Testament, I shall sometimes discover
notions of those truths, in so full and piercing a manner, that I ever feel my
body replenished therewith, that is, my whole nature penetrated.

And to one of his friends thus:

When I read the Sacred Scripture, I fortify my self to enter into those
effects they work, which is a plenitude of the truth of God, wherewith the soul
is solidly and experimentally satisfied.

And he made notes upon all the Lent-Gospels, full of piety, and those great
illuminations, with which his spirit was replenished.

This is a short account of the Prayer of this great servant of God, so far as
we could discover it; for the chief part thereof, is that which passed within
the Sanctuary of his own Soul, where his union and converse with God was so
wonderful, that after he had spent seven or eight hours therein, he found
himself in the end, as if he had only then begun it, except only that he had
then yet more desire to continue it; and at length arrived to that height, that
he never ended it at all, being wholly and constantly in recollection and
application to God: Whereupon he professed to an intimate friend, that he need
neither particular place, nor time for prayer, since in all places, times and
business, he continued it.

CHAP. 9. The state of his Mystical Death and Annilation.
WE are now come to the highest degree of Virtue, and the ultimate disposition
of soul, to render her capable of a most intimate union with God, wherein her
perfection consists: She must dye first, before she can live this new life, and
must be annihilated, to become truly something.

This death and annihilation stands not, in the destruction of man's naturals,
to deprive him of understanding, memory, will, and affections, much less of his
senses; but in the ruin of the old man, which is wholly corrupt, and infected
with sin; in such sort, that the understanding and other faculties spiritual
and corporal be cleansed, and animated by the Spirit of Christ Jesus, to work
no more according to nature corrupted, nor yet nature pure, but nature elevated
by grace, and sanctified by Jesus Christ.

Now as the corruption and malignity of the old man, holds an entire possession
of our nature, and the poison of sin is spread all over body and soul, so that
from the crown of the head, to the soul of the foot (as says the Prophet)
there is no sound part in us: So all these parts must be healed, this
corruption purged out, and the malignity perfectly mortified and destroyed.
When I say perfectly, I mean, so much as this can be done here on earth; for it
is only in heaven, in the estate of glory, where this happiness is completely
perfected; but in this world, there will still remain something to be purged.
This holy man, writing to one concerning this state of death and annihilation,
tells him, how that singing in the Church, with others, the Magnificat, he was
illuminated upon these words, Deposuit potentes de sede, etc. He has put down
the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble; which represented to
him a soul full of it self, complete in the power and riches of its parts and
natural endowments, in its life of Exterior and Interior sense, undertaking to
see and understand every thing, full of it self, and quite empty of God.

Then he adds:

Now our Savior gave me to understand in this verse, that he divesteth this
soul of her own proper arrogant spirit, rich in nothing but iniquity, that he
humbles, and empties, and annihilates her, and so exalts the lowly, advancing
her at length to a wonderful condition, where I saw her reduced to an happy and
rich annihilation, emptied of herself, and dispoiled of what she possessed, of
sense and man; divested not only of the old man, but of the gifts of God that
are in her, to be presented before him in nakedness, and simple obedience. I
understood, that in this estate, the soul being affected with great humility
and affiance; likewise, God did in her, that which he pleased, and that she was
thoroughly enlightened, and that she discovered afar off the least things, as we
usually do a little bush in the midst of a mown field.

He writ this following Letter to his Director upon the same subject.

Since the time that I gave up my liberty to God, signed with my blood, as I
told you: I was given to understand, to what a state of annihilation the soul
must be brought, to render it capable of union with him: I saw my soul reduced
into a small point, contracted and shrunk up to nothing: And at the same time,
I beheld my self, as if encompassed with whatsoever the world loves and
possesses, and, as it were, a hand removing all this far from me, throwing it
into the occan of Annihilation. In the first place, I saw removed all Exterior
things, Kingdoms, great Offices, stately Buildings, rich Household Stuff, Gold
and Silver, Recreations, Pleasures; all which are great encombrances to the
souls passing on to God, of which therefore his pleasure is, that she be
stripped, that she may arrive at the point of nakedness and death, which will
bring her into possession of solid riches, and real life. Secondly, all
Interior things, which are more delicate and precious; as, Acquired Sciences,
skill and sublime Learning, operations of the Memory and strength of
Understanding, humane Reason, experience of Sense; of which the soul must
likewise be purged, and dye to it^ own proper actions. And I perceived, that we
must come like little Infants, simple and innocent, separated, not only from
evil, but even from our ordinary way and manner of doing that which is good,
undertaking what the Divine Providence presents to us, by making our way by God
to them, and not by them to God; which is a course more naked, unengaged, and
abstracted; which sees nothing but God: And not so much, if I may so say, as
the things she does, of which nothing stays in her, neither choice, nor joy,
nor sorrow for their greatness, or for their littleness, for good or bad
success, but only the good pleasure and order of God, which rules in all
things, and which in all things sufficiently contenteth the soul, which adheres
to him, and not to the vicissitude of affairs, whereupon she is constantly
even, equal, and always the same in the midst of all changes.

In another he writ thus to the same purpose:

An absolute abnegation, will be necessary to all things, to follow in
simplicity, without reserve, or reflection, what our Savior shall work in us,
or appoint for us; let it be this or that: This way was showed me, in which I
ought to walk toward him; and hence it is that all things to me, ordinarily,
are without any gust or delight.

Moreover, in another thus;

I apprehend great matters concerning the verity and simplicity of the
annihilation I ought to have; and I had, for the twinkling of an eye, the sight
how simple this should be, that the soul it self cannot take notice of it: This
is the state of Death and Annihilation, without regard to any thing, save our
being wholly to God, by Sequestration, Faith, and Affiance.

Lastly, to another:

Assure your self, there is no security in any estate, but this, of Dying and
Annihilation; which is, to be baptized into Christ's death, that we may live the
life of Mortification; not that other ways may not be good, but not secure;
especially any thing we do of our selves: Our best way is therefore, to divest
our selves of all, that the Holy Infant Jesus govern all.

He used the word All, because this death must be universal, through every part
of old Adam; even as a dead body is not only dead in an eye, or ear, or hand,
but in every sense and member; so much we dye to riches, and poverty, to
pleasure and pain, honor and dishonor, praise and dispraise being affected
with none of these, because we are dead to all: Moreover, the spirit must be
dead, not only to one faculty, as the Understanding or Will, but to all, and
to every thing; only the difference is this, that the body being once deprived
of her life, cannot naturally recover it again; but the Spirit will easily live
again, and the malignity of the old Adam return upon us, if great heed be not
taken; because we are not able by this death, to reach the very center of
nature.

Just as in your Garden, you may either suffer a noysom weed to grow, if you
meddle not with it, but give it liberty to spread its leaves, and increase, or
if you would not have it appear, you may cut it, or pluck it up by the roots;
but after all is done, you cannot prevent that the earth should not produce the
like, if it be thereto disposed naturally: Even so it is in your power to
permit unruly affections to live in your soul, producing therein disorders, and
exercising their tyranny; or you may mortify them so, that they get not head,
although the root remains; or further, may root them up, as heroic spirits do,
changing their nature, and turning the course thereof, introducing contrary
inclinations, from evil to good, from vice to virtue; yet although these
generous spirits arrive to this height, yet will their nature continue still
rotten at bottom, ready to bear the same cursed weeds, without our daily
vigilance.

SECT. 1. Of the same subject.
TO decypher particularly the mystical death of this renowned person; we may
aver, That in the first place, he was dead to riches, and all the wealth of
this world; in which he so absolutely divested himself, both of any affection
to them in his heart, and of the real possession of them, that he quitted, as
we have formerly mentioned, all property to them, using them no otherwise, than
in the quality of a very poor man, with an ardent desire that he might also be
deprived of the very use of them.

I acknowledge before God (says he, in a Letter to his Director) his great
mercy to me, through his Son, in freeing me from the things of this world: and
my constant thoughts are, that if his order did not oblige me otherwise in that
condition he has set me, to give away and quit all I have: This is my earnest
desire, after which I long exceedingly; not out of presumption of my own
strength, but in the power of Jesus Christ, in imitation of his life.

And to another person he writ:

All that can be imagined in this lower world, is of small concernment, though
it were the losing of all our goods, and the death of all the men in it: This
poor Antchill, is not worthy of a serious thought, had we but a little faith,
and a little love, how happy should we esteem our selves, in giving away all,
to attend no more save on God alone; and to say, Deus meus and omnia; My God
and my all.

In his suit of Law at Dijon, he acted with so little show of interest, and so
like a mortified man to gain or loss, that he could not be persuaded not only
to solicit the Judges, but not so much as to commend his case to them himself;
not out of any faulty supine indifferency, or neglecting what he thought
absolutely necessary; but because by an heroic virtue, he had lost the sense
of all these earthly things, entirely committing the success thereof to God;
and knowing, that these things succeed better by our prayers to, and affiance
in him, than with our addresses to men, through the multitude of solicitings,
many times fruitless.

Secondly, he was dead and crucified to all recreations and pleasures of this
life; having renounced them at the beginning of his Conversion, remaining
constantly in the condition of a sacrifice of body and soul no God, which was
his great exercise, and his usual phrase; making no further use of his senses,
and their objects, than what was of absolute necessity, following herein the
pattern of our Savior: He was so wholly taken up with God (as we have said
before) in his soul, that when he had very grievous pains in his body, and was
very sick, he scarce thought upon them, but accounted it a trouble to speak or
complain thereof, as appeared notably in his last sickness.

Thirdly, he was annihilated and dead to honor, his great birth and nobility,
wherefrom he solemnly degraded himself in the arms of our Savior, to render
himself the more humble.

He was dead also to all esteem and praise of men, and to disgrace likewise; of
which he gave a notable testimony to a familiar friend, who told him how much
she was troubled, to see him so much honored and esteemed by men: Who answered
her:

First, That she had great reason for it, in that he so little deserved it. And
secondly, upon her demand, how those commendations assected him: He replied, I
neither attend, nor return any answer to them; they affect me no more than a
stock, through the grace of God, I am insensible of praise and dispraise; the
one, nor the other make not any impression upon my spirit, but I entertain them
without reflection.

And he had good reason, since'as all the prayers men bestow upon us, make us
not one jot the better, so neither their opprobries the worse: Besides that,
ordinarily in the distribution of these, the greatest piece of injustice in the
world is committed, by commending such as least deserve it, but rather shame
and confusion; and blaming such, whom God highly esteems.

In the fourth place, he was dead and crucified to all supernatural good
things, all spiritual delights and favors (which without comparison are of
greatest value, above all that we have named) even to all gifts, virtues,
perfections, which he desired and sought after with a most disengaged and
self-denying spirit, not lusting after this or that virtue, this or that degree
of perfection, but willing and desiring all, according to Gods will; about
which he expressed himself further thus:

The love of our selves is so afraid to be stripped out of any thing, that it
suffers us not to be carried forth to our true rest, as long as it can subsist
and uphold it self by its own right and property; which should teach us, to use
all diligence for the annihilation of our own desires, even of those that seem
to us to tend only to virtue: I say, that seem to us, whereas indeed if God
gave us a true light, we should undoubtedly see, that the course which tends to
our divesting of all these things, carries us on secretly, but most really, to
the true possession of them, and our own preservation; and that we must daily
descend to our own nothingness, in which alone God is to be found. Thrice happy
are all such poor in spirit.

He was also dead and annihilated to all gusts of Devotion, all sensible Graces
and Consolations, of which our lovesick souls are so greedy: Upon which
subject he expressed himself thus:

I am better satisfied with those graces in which sense has no part; than with
those that have more of the sensible; of which indeed, I am somewhat jealous;
for we find amongst spiritual persons, great store of counterfeit riches of
the Spirit; those, I mean, who are all for gusts, and sensible consolations and
illuminations, in this state of exile; wherein we ought to live rather by
faith, than feeling, and which is much to be ^amented; We meet very few that
are not infected with this ^^ch, it being the natural condition of man, to
desire to see, and to that end to affect and search for enlightnings, and
wanting the experimental knowledge of that which comes from God, which is not
to be gotten but by quitting his own, he looks after that which he finds in
himself, mistaking it for Divine, because it is modeliz'd to his own gust and
fancy.

And in another Letter thus:

As for obscurities, aridities, and other troubles of spirit, they are to be
born with upon any terms; and we must give up our selves as forlorn creatures,
throwing our selves into God, on all sides of us, as a fish in the Ocean, which
is its proper element; into God, at all times and for all things: If we be true
members of our Savior Christ Jesus, we shall see nothing but submissions and
abnegations, and shall sense nothing else but these.

He was dead and annihilated also to all glorious and extraordinary favors and
enjoyments; of which he had no other feeling, than the Sun, which being covered
over with light, and crowned with glory, yet is no way sensible thereof;
insomuch, that having received by the mouth of a great Saint, promises of some
great favors from God, he returned this answer to his Director:

Those things whereof they have given me notice and assurance, must be as they
may, I rest nothing upon them, nor confide in them, knnowing it to be my duty
to live by faith.

Being certified at another time, of a special favor received from our
Savior, it had no other operation upon him, but the impression of a great
confusion, and profound humility; And as they gave him all these things in
writing at large, he parted with them all to his Director, together with all
his other secrets, and most important papers of Devotion; especialy those
written with his own blood, formerly mentioned; an evident demonstration of his
great humility, by reason that most men are taken with those parcels of piety,
grounding this their affection to them, upon some benefit receiveable by them:
But the reliance which is placed upon God, must be disengaged from every thing
else. This he made appear by this Letter to his Director:

I have received the paper, which mentions this grace and favor, whereof I
send you the copy, having no other reflection thereupon, but to meet it with
the greatest latitude of heart I can possible, to bless God, acknowledge his
goodness, and serve him for it. I have burnt the original, with several other
papers of the like nature. If you judge it not convenient that I should do so,
let me receive your commands accordingly for the future. I could wish (if there
be any thing left for me to wish) that I had nothing left me but my God: This
is the sure replenishment of the soul, and rich treasure of the heart.

Moreover, he was wholly dead to all that God wrought by him, taking no share
thereof, nor interesting himself any more with them after they were done, than
if they had been performed by another.

Fifthly, he was crucified and dead to all affections, not only such as are
irregular, but those also which are purely natural of all creatures; and in
particular, of those who used his counsel, and depended upon him for the
conduct of their souls; wherein the obligations and relations on both parts,
use to be more than ordinary; insomuch, that upon a separation, there falls out
de jection of spirit, and distractions of Devotion. To this purpose he writ to
one of those persons, thus:

I cannot, without much trouble, bear the great matter you make of my converse,
and of my removes: Let us breath after God, and make good our alliance with
Jesus Christ to learn in, and from him, a profound abnegation of our selves.

And in another Letter thus:

Jesus Christ is ever the same, and his grace is continually advancing, and as
long as I am to him, so long shall I be to you, for him, and in him; he is not
wont to part souls, by the separation of bodies; since his custom is, to
separate only what is imperfect, as being that which very often brings with it
some hindrances to the perfect life of the spirit, which is never so complete,
as when it is alone.

Giving notice to a friend, of the death of the Countess of Castres, for whose
spiritual good and perfection, he had taken very much pains: He writes thus:

I was not in Paris, but at Citry, when she departed, I was sent for post the
day of her death, which was Saturday, but came two hours too late. Entering the
Town, I understood the news from them, that spoke openly of it in the streets:
Presently I fixed my self to the will of God, whereupon I found no more
alteration in my soul, than if she had been alive: I see his order in this,
that I assisted her not at her death, and make no doubt, but that he permitted
it for her advantage.

To a friend that had lost his Spiritual Director, he writ thus:

Touching the remove of your Ghostly Father, it would, without question, prove
a great loss to you, and all the Country from whence he went, if the
providence of God herein did not rather sanctify and establish, than destroy;
and if oftentimes by removing these petty visible and sensible supports, he did
not make way to settle us more firmly in our progress to which he designs us;
which is, to dwell and to hold our selves in God together with Christ Jesus;
where we find all truth, and all power, and who is so near to us, that he is
even in the midst of ^; and proportionably, as our dependence upon creatures
fails, through his providence, he makes it appear, and we experimentally
find, that we are not left destitute thereby, but that supply is made, either
by his Spirit, that resideth continually in us, for our relief; or by the
conduct of his Ministers, which the fewer they are, the more is that grace
dilated and multiplied, which we receive by them. So great is the providence of
our Heavenly Father, as to take care of the meanest necessities of all his
children, who to him behave themselves as children. Neither indeed ought we to
be further engaged to those persons who assist us in our Spiritual conduct,
than as to Gods instruments, whose help, it is his will we should make use of,
but no longer than he pleases; and when his will is, either by death, or
otherwise, to take them from us, we ought not to be afflicted, nor lose our
courage; but, with submission and gratitude, resign all to him, which will be a
good means to move him to provide others, who perhaps with more advantage to
us, may understand the pulse of our souls.

In fine, he was dead to all love of himself; which he had so perfectly
subdued, that being naturally quick and hasty (as we have formerly hinted) he
became so staid and equal in all his demeanor, as caused admiration in those
that knew him; being naturally of a high spirit, he had acquired a most
profound humility of heart, whereof he produced most evident actions
exteriourly, at all times, and in all places: And though his genius inclined
him to wit and scoffing, yet he so corrected it, that none was more respectful
and courteous to all, even the meanest: As for his passions, those were so
perfectly subdued and regulated, that they never broke loose upon any occasion;
so that you might say, he had none at all.

He had arrived to a perfect death in the superior faculties of his soul; his
memory so emptied of all worldly things, that it never presented any Idea's
sufficient to distract his Devotions: He made not any imperfection upon what
was past; as we have observed, and our Savior had endowed him with this
singular grace, not to be busied in his thoughts about those actions, in which
he was conversant; which after they were done, were obliterated wholly, as to
any care for them, and quite blotted out of his memory, that they might be no
hindrance to what was in hand.

This Letter was writ to a familiar friend, relating hereunto.

It is some while ago, that finding my self in the midst of a world of people,
my spirit was enlightened and affected, neither to desire to know any body, nor
to be known to any: This has wrought in me a wonderful separation from every
thing; and methinks, herein consiste^h one of the chiefest points of a
Spiritual Life, which requires great purity of spirit, wonderful estrangement
and distance from the creature, and which places the soul in this world (as if
it were no part of it) in a state of perfect oblivion and ignorance of things
which do not concern her, that is no longer able to endure, but only what is
necessary.

He was dead to his spirit, reason, and judgment, living only the life of
Faith, which is a Christians proper death. It may be gathered from what has
been mentioned already, that he acted nothing by this faculty of its self, no
more than if he had had no such power, but wrought all by the moving of Christ
Jesus, who lived in him, and operated by him.

Lastly, he was annihilated and dead to his own will; which we have placed
after all, as being the most important faculty in relation to Moral actions:
This therefore he had entirely resigned, in conformity to Gods will, not
desiting absolutely any thing, but in order thereto.

I adore (says he, in one of his Letters) so affectionately the will of God,
in whatsoever he pleases to make out for me, that Hell it self should be my
Paradise, if he decreed me thither.

And in another, thus:

Far be it from me, to act in this business by my own spirit, I would have it
wholly annihilated, that it might know no other language but Nothing, and
continually Nothing, to follow in all the footsteps of the Divine will,
according to its measure and manner.

And to a third, thus:

My Savior has graciously brought me into such a state of indifferency for
every thing, that I could be very well cortent all my life, to be fixed to my
bed a Paralytique, not able to stir, without making any reflection upon any
service I might render to my neighbor, or that I could render him no more; all
things, according to the will of God, being equal to me.

And in a fourth, thus:

Of late I have been busied in such occasions, both Exteriourly and
Interiourly, as were sufficient to have gravel'd such a weak, mean spirit as
mine, had it not been absolutely resigned to the will of God. It is upon him
alone, by this way of Abnegation, that I bottom my self, adoring with you, and
by your instruction, the decrees of his Sacred and Divine Will, who holds all
things in his own hands to keep us subyect unto him by his justice, and to
sanctify us also by love: If the effects thereof upon us do evidence us to
have the hearts of children (that is) (...) Spirit of Christ Jesus, to sigh
after our heavenly Father, and cry, Abb^ Peter.

SECT. 2. Continuation of the same subject.
MOnsieur Renty was so absolutely resigned to God, having quite lost and
annihilated his own will into th^^ of God, that he neither desired no^ feared
any thing in this world. And in fine, enjoyed such a sweet tranquillity of
spirit, and repose, which nothing could disturb or alter, that from thence
arose a wonderful and invariable equality, shining forth in his Exterior at all
times, in all places, upon all occasions.

One of his intimate friends, desirous to try one day whether he had an
affection to any thing, questioned with him about every thing he could think
of, to put him to the rest, and, among other things, asked him, whether he
desired not that these works which he had undertaken for the glory of God,
might succeed and take effect. To whom ^he replied, that he had no other aim in
all his actions and enterprises, than the accomplishing of the will of God; and
that although he used his utmost endeavor that such things might succeed, yet
notwithstanding, he was perfectly resigned in all things to his Majesty's good
pleasure; adding many other expressions, testifying his Mortification to all
desires, and a perfect transformation of his will into that of Gods. This
discourse was not quite finished, but there happened an occasion to put it to the
trial; for one came running in, crying, that all the Heaven was on fire; which
news, usually very frightful, made no alteration in him at all, who most calmly
and composedly looking up to the heavens, said, the fire is here in Paris,
without any further distance, though he understood presently that it was so
violent, that the street he lived in, was in danger to be burnt down, and his
neighbors said, it was necessary to quite forsake their quatters, by reason
that the fire was not far off, and was likely in a very short space to reach
them. In this public fright, he keeping his ordinary equality, and referring
all to the will of God, went into his Chapel, where he continued long time in
prayer, offering up himself in sacrifice to God, and resigning up his own will
unto him; some persons looking upon him with great admiration in this posture;
whilst so many hundreds were at their wits end, and preparing for a speedy
flight.

He professed to another secret and familiar friend, that he felt himself,
through the mercy of God, in such an absolute state of death to every thing,
that neither Angels, nor men, the loss of all he had, the subversion of his
family, nor any other accident could remove him from his settled tranquillity:
And this he said, not hyperbolically, or by way of ostentation, but out of a
solid experimental establishment in that fortitude, common with him to all
great Saints.

Such was the mystical death and annihilation of this man of God, by which his
soul was enriched with a vast treasure of spiritual wealth, causing him to lead
a most perfect life, and uniting him most intimately to God, to which this
death is absolutely necessary; because no being can arrive to that which it was
not formerly, without ceasing first to be what it was; as, wood cannot pass
into the nature of fire, as long as it keeps its former nature; this must be
quitted, and the matter be divested of all the form of wood, both in substance
and accidents, and reduced into a state of privation, to be made capable of the
fires unitement to it. And this is a general rule in nature, admitting no
exception, that each subject must be predisposed to receive a new form, and so
much more, as this form is more noble; and this disposition consists in the
privation of the subject, and loss of other forms, to gain a new one: So also
to make a spiritual man, he must no more live according to nature; but that he
may be capable to be united to God, must necessarily dye, and be annihilated to
himself.

And if fire require this total privation in the matter, to communicate it self
thereto; with greater reason does God, who is altogether a spirit, infinitely
pure, the first and sovereign entity, require of a man this universal nakedness
and privation, this death and annihilation to himself, and all created beings,
before he give and unite himself with him; for in giving himself, he gives
also the fruition of himself, of his beauty, goodness, wisdom, and his other
perfections, and by this union renders the receiver happy.

Hence also may be gathered, what admirable purity is requisite in a soul, for
this union with God in Heaven, in the state of glory; that for this we must
either conserve our Baptismal Innocence; or if that has been lost or fullied,
we must be purged here, or in Purgatory, by severe penances, notwithstanding
our other good works, and the high degrees of sanctity to which we have
attained.

And the same, in proportion, may be averred of the soul here in this estate of
grace, where it must be very pure, to prepare it well for its union with God
here in this life: And seeing her pollution arises from her love to the
creature, and to herself, and from the life of the first Adam, according to the
lusts and appetites of our own spirit, it must dye to all these creatures, and
likewise to its self; just as the body to be made perfect, and to partake the
true life of immortality and bliss, must necessarily dye first; so likewise
must our souls, if we will have them arrive to perfection, consisting in this
union with God, to lead a holy and Divine life, which alone can truly be called
life.

To this purpose he writ thus to his Director:

I see clearly, that the only way to a Divine Union, is to be perfectly
divested of every thing that is not God, and dead to our selves, and every
creature: O that I well understood the importance of this nakedness and death!
and what is it that hinders the bonds of this Celestial love and union with his
Divine Majesty, and that Sovereign Beauty, but a certain show of, and light
adherence to some creature? and shall we suffer that a thing so small, and so
unworthy, should possess in the room of God, and that Holy Spirit, which is an
all-consuming fire of love, invirancing us on all sides, should not have the
power to work upon us the same effect, which this elementary fire works upon
wood? Why should not I vicious and discontented creature, in the midst of these
my wretched plenitudes, acquire happiness in the possession of God, which I may
do by his grace, in separating my self gently from the creature, by a single
and affectionate application to the Creator.

To another person he writ, thus:

When S. Paul says, You are dead, and your life is hid with God in Christ
Jesus: He lays death as the necessary foundation of a Christian, whereby to
remove from him all affection and inclination to the creature: As we see, that
a dead man has no more any motion or sense of any thing; for though we are
frequently sensible of the rebellious motions of corrupted nature, yet they
only spring to be choked and stifled in their birth. To this purpose the
Apostle sets our Savior for our pattern; of whom he said in the former part,
Exinanivir seipsum; He emptied himself. If you ask how long, and to what
degree? I answer, even from the instant of his conception, to his death:
Behold, this is our Rule, our Patron, and our general Rendezvous from all sides.

And to a third:

If we understood truly, how the real divesting our selves of all, rendered us
capable of union with God, we would incess^ntly beg this grace, offering great
violence to our selves, to arrive at this state of Death and Abnegation, to
which every Christian must endeavor, that aims at union with God, and ascend
to perfection. I received some years since, great illumination upon this
verity, giving me to understand, that the treasure hidden in the field,
mentioned in the Gospel, is no other but this estate of Death and Annihilation,
taking away from us our selves, to give us to God, emptying us of all
creatures, to be replenished with the Creator, the Fountain of all good. Our
Savior tells us there, that he that found it, went and sold all to buy it: If
we understood the true value of this precious treasure, we would freely part
with our liberty, with all we are, and all we have, to purchase it.

Really, this should work in us great confusion, that such precious things, and
such forcible motives, obliging us to tend to this Abnegation, we arrive at it
so slowly, and most men so seldom. O how few truly annihilated persons are to
be found! few that do not live according to the corrupted life of the old man,
producing actions accordingly, when ever occasions of honor, or profit, or
pleasure are presented: Few that attain to lose and renounce themselves in such
points as tend to their perfection: Let us therefore employ all our forces to
arrive at this happy estate.

O the spirits that are thus dead, what an admirable life do they live I and
hereby become rare instruments in the hands of God, capable to act great
matters tending to his glory: These are intimately united to him, wholly
transformed and annihilated in God; and by this gainful loss, and happy
annihilation, arrive t the height of perfection, they enjoy a settled peace, a
pure and solid contentment incomparably surpassing all sensual pleasures.
These are so far advanced above all earthly greatness, above that Idol-Honour,
which the world so much admireth, that these are become their contempt and
scorn: They make no difference betwixt the pomps of Emperors and Spiders-webs;
they value Diamonds and Precious Stones, equal with common Pibbles; they
neither take health for happiness, nor sickness for misery; they think that
poverty should not be termed a misfortune, nor poor men be deemed miserable;
they weigh not Beatitude in silver scales, nor measure it by the ell of
Pleasure; but repute that all these things do much resemble running waters,
which in their courve wash the roots of trees and plants as they pass, but make
no stay with any of them, flowing continually toward the end and place
appointed them.

Of these illustrious dead men, and most divinely annihilated souls, the Angel
speaks in the Apocalypse, Write, blessed are they that dye in the Lord from
henceforward, for they rest from their labors. And indeed this verity should
be writ in Letters of Gold, in Characters of Saphyrs and Rubies. Blessed are
the dead who dye thus to themselves, and to all created things, to live only
to their Redeemer: The Holy Ghost has said it, and assured them, that at the
instant of this precious death, they find rest from all their labors, because
their former pains and troubles of spirit now have an end, for that they have
now rooted out the causes of them, and dried up the fountain, which, according
to S. James, are our lusts and concupiscences.

Monsieur de Renty had arrived to this pitch, as may be seen in what we have
mentioned, deserving to be put in the list of those truly happy. I mean, those
happy ones of the state of grace, and possessors as of the Paradise of this
life.

CHAP. 10. Of his Corporal death.
MOnsieur de Renty having now finished his mystical death, must now also look
for to enter into the way of Glory, to receive that recompense of the reward
which God had prepared for him in the Heavens, necessarily dye the death of the
body, and so he di^^, it is this day that I writ this, two years ago, which fell
out in that manner as I shall now relate.

One the 11 of Aprl, 1649. he found himself very ill, and having concealed his
sickness for five days, was constrained, immediately after a journey he had
taken about some acts of Charity, to keep his bed; where he endured great pains
all over his body, with which his spirit likewise was so much affected, that he
professed his fancy to be so much disturbed with absurd and raving
imaginations, that if Gods grace had not assisted him, to undestand the ground
of them, and preserved him under them, he should have spoken more
extravagancies than any mad man: that there was much therefore in such an evil,
to desert and humble him; but it was the duty of a sinner to honor God in all
conditions in which he should put him.

During these great pains and torments, both of body and mind, and during the
whole course of his sickness, his ordinary employment consisted in affectionate
elevations of his mind to God, in thoughts and words of blessing, praise, and
submission to whatsoever was laid upon him, of meekness, and perfect obedience
to all that attended, and had the care of of him, with such a humble and
contented spirit, that he thought all well done, though sometimes it was
otherwise.

He expressed a wonderful patience, which ever gave a check to any complaint;
still saying, that he suffered nothing, although his pains were extraordinary:
And when his keeper; which was a Sister of the Hospital of Charity, with whom
he had visited so many poor and sick solks, did importune him to declare his
grief, O Sister (said he) how does the love of God wipe away all pain? The
Servants of God-fuffer nothing. Another friend demanding of him, if his pain
was not great? He answered, No. The other replied, That he thought it was. Its
true, says he, that I am much clogged with my disease; but I feel it not,
because I do not think of it. Being urged by their sister to take some sweet
things, he refused saying; These conduce little either for life or death, and
are not at all needful.

Yet he refused not Physic, though it was very bitter, which he took with a
cheerful countenance, and swallowed it with great difficulty, without leaving
any. The day before his death, one told him of an excellent medicine, which had
done great cures. He answered, Patience is a sovereign remedy, intimating his
unwillingness to try it; yet when it was brought, he took it without any
reluctance, or once asking what it was, evidencing his mystical death to any
thing that concerned him.

His sickness increasing, and afflicting him very sore, yet he never called for
any thing to refresh or relieve him; and when they had forced lean sheets upon
his bed, and a pillow, which he had formerly refused with great confusion and
humility; he said, Lo here lies a Gentleman at his ease.

Feeling some natural affection of joy arise in him, upon the sight of a person
of his acquaintance, with whom he had held a strict correspondence in spiritual
matters, who came out of the Country of purpose to visit him; he straightway
suppressed it, repeating these words three times over, with great fervor, I
desire nothing more but God; which demonstrated clearly his perfect
disengagement from all created things.

He commended to this parties care the missions (entreating him to labor
eranestly in that business, as an employment by which God was much glorified,
and the most profitable to the Church of any he knew) in these words:

Promise me Sir, that you will take pains therein, and promote them with all
pessible diligence: O Sir, it is a service well pleasing to God.

Reflecting upon the poor (for whom he had always a most tender care) he said
to his Lady;

I recommend the poor to you, will not you have a great care of them? you will
perform it better than I: Fear nothing, what you give to them, will not lessen
the rest.

Most part of the first week, and some time also of the second, that he lay
sick, were spent by him in works of mercy, appointing several Alms, and giving
order for letters to be writ into several Provinces about businesses of
Charity; with which he stood charged, and whereof he gave an exact account,

Many persons of quality came to visit him, whom he received with much
civility; but not without some trouble, by reason that most of those visits
drew on discourse of worldly things and complements, of which he complained,
saying,

They come hither to talk their Philosophy, of which I have no need.

And another time his expression was:

A Christian should talk little.

A Lady of great worth and piety, coming to visit him; said, Sir, I would with
all my heart lay down my life to save yours. To whom he replied with a cheerful
look, and his eyes lifted up to heaven;

To dye is not to be lost, our conversation and union will hereafter be more
near and intimate.

But, Sir, said she, if God would restore your health, and continue you longer
with us, do not you desire it? St. Martin desired to live upon these terms. He
answered, with much confusion:

O Madam, there is no comparison betwixt a Saint and a sinner, the will of God
be done.

The third day of his sickness, he desired, that his Ghostly Father might be
sent for: Whereupon they took occasion to demand of him, if he found himself
much worse. He answered,

No, but that in a business of that consequence, and where the memory and
judgment were so subject to decay, it were not safe to defer, for fear of a
surprisal; and that it were very fitting to do that, which he had so often
advised others unto, in the same condition.

The day after he made his Confession, and then called for his Reliquary, that
he might enter more particularly into a communion with all the Saints. The day
after, he confessed again, and almost every day till his death.

The Pastor of his Parish came to give him the Communion; and observing him
after receiving, in a great silence, not speaking one word, but only with
profound humility; saying,

My God, my God, pardon me, I am a great sinner.

He asked him the reason, why he spoke so little, and did not apply himself to
those that stood by, and were well pleased to hear him.

It is not fitting, says he, to speak in the presence of the Word Incarnate,
which I have received, nor take up any room in those hearts, which ought not to
be filled, only with God.

But he added besides;

That his spirit was then applied to that joy, which a creature ought to have,
to see it self upon the point of being reunited to his first Principle, and to
its last end.

The same day after dinner, one told him it was fit to use some diversion from
his serious thoughts, the Physicians judging his disease to have much of
melancholy in it. To whom he replied, I never had any joy comparable to that I
have felt this day. He asked him, upon what cause? To think, says he, that I
am going to be united with my God; repeating the words of the Apostle, Cupio
dissolvi and esse cum Christo; I destre to be dissoved, and be with Christ; and
those also of the beloved Disciple, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let
him that hears say, Come; and, he that thirsts, let him come: Behold, I
come quickly, Amen. Come Lord Jesus: Yet resigning himself as well for life as
death, unto the will of God.

One day about noon, he desired that his Chamber window might be set open, that
he might behold the brightness of the day; which being done, he cried out:

O bright day of Eternity! how this Sunshine chears me, helping me to meditate
on that day, which shall never have night-

The more his sickness and pain increased, the more he strove to unite himself
to God by prayer, imitating his heavenly Master, who in the strength of his
Agony prayed the more earnestly: And when the violence of his disease oppressed
him more, and he had need of greater straining to think upon God, he cried out:

Courage, courage, Eternity is at hand.

With many such like speeches, uttered with incredible fervor, but which could
not be distinctly pronounced, by reason of the extreme dryness of his throat,
caused through the feavour; till at last, stopping his speech all on a sudden,
he fixed his eyes steadfastly on heaven, for a quarter of an hour together, with
a smiling look, and full of reverence, as if he saw some extraordinary sight:
After which mustering up all his forces, he sat up in his bed, took off his
cap, and holding it in his hand, he said, as it were ravished and overwhelmed
with this Contemplation, with great straining, and words half stifled in his
throat, as well by the ardency of his spirit, as the weakness of his body;

I adore you, I adore you.

The Curate having administered to him Extreme Unction at the time appointed;
which he received with great devotion, answering to each prayer, and attending
to what he said, and repeating them a good while after. He asked him, if he
would give his blessing to his children. He answered,

How so, good Sir, shall I presume to give a blessing in your presence? I
should be happy to receive one from you.

But being urged thereunto, and told that the Church allowed that laudable
custom, he lifted his hands and eyes up to heaven; saying,

I pray God give it to you, and may it please him to bless you, and to preserve
you, by his grace, from the malignity of the world, that you may have no part
therein; And above all, my children, that you may live in the fear and love of
God, and yield due obedience to your Mother.

On Saturday, which was the day of his death, about half an hour past ten in
the forenoon, being newly recovered out of a violent fit of a Convulsion, which
had like to have carried him away, looking attentively on those that were
present, he made signs with his hands, head, and eyes, with a pleasant
countenance, for a person of quality, and his intimate friend, to come near
him: Which being done, he spoke thus to him:

Sir, I have one word to say to you before I dye (then pausing a little, to
recover his strength, he testified his affection to him, but in words that
could not distinctly be understood, at length raising his voice, and speaking
more articulately and plainly, he proceeded) The perfection of Christian life,
is to be united unto God, in the faith of the Church: We ought not to entangle
our selves in novelties; let us adore his conduct over (...) and continue
faithful to him unto the end; let us adhere to that one God, crucified for our
salvation; let us unite all our actions, and all that is in us, to his merits,
hoping that if we continue faithful to him, by his grace, we shall be partakers
of the glory of his Father. I hope we shall there see one another one day,
which shall never have end.

The party ready to reply, and give him thanks, Monsieur Renty stopped his
mouth, saying,

Adieu, this is all I have to say to you, Pray for me

Some time after this, and a little before his death, fixing his eyes
steadfastly upon heaven, as if he had discovered something extraordinary; he
said,

The Holy Infant Jesus, where is he?

Thereupon they brought him his Picture, which he kissed devoutly; and asking
for his Crucifix, took it in his hands, and kissed it most affectionately. Then
turning himself toward death, presently entered into his last agony, which held
not above a quarter of an hour, of which he spent the most part in pronouncing
the Holy name of Jesus; making as well as he could acts of Resignation, and
commending his spirit to God; after which he expired sweetly, and his holy
soul, as we have good cause to believe, departed to its place of rest.

Thus lived and dyed Monsieur de Renty, one of the most glorious lights that
God has bestowed upon his Church in this age, and one of the greatest
ornaments of true devotion that has appeared this long time. He died at Paris,
the 27 year of his age, the 24 of April, 1649. about noon, near the time of our
Saviors elevation on the Cross, of which a certain person having a particular
knowledge in his prayers, applied the merits of this passion to him at the
instant of his death; in such sort, that this application, together with his
own acts of resignation and annihilation which he had made, and with which he
both honored and embraced the Cross, are piously believed, to have perfectly
purged his soul, and put it into a condition of entering into its beatitude and
enjoyment of God at the instant of its dissolution.

There are reports of several Revelations and Visions concerning his state of
glory, and how at the instant of his death, a Globe of light was seen ascending
from earth to heaven. Certain mira^ulous cure are also related to be done by
his intercessions, and spiritual relief, supernaturally afforded to several
devout persons by his admonitions; which things will not seem incredible, when
we consider his holy life, and heroic virtues, rendering him one of the
miracles of our age: Yet since I have not the like assurance of these, as of
what I have already written, and that true Sanctity and Ch^istian perfection
consists not in such things, which are not at all imitable, I shall not insist
upon them.

I only add by way of conclusion, that we have great reason to admire the
secret counsels of God, in taking out of the world a man so useful; who being
in his full strength, and flower of his age, and in such an eminent degree of
credit, reputation, and capacity, might wonderfully have advanced the honor of
God, and good of his neighbor.

But when I say it was the hand of God, all things are therein concluded: And
hereby he is pleased to let us know, that he has no need of us for the
advancing of his glory, and the execution of his designs, which he can bring
about without us; and when he is pleased to make use of us his instruments
therein, we are to behave our selves with great humility in his presence. He
has translated him to another place, where he glorifies his Majesty with
greater perfection; to a place and state, that truly deserves the name of
glory, and that not only in consideration of what the Saints receive, but of
what they render to the King of glory. Moreover, we may affirm, that these holy
men, great pillars of the Church, and comforts of the fai^hful, are frequently
taken away before their time, as a just punishment upon us, for the little use
and benefit we make of their conversation and example.

And truly when first I heard the news of his sickness, and the danger that he
was in, I could not but make this reflection that considering so solid and
complete a virtue, notwithstanding that great need the world had of him, and
the exceeding great good he might still have done in it, it was very likely he
might dye, as being a fruit ripe for heaven; even as fruit in its maturity is
ready to be gathered, and takes hurt, by being plucked too soon or too late.
Thus did God gather this good man, in the maturity of his graces, and
perfection of his virtues, as a man perfect and completed, to place him in
heaven, there to receive his just reward; where he waits for us, to adore, and
glorify, and love, together with him, in all perfection God the Father, the
Son, and H. Ghost, to whom be Honor, Praise, Benediction, and all sorts of
Adoration and Service, now and for ever. Amen.

THE CONCLUTION OF THE WORK.
How we ought to read the Lives of Saints.
TO conclude this work, and render it more useful to the Reader, I think it
will not be amiss, to afford him some instructions how to read the Lives of
Saints, and Histories of persons eminent in virtue; to the end, that that fruit
may be reaped by them, for which they were compiled. These eminent souls then,
are to be considered two several ways: 1. As they have relation to God. 2. As
to our selves.

For the first, as they relate to God, it is certain, that these Saints, and
Persons, famous for Piety, are the greatest Masterpieces, the richest
Ornaments, the most precious Jewels, the choicest Works, and the greatest
Instruments of Gods Glory, that are upon earth. For if the meanest righteous
man is incomparably more noble and honorable, than all sinners put together
(since these are the very slaves of the Devil, and enemies of God, even the
greatest Kings and Monarchs of the Universe (according to the estimate that
truth it self makes of them) ignoble and infamous, whereas the other is a
servant, friend, and child of God (whose service is perfect freedom) how much
more honorable and glorious are the Saints, and the Persons of such heroic
Virtue, because they possess such justice and virtue in a more high degree,
have a greater abundance of gifts and graces, partake more fully the
perfections of God, are more lively images of him, and enjoy a nearer alliance
and resemblance with our Savior Jesus Christ, and are his richest conquests,
and his choicest workmanship.

Tertullian considering Job, in the thickest of his bad news, posting from all
quarters, in the height of his afflictions, and most sensible pains, free from
all impatience and murmuring, not opposing the least word, or repining thought
against Gods sacred counsels, but continually blessing God for all; and looking
upon him fallen from the height of happiness, upon his dunghill, where he lay
stripped of all, but sores and scabs, spread from the crown of his head, to the
sole of his foot, enduring all this extremity with invincible patience, he
breaks forth into this expression, Quale in illo viro feretrum Deus de Diabolo
extruxit! quale vexillum de in mico gloriae suae extulit, cum ille homo ad
omnem acerbum nuncium nihil ex ore promeret nisi Deo gratias! What a Trophie
has God erected to his own honor, in the person of Job, by his patience, able
to encounter the Devil! what a Banner has he set up, what a Victory has he
obtained by him, over that enemy of his glory!

These words and considerations are applicable to all his Saints, of whom we
may say, that they are the great procurers of his honor, and by their Faith,
Hope, Charity, Patience, Fortitude, Humility, Obedience, Chastity, and other
Virtues, like so many high-sounding Trumpets, do make the earth echo with his
praises.

We ought therefore to have a high esteem of all the Saints and persons of
signal Virtue, we are obliged to a particular veneration of them, praising, and
loving, and honoring them, and our Savior Christ in them, and for them; for
undoubtedly, Mirabilis in Sanctis Deus, as David says; God is most admirable,
and to be praised, loved and feared in his Saints. We ought to admire his
power, in their miracles, the might of his grace, in their heroic actions; we
ought to hope in his mercy, on the consideration of those happy changes he
wrought in them; and to fear his justice, when we consider those severe
chastisements, which he inflicted upon their smallest faults; and love his
bounty and goodness, in those demonstrations of his mercy and benignity which
he has showed to them. Where it is to be observed, that as we are not to
credit lightly all that is said or written of their Visions, Revelations, and
extraordinary graces and favors which God has bestowed on his Saints, when
not approved and authorized by the judgment of his Church, because herein a
man may easily be deceived, and the Devil, much craftier than we, knowing our
cu^ious and ambitious nature, apt to be taken with sublime novelties, can
disguise himself in several shapes, and be transformed, as says S. Paul, into
an Angel of light. So neither on the other side, ought we to be too incredulous
or rash to condemn; since it is certain, that there ever have been, and ever
will be, true miracles; nor is it just for us to measure the power and goodness
of God, by our reason, nor limit his bounty by the narrowness of our hearts.

Since the great mysteries of the Incarnation, and of the H. Eucharist,
together with what God has wrought in the beginning, and continues working
every day for man (whereof we can raise no doubt) there is nothing that can
seem incredible in the Graces, and favors of God communicated to a soul, since
nothing herein can be paralelled with the former. Our Savior testifies greater
love to weak man, giving himself to him more miraculously, and in a more
transcendent manner in one Communion, than he ever manifested to all his
Saints, in those extraordinary Communications of his graces and favors to them.

Moreover, what bounty, what compassion and tenderness did he exercise toward
men, whilst he lived amongst them? What did he not for them, in his life? what
did he not suffer for them at his Death, after his glorious Resurrection, when
he was in a condition so far above them? what familarity and intimacy did he
show to his Disciples, visiting them frequently, disguised in diverse shapes,
appearing visibly to them, appointing several meetings with them, talking
lovingly with them, suffering them to touch him, and eating with them: These
familiarities are very wonderful, and withal very certain; we may truly affirm,
that the love of God to mankind, and particularly to pure and innocent souls,
is unconceiveable, Cum simplicibus sermocinat^o ejus; His Secret is with the
righteous. We see how Fathers, though never so grave and ancient, delight
themselves in their children, even often to play with them; insomuch, that that
renowned great Captain, and King of Sparta, Agesila^s, surprised by a friend,
riding upon a stick with his little son, and observing him astonished at the
action; asked, Whether he had any children: Who answered, No. Then said
Agesilaus, wonder not at what I do; you must be a father, to be capable of
these tendernesses, and to come to these forgettings of your self.

We must not therefore think it strange, if God (who is truly a Father to
mankind, and so far transcends in paternal affection all others, that in
comparison of him, they deserve not the name of Fathers) has such tender
bowels, and amorous affections to the Saints, who are his dearest children;
which he expressed often with unconceiveable intimacies and caresses, that
whosoever will judge of the reality of them, must first be possessed with the same
love, that God bears in his eternal bosom, some glimpse whereof we may
conceive, by considering the embraces, and kisses, and welcomes that passed
betwixt the Prodigal Son and his Father in the Gospel, Luke 15.20.

Here therefore, according to the observation of the Ancients, Ne quid nimus;
let there be nothing done too much, let there be neither too much facility, nor
too much difficulty to believe what is said of the graces done by God to holy
souls: But let us balance our selves equally between the one and the other,
weighing and examining things in the scales of Divine Prudence, not of Humane
Reason. And thus much for the first consideration, as they relate to God.

Concerning the second, as they relate to us, Saint Gregory the great has an
excellent Note, Homil. 34. in Evang, where he says, That God has not lighted
more Torches in the heavens, to guide and direct our steps on earth, than he
has set us here below, to conduct and show us the way to him. Amongst these,
the Saints are undoubtedly the most considerable, since there is not one
amongst them, whose life is not a bright shining light unto us, to discover the
paths we are to walk in; and like that famous Watchtower Pharos in
Alexandria, which by its fires and light, served to guide the Mariners in the
night, how safely to steer their course.

The Saints, says S. Gregory Nyssen, set forth their lives to men, who direct
their course toward God, like a bright Lamp, to conduct them securely. And
speaking of S. Ephrem. he calls him a great Luminary, In vita S. Ephrem. (...).
Prefat. in Job.
who had more enlightened the world by his life, than the Sun had by his beams;
and a little after says, That God had fixed him as a stately living Pillar
(like the Mercur^es of the Ancients, placed in Cross-ways to direct Passengers)
to declare to men, the Highway to Sanctity and Perfection. S. Gregory the great
advises us, moreover, to consider, how that as God the Creator by an admirable
Providence, a most beautiful Oeconomie, and profound Wisdom, has so ordered
the course and seasons of stars, that every one keeps his time of rising and
setting one after another, to enlighten the darkness of the night, and cast
their influences upon us: So in like manner, he has sent and disposed his
Saints, like so many stars, to give us light in the darkness of this life.
Accordingly (says he) he has appointed Abel to rise, to teach us Innocence;
Enoch, purity of Intention in our Actions; Noah, to forrifie us with courage,
in expecting our long delayed hopes; Abraham, to set before us a model of an
heroic obedience; and so of the rest. Ecce quam fulgentes stellas (as that
holy Pope goes on) in coelo cernimus, ut inoff^nso ped^ operis iter nostrae
noctis ambulemus; Behold what bright Stars bespangle the firmament of the
Church, to guide our feet safely in the night of our journey.

And admirable are the examples they have left us, and the influences of Virtue
that these mysterious stars have conveyed to us, Fuit in iis (says S.
Augustine) Continent^a usque ad tenuissimum victum, panis and aquae, and non
quotidiana solum, sed etiam per plures d^es perpetuata je^unia, Castitas usque
ad conjugii prolisque contemptum; patientia usque ad cruces flammasque
neglectas, liberalitas usque ad patrimonia distributa pauperibus; denique tot
us mundi aspernatio usque ad desiderum mortis; Their temperance was extended
even to the most slender diet of bread and water, and to fasts, not of a single
day only, until the evening, but continued for diverse days together. Chastity,
even to the contempt of Marriage and Progeny. Patience, to the slighting of
Gibbets and Flames. Liberality, to the distributing of their whole Patrimonies
to the poor. In fine, con^empt of the whole world, even to to the desiring of
death.

And all this to instruct us, what we ought to do, Sanctorum Vita (as says S.
Ambrose, cap. 1. de S. Joseph) caeteris norma Vivendi est; The life of Saints
is our rule, to order our lives after them.

Since then God has given these for a rule to guide our lives after; and for
Beacons, to direct us in our sailing toward heaven, let us mark them
attentively, and follow their steps in our journey thither.

To which undoubtedly we are obliged, because God demands and expects it from
us; and also, we shall find it most pr^fitable, in that this attentive
observing what they did, is most likely to make the deepest impression upon our
spirits, Whereupon S. Anthony (as Athanasius reports of him, in e us v t^)
recommended earnestly to his Religious, the lives of Saints, to fashion
themselves after their model. And S. Basil writes in his first Epistle, that as
young Painters, to make themselves skilful, look often upon the pieces of
curious and excellent Masters, sp^nding whole hours and days in the ^opying of
such Works; so they that would draw the Picture of Virtue in their souls to the
life, must diligently heed these most excellent Originals, by which they shall
in time become, in some measure, like unto them. He adds moreover, That as
heat and light stream naturally from the fire, and sweet sents exh^le from
perfumes; in like manner sacred Knowledge arises from the actions of Saints,
and the sweet odor of their virtues, perfume such as are much conversant in
them.

And as it is not possible, that he that continues long in the Sun, should not
receive some heat and light from it; and, he that makes some stay in the
Perfumers shop, amongst Musk and Ambergrise, should not smell at all thereof;
neither can such as have much commerce with Saints, and study their virtues,
remain without some amendment and savor of holiness.

Those two renowned Courtiers of the Emperor, which S. Austin mentions in his
Confessions, lib. 2, cap. 6. were so wrought upon, by reading the life of S.
Anthony, that they presently took up a resolution to quit the world, and all
other thoughts, save of their own salvation; Legere coep^t unus eorum (these
are his own words) and mirari, and accendi, and inter legendum, med^tari,
arr^pere talem vitam, and relict a militia saeculari, servire tibi; legebat and
mutabatur intus, and exuebatur mundi men's ejus: One of them b^gan to read the
life, and as he read, to admire, and his heart burning within him, conceived a
resolution to imitate it, to throw off his sword, and the Emperors Service, to
become a servant of God: Thus whilst he read, he found his heart changed, and
his soul to disentagle herself from the affections of the world, to put off the
old man, to be clothed with the new.

And of himself he affirms, that the examples of these holy servants of God,
were like hot coals cast into the bosom of his soul, heating, and warming, and
setting him all in a flame.

S. Columban owes his conversion to the reading, and the considering of the
life of Mary of Egypt, our Founder S. Ignat^us his, to the lives of several
Saints, with innumerable others: S. Eugendus Abbot of Claude, read continually
the lives of S. Anthony, and S. Martin, and having them constantly before his
eyes, and more within his heart, fashioned his own after them. Bonaventure,
says of S. Francis, that Ex recordatione Sanctorum omnium, tanquam lapidum
ignitorum, in deificum recalescebat incend^um; when he found his heart wax cold
in the love of God, he warmed and enkindled it by the frequent ruminating upon
the Virtues of Saints, as so many red hot stones.

To this purpose, the examples of Saints are serviceble unto us, and such
benefit are we to extract from the reading of their Histories; and as they are
our patterns for our imitation, so will they be witnesses against us at that
great day, if we fail herein; and will sit then as Judges to condemn us. We may
much more truly say of them, than Seneca said of that great Philosopher of his
times, that he was given to that age, Ne aut exemplum d^esset saeculo suo, aut
convicium: for the instruction or the reproach of those times.

For the Saints were like us, and we are like them, men made of the same Mass,
children of the same Father, servants of the same God; we have the same
Commandments, the same Sacraments, the same Hope, the same Heaven before us.
Elias (says S. James) was a man subject to like infirmities: The Saints had
flesh and blood, as we have; subject to like passions, like weaknesses,
sensible of the same difficulties as we in resisting their appetites,
vanquishing their vicious inclinations, practicing of virtue; yet
notwithstanding, through the grace of God (which is never wanting to any) with
good courage and resolution, broke through their difficulties, achieved heroic
actions, though never so contrary to their own inclinations. We must think
(says S. Ambrose upon this subject, l. de Joseph. c. 1,) that the Saints N^m
naturae praestantiris f^erunt, sed observantiae majoris, nec vit a nesciveru^t
sed emondarunt; had not a more excellent nature than we, but a more exact care
over it; were not exempted from the temptation of vices, but circumspect to
correct and avoid them: Therefore we must imitate them, because we are able,
and if we neglect it, shall be held culpable.

S. Aust^ne relates, that when first he began to consider of a conversation, he
fell into mighty torments, and unspeak^ble anguish, e^pecially upon the
thoughts of quitting those delights which ^ad bewi^ched him, and of living in
continence; and hereupon, That virtue presented herself before him, with a
countenance full of majesty and sweetness, and inviting him with a pleasant
look, to draw near, opening her friendly arms to embrace him, which were filled
with a number of persons, whose example was sufficient to encourage and
fortify him: Here were young men and maidens, men and women of all ages,
vigorous old people, and ma^ds grown ancient in virtue: Then Chastity, with a
little disda^nful s^n^le; yet such a one as was proper to encourage him; said,
Tu^n ^n p^^eris quod is it and istae? an vero isti and istae in s^m^t ^sis
possunt, ac non in domino Deo suo? Can not thou do what th^s^ of both s^xes
have performed? or can any of these perform this of then selves? or rather by
the Lord their God?

We may therefore do according to our degree and station, what the Saints have
done in theirs, wherein if we fail, we shall be found guilty, and their deeds
will condemn us, Instauras (says Job to this purpose, according to S,
Gregory's interpretation) testes tuos contra me, and multiplicas ^ram tuam
adversum me; Thou producest thy witnesses against me, which are thy Saints,
because I neglected to imitate their virtues, and encreasest thine anger round
about me; and in another place, Resp^ciet homines and dicet, peccavi and vere
deliqu^^; the sinner beholds men, that is, the Saints, weak men like himself,
who yet conquered their infirmities, and went beyond themselves; and
considering their victories, accuses himself, saying, I have done amiss, I
have sinned, and I condemn my own life, so lazy, imperfect, and vicious.

Hence it is, that S. Jude, and the Wiseman before him, tell us, That the
Saints shall judge sinners, and condemn at the last day; because they shall
then make it appear, that if, with them, they had corresponded to that grace
which was given them, and done their part as they should, they should have been
partakers with them in the same bliss, and therefore their destruction is
wholly from themselves.

When we shall all stand before that great Tribunal, to receive our final doom
(says Prospe^) what shall we do, or what will we answer? which way can we turn
us? to the Saints, those friends of God, whose instructions we have refused,
and whose lives we have not imitated? shall we excuse our selves by the
corruption of our nature, and frailty, and infirmity of our flesh: Sed
excusationi reclamabunt omnium Sanctorum exempla, qui cum frag^litate carnis,
in carne viventes, quod fecerunt, ut^que sieri posse docuerunt: maxim quia
neceipsi peccato, sua vertute, sed domini miserantis auxilio, restiterunt: But
the examples of the Saints will confute us, and render those excuses fruitless;
who laboring under the same infirmities, and conquering them, demonstrated
that what they did, we might have done, seeing neither did they such things by
their own strength, but through that assistance they received from the goodness
of a merciful God: what then shall we answer for our selves, if our Savior
shall say unto us, as undoubtedly he will, Si po^uistis, quare non restitistis
desideriis peccatorum? si non potuisti^, quare meum contra peccatum non
quaesistis aux linm? aut vulnerati quare poenitendo non adhibu^istis vulneri
vestro remedium? if you were able to resist sin, why was it not done? if you
were not able, why did you not seek help from me? if you were wounded in the
combat, why did ye not apply a remedy to your wound by true repentance? to
which not having any thing to answer (says the same Father) he will pronounce
against us the sentence of condemnation, and send us into everlasting torments.

Let us therefore in the name of God, secure our selves from this danger; let
us not flatter our selves, by saying, these things are high and impossible,
until we have first tried some of them; let us up and be doing, every one of us
according to our condition and measure of grace, imitating these Saints and
great servants of God; and in particular this, whose History we have here
related, who in the flower of his age, of so noble descent and birth, tempted
with all the advantages the world could afford, in a secular and married
condition, having lived so holy and virtuous a life, has traced out to all
sorts of people, most excellent patterns of virtue for their imitation; and
likewise has afforded a fit subject, if they do neglect it, for their just
reproach.

FINIS

