A FRIENDLY DISCOURSE Concerning Profane Cursing and Swearing, Wherein is
showed The Heinousness of those Sins, and the Necessity of private Persons
giving Informations for the Suppressing of them, pursuant to the late Act of
PARLIAMENT. In a Familiar Conference Between Two Plain Persons.

Made Public for the awakening of the Consciences of Common-Swearers; and the
Vindication of our Religious Informers, who have been the Instruments of the
remarkable abatement of SWEARING; and for the encouragement of all good
Christians, to join their endeavors with them for the entire suppressing it;
and by giving Informations to the Magistrates against it, Drunkenness, and
Profanation of the Lord's Day.

Because of Swearing, the Land Mourns,

Jer. 23.10. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness.

Psalm. 141.5. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by W. Downing in St.
Bartholomew-Close, near West-Smithfield, 1697.

An Abstract of the Late ACT, for the more effectual Suppressing Profane
Cursing and Swearing, made in the 6. and 7. Gulielm. III.
THat if any Person, after the 24 June 1695. Profanely Swear or Curse in the
Presence of any Justice of the Peace, or head Officer of the place where the
Offense is committed; or shall be thereof Convicted by the Oath of One Witness,
or by his own Confession before such Justice or Officer, he shall for every
such Offense pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the Offense is
committed, if Servant, Day-Labourer, Common-Souldier, or Common-Seaman, One
Shilling, and every other Person Two Shillings, and for a Second Offense after
Conviction double; and for a Third treble. 2. That upon Neglect or Refusal to
Pay, any such Justice or Officer shall send his Warrant to the Constable,
Tything-Man, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor of the Parish where the
Offense is committed, to Levy the Sum forfeited to the Use of the Poor of the
Parish; and in case no Distress can be had, to set the Offender, if above the
Age of Sixteen, in the Stocks by the space of one hour for a single Offense,
and for more than one Offense, at the same time, two Hours; but if under that
Age, unless he Pay forthwith, to cause him to be Whipped by the Constable, or by
the Parent, Guardian, or Master of the Offender, in the Presence of the
Constable. 3. That if the Justice or Officer wilfully or wittingly Omit the
Performance of this Duty in the Execution of this Act, he shall forfeit Five
Pounds, one Moiety to the Use of the Informer. 4. That if any Suit be brought
against any Justice, Officer, or Person, for any thing done in pursuance of
this Act, the defendant may Plead the General Issue, and give the special
Matter in Evidence, and shall have trebble Costs upon Verdict for him, or the
Plaintiffs Nonsuit or Discontinuance. 5. Proviso that the Proof be within Ten
days next after the Offense committed. 6. That the Act be Read in all Churches
and Public Chapels immediately after Morning Prayer on Four Sundays, viz.
next after June 24. September. 29. December. 25. and March 25. under pain of 20.
Shillings for every Omission. 7. That the Justice or Head Officer Register all
Convictions at the time, and Certify the same at the next General Quarter
Sessions, to be kept upon Record, to be seen without Fee.

A FRIENDLY DISCOURSE CONCERNING Profane Cursing and Swearing.
S. YOUR Servant Mr. M. I am glad to see you again this Evening, although I was
much surprised at your hold Answer last Night, when I gave you that mild
Reproof for Swearing, that you should say, You thought it little or no Sin;
which is one reason of my waiting on you this Evening, in hopes to convince
your Judgment of the contrary, if not reform your Practice.


M. Sir, I am glad to see you; but for my part, I am of the same mind I was
last Night, which is, Tho I do not think what you call Swearing to be no Sin at
all; yet I don't apprehend it to be a Crime of that Heinousness which You and
some others seem to make it.


S. Well, I shall be glad that you will be so kind, as to spend this Evening
with me, although you say, you are still of the same mind; however, let us be
plain and free, since we have been so long acquainted, and give me leave to ask
you one or two Questions.


M. With all my heart.


S. Do you believe the Scriptures to be true, to be the Word of God, and the
Rule which we ought All to walk by, both in respect of our Deeds and Words, and
that which we shall at last be Judged by?


M. Yes, surely, God forbid I should believe otherwise.


S. Well then, if you believe as you say, it makes me stand amazed at you; for,
How can you think that Swearing is but a very small or inconsiderable Sin, when
the Scripture is so plain in prohibiting and condemning of it? for it flatly
forbids our Swearing by God's Holy Name; for in the Third Commandment, The Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain: And our Savior says
in the fifth of St. Matthew, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is
God's Throne; neither by the Earth, for it is his Footstoo^: And in the same
chapter it is said, But let your Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for
whatsoever, are more than these, comes of Evil: And again, St. James 5.12.
Above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay;
lest ye fall into Condemnation: And in Jeremiah 23.10. Because of Swearing the
Land mourns: And in Hosea 4.2. Swearing has the van of the most crying and
provoking Sins: And the Prophet David makes it a symptom of Hatred against God,
when in Psalm 139.20. he says, Thine Enemies take thy Name in vain. These Texts
are plain to be understood, and I might quote others of the same nature, but I
hope these being well and seriously considered will convince you that Swearing
is a Sin of no low degree.


M. What, I perceive you are of the Quakers Principle, and conclude, that it is
not lawful to Swear at all.


S. You utterly mistake me. I do believe it is not only lawful, but a
Christian's Duty to Swear; that is, to make an Appeal to God of the Truth of
what he affirms, and the Sincerity of what he promises, when lawfully by the
Magistrate called thereunto; for the Scripture gives not only countenance, but
commandment to this Duty, Levit. 19.12. and Deuteronomy. 6.13. and chap. 10. ver. 20.
and Heb. 6.16. But it is against the Sin of Common Swearing, whereby the Name
of GOD is greatly dishonored, and the Rules of the Scriptures impiously
violated, and our Holy Religion contemned and disgraced; it is against This that
my Discourse is levelled, and it is against This that I produce these Scriptures.


M. Well, I do believe it is a Sin, but I hope it is no very great One, by
reason there is so great a number of Swearers, and most of them think it a
little or no Sin.


S. Alas! Mr. M. How can that Sin be little, that is committed against an
Infinite Majesty? How can that affront be small, that is levelled against Him,
who dazles the Eyes of Angels? If it were not against the Law of God, it could
not be a Sin: But when it is so expressly forbidden, How can you, or they, or
any Person whatever, conclude it to be little or no Sin?

But admit that the Guilt of single Oaths were no less venial, than is
pretended, yet certainly, when in most Swearers, as well as in your self, the
frequency of Swearing is so great, that in one day they are guilty of many
scores of Oaths; these Sins not growing single, as Apples; but like Grapes, in
clusters, their Multitude cannot but render them considerable; and you may
consider, (since you are a Seaman) that a Thousand holes may as well sink a
Ship, as some great Leaks besides, these Common-Swearers are not only ruinous
to themselves, but have a destructive Influence upon the Nation that suffers
them; for what the Prophet relates of Judah, I wish were not now fulfilled of
England; Because of Swearing the Land mourns, Jeremiah 23.10.

But farther consider, The awfulness of the Divine Majesty, who, in order that
a Fear of his Wrath, and a Reverence of his Holiness, Power, and Justice, might
be kept always fresh upon us, has commanded us never to use his Name in Vain;
i. e. never so much as to pronounce those Holy Words (whereby God has been
pleased to style Himself, and to communicate the Knowledge of Himself unto his
Creatures) idly, vainly, and without the greatest Reverence: Therefore they
who profane the Name of God, (as all Common Swearers in a most grievous manner
do) do not only break a Positive Law, but testify, that they have no Fear, no
holy Dread and reverent Awe of God before their Eyes; and, therefore, as I
never knew, so it is utterly impossible that a Common Swearer should be a pious
Man; but, on the contrary, One that breaks forth into any other Sin, whither
Pride, or Passion, or Last, or Profit, or Humor calls him. He that casts off
the Reverence of God, (as every Profane Swearer does) can never
conscientiously keep any of his Commandments. Consider therefore, it is no
single Sin, but such an one as is produced by a Fearlessness of God, and
attended by any other Vice, which the Corruption of the Offender is most
inclined unto.


M. I do confess I believe there is something in what you have said, and that
it is a greater Sin than I took it for before; especially where Men Swear at
every Word; but I only Swear when I am angry, or in a passion, and I think no
harm in it then.


S. How Man, think no harm in it, by reason you are angry, or in a passion!
Surely the Sin is so much the greater, if you consider the Apostle's Command,
Ephesians. 4.26. Be ye angry, and sin not: besides, this is but to excuse one Fault
with another; to make a lesser Sin the Apology for the Commission of a greater.
But, alas! how strangely industrious are Men to deceive themselves! But,
remember, if we must answer for every idle Word, (as our Lord himself assures
us we must) then will passionate Words add to our Account; but Swearing in
Passion, (as if we would quarrel with our Creator) this will weigh down the
Soul (without a true Repentance) to the burning Tophet, to the Regions of
Eternal Horror, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


M. How! be not so censorious, I hope I shall not be damned for an hasty Oath.


S. Sir, Bear with me if I tell you and all common Swearers your Doom, which
will as assuredly as the Word of God is true, be past upon you hereafter, at
the great and terrible Day, (without a sincere Repentance and Reformation
prevent it) you, and all the Tribe of Common Cursers and Swearers, who profane
the Name of our Great and Holy God, will make up your account to all Eternity
in the Lake that Burns with Fine and Brimstone; for Heaven is a place too good
for such who daily affront the Majesty of its King, by impious, rash, careless
and heedless Oaths and Curses.


M. Sir, You startle me, I hope my Case is not so had as you seem to make it.


S. Pray Neighbor consider, it is not I that make your Case either better or
worse, it is the Word of God, it is the Holy Bible which you profess to believe:
And if you behold your self in that true Glass, That will make you sensible,
that you are altogether as deformed as I represent you. And as to what you
generally urge, that your Provocations are such, that you cannot avoid it; The
Excuse is utterly false and sinful; for would you but give so much Money to the
Poor, for every Oath you Swear, as the Law directs in that Act against Cursing
and Swearing, I do believe it would not belong before you would conquer it,
although at present you think you cannot avoid it.


M. But there are others that Swear as much as I, and I seldom see them
reprehended; and yet you were sharp upon me for Swearing last night but twice
or thrice.


S. How strangely you answer! Am I therefore your Enemy, because I tell you the
Truth? Your Excuse is, just as if in an Hospital a desperate Patient should say
to his Physician, Why am I so much the subject of your Care, when there are so
many others who are as bad, if not worse? If you complain of being reproved,
you complain of being cared for: And remember by the way, As one may be far
from Health, and yet not so Sick as gasping People; so it is but a very sorry
Goodness, not to be as bad as the worst; and I hope my Reproof will have a good
Effect upon you, for I am sure I designed it for your Good.


M. I wish it may be for my Good; but, after all, I only Swear to the Truth, I
scorn to Swear Falsely; and what I know to be True, I think I may Swear to
without any harm.


S. This seems to be the very Sin of the Jews, whom our Savior reproves in the
Fifth of Matthew. They thought they might Swear, (as I have been informed) so
they did but Swear to the Truth, in their common Conversation; and this was
founded on that false gloss of the Elders, Ye have heard that it has been said
by them of old times, Thou shall not forswear thy self. -- Yet, however, lest
they should profane the Name of GOD by Common Swearing, they invented a sort
of new and inferior Oaths; such as, by Heaven, and by the Earth, and by the
City of Jerusalem, the Metropolis of the Kingdom. Much like to the idle and
sinful Oaths of too many vain and ignorant Christians, who will Swear, by
Heaven, and by the Light, and by our Lady; by the Mass, by their Faith and
their Truth. But now our Savior tells the Jews, and in telling them, He tells
us, that all such vain Oaths are sinful, since all Oaths must terminate in GOD;
and that our Communication should be plain and innocent; Yea, yea; and Nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more comes of Evil. But now you, Neighbor, exceed far
the Impiety of the Jews; for you make no Conscience of Profaning the Name of
the Great GOD by your execrable Oaths, which Name ought never once to be spoken
without the highest Respect and Reverence. Therefore I beseech you to consider
the Greatness of your Sin, which is also augmented very much by this, that
there is in it no Temptation either of Profit or Pleasure to allure you to it;
but shows that you are willing to affront God, and serve the Devil altogether
Gratis; and that you are wicked, only for the sake of being so.


M. But if I don't Swear, the Incredulity of Men is such, they will not believe me.


S. Fie for shame, Man, don't so wretchedly proclaim your own Dishonesty, and
want of Credit, for no sober Man, no honest, good and virtuous Man, will ever
believe you the sooner for an Oath, but the sooner question what you affirm;
for, How can I apprehend that that Man makes conscience of telling me a Lie,
who makes no conscience of Profaning the Name of God? and, indeed, we shall
never find Common Swearers great Friends to Truth, but always the contrary;
for, How often do we hear such Men swear to the Truth of a lying Jest, when
even they themselves and the Hearers also know it is a Falsehood?


M. God forgive me, I fear I have been sometimes guilty of that.


S. Why then consider the danger of this Sin: And that you may do it
effectually, remember this Truth, That God never will nor can forgive without
Repentance and Reformation. But supposing it true, (as it is altogether false)
that Men will not believe you without this Sin, and that by it you purchase
Belief; Credit is better wanted, than bought at so dear a rate, as Sin; and you
make no better a Bargain than the Man in the Gospel, who lost the Kingdom of
Heaven for some Stores in his Barns.


M. Ay, but it is so customary for Men of my Profession, (whose Employment lies
at Sea) that it is almost impossible to avoid it, especially under such great
Provocations, and where few or none make Conscience of it.


S. Weak is the Excuse that is on Custom built,
For the Use of Sinning lessens not the Guilt.
And Custom in Evil rather increases, than contracts the Fault, therefore you
must not plead for it, but strive in good earnest against it, and desire the
Almighty to assist you; Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. And as you
would avoid hereafter the Punishment of those Sinners against their own Souls,
when they shall be condemned to Eternal Torments; so now avoid the Sins which
they are guilty of, which will assuredly lead to that place of Vengeance. And
remember farther, that no Provocation can be enough to atone for a Sin.


M. Indeed I cannot well reply: I believe it is a Sin, and a great one too; But
yet if we don't sometimes Swear, our Men will never obey our Command.


S. Alas, my Friend, it is a sad Answer you make; for, believe me, it is but an
extravagant way of teaching our Inferiors to pay us their Duties, to teach them
to disobey the Command of their Superiors by our own Example; and to lead them
the way to despise the Injunctions of the most adored Power, to whom we confess
to owe an impartial Obedience upon the highest Considerations.

But that there are ways enough to make those under your Command regard what
you say, without your breaking the Law of God to induce them to it, appears
from what I have been credibly informed by sober Persons; That there was a time
when our English Naval Force was formidable to all our Neighboring Nations,
when we were as terrible to all that opposed us, as if Victory had lodged her
self in our Sails. And then not so much as an Oath or Curse was heard in our
whole Fleet. I was told by a Person who deserves Credit, and does also obtain
it, (tho he does not Swear) who was an Officer in those days, That tho they
were exactly careful to punish this Sin in the Ship in which he was concerned,
yet for several Months none was punished, because there was not a Man found
Guilty. But now, since we have altered our Measures, and have chosen to become
terrible to our Men, by most prodigious and newinvented Oaths and Curses, we no
longer become a Terror to our Foes; God grant they may not prove so to us. And
this, I think, proves we may Command without Cursing and Swearing.


M. Hold, hold, hold, why, what you are arguing for the times of Rebellion; I
little thought you had approved of those Times, or any of their doings.


S. I thought you had known me too well ever to have suggested such a thought;
As I always did, so I always shall, love Monarchy. But yet, as something was
found good even in the House of Jeroboam, so this abstinence from this accursed
Sin, in that Day, and under that Government, must be acknowledged, and also
commended; and the contrary in us, I am afraid, must be owned, and I am sure
will be both here and hereafter condemned. And I will not be ashamed to confess
my Thoughts, That till we are Reformed, we shall never arise to that Glory and
Greatness which our Forefathers were by the Almighty Blessed withal. But this I
urge only by the way: And whatever we now are, or hereafter shall be, I am sure
this Sin shall not escape unpunished.


M. God grant we may all amend, I believe it is time: But yet, notwithstanding
all you have said, methinks it looks something like a Gentleman, and a Man of
Courage, now and then to grace our Speech with an Oath.


S. Why, Is Swearing the Mark of a Gentleman! which is indeed one of the
greatest stains to his Reputation! at this rate every Porter and Carman may
commence Gentleman when he pleases. And the greatest Coward may Swear as
valiantly as the most fearless and undaunted General. For my part, I bless God,
I am not ambitious of those Badges either of Courage or Gentility, which our
Holy Religion declares to be the Signs of Reprobation. But, indeed, this is an
Affront to all the best of our truly Courageous and well-bred Gentlemen, who
are so far from being tainted with this Sin, that they have made a Law against
it, that it might receive a Punishment here, by a National Sanction; as well as
'twill do hereafter, by the Judgment of God.

And tho there are some degenerate Gentlemen, who do signalize their Impieties
by this abominable Sin; yet the Better, the more Judicious, the more Valiant
and truly Honorable hate it, and avoid it. And this, I thank God, I can speak
by the intimate knowledge I have had the Honor to have of many worthy Persons,
both for Families and Estates, who are free from this Sin. I lived in the
Family of a very worthy Person, of a large Fortune, for three years, and in all
that time I never heard him once either Curse or Swear; and I hope our Nation
has many more such. And since we have a Law for the Punishment of this Sin, I
heartily wish it was more carefully put in Execution, and that every Magistrate
and Officer would discharge their Duty, in the effectual Punishing and
Suppressing of this Sin; and that all other Men would be industrious to inform
the Magistrate of it, as you may expect I will be, if ever I hear you Swear or
Curse again, that you may pay the Penalty the Law directs, except you leave off
Swearing without it; and I think you will have reason to thank me for it.


M. I must confess I have reason, as I told you before, to return you thanks
for taking so much pains with me; but still I hope you will not turn Informer
at last: But perhaps you are become one of this new Gang of Regulators, one of
those they in derision call Soul-Savers.


S. I am not at all solicitous what Names the Agents of Hell do brand us
withal; for I do openly acknowledge my self to be one of that Number who have
engaged themselves to endeavor to put a Check to the Rampant Vices of our
sinful Age; such as Cursing, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness, and
Uncleanness, and the like. And how odious soever Men may endeavor to make Us,
by loading us with Nicknames, I am sure both the Law of God and the Law of our
Nation do encourage and commend detecting of notorious Offenders to the
Magistrate, that they may receive a legal Reproof and Punishment for their Sin:
And this is so far from Hatred; that it is Charity, and perhaps the Greatest
that can be shown to such Persons Souls.

And as to what you urge of turning Informer, it is just as if one Commander at
Sea should tell another, that he is a Roguish Informer, for giving Information
how he may escape the Privateers or Pirates that are in such a place waiting
for his coming, when at the same time he did not know of it before, and by the
Information he and his Cargo is saved from being taken by those Pirates and
Robbers: And as for your hoping I will not turn Informer against Swearers, I
hope I shall love Almighty God better, and my Neighbor and my self too, than
to take your Advice in this case, when it is my Duty, and an act of Charity,
and the Duty of all Men, to turn Informers: And 'twas a standing Rule in the
Jewish Nation, That such as heard or saw the Fact were to be Informers and
Witnesses against the Offender, although it were a Friend or a Neighbor; nay,
they were to be Executioners too, as we read, Deuteronomy. 17.7. The hands of the
Witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to Death, and afterward the hands
of all the People. And in Levit. 24.11. we find the People that heard the
Blasphemy and Curses of the Son of Shelomith, carried him before the
Magistrate; They told Moses of it, and, ver. 14. he gives Command to have him
punished, and all that heard him laid their hands upon his head, and let all
the Congregation stone him.

Besides, I and all Mankind are commanded to discharge this Charitable Office;
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall in any ways rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin
upon him. So that I am diligently to pursue all proper means to pull the
Swearer out of the Fire; and there is a Necessity of appealing to the Minister,
to the Magistrate, to the Church, and to the Seat of Justice, that all fit
Spiritual Censures and Temporal Chastisements may be applied to him here in
time, that his Soul may be saved, and that others may hear and fear, that we
may put away the Evil from the whole Body of the People.

Again, we pray That Magistrates may minister Justice in the Punishment of
Wickedness and Vice; and, How can we expect our Prayers to be answered, except
we give Information to Them, since the Offense is seldom committed in the
presence of the Magistrate? so that Magistrates must have Information from
those that hear or see the Offense committed: And I hope I have convinced you
of the Necessity as well as the Duty of it.


M. I must confess that I am almost convinced that the Informer does no more
than the discharge of his Duty; yet I should have taken it ill of you, if you
had informed against me, You being my particular Friend, and so long acquainted
with me.


S. How can you take that ill, that is designed for your good, and when a Man
does no more than the discharge of his Duty, and I had almost said, the
greatest Kindness he can do you: For if Good Laws be necessary, if the
Execution of them be necessary, if Magistrates be necessary for That, then must
also the Knowledge of the Offenses committed against the Laws be necessary to
the Magistrate; and because they are seldom committed in the presence of the
Magistrate, due Information by those who have sufficient knowledge of any such
Offenses is likewise necessary, and the very Foundation upon which the due
Execution of the Laws does depend. From whence it does plainly follow, that if
Wickedness does abound in a Nation, as we see and hear this Sin of Cursing and
Swearing does; by reason of which, I heartily wish and pray, that that Prophecy
is not now fulfilled of England, which was once of Judah, Jer. 23.10. for this
Wickedness so much abounds in this Nation, that we have reason to pray that we
are not involved in a National Guilt for not faithfully discharging our Duty in
the Correction and Reformation of it; nay, even if it be to a Friend or a
Neighbor, if we have sufficient knowledge of the Offense, let us give due
Information to some proper Magistrate, unless the Offender will otherwise be
brought to do what is requisite: And, as I showed before, this is a Duty
confirmed by the Authority of Sacred Scripture, in those Texts I have just now
quoted to you, and I might quote many more to that purpose; therefore I cannot
see how you, or any body else, can take it ill that are Guilty of this Crying
Sin, if I, or Others, should Inform the Magistrate of it.


M. I must confess I am convinced I cannot take it ill, and I think there is a
Necessity in this wicked Age for Men to do it; and I heartily pray, that if
ever I Swear again, I may be punished for it; and as you have been an
Instrument, under God, to convince me of this Sin, as well as of the Necessity
of Informing against it, I shall ever prize your Friendship, and think my self
happy in so good an Acquaintance; and I hope you will pardon the Trouble I have
put you to in answering my rude Arguments.


S. I cannot think that a Trouble, which I do for the Good of my Friend; and I
must confess you make my Heart rejoice, to hear you say, you are convinced of
the Sin, as well as the Necessity of Informing; for without Informations to
Magistrates, this Crying Sin will hardly be stopped; and I wish good Men would
be as openly Pious and Virtuous, and resolutely bent in the Punishing of Vice,
as wicked Men are openly Vicious and Impudent in Committing of it; and as they
are not ashamed to Swear, and profane the Name of GOD, Why should I be ashamed
to Inform the Magistrate of it? and as they take pains to get to Hell, let us
be at some pains to get to Heaven: Let us declare our selves for God first, by
living good Lives our selves; and, next, by encouraging others to do the same;
and where we meet with those that are so far Servants to the Devil, as to break
the Laws of God and the Nation, let us show our selves to be the Servants of
our God, by vindicating his Name, his Laws, and the wholesome Laws of the
Nation; that by our Informations to the Magistrate, the Offender may be brought
to see the Greatness of his Sin, and by that Punishment and Shame brought to
Repentance: And putting the Laws in Execution will be one great means to mend
the World, and without this it will hardly be done: It is not good Books, nor
good Preaching, will reclaim such profane and profligate Wretches, as the
Swearers, and Drunkards, and Sabbath Breakers are; for such Persons will seldom
or never read good Books, nor hear Sermons, nor accept of Counsel and Advice:
They seem to be out of the reach of all other methods, except that of
Information to the Magistrate.

But when Magistrates, Constables, and Churchwardens, who are under special
Obligations by their Oath, resolve to keep them in good earnest, and all good
Christians engage in it, to punish and frown Profaneness out of Countenance,
then the World will mend, if not grow devout, yet at least grow modester and
civiller toward Religion, when good Men give Evidence that they do believe in
good earnest, by Punishing the Profaneness of all open Offenders, according as
the Laws direct, and for which very end the very Laws were made: And we should
condemn the Wisdom of our Forefathers, as well as our own Parliament, if we
did not do it; for if Good Laws be not put in Execution, they had better never
been made, then not to have them Executed; for, as the Violation of Laws, is a
Contempt of Authority; so the Neglect of the Execution, is a Prostitution of
it, exposing the Government, and tending to the Dissolution of it, and to
habituate and harden the People the more in Wickedness and Disobedience; which
God forbid in this Christian Nation, where all Men ought to engage in the
Prevention of it, as I hope you will, now you say you are convinced of it.

But, Sir, lest I should give you an Occasion to say, I have paid you too long
a Visit, I shall only remind you seriously to consider what I have said, and
apply it to your own Heart and Soul, as you are going to Bed, and when you are
in it, and I shall pray it may be to God's Glory. So wishing you and all your
Family a good Night, I remain


Your most Faithful Friend, and Humble Servant, H. S.

FINIS.

