A SHORT ANSWER To a Pamphlet, Entitled, The CASE and of William Bentley
Printer at Finsbury near London, touching his Right to the Printing of BIBLES
and PSALMS.
I. Whereas Bentley insinuates, as if the Printing at Finsbury was upon his
own Account, the truth is, if he was any other then a Servant to, he was at the
best but an inconsiderable Partner with certain Merchants; for they having
formerly imported Bibles erroneously printed, and being thereupon restrained
from any further importing, by Order of the Parliament, did erect the
Printing House at Finsbury, and employed Bentley there upon their Account,
which is the true Original of their Bible-Printing in that place; the Work
being begun and carried on there, not for any public end, but merely for the
private Profit of the said Merchants, who, together with himself, were men
Forreiners as to the Art and Mystery of Printing. And that it was not out of
any public Respect, is evident, because when others erected Presses, and so
ordered the matter, that they sold Bibles at cheaper Rates than these men of
Finsbury did: Then the matter of private Profit ceasing, the Merchants withdrew
their Stocks, and Bentley himself also gave over Bible-Printing, and so
continued for the space of about Five years, but employed the Printing House in
printing Popish-Books, and invading other men's Proprieties by printing their
Copies from them. And as concerning the said Popish-Books, although one of them
seized by His Highness's Printers, was (by Order of the Council) burnt by the
hands of the Hangman, yet about two Months after, search being made in his
house of Finsbury, the same persons found the same Popish-Books prepared for
the Press again, in defiance of Authority, which they seized and brought away
the second time; for which second Offense he ought by Law to be disabled for
ever from the exercise of Printing, in case he had been a Lawful
Master-Printer, whereas the Truth is, he was a Paper-Seller.

II. Whereas, he pretends service done to the public by his supplying the
Armies in Ireland and Scotland, at cheaper rates then ordinary, with Bibles; it
is to be observed, that multitudes of Bibles being at that time printed by
others, who sold them at cheaper rates than he had done, thereupon his Bibles
came to lie upon his hands as a dead Commodity, and so he was constrained to
put them off at easy rates; but it is to be observed likewise, that the
cheapness of vending was much beside his intention, forasmuch as since that
time, a motion was made by him the said Bentley, to other persons who were then
printing Bibles, that he and they might by consent resolve to advance the
prices of Bibles to a higher rate; which he not obtaining, both himself and his
Partners declined the whole business of printing Bibles: after which he went to
the Barbado's and never stirred more about it, till upon his return he saw that
the sole printing of Bibles was by Purchase of the Original Manuscript of the
Translation, and an Entry thereof in the Register of the Stationers Company,
legally vested in his Highness Printers; immediately whereupon he began to lay
claim to, and made many Clamors about his pretended Right, supposing thereby to
have constrained his Highness Printers to admit him to partake of the benefit
of their Copy; and during the time of the Clamor, one of his Partners offered
his Highness Printers, for himself and Bentley, that if the said Printers would
accept of their laying down a third part of the moneys laid out in the
Purchase, and admit them to a third share in the Propriety of the Bible-Copy,
they would then shut out all others, and agree to raise the Price of Bibles
above the rates at which they are now settled by his Highness.

III. Whereas he pretends to a right of printing Bibles and Psalms, by virtue
of a Proviso contained in the Act of Parliament, dated September 20. 1649.
which he cites thus, That notwithstanding the particular Restrictions thereby
made, that Act should not extend to the Printing-press at Finsbury for printing
Bibles and Psalms, but that it should continue to all Intents and Purposes, as
if that Act had not been had or made. It may be observed, that the Intent of
the said Act (as appears by the Contents of it) is, That in regard irregular
Printing increased, by reason of the multitude of Printing-presses erected in
By-corners out of the Eye of Government, therefore no Printing-press shall
hereafter be erected in any place without the Precincts of London, except the
two Universities, York, and Finsbury; by which means, Finsbury stood excepted
from the Restriction in the same manner as the two Universities and York did: so
that the Intent of the Act was, only to save Finsbury harmless from the
Penalty, notwithstanding it stood out of the Precincts of London, and not to
confer a Right of any Copy upon the men of Finsbury. This is not only the
Opinion of the ablest Lawyers, but well enough understood by Bentley himself,
as appears in this, That he never durst put the Issue of his Clamors and
Pretenses upon a Trial at Law, though often offered by His Highness Printers.
However, something may be added here as considerable, First, that Bentley in
his Case cites the words of the Act falsely, inserting them thus, viz: That the
Act should not extend to the Printing-press at Finsbury; whereas indeed the
words are, That the Clause (that is to say, The Clause of the Act confining all
Presses to the Limits of London) should not extend to Finsbury: but, that in
reference to the said Clause confining, it should remain as if this Act had not
been had or made. Moreover, in the following part of the Act where Provision is
made on purpose for the settling and securing Titles and Propriety in Copies;
there is not the least mention made of any Propriety conferred upon Finsbury.
Much more may be said upon a full Hearing, but here we mind brevity.

IV. Whereas Bentley says, The Company of Stationers by irregular dealings and
misinformation were forced to make an undue Entry in their Registry of the Copy
of the Bible to His Highness Printers, the very truth is this, That His
Highness being informed, that His Printers had made a legal Purchase of the
Original Copy of the Translation of the Bible from the Proprietors, did
thereupon, by special Warrant to the Company of Stationers, give direction for
the Entry of the said Copy for His said Printers, as the lawful Proprietors
thereof; which was done accordingly.

V. Whereas Bentley charges His Highness Printers to have abused the Deputation
given them from Sir John Barkstead and Mr. Foxcroft, they have, and are still
ready to justify themselves in what they have done by Authority of Parliament,
and by the Orders and Instructions of His Highness and the Council, for putting
the said Act in execution.

VI. Whereas Bentley sets so high an esteem on the Bibles of his own Printing,
undervaluing all other, it appears upon a cursory view of some part of his
Bible, that so many gross Errors are in a few Pages escaped, that it must be
presumed, upon a strict enquiry, they will exceed the number of those against
which he makes Complaint.

There are diverse other Passages in his Pamphlet insinuating matter of falsehood
and scandal against His Highness Printers and others, which being both
frivolous and false, it were needless to make any reply to them, after so full
an answer given to the most material untruths and scandals. And for what is
suggested (we conceive untruly) concerning the Company of Stationers, is left
to their own vindication. All which are humbly submitted to consideration.

All which and more, will be made good by His Highness Printers.


