London's Glory OR, THE HISTORY Of the Famous and Valiant London Prentice:
Being an Account of his Parentage, Birth and Breeding, together wi^^ many brave
and Heroic Exploits performed by him throughout the Course of his Life; to the
Honor of London, and the whole (...) Nation.



London: Printed by (...).

LONDON's GLORY, etc.
Chap I. Of the Birth and Parentage of Aurelius, the valiant London 'Prentice;
how he encountered a Serpent in his Cradle; and growing up, did the like with a
Bear that met him in his way.
ENgland has been behind-hand with no Nation, in giving Birth to gallant Men,
who, by their Valor and great Actions, have spread her Fame in every corner of
the Universe, making her beloved of her Friends, and feared by her Enemies: I
need not here mention the renowned King Arthur and his Knights of the Round
Table, the baave Tom of Lincoln, the ever-famous Guy of Warwick, nor the
valiant Knights Templers, who warred against Infidels in the Holy Land, to
establish the Christian Faith at the expense of their Blood, doing Wonders in
Arms, which shall preserve their Names as long as Time shall last, since I am
to treat of one whom Fortune made her Darling, and Fame has crowned to all
Posterity with lasting Wreaths of Laurel. To be brief then, In the Beign of the
renowned Queen Elizabeth, who confirmed the Protestant Religion, upheld the
then sinking State of the Dutch Nation, made Rome and Spain to tremble at her
Frowns; in the famous County Palatinate of Chester, commonly called Cheshire,
lived a Man descended from ancient British Blood, who marrying a virtuous Wise,
was blessed with a Son, of whose Fame all England has rung; nor has it been
bounded here, but passing the narrow Limits of this Isle filled distant Lands
with Admiration. In his Baptism they named him Aurelius, in memory of a British
Prince of that Name, who, in the defense of his Country against the invading
Romans, did Wonders, overthrowing diverse Roman Lieutenants, and destroying
multitudes of their legionary Soldiers, this Child, like Hercules, in his
Cradle began to show his promising Strength, and what great things in time he
would do, when he matured his Strength: A huge Snake that lay lurking in a hole
of the House, and used to lap the Milk in the Dairy, drawn by the warmth of the
Insant to the Cradle, reared his dreadful Head to gorge himself with innocent
Blood, whilst the sleepv Nurse was hanging her Head over the Fire, and
neglected her tender Charge: young Aurelius, undaunted, beheld this dreadful
sight, and smiled, which would have scared another Infant into Fits, and with
his hands beat the Snake back as often as it assailed him, till with the violent
motion the Cradle overturned, the noise of which waked the Nurse, who suddenly
turned it up, found the Infant struggling with the Snake grasped in his hand;
but fearful at the sight, instead of disengaging them, she set up such a loud
throat, as made the Men that were inning their Harvest, come running with
Prongs, who seeing what was the cause of her yelling, took courage, and drew
away the Snake, whilst the Nurse fell into a Swound, and much a do they had to
recover her; the Infant all this while lay smiling though bit by the Arm, that
the blood trickled from the Wound. This Passage being told abroad, a grave
Divine came to see this Child, and being well skilled in Astrology, kissed him,
and told his Parents, That from this he foresaw that their Son should be great,
do things, though dangerous in the Attempt, that should make him known to the
World's end. This did not a little comfort them, and put them out of the fright
they were in, lest the poisonous wound might bereave them of a Blessing, in
which, next to Heaven, they placed their Happiness, and so with the use of
Walwort, Poltises of Rue and Plantaine, they cured it; the Wound being healed,
and the danger over, they more rejoiced in their hopeful Issue; and as he grew
up, his Beauty increased so, that the Virgins strove who should dandle him
most, and get the most Kisses for their Labor. When he grew up, his Parents
took care to breed him up in Learning; among the Schoolboys he took so much
delight to try his Strength, mastering those that were much older that himself;
he delighted himself with the thoughts of noble Actions, becoming grave and
serious, much above his Years, yet in public Pastimes he would be behind none.
He grew so expert in Wrestling at twelve Years old, that he would encounter
with lubberly Fellows, and throw them to admiration; at Cudgels, throwing the
Bar, and many other youthful Exercises, he won much Praise; in shooting at the
Long-bow, he might well be compared to Robin Hood, who rarely missed his Mark;
and, to be brief, a hopefuller Youth was not found in the West. When he had
learned as far as his Master could teach him, he was sent home with great
commendations, and often went with his Father to Fairs and Wakes to understand
Company, and (as the Countrymen call it) learn Behavior, and in all Places
his Discourse was so taking, that he parted not without regret: He soon learned
skill in Buying and Selling, so that his Father soon trusted him to bargain and
sell, in which he was so cunning, that he brought him great Advantage: One day
coming home from Market, a Bear, that had been baited, broke loose and
scattered both the Dogs and People, so that none durst venture to stay her; she
came directly in his way, and the People that followed at a distance, cried out
to him to get up a Tree to shun her Fury; but he scorning to stoop to base
Fear, alighted from his Horse, stood full in the way; the furious Beast to make
her Passage clear, rose an end, and clasped him in her Paws, thinking to have
overthrown him; but with his strong Arms (being not eighteen years of Age) he
girded her so-hard that she roared horribly, and immediately throwing her, they
reeled over each other for some time, but at length catching hold of her Nose
with his Teeth, a dangerous, though successful Adventure, she roared horribly,
turned on her Back, and yielded to the Conqueror. By this time the People were
come up in Crowds, thinking he had been slain, but, to their amazement, found
he had only got some slight cratches, and a little bite on his shoulder; then
taking the Muzzle out of one of their Hands, he put it on, and so led her to
the Place from whence she came.

Chap II. How many sair Virgins fell in Love with him, and among others,
Lucinda, a wealthy Herdsman's Daughter; how her Sweethearts discovering it, lay
in wait to be revenged on him etc.
THe things that had been done by Aurelius thus early, got him great Repute
among the young Maidens of the Country, his Beauty conspiring with the
Proportion of his Body to inflame their Hearts, so that many a Virgin longed to
have him her own, and grew Lovesick for him, which appeared by their
languishing Eyes, Sighs and Blushes, more than their Tongues, being restrained
by Modesty, durst proclaim; among others a beautiful Damsel named Lucinda, who
was courted and admired by many amorous Youths, fixed her Affection on him;
it is true, she was not of noble Parentage, as most commonly Historians boast
their Female-lovers to be, but her honest Parents lived by keeping and selling
Cattle, Darying, and such like Rural Affairs, and by their Industry were very
Wealthy: This young Virgin infinitely doated on Aurelius; Love tormented her
with his burning Flames, and in vain she strugled to extinguish the sacred
Fire; for, not being past her first Blushes, Modesty and Bashfulness, locked up
her Tongue from making known what she so much desired, and all her Language in
that Affair, was Sighs, Blushes and Glances; but Aurelius, whom Fame prompted
to great things, did not, nor would not interpret that silent Talk of Lovers;
yet she would not stick to praise his comely Features and manly Limbs to the
rest of her Lovers; which made them conclude some other had taken up the room
of her Heart they so earnestly labored to possess; they used all means
possible to find out who this Adonis should be, that could charm so fair a
Venus, and make her sigh for him, whilst they, who highly valued themselves,
must sigh for a Smile in vain. They long suspected, but not certain, till an
unlucky Accident discovered all: The fair Virgin saw she could not force her
Tongue to disclose her Love thought with her self, it was better to break her
of Cupid's Tyranny; A Letter, says she, will not blush though I must almost to
Death, to tell that I entrust the Paper with; and so resolving and unresolving,
for a time, at last she resolved to write, and did so in these Words:

Dear Aurelius,
Pardon me in your Censure for this Boldness, and spare the Blushes of a
Lovesick Maid, when she tells you, constrained by no common Passion, she loves
you; and without a suitable Return, must be ever miserable: I have slighted for
your sake many that pretend to admire me, and fill my Ears with Praises of my
Beauty; but whether in this they flatter me or not, the proof will lie in your
Judgment: If I am scorned and slighted by you, I must unavoidably remain your
disconsolate

Lucinda.


This Letter she delivered to a Confident to carry it to Aurelius; she dropped
it, and one of her Lovers coming to pay her a Visit, found it, and read it, to
his no small Grief, and soon communicared it to the rest of her Sweethearts,
resolving to make this slight Affront a common Cause, and so unite in Revenge
against this Troubler of their Repose. Upon this, all of them being heartily
vexed, that one whom they accounted a Boy, should steal a Heart they had
labored to possess with great expense in Gifts and Treats; and in the end,
concluded she was taken more with his fair Countenance than Fortune, they came
to this wicked Resolve, which was to way lay him as he came from Market, and
deform him, by Wounds, and then they doubted not but the Object of her
Affection would be removed, and she would as much detest him as ever she had
loved him: In order to this Villainy, they armed themselves with Swords and
Daggars, hid themselves by the side of a Wood, nor had they lain long in
Ambush, but, as they wished, he came along, singing merrily this Song: Love is
folly, Melancholy
does on it attend;
Venus Tents I do despise,
Mars alone can me suffice,
where Fame does crown the end, etc.
Our gallant Youth being come to the place where the Ambush was laid, was not a
little surprised to see four (...) armed, supposing them to be Robbers, but by
their Reproaches; saying, Now, Villain! we complement you in Lucinda 's Name,
whom thou have basely enchanted with Love-powder, to withdraw her Affections
from us, and place them on thy self, who art not worthy of her Smiles; he was
of another opinion, and would have replied to vindicate himself, by protesting
his Innocence of what they charged him with; but their blind Rage, and
Love-fury would not give him leave to do it, but rushing on him they gave him
many strokes, which raised his Anger, so that (being weaponless) with his
strong Arms he seized two of the forwardest of them, and grasping them fast by
the Collars, brought their Heads together with such violence, that their Eyes
seemed to flash Fire, and reeling, at last they fell to the ground, unable to
rise for a time; then taking away one of their Swords, he fell on with such
fury that they concluded him endued with more than Humane Force; so that
fainting with loss of Blood, they fell on their Knees and begged Mercy,
entreating him to save their Lives, and they would tell him all that moved them
to this rash Attempt; upon this he bid them disarm, which they readily did, and
made a full Confession, how they designed to have handled him if they had
overcome him: Nay, says he, then if you were so hot for Mischief without a
Cause, it is time to cool you; whereupon he made them unstrip, and drove them
into a Wood before him, like timorous Deer, and with their Garters bound them
naked to several Trees, laying every one his Clothes by him; then pulling out
his Pen and Ink, he wrote these Lines, and fixed them on the Tree above the
Head of the first: These valiant Heroes one poor Man assailed,
But unarmed, over them all prevailed;
Hot Love it seems made them so daring bold,
Therefore he thought fit thus they should be cooled.


This done, he went home and said nothing to any body of the Matter; but they
having staid in the Wood, and the next day unbound by the Wood-men, they dropped
such words, that, together with the lines affixed, discovered their Disgrace,
and the cause they had been so treated; which flying abroad in the Villages, it
was soon known who had thus handled them; so that they were jeered by every
one; and fair Lucinda greatly rejoiced for two Causes: First, That her Lover
had escaped the Danger. And, secondly, by this means he could not be ignorant
of the Love she bore him.

Chap. III. How Aurelius was sent to London, put Apprentice to a Turkey
Merchant, fell in Love with Dorinda his Master's Danghter, but being slighted
by her, got leave to sail for Turkey.
THis Adventure got Aurelius much Praise; but he little regarded the Love of
the fond Maid, which made her fall sick, and her Friends fearing to lose, by
this means, their darling Daughter, came to treat with his Friends about a
Marriage, offering a large Portion; but his Years not much suiting with Love,
they finding him averse, his Parents did not much urge it to him; however,
Lucinda, by the help of able Physicians recovered, and with her health her Love
abated; so that growing more and more indifferent, a lusty Youth, courting her
closely, at the importunity of her Parents, she was married; which greatly
rejoiced Aurelius, who feared she might have done some mischief to herself for
being neglected by him, which would have redounded to his disgrace; however,
his Parents fearing the Rivals whom he treated as mentioned, might meditate
Revenge, and do him some Injury, they concluded to send him to London, and put
him to some Calling that might enable him to live in Wealth and Credit; and
communicating it to him, bid him pitch upon what he thought fit; and having an
Itch for Traveling, he chose to be a Merchant; and soon one was found, who
traded to Turkey; with him he was placed, soon gaining the esteem of the whole
Family, by his courteous Behavior. I should have told you in his way to
London, he fought with and took two High-way-men that set upon him to have
robbed him, for which, the County in which he did this brave Exploite, rewarded
him with an imbroidered Belt, and a well tempered Sword, which afterward upon
occasion, he used with success, as will appear in the sequel of this History.

When he had served about three Years of his time, having gained much Fame by
playing several Prizes, and worsting the experiene'd Masters of Delence; he
grew so in love with Arms, that nothing charmed him more than the sound of the
Trumpet, or rattling of the Drum: In exercising the Pike and Musket, he took a
singular delight, exceeding. in it all the City; but whilst he followed these
Practices, and everywhere gained Applause, the powerful God of Love, whom he
always thought to have baffled, stormed his courageous Heart, and got strong
Possession in it; his Master had only one Daughter, who till this time was kept
from his sight at a Boarding-school, where having acquired many Accomplishments
to add a seemly Grace to her Beauty, so lovely and charming she was, in all
Parts, that the first sight of her inflamed him; and now knowing what it was to
be in Love and the Torments that attend it, he blamed himself for stopping his
ears to Lucinda; he tried by all obliging Actions he could to make fair Dorinda
(for so she was called) understand his good meaning to her; but she not
exceeding fourteen, though proper of her Age, through Ignorance of what Love
meant, took his civility as a duty and respect toward her, being his Master's
Daughter, and concluded it no more than his Duty, though he made her several
Presents; and when he waited at the Table, his Eyes were always fixed on her,
his sleep went from him, and he frequently dreamed, he add ressed himself to
her in studied Eloquence and Courtship, but she refused his Love, frowned on
him, and when he went to grasp her, slid away like a Shadow from his Arms.
These he took as bad Omens; yet at length summoning his courage after long
deliberation, he resolved to write his Mind and lay it on her Dressing box,
that she should not miss to find the Letter; and accordingly he wrote in these
Words:

Lovely Dorinda,
YOur Beauty, fair as the new born Light, has captivated the Heart of your poor
Servant, and entangled him in the Fetters of Love; therefore humbly prostrating
my self at your feet, I beg Compassion at your Hands: The Inequality indeed may
make you check my Presumption; but consider Love that takes the Diadem from
Queens, and makes them condescend to match with those of an humble Strain,
pleading on my fide, may make you compassionate toward him that can only live
by your Smiles, and without your Favors must be miserable.

Aurelius.


This fell into her Hands as he wished, and she read it with much surprise,
mixed with anger and disdain; then tore it, saying, What, has my Facher
bestowed so much in breeding on me, and dares his Man, who came a Country Clown
yesterday, presume impudently to tell me he loves me, who am my Father's only
Heir, a Match for a Lord, and may glitter in the Court amongst the proudest
Ladies? No, no, this must not be suffered, I Will nip his saucy Love in the Bud,
and make him know his Distance. This said, she flung down Stairs, and finding
him in the Counting House by himself, she said, How now, Aurelius, what made
you so bold as to intrude into my Closet, and leave a Letter there? I think you
did more than good Manners will bear you out in: But let we bear no more of
you, for if I do, you may have such cause to repent it, that you little wish
for. Thunder struck at this sharp and unexpected Repremand, whilst he labored
to force suitable words for a Reply and Excuse, she gave him not time, but
forcing frowns on her Brow, she flung away in a Pet.

This greatly vexed him, and made him repent him, but at length resolving to
struggle with the Flame, and not speak of Love to her, for fear of offending
till he found a more favorable opportunity; he at that time only continued a
duteous respect toward her, trying all manner of ways by his Service to oblige
her, yet found her Countenance estranged from him; and indeed her Father being
vastly Rich, that, and the Fame of her unparellel'd Beauty, soon brought a
great many young Lords and Knights to court her; this killing sight tormented
our Lover more than her disdain before had done, as now concluding he should
lose the beauteous Object of his Wishes and Desires, and therefore that
absence, as he sancied might mitigate if not cure the violent Feever, Love
tortured him withal, he took an opportunity when he found his Master in a good
humor to desire one request of him, What is it, said the Merchant, if it be
reasonable it shall not be denied you? Only Sir, said be, that to improve my
Understanding in Merchandise, I may with your good leave go aboard and manage
your Affairs beyond the Seas, in the nature of your Factor. Well mentioned,
said the Merchant, I was thinking of this my self, and thought to ask you, how
you stood inclined that way; but seeing you have freely offered it on your own
accord, I am the better pleased, and shall conclude you will be more diligent
about my business, for thero is nothing like a willing mind, and the next Fleet
that sets sail, I will provide all things necessary for your Voyage to
Constantinople in Turkey, the largest City in the World; for the Vactor I
employed there is lately dead. Aurelius very well pleased at this, thanked his
Master, and promised in every thing he could to do the best, and faithfully to
serve him.

Chap. IV. How Aurelius took leave of the Family, and left a Paper and Token
for his unkind Mistress; how sailing the Seas, he had a dreadful Fight with
Algier and Sally Pirates, the Wonders he did therein, and safely arrived at
Constantinople; his Reception and Welcome there by the Factors; how he slew a
Tygar, and rescued the Sultan's Daughter, etc.
EArly in the spring, when the Seas where freed from the rage of boisterous
Winds, Mr. Tradewell, the Merchant fitted out three Ships of his own riehly
laden, which in company of diverse others prepared to set fail; when the
Maidservants heard that Aurelius was to go and leave them, they wept for
sorrow, for they loved and valued him at a high rate; however at parting he
treated them with Wine and Sweetmeats, and left with one of them these lines,
with a Jewel sealed up, to deliver to fair Dorinda, but with charge not to do
it, till she heard the Ship was put to Sea.

Lovely, but cruel Maid, too too unkind,
It Is you that force me to the Sea and Wind;
Yet I must blame my self, and needs confess,
In me was found too much Unworthiness
So rare a Prize to gain, I aimed too high,
Like those I am punished that would storm the Sky:
Yet pardon me, though you will not be kind;
That I must bear your Image in my Mind.
That lovely Form, Time never can deface,
Which Infant-love, first in my Heart did place;
Then be so kind when you this Jewel see,
In pity, to vouchsafe to think on me.
The Fleet sailed with a prosperous Gail, till they came within ten Leagues of
Gibralter, on the Spanish side, and then a Storm arising they were tossed with
uncertain Wind all Night, and next Morning, to the great Terror of most, they
stood in with five Algerine and Sally Men of War; so that many began to cryout,
they were utterly undone; some were for running a snoar into the first Bay or
Creek, though to a certain hazard of their Lives upon those unmountable Rocks
and Shoars; others for putting off in the Long boats and leaving the Ships and
Goods a Prey to the Pirates, that so they might escape Slavery; in this
Consternation, they came up board and board, the Admiral of Algire biding them
strike and yield, or else to expect no quarter; to this proud language of the
Turks Aurelius being on the Deck, with his Sword in his Hand, anlwered, The
Ships were laden with his Master's Goods, of which he had a charge, and that
they were English Men on board, who did not use to be out blustered or dared
with Words; therefore if they expected any thing they must win it and wear it.
Then turning to his drooping Companions, he said, Come, pull up courageous
Hearts, and let us fight for the Honor of our Nation, famed for Valor,
throughout the World; we have a stout Ship under us, and whilst she swims above
Water, let it never be said we will quit it.

By this time the bold assailing Turks eagerly strove to win the Mast of the
Ship, in which the first that entered with one mighty blow he struck his Head
off, and down fell the Body with it into the Sea, to breakfast the Fish; this
animated others, and all taking Arms, sought with prodigious fury; the great
Guns in the mean while roared from either side, bellowing Thunder and breathing
Fire whilst Iron Globes pierced through and through the Waves, by their
violence mounted, and by the shock grew tempestuous. Aurelius laid about him
with such violent force, that he made Arms, Legs and Heads, fly at a dismal
rate; so that the Turks swearing by Mahomet, he was a Devil, and no Man, but
would have ungrapled; which he perceiving, leaped on Board, and was seconded by
others; hand to hand he slew the Admiral, which so dismayed the Turks, that they
hoised all their Sails, but too late, for throwing prodigious Showers of Fire
upon it, soon set their Tackle in a blaze, and the broad Waves shined with the
light of the Flame: this Ship running foul on another set her on Fire, and a
third coming up to relieve her Fellows, met with the same fate; a fourth sunk,
which made the fitch run away with all the sail she could make, to deliver
herself from the like ruin, and carry home the dismal News; some of the
floating Turks they took up and saved, the rest perished by Wounds, Fire and
Waves; and their Cries were heard half broiling in the Flame, like the Damned
in Hell. The Prisoners they took, they stowed in the holds of the Ship; and
lying by a few hours to repair the damage they had received in the Fight, they
set sail, and with out any further Interruption passed the Streights, and
Dardanellos sailing directly for Constantinople.

The Ships no sooner arrived in the Port, but the English Merchants and Factors
came on board to welcome and congratulate the safe Arrival of their Country
men, and enquire of the welfare of their Friends in England; and great joy and
feasting there was amonst them; they saluted the Port with their Guns, and were
resaluted with as many; and going on Shore, he took charge of his Master's
Effects in the Warehouses on the Key, and so prudently managed Matters, that
he got Reputation, and large Commendations were carried back to England of him:
yet it moved not Dorinda's haughty Mind, who sacrifie'd her Love to Ambition;
marrying into a noble Family, though she proved an unhappy Match, for her Husband
being banished, for Conspiring against the Queen, and his Estate seized, he
compelled her to accompany him, to the great grief of her Parents.

Aurelius being as is said, in Turkey, got great Riches; and, when his leisure
would permit, took his Pleasure in a Chalap on the shore of the black Sea, and
other pleasant Floods that are in the Neighbor hood of that famous City; when
landing by a Wood-side that descended from a Mountain, as he with some others
were banqueting under a shady Palm Tree, and very merry, all on a sudden their
Ears were saluted with a dismal Cry, which seemed to proceed from Female Voices
(and still drew nearer) upon which apprehending the approach of some Danger,
they rise up, drew their Swords, and stood on their Gaurds, till they should
see or know what the meaning of it was; when immediately two Ladies well
mounted came riding, diging the bloody Rowels of their Spurs in their Horses
sides, and seeing Company, redoubled their Cries for speedy Help and Assistance
to save their Lives. Aurelius who as yet saw nothing pursue them, thought they
had been affrighted by some Phantom, or else distracted, but they were no
sooner come up, nor had time to relate the cause of the Fear and Danger, but he
beheld a monsterous Tygar coming after them at full Cry, as having the scent of
them in the Wind; his Companions, who were only two young Factors and a Steers
man, persuaded him as he loved his Life to have aboard the Boat, take the
Ladies with them, and leave the Horses a Prey to the ravenous Creature, seeing
they could not convey them away in their Boat without Danger of Sinking, not
being capable of holding them; but Aurelius not harkening to this, bid them put
the Ladies aboard, and those that would might put off in it, and see the
Combat safe from Danger for he was resolved to try his good Sword, to see if
the Tygar's Skin was proof against it or not; Fear soon made them all take his
Counsel, and now he is left alone on the Shoat to stand the brunt. The Tygar
come at him with great Fury, thinking at once to have devoured him, but his
undaunted Courage bore him out, for the first blow he cut of one of his fore
Legs, at which he howled horribly; yet made at him again, and, wounding him in
the other, quickly sheathed the Sword in his Belly, which made him loose his
hold. and following that with a mighty blow he felled him and smote off his
Head; his Companions in great fear beholding the Fight, now as much rejoiced to
see him Vanquisher, whom they had given before for lost; his Friends embraced
him, and the Ladies returned him a thousand thanks, owning the safety of their
Lives had hap pened by his means; for this cruel Beast it seems ranging up and
down the Country a long time, had destroyed many People and Cattle, being as
big as ordinary an Horse; and so with the Head he returned to Constantinople,
the Ladies quitting their Horses to go the safer way by Water, as fearing, in
returning by Land, some other Danger might befall them; one of them turning
aside her Vail, showed her lovely Face and lilly Hand, presenting Aurelius with
a rich Diamond Ring, enquiring of his Country, Name and the cause of his being
in Turkey, all which he briefly told her, the relation of which spun out the
time till they landed; now this fair Lady was the Turkish Sultan's Daughter,
who going in disguise with her Waiting-maid to take the Air privately, and
retired from State-formality, fell into this Danger, which had not Fortune
thrown as it were our valiant London 'Prentice in their way, had been fatal to
them: And, as a further mark of her Favor, she afterward privately sent him a
Vest of Cloth of Gold and Sable, and a Sword-handle, studed with Rubies and
other precious Stones, biding him wear it for her sake, as a Rewaad for the
good Service he had done; but withal not to mention he had seen her, for that
might be dangerous to him, if not reflect on her Hononr, for as much as she had
stolen out Veiled, and none but her Confidents knew she was missing, intimating
his Companions should be cautioned the like.

Chap. V. How the Prince of the Georgeans married the Sultan's Daughter, and
how Aurelius Justing, overthrew three mighty Turks, and brake the Prince's Neck
with a weighty stroke, for which he was d^m'd to be devoured by two Lions,
which he slew, and gained his Liberty, and other matters.
AVrelius bringing the Tygar's Head to Constantinople, the Aga of the
Janissaries sent for him, and demanded it of him a due to him, but withal gave
him five hundred Aspers for the good service be had done in destroying so cruel
a Beast; and then it was hung up in the Arsenal among the Heads of Bears,
Lions, Leopards, Panthers, and other wild Beasts slain in Hunting, for the
Turks naturally love that Exercise, and seek Danger for Applause, though many of
them come short home.

During these Transactions, the Prince of the Georgeans, a vast Country lying
in the Turkish Territories between Persia and Armenia, came to the Ottoman
Port, and being highly entertained by the Sultan for aiding the Persians, and
doing him many good Services on the Frontiers; he at length aspired to court
the beautiful Teozara, the Lady whom Aurelius had rescued; and the Sultan
encouraging him in his Suit, for here the Daughters have not their own
choosing, but are absolutely at the disposal of their Fathers: He so prevailed,
that the match was concluded, and great preparations made for the celebrating
the Marriage. Rich Presents were sent from the Br^degroom to the Bride, and
from her to him carried publicly through the Stre^ts, for the People to
behold, by Eunuchs, Pages, and the great Officers of the Court; and at length,
in the stately Mosque of Sancta Sophia, formerly a Christian Church, the Musty
or Mahomet's High Priest, joined their Hands; and after great Feasting, for
such a Wedding usually lasts for ten or twenty Days, Martial Feats were
appointed, in the nature of Justs, Tilts and Tournaments, and many gallant Men
prepared to try their Prowess, and win Honor to the Nations that gave them
(...); this being known, inflamed Aurelius's Heart with a Thirst of Glory, and
he resolved to make one amongst them; early in the Morning the City was filled
with Crowds, the Trumpets and Hautboys sounding and flourishing to give
warning, that the Combatants might in due time prepare to be in a readiness;
and the Janissaries were appointed to make and guard the List, whilst golden
Pavilions were erected for the Sultan, Sultanness, and others of the highest
Rank.

In the mean while Aurelius had suited himself with a fine suit of Armor,
furnished with a silver Lance, and the trusty Sword that was given him in
England, the Device of his Shield was a Phoenix, representing the Virgin Queen
he was born under, and the Ocean chained, signifying the English Masters of the
Seas; and buying a strong Horse of Thracian breed he came prancing in to try
his chance in the List; yet, seeing many forward, and being but a Stranger, and
young, he gave way to them, thinking thereby to gain the greater Honor, to
conquer those that had conquered others; at length, many being thrown out,
three Turkish Bashaws of diverse Nations were left. Conquerors, who proudly in
the name of the Bridegroom, challenged any that dare to enter: Aurelius seeing
many strange Courtiers, and none very forward, concluded this was his time to
win Honor, and signalize himself at the Turkish Court; and pricking forward
his foaming Steed, gallantly entered. The first he encountered with, he struck
full on the Breast with his Lance, and tumbled him with his Heels kicking
upwards over the Crupper, so that the Earth shook with his heavy fall; and much
on the same manner he served the other two, one at the first and the other at
the second Course; upon which a mighty shout arose, and many wondered who this
valiant Stranger should be: Some English, who was privy to this Enterprise,
greatly rejoiced that their Country had bore the Honor from other Nations: The
Prince of the Georgians was inwardly vexed to see his Champions thus baffled,
and no other attempting to enter the List in Vindication of his Honor,
wherefore, with the leave of his Father-in-law the Sultan, he armed to
vindicate his failed Men; nor could the Entreaties or Tears of his fair Bride,
stay him from the Encounter: Our Heroic English Youth, seeing him enter in
golden Armor, undauntedly prepare to run the Course; and they did it with such
thundering speed, that the ground trembled under their Horses feet, and with
such strength and fury they met, that the ends of their Lances or Spears
shivered in the Air; then passing on they turned again, the Prince drew his
Sword, and came upon Aurelius ever he had time to draw his; yet, having the
weighty truncheon of his Spear in his hand, he met him at English Club law, and
receiving a slight wound in the shoulder, he returned the stroke with his
truncheon, charging it so forcible on the Poince's helmet behind, that he not
only beat him from his Horse, but by the violent inclining, his Neck broke, so
that he was taken up dead.

This greatly enraged the Turkish Sultan, insomuch that he swore by his
Father's Scalp, and the Beard of Mahomet, that our Youth should dye the
cruell'st Death that ever was invented for Men; causing him immediately to be
unarmed, and brought before him, demanding who he was, and of what Nation he
was; he as undauntedly replied, He was a London Prentice, come over to manage
his Master's Affairs, and had done this according to the rule of Justs and Law
of Arms, in Honor of the Maiden Queen, to whom he was a Subject, and was ready
to do more if permitted. The Turk amazed at his bold reply, turning to his
Nobles, said, By Mahomet, if all the London 'Prentices be as stout as this,
they are able to be at me out of my Empire: The German Armies, I have so often
baffled, are but Pigmies to them. However, he ordered him to a Dungeon, where
he lay three Days without any Food, only Rats and Mice which the Dungeon
afforded; verily believing he was put there to starve to Death; in the mean
while the English Merchants and Factors did all they could to interceed for
him, but the inexorable Turk would hear nothing on his behalf.

At the end of three Days, Aurelius over Night had notice to prepare himself
for Death the next Morning; but was not acquainted by what means he should die,
expecting from his usuage nothing but Tortures and Torments: this brought into
his Mind, how St. George broke the Dungeon, and escaped the like Fate; he tried
to do it, but finding all the sides a hard Rock, and the Entrance a mighty Iron
Gate, wanting suitable Engines to force his way, he gave over his struggling,
thinking next Morning to surprise the Keepers, when they came to take him out,
and by wresting a Weapon, hew his Passage througo t^em, and so escape to Sea;
but then thinks he, I shall inj^re my Master, for all his Goods will be
confiscated: whilst he was musing on these things, he heard the Bolts and
Chains rattle, Ropes let down to draw him up, which he willingly embraced; and
once more viewing Light, saw himself emcompassed with armed Men, who led him to
the Amphitheatre, where he found the Sultan and great numbers placed round in
Galleries to see his Tragedy. Two Lions it seems were prepared, the fiercest
and largest in the Den, who had been kept three Days without Meat, to make them
more cruel and ravenous on their Prey: and that he should make the better
Figure, the Princess, whose tender Heart would not let her be present at so
woeful a sight, in token of her Love, sent him privately a Shirt of Cambrick,
Drawers of white Satin, embroidered with Gold, and a crimson Cap; when upon
notice from whose fair Hands they came, and being informed she was one of the
Ladies he had delivered from the fury of the Tygar, he returned her the Ring
she gave him, and desired when he was dead, she would condescend to keep him in
her remembrance, and whilst alive, favor him with her good wishes; and so
stripping, put on the things she had sent him, as a Token of her Love.

This he had scarce done, when the Skies overcast with dismal blackness, so
that the Sun yielded but a feeble light, and soon after all Heaven thundered
with a Storm, when immediately the doors of the two dreadful Dens were opened
by Pullies and Chains from above in the Galleries, and two huge Lions, with
fiery Eyes came running out roaring horribly, swinging their Tails about their
sides, when casting their glaring Eyes on our undaunted Youth as their Prey,
they came furioussy at him with open Mouths, thinking to rend him in pieces
immediately and bury him in their hungry Maws; who resolving not to dye without
some Trial of Manhood, stretched out his strong Arms, and as Fortune favored
and guided them, just as they made a furious leap, to seize him in their Paws,
he thrust his Fists down their Throats with such Strength and Fury, that after
long struggling, seizing their Hearts, pulled them out by main Strength; upon
this, with a roar the two furious Beasts fell dead at his Feet and two
prodig^ous claps of Thunder ensued; at this all the Spectators were much
afrighted; but our undaunted Youth, demanded aloud if they had any more Lions
to send, he was ready to encounter them; and for the Honor of his Queen and
Country, again expose his Life: But this valiant Act made the Sultan conclude
him more than mortal Man, and ordered he should immediately be set at liberty,
and rich Rewards given to him. He afterward offered to make him great in his
Court, if he would be a Mohammedan, but he refused it with disdain; and so being
by his Valor freed from the Danger, he went to his business.

Chap. VI. How the Turkish Princess fell in Love with Aurelius; for his sake
turned Christian, and came to England with him with great store of Riches; of
the Splendour of their Wedding, and other memorable things worthy of note.
AVrelins thus having increased his Fame and Renown; no sooner was the Funerals
of the Georgian Prince over with great Solemnity, but the beauteous Teoraza
began to contemplate his Beauty and manly Courage, and to fix her mind on him,
and at length growing restless in her Love, not knowing, for blushes how to
discover it, she acquainted an English Merchant's Wife with her Love; who at
first fearing her Life was in hazard, if it should be discovered, put off the
Princess with delays; but finding her impationt, and bringing her Jewels and
Imbroideries of Gold and Silver, to make her her Friend in this Service; at
last she promised to deliver her Letter, written in few Words, viz.

Brave English Youth, my Preserver; I, the Sultan's Daughter, am in Love with
you; I know you have Courage enough to meet me, do it this Evening in the
Orange-grove behind the Seraglio; and I hope you will have no cause to repent
your so doing. Teoraza.

Anrelius upon reading it was in many doubts, but considering what the Princess
had already done for him, and calling to mind her excellent Beauty, resolved to
go, though at the hazard of his Life; for it had been no less than Death, had
it been discovered, to make love to the Sultaness of the Royal Ottoman Blood;
and accordingly he met her, and she kindly recieved and welcomed him; for in
Turkey, nice Complements are out of fashion: And, to be brief, after some other
meetings, she promised for his sake, to refuse the greatest Princes in the
Empire, and turn Christian, if he would make her his Wife; it was agreed
between them, that shipping all his Master's Effects in the Fleet ready to
sail; she in disguise should go with him into England. And thus the Love of our
brave English Youth, made her enterprise it in a Sailor's Habit, bringing many
Caskets of Jewels and Gold with her; and so they safely arrived in England;
when coming home and finding his Master's Daughter married. The Princess was
Baptized by the Bishop of London, at St. Paul's, and then soon after they were
married in great Pomp. Aurelius's Master being at the charge of the Wedding; so
that the Festival lasting six Days, all the Turkey Merchants graced the
Wedding, as did the Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and the Queen hearing of this
great Princess, sent for her to Court, and kindly entertained her; and at her
request, sent such prevailing Letters to Amurath the Turkish Sultan, that after
his stormy Fury was over, he began to have a liking of the Match; and, inviting
his Son-in-law, without fear of harm, to trade in his Country, and he would
make him the richest Merchant in the World: Which accordingly he did, and
increased in Wealth exceedingly: having all his Goods in Turkey, inward and
outward bound, (Custom free;) and for his sake the English Merchants had many
Privileges granted them, and were esteemed above other Nations, which in a
good measure continues to this Day.

Chap. VII. How he served a Jew for cheating him with counterfeit Jewels, from
whence the Custom of Bumpin, at the Post at Billinsgate, on Easter-monday
arises; his great Charity to the Poor; his Death, and the memorable Epitaph,
placed on his Tomb.
AVrelius in his Trading, still increasing, and bringing great Riches to
England, at length a Jew came to him, pretending he had Jewels of great Price,
and he not well known in the Country; if he could put them off for him, he
would think himself ever obliged to him, and would reward him to his content.
Aurelius, who thought he meant honestly, undertook it, not regarding Rewards,
and they appearing excellent in Luster, made no farther enquiry; but believed
the Man, and sold them to a great Court Lady for six hundred Pounds, which
Money he gave the Jew, and he laughing in his sleeve, sneaked away to Holland,
thinking at this rate any thing would pass upon the English; and there making
more, for they were no other than Christial and such like, finely set off, came
again and proposed as before, but in the mean while, the Plot had been
discovered, for the Lady having occasion for Money, and going to pawn them to a
Goldsmith, they were found to be Counterfeits; whereupon she undeservedly
reproached Aurelius, who told her how he came by them, and freely returned her
the Money; and now he took the couzening Jew to task, but he not having Money
to satisfy him, he scorned to throw him in Goal, to lie lousing and starving
as many would have done, and as indeed he deserved; but living near
Billingsgate, all the Satisfaction he took of him, was to order his four Men,
each to take a Hand and a Leg, it being then Easter-monday and carry him to a
Post on the Key, and there by swinging him backward and forward to bump his
Arse soundly against it; and that was all the satisfaction he had for his six
hundred Pounds. And in memory of this, the 'Prentices and Porters thereabouts,
keep up a Custom to do it, to any they catch on that Day near the Place;
concluding the Jew's Bum made not satisfaction for the Money, and so they will
Bump on till they think the Merchant's Money is out.

But to conclude, when he found himself in his declining Years he ordered
fourscore poor-People to come every Morning to his door, who received twelve
Pence a piece, and increased the number as his Years increased, to his dying
Day. His Pri^cess dyed before him, for wh^m he built alstately Monument, in
which he also was laid, and this Epitaph affixed on it: The EPITAPH.
In Cheshire born, I did through Dangers wade,
And with Success did drive the Merchant's Trade;
Riches I got; I did befriend the P^;
So wish I all to do who have good store:
The Comfort of it in my Life I found,
But now more happy in it, though under ground;
Eternal Life it purchases for me,
The best of Christian Life is Charity:
Therefore do well to these that are in want,
And you will find Rewards in Heaven not scant.


Thu^, Reader, have I revived this ancient Hostory of the famed London'
Prentice (^r^^ch Merchant) which for many Years has lay in Obscurity; which no
doubt will be a great encouragement to Youth, to be Virtuous and Valiant, and
to those of elder Years, to hope by industry from a small beginning (...) to
great Advance; and if both succeed, I have my Wish.

FINIS.

