THE TRUE CHURCH OF CHRIST, EXPOSED To the View of all SOBER CHRISTIANS, from
the Word of GOD, Sound Reason, AND THE Ancient FATHERS.

By JAMES SALGADO, a Spaniard, a Converted Priest.

London, Printed by T. B. for the Author 1681.

To the Right Honorable HENEAGE, Earl of Nottingham, Lord Chancellor of
England.
THis most Important Affair, which concerns the Conversion of a Man to God,
cannot better be offered to any Person, than to one that manages the greatest
Affairs of a Mighty Monarch; to the Glory of his God, to the Credit and
Interest of his Prince, to the Honor and Repute of the Nation, to the gladding
of the hearts of all good Subjects therein, and the Terror of Offenders; to
his own Immortal praise here, and Immortal Felicity hereafter, with universal,
steady, unshaken Loyalty, Justice and Integrity; It is, to speak in short, most
agreeable for one that is the Quintessence of all Excellencies, both Divine and
Humane.

The boldness which I have to present this Book to your Honor, does not only
bid me hope for Excuse, but also promise my self that your Honor will receive
it according to your wonted Noble and Generous Condescension, being your Poor
Offerer tenders it with the Profoundest Reverence and Respects imaginable.

I humbly pray your Lordship to take both my Self and Book to your Honors
Protection; and it shall be my daily Prayers to Almighty God, to take under his
Especial Charge your Honors Person, and under his Especial Conduct all your
Honors Actions; so that both may be acceptable to his Divine Majesty, and his
Majesty of Great Britain, and to all true English Spirits; being,

My Lord, Your Honors most obedient Servant, JAMES SALGADO.

THE TRUE CHURCH OF CHRIST, etc.
IT was not without Reason that the Fathers compared the Church to the Ark of
Noah; because that as none that were out of the Ark could escape destruction by
the Flood; so none that are without the Bosom of the Church can escape
Everlasting Damnation; for those that are no Members of the Church, cannot
partake of her peculiar Privileges, such as Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, etc. without which it is impossible to attain Eternal Life: And
as any Member cut off from the Body is thereby deprived of Life, Sense and
Motion, because it is no more united to, nor influenced from the Head; even so
those that are cut off from the Church, are thereby deprived of Eternal Life,
because they are not united unto Christ, who is the Head of the Church; and
therefore want that influence of his Spirit which is the Author of all
Spiritual Life.

For this reason David affirms, that the Heathen knew not the Laws of God, even
because they were not in the Communion of Israel, to which the Church was
confined under the Old Testament, Psa. 147.19, 20. The Apostle Paul writing to
the Ephesians, does yet further confirm this Assertion; At that time you were
without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers
from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. Namely, because they were not in the Bosom of the Church, they were
therefore excluded from the Communion of Christ, who is the faithful Husband of
the Church his only Spouse, as he himself affirms, Cant. 6.1. My Dove, my
Undefiled, is but one.

But when the Fathers used this similitude, they meant the Universal Church,
whose beginning Augustine deriveth from Abel, and deduceth the continuation
thereof even to the end of the World: Therefore it is not this or that Church,
in this or that part of the World, that can be called Catholic in this sense;
but that Church which was, which is, and which is to come, and comprehends the
Triumphant as well as the Militant. And if that be properly Catholic, which
has been always and every where believed by all (Vincent. Lirinensis contra
profanas novitates) then that is the Catholic Church which has and will be
always found in all Nations; for the thing ruled cannot be narrower than the
Rule, and Faith cannot be found but in believers.

I don't deny that there are many particular Assemblies, and many Provincial or
National Churches, and some of these purer than others; but none of these
Assemblies or Churches can be called Catholic, taking the word strictly,
because they are only parts or members constituting one general body; and
therefore cannot be called universal without a plain contradiction, unless you
would give to the Hand or Foot the name of the whole body.

Hence it follows, that the Roman Church being but a particular Church
(supposing that it were Orthodox, which yet we utterly deny) cannot claim unto
it self alone, exclusively to other Churches that profess Christ, the Title of
Catholic.

I confess I am not so rigid as to exclude the Roman Church and her Followers
from the Latitude of the Universal Church; because besides that men living in
that Communion, but in the simplicity of their heart professing God and his
Christ, and sincerely endeavoring to work out their Salvation (although in
many points they neither understand the thing it self, nor the manner of the
thing, because of an invincible ignorance) may attain unto eternal life; for
God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10.34, 35. I say, besides
this, the Popish Church may be called a Church in a Physical though not in a
Moral sense, even rs an Adulterous Wife does not lose the name of a Wife,
although she lose the name of an honest Wife.

But because the Court of Rome will have their Church to consist in the Pope,
or Council, or both, I shall evince their Church so taken to be fallible,
erroneous and false.

And although the Church in this sense be but representative; yet seeing all
the rest do depend upon her as infallible, and have nothing left them but a
blind obedience, taking the denomination of the whole from the principal part,
I rightly affirm that the Roman Church is false, uncatholick, yea, and no
Church at all.

The Papists, not contented to pronounce all Churches without their Communion
Heretics and Schismatics, and therefore without any hope of Salvation, have
moreover asserted, that their own Church is infallible, and void of all Error.
A great Assertion indeed, and which is not only false in it self, but also is
one great reason why other Churches dissenting from her, cannot join into one
Body, nor hold Communion with her: For, besides that no particular Church (such
as the Roman is) can be called infallible, it necessitates them, after the
manner of the Athenians, to worship they know not what, and erect an Altar to
the unknown God.

It is in vain to dispute concerning the property or privilege of any thing,
while they that attribute these privileges to it, have no certain knowledge of
the thing it self: Therefore in vain do they assert, that their Church is
infallible, while they cannot determine when, or where this Church is. Some of
them, as the Sorbonists, do place it in the Council; others, as the Jesuits, in
the Pope alone, and finally, others in them both both jointly. Now choose which
of those you please, you will find your self involved into inextricable
difficulties; and, as I said before, under a necessity to sacrifice to an
unknown God, which I shall shortly evince.

Let us suppose, that the Church and her Infallibility consists in the Council
alone, you shall presently be contradicted by some men of that same Church. But
to pass this, Whence pray does it appear that this Council is infallible? For
first, it is impossible, that of things of one and the same nature, there can
be made up another thing of a quite contrary nature: Therefore all the Members,
of which this Council consists, being fallible, how comes the Council it self
to be infallible? for if this Infallibility came but then to the Council, when
they met together to constitute one Synodical Body; where pray' was it before?
in what corner of the World did it lurk? from whence, and in what manner did
this good Infallibility come down upon the Fathers of the Council? or what
shall become of it after the Council is dissolved? Where shall it compose its
Head to rest, that has been tossed and wearied by so many janglings and
Gramatications.

Moreover, how shall you know that all the Members of the Council have been
lawfully or at all baptized, seeing you cannot be certain of the intention of
the Priest, or Old Woman that baptized them, upon which the Efficacy of the
Sacrament depends; that they were Canonically ordained, and not per saltum?
that they were not intruded by force or Simony? All which are required to the
constitution of a Bishop in suo formali. And unless you can persuade your self,
that you believe all these with a Divine and Infallible Faith, you cannot
embrace their Decrees for infallible.

Again, if this Infallibility of the Church do consist in the Council, there
should be always extant such a Council, to which disagreeing Parties might have
recourse, and receive a final determination of their Controversies; that so all
scruples being removed out of their minds, they might live in peace and concord
among themselves. But where is all this to be found? And if there were such a
Council always in being, which yet is impossible, how should you know that this
Council is not misguided by partiality; that it is not as bad as that of
Ariminum, and needs not to be corrected by a subsequent Council? (as many
Councils have been, if we believe Augustine.)

You Will say perhaps that Christ promised unto his Disciples, and consequently to
the Church, that the Spirit of truth shall come, and guide them into all truth,
Joh. 16.13. and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

For answer, I deny not that Christ promised his Discipies the Holy Ghost, but
extraordinary things are not to be confounded with ordinary; for they received
both the matter and words of what they wrote from the immediate inspiration of
the Holy Ghost; but in after-Ages the Church was tied to the Scriptures, as
sufficient for all manner of holy instruction, Call. 1.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
which if the Fathers of the council do follow, it is not to be doubted but God
will afford them the assistance of his Spirit: But it cannot be said, that the
Council does hereby become infallible.

2. When Christ says, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church, he does not understand any particular Churches of their Bishops, but
the Universal Church, which that it cannot err in Fundamentals, we believe and
assert.

3. How do you know that the Holy Spirit presides in this or that Council,
seeing the Council of Ariminum may be called a Council as well as the Nicene?

4. How can you be sure of any Council, that the Members thereof speak from a
love to truth, and desire of peace, or from the Dictates of the Holy Ghost, and
not rather from partiality? that their Decrees are framed more by the weight of
Reason and Scriptures, than by the multitude of Votes; that it is not such as
the Council of Trent, to which (as a Member of that Synod said) the Holy Ghost
was brought from Rome in the Bags of the Roman Packet, and stayed longer away
when the waters did rise, but came quickly thither when they were sallen, as
being afraid to be wet or drowned.

5. It Is ridiculous for a Papist to go about to prove the Infallibility of
Councils from Scripture; for I ask him this question, Whence does it appear
that that Church is Infallible, whose office it is both to make a Rule or
Canon, and to give Authority to the Scriptures? for they hold, that the
Authority of the Scriptures, as to us left, depends upon the Church: Now if the
Church give the Scriptures their Authority, as to us, how can they convince us
of the Authority of the Church?

Thus you see into what difficulties they involve themselves, who place the
Church with its Infallibility in the Council.

Nor is it less, but rather more absurd, to settle it in the Pope alone; an
Assertion so foolish and ridiculous, that the very reciting of it might be a
sufficient confutation; namely, to place the Church in one Man; the Church, I
say, which (even though representative) is formally a Congregation of many:
Nevertheless we shall proceed in the Method we have begun.

The Jesuits do generally hold this Opinion, and affirm, that the Pope alone,
like the Pythia of Delphos, may frame Decrees, and impose them upon the people.

But the forementioned difficulties return; For how can you persuade your self
that the Pope was Popable? that he was rightly, if at all baptized? that he
obtained not the Popedom by force, by fraud, or by Simony? that he was a Man,
and not a Woman? (for we have an instance of a Woman Pope, namely, Pope Jone)
any of which being supposed, renders the Pope no more a Pope.

Moreover, How shall you know that the Pope when he went about the framing of
his Decrees, neglected not the usual preparations, namely, Fasting and Prayer
for seven days, etc. that he acts by the advice of his Conclave, and not rather
from the dictates of his own private judgment or humor. Now if these Conditions
be wanting, the Decrees are not pronounced from the Chair, and therefore not
infallible, nor obligatory to the Conscience.

Further, By what Argument can you be convinced, that this Infallibility does
not belong to the Bishop of Paris (for example) as much as to the Bishop of
Rome; and that it cannot be removed from the Roman Chair; for Gerson has
written a Treatise concerning the possibility of removing it.

Finally, It cannot be conceived that one single man is Infallible in matters
of Faith, seeing he has no promise of an Infallible Spirit; and there are
manifest examples of his having been actually deceived. But perhaps you will
sly to that Vulgar distinction of the Popes pronouncing from, or without his
Chair; so that what he Decrees in the former way is infallible, though in the
latter he may deceive, and be deceived.

But you will find that even this distinction can very little advantage, but
rather prejudice your Cause: For how can it be conceived, that one and the same
Man, without any fear or compulsion, can contradict himself in one and the same
matter? Again, the Pope, who being out of the Chair may deceive, ought to
advise with himself, as sitting in the Chair, lest he fall into an error; or
the Cardinals, if they would have this Holy Father to be always infallible,
should bind the good Old Man to the Chair with Chains, (as Prometheus was tied
to Caucasus) that he may never be moved out of this Infallible Seat. Besides,
it is manifest, that the Popes, even pronouncing from the Chair, have
frequently erred; as appears by the examples of John the XXIII. Stephanus,
Formosus, and others, as has been made manifest to the World by many of the
Reformed Writers, yea even by the Papists themselves; witness Platina
concerning the Lives of the Popes, which Platina was the Popes own
Library Keeper at Rome.

2. They can give no account what they mean by this Chair; for the material
Chair can contribute nothing to the Popes Infallibility by any physical or
internal virtue, else a Herds-man, if set upon this Infallible Chair, would be
no less Infallible than the Pope himself: But by the formal or rather Moral
Chair (in which sense our Savior makes mention of Moses Chair) there can
nothing else be understood than the Holy Scripture it self; and if the Pope
pronounces according to the tenor thereof, we shall willingly hearken to him.

3. The Holy Spirit, upon whom the Popes Infallibility is said to depend, is
not tied to this or that place, but blows when, and where, and upon whom he
lists.

Others more sharp-sighted observing the foolishness of this distinction, have
devised another; namely, that the Pope cannot err in a question of Right,
though he may be deceived in matters of Fact. But this also is a broken Reed,
upon which if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it; although it
was invented by the Jansenists, to heal that Wound which Alexnnder the VII.
gave them, in that famous business of the five Articles. For first, when the
Pope Anathematizeth a man, he considers him as believing so and so: Nor does it
appear, how he that is free from all possible error, in matters of Right, can
be subject to error in matters of Fact; for when he pronounces concerning the
sense of any Book, being an Infallible Interpreter of the sense and meaning
(which they do affirm) he may fall from a question of Right into a question of
Fact; and so may determine that this and no other was the Authors meaning. 2.
Seeing Law prescribes to matter of Fact, it is not likely that he who is
Infallible in matter of Right, can err in matter of Fact. 3. Right does
sometimes arise from Fact; therefore that which before was a question of Fact,
afterward turning to a question of Right, the Pope may give an infallible
judgment concerning it. 4. If this be true, the Pope cannot condemn nor
Anathematize an Heretic, his judgment being fallible in matters of Fact. 5. We
have before shortly proved, that the Pope has erred most abominably in matters
of Right.

And thus you may see what difficulties they involve themselves in, who place
the Church and its Infallibility in the Pope alone.

Now follows the third and last Opinion of the Papists concerning the Church
and its Infallibility, namely, that it consists in the Pope and the Council
together: But Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim.

For the same difficulties that were before proposed, do press them equally:
And moreover, these doubts will arise, Whether the Pope have his Infallibility
from the Council, or the Council from the Pope? Whether if the Pope be absent,
his Legates have the same Infallibility that he himself would have, if Present?
if so, whether he might not as easily Delegate this Infallibility to the
Bishops of the Council, as to his Legates? Whether Decrees made in the Popes
absence be Infallible, and binding to the Conscience? For if no Decrees be
binding without the Popes Confirmation, it cannot be conceived, how he can
extrajudicially (or out of Council) ratify the Decrees made in Council, being
the Popes Infallibility consists not in his own Person, as separate from, but
jointly with the Council.

From what I have said it evidently appears, that the Papists catch at a Shadow
instead of the Body; and though they obstinately assert the Infallibility of
their Church, yet they cannot agree, nor do they know where this Church is to
be found: So that they are altogether ignorant how to satisfy a doubting Soul
in this matter, and yet they desist not Projicere ampullas and sesquipedalia
verba.

While I was yet in the Roman Communion I perceived my self entangled in these
Labaryinths, and often considered how to extricate my self, that so I might
with a clear Conscience worship God in purity and holiness. And although I had
heard much in my own Country (which is Spain) of the Reformed Churches, yet I
could never light on any of the Books of their Learned Divines, being forbidden
to read them under the severest penalties. But hearing that they founded all
their Doctrines upon the Holy Scriptures, I became very desirous to search into
the same; (for in Spain it self the Clergy is not forbidden to read the
Scriptures) and having met with these words of the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3.16,
17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. It
seemed to me, that the Apostle had drawn a lively Portraicture of a Minister of
the Gospel; and described at once what ought to be the matter and Fountain, as
well as Method of Preaching; yea, and declared by what means the Man of God,
that is, a Minister of Christ, may undoubtedly attain unto the full perfection
of his Ministry, as well in reference to his own accomplishments for the work,
as to the good effects of his labor upon the Souls committed to his care;
namely, he asserteth, that the Scriptures contain a rich Treasure of Divine
Knowledge, able to make a man wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. and pronounces
him accursed that should preach another Gospel, even though it were an Angel
from Heaven, Gal. 1.8. but peace upon as many as walk according to this Rule,
Gal. 6.16. And God himself sends his people to the Law, and to the Testimony,
as the most effectual way to reduce them from seeking unto false Prophets and
Wizards, Isa. 8.19, 20.

Having pondered these things seriously and often within my self, and observed
that Paul speaks so magnificent things of the Scriptures; and that he (who
shunned not to declare the whole Counsel of God) professes that he had said no
other things, than those which Moses and the Prophets did say should come; I
quickly concluded, that the only mark of the true Church, is to be taken from
this Fountain, That the Church is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the chief Cornerstone is Jesus Christ. And I found that
Augustine (that glorious Light of Antiquity) did agree with me, writing, Contr.
Ma. Arian. l. 3. Neither will I allege the Nicene Chuncil to your prejudice,
nor ought you to allege the Council of Ariminum to mine: Let us not make use
of Writings, partial to the one or to the other Party, but of the holy
Scriptures, that are impartial Judges of both; and compare Cause with Cause,
Matter with Matter, and Reason with Reason. And elsewhere, writing against
Donatus, There (namely in the Scriptures) let us seek for the True Church;
there let us discuss the point.

Being now fully confirmed in this general Principle, I began to enquire
narrowly into the Purity of particular Churches, and upon enquiry found, that
none do so exactly agree with the Scriptures, as the Reformed Churches:
Wherefore I firmly resolved with my self, to forsake the Roman Idolatry, and
associate my self to the Protestants: which I accordingly performed in France;
and having renounced the Romish Superstitions, I adjoined my self to the
Reformed Church, as being the true Church of Christ; which I shall now shortly
evince by the following Arguments.

That is the true Church, which 1. Vindicates and maintains the Authority of
the Scriptures. 2. Teaches Doctrine agreeable to the Scriptures. 3. (Because I
will not be so Scripturary as to neglect the Testimony of the Fathers and
Councils) Which agrees also with the Testimony of Ancient Fathers and Councils:
But the Reformed Church is such: Therefore the Reformed is the true Church.

As for the first, the Reformed Church maintains the Authority of the
Scriptures against the Papists, who affirm, That the Scriptures have no
Authority, as to us at least, but from the Church. Which distinction was found
out by Bellarmine; namely, that the Authority of the Scripture, considered in
it self, does not depend upon the Church, but only in respect of us. But how
frivolous is this distinction? For all Authority is Relative, and therefore it
cannot be considered without a relation to us: And moreover the Supposition is
false, that the Scriptures Authority, as to us, depends upon the Church.

But before I come to overthrow this Assertion, it will not be amiss to
observe, that the reason which induces the Papists to defend it, is evidently
this; They know not how to answer the Protestants Arguments from Scripture,
without wresting the sense; and therefore hold, that the sense of the
Scriptures depends upon the interpretation of the Church; which obliges them
to desend, that the Authority of the Scriptures depends also upon the Church,
being that, without the Churches Tradition, we can have no certainty of the
Scriptures themselves, nor of their sense. In this they imitate exactly the
Ancient Heretics, of whom Tertullian says, When the Heretics are confuted
from the Scriptures, they presently begin to accuse the Scriptures, as if they
were not of sufficient Authority, or were otherwise written than they are cited
by the Orthodox, and of which there is no certainty without Tradition. Where
you may see an exact Portraicture of the Modern Papists.

But to return to our purpose; we assert, That the Scriptures Authority does no
way depend upon the Authority of the Church, but of the Holy Ghost only,
speaking internally in our hearts, and externally in the Scriptures, because he
is their Author, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. and therefore he alone can give them
their Authority. And as Christ seeks a Testimony from none besides the Father;
so neither does his Word need any other, which he has left upon Earth instead
of his own Person. And as it were very absurd to affirm, that the Authority of
the Kings Proclamation depends upon the Crier, or a Rule upon the thing ruled,
or that the Sun borrows his light from his own Orb or Vortex; so it is no less
ridiculous to affirm, that the Authority of the Scriptures depends upon the
Church: The Church is the Candlestick, the Word of God is the Candle, Revel.
1.20. Luke 8.16. Now as a Candlestick contributes nothing to the light of the
Candle, so neither does the Church to the Authority of the Scriptures.

We reject not the Ministerial Testimony of the Church in this affair, because
thereby we come to the knowledge of the Scriptures, as the Samaritans came to
the knowledge of Christ by the Samaritan Woman's Testimony; which nevertheless
was not the reason or ground of their Faith, but the Instrument only.

The Papists object, that the Church is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
1 Timothy 3.15. And from hence they conclude, that the Authority of the
Scriptures, as to us, depends entirely upon the Church. But to pass Camero's
observation, that these words belong to the sixteenth verse, where there is a
Copulative Particle, which otherwise were useless; and that the Apostle first
compares the Church to a House, and then teaches us, what is the chief Pillar
of that House, viz. God manifest in the Flesh: For a House cannot be called a
Pillar, but a Pillar is in a House. In this place Paul means not an
Architectonical Pillar, (that sustains the Authority of the Scriptures) but a
Political, to which the Fdicts of the Supreme Governor are affixed. Nor is
Bellarmines Exception against this distinction of any weight, that the Church
may be as well called a Bibliotheck, as a Pillar, in this sense: For we affirm,
that the Church does not only keep these Books, but also teach and publish the
Contents thereof, and expose them to the view of the people.

So then, the Testimony of the Church may be one Motive to induce us to believe
the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, but cannot beget in our minds a firm
and certain persuasion of it, which is the work of the Holy Ghost only, whom
God joins with his Word, Isa. 59.21. My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc.

Augustine speaks well to this purpose, in his Confessions; But how shall I
know that these are thy words? Moses said so indeed, but Moses is gone; and if
he were present, and should speak Hebrew, I could not understand him; but if he
spoke Latin, and I understood him, how could I be certain that he spoke the
truth? The Truth it self, which is neither Greck, Latin, Hebrew, nor Barbarian,
without any sound of the tongue, or noise of Syllables, would say unto me
inwardly in the Cabinet of my heart, he speaks truth. You see, Christian
Readers, how Augustine was persuaded of the Divinity of the Scriptures, not by
the Authority of the Church, nor of Moses and the Prophets, but by the Internal
Truth speaking in his heart, which is the Holy Spirit.

It Is in vain to reply hereunto, that every one may pretend the Spirit; for
pretensions cannot prejudice the Truth; the Question between us and the Papists
is not, Whether the Scriptures are of Divine Authority, or not? for both of us
assert that they are: But, Whether he that admits this, is persuaded of it? To
which whether they or we give the most satisfactory answer, we leave the whole
Christian World, that are not partial to either Party, to judge.

We conclude therefore, that as this Question, Whether the Scriptures are the
Word of God? is unworthy of a Christian: So Jesuit Sambays's Assertion (de fide
Orthodoxa) is foolish and ridiculous, That the Protestants have not the
Scriptures. For, besides that, he defends it for no other end, but that he may
shun the dint of their Arguments drawn from the Scriptures: He uses no other
Medium to prove that Assertion, but that the Reformed Church, wanting the Marks
of the true Church, is a false Church, and therefore cannot have the
Scriptures, which do both in their matter and form depend upon the Church:
Which Argument is most false, and does manifestly beg the Question, viz. That
the Scriptures, and their sense, depend upon the Authority of the Church; which
we utterly deny, and that not without reason, as I showed above. Moreover, the
Jesuit shows his Cause to be desperate, by endeavoring to rob us of the
Scriptures; for none of the Ancient Fathers denied the Scriptures to any
Heretic that argued his own Cause from them; and Augustine that we quoted
above, affirms, that the Scriptures are not peculiar to any one Party, but
impartial Judges of all. We might with far better reason return this Argument
upon the Papists, because we have proved, that their Representative Church is
not only false, but no Church at all: But I am not so much afraid of their
Arguments from Scripture, and therefore do not deny them the Bible.

Having established the Opinion of the Reformed Churches, in reference to the
Authority of the Scriptures, I shall now proceed to the properties of the same.

First therefore I affirm, that the Scriptures are perfect, by a perfection of
parts as well as degrees; and so sufficient to Salvation, Psalm. 19. The Law of
God is perfect: Their sufficiency appears from the forecited place, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17.

The accession of the New Testament to the Old, does not disprove the
perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures: For he that revealed the whole
Counsel of God to Believers, did nevertheless reveal no other than what Moses
and the Prophets had written before, as we hinted above. Hence the Ancient
Fathers said very well, As the New Testament is hid in the Old, so the Old is
made plain and clear in the New. Nor does a difference in degree alter the
nature or species of a thing; neither is the Question betwixt the Papists and
us, concerning this or that part of the Scriptures, but concerning the whole
Canon, as it was received by the Ancient Church, and enumerated by Hierom. So
that in this Argument there is evidently the Fallacy of dividing what ought to
be joined together.

And as we justly cut off the Apocryphal Books from this perfection and
sufficiency of the Scriptures, because they contradict both themselves and the
Canon; nor were they ever received in the Jewish Church, to which the Oracles
of God were committed, Romans 3.2. So we reject the Popish distinction of
Protocanonical and Deuterocanonical Books, with the same facility that they
propose it, being without proof.

Hence we do but little esteem unwritten Traditions, because what is written
does sufficiently instruct us what we are to believe and do in order to life
eternal, John 20.31.

It Is ridiculous to refer the several Orders of Monks, and particularly the
shaving of their Crowns, to these unwritten Traditions; because Christ says, I
have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, Joh. 16.12.
For if this had been the thing that Christ had further to say unto them, he
might easily have sent for a Barber and caused their Heads to be shaved:
Besides that the Monks, ( whose duty was to weep, and not to teach, says
Hierom) were shaven as a sign of their penitence, not of any honor or
preeminence.

Secondly, The Scriptures are plain and easy to be understood; The
Commandment, enlightening the eyes, Psalm. 19.8. Whatsoever things were written
afore-time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. Those things therefore which are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, being very few, and very easy, are clearly
and plainly set down in the Scriptures, though other things not so absolutely
necessary may puzle the most Sagacious understandings: Chrysostom says well;
The holy Scriptures are such that a Lamb may wade in them, and yet an Elephant
may swim.

Seeing then that the Scriptures are plain, as is evident from Reason, and the
Testimony of the Fathers, the Reformed Churches do with good reason attribute a
judgment of discretion, in Controversies of Faith, to every true Christian: So
that every Believer, by frequent reading and comparing of the Scriptures, may
easily understand their meaning, at least as to things absolutely necessary to
Salvation; For no Prophecy of Scripture is of a^y private interpretation, nor
came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.

As for the Fathers of the Ancient Church, and the four Primitive Councils, we
willingly embrace them as Interpreters of the Scriptures; yea moreover, we
affirm, that in subordination to the Scriptures, they may bind, but not force
our belief: But we utterly deny, that the Fathers, or these Councils, or the
Pope, are Judges of Controversies about matters of Faith; but the only Judge of
all such Controversies is the Holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, or as
Augustine says, Christ himself; Let Christ judge of this Controversy, who
although he be absent in his Person, yet is present in his Word.

Hence it does appear that the Scriptures may rightly be called a Normal Judge,
deciding the question in manner of a Law, though not outwardly proclaiming the
sentence: The Word of God is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. 4.12. We have sufficiently proved, that the Reformed Churches do
vindicate the Authority and Properties of the Scriptures: It remains now to be
proved, that they teach according to the Scriptures.

I shall pass the Doctrines of God, and his Attributes of the Trinity, and the
like, because there is little difference between the Papists and us in there
Points, except in some Preter-fundamental things, which the Jesuits and
Dominicans do also dispute among themselves. I shall now only take notice of
this, that the Jesuits do very absurdly define Free Will, viz. A Faculty
whereby all things requisite to action being present, the will may act or not
act, act this or the contrary. For besides that, when the Object is present to
the Understanding, the Will is necessarily determined by the last practical
judgment of the understanding to embrace or reject the object; like as if Straw
and Fire come together, there must needs a Flame be kindled: I say, besides
this, it is impossible for any man to alter the Prescience and Decree of God
(which is one of the things requisite to action) for the Counsel of God stands,
and he will do all his pleasure. All things requisite to Judas his betraying of
Christ being present, ( viz. the last practical judgment of his understanding,
the receiving of the Money, etc. and the Eternal Counsel of God, designing that
Christ should be delivered into the hands of men, suffer death, and rise again
the third day) it was impossible for him not to act.

Therefore the Reformed Churches do excellently define Free Will; A faculty of
acting freely, without compulsion, or physical determination to one thing. For
the Will cannot be forced to any elicite or internal act; nor is it capable of
a physical or natural necessity, determining it to one thing, as Fire is
determined to burn. But it is not free from the determination of the Divine
Decree, and the last practical judgment of the understanding; nor in the
unregenerate from sin, to which it is in general necessarily determined by its
Original depravation, although it has a freedom to choose this or that special
sin: So that in the unregenerate man it is free only to will, nor can he by his
own strength perform any action spiritually good: Of our selves, as of our
selves, we cannot think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. much less do a good action
by nature. We are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.3.
and every imagination of our heart is only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. And the
best actions that the unregenerate can do, are really evil, because they do not
proceed from Faith; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. So that
as from a total privation there is no returning to the habit, but by an
Infinite Power; so from sin, which is a privation of that rectitude, which
ought to be in our faculties and actions, there is no returning to
righteousness, except God do quicken us from the Dead; and say to us as unto
Lazarus, Lazarus arise, Joh. 11.43. and cause the Sun of Righteousness to arise
in the dark Horizon of our hearts, saying as in the first Creation, Let there
be light, Genesis 1. And truly seeing Regeneration, according to Scripture phrase,
is a new Creation, ( Create in me a clean heart, Psa. 51. We are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. In Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but the New
Creature, Gal. 6.15.) it cannot be the work of less than an Infinite Power,
whereby God works in us both to will and to do of his good preasure, Phil.
2.13. So that Augustine did rightly affirm, that the good works of the Heathen
were but glistering sins: They may indeed act something that is morally good,
by the general influence of Divine Providence; yet they can act nothingthat is
truly good in a Theological sense, because they want Faith to purify their
hearts, nor do they aim at the glory of God; for they do not shun this or that
sin simply because it is a sin, but from a vainglorious desire of Reputation
among the people.

Hence it follows, that Justification and Sanctification are not ours, but
Gods: so that when God conferreth Glory upon those that are Justified and
Sanctified, he may with good reason be said to Crown with this reward his own
gifts, and not our works. As for Justification, of which we intend to speak
first, it is twofold, active and passive; for it may be considered either in
respect of God that justifies, or of Man that is justified. In the former
consideration it is nothing else but an act of God, whereby he absolves the
sinner, and reputes him righteous, for the Merits and satisfaction of Christ.
Hence God is said to justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24. So that God in justifying makes
no physical change in the sinner, as the Papists say, who would have the
Justification of God to be of the same nature with Transubstantiation, whereby
one thing is changed into another; that is, that God in Justifying does not
proceed as a Judge, pronouncing one at the Bar Innocent, but as it were by a
physical immutation, making a righteous man out of an unrighteous, even as
Christ turned water into Wine.

Bellarmine, Becan, and other Jesuits, have labored much in the proof of this
Assertion, but without any success: They produce nothing from Scripture, but
what is to be referred to Sanctification, not Justification. And thus they
commit the fallacy of ignoratio Elenchi; and as for their Arguments drawn from
Reason, they are so unreasonable, that they do not deserve a Refutation. Their
chief Argument is taken from the Word it self; for, say they, to Justify,
according to the Etimology of the word, is nothing else but to make just or
righteous, being it is compounded of justus and facio; as well as to Sanctify
is to make, not to pronounce holy, etc. Therefore to justify cannot import the
absolution of a sinner who is really unrighteous, but the making of him
righteous. But they hereby show themselves to be no better Gramarians than they
are Divines; for the sense of a word, in matters of Faith, is not to be taken
out of Calepine, but from the Word of God, which is the Rule of our Faith. Now
it is manifest, and has been demonstrated by many, that Justification is every
where in the Scriptures taken in a Law-sense. Thus Solomon, He that justifies
the ungodly, and condemns the righteous, are both an abomination unto the
Lord. Here the justifying of the unrighteous is opposed to the condemning of
the righteous; and so in all other places of Scripture.

Moreover, if this were the meaning of the word Justify, then there would be
no difference between Justification and Sanctification; which nevertheless is
evident from Rev. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and
he that is holy, let him be holy still. Also Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them
he also glorified: where under the word Glorify is comprehended
Sanctification, which is begun Glory, even as Glory is consummate
Sanctification.

Lastly, This Composition with the Verb Facio does not always import an
internal change, as appears from the Song of the Blessed Virgin, My Soul does
magnify the Lord. Now let them set their heads together, and prove, that the
Blessed Virgin, by magnifying the Lord, did cause any internal change in him;
and we shall also allow, that God by justifying us, does make an internal
change in us; Ante leves vero pascentur in aethere cervi.

Hitherto of Active Justification: Now we shall come to treat of Passive
Justification, or Justification considered in respect of the man justified. And
thus it is nothing else, but an assured considence of our righteousness in
Christ, and by the imputation of his Merits, which we receive and apply unto
our selves by faith, Romans 3.25, 26. Hence it appears, that the Meritorious
Cause of our Justification is the Merit of Christ, as we proved a little
before; and the hand by which we apply this satisfaction of our Savior, or the
instrumental cause of our Justification, is Faith. Man is justified by faith,
without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. It is as clear from the Scriptures as
the light of the Sun in midday, that we are justified by faith only: By grace
ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8. So that I shall insist no longer upon this point, but conclude with
the Apostle, That by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified, for by
the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. There is therefore no Justification
in the sight of God by our works, but only by says, which applieththe Panacea
of Salvation unto our dead hearts, and causes us to live in God, and God in us.

We are not so unreasonable, as to separate Works from Faith; yet nevertheless
we affirm, that Faith only does justify: it is the eye only that sees, the hand
only that weighs; yet neither can the eye see, nor the hand weigh, unless they
be united to the body: Even so Faith only does justify; but this Faith is
never separated from Good Works.

The Apostle James indeed says, We are justified by works, and not by faith
only, Jam. 2.24. But he either means justification before men, as in the
eighteenth verse, Show me thy faith by thy works; or else the confirmation of
internal faith by external actions; or else he speaks by a Metonimy of the
effect for the cause; so that by faith and works he means a working faith;
which seems to agree well with the words, You see then how that by works man is
justified, and not by faith only; that is, not by a solitary or naked faith,
which is not accompanied with works, for faith being alone is dead; but by a
living faith, which shows its foundness by works.

So that we are not justified by works, but by faith only; and whosoever will
narrowly look into himself and his own frailty, must needs break forth into
Bellarmine's words; Because of the frailty of humane life, and the uncertainty
of our own righteousness, it is safest to rely only upon the mercy of God,
Bell. de bon. oper. Consider, Candid Reader, the words of this Cardinal, who (as
I can demonstrate, if need be) at the end of the greatest Controversies between
us and the Papists, yields at last unto the truth, and appears, though an
Italian, to be more a Protestant than a Papist.

Thus we have proved, by Gods assistance, that Active Justification is an
external judicial absolution of an unrighteous man, and pronouncing of him
righteous; and that Passive Justification is by faith only, and that a living
faith, which applies to us the Merits of our Savior.

As for Sanctification, I shall say little concerning it, by reason the Papists
don't disagree much with the Protestants in this Point, as to the nature of the
thing; only I utterly deny, that the good works which we do are meritorious, or
necessary to Salvation, necessuate medii, as a mean to bring us to Salvation:
Bernard says well, Good works are the way to the Kingdom, not the cause of
reigning: nor does the Popish distinction between merit of congruity and
condignity: mitigate this Assertion for, besides that the Congruity of Gods
Reward for our Works consists only in his own good pleasure; Fear not little
Flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32.
I have often admired, that they have found no Text of Scripture to prove the
condignity of works, but this one which is Diametrically contrary to their
Assertion. The Sufferings of this present time are not worthy (but condign) to
be compared with the Glory that is to be revealed in us.

This is the only place where the word condignus is to be found.

I will proceed now to show how found and genuine the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches is concerning the Sacraments, which are Seals of the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.11. And shortly refute the Popish Errors. As for Baptism, both
Parties acknowledge it to be a Sacrament of Initiation, by which in the faith
of our Parents (which is my opinion) we are implanted into the Church, which is
the Body of Christ.

But the Papists falsely affirm, that Baptism ex opere operato (by virtue of
the work wrought) works in us Regeneration, and abolishes Original Sin: Not
only because an external, corporal thing can have no influence upon things
internal and spiritual, in reference to the rectifying thereof, which can only
be done by God himself; every good and perfect Gift comes down from the Father
of Lights, says the Apostle James: But likewise because the sign of the
Covenant cannot communicate to us the things comprehended in the Covenant.

And the contrary appears also from the effect; because those that have been
baptized, are and have been subject to everlasting damnation. And if this
Sacrament ex opere operato, did work Grace, Regeneration, etc. then Abraham
could not have been reputed righteous by faith in uncircumcision, Romans 4.9.
Moreover in the Primitive Times, and especially as to them that were baptized
when come to Age, Faith was required before the Seal of Righteousness were
stamped upon their hearts and consciences. Now because Faith is the Root of the
rest of the Graces, and has annexed unto it that great work of Repentance: It
necessarily follows, that the Apostle requiring faith in the Adult, did suppose
the rest of the Graces to be in them, not imagining that they should be
conferred upon them, but rather sealed or confirmed by Baptism: for Baptism is
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; and not a thing that by its internal
virtue work Faith and Regeneration.

For this very reason, Augustine, and other of the Fathers affirmed, that
Infants are baptized in the Faith of their Parents, if believing Parents; or in
the Faith of the Church, if their Parents were unknown, or Unbelievers; because
they were persuaded, that Faith is rather required before, than conferred by
Baptism. So that we believe that the holy Ghost does operate in the tender
hearts and minds of elect Infants, even from their Birth, and that effectually,
though insensibly: and although perhaps he does not work in them subjectively
an actual faith; yet he objectively applies unto them the benefits of Christ,
which in others are received by an actual faith,

But lest any should think that we falsely charge our Adversaries with this
Assertion; I will show the candid Reader the reason why they assert it; and
then evince the same from a custom frequent among them in the Celecration of
this Sacrament.

The reason why they affirm it, is because they hold that Infants departing
without Baptism cannot be saved, but go into the Limbus Infantum (a kind of
Hole prepared to put Children into) where they suffer paenam damni, but not
paenam seasus; that is, they are deprived of the Beatifick Vision of God,
though they are not under any sensible torment. If then their Election, which
is unchangeable, and their being under the Covenant of Grace, which belongs
to them as well as to their Parents, be not sufficient to save them because
they were not baptized; surely Baptism which makes them capable to demand
Heaven, must by a physical virtue work those Graces, whereby they may attain
unto Salvation. (2.) They hold that none can be saved without the Bosom of the
Church; and that none can be reputed Members of the Church, except such as have
been baptized. Moreover their Custom is to admit of the Baptism of Women
(providing the Form be observed) in case of necessity; which shows how
absolutely necessary they esteem Baptism unto Salvation.

Having proved the Charge, I shall demonstrate the Error.

And first it is as certain, That all Infants departing without Baptism are not
deprived of the beatifick Vision; as that David was saved, who after death was
to go to his Child that died without Circumcision (1 Samuel 12.18, 23.) in place
whereof Baptism succeeded, as appears from Coll. 2.11, 12. And as certain, as
that the promise of Eternal Life does belong to Infants; which Argument is of
the same force against the Anabaptists, that deny the Seal to Infants, to whom
the promise belongs, (for which reason Peter did willingly confer Baptism upon
some Converts ( Act. 2.38, 39) as against the Papsts, that deny Eternal Life to
Children dying without Baptism, although they be under the promise and Covenant
of Grace; for he that is under the Covenant of Grace, or the Promises, is in
Christ; and he that is in Christ will certainly be saved: Therefore Children
being under the Covenant of Grace, and the Promise of Life, will certainly be
saved, Acts 2.39. Ephesians. 2.12.

But they object this Scripture, Except a man be born of water, and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.^. whence they conclude
that none can be saved without Baptism.

But I answer, that nothing else is meant by this water and spirit but the holy
Ghost himself, who is compared to water, because he washes away our sins.
There is another expression like unto this in Mat. 3.11. He shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; that is, the Holy Ghost shall purge you as
fire does Gold, seven times refined. So that these Expressions are Metaphorical
and Figurative: Virgil has the like expression: -- Pateris libamus and auro

We drink out of Cups and Gold, that is out of Golden Cups; so to be baptized
with the Spirit, and with fire, is nothing else but to be baptized with a fiery
Spirit; and the same way are Christ's words concerning water and spirit to be
understood; wherefore what he says here figuratively, by way of Hendiadis he
expressed in the third Verse in proper words, except a man be born again he can
not see the Kingdom of God. So that it clearly appears from Christ's own
exposition, that here is understood spiritual Regeneration, and not the
external washing with water in Baptism.

2. We utterly deny that Baptism by women is valid, and not to be reiterated.

They can only allege the example of Zipporah that Circumcised her Son; whence
they argue, that a Woman may as lawfully Baptize, as Circumcise. I shall not
give the answer that is usual amongst some Divines, viz. that Zipporah sinned
in so doing, for God never blesses men for any sin, as such; but he did bless
Moses for this action of Zipporah. But I answer thus, that Circumcision in the
Old Testament was indifferently administered by any person, by reason it was not
so strictly joined with the Ministerial Office of Preaching, as Baptism is in
the New Testament; Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Mat. 28.19.
So that now it is unlawful for any to administer Baptism, but such as are
ordained for the Ministry.

Now we shall proceed to speak of the other Sacrament (without regarding the
rest of their five Sacraments, that have no ground in the Scriptures, nor the
Fathers) which is the Lords Supper.

According to sound Doctrine, the Lords Supper is nothing else but a visible
sign of an invisible Grace; wherein by receiving of Bread and Wine, is
signified our receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ as a Seal of the
Covenant of Crace, tending to our Salvation. We deny not, that the Body and
Blood of Christ is really present in this holy Sacrament; but we deny, 1. That
it is corporally present, because it is circumscriptive, and in Heaven, and
therefore cannot be every where. 2. We deny, that the Lords Supper is a
Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead; which point I shall chiefly insist upon.

As to the first, the Papists do very much urge their Transubstantiation, by
which they understand nothing else but the Corporal presence of the Body and
Blood of our Savior, under the appearance and accidents of Bread and Wine,
imagining that the substance of the Bread and Wine is turned to the first
nothing, out of which it was created, and the accidents only do remain which
affect our senses of sight, feeling, and taste: The falsehood and absurdity of
this imagination I thus demonstrate.

1. Neither the Word nor the thing is to be found in Scripture; for after the
Consecration it is called, the Bread of which we are partakers, 1 Cor. 10.17.
Now if the Bread were annihilated, how could we be partakers of it? And
moreover, no Papist will allow that it be called Bread after Consecration,
which yet we see the Scripture does.

2. The Word it self is new, and was never heard of before the Lateran Council,
when Berengarius was forced to recant the Truth, and fall into a most
abominable Error, namely, that Christ's Body is bruised by the Teeth, and let
down into the Belly, etc.

3. The Word is no way adapted to the thing; yea, Creation may be as well
called Annihilation, as this may be called Transubstantiation; for
Transubstantiation is nothing else, but a mutation or turning of one substance
into another; as in Cana of Galilee, Wine was turned into Water: but the
Papists say, that in this case one substance is not turned into another, but
that the one (namely, the Bread and Wine) is annihilated, and the other,
namely, the Body and Blood of Christ, is induced, under the appearance and
accidents of Bread and Wine (although they have a thousand distinctions here
about the introducing of the Body and Blood of Christ under these accidents,
which I shall pass over;) so that it ought rather to be called, an Annihilation
of one substance, and Introduction of another: but an absurd name is fit enough
for such an absurd thing.

Convenient rebus nominal saepe suis. 4. The thing which is distributed in the
Sacrament, is called by the Ancients a Sign and a Figure of Christ's Body. Now
nothing can be a Sign or a Figure of it self: therefore Christ cannot be
Corporally present. Augustine says, The Lord was pleased to say, this is my
Body, when he gave but the figure of his Body. And most of the Ancient Fathers
do understand the words, etc. Also the Scriptures call it, A Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, as we said before; now the Seal cannot be the thing it
self.

It were too tedious to consider all the arguments of the Papists against the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the Lords Supper, only this one I
cannot pass by, which I have read in an Anonymous Jesuit, whereby he endeavors
to invalidate our last reason against Transubstantiation, by giving this
instance, that David might have been a sign of himself, as sighting with
Goliath, if he had presented himself to the peoples view upon a Theater.

But I answer, 1. David had not been in that case a sign of himself, but of the
actions he performed in the Combat.

2. If David had been sowed up in a Sack, or laid himself down upon the Theater
covered with an Asses skin (as they say Christ's Body is covered with the
accidents of Bread and Wine) so that he could not be seen, I do not understand
how he could have been a sign of himself, or his actions either. I shall omit
to observe, that the Sacrament was instituted in Commemoration of the Man
Christ, and a that Commemoration is only of absent persons; as likewise many of
their Exceptions against, us for brevities sake.

Only I shall shortly demonstrate the other Proposition, viz. that the Lords
Supper is not a Sacrifice for the sins of the Living and the Dead, by this
general argument; Where there is no Priest, no Altar, no proper Host, there can
be no proper Sacrifice for sin: But in the New Testament there is none of these
(beside Christ himself) Therefore, etc. The Major is most certain; for
Relatives are mutual, and the one presupposes the other: therefore where there
is a proper Sacrifice, there must be an Altar, a Priest, and an Host, properly
so called. So Bellarmin himself says, That Altars use not to be Erected,
unless for Sacrifices, properly so called. (de Miss. Lib. 1. Cap. 16.) And
elsewhere, without an Altar can be no Sacrifice, de Cult San. l. 3. c. 4.

Now to prove the Minor; there is no material Altar to be found in the
Scriptures, as one to be used in the New Testament. Christ who instituted this
Sacrament, Celebrated the same on the Table, Luke 22.21. The Apostle Paul calls
it the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10.21. But there is no mention made of an Altar,
which had been certainly done, if an Altar had been in use: Hence the great
Bellarmin says ( de Miss. l. 1. c. 17.) The Apostles did not use the Names of
Priesthood, Sacrifice, Altar; as knowing well there could be none after the
material Sacrifices were Sealed up: But the Papists object, Heb. 13.10. We have
an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. I
answer, This Text speaks of an improper, figurative, invisible Altar, but we
deny only a proper and material Altar: for that the words are figurative,
evidently appears, because no Body can eat of a material Altar: And moreover,
the Sacrifice that the Apostle would have to be offered up upon it, does
plainly discover what kind of Altar he means: By him therefore let us offer the
Sacrifice of Praise to God continually; that is the fruit of our Lips, giving
Thanks to his Name. The Ancient Fathers also do agree with us. None of these is
visible, neither the Priest, nor the Sacrifice, nor the Altar; Ambrose in
Epist. ad Heb. I think that the Altar is nothing else but the Body of the Lord;
Bernard, in Sermon. 4. Nazianzen calls it the Altar which is above, Orat. 24. And
finally the Papists themselves are forced to confess, that here is meant an
improper Altar; I do not urge the place it self. Bell. de Miss. l. 1. c. 14. as
also Thomas, Anselmus, and many others.

2. Nor is there any proper Sacrifice in the New Testament. For Daniel
prophesies, That the Sacrifice and Oblation shall cease: And we see this
Prophecy fulfilled; The Apostle Paul says, Nor yet that he should offer
himself often, but now once in the end of the World, Heb. 9.26. Every Priest
stands daily ministering and offering; but this man after he had offered one
Sacrifice for sins, for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10.12.
where the Apostle evidently asserteth, that Christ offered himself but once;
and does not offer himself, nor can he be so offered, again. Yea the Apostle
urges the sufficiency of Sacrifice by these two Arguments. (1.) Because he
offered himself but once, and did not repeat his Sacrifice as insufficient. (2)
Because having perfected his Work, he sat down on the right hand of God for
ever: But the Priests did always stand, which signified that they had not yet
completed their Work, but must lay their hands once more to it, before they
might sit down and rest from their work, Therefore the Papists devising daily
Sacrifices of Christ after that one Sacrifice, does derogate from its
sufficiency, and makes Christ liable to the Ministry of standing, who is
already set down for ever at the right hand of God. This was also the reason
why God destroyed Jerusalem, and the Temple (after Christ's Mediatory Office was
fulfilled as to one part of his Priesthood, namely his Sacrifice) that there
might be no more material Sacrifices, that being the place to which they were
confined.

The Papists urge the Custom of the Ancients, and the expressions of the
Fathers, who speak very often of Sacrifices. But it is clear, that the Fathers
meant no other, th^n Sacrifica Eucharistica Sacrifices of a Thanksgiving, which
were commonly performed at the Lords Supper; which with Prayers and Alms are
indeed a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. Hence Clemens
Alexandrinus says, that a righteous Soul is a holy Altar, and holy Prayer is
the Incense. Lactantius says, two things are to be offered, a Gift and a
Sacrifice, both incorporcal; integrity of mind is the gift; Prayer, and Psalms
are the Sacrifice. Augustine calls our heart an Altar, Humility and Praise a
Sacrifice, and Charity the Fire. So ronimus, Ambrosius and others.

As for the Priest, there is none besides Christ; for he is a Priest for ever,
after the Order of Melchizedek; and Levitical Priests they cannot be, being
that Order is ceased.

Thus having proved, that there is no Altar, Priest, nor Host, besides Christ
himself, who is our Sacrifice, our Priest, and our Altar, Epiphan. lib. 2. com.
1. hoeres. I conclude, that there is now no proper Sacrifice for the sins of
the Living and the Dead; and by consequence no Transubstantiation, upon which
this Sacrifice is builded.

And here their Purgatory falls to the Ground; for besides that it is contrary
to Scriptures, to Reason, to the Ancient Fathers, and injurious to the
satisfaction and merits of Christ; moreover, if there be no Sacrifice, there
can be no Mass, and by consequence no money for the delivery of Souls out of
Purgatory.

Here also falls to the ground their Doctrine of Concomitancy, for the sake
whereof, (as Gelatius one of their Popes Intimates) they have committed
Sacriledg, in the Cup from the Laity; which although the Council of Constance
confesses to be contrary to the Primitive Institution of Christ, and Custom of
the Ancient Church; yet for some ridiculous reasons (such as; That some persons
hands do shake, that some have deformed Whiskers and Beards) pronouncing an
Anathema against him, that will contradict it.

And I have many times wondered why by the same Doctrine of Concomitancy, they
may not as well give the Cup, and take away the Bread, or take away the Cup
from the Clergy as well as the Laity? Why it is a fufilling of the Law to
abstain from the one, and a sin, yea a mortal sin to abstain from the other?

There is neither reason nor Scripture to countenance it in the least. So that
the Reformed Churches teach sound Doctrine, both as to the Nature, and the
Integrity of this Sacrament.

The last Point I shall touch upon, is the worshipping of Saints. The
Protestants agree herein with the Scriptures, and the Ancient Fathers, that the
Saints are to be honored by imitation, but not to be religiously adored; and
that for these three Reasons:

1. We cannot believe in Saints, therefore we cannot worship them, how shall
they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14.

2. We are severely forbidden to worship any but God: Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4.10.

3. The Saints do not know our thoughts, nor can they hear our Prayers: Abraham
is ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not. Isa. 63.16. Hence Aquinas
says, To know the thoughts of the heart, is the property of God: and
elsewhere, The Angels know not the secrets of the heart. And again, to know the
particular thoughts and actions of men, is above the perfection of a create
understanding. And Durandus denies that the glorified Saints do know our
thoughts. Finally Augustine says, that the dead know not what is done here. God
only knows the hearts of the Children of Men, 1 Kings 8.39. Peter the
Apostle, though a Saint, would not suffer Cornelius to worship him, saying I my
self also am a man, Acts 10.26. nor would the Angel suffer John to prestrate
himself to him: worship God, says he, Rev. 19.20. Yea a Heathen Poet could
tell that God only is to be worshipped.

Nec D^a sum, dixit, nec sacro thuris honor
Humanum dignare capu^ --
Their distinction betwixt latria, and dulia, and hyperdulia has been
abundantly refuted by many of the Reformed Writers.

I shall only conclude, that if Papists cannot be accused of formal Idolatry,
yet they are certainly guilty of material Idolatry.

Having demonstrated, that the Protestant Churches do defend the Holy
Scriptures, and conform their Doctrine thereunto in the most weighty points. I
justly infer, that the Protestant Church is a true, faithful, and sincere
Church.

I shall shut up all with this Observation, that the Papists perceiving, that
they cannot prevail against the Protestants in disputing of their Doctrine:
They question the Protestant Minestery as not Legitimate. But besides that
their own Scholasticks (as Bannes, Canus etc.) do allow, that the power of
Ordaining is not lost by Heresy: their own practice does evidently confute
them: for these that have been ordained in our Churches, are not reordained by
them as to the substantial part of Ordination

And it is certain enough, That a bad Governor, or Governors of the Church
may send good Laborers into Christ's Vineyard: yea Antichrist himself being
under the Cloak of Christ's Vicar, may distribute the Offices of Christ's
Temporal and Earthly Court to good men that are willing to serve Christ. So
when Christ was upon Earth, the Church was very much corrupted, and yet they
sent good Workmen into the Lords Vineyard, such as Joseph, Nicodemus, and oaths.

I shall conclude all with thanks to Almighty God, for that he has been
pleased to open mine eyes, to see the way of truth, and prayers to him to
confirm me therein: and my hearty wishes, that every one may reject the way of
abomination, and be rooted, and built up in Christ, and established in the
faith, lest he be spoiled by vain deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ.

Come out of Babylon my People, lest ye be partakers of her sins.

Embrace the true Protestant Religion, which is pure in Doctrine, holy in
Manners, and faithful to God and the King.

FINIS.

