Chap. Verse. Page 3 7 107 9 34 11 93, 107 12 8,69 15 34 4 2 70 6 10 103 10
28,29 8 38 91 11 1 11 James, 1 23,24 74, 75 2 20 6 1 Peter, 2 1,2,3 51 9 64 2
Peter, 1 21 119 1 John, 3 16 46 23 46, 63 5 10 63, 70

TO THE READER.
IT will be needless for me to write any thing in the Commendation of the
Author of the ensuing Treatise, both because in London and Cambridge and
elsewhere (where he was conversant) he was for his Godliness, Learning, and
Abilities as well approved of as known: As also because (though by Reason of
above twenty years knowledge of him, and twelve years constant sitting under his
Ministry, and private intimacy with him, I could say much, yet) whatever I
should say of him would avail but little to such as were both strangers to him,
and are also to my self. I assure you, that in these Sermons, you have nothing
but what I took from his own Mouth, when he Preached them: which I did
transcribe in the Authors life time, with a desire that he might perfect and
fit them for the Press: which I found him willing to, but hindered from, by his
constant Ministerial work, and great weakness of Body. I confess that my love
of the Matter in the following Treatise, and the Blessing which the Lord of his
goodness vouchsafed me by the same, Together with the leave which the Author
(in his life time) often gave me to Print any of his works that I had taken from
him in writing, have strongly inclined me (since his death) to publish some of
them to the World: But did forbear, because I knew that Sermons Preached by the
most able Minister, may yet need and deserve his perusal, and some amendments
before they be Printed: Yet at last am overcome to make them (as they are)
public, by the importunities of many that heard them preached, having this
Confidence that you will remember that they are but Sermons Preached, and not
prepared by the Author for the Press: And notwithstanding that, I do believe,
that if you read them seriously, ponderously, and with a spiritual heart,
(whether you are Ministers, or private Christians) you will find no cause of
repenting of your pains, but rather will be constrained to read them again and
again; for I ever found his Sermons well studied and digested, that the oftener I
read them, the more I perceived in them. Give me leave only to inform you that
the Author did preach above fourscore Sermons upon that Text Ephesians. 13. To the
Praise and Glory of his Grace, and upon Texts relating to and pursuing that
matter of Arminianism, which he has elaborately handled both Doctrinally and
practically, many of the which I have wrote out, and am resolved (as God gives
strength and time) to finish the rest; yet I shall altogether omit the
publishing of any of them, unless I understand that these find good acceptance.
In the mean time, A Blessing of those upon your hearts, is, and shall be the
earnest Prayers of,

MARK CO^

TWO BOOKS OF MR SYDRACH SIMPSON, Late Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridg; And
Preacher of the Gospel in London. VIZ. I Of Faith, Or, That believing is
receiving Christ; And receiving Christ is Believing. II. Of Covetousness.


In the First Book is showed (besides many other things) 1 That Persons that
are believers are Receivers. 2 That to Receive is the Principal use of Faith. 3
That nothing should hinder our Receiving. 1 Not our Sins. 2 Nor Gods delays. 3
Nor the smalness of our receipts. 4 Nor the greatness of our Wants. 4 How Faith
Receives. 5 That Faith Receives Christ. 1 In the understanding. 2 In the Will.
6 The temper of a man that has faith. 7 The necessity of Faith. 8 Though Faith
be small yet it makes us the Sons of God. 9 The Nature of True Faith. 10 There
are but few that Receive Christ. 11 Three sorts that come not to Christ. 1 Such
as Receive him not as he is. 2 Such as delay their coming to him. 3 Such as
give not that place to Christ in their hearts that is fitting for him.


In the Treatise of Covetousness is showed, 1 It is the Duty of all as they
would obtain eternal Life to be ware of covetousness. 2 The Reasons of the
Doctrine, 1 Its a spiritual Sin. 2 It over spreads the whole man. 3 Its
opposite to the Nature of Godliness and Religion. 4 Its the Womb and seed of
all Sin. 5 Its a base Sin. 3 The Dangerousness of covetousness. 1 It is hardly
avoided. 2 Its difficultly cured. 4 You shall have all things needful for this
life if you will look after Grace. 5 Your Life lies in Grace, not in Riches. 6
There is more to be feared than to be desired in Riches. 7 We should Mortify
our desires after Riches.


London: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the sign of the
Printing-press, in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1658.

A TREATISE OF FAITH.
JOHN, 1.12. To them that received him, to them he gave power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that be leeve on his Name.


CHAP. I.
The Scope of the Text. The Phrase of Receiving Christ, opened. Receiving
denotes, 1 Passiveness. 2 A meanness of condition in the Receiver. 3 A taking
that which before he had not. 4 A taking a thing with joy and gladness of
heart. The Doctrine; Persons that are Believers are Receivers; and to believe
is to receive. This proved by three Arguments: 1. Faith is the appetite of the
New Creature. 2. All other acts of Faith are subordinate to this of Receiving.
3. Nothing is done by Faith until such time as it does receive.

THese Words are an Argument to prove the Eternal Godhead of esus Christ,
because those that do receive him, are made the Sons of God, and have such a
dignity and pre-eminence, or prerogative thereby, as none but God can bestow.
My intent in this Text is only to open the phrase of receiving Christ, as it is
Synonimous and made all one with believing on him. As many as received him, As
many as believed on his name have this power, to become the Sons of God.

First: In general, Receiving notes passiveness, or being the subject of a
thing. As cloth does receive a color which is put upon it, and is not natural
or proper to it. And as the Earth receives the seed that is put into it by the
hand of the Husbandman. There may be an act in receiving, yet Receiving does
principally note passiveness; because that act is an order of nature, either
after receiving, or else Receiving is the complement, or that unto which the
same act tends. As a graft being put into a stock, the Stock closes with the
Graft by virtue from its self: So we having the Grace of Faith infused, we also
do adhere and cleave unto God. Or as in receiving money, there is an acounting
of it, but that accounting of it serves only to take it into possession. So it
is here also. There is something the soul does in receiving, but it tends only
to this end that it may be possessed of Jesus Christ and of his merits.

Secondly: As there is a passiveness in Receiving to be noted; So in receiving
there is a meanness and and lowness of condition. It was an Apotheg^e or usual
speech of our Lord (as it seems by the Apostle) To say. It is better to give
than to receive Acts 20.35. That is better, more honorable, more commendable.
He that gives the least gift, has more honor than he that receives the
greatest kindness. And as I shall show you afterward. In regard of the profit
of believing, it is very great, but in regard of the manner of believing it is
an abasement unto man, A denial even of his reason for the testimony sake of
Christ. But those are not the things which I intend principally.

Thirdly: in Receiving there is a taking to ones self that which before he had
not. As a man receives money which before was out of his hands; by being
received it comes into his possession, and is his own. And in this sense you
shall find the word [Received] used in the Scripture in Heb. 11.39. All these
having obtained their good report through Faith, received not the promise.
Received it not, that is, they saw not: they were not made actually partakers
of the benefits of Christ being in the flesh; Although that they had the
advantage and profit of his undertaking for them with the Father: They Received
it not, that is, they were not actually partakers.

Fourthly, Receiving notes the taking a thing with joy and gladness of heart.
As the Text says, in Heb. 13.2. There was some that did receive Angels
unawares. It being (you know) a phrase that is taken from those men that do bid
welcome their guests or friends. Acts 7.59.
And so Stephen prays in that language, Lord Jesus (says he) receive my
Spirit. He does by his faith apprehend Jesus Christ standing in the door of
Heaven (as Abraham stood in the door of the Tent) and prays him to be pleased
and not pass him by, but to receive him that he may sit down and eat and drink
in the kingdom of God.

These two latter things are those which principally I intend to speak unto in
this point. And if you look into the words of my Text, you shall find.

First, that the persons that are Receivers are Believers. For as many (says
the Text) as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God,
even to as many as believe on his name. All they that received him, believed on
him, and all they that believed, received Christ: They, and none else. They are
the same persons.

But to believe is to receive, and to receive Christ is believe on his name.
What in the beginning of the Text is called receiving of him, in the end of the
Text is called believing on his name, the same persons in the same act that in
the beginning of the verse are said to receive, are in the latter end of the
verse said to believe on his name. They must of necessity be but diverse
expressions of the same Act, for this reason: Because otherwise, if you make
them two distinct acts, a man may receive Christ, and yet not believe, and a
man may believe on Christ, and yet not receive him. It is impossible that
Christ should be received but by Faith, and it is impossible a man should
believe on the name of Christ, and not receive him. The manner of speech is
supposed to be a Caldeisme, or a propriety among the Caldees, who make it all
one to believe and to trust. And upon this now shall I fasten a little while.

Faith, I say, it is a receiving of Christ. As many as received him. There is
something to be received for believing. In 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your
Faith, the salvation of your Souls. A man shall be saved for his faith, as well
as rewarded for his sufferings or any other act of obedience and observance
unto God, a man shall be as well rewarded at the last because he has much of
God, as because he has done much for God, indeed he does most for God, that
receivs most from God. He that goes on trust with Christ, and receivs any thing
of him, shall be rewarded for his receiving, rewarded for his gain and for his
getting. Of his fullness have we received Grace for Grace, John, 1.16. For Grace
that is, because we have one Grace, we shall have another until we come to be
full. That word (...), translated [for] is as much in the Scripture, as
[Because] in Ephesians. 5.31. For this cause (...), shall a man leave his Father and
Mother and shall be joined unto his Wife. The same word may be rendered, For
this cause, Because God has given us one degree, he will give us another:
Because he has showed us one kindness, he will withold nothing that is good
from us. Among men, he that takes upon trust, binds himself to make return and
to pay again: But he that trusts God makes God a Debtor to him. It may be that
thou accountest it a presumption, that thou beleevest; But God accounts it
service: And of all services it shall not be unrewarded, but have the fullest
and largest measure, because of all services it is that which is most humbling
and self-denying of the Creature. But of that by the way.

As there is a receiving something for believing, so there is a receiving in
believing. Faith it self is a receiving, as eating is a taking of what may
nourish: And buying or possession is a receiving an inheritance. So you shall
find that Faith is compared in John 6.53. to eating and drinking. And to buying
in Esa. 55.1. Sometimes its an hand that lays hold, and will not let go the
thing which it has; and to the being possessed of an inheritance. Christ
receives all from the Father, and Faith receives all from Christ. All comes
from the Father into Christ as into a Fountain, and Faith fetchech all from
that Fountain into us as into lesser measures or cisterns. Jesus Christ is the
Treasury and Faith tells out of him what the Soul has need of; as Christ is
made between us and God, so faith is given to this end that Christ may be made
whatsoever he is unto us. That the thing I aim at may yet be more fully and
plainly known to you.

Faith indeed in the Scripture is sometimes expressed by Working but the Text
says, It works by love. Gal. 5.6. that is, It does set love on a flame and
makes a man to have an indeared esteem of God, and an undervaluing of himself,
and every thing which he has for his sake. Faith does work, but it is by the
hand of love. But now look on Faith in it self, And so its a receiving. I say
it is a receiving. Its a having and craving grace, which will always be
getting and will never have enough. When it is filled, it is hungry, and like
the barren Womb, and the earth, and the grave, it still cries, Give, Give. And
for this you shall find the Scripture very clear. John 1.11. He came to his
own, and his own received him not, that is, they did not apply him unto
themselves as the author of their salvation, as the Messiah which was promised.
In 2 Cor. 6.1. the Apostle calls believing, the receiving of the Grace of God.
When he would set forth the unbelief that is in men naturally, he says, the
natural man receives not the things of God, in 1 Cor. 2.14. As you have
received Christ Jesus, so walk in him. Col. 2.6. that is, answer your Faith
with works, let your life be answerable to your hopes, and to the state you are
brought into by believing. I may quote many other expressions to show that
Faith is a receiving. But these shall serve. I will only give a three fold
Argument or Demonstration of it.

Frist, All that have Faith in any degree, have desires and longings after
Jesus Christ, and the things of him. Faith its an appetite in the new Creature
whereby it craves and hungers after Jesus Christ and his benefits, and
therefore you shall find expressly, that Faith and praying unto God or desiring
after him are made all one. Romans 10.11, 12, 13. In verse 11. the Scripture
says, Whoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. For mark it, There is no
difference between the Jew and the Gentile, for the same Lord over all is rich
unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall besaved. I say if you compare verse 11. with ver. 12 and 13. Faith and
calling on the name of the Lord are al one. For the Apostle proves that there
is no man that does believe, but he shall be saved, by this; That there is no
man that calls on the name of the Lord but he shall be saved. Those that have
attained unto the greatest degrees of Faith their mouths are fullest of
complaints, and their Souls fullest of sighings because of their wants. Their
prayers are Lord increase out Faith. And not only so, Luke 17.5
but when they have prayed, they cannot be quiet until such time as they find
it increased and the fruits of it in them. In Acts, 26.7. it is said that the
Patriarchs hoping to come to Heaven, did instantly serve God: That word
translated Instantly, is in the Greek (...), that is, they did as one does who
stretches out himself to get a thing which he has much ado to lay hold on, but
had rather have, than any thing that he has in his hands. Such a kind of
desire was in the Patriarchs after Glory. In Romans 8.19. the Apostle tells you
of an earnest expectation that is in the Creation for the manifestation of the
Sons of God, that they may be freed from their imperfections, and be like their
Head Jesus Christ. Paul professes that he desires to be with Christ Jesus;
that is, he professes it as one that must either have his mind, or must die.
Those that have the least degree of Faith, are always craving after Jesus
Christ; they are never well but when they are receiving. Paul in Acts 9.11. is
said to pray; Go (says God to Ananias) unto Paul, Behold he prays. He did
other things besides prayer; he was sensible of his sin, and afflicted in his
conscience for going against Jesus Christ; but the Text mentions nothing but
this, That he prays; because that was it that all the bitterness of sin was a
means unto, and that which he was eminent in. And all that Paul desired was,
That God would give him Christ although he had done what he could to crucify
him again in his members. As the love of the world makes a man to be scraping
and gathering together by any means, although it be never so vile. It Is no
matter what the thing be, so it brings in gain to a worldly man. So it is the
proper work of Faith to make a man look for Jesus Christ in all Ordinances and
Duties. That is the penny which it sweeps the house for, and searches every
duty for. Now this desire, it comes from Faith. For what makes any man desire,
but hope, and the knowledge of the excellency of the things hoped for: Both
which comes through believing. That is the first thing. All that have Faith
desire to receive Jesus Christ and his benefits, and therefore the Act of
receiving is the principal act of Faith.

Secondly, All other Acts of Faith are subordinate to this Act of receiving,
and done in reference to receiying. You have heard that Faith has diverse Acts.
It takes Gods word, and receives his Testimony, even when it fees no reason to
expound the thing that is spoken of; but the End is, that it may receive. I
know whom I have trusted, and that he is able at that day to give unto me what
I have committed to him. As a man takes the word of a man to this end, that he
may be sure not to miss what is due to him: So this man takes the word of God
and the Testimony of God only in order to be made a receiver of the things
promised. Faith that does unite, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, but that
very act of union is to this end, that so all Christ may be ours, Ephesians. 3.17. We
do but touch him, that so virtue may come out from him into us. Faith makes a
man dependant and hanging upon God, but it is only that so a man may engage the
Lord to give, and he may receive. As a man comes to one and says, I will trust
to you for such a debt at such a time, that so he may see that he does not only
expect it, but that he does him double injury if he does not give it him. Faith
attracts and draws, but that is only that the soul may receive. That is the
second Reason. Faith is a receiving Grace, because all the Acts and Operations
of it are in order to receiving.

Thirdly,: Until this act of Faith be done, Faith can do nothing. Nothing can
be done by Faith until such time as it does receive. Faith purifies the heart,
Acts 15.9. It makes the whole conversation lively. We do live by the Faith of
the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. It makes a man overcome the world, and all the
corruptions that are in the world and the evil one to boot, 1 John, 5.4. This
is the victory whereby ye overcome the world, even your faith. He that is born
of God overcomes the wicked one. But mark it, As water is first put into the
Cistern before it flows forth, And as the earth first receives the seed before
it brings forth meat for him by whom it is dressed: Heb. 6.7. And as the
Disciplesare first bid to attend the Passover, and then to receive the Holy
Ghost, and then to go abroad and to distribute unto the Nations the knowledge
of Christ: So Faith first receives from Christ, and according as it receives
from him, So it stirs up every Grace and Faculty to its work. I say Faith
receives first, In Col. 2.6. As ye have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk
in him. As, (...), that is suitably to our receiving of Christ. We believe,
therefore have we spoken, 2 Cor. 4.13. Now that which is said concerning faiths
opening the mouths of the Apostles to declare for certain the truth of that
Doctrine which they were experienced in: So I may say concerning any other
Duty. When as Faith has received the certainty of the word of God, then it
calls upon the understanding not to dispute. When as Faith has received Jesus
Christ then it calls upon the will, and says, forsake all other things and
cleave unto him, for you have enough in him; He is a Mine and a Field wherein
there is a Treasure, and you shall need nothing while you have him. And from
this threefold Demonstration, I suppose it will appear that Faith is a
receiving. And beloved, think not much that I stand long upon this for it is
not rivited in our thoughts. We live not as if it were so.

CHAP. II.
Application. Believe that to Receive is the principal Use of Faith.

USE

Believe then this is the principal use of Faith, To Receive, to be like a
Bucket to draw water of life, and salvation out of the Well; A sponge (as I may
expressit) to suck in and draw of the fullness of Jesus Christ. That Faith is
best which is most receptive. That is the thing I do intend. That is best used
which is used to this end, to receive. The excelency of Faith does not lie in it
self, but in its object: In what it does bring in: For there is more virtue in
the Act of any Grace whatever. He that knows a thing, does it because of the
evidence of reason. But he that believes, knows it not, Only he believes
because he thinks that he that speaks, speaks true. Faith degrades a man from
the use of his reason, and makes him although far more excellent in his
knowledge, yet to see in the light of God. It is so, because he says so. As a
man that has but little stock, but has goods coming in by his trade, Such a
trade is Faith. It Is a weak and a feeble Grace (as I may call it) of it self,
but it is that which does receive and fetch in much from Jesus Christ. As the
way of some man's living is not upon any thing he has of his own, but he is a
Receiver to some noble and great man, and all his rents and Estate passes
through his hands, and so he comes to have a feeling of it, and to be enriched.
Through the hand of Faith all the Treasury of grace and mercy comes, Do not
therefore my beloved think it enough that you do by Faith secure your selves
from the fear of Hell, and say I do believe and therefore I shall not perish
but have everlasting life, Do not think it enough that by Faith you order your
conversation aright; (for although it be true that no grace makes cleaner work
in a man's conversation than Faith does, it purifies even as God is pure, of all
that Niter and Soap which God has given to wash in, there is none so scouring
as Faith is, if I may use that expression, it will fetch out any spot and any
defilement) But although Faith be of excellent use to order a man's conversation
yet do not think you have made sufficient use of your Faith when you have used
it to that end, but use it to receive. As the use of a purse is to put money
in, And the use of an Iron Chest is to lodge money in, So the end of Faith is
to receive. You are often times checking your selves, that you are not
contented with what you have, for you have more than you deserve, And that is
true, But it is not more than you ought to receive. For Faith must have its
perfect work, and its perfect work is this, that it does look upon all
Ordinances as bags that are filled, out of which it is to receive according as
Jesus Christ has laid up and treasured up of himself in them. After every duty
enquire therefore what thy Faith has gotten, how thy talent of Faith has
gained. Be not contented that thou have the same confidence that thou had,
thou must either have more confidence, or further of the spirit of Christ by
that confidence. Before thou do go to any Duty or to any Ordinance, charge
thy self as the Master or Merchant does charge his Servant that goes out to
receive money Go to such a place and receive and return not else, Importune and
be not satisfied with any answer until you have received such a sum. As men
are lost in the world, and are of little use, they are in vain, but ciphers,
because they are not put to that work to which their Genius and disposition
tends: One man is made a Preacher that is much fitter for another calling, And
another goes into the world that is fitter for another politic employment. The
World is out of order, because men are not put to that use which God has
fitted men for. So the Grace of Faith is out of order and of little use,
because it is not put to its proper work, viz. to receive. Put your Faith to
that and you will thrive, and not otherwise. They profited not, because they
did not mix the word with Faith, Heb. 4.2. And what is said of hearing the
word, may be said of Praying, or receiving the Lords Supper, Meditation, or any
other Ordinance whatsoever. They profited not: That is, they got no more
because it was not mixed with Faith. Things are said to be mixed, not when they
are one in another in a common vessel, but when they are beaten together that
they make but one body and substance. So Faith is mingled with the word, when
there is not only a believing in the Gross, and a taking for granted that that
is true which is received, but when unto every word there goes an assent and a
closing of heart unto every word. That is true says the soul in such a case.
When as it hears the heart is desperately wicked, and that none can go to the
bottom of it, And when it hears by and by that concerning such an heart that
there is hope, the Soul says that is true. When every thing is mingled with
Faith then it profits. Let me I beseech you (my beloved) speak a little to you
freely. Why do you suffer your Faith to be Idle? Why do you busy it about
works beneath you, about that which is not most excellent and profitable? Do
not think you have gotten enough when by your Faith you have gotten into
Christ, and Grace from him by Faith, for you are always to be receiving. Many
a man is apt to think it were well if he could keep what he has gotten, if he
can but hold his hold, and keep his union, and continue it under temptations,
if he can but maintain his practice and hope and not backslide: But I beseech
you beloved consider that all this is not enough, for you are to be receiving,
not withstanding that which you have received. And let me tell you this too,
that if you are not receiving you are never able to hold that which you have.
As the waters in the stream would fail if there were not a continual flowing
from the Wel-head and Fountain, So there must be a continual efflux and flowing
and influence from Jesus Christ that so the Grace you have may hold. In a
Trade, he cannot keep open a Shop long that has no comings in: And so it is
certainly in the matters of Religion; If you pay use (for so you must do for
all the opportunities and grace you have, they must be employed) and you have
no gain, it will undo you, although you began with the greatest stock of
resolutions, and purposes, and desires, and what you will else. And therefore as
you enquire into your selves, whether you have faith or not to prove whether
you are a Believer; So examine especially thy Book, and see what thou can get
by believing. Employ thy faith therefore to this end, That you seek out what is
promised, what God has said he will give; for he will give Grace and Glory,
and withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. And
send out Faith to get in all these Promises, and challenge God upon his word
continually, and say, Lord, thou have said this, and that, and a third thing, I
have it under thy hand, it is written, Thou have spoken it, and have made me to
believe in thee; and shall thy Word be as flesh that shall fail and come to
nothing? Imbolden thy heart, and strengthen the hand of thy Faith to receive;
enlarge thy hand, and open thy mouth to take in much: and if thy Faith brings
in any thing less than Jesus Christ, it brings in nothing: For as it is in my
Text, As many as received Him, Joh. 1.16.
were the Sons of God; and of His fullness we received Grace for Grace. If thou
have any thing but Christ, thou have nothing: And if thou have any thing but
from his heap, and fountain, and fullness, thou will not be enriched by it; thou
have received but straws and leaves for Gold and Jewels. I beseech you my
beloved, know, That as God has given the eye to see, and the ear for hearing;
so he has given Faith to receive; on purpose to this end, That you may be
continually taking in from his fullness. Faith is of a having and a craving
nature and unsatisfied til a man has obtained the fullness he is ordained to in
Christ; when it is filled, it is hungry: the more it has the more it would
have. Faith does not only serve to keep you in a state of Grace (for by Faith
you stand) but to receive all Christ's fullness which is laid up in him for you.
Oh that we could beloved believe this, and live such a kind of life; Such a
kind of life of Faith is indeed Heaven upon Earth, when as a man is always
telling over treasures for his own use and purpose. How joyful is the Merchant
when the Ship comes home, and he is unlading the rich commodities which it is
come fraighted with? How joyful is the Husbandman when the harvest comes, and
renders an hundred fold for every corn? Such is the joy of God in the heart,
and would be so if we did continually receive.

CHAP. III.
Use 2. Put forth this act of Faith. 1. Neglect not this for any other act of
Faith whatsoever. 2. Put it upon receiving much. Jhon. 1.16. opened. 3. Let
nothing hinder this act of Faith. I. Not your sins. II. Let nothing discourage
you. Neither 1. Gods delays. Nor 2. The smalness of your receipts. Nor, 3. The
greatness of your wants. Nor, 4. The greatness of your receipts. III. Epecially
take heed of refusing what is offered.

USE II.

IN the second place. If Faith be a receiving, then put out this Act. Exercise
your Faith thus. As our Lord says, John 16.24. Ask and receive. That is, not
only desire and pray, but take what you desire and pray for from God: So I say,
Believe and Receive. Believe not only that Faith is a receiving, but actually
receive, and be ever getting. Every Grace is to have its perfect work, as the
Apostle James speaks concerning patience, Let patience have its perfect work
James 1.4. A Grace does its perfect work when it serves all the turns for which
it is given, when as it does all the acts to which it has power. Faith (as you
heard in the explication) has many other acts besides receiving. Receiving is
an act and work which Faith is as good at, and as good for as any other, the
perfect and complete work of Faith is to receive Christ. Set it therefore about
it. Set it to reap all the Fruit of Jesus Christ and of the promises. Set it as
your Attorney (as I may so speak) to call in the debts you have and the good you
hope for. Make Faith to be not only the evidence of what is promised (as Moses
did the Mountain that he stood upon to behold Canaan) but make it the substance
of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. That is, possess your selves of the things
believed and hoped for. Therefore as out of the Ark the Dove was sent, and when
she returned she was sent out again until she brought an Olive branch in her
mouth. So send out your Faith again and again, and never rest till it has
received and gotten more from Christ than it had before, yea received according
to the large gifts that are made through the promises. Plainly thus. As a man
is to enquire of his Faith whether it be opeative or not, whatit does, What
work and fruit his Faith has. So he is to enquire what his Faith receives what
receipts it makes. It Is not a good Faith which works not, and it is not a true
Faith which receives not. Ask what the Lord has done for thy Soul? What
promises are come in? What they have yielded unto thee? What word is made good?
What thou have gotten every day more than other? What thou have gotten by
prayer or any other duty. And if thou do find that there is no coming in,
blame thy Faith, and send it out to its work, send it out to receive from Jesus
Christ. That I may a little set you on upon this, or that you may understand
what you are to do.

1. Neglect not this for any other Act of Faith whatsoever. As our Lord said in
another case, These things you ought to have done, but not to have left the
other undone, Matthew. 23.25. So I say, you ought by Faith to assent to the truth
of what is promised, And you ought by Faith to keep your hold and union unto
Jesus Christ, but you ought as well to receive, and to get in what you have not
yet. Intend this act of Faith more than al other acts, as that end to which all
other acts of Faith serves, and which maintains all other Acts of Faith. Know
that you are therefore to trust and are to be united to Christ that you may
receive from him, and be filled with his fullness. Be contented with no other
kind of receiving through Faith than what may be able to maintain all other
acts of faith. For as the Stomach in the body must be looked unto, because it
maintains the blood and spirits, if the stomach takes not in and receives, all
the rest of the parts of the body will decay. Or as the fountain and water head
must be kept continually clear; because it sils the stream and the pipe. Or
that I may set it out more familiarly; As a man that has a great family and
many mouths to feed, he takes care that he has receipts coming in
proportionably. If we get not in from Christ continually, nothing that is
required will go on well, and be well performed: Out of the receipts of faith,
you are to purify your hearts, and to mortify corruptions; The receipts of
faith must strengthen comfort and encourage your hearts in God, and put you on
upon prayer and all other things. Every duty you perform must be done in the
strength which you receive from Jesus Christ, and therefore you need receive
much. We are troubled if the earth yields not forth its increase, If by our
Trade, comings in are not according to our expenses: We are justly troubled if
we find distance and strangeness of heart between us and Jesus Christ, If our
Souls close not by faith with Jesus Christ and his righteousness, but stands
off, and stands out with him: We are as well to be troubled if we receive not
of his fullness. Thou ought as much to put thy faith upon receiving, as upon
adhering unto Jesus Christ. That thou majest adhere and cleave unto Christ by
faith, thou say that Christ is thy life, and thou art undone if thou rest
not thy self upon him: Thou art undone also if thou do not receive of his
fullness. Union with Jesus Christ is done by faith at once, Receiving from
Christ is to be done daily. You will cleave unto Christ so much the faster as
you find you have received from him. Whether shall we go from thee, say they,
thou have the words of eternal life, John 6.68. When they had once found life
in Jesus Christ, they could not tell how to leave him. Like foolish Children
that play with the breast, but suck not, Such folly is in our hearts. We must
have promises suitable to al our conditions, but we let them lie by us, and we
improve them not. Though we have a right in Christ, yet we draw not from him
Grace for Grace. Like persons that lay up Gold, but it is for some special
use, Or like Cordials that are taken only in extraordinary fits, but not
continually; So do we make use of faith. But as a worldly man counts there is
so much loss as there is no laying out of the money that lies by him, If his
money lies by him any time, he counts there is so much loss to him, because it
might have brought him in something. So count so much loss of your faith, as you
want use of it in receiving from Jesus Christ.

2. And as you ought to put your faith thus upon the act of receiving. So put
it upon receiving much. The receipt of a little from Christ, is as much as
nothing to him, John 16.24. Hitherto you have asked nothing in my name: They
had asked, but he counts it nothing, because it was not answerable unto the
interest that Christ had in his Father nor suitable to what he had purchased
for them, nor unto the power that Christ had to give. You have asked nothing in
my name. In my name, that is, as having my right made over to you, and as
having as much to do with the things you need, as I have that am Lord over all.
I say, Christ counts every thing less than this, nothing. If you ask less than
this, you ask nothing, and if you receive less than this you receive nothing.
Faith may have what it will. Matthew. 9.29. Be it to thee according to thy Faith.
If faith opens its mouth wide, it shall be filled. As it was in the gathering
of Mannah, Every one had as much as his has ket was, although it was never so
great that he brought to gather it in. If thy faith be great, thou shall have
great things, If thy faith be small thou shall have precious things. As there
ought not to be the least doubt or question in a Believer, because God is so
able to perform his promises, and so faithful and true, So there ought not to
be any question or exceptions of any thing to be received that is in Jesus
Christ, because al is yours. Observe it. Faith is indefinitly called a
receiving, because it receives this and that, that which is essential, and
that which is consequentiall. That which is for the inward and for the outward
man, for mortification, and vivification, for faith and for holiness. Faith is
a receiving without any limitation. As none may say that he is rejected,
because the promise runs indefinitly, Mark 16.16. Who ever believes shall be
saved. So none may say that this and that cannot be had by faith which is
promised, because faith is indefinitly called a receiving. In Joh. 1.16. Of his
fullness we have received Grace for Grace. Mark the Text. We have received of
his fullness. You are to go unto the Well head, to fetch water out of the Sea,
Gold out of the Mine, you are to take from fullness, and therefore you should
not take a little. You are to receive Grace for Grace. The meaning of it lies
thus.

1. One Grace is to be unto you a pawn and a pledge of another, One kindness, of
another. For as God loves, because he loves, So God gives Grace because he has
given Grace. When you go to receive any thing from him, you are not so much to
look at his Act in giving, nor at your own act in using of his Grace, as you
are to look at this, that he has given Grace: He gives Grace for Grace.

2. Or thus, Grace for Grace. That is, as face answers to face in a glass, that
there may be a proportion and sim^litude between us and Christ. That as what
impression is upon the Seal is left in the wax, so what Grace and favor God
has showed unto Jesus Christ in abundance, we should receive in abundance.
You are to receive Grace according to the Grace that is in Christ. So that by
faith you may boldly say unto God that Christ has this Grace and he has it in
abundance, although I may not have it in his abundance, yet in the abundance
that I am capable of, bestow it on me, and send me not away without it. And as
we are thus to put our faith upon this act of receiving, and receiving much, So

USE III.

Thirdly: Let nothing hinder or take you off from it. There should be no
interruption or hinderance to any obedience, especially not in the obedience of
faith: Because faith feeds every Grace in the Soul, and puts every faculty upon
its work. In 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the Loins of your mind, and trust perfectly.
Gird up the Loins of your mind. They were wont in those Eastern parts to wear
long garments, and to gird them up to their Loins that they might not hang
under their feet when they went to run. The meaning of the Apostle is, whatever
may hinder faith from perfection, or from doing its perfect work, that put from
you. And in 1 Pet. 1.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. the Apostle speaks altogether of faith
as receiving. Receiving the end of your Faith, the salvation of your Souls. For
he speaks of the Prophets, of their looking to recoive what they did foretell;
And (...) Angels did look to see what was revealed in the Churches, Jam. 1.21.
Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughti^ness, and receive with
meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save your Souls. Observe that word
[Lay aside and Receive the word that is ingrafted] That a man should lay aside
any thing, that he may receive from Jesus Christ. And if you compare that place
with 1 Pet. 2.12. He exhorts them to put away every thing that may hinder their
desires, As James exhorts to put away all things that may hinder from
receiving. It comes to this. As nothing should take away your hearts from
desiring much, so nothing should hinder you from receiving much.

First: Let not sin hinder you. Therefore mortify every corruption, because it
keeps good things from you, and takes away your heart, and hinders the
application of your selves to Christ. Sin d^oh incapacitate the Soul that it
can receive nothing else, And it sils it as the stomach with wind, that it can
get nothing down. Guilt infeebles and weakens the hopes of a man, and makes him
afraid to draw near to God. Yea beloved, if you would mourn kindly, and
bitterly, and heartily for your sins, the best way is to receive from Jesus
Christ. For in Ezekiel. 36.31. when he had given them a new heart, and purged them
from all their Idols, then says the Text they shall abhor themselves in dust
and ashes for all their doings that are not good. Then: that is, especially
then most kindly, and most abundantly. Against sin we ought to be carried with
violence, bitterness and indignation, for this very reason, because it keeps
good things from us. It hinders us of the gain we might make in believing.
Especially take heed of the pride of your hearts, for that is immediately
opposite to receiving. If any man withdraw himself my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. If thou have never so much yet its nothing to what thou
ought to receive. Thou ought to receive not only what may help thee in
thy work but what may show forth the riches of Jesus Christ in thee. It must be
seen what he can give, and what he has to give: and therefore when thou have
received pray for capacity to receive more. Yea indeed if thou do receive, it
will enlarge thy desires and affections after more. Therefore take heed of
pride which is opposite to faith as it is a receiving. Take heed of that. It
shows it self diverse ways.

Sometimes in this, because a man refuses to receive from Christ because he is
unworthy. Which in plain English, and in the sense that it has with God is as
much as this, that a man would have nothing from him, nor be beholden to him,
for any thing, but what he finds a suitableness and fitness in himself for. As
the spirits of some people are so stout, that they had rather starve, than ask,
It Is a shame to them to receive, and a greater misery than to endure any thing
that can be laid upon them. So it is with our hearts. We can complain and roar
out because of our wants, but we have no mind to receive, although it be put to
our lips, just like men that are sick, we shut our lips against it, and cannot
take it down. Our hearts would willingly have something from God, but as a
reward, and not merely as a gift, something for doing what he requires, but not
as an alms purely. Faith even for this very reason is difficult to the Soul of
a man, because that it makes him to live dependantly, and to have its good and
happiness out of its self. But if the pride of your hearts would suffer you to
receive, yet notwithstanding God will not give to them that are proud. For God
resists the proud. and gives Grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. You ask and receive
not because you would spend it on your lusts, upon your envy, in Jam. 4.3.
whereas God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.

Secondly: And as you ought not to be hindered by sin: So to be discouraged by
nothing in this act of Faith. If you look in Heb. 12.12. the Apostle has these
words, Lift up the hand (says he) the hand that hangs down, and the feeble
knees. His meaning is this, that it is the method and cunning of Satan to
hinder our faith by discouragements. If he cannot kill and destroy it directly
and immediately, then he does what he can to cause the Acts of it to be weak
and without strength. Be not discouraged in your receiving by any thing.

1. No not by Gods delays and denyals of you. In Math. 15.23. to 28. You have
to this purpose the example of the woman of Canaan, that although Christ calls
her a dog, and had nothing for her, yet she grows as the more humble to ask a
dogs part, so the more earnest to ask and beg and knock. As a party that goes
to receive money, if he cannot find the man, he goes again and again till he
finds him. So although you have not at the first asking, yet ask again. The
reason why you have it not at first is not because you shall not have it, but
that you may know you have it gratis, for asking. What though you receive not
presently? know that it is an alms, and therefore you should wait. And though
you be importunate and God represents himself as one that is asleep and that
has the door shut to him, yet know that he will arise and open to you as he
speaks in the Gospel of Luke. Though he calls you dog (as I instanced before)
yet his meaning is that he is come for you though not in the first place, yet
in the second, and if he gives you but crumbs, yet he will give you the Childrens
Bread.

2. Neither be discouraged in this act by the smalness of your receipt,
Although you have gotten but a little in the use of many ordinances many
years. For mark it, If you get never so little, you get by that a title to al,
and you shall have al in Gods own time. That little is like the bunch of Grapes
which interests you in all the land of promise. There was a blessing left in the
Berry, though there was but here and there one left upon the Tree. They that
make often and quick returns, although they get but little at a time, yet they
get much in the whole. Lay therefore al thy gettings together, I say al
together, and consider not the returns sent in, in one prayer, or one sermon,
or one ejaculation or casting your heart into Heaven, but lay al together.
Beggars take any thing that is given them, they are not chusers, they will be
contented with the smallest. That money which is not current with others will
pass with them. The smallest piece of silver you have, is a kindness to them.
Such meat as is not of use in the family, is dainties and of use with them.
Herein thou shall show thy self to be a receiver, in that thou art contented to
be at Gods allowance. Beloved, you are receivers, and receivers of free Grace.
You have it not because you earned it, but because God does abound and is rich
in good works. And therefore although you have never so little, you have cause
to rejoice. Thou art but a receiver by faith, and therefore thou have no cause
to murmur. Thou have al things of Grace, and thou shall have every thing if
thou submittest unto God in every thing he does as pleasing unto thee for him
to do what he pleases.

3. And as you have not cause to be discouraged at the smalness of your
receipt, So neither are you to be discouraged in your receiving by the
greatness of your wants. For the promise runs thus, in Matthew. 21.22. All things
whatever ye ask in my name, believing, you shall receive. If you want all
things, yet if you shall have whatever you shall ask then believe that there is
nothing that the greatness of your wants can amount unto, that should make you
say within your selves that this cannot be, nor that cannot be given. The
greater things you ask the sooner you shall have. God gives blessings like
himself. The promise is indefinite; And if you ask you shall receive.

4. Be not discouraged in this act of faith by the greatness of your receipts.
For although you have received much, yet look for more. He gives liberally, and
upbraids not, James 1.5. He does not say I have given you this, and that, and
so often, and releeved you in so many wants, and set you up when you have been
bankrupts, and set you up in the state wherein you were, many a time. There is
this reason why the greatness of your receipts should not discourage you,
because the more you have received the more there is yet behind to receive. I
say there is more yet behind to receive. To whomsoever much is given, God looks
for much from them Luke 12.48. He gives Grace for Grace, as you heard. John
1.16. If he gives much Grace, he will give more Grace in a like proportion. We
are ashamed to ask of them again, whom we have received lately from. But here
you need not; for God has much to give, and that which you have received is
not in your own name, but in the name of him that is the Lord of all even Jesus
Christ, God gives often, that there may be a fruition and Communion between you
and him. He gives you but a little at a time that you may come oftener: and he
gives you often because you may know that whenever you come, you are welcome to
him.

Thirdly: And as you ought not to be discouraged: So especially I beseech you
take heed of refusing what is offered to you. There is nothing more opposite to
receiving than refufing. In Acts 13.46, 47. says the Text there, They did
reject and put away from them the words, and they did judgthe mselves unworthy
of eternal life. Seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
eternal life. That putting away is directly opposite to this receiving. Whoever
does put away the gracethat Gods offers, he does by that act pass Judgment upon
himself, as one that is worthy to have destruction for his portion. And they
did put it away by contradicting and blaspheming, and by questioning without
any kind of reasoning, but merely out of the enmity that was in their Spirits
unto the Doctrine which the Apostle preached concerning free justification. So
much shall suffice to have spoken of the second Use.

CHAP. IV.
By this property of Faith, viz. to Receive, try whether your Faith be true or
no. Objections answered.

USE III.

IF Faith be a Receiving, then by that property try whether your Faith be true
or not. What is the Spirit of it? Is it a having, and a craving, and a longing
appetite and desire in thee that can never be satisfied and contented? Faith
will make a man to live upon that he has, that is, to take the comfort of it:
But it looks after more than it has. The just shall live by Faith, says the
Text in Heb. 10.38. But what is that Faith? A patient waiting, that when you
have done the will of God in one thing, you may receive the promise in another;
And a patient waiting upon him as one that will not tarry long. Faith makes a
man to wait for far greater things, than it has already received. This is the
property of faith; Give it but one thing that is good, and you must give it
all. As he that commits one sin, and commits it but once, gets thereby a
disposition unto every sin. So he that does exercise true faith once upon
Christ must always have from Christ. As persons that long, must have every
thing they see, else they are ready to die. So faith looks for all from God,
and from none else. It takes all that comes from God, and looks for all that it
knows God has to give. And hence it comes to pass that if one Believer sees
another in his party-colored coat (as I may call it, alluding to that of the old
Testament where the beloved child was so clothed) If a Believer sees another
clothed with Peace and Joy through believing, It works doubting in him and
questioning whether he be a child of God, because he has not received those
gifts, or has not received so much from God as others have.

Object. It may be some will say unto me here, I have cause to complain, for I
have not received: And I have reason to complain because of my wants; I want
Faith, and I want love, and I want patience, and I want beavenly mindedness:
And it is not a little of these things that I want neither.

Answ. Yet know that complaining is no argument that you have not received:
Because our hearts are so full of injustice that they will deny that to be paid
them by God, which they have received. But it is an argument that you have
received and that you have Faith, because you would have more, and are
unsatisfied with what you have received. For Faith is a receiving.

Object. This is my Condition says one, that I am unquiet till I get all; when
I have a little, then if I could get but this and that, I should be contented;
and I bow my knee before God for it, and he gives it to me; but when I have it,
I am where I was.

Answ. I answer: Although thou should do well to cease murmuring when thou
have gotten any thing (for a little will go far) but it is best whatever thy
receipts be, that thou should look after more. The Grace and Comfort that
thou have is likely to be true, because it does enlarge thy heart, and make
thee still to be a receiver. Learn to distinguish therefore between murmuring
and coveting: Covet spiritual Gifts, says the Apostle in 1 Cor. 14.1. Covet,
thou may; that is, thou may be as covetous after a thing that God has, as
a covetous man is after any thing in the world. But murmur, thou may not; for
murmuring supposes all to be thy due. And then whatever God should give thee,
thou should not receive as an Alms from him, and he should lose his Glory.
Coveting, is a desiring much from God: and murmuring, is a repining to think
that God should give to any besides thy self.

To shut up this Use therefore, examine what thy Faith sets thy Desires after.
And that thou may judgaright, Consider,

Whether it be Gifts or Grace? If it be Gifts, confider whether it be gifts
merely or not, or gifts that are sanctified? If it be gifts merely, then it is
no argument of grace, nay, an argument that thou shall not receive from God; in
James 1.4, 5, 6. You ask and receive not, because you would spend it on your
lusts: You would be counted more for them, and more eminent Christians than
others, and to be the greater Stars; and after your motions you would have all
the rest to walk: but God resists such proud men. If so be it be after Gifts,
that is, that thou may have power of speech, or utterance, and be able to
reason every Point and matter of Religion, and to say something to every thing
that may arise, there is more suspicion, I say more suspicion: But if it be
after Gifts that are sanctified, or especially if it be after much grace; thou
have the faith of adherence, and thou would have faith of assurance; thou
do adhere sometimes, but thou would have no distance between thy soul and
Christ at any time, and at no time have a hankering of soul after relief any
other way but from Christ. If thou longest after Grace, after Love, and after
more Godly Sorrow, then thou have less cause to be troubled, because thou
feel thy wants; and thy feeling of thy wants, is but only. the life of thy
Faith as it is a Receiver.

There is one or two Uses more of the Point which I shall make, and so shut up
the Point.

CHAP. V.
Use 4. Then Believers ought to behave themselves as Receivers: And that in
these Particulars: 1. In waiting continually upon Means and Ordinances. 2. In
being humble whatever they do receive. 3. In being communicative. Use 5.
Consolation to all that have Faith.

USE IV.

IF Faith be a Receiving, Then Believers ought to carry themselves as Receivers.

I shall Instance in Three Particulars.

First: Wait continually upon the Means and Ordinances. Jesus Christ is to be
found among the Doctors (that I may allude unto that story of him.) The
Ordinances may be called the highway wherein Jesus Christ comes, that so he may
cure the blind and the lame. If you look into Ephesians. 4.8.11. you shall find the
Apostle says, That the gifts which Jesus Christ has received for men, he
gives to them by Pastors and Teachers, and the work of the Ministry. And if you
compare the 20. verse with the verses that follow after, the Apostle clearly
says, that that man does not walk like a Saint, nor worthy of his calling who
does not attend unto the Ordinances. He does not carry himself like himself.
Ephesians. 4.1. I beseech you walk worthy of your calling wherewith ye are called,
and then he comes and tells them that God has appointed the Ministers to bring
them together, And when they are together to fill them with gifts according to
that measure that Jesus Christ has received of his Father for them. As faith
does at first come by hearing so it is nourished by hearing and other
Ordinances, A Believer is not one that lives immediately upon God, but upon God
by means: Romans 10.17.
For to live upon God immediately is the life of sight and not of faith. It Is
as directly opposite unto a life of faith, to neglect Ordinances, as faith and
sight are opposite. And therefore you shall find that by the word and ordinances
faith is wrought in men in the days of the new Testament, though the spirit be
given abundantly. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, as it is
preached, Romans 1.16. It is the immortal seed whereby men are regenerated and
begotten again as the Apostle Peter speaks 1 Pet. 1.23. As in the times of the
old Testament the word and the spirit went together, And so it does still, And
that Covenant is established for ever. How can they believe says the Apostle
therefore in Romans 10.14. except they have heard? and how can they hear whithout
a preacher? There are none more greedy of Ordinances than those that have had
their Faith by them, or that have received (which is the phrase here in the
Text) the fullness of Jesus Christ by them. As soon as ever men have been
converted, though their faith have been exceeding weak, yet then they have put
themselves upon the use of the Ordinances, as I might show you out of John 4.
and Acts 2 and diverse other places. In Romans 11. when the Apostle would set down
the rejection of the Jews, and that they should receive no more, he sets them
down as being barred and shut out from the use of the Ordinances which God gave
to his people. If Faith be a Receiving then he continually attending upon the
Means and Ordinances, because by them Jesus Christ does convey his fullness.

Secondly: Whatever you do receive, be humble in 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou
which thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why do thou
boast? If what thou have attained unto were either of thy self, or given thee
for what thou have done, thou might then glory as having made a difference
between thy self and others. But when all has been upon receipts thou must be
humble. Shall one letter bag be counted better than another, because its filled
with Gold? Or one earthen vessel more precious than another, because precious
liquor is put into it. Pride says, as Nebuchadnezzar, This is Babell that I
have built: but Faith says quite contrary; This thou have received, and if
thou have received it, then be not proud.

Thirdly: If thou would carry thy self as one that it is a receiver, then be
communicative. In Mtah. 10.8. Freely ye have received, therefore freely give.
Such ought to be our communication unto men, as they are unto us from God. Let
the Saints have the use of all, and be forward to use whatever they have gotten
for their good, for to this end you have received it. He that had a Talent, you
know received it, not to lay up, but to lay out. Jesus Christ himself has his
gifts to distribute.

And if any man should say, they are so and so and so with whom I do converse.

The Text tells you that he has received gifts for the rebellious, and to lead
captivity captive, Psalm. 68.18. He overcomes the opposition in men by the gifts
which he gives and bestows upon men. Why should Christians be so reserved, and
keep their oil to themselves? why should they be so backward to comfort and
direct others, with the same comforts and directions which they have received?
For if God has put these things into you, its but that you may put them into
others. Why has he communicated unto you a spiritual gift, but that others
may be edified by you? Even as what one member of the body has, is for the
good of the whole and the more you use what you have, the more you shall
receive. There is not only an easiness of exercise of Grace to be gotten
hereby, but an abundance of Grace. God lets rain fall upon the Mountains, that
it may run down upon the Valleys. The more thou art willing, and useful, and
communicating, the more use thou have of thy grace, the more grace thou shall
have from God. As the things of this life are given unto men, not for
themselves, but that they may do public service, so specially is Grace given.
Thou have more faith than another, It is to this end, that thou may
encourage another. Thou can take freely of Grace, It is to this end, that
thou may encourage another to do as thou do.

USE V.

But in the last place. If Faith be a receiving, then there is strong
Consolation to all them that have this Faith. Consolation in this, That thou
have a right to all, all things are for you, and you have a power or an hand
given you to take all. You are made the great receivers of the estate and
riches of Jesus Christ. And you are not only receivers in trust, but what you
do receive, you have a right unto. And let this comfort you against the
weakness and inability that you find to do any service for God. You can do
nothing, but know, that the great and main work is not doing, but receiving.
Heb. 6.7. As the ground does drink in the rain, and receive the seed before it
can bring forth fruit for him by whom it is dressed. So must you first get from
Jesus Christ, before you can bear fruit unto him.

And it is a Comfort to you in this, that though you do lose much, and suffer
much loss in something for the sake of Jesus Christ, you shall have it again,
whatever thou partest with, that the Grace of Faith may rule in thee. I say
whatever thou partest withal; thou have by the Grace of Faith something whereby
thou may receive that in a better kind and much more. As men pay money in
one Country, and take a bill to receive it in another with increase, so now
when thou partest with thy confidence, and with thy understanding that thou
mai'st receive from Jesus Christ, thou do it but that thou may receive ten
times more at the hand of Jesus Christ, than what thou partedst with, and every
way as good for thee.

And so I have now done with the general poins, that Faith is a receiving.

CHAP. VI.
How Faith Receives. 1. By an Act of the Understanding. 2. By an Act of the
Will. Faith as it is an act of the Understanding does several Works. First, It
does the office of an Informer, and that in several particulars.

I now come particularly to open how Faith does Receive. And for that,

Faith does receive by the Act of the mind or the Understanding, or

By the Act of the Will.

These Two faculties, the Understanding, and the Will, are like hands by which
we receive Jesus Christ and his fullness: Or they are like several Vessels and
Barns which are filled with his fullness. If you look into the Scripture, you
shall find that, To Receive is ascribed unto the understanding. I will mention
but one place of many. 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man cannot receive the things
of God: He receivs them not, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. When Christ had spoken in parables unto the people, he
uses this language, in Matthew. 19.12. He that can receive it, let him receive
it.

And Receiving is not only a work of the mind and understanding, but a work
also of the Will. In Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in Faith Receive. Receive,
what is that? He speaks of such a receiving as the Apostle in the Epistle to
Philem. ver. 12. writes concerning Onesimus, which was nothing else but a
welcoming and kind entertaining of him with love. The Text that I have in hand
(As many as received him) must be understood of both these.

You must understand this Receiving of an act of the mind. For in the verse
before the Text, he speaks of light and inlightning, and bearing witness of the
light. And therefore the receiving this light, is by having the eyes of their
mind enlightened and opened. And on the contrary, those that receive not Christ,
are faid to be in darkness or without understanding. And in Heb. 11.3. By Faith
we understand.

And this receiving also is an act of the Will. For it notes the taking of a
thing as our own, and the near and intimate conjunction unto it. As a man you
know that does receive meat, or as one that receives an Estate or possession,
or (as I said in the beginning) a Friend entertains a Friend. So we are said
here to entertain Christ. In John 10.38. We know and Believe. Believing being
distinct from knowledge, must needs argue an act of the other faculty of the
Soul (the Will) It is true, faith is but one habit, but yet there are diverse
acts of that habit which are coordinate one unto another. An Act in the
understanding, as well as an Act in the Will. Faith is seated but in one
faculty, but yet that one faculty has a redundance into the other. If we
should say the Will is the subject of Faith, because Faith is a Grace, and from
it a man is denominated good, which a man is not from any habit of the
understanding, yet still we say faith has a work upon the understanding. And
if we say Faith is in the understanding, yet we say it has a work upon the
Will in making it to delight in that which the understanding presents unto it.
There is an acurateness in determining which faculty faith is in, but we need
not stand upon that, because there is something that this work of faith does in
both. And if we look into the Scripture, we shall find it speaks as it is an
act of the understanding. By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify
many, Isay 53.11. And they that are taught of God come unto him, John 6.45. and
sometimes faith is described by a confidence and trust of our selves upon God
through Christ. But when faith is described by an act of the understanding, you
are to suppose allwaies that there goes an act of the Will with it. And when
Faith is described by an act of the Will, you must always suppose that there
goes an act of the understanding also. For they only that know the name of God
trust in him. Psalm. 9.10.
Whether the Understanding or the Will be first wrought upon, I shall not speak
to now (something peradventure may fall in before I have done this point.) But I
shall now fall upon the Understanding, because men have suffered their light to
be put out, and while they cry out against a bare notionall knowledge of the
things of God, they have lost the knowledge of it. Faith (I say) is an act of
receiving. And by Faith as it is an understanding act. I shall open that in
some particulars.

First: Faith does the office of an Informer, or it brings in news and tidings
into the Soul of what good is to be had in Jesus Christ. It is as it were an
Invoice or bill of lading, or advice of what commodities and advantages Jesus
Christ is full of. As Merchants you know have their Factors abroad to inform
them what wares and commodities are to be had in several Countries, and what
goes off and bears price. Or as there are particulars and surveys given of Land
unto purchasers, that they may know every thing they deal for. So Faith now (as
it is in the understanding) it gives in a particular unto the Soul of what
Christ is appointed to do, and has received to give unto poor sinners. And
hence it is in the Scripture called a teaching, Joh. 6.44, 45. No man (says
the Text) can come unto me except the Father draws him, as it is written, They
shall be all taught of God, Every one that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me. And in Ephesians. 1.18. It Is called an opening of the Eyes to take in
that which is to be received. For this cause (says Paul) I bow my knees unto
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the eyes of your mind being
enlightened, ye may know what is the hope of your calling, etc. And it is
called a revealing, and making known of the Mystery, Ephesians. 3.4, 5. Who has
believed our report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? As the
Apostle quotes the words of Isaiah in Romans 10.17. and beloved the things which
faith does reveal, cannot be known otherwise 1 Cor. 2.7. Eye has not seen nor
Ear heard, nor is the heart of man able to conceive what God has laid up for
them that love him. But we have this mind of Christ whereby we know him: we
have the knowledge of the deep things of God. It is hidden wisdom, and not to be
found out by man, in ver. 9. and 14. the Natural man cannot discern it. As weak
eyes cannot look upon the light: Or as some small prints cannot be read by some
tender eyes. There is in all ordinary things which faith believes, and
receives, some extraordinary things. As for example: By faith a man knows the
world was made of nothing, Heb. 11.3. But his Faith rests not there, but he
looks upon all the promises of God as being made by God that has such power to
perform them, and rests upon them accordingly. He looks upon all as coming
through the merits of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.19. He looks upon things as passing
knowledge. I pray that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that you may
comprehend what passes knowledge.

And as Faith will reveal and tell a man nothing that is ordinary, but wonders;
so it informs a man certainly. It brings nothing that is liable to a falsehood,
or a question. It cannot but come to pass which Faith reveals, because Faith
has always the Word and Truth of God for its Object. It will speak nothing
but what it has from Gods own mouth; and the words of his mouth are as pure as
Silver seven times tried in the fire, in which there is no dross at all. Unto
this end, that Faith may make the soul to know what is to be had, and to be
gotten by Jesus Christ. It does particularly set before us the benefits of
Jesus Christ, or the End of God the Father in giving Christ. He is Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. It reveals them as those things
that are to be attained unto by us. And upon this is speaks unto the Soul, as
the Patriarch did unto his Son when there was a Famine in the Land, There is
Corn in Egypt, why do you not go thither?

So Faith tells a man what he should pray for, and look for; and it says unto
him, Thou art troubled because thy heart is barren, but is there not
fruitfulness in Jesus Christ? And though thy Understanding be dim, and cannot
see the bottom of things, yet is there not light shining in him? Whatever a
Soul needs, there is a supply of in Jesus Christ, and Faith informs a man of so
much. It makes known both the power and love of God the Father in his person,
and the holiness of Christ, and his satisfaction and purchase, and the state to
which he is risen. These things are necessary to be known, and without them no
man can receive any thing at the hand of Christ; he must know Jesus Christ to
be God, 1 John 5.20. This is the true God, and eternal Life. And until a man
does thus know him, he has no understanding, as the Apostle speaks there, We
know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to know
him that is true, and we are in him that is true; and this is the true God and
eternal Life. Faith upon Christ is the greatest Idolatry and Superstition that
can be, till the soul be clear in this; and the greatest folly for a man to
commit himself to Christ, if he were not God. You must also know the
Satisfaction of Christ: For this indeed is that which troubles the soul of a
converted man, That there must be mends made, and restitution unto God for all
that dishonor which sin has done him, which he cannot do by all his duties and
engagements, nor by reformation for the future.

And not only does it inform a man of particulars, but of the readiness and
willingness that is in Jesus Christ, and in the Father to part with all these
things. A readiness in Christ; that he is sent of the Father, and made as a
common Stock, out of whom he communicates, even as the First Adam communicates
his sinfulness to his. Therefore the Scripture reveals him as a Stock and Head,
as one that is entrusted in the behalf of sinners, as one that has received
Commandment from the Father that he should call them, and having called them,
should bear them in his Arms until he brings them to Glory. And for the
readiness of God the Father, It reveals unto the Soul that he has received a
price, and therefore all that is to be given, is a debt: That this Price did
but make way for the accomplishment of Gods good Will from all Eternity; and as
he could not til he was satisfied (because of the honor of his Justice) give
us; so he cannot being satisfied (because it would be a dishonor to Justice)
but give us. I might be large, but the Sum of all is this: That there is a
necessity of the knowledge of the Gospel required of those that do believe, or
required unto the receiving of any thing from Christ. Information of the
mystery of the Gospel is the way whereby we come to be made partakers of all
the Grace of the Gospel. As the heat comes in with the light into the Air, So
does also with the knowledge of Christ, the things of Christ. They that know thy
name, they will trus^ in thee, Psalm. 9.10. I know whom I have trusted. How can
ye believe except ye have heard? says the Apostle in Romans 10.14. While men are
not in fear, nor sensible of their danger, So long (as Solomon says) the fool
believes every thing and will hope in any thing, and make any thing to be the
foundation and ground of their trust and confidence, Prove. 14.15. But when
Conscience comes to be troubled, and when a man comes to see what must be done
to satisfy the wrath of God, then a man grows wary and is afraid of trusting
to any thing that is not sufficient, and able to bear him up in the day of
trial.

You shall find sometimes in the Scripture, Faith set out by Wisdom, Ephesians. 1.8.
He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and knowledge. So Christ is made unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Wisdom, that is, he
gives Faith* because it follows afterward, that he is made unto us
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. These words comprehend all we have in Christ, both
in this world and in the World to come. There is righteousness and
sanctification when we do believe in him: There is wisdom that we may be
partakers of that righteousness and sanctification: And Redemption or gathering
together of the body again out of the dust into which it moulders, that you may
be for ever with the Lord. That Wisdom there going before righteousness, must
needs be meant concerning Faith. Faith therefore does make a man wise. And the
reason why it is so called, is because it makes the Soul to deal exceeding
warily, and charily, and upon good grounds. Else a man would take the most
ordinary Bayl (as I may call it) the meanest grounds and reasons for his hope
that could be. As a wise man will not adventure his Estate into the hands of any
one whom he knows not well but he will have good grounds and know whom he trusts
before he trusts, he will have something to show for that which he trusts another.
A wise man will not take every ones word, but will enquire what the man's Estate
and goodness is that promises to pay him. So a man becomes wise; Faith makes a
man exceeding chary and wary least that he should lay so great a building upon
a foundation or principle that will not hold out in the day of the Lord. All the
time of a man's unregeneracy, a man adventures himself and puts all his hope
upon such things as in reason (indeed) will give him no kind of confidence.
What argument is this, that because Haman was called to the banquet of the
King, therefore it was that he might have all the honor done to him, which
might be done to a subject? What argument is this, that because a man has long
life and an abundance of these outward things, that therefore God has no score
against him, and that his sins are pardoned and done away? Foolish and absurd
things do men lay as the bottom stone upon which they lay their hope during
the time of their unregeneracy. But when faith is wrought, men will know good
reason before they do confide or trust themselves. They know God is good that
has promised, but they will have something to intimate to them that the
promise is to them, and that they have a share in it: and therefore it comes to
pass that that which men count the misery of Christians, is their happiness and
commendation, viz. that they are so full of doubts, and impressions, and fears,
least this, and that, and a third should not abide the touch in the day of the
Lord. The more a man's faith does thus inform him, the more opportunity he has
of receiving much, and of growing much into the fullness of Jesus Christ. If so
be I may borrow some meaner representation of it, it is in this case as it is
with Merchants that have quick advice from beyond Seas, they know what to buy,
and what will put off, and what will yield greatest profit, and they gain much,
and grow rich quickly: They get and vend the commodity to their great profit in
a little while. So now does a Christian too. When his Faith and Conscience is
continually telling him that there is this to be had, and with this prayer, and
with this Saint, and under this Ordinance you may be fitted with this and that
and with a third Comfort or Grace according as your need requires. A Christian
grows to a very great degree in a little time.

CHAP. VII.
A second Work of Faith as it is an Act of the Understanding, viz. To persuade
the Soul to an assent. A third work, is to persuade the Soul to go to Jesus
Christ for all things revealed to be in him. A fourth work is, to keep in mind
the thoughts of these things thus revealed.

SEcondly: And as Faith does thus in the Understanding inform, So it does
persuade the Soul unto an assent, that is to judge and approve all the things
that are revealed to be real and true. Faith in the Understanding does reveal
the things promised as real and substantial, and not barely as news* but as
matters of concernment; and not of concernment only, but as the things which
cannot be otherwise. And therefore it works a firm assent in the soul, so as
nothing can make it think otherwise. Nothing can make it question whether these
things be not to be had in Christ which it does reveal. And so you have it in
John 3.33. He that does believe sets to his Seal that God is true. He sets to
his Seal. It Is a further confirmation (you know) in Law, for a man to set to
his seal before witness than it is for a man to pass his promise. When the Seal
is set, there is no plea, as well as no going back: That is the fullest
confirmation such a confirmation as Amen, and such a full assent does faith work
in the Soul concerning what it knows of Jesus Christ: So that Faith will say,
It Is true, and it cannot be questioned, and it is undoubted, It is worthy of
all acceptance, as the Apostle says in another case. And let the cunning and
subtilty of Satan be what it will be, yet he holds that sure which is spoken
concerning the promises. And hence in all the troubles in the minds of the
Saints, their trouble is not so much for any thing as this, that there being
such things to be had, that they have no share nor portion in them as they
fear. For the setting forth of this firm assent, In Bsay 53.1. Who (says the
Text) has believed our report, and that word there (...) [Beleeved] is of such
a conjugation in the Hebrew Tongue, as makes a thing out to be true, It gives
it a being, that is, it makes the thing as real, as if the thing revealed,
were revealed unto sense, and to be taken notice of by the eye, or ear, or the
like. And in Romans 4.21. it is said that Abraham because he had the promise of
God, was fully persuaded, that what God had promised he was able to perform. He
was fully persuaded. Where true faith is, there is not always such a full
persuasion that a man shall be saved: but where true faith is, there is a
fullness of persuasion that the things revealed shall be accomplished: But yet
not such a fullness as no further degree can be added to it, but such a fullness,
as there is no doubt nor fear of the contrary: As full assurance is opposite to
an opinion: whereas an opinion is nothing else but an assenting to a thing with
fear that it may be otherwise than it seems to be. In opposition to an opinion,
Faith is a full persuasion, though it is not a full assurance as it notes
perfection. As for example. He that sees a color may be so certain as he cannot
be deceived and yet he may see it more clearly than he does. So a man may have
more of the Grace of the faith of assent, yet that further degree does not add
any further certainty of the object, but only of the degree of believing. Joh.
10.3. Isa. 55.3.
And therefore in the Scripture, Faith is sometimes called seeing, and sometimes
tasting. Taste and see how good the Lord is. And sometimes hearing: My sheep hear
my voice. And hear and your Souls shall live. As reason persuades the
understanding in ordinary and natuarll things, and that Reason most which is
demonstrative. So Faith persuades the Soul in things that are revealed, and
though that the things themselves do not appear, yet because God says they are
so, it does as verily believe them, as if they saw them with their eyes, or
felt them with their hands, or were partakers of them by any sense. And herein
lies a very great difference between the people of God, Believers, and others.
To others, the great things of the Gospel seem to be as a strange thing, yea as
foolishness as the Apostle says. And as the Apostle does intimate in another
place when he uses this phrase, Why should it seem strange and incredible to
you that God should raise up the dead? All that the Gospel says till faith
has this work, is not only counted as a fable that is the Phrase of the
Apostle when he speaks of them that preach Fables, such things as are devices
for some further end, and because there are such things but only used as a
piece of Rhetoric to persuade men to another thing: As there is no disputing
against sense: A man feels it to be hot, and nothing can make him say it is
cold; when he tastes the thing that is sweet, nothing can make him say it is
bitter. So nothing can make a man that believes, believe the things that are
revealed to be otherwise. That is the meaning of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.15. That
the spiritual man is judged of none. He may be censured of men for to be a
fool, and by his own heart, and by Satan: What do you believe that God will part
with such things unto such a one as you are? Is it reason that the Lord of life
should die, and be made a curse for you? But though he may be judged, yet he
cannot be cast in his judgment; he cannot be persuaded to the contrary, from
what he receives from the judgment of Faith in the Word of God. The spiritual
man judges all things and he himself is judged of none. There is a Judgment of
censure and a Judgment of conviction. By a Judgment of censure a Believer may
be condemned of others, and condemned and checked by his own carnal heart. As
Sarah laughed when she heard the news of having a child in her old age, in whom
all the generations of the World should be blessed. So a man is ready to laugh
at himself for believing things which the Gospel requires which are so much
above reason. I say a man may censure himself, and be censured by others. But
with the Judgment of Conviction he cannon be Judged. The word (...), which the
Apostle uses signifies such a kind of Judgment which a man makes of a thing when
he has tried it in all the most exquisite ways that possibly may be used. Such
a kind of knowledge as a man has of the matter which he has gotten out of the
confession of another by torments and tortures. Do what you will unto a Godly
man and a Believer, yet still he holds that God is good, and that there are
such things in Jesus Christ which the Gospel reveals. Do what you will;
Torture him with temptations, yet when he is himself he holds that. You may see
this to be the nature of common Faith. Men that have but a common historical
faith, yet they believe so firmly as nothing can make them deny Christ. As we
see by experience of many among the Turks who have nothing but this Faith, yet
when they have liberty offered them from those torments upon refusing to own
Jesus Christ to be God, yet they refuse that liberty. Specially you shall sind
those that have strong faith, they will hold the conclusion when they cannot
answer the reason. As Job said unto his friends, Job 27.5. He would hold his
Integrity till he died. Let them say what they would of Gods dealing with good
men and bad men, yet he would hold his own. Thou know there is no Iniquity
in my hand says he. So when a Godly man knows not what to say, yet he says
this is the word of God, and that remains Faithful, and this is certainly
true concerning Jesus Christ, and cannot be questioned Nay, take those that
have weak Faith: As the Needle that is touched with the Lodestone, though it
may be jogged, yet it will turn again to the North. So though a weak Faith
should forget it self, yet it will recant, and retract, and recover it self
again to the acknowledgment of the Truth. I shall say no more of this, but only
thus much; That as he that has drunk in an Opinion, is so prejudiced against
the contrary, that he will not hear nor credit whatever is said against it. So
does Faith prejudice the Soul against any ill reports or falsehoods that can be
raised of Jesus Christ, or the Promises.

Thirdly: As Faith does this as it is an act of the Understanding; So it does
persuade and lay arguments before the Will, that it should go unto Jesus Christ
for all these things which are revealed to be had in him. As Jacob in Genesis
42.1, 2. says to his Children, Why stand you here when there is Corn in Egypt?
Go down thither. So does this Faith speak unto the Soul of a man. Why do you
sit weeping, and mourning, and lamenting your condition? What is it you want?
If it be either Grace or Comfort, you may have it in Jesus Christ. As the Angel
did check Hagar for weeping so as she did, because she was athirst in the
Wilderness, when there was a Well hard by: So does Faith check the Soul when it
lies moaning and complaining and does not put it self upon the Lord Jesus
Christ for a supply. What would you have says Faith? If what you would have
were not to be had, not to be had any where, or upon a rate that you could not
give, then you might sit down sadly. But when it is but Take, and Eat, when it
is but stretching forth the hand, and take of the Word of Life: Why do you not
believe? As Jesus Christ said, upbraiding his Disciples of their Unbelief, Why
is it thus with you? You are troubled with an heart of Unbelief, because it is
dull, and because it is dead, and because you are hurried with temptations, and
you would fain be quick, and believing, and be at peace and quiet: Now go unto
Jesus Christ. Thus Faith calls upon a man. Psalm. 16.7. says David, I bless the
Lord who has given me Counsel. Now God Counsels the Soul thus by the
Revelation of his Word unto a man through Faith. In John 6.44, 45. Faith is
called a going unto Jesus Christ. And as Joab learned the Woman how to go unto
King David in the behalf of Absalom, So Faith learns the heart how to go and
speak unto God in the behalf of it self. And this the light which is in his
mind cannot but do. For you must know that the Understanding does naturally
work by way of persuasion upon the will. As Achan said he saw the Babilonish
garment and coveted it with the lust of his soul, so the light that is in the
soul by faith does stir up a man much more to get it. The seeing of things by
the understanding, calls upon it, and provokes it to apply it to it self. We
heard the King of Israel is a merciful King, and therefore we say to him, let
thy servants live. So the soul upon the report which the understanding makes
unto it, goes unto Jesus Christ, and says, we have heard that with thee is
Grace, and that thou will impute thy righteousness, and take my sins upon thy
account, and that the spirit shall be shed abroad in the heart of them that come
to thee, And therefore it goes unto him. Therefore says the Text in John 6.45.
Every one that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me. That is,
there is none but do come. There is indeed a persuasion which the word makes,
which may be resisted, but the persuasion of true Faith cannot. There is such a
Sicada, and Rhetoric, and such an Emphasis, and such an aptness in all that
faith does reveal unto a man, that as it is said in Matthew. 22.8. it does
compel a man to come in. Which compulsion there, is not meant of an external
violence, but of the constraint of the word of God to whom it comes savingly.
And because of this persuasion it is, that the sin of Unbelief, of living out
of Jesus Christ, is so exceeding great where the Gospel comes, because men are
wooed and entreated and pressed by the best and strongest arguments. And
therefore there can be nothing else but a pure hatred, and not desirous of the
things of Jesus Christ, which keeps a man from it. And that I may set forth
this a little more clearly unto your understanding.

You shall find in the Scripture that faith is said to give a kind of reason
unto a man, and to take from him that folly and unreasonableness whereby he
stands in the way of his own good, and cannot see what is good for himself. 2
These. 3.1.2. Pray (says he) that the word of the Lord may have free course,
and that we may be freed from unreasonable men, for all men have not Faith.
Unbeleevers are unreasonable. And on the contrary, Faith brings a man to his
reason. That when the word comes, an Unbeleever stops it, and says, this
Doctrine shall not be preached, and this is not the way of life, and counts
himself as Paul says, unworthy of eternal life by contradicting it: Now a
Godly man grows wise, and says, speak this word, and whatever is hid and
concealed, yet hide not this word of God. He goes and sels all as it is in
Matthew. 13. that he may buy this pearl.

And as Faith gives a reason to a man, so when a man is careless, Faith calls
upon him, Isa. 55.3. Hear and live. Will you lose your souls, and your eternal
good by losing the opportunity? What should you mind but the thing you are
about? Hear what Jesus Christ is, and what he has done, and what he has? Is
there any thing like unto pardon, and like unto Union with himself?

And when a man says, It is true, these things are, But not for me. Faith
answers, the things are near unto you, in thy mouth and in thy heart. Romans
10.6, 7, 8. Do not say who shall ascend, or who shall descend, etc. The meaning
of it is this, That whereas the Law does require of a man duty, and gives him
no power to perform it. the Gospel gives him as well a power, as it does make
known his duty. Those things are impossible unto us which are far off, either
in the Heavens or in the depths. But now says the Apostle, whereas you say it
is not for you, because you know not how to believe it and close with it, says
he, you have this both given to you, that you shall embrace it and confess it.
With the mouth man confesses it, and you shall with the heart submit to it.
With the heart man believes unto salvation. Why do you say it is not for you?
You are in misery by the corruption and depravation of your understanding and
will: But says Faith both shall be taken away. If that be the meaning of the
place, as I conceive it is. But if it be meant of doubting as some conceive,
Who shall escape the pit, and therefore who shall ascend etc. Faith tells a man,
Never be disquieted because of that, for Christ came down and is ascended. He
came down and descended and revealed the will of his Father to us. When the
Soul is going toward Jesus Christ, then this Faith persuades it so far as that
it puts it into a resolution. I said I would go said the Prodigal. In 2 Cor.
5.15. We thus judge, says the Apostle. A Judgment is a Sentence past after all
is heard that can be said on both sides. A Judgment is the last act of the
understanding after which there is no appeal not debate. Faith says, I will
hear no more doubts, nor assent to any doubts, suspcions, nor fears. And when
the Soul is ready to give over that work, then the work of Faith says, If you
withdraw your selves the Lord will have no pleasure in you, Heb. 10.38. What
though things go hard? yet you may live by your Faith. And as faith reveals the
things that cannot be known by nature.

So as it is a Perswader, it brings to mind such things which the Soul knew not
before, Such things which are suitable to its case and its present condition.
And that is the third thing whereby faith receives. It does persuade, and
invite, and excite a man, that seeing there is so much to be had in Christ that
we would not suffer it to lie still and to be unused. There is another thing
that the understanding does.

Fourthly: It keeps the thoughts of these things thus revealed. It lets them
not go out of mind, but sets them continually before a man's face. As the
understanding does put a man to go to Christ and to him only: So it keeps
Christ and the things of him in mind. It Is as the Glass to set them always
before the face. As David says in Psalm. 51.3. that his sin was ever before
him: that is, he could be in no Ordinance, but his Conscience troubled him: And
he could be in no company, but it administered cause of fear to him. His sin was
always dogging him, accusing him, and opposing him. So Faith sets Jesus Christ
in his benefits before the soul in whatever condition a man is. Therefore you
shall find in the Scripture that it is all one to believe, and to think upon
God. I thought upon thee in the night season, and I set thy loving kindness
always before my face Psalm. 119.55. In Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator.
It Is not the bare having God in our memory, but it is believing that will save
us from wrath to come. But believing is called Remembrance there. And on the
contrary side in Heb. 2.1. Unbelief is called a Letting escape. Take heed least
you let slip the things which you have heard. And in Matthew. 13.4. those that
did not believe are said to have the word of God piekt up our of their heart,
As the Fowls of the Heavens do pick up the seed that is sown by the hand of
the sower, and are not converted by the Word. And Unbeleevers are called such
as forget God. Mark it.

There are Two ways of keeping things in mind:

One is by a Similitude, or Image, or Picture of it. Now to keep Spiritual
things in a man's mind thus, is either but Natural Knowledge, or Superstitious
against the Second Commandment which forbids a man to make any graven Image of
what God has done, thereby to keep a man in thoughts of what God has required.

There is another way of keeping things in mind, and that is by the presence of
the things themselves. Now this is the way by which Faith keeps a man and the
things of Jesus Christ, which is by way of Intuitive knowledge. Or it keeps
things in a man's knowledge by the presence of the things themselves. And that is
the ground why that Faith does cause so firm an assent, and is so strong a
perswader, because I say the things themselves are made present unto the soul.
In Psalm. 16.7. My Reins (says he) instructs me in the night. In the night when
others sleep: or in the night when I am free to consider, and awaking, then thy
Promises (says he) they come into my mind. As Faith will not take any slight
denial for answer, but does convince the false reasonings that are in us: so it
will slip no time nor opportunity of winning us. It does continually beliege the
Soul, as I may say. The strongest Fort may be taken in by a long Siege, when
the Enemies rise not from before it, but are continually battering it. Now
Faith does (as it were) batter the Unbelief and the Reasonings of our heart
with continual arguments to the contrary. Says Faith to the Soul, You say
thus, but hearken to what the Word says: you speak words of death, but God
speaks peace to his people. And you shall find by experience (which I shall leave
as the proof of this point) that that word which a man has often times
forgotten, and which he seems to have lost, the operation whereof is ceased,
yet a year or two, yea seven years after it comes to work upon a man again, and
works him to that very thing which all this whil he stood against. Especially
when the time of a man's conversion is come, it is with him as it is with a Woman
in her time of travel, that one throw comes upon the neck of another, until
she be delivered and sees the Fruit of her womb: So there comes one argument
upon another. And if one thought comes and says, This is not for me, There
comes another and bids him take heed that he puts not the loving kindness of
God from him, and so it leaves him not till he be conquered. And that is the
fourth thing to help a man to receive.

CHAP. VIII.
A fifth work of Faith, as it is an Act of the Understanding is to assure and
certify a man of the things already received.

Fifthly: Faith helps a man to receive of Jesus Christ by making known to him
the things freely given of God, by making known and assuring and certifying him
of the thing freely bestowed, 1 Cor. 2. As Faith tells a man what Christ has,
and what Christ will do, So it informs a man what he has received from
Christ, though that we come to know our particular state by experience. We say,
we do believe, because we find a denial of our selves, and a loathing of our
righteousness, and a prizing of Jesus Christ, yet because this that we find in
our selves does arise from comparing of our selves with the word of God
therefore it is ascribed unto Faith. My meaning is this. It is as well an act
of divine faith for a man to conclude that he shall be saved, as it is an act
of divine faith for to assert that he that believes shall be saved. This, That I
shall be saved, Matthew. 16.16.
arises as well from that word which opens the nature of faith, which I find to
be in my heart, As this does arise from the word, that there is none that
believes shall perish, but have everlasting life. 1 Cor. 2.12. The Spirit of God
is given us, that we may know the things freely given us. And this Spirit of
God is the spirit of faith, as the Apostle calls it in another place. The sum of
the point is this. That the spirit of God does by this Grace, or this act of
the understanding make a man to see that he has already in possession, that a
great deal is paid down, that he has received before hand. There is a pledge in
his bosom: The Staff and the Jewels are left with him which Jesus Christ will
own. It tells him thus much when he stands saying in himself, Alas says he, Why
should I go? Or why should I, if I do go to Christ think I should receive much
from him? It tells him, you have received something, and he will give more: that
which you have is but as the morning Star, which arises before Sun shines: You
shall be sure you shall have these things, because when you knew not, he put
such and such things under your pillow, when you thought not, and sought not,
yet these things are done. Making known to a man that he has received, does
strengthen him to receive more. For what he has received is given as a pawn
and pledge by God on his part, and it is a Motive and engagement on our part to
go unto him for more. As God will not leave his work imperfect, so we are bound
to seek the perfection of it. There is a mavelous boldness and freeness, Nay,
(that I may use the word of the Scripture) the Mouth is opened exceeding wide
upon this, in asking things at the hand of God. It will go unto him and say,
Lord thou have given me a penny, therefore give me a pound: Thou have given me
a little, and therefore give me much: And this is strong persuasion with God,
for he cannot deny himself. He will never begin, but make an end. As a man that
has received something in part of payment, does not only live upon what he
received, but he pleads his receipts in Law: And he is enabled to follow the law
by what he has received: He urges the debt the stronger upon the Debtor by
showing him what he has received. Thus when the Soul knows what it has
received by Faith, it goes and says unto God after this manner; Did thou not
do this for me? Did thou not when thou did for me at my first conversion
tell me that these were but some of the Grapes of the vintage that I should
have? That they were but only to satisfy my longing, and were not all my
portion? Have thou not by these things allured me to follow thee? Thou
requirest of me not to leave the things I have put my hand unto: The Lord will
not do so much more; What is this little to thy fullness? What is my little but
only a pawn of more? There is a great straitness in the Soul till it comes to
have this act of faith. The Soul does take sparingly, like one that steals,
rather than one that does receive his own, until it comes to have this act of
Faith. There is a kind of modesty and sparingness, It thinks it much to have a
little. Although that assurance keeps the Soul modest and humble, because God
gives it all in the name of Christ, It Is not for us but for his sake that any
thing is given us: Yet assurance knows no bounds, and acknowledges no limits
in receiving, but binds a man to take as much as he can, or as his present
state does require. The least degree of Faith does give a man a capacity to
receive somewhat from Christ, and this degree of faith does give a man a
capacity to receive it as his own.

I beseech you (by the way) think of this you that nourish your doubts, and
that make much of your fears, that raise up this spirit continually in your
hearts; You know not what you should get if you were quiet, and what you loose
by your doubts. The assurance of your heart by faith is the enlarging of your
heart to receive, and it is the key to Gods treasure, where al his good things
lie. Consider therefore and try whether you have faith, and if there be in your
understanding an endeavor to know more of the Mysteries of Christ, If you are
going every day into a fuller and larger knowledge of the things he has done
for you, you are every day looking into the Ark, into the richest promises that
you may see their extent. You have your Conscience continually telling you that
these and these things are to be had in Jesus Christ, and you sit mourning for
want of them, and therefore go and receive them: Do you find a Jealousy least
you build upon the sand? When you see a sign the straighter it is, the better
it is, the more narrow it is, the sweeter it is, and you put your selves upon
the trial because you would not be deceived in your selves: Therefore because
your understanding is so praying, and craving, and prying into the deep things
of God, you may know your understanding is true, or your faith is true.

There is one thing more which indeed should have been the first in regard of
order of nature, but I place it here, because it is last known. And that is
this.

CHAP. IX.
A sixth work of Faith as it is an act of the Understanding, is a receiving of
Jesus Christ and his benefits. An Objection answered. Application.

Sixthly: That the very being wrought upon is a receiving of Jesus Christ and
his benefits. Or thus, the first impression and infusion of the light of Faith,
before ever we have by the power of that faith made any of the aforenamed acts,
is an instituting of us into all that we have, and all that Jesus Christ has.
We are first made to believe and know: We have an eye of faith given to us, and
then we see with that eye: Then faith becomes an Intelligencer, as you have
heard, and a perswader, and makes a man give his firm assent. This very power
to believe, this making the Soul to take the testimony of God by Christ, that
is that which gives us all. A man may be said to receive when he is under this
work, As the wax is said to receive the impression when the Seal is put upon
it. Or as the ground receives the seed when it is cast into it, As the Air is
first enlightened, and then scatters light abroad.

Object. How can this be counted a receiving? The very giving a power cannot be
a receiving.

Answ. To that I Answer in a word or two. That this giving us power does
comprehend within it two things.

First: Gods working.

Secondly: The Answer or Effect of that work. As a Workman that makes a piece
of plate, or any other piece of metal that is ductile, or that may be beaten
forth: his hammering of it makes it of that fashion or Image: So Gods working
upon a man to receive, makes him to receive. And the truth of it is, my
beloved. That this does alter our state. For though we are distinguished from
men unregenerate by believing, yet our believing is distinguished by this
working of the spirit. And though there be phrases in the scripture which speak
of Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith, yet that whereby Christ comes to
dwell and take possession of us is his Spirit. We have more security of our
perseverance and continuance in the state of Grace from this, that we are laid
hold on by the Spirit, and wrought thereunto as says the Apostle, and are
apprehended, Then we have from this, that we do apprehend and lay hold upon
Christ. Thy apprehension were nothing, were it not for this, that thou art made
to do this by him that alters and changes not. And I speak this to this very
end, That though this work be never without a work of ours following of it, yet
notwithstanding the frame and habit of the soul, the dispolition and temper
which we are cast into by the Spirit through the word is unto a man a better
ground, when he cannot act faith or when he does act faith, it is a better
ground than any thing else. It is a ground when he cannot and a better ground
than any thing else: For Mark it. Thy acting does but flow from this work, and
cannot be made out to be good further than this is in thee. As we say in all
other duties, The Lord looks to the heart; It is not the gifts, but the will
with which we do any thing that God takes pleasure in. So I say here, It Is not
any thing that I have mentioned concerning faith, But it is that spirit of
faith (so the Apostle calls it also) that frame of faith, An heart cast into
that mould, which makes al your acts to be accepted. If upon any act of ours
(though those acts were enabled unto by Grace) our salvation did depend, it
might be hazardous. But it cannot be hazarded, There is no possibility of
falling away, because the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Son, and of the Father
does work, and has wrought us hereunto to believe upon him, and will maintain
that work. As a child (if I may so express it) because born of such Parents,
has a right unto the Estate, though it cannot plead, nor speak to it self. It
is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. So art thou one Spirit with Jesus
Christ, when thou art thus shaped, and made to give up thy self, when thou have
a tendency of spirit to God in all thy hopes, when they heart and all within
thee is unto Jesus Christ, and thou take all from him, as he shall please to
give it thee.

USE

If Faith as it is thus in the understanding, be a receiving, or there may be
so much gotten from Jesus Christ by the understanding and knowledge of him, then
I beseech you look unto the understanding. There is a double reason that lies
in the Text, and in the Point that I have in hand. By it, you do receive as by
a hand. And in it, is laid up, as in an house or barn or treasure rich things
from Jesus Christ. It is his Cabinet, and your Honor, or it is your
Treasure-house. You have nothing to lay up the things of Jesus Christ in, or
you will not know where to lay them up, if you have not a mind to know him.
Take heed to your understanding, take heed what you believe. Errors in the
understanding hinder you from the getting of faith. We live in the last and
worst Age of the world, wherein men make no Covenant with their understanding.
Job said that he would do so with his eyes that he might not look upon a Maid:
Yet that was lawful: But there was a snare laid in it. Men keep not their
thoughts from any thing that may be said pro and con against the Gospel of
Jesus Christ: So full of Adultery and unchastity are the minds of most that
there is scarce any room for Jesus Christ to lodge in. Let me but tell you thus
much that so much as you are stuffed with the things that are not according unto
truth, so much you keep out the things of the Lord Jesus. If you do not believe
the truth, you may be damned. So the Text says in the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians 2.12. That they all might be damned, that believe not the truth.
That word [All] is put in to show both how great the punishment is of those
that do not believe: As a fire grows hot by having much timber: So the wrath of
God is hot against such kind of Men: It Is an increase of coals upon them. God
puts in [All] there, because he would have men know how exceedingly he is
provoked, and that he will do nothing for them. When Princes see whole
Counties, and Cities in a mutiny, they take out one or two to punish, and not
al. And to show you that if God do not damn you for receiving the truth, yet
you will be damnified for not receiving the truth. That is, you will be
hindered. Take heed that you miss not of receiving a full reward. Why what will
hinder them? He reckons up the Errors of those times (which are rank now as
they were then) that men do not abide in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. In 2 John 10. If any man come unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not,
Nor bid him God speed, for this will hinder your of receiving a full reward: And
as the Apostle says in the Corinthians, You shall be saved it may be, but as
it were by fire, it will cost you many an heart breaking, and many a frown from
God, and many a sob and sigh, when God opens your eyes, that you should be so
careless of letting things into your understanding, which he has made a place
and treasure for himself. Look you therefore unto your understandings. Me
thinks this should make a man very cautious, yea very obstinate against Errors,
when he once understands that he must sustain so great a loss, and be hindered
from so great a gain by it. As a man sometimes says unto his friends, If it
were not for you, I might have gotten thus much and thus much. Let me tell
thee, If thou did believe the truth (which thou can not do while thy
understanding is darkened through Errors) thou might have gotten this and
that from Jesus Christ: for by believing in thy understanding, there is a
receiving of him.

CHAP. X.
This Object. That Receiving of Christ is not an act of the Understanding, for
that may be in Hypocrites and Unregenerate Persons, answered.

OBJECT.

THese Acts of the understanding may seem not to be a receiving of and from
Christ, for these may be in an Hypocrite. Hypocrites have their understandings
enlightened, and assent so firmly unto the things that are revealed in the
Gospel, as those which are regenerated do. They are often times persuaded, and
affected with the persuasion of the word to go unto Christ. The Seat of Grace
(it may be said) is not in the understanding, for it is Grace which makes good,
which no virtue in the understanding does, for no man is said to be good,
because he knows. Faith, so far as it is in the understanding, is common as
well to an unregenerate man, as to a regenerate man. The Objection is grounded
upon these two things. 1. Because the Scripture does ascribe unto Hypocrites
and men that perish, that they do believe. 2. Upon this Principle, viz. That is
only to be counted a Grace which makes a man good, and no man is said to be
good for what he knows, but for what he does.

Answ. Because of this difficulty some have placed the difference btween a
regenerate and an unregenerate man only in the Will: that a regenerate man
approves, and an unregenerate man does not, of the light that shines in him.
But though that be true, yet the Scripture does make a clear and distinct
difference between a regenerate man and an unregenerate man, even in their very
mind and understanding. As you may see in 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man (...),
He that has all the reason and understanding which a man as a man is capable
of, he does not understand the things of God, neither can he says the text:
But we have the mind of Christ. As the sense does only meddle with the things
that are sensible. So reason and understanding in men does meddle only with the
things that are natural, or with things that are spiritual in a natural way.
For as every thing is, so it works. So in 1 These. 5.23. You have the whole man
distributed into spirit, soul and body. I pray God sanctify you throughout in
spirit, soul and body. By the spirit be means the understanding, as you may see
by the like phrase in Romans 12.2. where he bids them be renewed in the spirit of
their mind. And by Soul, he means the Will, and affections, and by Body the
outward practice and conversation. And in John 6.44. Our Lord lays the reason
why some come to him, and not all, because some were taught, and some were not
taught of the Father. Murmur not among your selves, for no man can come to me,
except my Father which has sent me, draw him, for it is written in the
Prophets, You shall be al taught of God. Every one therefore that has learned
and been taught of the Father comes unto me. And in Ephesians. 4.20. You have not so
learned Christ. That word (...), So, Imports a different apprehension in men of
the same object Jesus Christ. You have not So learned him, that is, so as some
other men have, whose hearts are not renewed and changed to walk according to
what they know of him. If you do but observe it in that very place, the Apostle
gives that as the reason, why some put off the old man with its deceitful
lusts, and others are clothed with the new man in righteousness and true
holiness, in verse 21.22. Because that they had not so learned Jesus Christ.
It Is a mavelous hard thing, I confess to assign the difference that is
between the historical faith of him that shall be saved, and of an Hypocrite
it is hard, but yet the Scripture makes a difference and distinction.

In the general therefore, Grace or Virtue may be considered under a double
notion.

Either as it gives a power and ability to do good: And so Grace may be said to
be in the understanding.

Or Secondly: As Grace does put that power into use, and inables a man to use
that power well. And so it is properly in the Will. For all virtuous acts must be
voluntary, and therefore they depend upon the sanctification of the affections.
But though the use of this light in external acts depends upon the Will, yet
notwithstanding this light in its self does differ from all other light. For
it is a new one. (Bear with the Phrase) for it is the phrase of the Holy Ghost in
Romans 12.2. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind.

This saving Faith gives an intuitive knowledge of the things of God as they are
in themselves. 2 Pet. 1.9. says the Apostle, He that lacks these things: the
word in The Greek is (...), These things are not present. It Is all one with
that of 2 Cor. 3.18. We behold with open face: And with that in Ephesians. 1.18.
where he prays that they may have their eyes opened to see what is the hope of
their calling, what it is in it self. For the better understanding of this you
must know, That unto the sight of the eye, there goes two things.

First: A Faculty and a visive power. And

Secondly: There must be light to discover the Object unto the eye. So unto the
sight of the mind, there goes these two things.

First: Something which does convey the mind of God, which the Schoolmen calls
Lumen deferens, Something which conveys things unto the understanding. And that
is the word of Scripture, The letter, Similitude, discourse, and reasonings
whereby one thing is gathered and concluded from another. And this answers unto
the light which is in the air for the eye to see by.

There is also Lumen disponens, or a light which makes the understanding to
see, or take notice of the things revealed, and that is as the light of the
eye. And this light which indeed is the light of Faith, it is infused, and
comes not, nor is caused by discourse, or study, or by deduction, or
consequence from any natural thing, but arises immediately from the spirit
bringing the things of God and the Soul together. You shall discern it in that
similitude which the Scripture sets it forth by, Tasting, and Seeing. Tasting;
That as a man that tastes a thing, he has it present with him, the savor of it,
that there is no disputing against it, or making him to believe otherwise. Do
not you taste it, says he: So also the things of God are brought unto the soul
so through the word by faith, that there is not a possibility for the soul to
be mistaken. That you may see a little into this, take the cleerest discovery
of God in nature, yet you cannot thence conclude that therefore God will do
such things, or that such things shall be done by God for us, as Faith does
believe. Again, Compare earthly things and heavenly things together. Though
that earthly things may serve to give you some resemblance of heavenly, though
that similitude may set out things revealed, and keep them in memory, yet these
similitudes do not prove these things to be, nor can show them in their own
nature: And therefore you shall find that Nicodemus was partly ignorant of
regeneration, though that Christ had told him of it under an earthly similitude
of being born again. That similitude did rather make the thing hard than easy:
And our Lord adds, that, If I have spoken unto you of earthly things, and you
believe not, how will you believe if I tell you of heavenly? Joh. 3.12. That is,
there are some things to be believed in reference unto salvation, that there
are no things in the earth, to be compared to them: Therefore if you will not
believe but by similitude, you will not believe them. You shall see what I aim
at, beloved. The knowledge or faith of unregenerate men may be reduced,

Either unto discourse, knowledge, or unto fancy, which is all one. Unto the
congruity that is between things that are earthly, and unto heavenly. I say you
may either reduce it into discourse. As for example. Men reason thus. First, by
way of causality, that if there be kindness in men, then much more in God that
gave it. Secondly, by way of eminency, there is much more in the Fountain than
in the streams that are derived from it. Thirdly, By way of negation. If so be
that this be not fit for a man to do, if man will not be unjust, or forgetful
of the service that is done unto him, then God will not forget the labor of our
love, and the work of our faith, etc. Now such a kind of conclusion as this is,
is not faith. I beseech you mark it. It is not faith because the conclusion is
drawn only from a natural principle, from that knowledge which we have of God
by nature. This knowledge by discourse is natural, and therefore this cannot be
true faith. I shall only give you this for a proof of it, which is in James
2.19. The Devils do believe, and tremble. They properly do not believe as is
apparent by this, because their Faith has not those effects, which true faith
has. But they are said to believe, because they have experience in themselves
of the truth of the word of God: They find that true to their cost which God
has threatened: It is made good upon them, which God has written in the word.
And again, they see by experience, that many whom they have tempted are gone to
Heaven, and therefore they know that God will not fail nor break his word.
Their Faith being raised only from their experience, that credit which they
give to God, being only from what they feel and see, is not good. Now all the
faith in unregenerate men is of the same sort with this faith of the Devils,
for there is no more in the Child, than there is in the Parent. In John 8.44.
They are of their Father the Devil; because they go no further than he is a
pattern to them in. As the Children of the first Adam are like unto him, so all
the Children of the Devil are like unto him. And therefore as you may thus
reduce, or analize their Faith unto light, or discourse, so that faith which
unregerate men have, is taken from the similitude which earthly things have
with Heavenly: They look upon Heavenly things through Earthly, as through a
glass, and no further than that do they see, Matthew. 13.11. To you (says God)
it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but unto these in
parables, that in seeing they might not see, and in bearing they might not
understand. Here you find a difference between the knowledge of the Mystery, and
the knowledge which men have by parables. Parables are nothing else but only the
comparing of one thing with another, One thing set out by another. To have no
more knowledge therefore of Heavenly things, than Earthly does administer, is
for a man to have his eyes blinded; Yea it is a Seal of the eternal wrath of
God, Least he should be converted and healed by me. If it may be, yet more
plainly to express my self. As in the worship of God, an Image or
representation made by man cannot help a man at all in the worship of God. So
neither can the Image of Heavenly things in Earthly similitudes give us life
and salvation. You know that there are Innate principles, Notions which are in
every man by nature, of a Judgment, and of a God. Look what those principles
are unto natural things, such a kind of innate principle is Faith unto the new
Creature, which makes known the things of God by Jesus Christ. It Is not raised
by discourse, It comes not in by discourse, it is infused, It lies there, and
from thence it sends forth its light into the Soul. You find the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, blaming the Teachers there, because they teached in
the wisdom of words, and he tells them that it was the means to make ^he faith
of their hearts to consist in man, and not in the power of God. His meaning is
this, they heard the Gospel preached Eloquently and Rhetorically: They looked
upon Heaven as upon a Paradise or garden of pleasure: They looked upon
Communion with God but only as friendship of one with his Friend. The things of
Christ were set out only by Earthly things as in a Map: All the Glory of
Heavenly things were put upon them only by the resemblances which they had unto
these Earthly things. If so be it be so good to be rich, and so good to have
pleasures here, then what is it to have good for ever, and the like. The
Apostle tells them that all this would never make them Christians, for their
Faith must be in God, and this would keep them still in the wisdom of man. I
shall conclude this Point thus. That as a man that knows a man only by his
clothes, takes another for him that is clothed like him: So a man that has
the knowledge of these things only by Earthly things, loses his knowledge or his
fancy of them, as his fancy alters.

Secondly: The second is this. Wherever this saving light in the understanding
is, there it is joined with love in the Will: that is, the heart does choose,
embrace, take pleasure and contentment in it: that is, it so takes pleasure, as
that it would rather have the truth than any thing: though sometimes in a
passion, it may as well quarrel with that truth, as it does at other times
quarrel with a lust. But that I shall speak more unto, when I come to speak of
the Acts of Faith as it is in the Will, which now I shall betake my self unto.

CHAP. XI.
Faith receives Christ also as it is an act of the Will, And here it has a
fivefold act. 1. A pious affection. 2. An approving of the assent of the
understanding to the ^th of the Promise. 3. A giving up it self to Jesus
Christ. 4. A resting upon Jesus Christ. 5. An application to it self of what is
in Jesus Christ. A Caution. Application.

FAith does not only receive as it is an act in the understanding, but as it is
an act in the Will. There are five several ways whereby Faith as it is in the
Will does receive Jesus Christ and his fullness. A fivefold act, Faith does (as
it is in the Will) put forth to the getting in of what is promised concerning
Jesus Christ and his benefits.

First: There is a pious affection. Or it works a kind of liking of, and love
unto Christ, and the things of him, as good and desirable and real. That is the
first thing. That whereas before the Soul looked upon him as an Enemy, or as
one that was exceeding hard and austere, and it may be, as one that did but
delude and mock, and intended not to give what he spoke of and revealed; Now
the soul begins to have better thoughts of God, and to think that he is kind
and real. And whereas before it looked upon the things of Christ as of no
value, and cared not for the knowledge of them, now it sels all to buy that
Field wherein they are, it looked before upon communion with God as not to be
desired in comparison or competition with the pleasures of sin. His favor and
good will with the will of the flesh he would have, but would rather leave God
than leave his lusts. Whereas before he had no mind to mortification or denial
of himself in any thing, now there begins to be some liking of the things of
Christ, and some kind of contentment to be so. In Psalm. 16.7. My reins instruct
me (says he) in the night season. It Is a Psalm, which is a profession of
Christ, and a Picture of one that is made after Christ. You may see in that,
how Christ suffered for us, and how we ought to be whatever our afflictions or
sufferings be for his name sake. Now says David, as one that is drawn after
Christ, My reins instructed me in the night season. The Reins are the seat of
the affections and desires. They instructed him: that is, they persuaded him,
and they began to work him into a better opinion of the ways of God, than
before he had. Then I could say, says he, The Lord is my portion, and my Lot
is fallen in a good ground, and now God and troubles, God and afflictions are
exceeding desirable together, let the afflictions be never so hard. In Romans
4.20. it is said that Abraham did believe, and gave Glory to God. What is it to
give Glory to God? It is to give a praise and commendation of his works unto
him, which is to set out the Attributes lively which he has put forth in any
thing toward us. But says he, he gave Glory unto God, that is, he commended
God, and spoke well of him, and surely (he said within himself) he would never
have spoken that I should have had a Child, and not have done it, and he would
not have made me believe that all the Generations of the world should be
blessed in him that should come from me, unless something above nature should be
done for the bringing forth of him. He had a good opinion of God. Mark it.
Though there has been no parley, no agreement, nor match made between parties,
yet we discern love between them upon their commending one another. So when the
Soul begins to commend God, and cannot tell how to think so and so of God as
Unbelief suggests, then he begins to love, and that indeed is a beginning of
Faith. The Papists tell us that Faith is unformed, and as a body without a soul
until there be love. That is an error. For the formal act of Faith is in the
understanding to assent, which is not comptiable unto the will and affections.
But in this sense much might be said concerning love, Though it gives not a
Philosophical, yet it gives a divine being unto Faith: that is, it puts an
excellency upon it. Whatever comes from Love unto God is thereby (you know)
made more acceptable unto God. And this love or desire of God is necessary both
to make a man's understanding captivated unto the mind of God, and to make the
things revealed to become easy unto him. We easily believe that shall be which
we would have be, and that man that gets our love, gets our trust. That
therefore is the first thing which Faith does in the will, it begets a pious
affection and liking of the goodness in God and the goodness that is in the
things which are promised by him unto us. It Is not (says the Soul) I perceive
now such a hardness, and such an ill condition to be married to Jesus Christ,
as I thought of before: It Is not a way that brings with it so many
inconveniences as my heart supgested to me.

But Secondly: As Faith is in the Will, it does approve and allow of that aslent
and credit which the understanding has given unto the truth of the promises. I
say it does approve and allow of that assent which the understanding has given
unto the promises. The understanding says, I do verily that these things are
true, you do well says the Will, hold you there, hold fast that word, that is a
word worthy of all acceptance, receive that rather than any thing. As a
Steward lets a Lease unto a Tenant, and afterward brings it to the Grand-Lord,
and he takes cognizance of it, and gives consent to it: So the understanding
brings the promise to the Soul, and says, I have believed these things to be
true, and that they shall be accomplished; They are above Sense and Reason, But
I cannot but think bu^ they shall be; They are better than all things else: Now
does the Will give up it self fully unto the liking and ratifying of this act.
You have it I conceive fully proved in Phillip. 3.3. We are the Circumcision
which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. We rejoice faith he, and have no confidence in the
flesh, the Apostle is there proving that a man cannot be saved by the works of
the Law, but only by being found in Christ, Concerning this (says he) we do
rejoice. As if he should have said, we are glad with all our hearts that we
shall not go to Heaven by doing, but by believing, and not upon out own Legs,
but in the Arms of Christ. It does us good to the heart that there is no duty
nor service that shall be accepted, but only the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not
our salvation alone which makes our hearts cheerful, but it is this, that it
is given by such a means and hand as Jesus Christ is. We rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. As by approving sin a man does make
sin his own, and contracts the guilt of it which was done by another: So by the
Wills approving of the assent which the Understanding has given unto the truths
of the Gospel, the Will becomes a partaker together with it. Or thus: As a man
that does approve evil, will soon be full of all unrighteousness, So the will
approving what the understanding believes concerning the truth of the promises
will bring the Soul to be filled with the blessings of it.

Thirdly: Faith does make the Will to give up it self unto Jesus Christ. And
therefore Faith is called a coming unto him: And in 2 Cor. 8.5. They gave
themselves unto God, and then unto us. You shall understand the meaning of it,
if we first consider the meaning of the word (...), [they gave] He that gives a
thing alters the property of it, he makes him to be the Lord and master of it,
to whom he gives it. This is yours do with it what you please, I call it my own
no more. So now they gave themselves unto Jesus Christ, and resigned themselves
unto him, and would no more meddle as before they had done in working out
meritoriously their own salvation. I am not my own says the Soul, I am thine,
Lord I have no more to do with my self, to save my self, than I have to do with
that which is another man's to use at my pleasure: I have given my self to thee.
And as you may discern the meaning of it by the word [Give] So you may by that
which the Apostle joins to it: They gave themselves first to God and then to
us. How did they give themselves to the Apostles? They did give themselves to
them as their Teachers as those by whom God would reveal the things of him, and
the way of practicing of the Will of Jesus Christ. Upon this account you shall
find that faith is compared to Marriage, where parties give over the right of
themselves unto another. Only let me tell you this by the way: That there is an
implicit giving. As a man is said to give himself to sleep, and to idleness
who does indulge his own ease, and lays himself softly: That is an implicit
giving. There is an explicit giving, and that is by way of express
resignation: As a man that comes and delivers a possession of goods, or a
commodity which is bought into the hands of another: Here, take what is thy
own. Now in all Faith there is an implicit giving, but not an explicit. I say
there is an implicit giving: there is an indulgence of it self, and liking
what may make it self vile, and what may draw it unto Jesus Christ, though it
cannot say (as it is true to say) before all things I had rather, or do desire
to favor, and will no more seek after the love of any other creature. The
explicit resignation is that which the Saints do come unto: But a man may have
faith though he cannot say so of himself. This explicit Resignation and giving
a man's self is necessary (but not as this implicit giving a man's self is) unto
salvation.

Fourthly: Faith as it is in the Will does make a man to rest and stay himself
upon Jesus Christ, and to look to no other means besides him for salvation. To
rest upon him. This you have the Scripture often times speaking. Esaias 50.10. Let
him trust in the Lord, and stay upon his God. Sometimes therefore it is called in
the Scripture (as in Psalm. 37.1.) a not fretting, but being quiet. This resting
brings in abundance from Jesus Christ. I say it brings in: For if a touch of
him be followed with virtue to heal: If one touch upon dead bones will make
life come into the spirit, then what will the continued acts of Faith do? This
is that indeed which the Scripture calls a life. In Gal. 2.20. Because, though
there be many intermissions and interruptions, that a man does so rest as that
he is beaten off, yet still he comes unto Jesus Christ again. That is his
general course, and that wherein alone he takes conentment. In this case the
Soul says to Jesus Christ in its carriage, I say in its carriage, just as a
man uses to say to one he depends upon, I will look no where else, If you
disappoint me, look to it, I have no other friends to supply me, I have none to
go unto for relief but you: So faith the Soul. And if it find its self at any
time carried to other things, and to rest in them, then it is displeased with
it self, and troubled at it self, and never has quiet until it makes that
void and nothing, which it has done before.

Then Fifthly: As Faith is in the Will, it takes in what is in Christ, it
applies it to its self, according as its need and necessities are. I say, it
takes in what is in Christ. All the rest of the acts of faith were but (as it
were) carrying the soul to him; This now does make it enriched by him. As the
Cloth lying in the Fat does receive the color and dye: Or as a man lying in
sin is thereby hardened and habituated to do evil: So the Soul by its rest and
continuance in Jesus Christ comes to be made partaker of all that is in Jesus
Christ. It makes use of him to pardon and to sanctification. When as it is
afraid of wrath, Joh. 15.1.
it looks up to him: When it is besieged with lusts it sends for help to him.
Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing. That is, Not only without their
being in him, but without their making use of him. Therefore in John 3.21. it is
said that he that comes to Christ, has al his works wrought in God. Wrought in
God; How is that? As he goes to God for direction, so he goes to God for
strength through Jesus Christ.

Let me add but this Caution.

That though these five several acts be done by Faith as it is in the Will,
yet you are not to think that they are done in that order that I have
propounded them, or that they must be done to so high and notable pitch and
degree before a man can receive, But there is something of all these wherever
faith is; and some thing done of all these, though it be very weak: There is
some love, though it be but a preferring of him to others: And some approving,
and yielding of its self unto Jesus Christ, and some resting on him.

I shall only say this one word of Application at this time, and that is this.

USE

If Faith be a Receiving (as you have heard) Then the sin of Unbelief is
exceeding great and very provoking. As our misery is great that we have not
only no active power to do good, but we want a passive power to receive good.
We are no apter nor fitter to any good work than the stone is fit for a
building which can be laid in no place till the hand of the Workman comes upon
it and squares it. So the sin of Unbelief is great in this, that it is a
denying to receive, or an hardening of the Soul, and making it incapable as
much as in it lies of the things of Jesus Christ. What an abominable proud
thing is it for a Beggar that he will not take an alms for himself that has
nothing to live upon, that he will not receive a favor? Yet such is the sin of
Unbelief, for Faith is a Receiving. Thou do as much as say in thy own self,
Thy acts of unbelief, have this voice, Lord I will have none of that which thou
offerest; Keep it to thy self; I had rather be without salvation than have it
upon such terms, by way of an alms or receiving; I will work for it, and
purchase it, and buy it, and not take it as a mere gift. What Prince is able to
endure that the condemned person should reject his pardon, and not take it:
that he should accept the halter and the block, rather than the Grace and favor
tendered to him. We think it modesty and humility not to receive the things of
the Gospel that are so glorious: No: But because that faith is a receiving,
thou do throw all these things like dust into the wind, and water upon a
stone,: Thou will not afford God so much as a Vessel to take in what falls from
Heaven into the Souls of men. It is not thy modesty, but thy pride. If thou
have never so much, Can thou not receive a kindness? If thou be never so
well, yet can thou not be better? Have thou so great an abundance, that
nothing can be added to thee? Say all this if thou dare, and own it before
the Lord: Thou must say it, if thou take the part of unbelief, because faith
is a receiving, and unbelief is a rejecting.

CHAP. XII.
Object. Faith being a Quality, and so an Accident, can be but in one Subject,
and therefore not both in the Understanding and the Will. Answ. 1. Faith is one
by Aggregation. 2. That habit which is in one Faculty formally may be in diverse
by diffusion. Application. By this try whether you have true Faith or no. An
Objection Answered.

OBJECT.

BUt it may be objected; That Faith cannot be both in the Understanding and in
the Will, because Faith is a Grace or Quality, and therefore an Accident, and an
Accident is proper but unto one Subject: As sight is only in the Eye; and
hearing in the Ear: So Faith is only either in the Understanding, or in the
Will; but not in both.

Answ. For Answer to this in brief.

1. The Habit or Grace of Faith (in the first place) is one; Not simply and
absolutely but by Aggregation and Composition of many habits: As two may be in
one act, So two habits does make one Virtue or Grace. Many qualities may
subordinately concur to the making up of one habit or virtue.

It Is opened thus.

Beauty in the Body is a Quality, but yet it is composed partly of the
proportion of parts, and partly of the healthiness and soundness of parts.

So, Liberality is a virtue; but it is composed of a good disposition in the
Will, and also of a moderation in desire after earthly things.

So, Prudence is partly in the Understanding, and partly in the Will ordering a
man's conversation. We find it by experience, that when we do believe we do both
put forth knowledge, and also good affection or an Act of the Will toward Jesus
Christ.

There is a meditation of the Promises, and there is also a resignation of a
man's self up to him that has promised; This we find by experience when we do
believe. And we find by the same experience that when we would believe we are
hindered by the darkness of our minds; and when our Understandings are cleared
yet we are hindered by the awkwardness and indisposition of our wills.

Let us love one never so much we cannot trust him except he promise; and not
then neither except we have an affection to him as to one that is faithful and
true.

2. One habit is in one faculty formally but may be in diverse by way of
diffusion and disposition. The meaning of it is this. There is a communication
or intercourse between the Understanding and the Will. One works into and upon
the other (...) the work of one is required to the work of the other.

As for example.

Freedom or liberty is formally in the Will, but it is radically or rooted in
the Understanding; for the Will were not free to choose if it had not a light
showing it the difference of things, what is good and what evil, what does come
near to, and will not bring it the end that it aims at.

Suppose you therefore (for I will not stand disputing) that Faith be seated
only in the Will; yet it works into the understanding all the acts that I have
spoken of, and is not without them. And so on the contrary; so that whether you
read or hear faith to be in the Understanding or Will; make no great difference
in that, for both shall be satisfied, and there is something to be done by both
that you may be made partakers of Jesus Christ.

So I have done with the Doctrinall part of that.

USE

For the Use and Application of it. If Faith be a Receiving, then by this you
may try whether you have faith or not. If you look into Scripture you shall find
that the Children of God are distinguished from those that are not born of God
by this, that the one receives and the other receives not the things of God. In
the verse before my text it is said that Christ came to his own and his own
received him not. Not to receive him and to be in darkness is all one (as you
may see by comparing the verse together) He came to his own and they received
him not, but they that did receive him they became the sons of God. By his own
is meant the Jews whom God had chosen for his peculiar people and owned before
the World; (All are Gods own by Creation, the fullness of the Earth is his; but
these were Gods by a special relation and obligation.) And they had received
from him Laws and Statutes; and they had professed peculiar subjection and
obedience to him, so that they could say, We are thine, Lord save us; yet they
who were so different from the World are distinguished from those that are
taken out of the World and are the sons of God by Regeneration, thus, They
Received not.

So you have the Apostle using the self same discrimination in 1 Cor. 2.14.
where he tells you that the natural man does not receive the things of God
neither can he, because they are spiritually discerned: But we have the mind of
Christ (says he) So that I say, Receiving does distinguish the Faith that is
unfeigned from that that is temporary and historical.

And as the Children of God are distinguished by receiving, so whatsoever a man
gets if not by Faith it is ill come by; Yea he does become guilty like goods
gotten into a man's possession illegally. Gal. 3.7. Received you the Spirit by
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? putting them in mind that if
that Spirit (they thought they were of) came to them by the hearing of the Law,
it were not the Spirit of the living God by which they could be saved. Therefore
try your selves by this. Thou say thou have Faith, Is thy faith a receiving
Quality? Something that does enable thee to gape and gasp? Does it open thy Soul
(too) in reaching after the things of Christ? In plain terms, Is thy
Understanding greedy of knowing? Art thou willing to give up thy reason to the
testimony that God gives of his Son? Art thou loath to let the thoughts of
Christ pass from thee? Is thy Will inclining and tending to them?

Now for the making out of this, (and I beseech you mark it) of some the
Scripture says barely thus much, That they received not Christ, They are shut
up under that (As in John 1.11. the verse before my text) He came to his own,
and they received him not. And, The natural man receives not the things of
God. 1 Cor. 2.14. Some believe not, and receive not but they are very near it.
The fruit is near their mouths, the word (as I may use it) is not far from
them. Plainly thus:

There are some that are negative not privative Unbeleevers: That is, they are
not Unbeleevers by way of opposition, but by way of omission. They have not
denied and said they will not go out to Jesus Christ, but, they are about the
matter, and about the matter, till the things of their peace be hidden from
their Eyes. Some Persons are neither free, nor are they promised in marriage,
but are in treaty so as they cannot admit of another to come to them: So there
are some that hold Jesus Christ in hand, cannot endure to think that Jesus
Christ should leave them, and yet they come not actually off to the closing
with him and receiving him in to their hearts.

As there is a negative holiness, the man can say I am not as this man: So
there is a negative unbelief, when as it may be said of men they do not lay
hold or receive, but it cannot be said of them that they do reject or refuse.

Sometimes this does arise from unsensibleness of the want of Jesus Christ:
Because we are not sensible of our need of Jesus Christ. And that (I take it)
was the case of the hearers who are compared to the high way upon whom the seed
fell to whom the word of God came and they minded it not; they gave it the
hearing but they forgot it presently.

And sometimes it comes from being taken up with lawful things as they in
Matthew. 22. would first of all go and do the works they had before them, and
they would then come to the Feast. They did not say they would not come, but
they could not come then.

Or, 'specially it comes from an unactiveness and slothfulness and listlessness
of heart.

There is a kind of Condition of Soul that a man is like the Sea in a calm,
that you know not which way it goes; A stillness there is or scarce any motion
to that which is good. Think on it. Be it from what cause it will though it
arise not from any dislike or opposition to the things of Jesus Christ, yet it
is a dangerous Condition. A still liveless spirit is as well a spirit in a
dangerous condition as that which is hurried and carried violently with strong
temptations to sin. In Matthew. 21.30.31. One says he will go into the Vineyard;
he granted it to be his duty, but he went not. The Lord gives us thereby to
understand that there are some who perish through not doing that which they
have a purpose to do, and that which they are convinced is best to be done by
them. He that said he would go, and did not; You are not to conceive him to be
one that played the Hypocrite, in promising to go and yet did not intend it; but
in this, that he did not fulfill that which had gone out of his mouth. There is
hypocrisy when a man is convinced, and does profess to do the good he does
not, Upon that account therefore you see there is a reason you should examine
your selves.

But besides; The Scripture does speak of some that contradict the Gospel and
word of Faith. In Act. 13.45. the Apostle exhorts them to receive with meekness
the word ingrafted that should save their Souls. That does imply that there is
an aptness in men to be provoked at hearing the Gospel. How many are there are
wise to evade and exclude themselves from the compass of the promises? that if
any thing come near them to comfort them, by and by some objection or other is
made, that so they may be still in their doubts and still in their fears? In Act.
13.46. It is said they put away from them the Word of eternal life; even as a
sick man puts away the meat and says he is not able to endure it; So they say,
this is not for such as they are, it is too holy for such dogs. And as it was
with Ammon when he had defiled his sister Thamar, he thrust her out of doors
and bolted the door against her. So do men do with the things of Christ: put
them from them and bolt and bar their hearts against them with a resolution
never to believe this while the World stands. God opened the heart of Lidia,
Acts 16.14. she would not open it, but he broke it open by his Spirit.

Yea lastly (my Beloved) There are that do trample under foot the things of
Jesus Christ, and instead of receiving of them, count them vile and not worthy
estimation. Heb. 10.29. which by many is understood concerning the
indisposition of heart that often times does befall one that is saved afterward.
Now then; seeing there are some that do not receive; and some that do
contradict and will not receive but slight the things of Jesus Christ; then try
whether you have Faith or not, by your receiving.

OBJECT.

But you have ranked me in my place; You have set me in the place of those that
have not Faith; for I put away mercy from me.

Answ. To that I answer. A Godly man does often times say nay to God when he
wooes him to be saved, and yet afterward takes it: Puts away the mercy which
he is glad on with all his Soul even as a hungry man is of that food which when
he was full he laid by and would not meddle with. When a godly man comes to see
what he has done in refusing and rejecting and disputing against the Grace of
God, then his heart breaks, and then he does close with that which he has
rejected. A Godly man does eat up that which he has formerly refused. Thou
shall not wash my feet says Peter to Christ: As if he should have said, It is
not fit that the Lord of Heaven and Earth should do any such thing for so poor
and vile a Creature as I am: But when Christ tells him, Peter, It is not the
sign but the thing signified that I speak to, and if I wash thee not thou have
no part in me; then he cries, Not only my Feet but my hands etc. He is now
content that Christ should do that in a great degree which before he could not
abide to hear of in the least degree.

CHAP. XIII.
The temper of a man that has Faith (as considered under the notion of
Receiving) does discover it self in these particulars. 1. He is daily purging
out corruptions, that there may be room to receive Jesus Christ. Particularly.
1. Confidence in the Flesh. 2. Living by sense. II. He is much in prayer. III.
He is not satisfied till he obtain all which the Promise is engaged for. IIII.
He lays hold on every intimation that may give hope, and thereby is raised to
great expectation.

THerefore, to discover to you a little whether you have Faith or no; I shall
in a few particulars set forth to you the temper of a man that has Faith; and
I shall keep to this notion of it, as it is a Receiving.

First of all; He that has this Faith is daily purging and emptying of himself
of every corruption of flesh and spirit that there may be room to entertain and
receive Jesus Christ. The ground of it is this. Naturally we are full of al
unrighteousness; (as a Vessel is full of water that can hold no more) there is
no place for Grace. So far as corruption is in us so far it naturally works to
take off the heart from seeking after Christ; Even as a Disease takes off the
Stomach from meat that is wholesome: That therefore Jesus Christ may be received
it is necessary that the heart be daily emptied that there may be room made for
him. But besides that, Faith does breed a hope and expectation in the Soul of
great things; and therefore Faith sets the Soul on purging that so it may be
capacious of those things.

Faith is called a Holy Faith. And we are said to be sanctified through Faith.
In Acts 26.8. As the things that were sanctified were separated from common use
to a holy one: So now the Soul that before was common; Common for the thoughts
of the World, and for the lusts of the flesh, Now is dedicated (if I may so
express it) to God. It is like a room that is locked up and kept only to lay
the things of Jesus Christ in. Grace does come into us, not as into a Subject
for that is free and fit the receiving of it; but it comes into us as life
comes into a dead body; Or as light comes into the dark Air. There must be
first of all a putting out of the strong man and of sin, before there can be a
putting in of Jesus Christ. It Is one thing to purge sin out of us and to
mortify it because it does keep good things from us; and another thing to
purge it out that we may receive Christ in the room of it. A Hypocrite may
purge out sin because it keeps out good from him; but not to this end, that he
may receive Jesus Christ; for naturally he has no knowledge of him, 1 Cor.
2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither does he 'count
them so good; for they are not so suitable to him as the ways of sin. As a man
to be eased of a bad and toublesom neighbor, will turn him out of doors and let
the house stand empty: So, (rather than perish) an unregenerate man will turn
sin out of doors, but he will not let Christ dwell there, for he will trouble
more a great deal. A Believer mortifies corruption that there may be a place,
and room for Jesus Christ and all that he brings with him. Therefore, as both
the Understanding and the Will (as you hear) are active in believing: So, a
Believer purges both; the prejudices and false reasonings that are in his mind,
and the distaste and carnalness of affection that is in his Will. An
unregenerate man he has a combat within him but the combat is not between
Grace and Sin, but it is one faculty combating against another. The whole Soul
does not strive against sin; but the Understanding would hate, but the Will
(for reasons) will not let him hate. So in like manner in mortification; An
unregenerate man does not purge all the parts and faculties of his Soul, but
some: and therefore his affections are bad though he have light: and if his
affections be hot, yet he has not light in his Understanding. Therefore, Do
you endeavor to cleanse your selves from all corruptions? Does the hope you
have of receiving Christ purify your hearts, or put you upon the endeavor of
purging your hearts daily?

There are two particular sins upon which the Grace of Faith (as it is
receiving) does work to the ejecting of them: and the one is, Confidence in the
Flesh: and the other is Living by sense.

1. Confidence in the flesh or in any thing a man can do: Therefore sometimes
the Saints of God are afraid to lok back upon the actions that has been
brought forth by them in any beautiful manner least their hearts should be
ensnared by them and they are abhorring themselves even when their ways are
pure, he abhors himself as to justification when he does the best duties in the
best manner he can. We have no Confidence in the flesh; that is, we would have
none, we cannot endure that. Other sins we fain would have mortified, but this
above all other.

2. And again, They live not by sense. 1 Cor. 5.7. We walk (says the Apostle)
by Faith, and not by fence. And we look not upon the things that are seen, but
the things that are not seen, etc. 2 Cor. 4. and the last. Of Abraham it is
said, Romans 4.19. That he believed, and did not so much as consider the
barrenness of Sarahs Womb, etc. The reason is this (my Beloved) Because there
is nothing can judge worse of the things of God than fence; and nothing hinders
more. When a man looks a little upon fence and reason, he is like a man that
has been in a dark room, that when he comes out, the light of noon day is a
trouble to him, and he can not discern the things that are before him.

Secondly: He that has this Receiving Faith, he is a man that is much in
prayer: Prayer demands and sues for what the Promise obliges and makes due to a
man^ In Psalm. 109.4. David says thus; I Pray, or, I give my self unto Prayer.
As we use to say, a man is of this or that Trade which he follows for the most
part; and other things are but by the by which he does: So David was so much in
Prayer, that he says he was Prayer. And so Paul, Acts, 9. as soon as ever he
began to believe, he began to pray. And as a Believer does pray, so he prays
upon the same terms of Grace that he is a Receiver; that is thus; He is a
Receiver for another, he receives nothing as his own primarily, and originally,
but as it is a gift and trust put into his hands by Jesus Christ to use for the
services to which he has appointed him. He goes therefore to God, not as one
that is the Principal, but as one that is a Receiver for another: He goes with
a Spirit that speaks after this manner to the Lord; It is not for my self
alone, I am but the Messenger of Jesus Christ, he sent me; Jesus Christ has
undertaken for me, and will see it made good to me, and I shall have it.

Thirdly: He that has this Faith as it is a Receiving, is unsatisfied with
whatever he gets at any one time till he has come to get all which the Promise
is engaged for and to him: And the reason of it is this: Therefore he is
unsatisfied, because he has much to receive, and that which he has received
does but enlarge his capacity for more, and encourages him that he shall have
it, as it is due: Even as meat gets a stomach to meat, so receiving gets an
appetite to receiving. As presumptuous persons will find something or other to
encourage themselves by; so, Faith (upon one respect or other) will ever be
looking for, and after something from Jesus Christ; upon one account or other it
will be still demanding. Art thou therefore applying to thy self the things that
are promised? Art thou challenging from God more than thou have? urging him
upon his Word that thou have not so much as thou do hope in him for? Is what
thou have received as a taste that makes thy affections run out after more? Then
know, that thy Faith is indeed a receiving Faith, a Faith of the Son of God.

Fourthly: This Faith as it is Receiving, will take hold of every insinuation
and intimation, lay up every word that does give hope; and works up it self by
small grounds (as one would think) to great expectations from Jesus Christ. As a
man that is trading takes notice of every thing that is said or spoken
hopefully of getting more than he has. As there are some spirits that are ever
growing upon one; give them once, and they will come again. Or, as some
Children, that when they have received something from their Parents, they have
their Eyes continually upon them looking for more. Such is the frame of the
Spirit of one that believes, as it is a receiving; Faith makes a man to do so.
And therefore you shall find by experience, that words spoken by the by, often
times in a Sermon, yet are the great encouragements, and hearteners, and
supporters of the hearts of Godly People. Faith is of that having, craving,
growing nature, that if it can but get a word, it will make a great matter of
it, sin makes us greedy of occasions to it; As a word or a syllable has great
provocation in it unto sin, so has a word that is spoken but by the by, a
great efficacy upon the hearts of them that believe: Thou complainest thou have
not what thou did look for, because thou do complain it is a sign of thy
Faith. Thou would have that which thou have not; and Faith is a receiving.

Then seeing both Understanding and Will, stretch forth their hands to receive
the things of Jesus Christ; Believers they have a rich, and plentiful
Condition. Their hands it is true are full of work they have much to do; but
they have much to get in too. What they have a mind to, they shall have; and
what they know or is revealed to be in the hand of God to do, shall be done for
them. Their Understandings and Wills (let them be extended and enlarged) they
shall both of them be filled full. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desires of
them that trust in him.

CHAP. XIIII.
Further Application of the Point. This shows a necessity of Faith. An
Objection from 2 Timothy 2.13. Answered. An Objection from the difficulty of
Believing answered. Encourage your selves to Believe. And to that end. 1.
Consider the many and glorious things that are to be Received. 2. Be convinced
that you cannot live without these things which Faith helps to. 3. Consider
these things are to be bad only by Believing. 4. Lay the command of God upon
your Souls. Several Objections answered.

USE

NOw I go to another Use. If Faith be a Receiving, then if you would have
Christ or any thing of his, you must believe, If you would have Christ or any
thing of his, I say, you must believe. The Use lies upon this, that Faith is
not only a Receiver, but the only Receiver which God has appointed and
substituted. There are other Graces which God gives besides Faith, but he gives
this virtue (to none) of laying hold and Receiving, but only unto Faith. Love
that does join the Soul to Christ and unites it, but Faith receives and takes
of the fullness that is in Jesus Christ. In Jam. 1.7. says James, Let not such
a man think (that is, such a one who asks not in faith, but wavers) that he
shall receive any thing at the hand of the Lord. This wavering the Apostle does
oppose unto Faith. And yet he that has this true Faith may have this wavering
in some particular acts, though not in the frame of his spirit. As in Matthew.
14.31. Christ speaks unto Peter, and tells him he was one of little Faith, and
asks him why he doubted? And the word that he does use there (...), signifies a
being between two opinions, a halting as it were, or an uncertainty of mind not
knowing what to do, whether to receive Christ, or not to receive him, or
whether not to receive Christ, or to receive him. In particular acts there may
be (I say) wavering in a man that has true Faith: But while he is so, let him
not think that he shall receive any thing at the hands of God. We are wont to
set other things besides Faith to be our Receiver. As the Papists, so do we put
good works unto the work of Faith: They think, by good words we do apply Jesus
Christ and his benefits. Mark it. Though there be much due unto thee from the
Promise, though thou have God engaged to thee deeply, yet will not God give thee
any thing by the hand of any other Grace but only Faith. God will pay what he
ows, but he will pay it through believing. Therefore the Text runs expressly, He
that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. that is all he must look for at
the hand of God. He could not do any great work (says the Text) among them,
because of their unbelief, Math. 13.58. No great works. The meaning of the
place is this, that God does do unto men according to their Faith. According to
thy Faith, be it unto thee, Math. 9.29. As men's Faith is, so shall their
receiving be. If their Faith be mingled with unbelief, their receipt shall be
but small. Where there is a total unbelief, their receipt shall be nothing
from God.

OBJECT.

But you will say unto me, as it is said in 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, yet
he remains faithful, and he cannot deny himself.

Answ. To that I answer, If we believe not, that is, if we believe not some
particular Promise, and at some particular time, God will abide faithful: for
if you observe the place, it speaks concerning suffering times, and this
Promise, viz That if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. A man
may come to the stake, and to his Grave, and yet notwithstanding want a
persuasion of this. A man may die by his act of affiance, and yet have no
persuasion of what assistance he shall have in his sufferings: But if a man
believe not, that is, not at al, then nothing is due unto him. Mark the Text
again. God says he is faithful. Therefore his faithfulness supposes his
Promise. And his Promise supposes our Faith: for he is engaged to none but to
them that believe. Therefore though God abides faithful, yet the meaning is,
though we question this and that at this and that time, yet if our hearts
remain faithful to God and his name, we shall receive the things that are
promised. Therefore let me speak unto you, and unto you especially that can
settle upon any work, but the work of believing, that are easily persuaded that
the Promises belong not to you, nor the mercies which are saving, with a small
hint and insinuation you are discouraged and disheartened: Let me speak unto you
that are ready to deprive your selves of every sweet morsel which the hand of
the Lord reaches out to you, who say within your selves, when I am thus, and
can do thus, then I will believe and go unto Jesus Christ. You must come unto
this (if you will have any thing from the hand of Jesus Christ) to believe. You
must lay down your reason and your sense, and you must put your selves to this
question.

Ask thy own heart whether thou would have Jesus Christ or not? If it would
have him and the things that are his, then tell it, that it must believe, for
there is no way to receive, but by believing. Therefore let me give this
counsel to thee, Spend that time in drawing and urging thy Soul to go to Jesus
Christ, which thou do in disputing thy right and title, and in answering
objections and doubts. In stead of making out a reflect act of Faith or
assurance, go directly unto the Lord Jesus Christ. And mark the reason of it.
Faith it gives a title and the possession of the inheritance. It Is a receiving.
Now mark. Be sure thar thou have a right: If thou have a Faith that is always
having and craving and longing and hankering after the things of Jesus Christ,
it is right.

And again, Though that every Commandment of God be to be obeyed, and none
ought to be more careful of holiness than he that is justified by the
righteousness of another and by the Faith of Jesus, I say none ought to be more
careful of a holy life than a Believer, yet spend thy time (mark what I say)
and thy spirits first in receiving and getting Jesus Christ. Go not this way to
work, when thou find thy self to be so and so, then thou will believe;
because thou art holy, therefore thou go to Jesus Christ, But go to Jesus
Christ that thou may receive holiness from him, for Faith is a receiving. As
eating a man's meat, takes up a great deal of time, yet there is no time lost,
because it fits a man for his work afterward. So the fitter thou will be to
all the works of sanctification, the more time thou spendest in receiving and
eating of the things of Jesus Christ. It is wisdom first for a man to get in a
fullness, and afterward to live answerable unto it. Why do thou think of thy
sanctification when thou have not received him that must make thee holy? Assure
thy self, it cannot be but all the things thou go about will grow dead
because thou have not wherewith to maintain them. Al thy motions are but like a
Wheel, which is hurried by a violent motion, but having no spring in its self,
in a little while it will grow dead. And assure thy self that thou shall not lay
a ground of Faith by doings. Doings may lay a ground of assurance, but not a
ground of receiving, or going unto Jesus Christ. It is true, Many things are to
be done, as well as believing when a man would receive. A man must ask, that he
may receive, John 16.24. And a man must be mortified that he may receive. Ye
ask and receive not, because you ask to spend upon your lusts, Jam. 4.3. And a
man must be humble, Jam. 4.6. God gives Grace to the humble. And the
Ordinances must be attended, even every of them, for it often times falls out,
that that Ordinance which is neglected, is that by which God will convey
himself. But the Ordinances are but the Vessels in the hand of Faith, they are
but Buckets which Faith does let down, or but Breasts which Faith does suck.
The Receiving, is still by Faith. Heb. 4.2. And therefore the word profited
not, because it was not mixed with Faith, And the Text says, If they prayed
and beleev^d, they should then receive. It Is true, there are a great many
Graces that must be in the man that receives any thing from Gods hands, but
they are all but the attendants of Faith: They are necessary unto Faith, Not
for reception, but by way of presence: As the Eye alone sees, though it cannot
see unless it be joined to the other members of the body. So Faith receives,
though it never receives, but when it is joined with other Graces. Whatever
Graces are required unto Faith* Faith will help us unto. To pray acceptably. If
we are to pray with humility and submission, Faith will help us to it. When
once Faith is infused it does dispose and enable the heart to every thing that
God requires.

Besides you know how a man that is touched with covetousness and the love of
the world will bow down himself and deny himself much, and become base that he
may heap up riches together. So will a man when he has once gotten Faith. He
will pray earnestly, and go from ordinance to ordinance, and submit to any
condition that the ordinances of Jesus Christ require at his hands that he may
serve God and be saved. And therefore again and again I say, If you will receive
any thing you must believe, else there is no way for it. If you will stand
reasoning and disputing and debating, and if you will have things clear to you
that you are a child of God, before you believe, you will have the matter put to
such an issue as God brings a man never into. God never gives his love to a
man, but by believing, because believing is a receiving.

OBJECT.

You will say unto me, This is hard quarter, and hard terms, that we can have
nothing but only upon trust and upon believing.

To this I answer the commandment of faith is nothing so hard as the
commandments of sin are. They that sow to the flesh, shall (says the Apostle)
in Gal. 6.8. of the flesh reap Corruption. They shall never have any thing in
hand or to receive after this life, but tribulation, sorrow, and anguish. Thy
faith assures thee, Or thou may be assured that faith will give thee a good
title, and something while thou live, and be sure to give thee honor and glory
and immortality hereafter. Thou art saved by faith, says he, It is the gift of
God. This is true indeed, It is a hard matter to believe. But the hardness does
not arise from it self, but from us. As it is hard for a sick man to get down
either meat or medicine. But it is not because there is neither a passage open
and free, or not because the meat is not good, but because he is sick. So thou
shall find the reason of all this difficulty to be in thy pride: Thou advancest
thy reason and sense against the commandment and law of the Gospel. And
therefore it is hard unto thee. It is hard, but it is but so in the beginning,
Like meat, when it is first eaten, does bring a kind of duliness, and heaviness
but afterward breeds spirits and strength. It is certain my beloved it is the
smallest thing that can be required for the receiving any thing at the hand of
God: for you are passive in it, you are made to receive. As a bal that is
thrown against the ground is made to rebound upwards. There cannot be less
required then faith to the receiving of any thing. For,

Take it as it is in the understanding: The receiving a testimony does not so
much require the use of reason, as a good report and esteem of him that speaks.
I say, the receiving a testimony is an artificial argument, and requires not so
much the knowledge of the things, as of the person speaking.

And Take it as it is in the Will: and it is a leaning: and that rather imports
weakness, then strength, rather debility, then ability.

And lastly, Whereas thou complainest it is hard to believe, yet if faith be a
hard thing, yet it is a receiving. Though it be a toil and a difficulty, It is
but in taking of things that are precious and good which will enrich thee. What
man ever complained of the hardness of telling Gold, and receiving Jewels and
things of worth which were given him out of the treasure of him that is rich.
Men take great toil, and run great hazards into far countries to receive. Thy
receiving is better and more certain. Thou shall receive strength by the
receiving of Christ, to receive more. Faith does not only give a man the things
promised, But as walking makes a man able to walk, so believing makes a man
more able to believe. Having once received something from the hand of God, thou
have thereby security given to thee that thou have nothing behind but what shall
be accomplished. As he that has received but part of a Sum, has an evidence
there by that the rest is due. And therefore I beseech thee, because that faith
is a receiving, encourage thy self unto believing: Encourage your selves unto
it. And that you may do so,

1. Lay open and keep before the eye of your Soul the many and glorious things
which are to be received. Meditate upon the excellencyes of Christ and the
portion that he brings: His portion: Both in regard of relation, ye shall be the
sons of God: And his portion in regard of estate or inheritance, for all things
are yours. The presence (you know) of an object does stir up the faculty and
the power in it, which lay (as it were) before dead and stirred not. Joshua.
7.21. I saw ( said Achan) the Babilonish garment, and I lusted after it, and
took it. As Sin prevails by its presence: So the way for Jesus Christ to
prevail, is to stand continually before thee. When thou have therefore looked
unto the promises, and looked into the story of what is said concerning Jesus
Christ, and what he will do for those that are united to him, Then come and ask
thy own foul, whether it will have none of these Then come and tell it that al
these are to be had, and it may take of them freely, though it can do nothing
for them, nor return suitably to them. The Apostle (to get men unto faith)
spreads abroad the Gospel and the things of Jesus Christ. Thou must preach unto
thy self the self same doctrine if ever thou will believe. Thy sins be before
thee, and death is before thee, and hell is before thee: And thou see by
experience that that takes up thy thoughts and thou can do nothing else but
only lament and bemone thy condition. If thou set'st Jesus Christ before thee
also, thou will be as much taken with him. For certainly there is more Taking
in his excellencies, then there is cause of terror in the other.

2. And again, Since faith is a receiving, convince thy soul that it cannot
live, nor be, unless it has these things which faith helps unto. Pardon must
be had. Justice will not be satisfied though thou should fulfill all the
commandments of God to the utmost, and never breakest them in the least. All that is due for the present, and there still remains an old score for the time
past that God will reckon with thee for. Thou art not able to make God amends of
thy self. Live of thy self, thou can not, therefore thou must receive. Acts,
4.12. There is no other name given under heaven whereby a man can be saved, but
only the name of Jesus Christ. And if a man (peradventure.) will be loath to take
of others as long as he has wherewith in his own hands, or his friends hands,
But when he sees he must either take of alms, or starve; and go on begging, or
die, Then he will go. That is thy case. Thou must receive from Jesus Christ, or
Starve. And thou can not receive the things of Jesus Christ but by believing.
As a Parent says to a Child that is peevish, and untoward, and that will not
eat his meat; Fast, says he. So there is nothing to be looked for from Jesus
Christ if thou beleevest not, but fiery Indignation. And if thy heart would go
to take contentment in the things in the World, Say to it, Now take Jesus
Christ, or nothing. What good will they do thee unless thou take Jesus
Christ? For they will not abide in the latter end, but then thou will have
sorrow.

Thirdly, Consider that nothing is required of you, but merely believing. I
reason thus:

If Faith receives al, then you must not look to have Grace without Faith: but
to have Grace, by Faith. In order of nature, Faith is before them, and your eye
must be most upon that, and your care of that. As the Text says in Math. 6.33.
that if a man seeks the Kingdom of God all other things shall be added together
with it. So I say, if you look after Faith, your heart will be humble, and
stoop to the condition which Faith reveals to you, and you will part from all
sins which have so great a place and interest in your affections.

And Lastly: Lay the Commandment of God upon thy self. This is the Commandment
of God that you believe, 1 John 3.23. This is the charge of God that you take
and receive, and drink of the Water of life freely. Be thou what thou will be:
Thou art under his Commandment. If thou art not, what need thou fear his
threatenings? He will do nothing unjustly, He will punish none but his Subjects.
If thou art his Subject, then thou art bound to obey.

Object. Thou will say thou art sinful and vile above measure.

Answ. But will thy sinfulness exempt thee from Obedience? This is his
Commandment, that you Believe, 1 John 3.23. Therefore come in the authority of
the great God, and speak unto thy Conscience, and say, Conscience, I charge
thee in the name of the great God, whose wrath thou tremblest at, I charge thee
in his name to go to Jesus Christ and believe. What wicked hearts have we,
which needs so much persuasion to receive, when we die if we do not receive?
How much ado is there with our hearts? How much are men encouraged by their
hopes to receive? Says Christ unto his Disciples and Apostles, Go and stay at
Jerusalem, and you shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.4. And yet
for them to go to Jerusalem, was to go into the Lions Mouth, and into the fire
as it were, where their greatest Adversaries were: But they will go that they
may receive. That was but the Gift of the Holy Ghost: And this is the Grace and
fellowship of the Holy Ghost. Know, when thou art once a Believer, thou art put
into the Paradise of God, wherein all the Trees of God are full of Fruit, and
thou may pluck where thou will. Faith is a Receiving. Know, that when thou
beleevest, God turns thee loose into his Treasury, and bids thee take where and
what thou will. Take the Covering or Righteousness of Jesus Christ to cover
thee. Take his Spirit for guiding and directing thee. The Lords Supper runs by
way of Commandment, Take, and Eat. As if he should have said, If there be any
thing in Jesus Christ better than another: As a man says at a Feast, If there
be any thing you have a mind unto, you have leave to take; forbear it not: So
the Lord commands you to take and eat. This is your Condition. A man
encourages himself in the World with this, That though he spends many hours,
and much time, yet he shall get that with which he shall do good at last. Many
a man is drawn by this, That when he has gotten this, then he may attend, and
do good. Let the same argument persuade you to believe: That if you believe,
you shall receive.

Object. But you will say unto me, I have believed, and yet not received, but I
am barren and empty.

Answ. 1. Thou say thou have not received. God says otherwise: Every one
that asks, receives, Matthew. 5.42. And Faith will not spare for asking. For in
the Scripture, in one place it is said, He that believes, shall not be
confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6. And in another place it is said, He that calls on the
Name of the Lord, shall not be confounded, Romans 10.13. Because Faith will be
crying and asking. As soon as it is in the heart, it will cry as a new born
Babe, in 1 Pet. 2.2. Every one that asks, receives, says God; and thou will be
judged by thy own heart and mouth. As he said to his Disciples; You have been
with me so long, and have you wanted any thing? No, say they. So let me ask
thee this question; When did thou ever believe, and had not hope in him?
When did thou ever trust in him for any thing, and that he did not make it
good? Did he ever disappoint thee? But

Secondly, There are diverse ways of Receiving. A man may receive an Estate by
receiving Security of that Estate, when he has good Bond, and Persons bound
unto him for it. Has not God given thee his Son? And has not God spoken unto
thee through a promise, and past his word that thy Heart has been enlightened,
inlivened, and cheered in the Meditations of it?

A man may receive you know by way of equivalency. As for example. If a man
does not receive so much in species, in money, yet he may in worth, in Jewels
or other things that will amount there unto. Do but look over all thy small Sums,
all the many mercies which thou have received, And see if they amount not to
what thou hopedst for? It may be thou have asked comfort, and God has given
thee Grace. This was but a bill of exchange. Thou have asked that God will fill
thee with joy, and God fills thee with humbleness. Here is but an Exchange.
Thou have received all this while. It may be thou would fain have Gloried in
him, and it may be God gloried concerning thee. As God said concerning Job.
There is not such a man in the whole Earth. God may say of such a one, though
he has nothing but Tears to Eat, and nothing but Bitterness and Anguish and
Sorrows, Yet he loves my ways. Here is a receiving. Know that Faith is such a
receiving, as a man that receives an infection, which he does not feel for the
present, but it may be he feels afterward. And the Reason is this. Because
that Faith principally receives as it is an act of the will. And if it did
receive principally as it is an act of the understanding, then a man could not
have any thing, but he should know it, or be near the knowledge of it. But since
that receiving is by the will, he must have the spirit of God to make known to
him the things that are freely given him of God. As the Apostle speaks in, 1
Cor. 2.12.

Now having answered this, I beseech you, Lay both hands (understanding and
will) upon the Lord Jesus Christ. Gather in with both faculties. Rest not til
your understanding be filled, and your will be satisfied. What ever it is which
you want, Christ has. What ever you would have from him, you must either have
from him upon price or merit, And you have none: Or you must have it upon gift.
Either you must receive it as an alms, or as a debt. A debt it is not to you,
but only as you believe. When you do receive it as an alms by Faith, it is
sweetest, and you shall receive most. The case stands thus. Either you must
yield to God, or God to you. It is fit you should yield to him. Why should not
the Cistern receive from the Fountain? The Creature from the Creator? It cannot
stand with his honor to yield to you, that is, upon any other terms to give
you any thing, but barely as an alms. If you will not part with your honor,
(as you must, if you do believe) know, God will not part with his honor, as he
must, if he gives any other way then by believing, for Faith is a receiving.
And it is fit he should uphold his glory as the Fountain of all that good which
the Creature hopes for,

CHAP. XV.
Receiving denotes Passiveness. This proved as to believing. I. In that Faith
is not of or from our selves. II. In the very act of Faith, whereunto we are
enabled by God, we act as little as possibly can be. This appears if you
consider. 1. The opposition which is in us to believing. 2. The Nature of Faith
it self. And that as it is an act either of. 1. The understanding. Or, 2. The
Will. 3. Who are believers. 4. Even the Saints are sensible of a power making
them to believe.

I Have already as you may remember spoken of Faith, as Receiving does import
and imply a getting an actual possession of that which God promised and gave
unto us in the purpose of his Grace through Jesus Christ. Election gives all.
The promises declare what is given, and engage God to make it good: And Faith
receives all. In Election God resolves what to do for us: The promise gives it
under his hand: And Faith puts it into our hands. Of this I say I have largely
spoken, and shall repeat nothing, but go on to what remains.

As Receiving implies and imports a getting into possession what was out of
possession before.

So it denotes passiveness rather then action: That is, A powerful virtue in
him that gives, rather then any such thing in the receiver. Such a passiveness
Receiving has in our ordinary speech. As when we say an Army received the
charge. We mean they stood out and bore the force and strength of their
adversary, they did defend themselves. So in the Scripture, James, 1.7. Let not
such a man think he shall receive any thing from the Lord. In 1 Pet. 1.9.
Receiving the end of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. In Heb. 6.7. The
ground receives blessing from God. In all these places Receiving is of passive
signification, noting something of action and excellency in the behalf of the
giver but little of the subject at the first hand. In all the passiveness of
understanding beings, there is some kind of action. For the Soul is not passive
in the same manner, that a tree is unto the Ax that hews it: or as a stone is
unto the instrument and hand that cuts and carves it. Our Lord Jesus Christ is
said to have suffered, yet even in that suffering, He laid down his Life (you
know the Text speaks) and he was obedient. A man is not converted unto God as a
stock, or as a stone, Phil. 2.8. John, 11 15.
but as soon as any Grace is given and infused into him, immediately at the very
next apprehension, or upon his receiving the Grace, you must suppose the Soul
acting, and moving, and stirring toward God. So it is in believing. As Soon as
Faith is infused, so soon does the Soul move toward God in Jesus Christ. So
that when I speak of the passiveness of the Soul, you are not to understand it
as altogether without action. But the Soul is said to be passive, because it is
first wrought upon, before it can work any thing that is supernatural. The act
of the Soul is not of it self, but from another. And there is more for degree
of the virtue of him that works upon the Soul, then there is of any inward form
and principle or habit in the Soul. But I uppose the distinction of active and
passive obedience is not specifical, but gradual. That is, that could not be
called obedience wherein there was not some, though not so much willingness and
subjectiveness, as there is bearing, Christ is said to suffer, not because he
was not active, but because that the hand of the Lord was heavy upon him. And
at that time there was more displeasure showed by the Father against Christ,
then there was put forth of the virtues of our Lord Jesus Christ: For that was
the vail both of the Godhead, and of the Manhood. Now according unto this
sense, believing is a receiving, and notes passiveness. The Soul does go unto
God through Christ, but that going is more from the power of God then it is
from the habit of Faith. It is more from that spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ,
then it is from that created quality, which we call Believing. We do believe,
but we are made to believe. 2 Cor. 5.5. He that has wrought us hereunto is
God. Wrought us hereunto. Even as the Clay is wrought by the Hand of the Potter
into this or that form, as is pleasing to him. So in Philip. 3. The Apostle
expressed his passiveness. If by any means I may attain unto the Resurrection
of the Dead. And apprehend that for which I am apprehended. But more especially
in Gala. 4.9. The Apostle does correct himself for saying so much as this, That
they knew God. After that they knew God, or rather were known of God. By
knowing of God, he means believing. By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant
justiffe many, says the Prophet Isa. 53.11. And yet we are justified by Faith.
When the Apostle had said, they knew God (as Faith indeed does give a man an
apprehension of him) because this apprehension or knowledge of him is in the
light of God (God makes known himself, and gives that whereby he is made known)
he corrects himself therefore, and says, I should not have said that I know
God, but rather that I am known of God. John, 3.21. It is given in as the note
and trial of the Hypocritical work of the distinction between true Grace, and
that which is not true Grace but counterfeit, that that which is true and good
is wrought, and wrought in God. That is, it is wrought by God. As the
Preposition (...), in, is used in the Scripture. So that is said to be wrought
in God, the power and virtue whereof comes from God. All actions consist of
their cause, and objects, and ends. Now as God is to be the object and the end
so also to be the cause and the worker of all our actions. Wrought in God. You
all know that Faith, it is a spiritual Life. In Gala. 2.20. I live by the Faith
of the Son of God. You know that by Faith you convert and turn to God. For it
is our answer in our calling. Now both our life and our motion to God, is from
God: But most plainly in 2 Cor. 4.13. The Apostle speaks to this purpose,
Having (says he) the same Spirit of Faith, according as its written, I
believed therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak. As the
Apostle says in 1 Pet. 1.11. That whatsoever the Prophets spoke, the spirit
spoke in them. It was not they that spoke, but the Spirit of the Father that
spoke in them. So the Apostle gives the Reason why he did deliver that Doctrine
to the Corinthians, because says he it was suggested unto me by Faith, and if
you ask him how he came by that Faith, he says he had it by the Spirit, It was
not so much the Grace of Faith, as it was the spirit of Faith which made him
both to believe and speak. It is indeed, we that do believe. As the Prophets
Mouth, and Lips, and understanding were all used by the Spirit of Prophecy, But
as what they spoke, was put into them: So what we do when we do believe is from
the Spirit of Faith. Having the same Spirit of Faith, We believe (says the
Apostle) and therefore speak. Believing is our act, but its by his virtue. And
that I may open this more plainly to you, I shall insist upon these three
Particulars.

I. That that Faith whereby we do believe, is not of, or from our selves, but
we receive it.

II. That in that act whereunto we are enabled by God, we act as little as can
be, but are acted. We are rather Receivers then doers.

III. That though we do believe never so little, yet the least degree of Faith
will give us Jesus Christ, and all his privileges. As many as received him,
had this dignity, (says he) to be the Sons of God, though they did but receive
him.

For the First of these.

I. We cannot of our selves believe, or receive Christ. Therefore Faith is said
in Ephe. 2.8. To be the Gift of God. Not of our selves, but through Grace ye
are saved through Faith, and not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. He
lays no more upon Faith but only this, that it was the means of our Salvation.
God was the chief and principal and efficient cause, ye are saved through
Faith, but even That, you have not of your selves. In Colos. 2.12. Its called
the Faith of the operation of God. Even as the Heavens are said to be the work
of his Hands, and the Firmament in Psalm. 19.1. That is, none could do and frame
so glorious a thing besides himself. We are not able to add one degree unto our
Faith, when we have gotten it: and therefore we cannot obtain of our selves the
least degree before we have it. It is far more easy for a man to increase a
stock, then to get it. In Lack, Luke, 17 7. to the renth.
17.5. The Disciples come and Fray, Lord increase our Faith. Our Lord tells them
by and by a Parable, that a Master does not use to bid a Servant when ho comes
from the field to sit down, but to wait upon him til he has supped, and he
thinks not that the Servant has any praise due unto him because he waits for
his meat, and waits at home, as well as abroad. And he makes this Conclusion
of it, when you have done all you can, say you are unprofitable Servants. This
being spoken upon their desire of the Lords increasing of their Faith, it holds
forth thus much, that Let us use all the means that we can for the getting and
the increasing of our Graces, yet that is a work which we shall never do of our
selves: We shall not move God to any thing, nor do any thing that shall be an
addition to what God has done. Now if we cannot add to the least degree of
Faith, then much less can we get the first degree of Faith. I say beloved we
cannot receive Jesus Christ: For there is no room in our Hearts naturally for
him. All the faculties and places and capacities of our Souls being taken up
with sin and self and with Satan. In Romans 1.29. We are (naturally) said to be
filled with all unrighteousness. We are born into the world as full of sin as we
can hold. It is true we add to sin, but it is because our capacity to sin is
made greater by sin, but as great as it is, it is filled. But we are full of
sin, and therefore their is no room for Jesus Christ. And if their were any
room in our souls fit for Jesus Christ (it being undefiled) yet we have no
Heart unto Jesus Christ. He came to his own, John, 1.11. John, 5.40.
and his own received him not. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
life. Yea, We cannot naturally but refuse to let Jesus Christ reign over us.
For naturally sin has our affections, and is unto us as our selves: A second
nature: and nature labors to preserve its self, and therefore cannot but oppose
Jesus Christ, For his work is to take away sin: Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world.

There are some material preparations unto faith (as they are called) whereby
diverse things that hinder Faith, are removed in some measure: And these are in
the power of Nature. A man may be in his Natural condition, and have knowledge,
and yet that knowledge does remove away ignorance which is a great hindrance
unto Faith.

A man in his Natural state may be troubled for his sin, and yet that trouble
for sin does take away pleasure in sin; and that pleasure in sin is a hindrance
unto Faith.

A man while he is in his Natural Condition may be in fear of the Judgments of
God, and thereby have the boldness and confidence of his presumptuous spirit
somewhat abated.

These preparations, these preparations I say are in our power. But for all
these a man may never believe upon Jesus Christ, he may for ever be a stranger
to him. These preparations are not unto Faith, as degrees of heat are unto
fire. There is not a necessary connection between these and believing: for a man
may have them, and perish, as you know, Judas had. Much less are they the last
disposition which immediately goes before Faith: and least of all are they
those things which get any thing at the hand of God. But that which indeed does
prepare unto Faith properly, that comes from the Spirit of Faith alone: And so
it is said in Acts 16.14. That the Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend unto
the things which were spoken by Paul. He opened her heart, that is, he opened
her understanding to apprehend them; he opened the things themselves that she
might look into them; he took away the prejudices that were in her thoughts
against them: She had (by diverse ways) her heart shut up against the Apostles
Doctrine, even as a door in a Castle is barred that it must be broken open: but
the Lord broke al those bars. Such thoughts as these were in her self: That if
she should receive such Doctrines, she should make her self to be by and by,
the But of persecution: All would forsake her, and she must take up the Cross:
she must leave that way of Worship which had been in use among her
Forefathers; nay, she must believe upon him to save her, that could not save
himself. Whatever prejudices there were, the Lord took them from her; she was
not able to break one of these bars, nor to lay down one of these thoughts. And
therefore there is no other preparation required unto Faith, than what comes
from the Spirit of Faith. As may appear by this:

If there be any preparation required of us, we shall never know where to get or
find it: For if we shall run unto this Grace, and that Grace, there must be a
preparation unto that, for that is Grace; and unto that preparation there must
be a preparation, for that is grace. And where will you find it? Go to thy
Understanding, and there it is not; and unto thy Will and there it is not; and
unto the Conscience, and there it is not: You will find that it cannot be
formed by any principle in us, but by the spirit of Faith. But as Faith is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8
so we can believe of our selves, and we cannot but through him believe. We
resist, but he overcomes our resistance: We have no good will, but he works in
us to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Therefore the Apostle says that we are made
to believe (in Ephesians. 1.18, 19.) as Jesus Christ was raised from the Dead. It was
impossible that Jesus Christ should be held in the Chains of Death; and it is
impossible that the Soul should be held in the chains of Unbelief, when God
comes to work Faith: that as the Apostle faith, 2 Pet. 1. last, No Prophecy
came in the old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost: The same word which the Apostle Peter speaks of
Prophets, that they cannot but speak what they receive from the Lord; So
neither can that heart but believe unto Salvation which God works upon.

And this takes not from the freedom of man, nor from the liberty of his will:
For this necessitates a good will unto him. And if it did not, truly it were
better for us to want our wills, than for God to want his will: And it is better
for us to be saved in a way which we understand not how it should stand with
our liberty, than to be left to our liberty to choose the way of our Salvation:
But that is but by the way. Faith is a receiving, and we receive this power
from the Lord himself to receive. We are passive in it.

II. But Secondly, (which is a thing that I do a great deal more aim at) In
that act of Faith whereunto we are enabled by God, we act as little as possibly
can be: there is as little done by us as may be, as little a touch (as I may
say) as is imaginable. The grace of Faith is usually at the first but as a
grain of Mustard seed. But suppose it to be given at first Conversion in what
degrees you please (unto ten degrees) yet that grace acts us, or takes as
little hold on us as possibly may be The Spirit does take fast hold of us, and
we by Faith take fast hold of Christ; but though the hold be fast, yet the hold
is but little which Faith takes on us. Suppose a man that hangs sure, but hangs
but by one hand, and by one finger: or suppose a thing that is joined and glued
fast unto another, but it is joined only by the edge, so that the fastness
arises from the Sement, and glue, and the firmness of that, and not from the
hold which the other thing has of it: Or (it may be this ruay set it forth
more plainly to your understanding) as the hand of a Child in the hand of the
Master, who teaches him to write; The Child's hand does as little as can be;
though it makes every Letter, yet the Child's hand makes it by the skill, and
direction, and power of the Master. So there is that of God which makes us to
believe: God does use the Understanding, and he does use the Will in the Work
of Faith, but as little as may be; though it be we that do believe, yet we do
no more than submit our selves to the work of the Lord. The Understanding and
Will must be used, that so Faith may be our act; but he does neither use the
Will, nor the Understanding, but barely to give it a just denomination of our
act. If Faith be not our act, then we are not quickened, nor saved by it, but it
has no more from us, than what may barely give it that denomination; we
contribute no more than what may justly denominate the action to be ours. And
this will appear (I conceive) if you do but consider,

First, The Opposition which is in us unto believing, even in the very instant
when we do believe: I say, there is an opposition to us in believing, even in
the very instant when we do believe: as much opposition made to Faith as
possibly we can make, either by the malice in us, or by the assistance and
temptation of Satan. No man can come to me (says the Text, John 6.44, 45.)
that is, Believe, except the Father draws him. Drawing imports withdrawing, or
drawing backwards from a thing: While God plucks, we pluck; and while he draws,
we draw back. He draws by teaching us (for so the Text expounds it in John 6.)
Ye shall al be taught of God. God convinces us that there is no safety in that
condition wherein we are; That there is no hope in any, but only in himself;
that the longer we delay, the more unfit we be, the more our hearts will be
hardened, the more his wrath will be provoked. While God is doing of these Acts
and others, the Understanding, the Reasoning is quite contrary; all the Reason
in us, and all the prejudice that possibly can be, and all the objections that
can be made, are made against Jesus Christ, and against our going to him in our
effectual Calling. God is putting in those persuasions which may prevail with
us, and the Understanding does give forth cross answers. There is no man comes,
but God draws; and there is no man that God draws, but he does withdraw, even
while God draws. Matthew. 14.31. Why did thou doubt (says he) O thou of
little faith? The word that is translated Doubting, (...), does properly
signify, the minds being in diverse stations: the word signifies (I say) the
mind to be in diverse stations. As the Sea, when it is tossed hither and
thither: As the Mind when it is hurried up and down with diverse unsettled
apprehensions and affections. As one thought comes and says, Go to Christ;
another comes and says, As you love your life, do not go. At another time the
soul resolves it will go; By and by it resolves it must not go, that is no way
for it to take: It is but presumption, and carnal confidence. A double minded
man (as unto principles) cannot be a Believer. But in the act or exercise of a
Grace, especially of Faith, the Soul is of several minds until the Lord comes
to overcome, and mightily to subdue by the power of his Grace, all the
imaginations that are in our hearts against him. That is one thing therefore to
prove that there is as little of us as can be in the act of Faith. But,

Secondly, The Nature of Faith it self will clear it. Faith (as you have heard)
has its acts in the Understanding, and its Acts in the Will: But now as it is
in the Understanding, the Light of Faith is barely Gods Testimony: The things
themselves promised being left obscure, and in the dark, as unto their own
Nature: that is, a man does believe the things of the greatest consequence and
concernment to his Soul, only because God says they are thus and thus; and he
know not, God being but a stranger to him: For as Naturally our Understanding
pierces and searches into the causes of things themselves, and will not be
contented to know with the light of another, but with the light of the things.
In Prove. 3.5. Faith goes another way; Trust unto the Lord, and cleave not to
thy own Understanding. In 2 Cor. 10.5. Every thought and imagination must be
captivated unto the obedience of Jesus Christ, or the obedience of Faith. It is
not an assent from the evidence of the things themselves, but from the report
of another. As a man believes there is such a place as Paradise, or such a City
as Rome, though he never saw it, only because of report. So that look upon
Faith as it is in the Understanding, and it is a most irrational thing, and it
has as little of man in it as can be.

Let me explain my self thus:

There are but Two Heads of all Knowledge.

One is called an Artificial Argument, which arises from the Natures of things
themselves.

And another comes from the report of others. As one believes there is such a
place as Jerusalem, though he never did see it. Now for a man to believe,
because another says it, is to see with his eyes, and to believe upon his
knowledge. And this is the way that Faith goes: It denies a man of his own
Reason; and bids a man take al things upon the report of the Lord, even in the
things of his great Salvation.

2 Look upon Faith as it is an act of the Will, and what is it but a resting?
Let him stay himself upon his God, and upon the Lord, Esa. 50.10, 11. And what
does it but only put out the sparks of his own kindling? A man must be in the
dark before he can do any of these acts. Who is it that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his Servant, that is in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and STAY himself upon his God. But he that
kindles a fire, and compasses himself about with the sparks of it, shall lie
down in sorrow.

The Will has diverse acts and motions, but faith cease all, and puts an
end to all the motions of the Soul, and all the courses which the Soul did take
for its good naturally; it cease from what it did naturally for its own good,
and gives them a Quietus est, and discharges them from all their labor, and
only leaves the Soul with God in Christ, and lets God do all. And hence it is
beloved that there is so great a venture in Faith: Like the Lepers that knew
not what would become of them, only they knew that death would be, if they
stayed in the City; and it might be, if they went down into the Camp, they
might have some relief: but they could find but death. Or as it is said of
Abraham, That he obeyed the Lord, not knowing whither he went: So does a man in
believing. Or as it is said in Joel; Repent, for none knows but the Lord may
return, and leave a blessing behind him. So, because God commands, therefore
the Soul goes upon these terms, though it knows no certainty.

Yea, therefore has Faith little of us, because a Believer knows not the time
of his first conversion. He does believe, and knows not that he does believe.
Were there much of us in that act, it could not be but we should know when we
do it. As we know when we eat and drink, because they are natural acts. But we
believe, and know not that we do believe. Yea, often times because we do so
little, we are afraid we have no Faith: Because we take Faith at the leastwise
to be such an employment and action of ours, as should make us to be abundant,
and forward, and singular in whatever we do. But that is a Second
Demonstration, That God does by Faith take as little hold of us as may be, and
uses our Understanding and Will as little as may be.

Thirdly: Let me add a Third, and that is that of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many mighty, and not many wise, nor chosen. You would sometimes wonder to
see what poor and weak parted men Believers are. Faith requires no great parts:
The things that are not, as the Apostle says in the same Chapter, verse 28.)
those are the things that God has chosen. Sometimes I have seen a man of no
great employment in the World, and yet deeply insighted into the things of
Christ.

Fourthly: As the last Demonstration of it. You shall find that the Saints are
sensible of a power working in them, and constraining them to go to Jesus
Christ. That even as a man that is under the power of Satan, though that reason
be against his Lusts, yet still he is put on, and egged to the committing of
them. It Is a sign there is somewhat more than Natural corruption in him; because
according unto the Motion of Nature, these contrary reasons would allay his
desire, and hinder his acts. There is a spirit of the Devil that blows up that
lust, and puts on to that course again. And Beloved, Because we find that when
we would not believe, and sit down resolutely in our selves, and say we will not
believe, and it is not for us to look for any thing but sorrow, and that is all
we shall have at Gods hand: yet notwithstanding that, we find something within
us bids us look toward the Lord, and to go unto him, and not to take our own
words, and not to think it shall be with us as we think. Whence can this come,
but from the Spirit of Faith? It is not from Grace only, but from that hand
that acts it. That shall suffice for the Second thing: That Faith is not that
which we have of our selves; so when God enables us to believe, he takes as
little concurrence with that Grace of his as possibly may be.

CHAP. XVI.
Though Faith he small, yet it makes us the Sons of God.

III. LAstly: Though we believe never so little, yet if we believe, we shall
receive this Dignity to become the Sons of God. There is a receiving in the
least degree of Faith. That is that which the Text holds. This term [to
Receive] notes as little action (as I said in the beginning) as can be. Only it
notes as being in subjection, a being continent, or a vessel to put something
into it. As Gold and Jewels may be wrapped up, and put into a filthy clout or
rag: So may this Grace of Faith into an heart that is exceedingly corrupted and
defiled. Again, you know you use to say, That the Receiver of stolen goods, is
not the principal offender; he is only one that does con^eal and preserve that
which the other has gotten. Such a kind of thing is Faith; he that does
receive is not the principal Agent. As the Wax does receive the impression of
the Seal, and yet the Wax does no more than either Clay, or Earth, or any base
Metal (as Lead would do) only a compliance there is with the Seal.

And let mead further. As Receiving notes little action in that respect: So a
narrow mouthed Bottle takes in but by little and little. As the stone upon
which the Rain falls is hard, and but a little wrought upon and filled by it:
things that are hard, are softened by little and little. As the hard and stony
Earth is softened by the little Rain that falls long upon it. So now suppose a
little Faith, and this gotten the hardliest, and come the slowest by, that
possibly can be; to be as weak as can be in your spirits, and to be as dull as
is imaginable: yet notwithstanding this shall receive a blessing from God: even
those great blessings in the Text, not only to be a Son of God, but to have
such dealings from God as becomes a Child; and God deals in this like unto
himself, according to the course which he took in charging us with the guilt of
the first Adam. For as we are conceived in sin; that is, as soon as ever we are
conceived, as Job says, but curdled, and a span long, we are accursed, so soon
is the guilt of Adams sin imputed. So the very embrie, and the least thing of
Faith, is that which God will bless. The first conceptions of Faith are
blessed, as the first conceptions of a man are accursed because of the Fall. So
soon as ever we receive Christ, so soon is the Righteousness of Christ the
Second Adam imputed and passed over unto us. He will not quench the smoking
Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, Matthew. 12.20. There is great difference
between flax and wood. Flax is but a blaze when it is light, and lasts not
long. And so it notes such a kind of Faith that is soon up, and soon down,
exceeding tender and delicate, soon discouraged and dismayed. A Faith that is
working by fits only, and not such a Faith as is of a constant motion. The
smoking of flax is less than the burning of it. The smoke may be conceived to
be such as either is offenlive unto the eye: And so there is a kind of
believing, or I may rather call it, of unbeleeving, which is extremely
offensive unto God, as smoke is unto the eye: When we are always unsatisfied;
when doubts beget doubts: when God answers one objection, and we take it up
again: and we over and over again with things that have no reason in them, nor
are fit to be spoken. But suppose it to be smoking flax.

Or, In regard of its weakness, which shall come into a flame afterward, which
is capable of further increase, as the smoke goes before the flame: yet the
Lord will not quench it. What is that? he will cherish and nourish it: For the
Negative includes the Affirmative. In John 6.37. He that comes to me, I will in
no wise cast out; that is, I will entertain him.

And as he will not quench the smoking Flax, so he will not break the bruised
Reed. Though Faith be as a Reed, a very weak thing of it self; though it be
bruised, and when it is bruised it will run into a man's hand, as you know the
Scripture uses that similitude concerning Pharaoh. Many ways do we pierce the
heart of the Lord, and grieve him with our Unbelief. We believe after such a
way, as it troubles him to see us. Though we be as a broken Reed that cannot
support, or be leaned upon. So though thy Faith be such as is neither pleasing
to thy self, nor unto God, and cannot carry thee through any Duty in Praying or
Hearing, or other Ordinance; but as a man that leans upon a broken staff, does
fall: So in every Duty, Thou prayest thy self into anguish of spirit; and
hear thy self into troubles. Now although thou have such a Faith as this,
yet God will not forsake it, but cherish it, and not break it, but bind it, and
fit it for Spiritual use. Suppose a man does by his doubts and cavils against
God, offend him, as a Reed does that runs into the hand; yet says the Text, he
will not break it that is, he will strengthen it. For that is an usual figure
in the Scripture, when the Text says, He will not do a thing, to mean that he
will do the contrary unto it. As, those that come unto me, I will in no wise
cast out, but I will entertain, and sup with them, and make them glad with my
presence. In James 2.26. the Apostle tells you, That that Faith that will save a
man, is such a Faith as has a spirit with it: Even as the Body without the
Spirit is dead, so is Faith without Works. That which I bring it for is this;
That if there be but the least Spirit or breathing in Faith, it is that which
will save: I say, if there be but the least breathing in Faith, it will save.
As men that are exceeding tender and careful of the lives of those that are
sick, when they seem to be as if they were gone and dead; they will lay a glass
to their mouths, and if there be but the least breath or smoke come upon the
Glass, they will apply all manner of things that may recover them out of the
swoun wherein they are. So is it with God. When thou think thy self to be
gone, and those about thee think thou art gone, and thou think thou can
never recover thy self to any confidence of hope again, yet God will hold a
glass to thy mouth, and if there be but the least breathing toward Jesus
Christ, it shall pass with him as well as the noble Faith of Abraham did when
he could part with his Child at the Command of the Lord, which is the meaning
of the Apostle in that place.

Here is refreshing and strengthening unto that poor Soul that cannot go to
Jesus Christ, but crawl as I may so speak: That lives like a man in the Sea,
and sees the Banks, and says, Oh that I were there, but knows not how to
strike a stroke to swim thither: or if he does, his stroke is too weak to
withstand the Current, and the strong stream of Temptation, and Doubts, and
Fears that he meets withal. Thou think thou shall have nothing, because thou
can do nothing: Thou can not believe firmly, thou can not lay on any hand
but that which is trembling on the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou can not look with
any eye, but that which is weak and feeble. Now know, that God looks not for
much from thee, but he intends much unto thee. He has given thee this Grace of
Faith, not because it should do great matters in thee, but for thee. It is only
to take thee by the hand, and if it can bring thee and Jesus Christ together,
it has done enough for thee, and as much as can be desired, and as it is
appointed unto. All the rest of its acts are for thy comfort: but this is for
thy Salvation.

CHAP. XVII.
Faith considered in its lowest degree. I. As in the Understanding: and so it
is, 1 Attention. 2 Inquiry. II. As in the Will: and so, 1 It is accompanied
with much fear. 2 It is careful and sollicitous for the things of this Life.

IT will not be amiss a little to consider, or at leastwise to set down, how
little Faith a man may have, or how little Faith God bestows upon men, when yet
he bestows Christ upon men withal.

1. Take Faith as it is a Habit and Disposition; so the lowest degree of Faith
is in an inclination, a yielding, a laying aside the stoutness of the heart in
some measure which he exercised before against God. In some measure. As the
weather we say, begins to change when there is some melting of the Snow, and
some yielding of the Ice, though it be very hard still. And as we say, a man is
inclined to peace, when he will treat and hear arguments for it, and does not
stand out in defiance. The least Degree of an Habit is an inclination. And you
shall find in 2 Chronicles. 30.8. That Faith is so described, to be no more a
stiff-neckedness, but a yielding themselves unto the Lord. As suppose a man
that would not pay Taxes or Rates, but will let another come and take it
quietly: He will not give such a thing, but if another will take it, he will not
oppose. In Acts 26. it is said of Lydia, that her heart was opened to attend;
that is, that whereas before she looked upon what was said by Paul, as not
worth the hearing, and as that which did not concern her, and which was not for
her good and salvation, her heart was set and prejudiced against it; yet now
she begins to have other thoughts. It is as mean an act as possibly can be, for
one to give God the hearing, to listen to the things that are spoken, yet this
the Scripture counts as a Work of God, and as the Fruit of her Faith. She
attended to the things that were spoken. That is one low degree of Faith, for a
man to be relenting and yielding a little toward Jesus Christ: To come, and
mind, and observe the things that are said of him, as things that are of
concernment and moment.

Again Secondly, It is a low degree of Faith to ask after, and enquire about
the things which do belong unto Salvation. And this you shall find in the
Scripture, that that enquiry, when it is truly and duly made is saving too. 1
Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves: and the washing of the filth of the flesh: But (...),
that word signifies not only an Answer, but a Question. The questioning of a
good Conscience, how by the Right of Christ's Resurrection it might come unto
Salvation? It Is one of the smallest acts of the Understanding to enquire and
search after the knowledge of things. That same act of the Understanding
exercised about the things of God by Jesus Christ, that is, such as shall be
accompanied with Salvation. Baptism saves, the questioning of a good
Conscience. If indeed the Question that men ask, comes out of curiosity and not
out of Conscience: If it comes only out of a Conscience that is good thus far,
Because it is awakened; but not good thus far, that it is willing to submit to,
and take the course which the Gospel enjoins, then it is no sign. But if the
Soul does but lie before the Lord, as the Resurrection of Christ is appointed
as the way of Salvation, so it says, Lord how shall I take that way? which way
may I come to be partaker of the power of it? This also shall be accepted.

Look upon faith now as it is in the will, or as it acts there (for I told you
that faith acts both in the understanding and will) you see how it acts the
understanding in attention, and Inquiry. See how it acts the will.

It acts the will most weakly when the heart is filled with fear. Fear does
distract the Soul, and makes it to do al things dully and very imperfectly Why
are ye afraid, therefore says Christ (in Matthew. 8. and 14. Chapters) Oh ye of
little faith. A man through fear does in believing, as a man does in going. He
takes a step, and then withdraws his foot: He goes another, and then goes back
again. So a man with one thought is for Christ, and in another thought, there
is no hope for him in Christ: with one thought he gives up himself to him, and
with another, it is but to give up a little straw to the flame when thy heart
is thus divided (and it is as displeasing as can be possibly) yet this thought
and this faith is not put out by the Lord; Though it be distracted yet that
faith shall save.

Again Secondly, That faith is exceeding weak, which is careful and solicitous
for the things of this life. What an absurd and weak thing is it for a man when
he is dying to take care for clothes? And when his life is going from him to
think of purchasing an inheritance? For a man when he is full of dolor and pain,
to think of increasing his riches and estate? So is it a great weakness for a
man to be careful for his body and the things of this life. In Math. 6.30.
Christ says when they ask what they should eat and drink and put on, He calls
them people of little says. Yet even that faith also the Lord will acknowledge.
I might go through diverse other particulars. As for example. Our relying upon
Christ which is the weakest and lowest degree. That a man rather desires to be
saved by Christ than any other, but he finds a hankering after others; but I
say he had rather have Jesus Christ than any other: He is troubled when he has
hopes not by Christ bestowed on him in the use of Ordinances. When you know a
man relies upon another, the weakest confidence and reliance that he can put is
this, To expect rather that he should stand him in stead, than any other. This
is that which the Scripture says he will accept, and take from our hands. Go
through all the several acts of Faith, take them at the lowest, observe when as
your hearts beat Christ-ward, but they beat flowest, and feeblest, and most
uncertainly: yet know, that though there be much cause of humbling thee, and
being ashamed, that where a man may receive so much good, and where he has so
much reason to be good, yet then he ought not to cast off his confidence, for
ever this shall receive this Dignity to be the Son of God.

And so much shall suffice to have spoken of the Second Reason, why Believing
is called Receiving.

CHAP. XVIII.
Receiving denotes a meanness and lowness of Condition in the Receiver. And in
this sense Faith is a Receiving, whether you consider it acting in the
Understanding, or the Will.

Thirdly: There is a meanness in Receiving. Receiving does imply a meaness and
lowness of condition, a want, or emptiness, or being beholden to another. God
therefore makes it his Glory, that he can challenge all the world to say, that
they have given unto him any thing. Who has given unto him, and instructed
him? and it shall be recompensed. It is an honor only belonging unto God, not
to receive. In Acts 20.35. the Apostle does advise them rather than they would
hinder the Course of the Gospel (who were Ministers) to preach for nothing from
the People; for says he, Remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give, than to receive. There is at leastwise a less
blessedness in Receiving, than there is in giving; if I say not that there is
an unhappiness in it. Let that thing be never so excellent that a man has, yet
if he has received it, he has no cause to be proud or boast; the praise must
not be given to him that receives, but to him that gives. 1 Cor. 4.7. If thou
have received it, why do thou boast? These several Instances proves that
there is a meanness in receiving, that receiving supposes a meanness of
condition. A Condition, that a man is not able to subsist of himself without
taking in supplies from others without him. And thus Faith is called Receiving:
because where ever Faith is, who ever did, or does, or shall receive Jesus
Christ, he does receive him with the sense of his own vile condition. There is
not only such an apprehension in him as this, that his state is low, (That
apprehension is true, and has a real foundation, and there is no error in such
an imagination: therefore I am poor, and therefore I am unable to do my self
good, or to do good, because there is no way of Salvation to be had, but only
by receiving, is a most certain and good way of Reasoning: As he is a poor man
that has no way to live, but by taking the charitable Alms, and good will of
others: So he is in a poor condition, and in a lost condition that has no
means to save him, but what he can get by receiving.)

Neither is a Believers condition vile only, because of sin and of punishment
(whereof he is guilty before he does believe) but this very act of Faith whereby
a man does receive, does make a man's condition mean, though not miserable.
Through sin and punishment, a man's condition is mean and miserable: through
believing a man's condition is not miserable, but it is mean. It is a mean and
low condition you know to live upon another; to go on trust for every thing, to
be beholden, and to beg Credit for whatever a man stands in need of. Consider
the state of Faith with the certain Glory that comes by it (for therefore it is
of Faith that the Promise may be sure) consider Faith as it is a relation, Romans
4.16.
and a receiving from so glorious and excellent ones as God and Christ are: and
so it is the most excellent condition in the World. A man lives better that
way, than if he had all that in Innocence continued to him, wherein he was
made. But now consider this Receiving in and by its self, and so it is a mean
condition, because it is a dependant one: he lives at the will of another. To
eat ones own Bread (we use to say) is better a great deal, and far more
honorable, than to live upon the Dainties of another man's Table. In the verse
before my Text, it is said, John 1.11.
That Christ came to his own (that is, to the Jews) and they received him not.
Now therefore they did not receive him, because of tht meaness of the life of
Faith. He trusted in God (said they) to deliver him; Matthew. 27.43.
Let him deliver him, if he will have him. As if they should have said: He is
not a fit way for a man to trust his Soul in; or he is not a fit person for a
man to believe on for the saving of his Soul who cannot save himself. In Romans
10.3. They went about to establish their own righteousness, and submitted not
to the righteousness of Faith. They submitted not, that is, they thought the
way of believing to obtain Salvation by, to be too poor and mean a condition.
Now the Evangelist takes away this offense: To as many as received him, to them
he gave this dignity to become the Sons of God. His meaning is, Though the life
of Faith be mean in it self, yet its glorious in its relation, for it makes you
to be the Sons of God: Though the life be such as is beneath, and lower than
you could or would imagine should make you happy, yet there is a greater
freedom in it of converse and communion with God than can be imagined: You
shall live with God, as if you were in Glory already. That therefore which I
would insist upon in this, is this:

Where ever true Faith is, there is a sense of meaness. The heart is humbled,
and brought into the account of it self as nothing. And as Faith grows, so does
this account of it self grow also.

Take Faith now as it acts on the Understanding, and there it makes a man to
lay aside what Reason says. As Paul you know says, He did not consult with
flesh and blood, but immediately follows the voice he had received from Jesus
Christ. Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy
own Understanding. 2 Cor. 10.5. Every thought and imagination must be
captivated (he says) to the obedience of Faith. Take Faith as it acts in the
Will.

And so it takes away all Glory in a man's self. How can ye believe, seeing ye
receive Honor one of another (says Christ) and seek the praise of men more
than the prase of God? John 5.44. By what Law is boasting taken away (says the
Apostle in Romans 3.27.) but by the Law of Faith? And therefore you shall find
that when ever any of the Saints of Jesus Christ have through Faith attained
unto any thing, they correct themselves, and use al kind of diminutive and
lessening expressions that may be concerning themselves. I live (says Paul)
yet not I: in Gal. 2.20. I live, but not I. I live by the Faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. As if he should have said, The root
of my life lies in his love. He loved me, and revealed that to me, and my Faith
laid hold of it, and that quickened me. As Faith cannot assent unto any Error;
no man can with a Divine Faith believe any thing that is false, because the
object of Divine Faith takes the infallible Testimony and Truth of God. So
Faith, as it is in the Will, makes a man that he cannot but be humbled, he
cannot be lifted up; Why? Because it leads a man out of himself unto another
for all he has. As infallible Truths and Errors are contra-distinct, and
cannot consist together; so is going out of a man's self to receive, and being
lifted up. Faith may be compared to a Golden Hammer: as it is Gold, it is
excellent; but as it is a Hammer, it subdues and beats down, and keeps down
every thought and imagination. As there is some Physic that does at the same
working both purge and strengthen. Such a thing is Faith, it empties a man of
himself, and fills him with Christ: it takes a man off his own bottom, and sets
him on Christ: it destroys in him the confidence he had, and gives him a
spirit above al his danger, or to contest with all his danger through Jesus
Christ: it makes him to do all things, and yet makes him see that he is able to
do nothing: Lord increase our Faith, said the Disciples unto Christ, Luke 17.5.
As if they should have said, We are not able to add one degree; we are not able
to improve the Faith we have, one degree, not the least circumstance. In 1 Cor.
15.10. I have labored more than them all, yet not I, yet not I. True Faith
makes a man as earnest for every thing as if it were his own, and due by merit;
and it makes a man as humble when he has any thing, as if he had nothing at
all, but ascribes all unto Jesus Christ, and the Love of God the Father in him.
There is not a motion of Faith; mark it, but if so be that you did attend unto
it, and understand it, you would find it to be of this sense. As God said unto
the People of Israel, That he had delivered them, but not for your sakes do I
do this, but for my own Names sake. So says Faith, All this that is done for
you, it is not for any thing that you have done, but for the sake of him who
has fulfilled all Righteousness. Peter, James, and John, in Acts 4.10. cried
unto the People, Be it known unto you that by the Power of Jesus of Nazareth,
and by the Name of him whom you have crucified, this man does stand among you.
So when Faith has received all from Christ. it says unto the Soul, Be it
known unto you, that you may thank the Lord for this; it is not your good
desires, or performances, or good disposition, and this leaves the Soul
exceeding humble; As you have sometimes writ upon something that is done for
public use, This is the gift of such a one and such a one. And as poor men do
wear the arms of those that give them clothes and food in the Almes-houses:
so faith does put forth such a work in the soul, that it leaves behind it this
sense, That it is done for us of Gods free grace and not for any thing in us.
Do thou find therefore that thy affections grow lesser and lesser to thy
self? Thou art less and less considerable in thy own eyes every day; When thou
look upon what thou have received thou wonderest wherefore God should do it,
That upon such a one as thou art his hand should be stretched forth, and unto
such a one as thou art he should give so much? Art thou when thou gettest any
refreshing from Christ, art more ashamed of thy self? do thou magnify Christ
more, and vilify thy self more, Thou may then think it to be true because
faith is a receiving.

So that the Sum of the point is this: The life of faith is mean, not in
regard of the things received by faith: (For we receive him says the text,
that is Jesus Christ, and such things with him which eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, as the Apostle speaks in 1
Cor. 2.9.) nor is the life of faith mean in regard of him from whom we
receive, for in that respect it is a living at the well head, it is the service
of a King. I know says Paul whom I have trusted, 2. Tim. 1.12 One that is
able. Nor thirdly is the life of faith in its self, simply considered mean.
For the happiness of a creature does lie in its dependence upon God, even as
the being of the stream lies in the flowing of the water from the fountain.

CHAP. XIX.
How the life of Faith is said to be mean. First. If compared with any other
kind of living well: 1 as Compared with the life of Adam in innocence. 2.
Compared with the life of Glory. Secondly, If compared with any other kind of
living by Faith. An Objection answered.

But compare the life of faith with any other kind of living well, Or compare it.

2 With any other kind of living by faith then this, and so it is exceeding
mean. I shall open these a little to you.

First, It is mean compared with any other kind of living well.

1 As compare with it the life of Adam in innocence, and so is the life of
faith mean. Because all that Adam did receive, he received it by way of
Justice: Here what you do receive is by way of alms. Adam should have received
for his work: and here we receive merely for good will.

2. Compare this life of faith with the life of Glory, which the Saints live in
heaven, and which the Saints shall: and so the Apostle says in 1. Cor. 13.13.
That faith shall cease as an imperfection.

Secondly, Yea compare this life of faith with any other kind of living by
faith, and it is the meanest of al. First There is a living upon God by faith
for preservation, and Secondly a living upon God by faith for Justification and
pardon.

For perservation. The most perfect of the creatures do live upon God. It
implies a contradiction that they should be without their dependence upon him.
For in him we live and move and have our being.

But the life of faith for Justification and pardon that now supposes guilt,
yea it supposes weakness. Guilt: for where there is no offense, there needs no
pardon nor forgiveness. And it supposes weakness, as not being able to keep
our selves in the love of God by any thing that we are able to do.

There are two things which do mainly make the life of faith to be mean.

1. Because its a life of dependence. A man lives not of himself, nor on his
own, but he lives upon another. He eats not his own bread (as I may so speak)
nor wears his own clothes, but what is given him. And not only so, but.

2. In the second place. A man receives not only by faith, but from hand to
mouth. Suppose al a man had was given him, but he did receive it at once, and
so became master of it himself for his use and dispose of it, then there were
some honor in it you know. The Prodigal you know prays that he may live no
longer at his fathers hand, but that he may have his portion, and live like a
man of honor upon his own. But through faith we receive no more then we have
need of, and we have no more then we need. We are fain to go to God for every
penny and morsel. The life of faith is often seen in prayer. It is al one, as I
often showed you in the scripture for a man to believe upon God and for a man
to pray to God, and for a man to live upon begging, and to have no more then
every day he can get as an alms, or as a favor. That is such a kind of life as
takes away al glory, and al confidence in a man's self.

Object, But you will say unto me, That this is enough to discourage a man from
any way looking after that life of faith, because it is so mean,

Answ. I answer to that in a word. That there is no reason it should
discourage. For it is better for us a great deal considering what we are to
have in this way, then any other. For

First, God will look better to us, then we can look to our selves. As a bird in
the Cage is more tendered, and better provided for then she could be if she had
her liberty in the wild waste flying up and down in the vast wilderness. We
live upon God, but we live upon one that is bountiful, and liberal, and one
that has enough, and one that thinks nothing too much to give to us. Were our
estate in our own hands, we would quickly spend it or engage and morgage it,
and bring our selves under wrath, which now the Lord prevents. Such a kind of
living upon God by faith is exceeding Glorious unto God. For upon this account
he has Glory, that he does provide for us al things that do belong unto life
and Godliness. Yea.

Secondly, There is a great deal of sweetness in this life. As a bit (you know)
from a Princes hand at his table, has more sweetness in it then a whole dish.
What ever provision we could make for our selves, could not carry that
refreshing to the heart, which the least thing does which we receive from God
by Christ through faith. For it carrys this with it, The love of God in Christ,
the favor and loving kindness of God: his wisdom, which cuts out this portion
for me, who knows what is better for us then we can chose for our selves.

Lastly to say no more. Though the life of faith be mean in it self, yet this
should encourage to it, because it is so mean, therefore pride is hid from
your eyes. There is nothing that hinders a man more from receiving from God,
then pride does. Jam. 4.6. He gives grace to the humble, but he resists the
proud. There is nothing more burdensome to a Believer than pride of heart is.
Pride of heart is unto the Soul of a Believer, like the swelling of a Joint
which puts to extreme pain. Says the Soul in it self, I have nothing, and can
do nothing, and am nothing, and yet notwithstanding I am lifted up as if I
wanted in no kind. As you know it is said concerning the Church of Laodicea. To
be poor, and yet proud: To borrow, and yet to carry it as if we were beholden
to none, is as great wickedness as possibly can be before the Lord. Because all
this is hindered by Faith, therefore it is a great encouragement to the Life of
Faith, though it be a mean Life in comparison.

CHAP. XX.
Application. The Reason why Believers are tempted to Pride. Where there is
true Faith, there is humility of Spirit: And that is manifested in four
Particulars. 1 In Modesty. 2 In a Sense of its own Condition before Grace. 3 In
an acknowledgment of all that is in a man to be from God. 4 In making a man
wary and faithful in the use of what he has received.

USE

ALL that I shall say by way of Use (and so pass on unto the next) is this:

First, You may from hence see the Reason why Believers are so much tempted
unto Pride: unto Pride in thinking of themselves otherwise than is meet, as the
Apostle speaks: unto Pride in neglecting good works, as necessary unto the
attaining and perfecting of Eternal Life. As some that are well born and
descended, cannot endure to fall unto mean employment. So does the Devil labor
to put it into the hearts of Believers, that they need not be so careful in
Duty, nor so strict and exact in the performance of the Law, for they are the
Sons of God, and born unto Eternal Life as their Inheritance. Now the Reason
why the Devil does labor to stir the Saints to this, is, Because that Pride is
the most contrary unto the Life of Faith, and the condition we are put into
through believing. For to see (as I said now) a Beggar Proud, or a Servant
Reign; to see an Alms man (who is clothed of mere Mercy) to jet and strut as
if he were clothed in Gold of his own, is the most uncomly sight in the World.
And so uncomly do we behave our selves in the sight of God, when (because of
the state we are in) we grow proud. For what have you to be proud of? For there
is nothing that you have, but what you have received.

And again. Hence it does appear that where ever there is true Faith, there will
be humbleness of Spirit, For the Spirit is suited to the condition and life
which Faith brings in from Christ, but it empties the Soul of it self,
according as it does bring in. So much a meaner opinion a man grows into of
himself, as he grows more into the enjoyment of Christ. There is this temper of
heart in a Believer, that as he rejoices in this, that he has much in Gods
hands to receive, so also he does walk humbly. As the Apostle speaks in Phil.
2.12, 13. He works out his Salvation with fear and trembling: Why? Because it
is God that works in him both to will and to do. And if a man would make a
Judgment of himself whether he be in the Faith or not, if he would discern
whether he has received Jesus Christ unto the Salvation of his Soul or not, he
may know it by this as soon as by any thing; Does thy Spirit grow more humble?
Art thou more vile in thy own eyes? See thou less worth, nay, no worth in thy
self? Does the manifestation or communication of Grace from Christ, make thee
to abhor and loath thy self? But I shall speak a little more to this particular
by showing you,

That where ever indeed there is true Faith, there is humbleness of Spirit
manifested in these four Particulars. There are four Particulars I say, wherein
humbleness of Spirit does always show it self in a Believer.

First. In modesty, or sobriety. Not assuming unto its self the doing of any
thing, or being the motive unto God, or the Reason why God should do any thing
to him. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the praise, is the
voice of Faith, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1. I live (says
Paul) yet not I, but Christ that lives in me, Gal. 2 20. I have done more than
they all, yet not I, but the Grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And as the
Psalmist says in another case, We got not the Victory by our own strength and
sword, but it was thy hand and power that gave us the Victory, Psalm. 44.3. So
the Soul says, That it is not its praying or hearing, or any thing whereby it
does attain unto any favor with God, or any degree of Grace, but only because
the Lord so pleases. As there can be no reason given why the Rain should fall
upon one ground, and not upon another, but only because the Lord Reigns and
Rules in Heaven. So there can be no reason given (says the Soul) why I that am
a barren desert, should have any life rained on me, but only because it seems
good unto him. That is the first thing.

Secondly, The humbleness of Faith shows it self in a sense and apprehension of
that condition which a man was in, before he did receive Grace. As a man unto
whom a prosperous estate is sanctified, he remembers his poor estate and low
condition. So does a man now (that has received by Faith from Christ) remember
what state he was in when Christ first came and gave him somewhat, and bestowed
himself upon him. Here the Apostle Paul speaking of it, in 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a
Blasphemer, and injurious, and a Persecutor, and the chief of all sinners. And
Ephesians. 2.3. We were by Nature (that is, we that are now quickened, and who are now
raised up together with Jesus Christ) Children of Wrath as well as others, and
under the Prince of the Air, even the Devil, who Rules in the hearts of such
Children of disobedience as we were. And therefore upon all occasions you know
he is up with his conversion, telling what an ill course he was in; and what
wickedness he was practicing when the Lord lighted on him, as you may see in
diverse places in the Acts. It is true indeed, that there is a passionate sense
of a man's misery, which does cease when a man has received mercy; that is, a
man cannot so mourn, nor a man cannot so weep and lament as he did do; yet
there is an understanding sense. A sense that lies upon the heart as sure,
though it works not after the same way; and as clear, though it has not the
self same passions that were before. Though the wound be healed, yet there is a
scar that puts in mind. And though the Lord has been pleased to take away the
danger, yet the Soul cannot but stand and wonder at that condition wherein it
was when the Lord delivered it. That is the Second.

Thirdly, The humbleness which Faith works in the heart of a man, is this; The
acknowledgment and owning of all that is in a man unto God. As we are wont to
write in the Books that are given us, The Gift of such a Friend, or such a
Friend. Or as Jacob said, he came over that Brook with a staff in his hand, and
now he had so many bands, But the Lord has given them to him. Behold I and the
Children which the Lord has given me, Or as Jacob said at another time when
his father asked him how he came by Venison so soon, said he, The Lord brought
it to hand. So the Soul acknowledges whatever he has received to be of mere
Grace. 2 Cor. 5.5. He that has wrought us hereunto is God, who has also given
unto us the Spirit. Mark the word: We are wrought hereunto. That is, as if he
should have said, if there had not been more done by another than was by our
selves, if we had been left to do for our selves, we had never come to this
state of Grace wherein we are: We were but like Clay, and He fashioned us into
this Mould. He, Who is that? Even God. He that has wrought us hereunto is God:
that is, Infinite Power, and Wisdom was employed in those things, and no less
would have done the thing. And so the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.12. It is given
to us, to know the things that are freely given us of God. Ask a Believer how
it came to pass when he and others sat under the same ministry, and in the
same seat, and it may be had the same convictions, that one turned his back
upon God, and the other came in; that one held up weapons of rebellion against
God, and the other laid them down. Or thus; That the one is more wrought upon,
and the other is less; that the one has perfect Peace, and the other stand
disputing, being filled with fears, and jealousies, and suspicions. The Soul
will answer that it was not for any thing that I did more than any other, it
was not because I was better than another, but because the Lord put forth his
Power upon me, and has more effectually called and wrought in me, than he has
been pleased to do upon others. That is the Third Thing.

Fourthly, The Humbleness which Faith works in the Soul, is this, that it makes
a man to be marvelously wary and faithful in the use of all that which he has
received by believing. If he has gotten peace, he keeps it warily and charily.
If he has gotten Grace, he maintains it watchfully: and he is faithful, not
because he does not look upon himself as a Lord over it, but he looks upon it
as a Gift merely given him. If a man (you know) has any gift given him by a
Friend, though it be very useful, yet he is very chary of the use of it, and
will not use it but upon great occasions. There is you know, a great deal of
difference between a man's receiving his life by Grace, and pardon from the
Prince; and a man's receiving his life upon terms of Justice: He that has his
life upon Pardon, is afraid if he ever comes again within the breach of the Law
any more: Whereas he that has his life upon Justice, thinks not of any such
danger, nor of any such evil that he needs to beware of. So much carefulness,
so much Wisdom and Wariness as there is in the Soul to use what it has
received, so much does it argue Faith in a man.

CHAP. XXI.
Receiving denotes taking a thing with joy and gladness of heart; and so Faith
is receiving. An Object. answered.

Faith is called receiving, because the soul that does believe, does believe
willingly and cheerfully. Receiving in the scripture is used for such
entertainment as friends give one unto another. Or guests or strangers have of
their friends, As in Math. 10.14. And Luke, 20.10. Christ sends his disciples
abroad without any thing to live upon, and faith If they will receive them, that
is, if they will be glad of the Gospel at such a charge, and at the cost they
must be at. In Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for in so
doing (says he) some have received Angels. As it is in that place of the
Gospel, Math. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, that
is, that makes him welcome as the Messenger of God. In the third Epist. of John
and verse. 9. Diotrephes that loves the preheminency received us not nor would
have suffered the Saints to receive us. As the Text tells us in the Book of
Genesis, that Abraham stood at the door of the Tent that he might entertain
strangers that passed by. And Stephen saw Christ in Heaven, and therefore used
the word of the Text, Lord Jesus Receive my spirit. Acts, 7.59. My meaning is
this, Though I cannot look upon Heaven, as my own house and home; Though I be a
stranger and cannot demand the glory thereof as due unto me, yet receive me
kindly, Bid me be of good cheer, and give me what is laid up in store there. All this I have spoken to show that this word (Receiving) is proper to a kindly
entertainment. Now faith is such a kind of receiving and entertaining Jesus
Christ in some measure. I say in some measure. As Jesus Christ does receive the
soul into Heaven so does the soul receive Jesus Christ into it by believing.
That self same love which Christ shows, that kindness which he expresses to
the soul in entertaining it into Glory that in some measure does the soul
express in its laying hold upon Jesus christ. It is said in Luke, 19.5. 6. That
Christ bad himself to Zacheus his house to dinner: Zacheus come down, and make
have, for this day I must abide at thy house: And Zacheus came down and made
have and received him joyfully. Thus is it in effectual calling, in conversion.
Christ comes unto a soul and says, Turn unto me and live: Believe and you
shall be saved, why will you dye in the way wherein you are? Though there be
nothing belong unto you but shame and confusion of face for ever, yet by, and
in me you shall find happiness. As Christ does first offer unto the soul
himself, So does the soul receive this offer of Jesus Christ. In Acts, 8.37.
Though that the Eunuch was but a young convert yet notwithstanding of him, as
of a young convert, Philip requires he should believe with all his heart. If
thou beleevest with all thy heart. All the heart, is not there taken extensively
or gradually, that is al one with perfection. As it is in the Commandment,
Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, that is love him, and love nothing
else. But all the heart there, is opposed unto a divided heart, and unto an
unwilling spirit. If thou beleevest with all thy heart, that is, if thou be glad
of Jesus Christ to undertake for thee: If thou do willingly give up thy self
unto him for salvation. I say there is a great deal of difference between a
man's doing of a thing willingly, and doing a thing electively and out of choice.

A thing is said to be done willingly, when it is done out of a principle
suitable to it, though that in the doing of it there be no thought of taking
contentment or pleasure in it. As a man sins willingly, when the corruption
that is in his heart does break into act. As for example,

A man that has a profane and wicked spirit, he swears willingly, though he
does not think of swearing when he does it. So al actual corruptions are
voluntary, though that we do not consider what we do. As the wise man speaks,
that they know not that they do evil, because it comes from a corrupt heart
within. To do a thing voluntarily and willingly, it is enough that a man does
it of himself, moved thereunto of his own disposition and quality of mind.

A thing is said to be done electively or by choice when a man (having weighed
arguments on both sides) does choose one rather then another: He puts a
difference between the reasons that are urged on either part, and chooses to
follow one before the other. In Heb. 11.25.26. Moses is said to choose
afflictions with the people of God, because he judged or esteemed, says the
Text. Doing things out of choice is a manner of doing things willingly, and the
highest sort of so doing. And So there is a difference between a man's believing
willingly and cheerfully, and a man's believing electively, and out of choice.
A man believes willingly when he is carried unto Jesus Christ by the spirit of
faith in a sense of his own nothingness, and a knowledge of the tenderness and
sufficiency that is in Jesus Christ to save him. A man believes out of choice,
when he chooses rather to adventure his soul in that way of believing upon
Christ, then in any other course. As for example. Conceive you a man like him
that came to our Lord Jesus Christ willing to do any thing to obtain eternal
life: And as a means thereunto, there is advice given him to repent of what he
has done, and to mortify his lusts, that he should take up the practice of al
duties and ordinances, hear much, and pray often, and deny himself
opportunities of sin, and give that which he has unto the poor; And all this
advice is urged upon him with all that can be said from the scripture and
reason, that if he does thus he shall be saved: But he is also advised to
believe upon Jesus Christ who Justifies the ungodly, who cures a man for
nothing, who saves them that are not able to return him any thing again
suitable to what they receive from him, And he chooses this way of faith
rather then that other way. This now is a believing out of choice: when. I say
al other ways are laid before a man for salvation in their greatest
probability, and yet a man can see faith to be the best way, and can answer the
reasons that are brought to the contrary.

Unto this election faith will grow in time and by experience. So that it can
say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and I have none on earth in comparison of
thee. Psalm. 73.25. Therefore it is compared to a Marriage, which cannot be
without union to Christ, and willingness to be so. A woman after Marriage comes
to say if she were unmarried again, she would have none but him, for when the
soul has had some experiences of God, if so be that all the delights and
pleasures that are in sin, nay that are in holiness, were set before it, it
would choose rather to live upon Jesus Christ then that way, As the good man
said when he saw David come home let him take al, now the Lord my King is safe.
So the soul can say, I have enough in him, though I have nothing else, and let
al other things be what they will, yet through him I shall stand.

But at the first, the Act of faith is only willing, I suppose. And therefore
you shall find believers to be always described that way. John, 8.56. Abraham
saw my day afar of. He saw it by faith. That is the spiritual optic, which
makes things far of, to be near. He saw my day afar off and was glad. As a
man that sees the shore many Leagues off at Sea, where the shore looks like a
cloud One would have thought it would have made the heart of Abraham sad, that
the day of Christ was so far off. For hope that is deferred, is the breaking
of the heart says Solomon. What joy (do you think) would the day of Christ
have been, had it come upon Abraham, who when he saw the breaking of it so many
thousand years off, was filled with Joy. But where ever there is a sight of
Christ there is joy and gladness. That I bring it for. Though it be at never so
great a distance, and never so weak a sight. When the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ does prevail, it makes his people willing. As it is in Psalm. 110.3.
Therefore the Apostle says, that with the mouth a man does confess, but with
the heart a man does believe unto Salvation. Romans 10.10. With the heart. As we
use to say, I am glad of it with all my heart. Or you have my heart. So now does
the soul say unto Jesus Christ in believing. He is taken with the object of
faith, and is rejoiced. So it is in Phil. 3.3. We are the Circumcision, who
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Mark it. The
Ministers by whom the Gospel is brought unto men are beautiful unto believers.
Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings. His
meaning is, As beauty wins and takes affections, so are our affections carried
strongly unto those who are the messengers of good things by Jesus Christ. If
you have judged me faithful (said Lydia) then come into my house. And if you be
worthy (said our Lord though you have no clothes on your back, nor penny in
your purse, yet you will be welcome to them. And the word of Faith which is the
instrument of Faith, that is now received also by a Believer. Matthew. 13.44, 45,
46. The kingdom of God is like a man that found a Treasure in the field, and he
went and sold all that he might be partaker of it. Every act of Faith, it is
done with joy and delight. Therefore Faith (in the general) is said to work by
love, and to be unfeigned, 1 Timothy: 1.5. Out of a good Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned. Why, because it is hearty, there is an affection, and an affection
that is real where there is true Faith. 1 These. 1.5. You received the word of
God in much affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost. And therefore you are
elected of God.

It is therefore by cheerfulness and readiness in believing, that true Faith is
distinguished in Acts 2.41. As many as gladly received the word were baptized.
They gladly received, is a note of distinction from the rest of the Auditory
who received it, but not with joy and gladness: By it I say true Faith is
distinguished and distinguished from the Faith that is in the Devils, and in
wicked men, who are the Children of him, and from that which does arise from
conviction. A man may believe through conviction, as the Devils do: who finding
something to be true which God has spoken, their own experience being a
witness to them that God has not failed of his word, they do therefore collect
that what he has said besides, shall be brought to pass: But that which they do
believe, they would not believe. There is the like Faith in the Children of
Satan. For as there is the same Grace in the head, Christ, and in his members,
so there is the same sinfulness and evil that is in Satan (the head and Prince
of wicked men) in wicked men themselves. While wicked men live under the
preaching of the word of God, they come to be convinced that there is no way of
salvation but by Christ, nor any course to get eternal life, but by going unto
him: But this they like not, but secretly wish that there were some other way,
which is evident and apparent, because their hearts do withdraw through
unbelief, and depart from the living God, As the Apostle speaks in Heb. 3.12.

There is a going unto Christ by men, as a man goes unto an enemy, and sues for
some favor that is in his hand to do him, which he can receive no where else;
but yet it troubles him. So now they go unto Christ, but they had rather be in
hard and costly working. If fasting and prayer, and giving all their goods to
the poor would help them, they would rather do it than go to Jesus Christ. As
wicked men do pray in afflictions, but it is because they are driven to it: so
do they believe in Jesus Christ, because they know no way else to go, or to
find relief unto themselves. He that is a Believer does choose Jesus Christ as
his way: He does choose him (I say) as his way or rather thus, he does like
that way and approve that way.

Object. But you will say, This can be no sign, because those that were but
temporary and fell away, did receive the word of God with joy, in Math. 13.20.

Answ. 1. But you must know that their receiving was not of al, but of some
truths of the Gospel. And Secondly: It was not sincere. They received not the
truth for the love of it (for then they should have been saved 2 These. 2.10.)
but they received it out of love of their lusts. So far they did receive the
Gospel as it might free them from Hell, but not as it might sanctify or take
away from them the love of this present World: for when persecution came, they
were by and by offended.

CHAP. XXII.
Faith accompanied with joy and delight: and that 1. As an Act of the
Understanding. 2. As an Act of the Will.

BUt now I shall come to speak of Faith in this point more particularly, As it
is a willing receiving of Jesus Christ: a Receiving of him kindly and
gratefully. And that I may speak of it distinctly to you.

There is (you must know) a love that is ever joined with Faith. Faith works by
love: And that love is set upon Jesus Christ singly and alone for his sake. The
heart does approve and like of its self in believing on or going to Jesus
Christ: That if a Believer could immediately reflect upon what he has done,
when he has closed with Jesus Christ, if he had (I say) a reciprocal knowledge
of his action, that he could say I have now given up my self to him, and this
giving up my self to him is forever, never to be my own any more: If he could
thus reflect upon himself, he would bless the Lord for helping him so to do.
But besides this.

There is a love which goes along with Faith: A love unto Jesus Christ alone,
besides the approbation of the Soul in believing: As the Eye delights in
seeing, and the Ear is taken with sound: So there is a contentment and pleasure
that the Soul takes in Faith. (As it is in Prove. 21.15.) said concerning
righteousness in the general, That it is a joy to a just man to do justice: So
it is a joy to a good man to believe: which I shall lay open in diverse
particulars.

1. Take Faith first (as we handled it heretofore) to be an Act of the
Understanding, an assenting unto the truth which God speaks, though the things
be not only obscure, but contrary to Reason, it is a pleasure now unto a
Believer to do so. To give up his judgment to God: To have his knowledge from
the report which God gives of things, and not from himself, or his own
apprehension. Therefore you shall find him to pray God to lead him by his
counsel, till he brought him to Glory, Psalm. 73.24. And Paul in Gal. 3. when
he was called, he would not consult with flesh and blood to hear what they
could say, but because of the divine testimony which he had received, he gives
up himself unto Jesus Christ, and unto the work of the Ministry. Hence it comes
to pass, that though you may silence a Saint, yet you cannot convince him that
he is in an error. 1 Cor. 2.15. The spiritual man judges all things: But he
himself is judged of none. As Bathsheba took all the ways she could to make
her Son Solomon to reign, in 1 Kings 1.17. Did thou not say that my Son
should reign, And why is it not so? She stuck unto his word, and took no other
way. So does Faith take that way: Thou have said, Thou have said, Thou have
said. And as a proof of that, that Faith delights to take Gods word by way of
evidence, rather than any other, In Heb. 11.3. it is said, By Faith we
understand that the world was made of nothing. We know it by reason, that the
world was made of nothing: But that does not content a Believer, But by Faith
we know it: Because we rather judge by the light that comes from God, than by
the light that is in the things themselves. I beseech you my beloved mark it.
In humane affairs and in things that belong unto men, It is as great a weakness
as can be to depend upon others, to see with other men's eyes, and not with a
man's own, To say as other men say, and to speak after them. We count it no
learning at all (neither is it) for a man to quote Authors, and to say such a
man is of this mind, and such a man is of that mind. A man may be as ignorant
as the Books themselves are wherein these things are recorded, and yet may have
this kind of knowledge. But though in humane affairs it be weakness and folly
for a man to give up his judgment, and to captivate his understanding to what
another says, yet it is the excellency of Faith. And therefore it is said in
John 6.45. that they are learned men who do hear and learn of the Father; Every
one that hears and learns of the Father comes unto me. He is a learned man (in
the judgment of God) that goes by hearsay. That Faith is more to be esteemed
that is grounded upon the Scripture, than that Faith which is assisted by
discourse and by reason. And the reason of it is this, because that Faith is
only dependant upon the testimony of God. Among Scholars and Ministers you
shall many times find a great deal more of knowledge than in others in the
matter of divinity, but less Faith, Because the Hearers go only by the
Scripture, and the Teachers go by parts and Books: They go by the authority of
God in the Scripture. Reason may be assistant unto Faith: But it destroys Faith
as it is a principle, in 1 Cor. 2.16. We have the mind of Christ, says the
Apostle: We have the better of it, because we have the mind of Christ: And if
you have all the subtilty and curiosity, and height, and depth which natural
understanding can reach unto, to, yet know that we are contented with this,
that we take things barely as they are reported unto us by Jesus Christ.

Now this is that which Believers do cheerfully. He is willing to be a Fool,
willing to have his understanding denied, that he may receive the testimony or
report of God, either concerning his person, or concerning Gods good will
concerning him, or his duty.

And so take the other part of Faith as it is in the will, A resting and
quieting of the Soul in Jesus Christ. And so a Believer is willing thereunto.
It is a great matter to be so, as I have showed heretofore: It is a mean thing
in its self for a man to live dependantly, and to have nothing but from hand to
mouth. All a man's Glory, and confidence, and boasting is excluded thereby. But
though a man be nothing, and though a man be rendered vile and mean in the Eyes
of God and all good men, yet Faith makes a man willing thereunto. A Soul that
is converted had rather have its Good in Christ's hands, than in its own; rather
have its comforts in Christ's giving and disposing, than in its own; that he
should keep the Bottle, and give it as he thinks good: It would not be its own
Carver, if it might. Observe it; So far as there is Faith unfeigned in a man,
he had rather be at Gods carving, and Gods allowance for Grace, and comfort,
and assistance, and supply, than at its own. Therefore see how cheerfully Paul
speaks concerning this case, in 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed: As if
he should have said, though that it be not in my own hand, yet it is in his
hand that is able. Though I have not that which makes me to abound, and to be
as if I were in Heaven, yet I know whom I have trusted, and that he will keep
it for me.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Nature of true Faith in a willingness to believe, appears in these
particulars. 1. In loving to hear the Doctrine of Faith. 2. In a desire and
longing after Christ. 3. In a high esteem of Jesus Christ. 4. In suffering it
self to be wrought up by God to Jesus Christ. 5. In gladly parting with its
confidence in any thing but Jesus Christ. 6. In that its joy is full, when it
comes to know that it has by Faith received Jesus Christ.

FOr the further discovery therefore of this joy and Faith wherein this
willingness to believe, and love of Christ appears, I shall name these six
particulars.

First: Wherever there is true Faith in any measure, the Soul does love to hear
the Doctrine of faith and of Jesus Christ. Of al truths, that is most pleasing:
And most pleasing not only because it is most profitable but because it is most
self-denying. If so be the Soul would make its choice, or call for any thing
out of the Book of God before another, it should be for something that lays
open Christ, and presses believing on him. How beautiful are the Feet of them
that bring glad tidings? Romans 10.15. How beautiful? that is. they are as
lovely as can be, Nay so lovely as no words are able to express: How
beautiful? The Apostle Paul did desire to know nothing among the Corinthians,
but Jesus Christ and him crucified; 1 Cor. 2.2. that is, he desired to make
nothing else known. And look what it was in him preaching, so in every
Believer. In Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, and the power of his Death, and
the virtue of his Resurrection. These things a man loves, and he loves to hear
spoken of, and discoursed of. Evil men therefore do love corrupt words and
unsavory language. Believers they love to hear of Jesus Christ; His name is
sweet and precious: Not only to hear of him as a story, but as a person whereof
there is need, and of whom there is use, and absolute necessity unto salvation.
First I say the heart loves to hear of Jesus Christ. Acts 13.42. When the
Apostle had preached in the name of Christ, all that were good came to him, and
prayed him to preach that over the next Sabbath day, or as it is in some
translations between this and the next Sabbath day, as the word may well be
rendered. And he did as you may read there. As in John 6. they cried out ever
more give us this bread, so the poor Soul desires to hear of that again and
again. When Lidia heard Paul preach Jesus Christ, she attended as one that
would not lose a fillable, nor a word of what was spoken concerning jesus
Christ, Acts 16.14. How heautifull (as I said before) are the feet of them that
bring glad tidings of peace. It is good to love the Law of God which teaches a
man his duty, like one that is careful to do his masters will, Psalm. 1.2. He
meditates therein day and night: But it is a better sign for a man to love the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the glad tidings of him: As I shall show you if I
come to it, that there is not only as great honor given unto God thereby, but
thereby a man if more humbled and abased in himself and made nothing, than by
all that obedience which the Law requires, or by all that sense of misery that
the Law works in us because we have not done our duty. A man has meaner
thoughts of himself when he thinks he must believe or he cannot be saved, than
he has when he thinks if he be called to an account he must needs perish
because he has transgressed Gods Law. The soul loves that law, which shows its
own face in a glass with all its spots upon it: But it loves that glass better,
in which it beholds the face of God, For thereby it is transformed from Glory
to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. last. Out of a spirit of indignation and wrath against a
man's self and sin, a man is glad to hear any thing that can be against
himself and his sin: But out of a love of Christ, and out of the love of
greater excellencies in Christ then is in a man's self, a man is glad to hear
rather of Christ, then of himself, his name is as ointment powered forth. Cant.
1.3, There is nothing in the scripture but what is sweet, and as honey; But the
Gospel is as the honeycomb. The whole scripture is as a sugared cup, But the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is as the bottom of that cup.

Secondly, Where ever there is true faith, there is a desire and longing after
Faith and Jesus Christ. As newborn babes, as the Text says in 1. Pet. 2.3. A
desire formally. O Lord said the Disciples unto Jesus Christ, increase our
faith. O Lord that we may receive our sight. For its faith alone that makes us
see the things freely given us of God, and to know the treasury of grace and
mercy which does and has lain hid from eternity. And so there is also a
vertual desire after Christ in all believers, They long after the means whereby
faith is wrought. If you have rasted how good the Lord is, As newborn babes,
you will desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby. Though
that a Child cannot distinguish rationally between the Milk of the breast, and
that which is sugared, It cannot tell that this is the one and this is the
other, But it has a taste by which it can, and nothing pleases but the mothers
breast. The Child cannot ask for it, nor describe it, but you may know it loves
it because it is stilled with it, and quieted with it. So may be the case of
many a Christian: He may not be able by reason, or by discourse, or argument to
make out the desirableness of Jesus Christ above al other things, the
excellencies of Jesus Christ above al other ways: There may be Rhetoric put
upon al other things, beyond all that which he can see through, or put upon the
things of Jesus Christ, But you will find his heart quieted with nothing but
Jesus Christ. Let him pray with never so much in largedness and affections, and
let him hear with never so much understanding, and live with never so much
unblameableness in the world, yet all this is nothing, his heart is unquiet,
because it is not according to what the law requires: And if he sees no fault
in it, yet there is fault which the pure eyes of God behold when he comes to
look it through and through: And he has no peace but when he comes to believe
in Jesus Christ, and receive peace from him. What is there in all the means of
salvation which thou longest after? What is it which thou would carry home
with thee? Is it something that may draw Jesus Christ nearer to thee and make
him more lovely to thee? So much thou may conceive of hope of thy state of
Salvation. The Love of Jesus Chrst is described by this, that nothing gives the
heart so much quiet, and in nothing is the heart so much taken up and
contented, as it is with this, that Jesus Christ is the Mediator, and
undertaker, and is the surety, and does al with the father: And that It does do
al with the father by him. The heart being pleased and contented, argues the
desire to be after him.

Thirdly, Where ever there is faith there is love even a high esteem of Jesus
Christ, and God the father in him, and a high valuation of him as one that is
good, and true, and able, and liberal. Not only an acknowledgment of these
virtues to be in him, but an estimation of him for them. And the reason is
this. There is no one (you know) can believe or trust another, whom (though he
does know to be able to discharge his promise, yet) he does not esteem of. No
wise man (you know) will trust him whom he judges to be vain and careless of his
word, that will speak any thing. If so be any one makes a promise, and be not
known to be rich, and besides that to be powerful, so as none can hinder him
from the fulfilling of it: If he be not esteemed good, and liberal, that will
not think much of what he parts withal, We will not trust him. In faith
therefore there is a love of the Glory of God. And so you have it described in
Romans 4.21. That Abraham did believe, and give Glory unto God. While he was
meditating on the promise, and the difficulty of receiving, and it came into
his mind, yet he said again, though that I be weak, yet he is able, and though
that I be dead yet he lives for ever: and though that unto me, there belongs no
such mercy, yet he is liberal. Such indeed our faith in God is, as our esteem
is of God. As our esteem is of God, such is our love. Where we see little of
excellency, there is little love: and where we see much, there is much love. It
is a piece of love, A duty and an act of love which the soul shows unto God that
it will suffer no blame to light upon him, that it will have nothing, I say
nothing imputed or charged upon his account, but he must stand fair and clear,
and without blemish and spot in all that ever he says and does, what ever
becomes of the soul. Nay says a believer in this case, The fault is not in God
but in me, the reason lies not in any want of love in him, but in the folly and
carelessness of my own spirit. The reason why I want any thing is not because I
desire any thing of God which he is not ready prepared to the doing of, but it
is only because I have a withdrawing heart. That is the third thing.

Fourthly: The Soul that does willingly believe, does even suffer it self to be
wrought upon by God if he please unto Jesus Christ, It leaves it self in the
hand of God to be wrought upon even as he pleases. That whereas before it was
wont to murmur, and repine, and think much; and hardly that God would take
nothing but satisfaction, and be pacified by no means but by the blood of his
Son: Now it says, Let the Lord do with me even what he pleases, so he will
but unite me to, and make me one with Jesus Christ. He puts himself like Clay
into the hands of him, that He may frame and fashion the Spirit according to
his own mind. You have the expression concerning John Baptist, in Math. 3. When
Christ came to him to be baptized, said John, Do you come unto me? Suffer it to
be so, says Christ, for so it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, and
then he suffered him. So the Soul is brought by God unto this, to let, or
suffer God to confute what reasoning he pleases in him, to suggest such
apprehensions as are contrary to his own sense and imagination. In John 6.53.
Christ told them that if they did not eat his Flesh, and drink his blood, they
had no share in him: and the Text says that many did murmur at the Doctrine.
And such is the temper of the heart of man when Christ comes to deal with him
about salvation, that he is offended at him, at the Call he gives; and is
offended that he will not allow him any confidence, or comfort in any thing or
for any thing that he has done. Must there be so much supernatural virtue
required to obtain eternal life, or it must not be had? As a Patient is told
by the Physician sometimes, You must so many days take this course, forbear
this diet, and take these bitter Pills: He begins to think he is injuriously
dealt withal: But the Physician tells him, if you will not take this course,
you will die. Then he lets him do what he will. So the Soul says unto Jesus
Christ, Lord take any course in the world with me: If thou will have me to lie
down in sorrow, If thou will have me be without those means and refreshings
that I have had heretofore: If it be thy pleasure that I shall lie upon thorns,
in comparison of what I have done before, do what thou will, Only save me in
the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. As a man says to a Physician whom he has a
long time refused to be directed by the Counsel of, says he, I do even submit
my self to you, prescribe what you please, use your own method, take what
course your wisdom thinks good, Let the things you give be bitter, and let the
things you withold from me be never so good, as Air, or food: So the Soul
leaves it self to Jesus Christ, and lets him do with it what he will, which was
the case of Paul in Acts 9.6, Lord what would that I do? Lord what would
thou that I do? do thou have care of me, for I have none of my self, I give up
my self to thee.

Fifthly: The Soul is exceeding glad and refreshed when it can do any thing to
take away its confidence, and its support that it has any where, but only in
Jesus Christ. I say the Soul is glad that it has nothing to help it, but
Faith, and that Faith has nothing to lean upon, but only Jesus Christ. When
one stone is not left upon another of all that which a man has built to rest
himself in: When as the pillows are plucked from under the head, and a man is
left (as it were) dying, and from under the elbow, that a man has nothing to
support him, yet then the Soul takes pleasure and contentment. There is a
pleasure and contentment to have all sweet morsels taken from a man that it may
feed alone upon the Lord Jesus Christ, when it can convince its self that in
such a course there will be no safety nor salvation found, it rejoices
exceedingly. We have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.
but rejoice in Christ Jesus. Rejoice when we have no confidence in the flesh.
It is said concerning the Saints, that they wash their feet in the blood of the
ungodly, and when the vengeance overtakes them, they say, This is the man that
made not God his refuge, but trusted in his riches. As it is in Psalm. 52.6.7.
said of Doeg. So does the Soul Glory and insult over, all its vain confidences
when they are taken from him: You are well enough served, and this is you that
would trust to praying, and to hearing, and that would put your confidence in
external performances; See what they come unto, and what they will do: All are
nothing, But oaken leaves that seems to be silver, they are but appearances,
and give no real satisfaction. You are well enough served (says the Soul unto
it self) and it is but justice that is done you, and I am glad it is so, and
take your portion and share. Whereas men are wont to complain in the world,
that such a Minister has undone such a person, he has cast him into the
extremest anguish of heart that can be. They were comforted, but now they cry
out they are undone, and undone: They cry out of nothing but this, that they
have trusted to this and that and another thing. And in this a Believer would
rejoice. Blessed be God, that I use al means, but it is as if I used them not,
I will trust to none: Blessed be God that I have got my heart to see that
whatsoever it is which seems to be a glorious support, yet I see it will fail
me: But in Jesus Christ there is strength. What a pleasure is it to a godly man
to think how God has pursued his Soul, and frited him and made him to run from
all the shelters wherein he would hide himself. When a man comes to make his
relation before God in prayer and says, I would have run into this house, and
have rested in this Company, and settled upon this performance, and yet the Lord
followed me again and again: This is a refreshment to him, and glads him. When
another says it would make a man cast off all care of goodness for to tell
him, that when he has done all things, there is not a penny paid, nor one nick
cut off from the talley of the Lord, when they say this is the way to make a
man cast the Commandments of God behind his back, He says, blessed be God that
would not let me take common Bail, which would not have stood my Soul in stead.
In 1 Timothy 1.13. Paul speaks home to this purpose. I was a Blasphemer and a
Persecutor, and injurious, but God vouchsafed mercy to me. And how was that?
you know in Acts 9. and Acts 22. God beats him down off his Horse, and a light
from Heaven did shine about him, and he was cast upon the ground, and told that
he had nothing to do with the Jews that persecuted Christ. But thou persecutest
me Paul: The more you strive, the more you wound and destroy your own Soul, Now
mark what Paul says, in 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King immortal, and
invisible, and only wise God, be Glory for ever Amen. As if he should have
said, Blessed be God that knocked me down, and blessed be God that spoke those
words, and for ever praised be his name that he would make me to lie with my
mouth in the dust, and to have no hope in the earth: As he speaks in Colos.
1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father that has thought us meet to be brought out
of darkness into his marvelous light. To be plucked as it were by the hair of
the head out of one condition into another. So Math. 13.44. The man that found
the treasure in the Field, went and sold all, and did it with joy: As if he
should have said, I am glad I have nothing in all the world but this Field,
this Christ, and nothing but this conversion, and that shall satisfy me. And
therefore in this case, because a Believer is glad to have his confidence in
the flesh thrown down. As it was the speech of Jobs friends in Job 34.36. My
desire is that Job may be tried to the utmost: As if they should have said,
Lord do not spare Job till thou have made him to know that it is a righteous
thing with thee to do with him as thou will, though he has not been an
Hypocrite, Try him to the utmost: Just so in the like case, when a Believer
begins to be taken off from confidence in himself, he prays, Lord let it be a
through work: Lord, go to the root of this pride, and cut it off at the very
bottom, and leave nothing but what is of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and Lastly: When the Soul does once come to know that it has by Faith
received Christ, and is Received of Christ, then its joy is full. 1 John 1.4.
Our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and I write this
that your joy may be full. It is not every one that has full joy, that has
fellowship with Christ, but he that has fellowship with Christ and the Father
too; that sees (if I may so express it to you) the Father in Christ, and
through Christ, as in a glass smiling upon him, then its joy is full. Full, that
is pure. As we use to say that is full Wine which is unmixt, and strong, Then he
rejoices in nothing else but only in God and Jesus Christ. Full, that is,
strong, that it makes a man do much in a little: To value no difficulties in
service, that it ravisheth a man, that he is dead to all things besides. Even
as the Women that saw our Lord Jesus Christ after he rose from the dead, they
fell about his head and held and kissed him and would not let him go. Full, that
is, his joy is great, unspeakable, as the Apostle says in 1 Pet. 1.8. such as
no word can express. It cannot be compared to the joy of him that does divide
the spoil, nor to the joy of him that reaps the harvest. When men have corn and
Wine and Oil increase, then they are glad: But says he, We shall have more joy
in Psalm. 4. when thou liftest up the light of thy countenance. It is joy that
is full of Glory. Glory, that is, Gravity, and Majesty, so as no mean and low
thoughts and pleasures will take with a man. It is full of Glory, that is, it
satisfies the Soul, As he that is full despises the honey comb. So he does
contemptuously look upon al those things which other men take pleasure in
besides. In other duties (I beseech you mark it beloved) the Soul has a taste
of Heaven, and a beginning and dawning of Glory. But when a man comes to know
that he has received Christ by Faith, then he is full of Glory, that is, he is
even as if he were in Heaven it self, as if he were in that complete happiness
which shall abide to eternity. I have enough said the Patriarch Jacob when he
heard that Joseph was a live. So says the Soul I have enough, for Christ is
mine, and I am Christ's. The Israelites when they came out of captivity, they
were like men that dreamed: The things were too good to be be true: They were
taken in a rapture as it were. So does the Soul in this case, Sometimes it
admires: What is this? (said Elizabeth) that the Mother of my Lord should come
unto me? Much more does the Soul say, What is this that Jesus Christ should
come to be in my Cottage, in my understanding, so poor and mean a one as mine
is? Prove. 13.12. The accomplishment of the desire is as a Tree of life: It was
a sign unto it that it should live. So the Soul says, Evil shall depart from
me, the sins that I have been troubled with shall be mortified, Weaknesses
shall be repaired, I shall no more lie down in sorrow. My beloved, as the man
that watches for the morning, and as the Child that waits for the full age,
and as the Joy of the Bride and Bridegroom: All these the Scripture uses, and
much more is the joy of the Soul, when it sees, and feels, and finds Jesus
Christ. But this I say is that which it comes unto. The other five particulars
are those which more concerns the Point in hand: But at this last, they all
drive, and at this they do all arrive, but in their season.

CHAP. XXIV.
Reasons why the Soul must be willing to receive Jesus Christ. 1. By this true
Grace is distinguished from that which is not true but only like to it. 2. By
this the murmuring and corrupt disputing of the Soul is silenced. 3. Faith is
not saving till it be willing. 4. The Soul must rest in Christ so as to seek
help no where else.

NOW consider that this must be for three or four Reasons. I say the Soul must
be believing, and willing to receive Jesus Christ.

First: In this true Grace is distinguished from that which is not true, but is
like unto it. It is that which changes the nature, and becomes a kind of
nature. In 2 Pet. 1.4. We are made partakers of the divine nature. And that
acts of it self, and that prompts and puts on to do according to it. A Stone
when it is out of its center and place, has a natural instinct to move
thitherto. The Fire would be upward, because it is its nature. Look how sin is
in a man, so Grace is in a Saint, for it comes in the stead of that. Sin is not
the essence of a man, It is not his soul, yet it is so wrought into his soul,
that he does as naturally sin, as he does naturally apprehend, or think, or do
a rational act. So now, Grace is not the soul of a man, but it is so infused
and created in it, as that the soul does as willingly the things of God
according unto its measure, as it does its rational acts, or as it did its
sinful acts formerly: I say according to its measure. For there is more sin at
first then grace in any man that is converted. Jer. 32.40.
The scripture therefore speaks after this manner, I will put my fear into your
heart And what then, This grace shall have the power of a cause, and that shall
work you according to it self. Fear, shall make you fear, and faith shall make
you believe, and to believe naturally. Common grace is not wrought into the
nature, nor become a nature and therefore hence it comes that men do loose it,
and sal unto their natural course, As the dog unto his vomit, and the sow to
the wallowing in the Mire, as the scripture speaks.

Secondly, By this willingness to believe, the murmuring and Corrupt disputing
of the soul against Jesus Christ, comes to be silenced altogether or in a very
great measure. 2 Cor. 10.5. The Apostle says that every thought and
imagination shall be captivated to the obedience of faith. To the obedience of
faith. Now it is captivated by the love which a man has unto faith. You al
know that we cannot endure to have that reasoned against which we love: we are
presently put into a passion if any one will go to vilify or speak against
that which we have a mind unto. Now when the soul has a mind to go unto Jesus
Christ, and a mind to believe, the nit stops its ear, and does withdraw its
sense and apprehension from what ever can be said against it. According as its
mind is to believe, so deafness grows upon it to all the reasonings of the
flesh, for continuance in any other state without Jesus Christ. If a man has a
mind to any meat, or to do a thing, he will say, speak no more, I am resolved to
do it, I will venture And so does the soul in this case. And its the best way of
confutation of arguments. As the Apostle says, God forbid. So confute them
with this, I will believe, and I will go unto Jesus Christ, what ever you say I
am resolved on that. That is the second reason. The murmuring and disputing
that are against faith will not be quiet and cease til they come to have such an
affection to believe.

Thirdly, Until you will be in believing, or til you love to believe, your faith
is not saving. For faith is an applying of Jesus Christ to a man's self,

There is a double application of Jesus Christ to a man's self.

The one is in discourse, when a man can conclude himself to be one of Christ's.
And that is faith of assurance.

And the other, is not by discourse, but by aim and intention. When a man does
go unto Jesus Christ for good unto himself. Now mark what I say. All the credit
that you give unto the word, All the sense that you subscribe unto, the promises
of the Gospel, These do not apply Christ to you, No more (you know) then for a
man to meditate on the treasures of the King of spain, do make his treasure
his, or do give him an interest in it. When a man loves faith, and loves
Christ, then he gives up himself to Christ that he may be his. A man looks not
from Christ for any thing to himself until he does by an act of the Will rest
upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly and Lastly: There must be this affection of love in believing,
because the Soul must acquiesce and rest So in Christ, as to seek help no where
else. Now that he must So acquiesce is evident by this, because to go to Jesus
Christ, or to receive Christ and not as the only Savior,, is to dishonor him. A
man cannot rest in him as the only Savior, unless that he does approve, and
like of, and take pleasure in, that which the Gospel has revealed concerning
him. Or more plainly thus. That way which a man does not approve, a man will not
stick unto for the salvation of his Soul. That a man may therefore stick unto
Christ, and never depart from him, he must have a good will or liking or
approbation of him. And so much shall now suffice for the Doctrinal part of this
Point.

CHAP. XXV.
Application. Then there are but few Receivers of Jesus Christ. This Use
concerns three sorts of Persons. 1. Such as do not receive Jesus Christ as he
is.

USE

IS Faith such a kind of Receiving? then truly it will cast even all the world
almost. There are but few Receivers of Jesus Christ. Many to whom he is
offered, but few that give him entertainment by Faith. And those that have
given him entertainment, have not done according to the Law of that duty in
receiving him with that kindness, which he should have been entertained with. I
shall put both these sorts together, because they are both under one reproof,
though not both under the same danger.

First: I say this Point discovers many to be under unbelief, and so not to be
the Sons of God, but the wrath of God to abide upon them. And that even many of
those who do live under the Gospel, and have believed and received Christ, but
not received him with love; As the Apostle says in another case, you have not
so learned Christ, So may I say they have not so received Christ. They have
received him, but not as a friend, and not as a guest and not as one that loves
him: But even as sometimes a poor Child is taken to keeping, because they are
compelled thereunto by Law, and they cannot rid themselves of that charge. So
men are compelled by their light and conviction to believe that there is no way
for salvation but by Jesus Christ; Their Understanding is forced to receive in
this truth because it shines so clearly: As the light that opens the sleeping
man's eyes that lies against it; but they do not love him. In John 3.19. They
loved darkness rather than light, because their works were evil. Loved
darkness more than light. Jesus Christ is that light and Faith is that sight
whereby we see that light, and they love darkness, that is, they love even the
most uncomfortable estate that they could be in the world, better then they
love the way of Jesus Christ, darkness in the Scripture is referred to
uncomfortableness. Whether you refer it to the darkness of the shadow under the
Law, Or to the darkness of heaviness and grief of Spirit wherein men are put
when they apprehend what they have done to the destruction of their Souls. Men
love any thing (darkness) rather than Jesus Christ. I shall have occasion to
open that again, and therefore I pass it over shortly.

Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have ordained praise, that thou
may still the avenger and the enemy, Psalm. 8.2. And who is the Enemy and the
Avenger? It is only the natural man. For in the Hebrews you shall find that
the eighth Psalm is only a Prophecy of Jesus Christ under whose feet. God puts
all things, Jesus Christ was the praise of God the Father, because he was as
unfit to have undertaken and perfected the work of our salvation in the eyes of
the world, as a Child is unfit to do the service of a man. Or, as the language
of a Child is insignificant, and is not able to express it self. Now why will
God take such a course? That he may still he Enemy and the Avenger. That I
would have you note. That there is in men an enmity and a rage against Jesus
Christ and the way of salvation by him. If there were any thing he would
destroy, and if there were any wall he would pluck down, and if there were any
truth, he would deny, namely salvation by Jesus Christ. He came to his own, and
his own received him not. His own, that is, those that were separated from the
rest of the world. As we call that a man's own wherein a man has a particular
interest, title, and possession. If they were Christ's own, then they had in
some measure owned him, as well as he had owned them. They had owned him by
profession, and yet they received him not, because they received him not with
love. (...), the word signifies properly a receiving kindly, and respectively
and gladly. So, they received him not. The Jews they thought they had received
the Messiah, when they refused the Messiah. They thought that he that should be
the Messiah should be such a one, and because Christ came not clothed like
unto him, therefore they rejected him. So Christians are apt to a great mistake
about Jesus Christ preached and born in the Gospel, (as I may say) as the Jews
were about him when that he came in the Flesh. I shall instance only in one.

They do not love believing, nor receive Jesus Christ with love: who believe
him not to be such a one as he is: who receive him not according to the
greatness and glory with which he is invested, and which belonges unto him.
Suppose a Noble man should come unto a man's house, and be regarded but as an
ordinary man: Let his entertainment be otherwise what it will be, he is not used
kindly, but you do degrade him, and level him to an ordinary man's condition,
when as he is a person of Honor. Kind usage of one lies in the showing him that
respect and esteem which belongs unto him. He is an unkind man to his wife, who
respects her but as his Father and Mother, when as he must leave Father and
Mother in his affections in comparison of her. So now, he uses Christ
unkindly, and he does not show his love by believing on him, who does not by
faith receive him as he is God and Man, One in whose hands al power is, and may
do what he pleases, viz. (Give the spirit from the father) And one who is
holy, and harmless, and separate from sinners: I say, unless you believe upon
him as such a one, and receive him as such a one, and love him as such a one,
then you do not believe, In 1 Romans 21. They Glorified him not as God, and
therefore God gave them up to vile affections. They Glorified God, he
confesses, But not as God, and therefore they were punished. Wherein lay that,
that they glorified him not as God; It lay in this, God had put forth his power
and wisdom in the things that he had made, and they set up things which they
made in the memorial of that God, but they praised him not as a God of infinite
power: They looked after no more then was in the creation and therefore not
giving infinite power to him, they Glorified him not as God. So I say here,
They do not love Jesus Christ as Christ, who do not acknowledge him to be what
indeed he is, and to be such a one as he is revealed. I shall speak more
plainly thus. The Jews did stumble at the meaness of Christ's outside, because
they looked by him to have a temporal kingdom. There are as false and as
erroneous apprehensions of Christ in the minds of men now. The dealings of
Christ with the Souls of men, are as contrary and as unanswerable unto men's
expectations and presumptions, as the mean coming of Jesus Christ into the
world was contrary unto the expectation of the Jews. Mark it. Christ's dealings
with the Spirits of men, are as unanswerable, as his coming in the Flesh was
unanswerable to what the Jews expected. When ever Jesus Christ comes, he comes
as a King, he will be Lord, or nothing. As Kings when they come into private
men's houses, command all their servants as their own, and use every room as if
they that owed them had nothing to do with them: They take all power out of
their hands for the present, and use nothing but what they bring with them, and
that which is of their own providing. So when Jesus Christ is come into the
Soul, he will have every thought after his mind, and not give a man leave so
much as to look after any other thing than himself. Men look not for such a
kind of thing as this is by Christ, and therefore they are not able to endure
it. Men look for ease, and not to be kept to their duty, and they look for
peace, and not for to be under the reproof and corrections and instructions of
the Lord. And men look to have their good will accepted, and that Jesus Christ
will be served with nothing of what is ours, but of what he gives. Or rather
thus, when Jesus Christ comes unto men, he brings trouble, Behold a Sword: He
changes men from what they were, and takes them off from the practices wherein
they walked, which they thought were good. As when Jesus Christ came, he nulled
all the services of the Jews, which they thought were exceeding Glorious. Now
Jesus Christ comes and sets the ax at the root of the Tree, and says, If we
will not bring forth Fruit, we shall be cut down. Now the Soul looks not for
any such thing as this. What are the expectations of men by Jesus Christ, but
only that Jesus Christ should be a Chariot, that Jesus Christ should give him
his hand to sit by him in Heaven? Men look that Jesus Christ should come with
his Arms ready to receive them, and his Bosom to lay them in: They look for
nothing but what may make their lives more free, and their Spirits more quiet
than they were before. You will be mistaken in receiving Christ: If you have
peace with him, you shall have trouble. You shall be a King and reign, but he
will be a King and reign over you. He will be served by you, but you shall take
all from his Treasure, that you may say only as David did, Of thy own do I
serve thee. Now this being contrary to men's apprehensions, they are not willing
to it, and being not willing to it, they are not believing.

If Jesus Christ be not received according to that Glory which he has, and
which does belong to him, (Make as much of him as you will) yet still it will
not be salvation to you. We saw his Glory (says the Apostle, (when he
preached) as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, John 1.14. [As] that
is, it was no other Glory, and can be counted no other Glory but what belongs
unto God himself. Now as Jesus Christ is preached and known, so he must be
received by the hearers. There is nothing that is worship and honor unto God,
nothing that will make us happy, but what is done unto God and Christ, as such.
The Apostle makes this in 1 These. 2.13. to be a sign of the effectual calling
and conversion of the Thessalonians, That they received the word, not as the
word of man, but as it was indeed the word of God. As the word must be received
as Gods word indeed, so must Jesus Christ be received as he is indeed. Look
therefore what Jesus Christ must be that he may be the Author of salvation, you
must receive him as such, if your Faith be saving. It was necessary if he would
save us, that he should be God and Man: that he should be the head of al
things: that he should be holy and separate from sinners. Do you now receive
him by Faith as such a one? Does your Faith close with him gladly under these
respects? It is not enough to saving Faith that you do not deny him to be thus,
but he must be owned by you to be thus. I say he must be owned by you. A man
may under one consideration be wonderful kind and respectfull to a Person,
when under another consideration he will show no respect to him. As for
example. They said unto Lot that he came in among them to sojourn, and would
have Lorded it over them. That is, (as if they should have said) If Lot will
live among us, and take his being with us as an ordinary Person, he may: But if
he thinks all things must be as he will, If he will trouble himself with our
matters, and order al things according to his Will, and be our Governor, we will
have nothing to do with him. Therefore the Apostle faith of some men, that they
love him not as a Lord, 1 Cor. 16.22. If a man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be accursed. They love him as Christ, for so he is anointed: and as
Jesus for so he is a Savior: But this [Lord] being added, makes their hearts to
rise against him, and against the precious oinment and Graces that are in him.
And so you shall find in Jude 4. He says, there are some that do deny the Lord.
The word (...), used for a [Lord] is a Master of a family: If Jesus Christ will
come, and he will have all our time, and strength, and not only that, but the
things that are done must be after his order, and according to his mind: Our
wisdom and reason must not direct us in the things that we do, though they be
materially good: If so, the Text says, They deny him: that is, They profess
they will not have such a one to rule over them. And thus if you compare it
carefully in Luke 20. from 9. to 17. verse, with Math. 21. where the same
parable is repeated, though those that had the Vineyards let out to them were
angry with the servants, yet they used them not so il, as they used the Son:
And why did they use him so ill? It was only because he was the heir, and would
have ruled over them. We will not (say they) have this man rule over us. And
therefore as Persons are wont to enquire what the quality and disposition of
those are, with whom they desire to marry, before they make any treaty or
Covenant with them. A wise Man or Woman first sits down and consider, whether
they can like a Man or Woman of such a Spirit and behavior: Suppose him to be
dull, and harsh, and contrary to her desire. So first get the knowledge of Jesus
Christ as he is one that saves, and then examine your selves how you can submit
unto him, that you may judge whether your Faith be true or not. Can you submit
unto Christ as God, having all things of himself, and having an absolute
dependence on him for all? Can you receive him as your Lord and head? and
therefore say as John did, he must increase, but I must decrease, he must
reign, and I must be put under his feet, and it is fit it should be so: Yea,
can thou receive him thus simply and not upon condition only or principally?
Rather than the Prodigal would starve, he would serve, and serve in the
meanest condition that could possibly be. Rather than he would die he would eat
and feed with the Hogs. A great change, and altogether unlike the Spirit of
such a one as he was when he went out from his Father, that could not endure to
live upon his Fathers courtesy, in hopes of his portion, but must have it in
his own hands. Now as he did it out of necessity, so may men be ready to
receive Jesus Christ. But in such a case as that is, it is a burden to a man,
and unto Jesus Christ also. For I beseech you consider it. If there be no
greater cause or reason, why a man would have Jesus Christ, than that he may be
a Plaster to heal him of his sores than that he may be life to recover him
from the dead. (His life is dear to him, that is clear, And his salvation is
dear to him but) Jesus Christ is only as a means to serve his turn, and so far
he cannot but be desired of a man. What man is there (as you shall hear by and
by) that will take delight in Physic for it self, or that does not count it a
misery to be always in Physic, though it be a means to preserve his health.
Salvation is to be looked for by Jesus Christ, But Jesus Christ especially.
When Faith gives entertainment unto Jesus Christ, it also receives salvation.
As Christ said unto Zacheus, This day salvation is come unto thy house: But
Jesus Christ is the great and chief Guest. Faith (I say) bids welcome unto
Christ and his benefits, but most of all unto himself. And so much now shall
suffice to have spoken of that first sort, such as receive not Christ
willingly, and therefore have no true Faith, because they receive him not
according to that Glory which he is of.

CHAP. XXVI.
Asecond sort of Persons not Receivers of Jesus Christ viz. Such as delay their
coming to Christ. When delays argue unwillingness.

SEcondly such also as do delay and put off their going unto Jesus Christ or
closing with him. Delay argues unwillingness. So the Seller says, A man has
no mind, he is not willing to lay out his money, by beating up and down he does
not make up his bargain.

Again. Delays are a kind of denials. And so the poor man takes them who calls
and asks for an Alms, and receives no answer. In War, If men accept not of
conditions by such a time, they are counted enemies. God counts delays,
unwillingness, Luke 14.18. The Guests that are invited would not come, and yet
if you look there, you shall see that they do but put off the matter for a
while, for one says, he had bought a yoke of Oxen, and another had other
business, that he could not come. God counts you to be unwilling, when you are
delaying.

There is a forbearance which is not a delay. As the Apostle Peter says in 2
Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, though he delays his
coming to judgment: because he has this great reason for it, viz. His elect
are in the world, and must be born into it, that so they may be called and
saved by him. The Lord having so great a reason for his patience with the
world, therefore he is not to be counted slack, though he lets things go
disorderly and without punishment for many years together, for what we can
think. I may say now in the like case also, that a man does not delay to
believe always, because he does not believe? For there may be some reason for
it. There is no reason can exempt a man from the obligation unto Faith. Its no
reason at all for a man to say that because he is poor and miserable and under
Gods displeasure, or in his sins, therefore he should not believe. But though
there be nothing to exempt a man from the obligation of the Commandment of
Faith, yet there is something to be done before the Act of Faith. That is, the
heart must be humbled, and have the sense of sin, The sense of sin and of a
man's need of Jesus Christ, does in order of nature precede and go before this
Act of resting on him. He that has no sense of sin, ought to say that it is my
duty to believe: But he ought to say as well, That I may believe, I ought to
see my sins. Because therefore there may be a reason, therefore every
forbearance of believing is not a denial.

Nor does every forbearance argue unwillingness. Every forbearance of a duty is
not a sign that a man is unwilling to a duty. As for example. A man makes his
friend to stay at the door, or in some outhouse for a while before he goes out
to him. Because the room wherein he would entertain him is not righted and made
hansome for him: And yet he may be as glad of his coming, as of any thing in
the world. And yet make him stay till things be ready for his entertainment. So
the Soul may be desierous of Christ, and yet not think himself fit to receive
him as yet: A fault there may be in thee, and often times there is, Because
Jesus Christ provides for his own entertainment. As soon as ever the door is
open, that is, that the heart be sensible of sin, Jesus Christ does come in
with all his furniture, makes it an habitation for himself. If a man will stay
from Jesus Christ for want of one degree of Grace more than he has, there is
the same reason he should stay for all degrees of Grace: for all degrees of
Grace are little enough to compass him with, or to give him entertainment.

But though that forbearance argues not unwillingness in all cases, yet in
sundry cases it does. As for example. When we are not sensible, and take not
notice of what is done by God and Christ to egg and draw out the Soul by Faith
unto him: When no spurring will make us go on: Though we be exhorted,
persuaded, commanded, entreated, threatened, yet still we stand where we were.
Amazed at our misery, but give not up our selves unto this Grace of Christ. Or
if a man be moved and not proportionably unto the means that are used: Though
he has lived long, and been under the persuasion of the Gospel continually,
yet still there is little, very little progress, or looking toward the Lord
Jesus. Like green wood, that though there be much fire, and earnest blowing,
yet retains nothing but only a little warmth, and comes not unto fire at all.
Were it only a dullness and heaviness, and slowness of spirit, and not
unwillingnesr, the continuance of the means, and being continually spurred
would remove that, and make us at length to get as much as might testify and
bear witness to our Souls that indeed we are in love with the Lord Jesus
Christ. Where (I say) continual means and Ordinances do but very little, it is
a sign that there is not only slothfulness, but unwillingness, that the Soul is
not wrought upon effectually.

But then especially does delay argue unwillingness when a man stifles and
hinders the working of the means. He pincheth in the pains that would deliver
him of all his trouble: He weakens and enervates the Arguments that are brought
to persuade him to go to Jesus Christ. He grows witty and wise and cunning to
evade the Arguments and Reasons of the Gospel.

And then again is a man's delay a sign of his unwillingness, when he has it in
his power to believe, and yet does not believe. I say when he has it in his
power. As it is a sign a man is not willing to pay his debt, or to give unto
the poor, when he has it by him, and yet bids the poor or the debt or to come
another time. In all that are regenerate there is a Spirit of Faith: And when
they are under the means, and the means do affect them, it is then in their
power to heleeve. Naturally no man can believe: But it is given unto them that
are regenerate, and they can bring that power into act when the means do work
upon them. As now in the hearing of a Sermon, for a man to withold his Soul
from Jesus Christ, when the Ordinance presses him, yet for him to keep his
heart back from going unto him, that is a sign of unwillingness.

I will mention but one delay more. And that is when a man keeps from Jesus
Christ without a Reason. And let me tell you this, that if once a man see his
sin, and his own helplessness, there can be no Reason why he should keep from
Jesus Christ. If there be any reason, It must be either in himself, or in
Christ. If it be in himself, it must be one of these two things.

Either the want of Grace.

Or the abundance of corruption and guilt that lies upon him.

If it be want of Grace. It must be,

Either the total want,

Or the want of some degrees.

The whole want of Grace that is no ground why you should not believe, for by
believing you receive Grace for Grace. Grace is an effect of Faith: It is the
blessing of that seed, and the Tree that grows upon that Plant.

Nor can it be for want of some degree. For as I told you just now, There will
be as much reason for a man when he has attained to twenty degrees of Grace to
stay still til he has attained to the last degree of Grace. as there will be
for him when he has one degree to stay til he has twenty degrees: for all
degrees of Grace are little enough to give Jesus Christ that respect which
belongs unto him. If it be not therefore the want of Grace in whole, or in part
that should keep a man from believing, Is it the greatness of thy sins? But

Know that thy sins are the greater by delays. As the debt grows more by
non-payment: Use, and Use upon Use. And the wound grows the worse by not laying
on the thing that may heal. Is not the reason then in thee? Nor in thy sins,
nor in thy Guilt: But in Jesus Christ? That it cannot be. For the Bride says
come, and take of the waters of life freely, Revel. 22.17. And what can be more
said, or be more desired? Jesus Christ is glad when sinners come to him: more
glad than a godly man is of the conversion of another. As in Luke 16.22.28. The
Father was exceedingly rejoiced when the Prodigal came home, when the elder
Brother was troubled at it, Romans 10.8. The word is nigh thee even in thy mouth.
It is nigh unto thee: that is, It is thoroughly known, As we thoroughly know the
things that are spoken in our Ears, the sound that is not far off, but near.
Now the word is nigh unto thee, even in thy mouth. As a thing that is confessed
by all, we phrase it thus, viz. that it is in every man's mouth. Now it is in
every man's mouth, and Jesus Christ has made it evident in his word, that
whosoever believes shall be saved. The word is nigh thee, and in thy mouth, that
if thou beleevest thou shall be saved. If there be any reason therefore that
thou go not unto Jesus Christ, it must be thy own apprehension and thoughts.
For there is none in the Object Jesus Christ: nor any such reason in thy self.
I say all the reason must be in thy own apprehension. And therefore thy
apprehension is such, because indeed thy heart is unwilling to receive Jesus
Christ. Unwillingness forms and shapes and frames strange apprehensions in the
Understanding. As where a man does not love he will find occasions to be angry,
and Arguments as often as he thinks good to engage and separate his affections
from that thing or Person.

Especially Beloved where there is a feigned reason. Mark what I say. Where
there is a feigned reason there is unwillingness to receive Jesus Christ. A
Lion, A Lion says the Sluggard is in the street.

Men say that they shall be refused if they go unto God by Jesus Christ for
Faith. You do but imagine this: It Is but a feigned reason for your
unwillingness, for none ever went to him that received a neglectful Answer. In
John 6.37. Those that come unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

Men think if they should lay hold upon Jesus Christ, they should but flatter
themselves presumptuously, and their hearts would be hardened more. It is but a
feigned reason. For as fire softens wax, so would the love of God soften thee.
The apprehension of the wrath of God hardens, and the apprehension of the love
of God softens.

As men go up and down Markets and Faires and and think to do better til they
have lost their opportunity; So do men put off, and put off to believe till the
day of Grace be past. There is as great a hazard in delay, as in opposition or
refusal: and though it seems not unto the Conscience to be so great a sin, (but
it is colored with modesty, humility, and fear) yet not withstanding it is as
dangerous. The Lord he reads the principle from whence it comes, and he judges
of the Act acccording unto it. The means continuing and the heart being
stirred, yet men find out some rub or other in the way, something or other to
stop and delay their course of going unto, and closing with Jesus Christ. It
may be their ruin. It is as much as if they should say, They would have none
of Jesus Christ, nor of his salvation. There are some men so foolish that they
will not send for the Physician, nor take advice til the Disease has gotten
them down and they are overcome by it and weakened and brought unto the Grave.
So it is a folly of Spirit that til we see all means perishing, we will not come
unto a period, and put an end unto the dispute and debate of our Spirits
whether we should believe or not. That is the second thing, that Delays do
argue unwillingness in the cases that you have heard

CHAP. XXVII.
A Third sort of Persons not Receivers of Jesus Christ, viz. Such as do not
give Jesus Christ that place in their heart which is fitting for him. There
are. I. Some that entertain Jesus Christ only in their Fancy. Of these there
are two sorts. 1. Such as entertain Jesus Christ only under the Metaphors and
Representations by which the Scriptures set him forth. 2. Such as entertain him
only as a chief point or Doctrine in Religion. II. Some that entertain Jesus
Christ only in their Understandings and Reasonings. III. Some that do indeed
entertain him in their affections, but not suitable to his excellency. The
Conclusion.

THirdly: Let me speak to a third, that do receive and believe presently. They
have no fault in their apprehension of Christ, nor any fault in their puts off
and delays, but they do not give Jesus Christ that place in their hearts that
is fitting for him. I say they give not Jesus Christ that place in their hearts
that is fitting for him. What greater unwillingness almost can one show to
entertain one, than to lodge him in some mean room, or in some out-house, or
with some base and vile company, which he knows his Soul abhors? To lay a noble
man among the Swine? Or to lay a man that is of tender sense where there are
most noisome smells? What greater proof of unwillingness can there be to take
one into an house, than such an entertainment? 2 Cor. 1.6. We beseech you
receive not the Grace of God in vain. He intimates thereby that there is a
vain, that is a slight and neglectful receiving and entertaining of the Grace
of God by Christ. When Christ was born, there was no room for him in the Inn,
but in the Stable, and he was cradled in a Manger. And so now do men deal with
Jesus Christ in receiving him by believing. There is a kind of believing which
is a receiving after that sort. As for example.

He is only taken into some men's mouths: Men speak much of him, but their
hearts are far from him, though they draw near to him with their lips.

Some men have Jesus Christ only in their Fancies and speculations, only in
their outward room and Fancy. The Fancy is unto the Soul as the Porch or
outward Court is unto the House: Or it is as a Shop or a Warehouse wherein
Commodities are set forth, that so that those that pass by may be taken and
allured by them. This is the nature of the Fancy of a man: Now Jesus Christ is
admitted no further with many men. That is. The Knowledge which they have by
Christ is only by the Metaphors and borrowed speeches which the Scripture
uses, and by which he is resembled and set forth in the Scripture. Their
knowledge of him, is not proper but Metaphorical and figurative. For the better
helping you in this, you must know that there are two sorts of fanciful Faiths
(if I may use that expression) two sorts of people that receive Jesus Christ
only so far. 1. Such as hearing or reading in the Scripture that Jesus Christ
is Compared to a Rock, and Bread, and Water of life, and unto a Tree of life,
and set out as one that stands at the door or Gate of Heaven taking and
entertaining those that are received unto Glory. The Scripture setting out
Heaven as a City: and fellowship with God as a Feast where Jesus Christ comes
as the Master of it, to see his Guests that they be welcome, and want nothing
but every way entertained according to the State and Fullness and Riches of his
House: Such reading that the Scripture sets out Heaven as a House, and as a
Paradise for pleasure, and as a Kingdom, that has al kind of contentment in
it and lives indepently: they hereupon begin to think of the state of
believing, as a participation of such kind of things, and their affections are
taken much with them. And now men's apprehension of a state of Grace and
happiness, it is formed up of these: They contemplate of happiness under these
resemblances. This is that which the Scripture calls the form of Knowledge. The
form of Knowledge. As in a Map or Globe all the kingdoms and places of the World
are put, that in one view they may be beheld. So men have in their minds, and
head and thoughts what the Scripture has thus set forth Heaven and Christ by,
and further then that their understanding goes not. Of this sort of fanciful
kind of Faith, are Raptures wherein men have visions, and think they see
glorious sights both walking and sleeping, and that they hear voices speaking
unto them, and comforting, and calling them to that Glory and Honor which they
imagine the state of Grace makes them Sharers in; imagining themselves to be as
upon thrones, and in Gardens, and in the midst of pleasures and treasures.
These are the meanest and lowest sort of this kind, for those that have but
little or no understanding and insight into the things of God, have these
visions and receptions in their minds and apprehensions most frequently.
Ignorant Persons they know not the mind of God. And many sick dying men whose
understandings are weakened, or who have but little understanding, all that is
left them, being but a disturbed fancy who have lived the life of man so far as
understanding and fancy goes, yet sometimes you shall find them speaking of
their desires to be gone, to be in Heaven, to be gone to sit upon Thrones, and
going into arms, and going to be partakers of riches and greatness, and to be
with their Savior, where Glory is prepared and many such things. And yet it is
but a Fancy, as is apparent if a man searches the bottom of it. They are taken
with their apparisions and resemblances of Glorious things, and in them they
are safe. Metaphors or figurative speeches (Let me speak that by the way) are
used by the Holy Ghost, and of use to signify excellent things, and to win the
mind to think of spiritual things: The mind is brought to think of those
Heavenly things by earthly things: Even as Children are won to drink off a cup
of Physic by the gayness of the Cup, or some such thing as takes the Fancy.
But mark what I say. There are no Metaphors that can set out the things of
Jesus Christ, or Jesus Christ, as they are to be received by Faith. No Metaphor
can set them out. Says the Text Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the Father but the
Son, and those to whom he reveals him: And how does he reveal him? Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man: that is, Neither
by the Eye, nor by the Ear, what God has prepared for them that love him.
Therefore if you look into it you shall find an infinite disproportion between
the things figured, and the figure it self. As for example. Christ is called
Bread. Though this be an Vmbra and gives you a little shadow of Christ, yet it
tells you not what Christ is: for bread does but preserve life, and Christ gives
life unto them that have it not. And you know how bread is made: But Jesus
Christ is of another constitution. Mark it. So long as truths or things are in
the Fancy, they are but little known. For they come not into the Fancy nakedly
and in their own nature, but in some shapes, and figures, and representations.
Before the understanding can receive any thing it must substract the thing from
all these figures and shapes which the fancy puts upon them.

Yea indeed this kind of figurative apprehension, where it is alone, as it is
the lowest and meanest sort of knowledge, so indeed it is nothing but a
spiritual madness and distraction of mind. For as it is madness in a man that
lies upon straw to think himself upon a Throne, and for him that has Chains
about him, to count them the Ensigns and Badges of royalty and state: And he
that has nothing, to think himself to have al things. The like madness is it
for a man to think of the glorious things of Jesus Christ so meanly, as meat,
and houses, or any Metaphorical speeches can set it forth to be. It is al one
to think mean things glorious, and to count glorious things to be mean. At the
beginning of the Reformation, the Devil has been wonderful careful to dress up
the fancies of men for Jesus Christ. He has appeared unto men that have been
falling away from Popery under diverse shapes: And in all of them, as if he were
an Angel of light, speaking for and pleading for the Religion and worship of
Christ, and setting out heavenly things according to earthly and carnal
apprehensions. And poor Souls in those times being deceived by him, have
thought indeed that they had such kind of Revelation as the Prophets of old,
and have applied unto themselves those Scriptures, Acts 2.17. That in the last
days young men shall see visions, and dream Dreams, etc. whereas all this
while it has been nothing else but a work of fancy, A figurative
representation of the things of Jesus Christ unto them. Though there be a great
deal of use to be made of figurative and metaphorical speeches in the Scripture
yet they are neither able to set out Heavenly things to the full, And as they
are not able to set out Heavenly things to the full, so the Ground of our Faith
is not the similitude that is between earthly things and spiritual things, but
only the testimony which the word gives concerning Jesus Christ. And mark this.
If so be that we do receive the Testimony which the Scripture gives by Faith,
then it is without any such kind of shape or image in our Understandings,
because we do by Faith so know as God knows, As God knows intuitively, so does
Faith also.

I say as Metaphors are not able to set out spiritual things spiritually: So
that light by which they are to be received, is not that likeness which is
between the similitudes, but it must be from God himself immediately. Faith
takes Gods testimony. It is not true Faith which judges, or accepts of any
thing by any light, but the report of God. 1 Cor. 2.16. We have (says the
Apostle) the mind of Christ. As God himself does not know, his knowledge is not
resolved into or gotten by Metaphors or similitudes of earthly things, So
neither is our knowledge that we have by Faith. There is a great opposition.

There are two kinds of Arguments as differing as possibly can be.

The receiving a thing upon report.

And receiving things from similitudes. That is another kind of reasoning.

As when we know there is a God, and infinite Wisdom, and infinite goodness in
that God we know it intuitively, (as they speak) That is, there is something
falls into the heart, which (without any image) does fix this upon the heart,
that there is such a Wisdom and Power. So from the Testimony of God, there falls
in such light, as makes a man without any Image or figure to receive Jesus
Christ. Therefore I say you do but hold up Jesus Christ in a Fancy, and hang
him up as a picture in your house, and that is not a receiving him by Faith.
Though this representation of him is that which (as you shall hear hereafter)
has strange effects upon men, viz. An Imaginary happiness: And a persuasion
raised upon a man's Imagination. A strange kind of effect wrought upon men's
affections, and the alteration of men's courses.

But there is a second sort, (that I may go on with that) of those which have
only Jesus Christ in their Fancy, and they are those that know and like of him
only as he is a part of, and head, and main point of the Doctrine of Religion.
As every science does consist of diverse principles and common heads whereunto
all other things are to be referred. So does Religion also* God has put all
that knowledge which is necessary unto salvation into a frame or model. The
Scripture calls it a pattern of wholesome words, in 2 Timothy 1.13. He has put it
into a Summary or Systeme that we may see the Glory and excellency thereof at
once, and be settled in it, and be taken with the apprehension of it, when we
see one part agree with another: And there is no contradiction, and one depends
upon and maintains the other. As in a building of a stately House (which is
uniform) when one part is a support unto the other. Look into Heb. 6.1.2. The
Apostle speaks of foundations summing up al Religion into a few particulars. In
2 Timothy 1.13. The Apostle says that the pattern of wholesome words, or sum of
Religion, it does consist in Faith and love. And in another place he calls it
the Doctrine which is according unto godliness 1 Timothy 6.3. Now in this model or
frame, the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is the principal point. Look upon the whole
Scripture, and Jesus Christ is the principal Theme. Look upon all the matters
that belong unto salvation, and he is the chief Argument. Even as the Center is
unto all the lines in the Circle, So is Jesus Christ unto all the several
truths which belongs unto eternal life: They are all drawn from him, and they
all tend unto him. And according unto this it is that men do receive Jesus
Christ. They receive him as a man receives the story of Moses, or Joshua, or
any other worthy that have done some noble Acts: That is, as he who is the
subject about whom all that is conver sant, And the Person by whom al those
great things have bin done. And this knowledge of Jesus Christ is that which the
Aposte calls a soundness in the Faith, Titus 2.2. when as men err not from,
and make not shipwreck, of Faith and a good Conscience, or Faith especially. 1 Timothy 1.19. From this knowledge a man may be so established in the profession of
Jesus Christ as that he may be able to instruct others, to answer all arguments
that shall be brought against this profession, and to endure much even as the
Heathen Philosophers that would rather die the cruellest death, than leave any
one principle of their learning and profession which they had received. So a
man may see so great a reason for the things of Jesus Christ, that a man shall
not dare to part with the least beam of it for the greatest afflictions in the
world, or to avoid the greatest misery. But yet notwithstanding all this a man
may be without saving Faith. It may be thus received into a man's mind and
judgment, and yet not be a faith that will bring him life and Salvation at the
last. For I beseech you consider it. A man may thus receive Jesus Christ by a
common gift of the spirit, though he has no Grace. In Romans 2.20. The Apostle
says of those that were not Jews in the Circumcision of the heart, that they
had a form of knowledge and did delight themselves in the Law, compared with
the last verse. And if you look into Romans 6.17. You shall find that besides the
form of Doctrine, unto a man's Salvation there is required his being delivered
up unto it. But (says he) you have obeyed from the heart the form of
Doctrine, whereunto you were delivered. DELIVERED, that is, cast in the shape,
and conformed unto it, so as that what you know, has authority and power over
you. As we say a man is delivered into such a ones hand, when he is made sure
of, so as he cannot escape. A man must through obedience come under the power
of that which he knows, or his knowledge is not saving.

Yea notwithstanding all this kind of knowledge, and this judgment, and
understanding of Jesus Christ, a man may have no affection nor love unto him at
al. In John 2.25. It is said that many believed upon Christ, but yet he says,
they were such as he did not dare to trust himself with all. That is, they would
have betrayed him, and for their own advantage would have put him into the
hands of his enemies. 2 Timothy 3.5. They have a form of Godliness, but deny the
power thereof in their lives. That is, a man may know much, and know it
exactly, and yet the things known have no power to order their affection or to
subdue their corruption. Or as some do understand the [Power] in opposition to
the [Form.] They do not value the things as they are in themselves; Al their
esteem reaches no further then the order and rank that these things bear in
the matters of the world. As for example. A man in casting up an account may
value a counter a pound, or a thousand pound, only because it is so in
reckoning: So a man may value Jesus Christ at a great reckoning, as one that
contains all the doctrine that belongs unto Salvation, and yet notwithstanding
unto a man's self Christ may be but a brass Counter, and as one that has no
value in himself. That is al I shall leave concerning this point That Jesus
Christ is received only into the fancy, when a man knows not Christ in himself,
but his apprehension is formed only into the Metaphors and figurative speeches
in the scripture of him. And when they know him only as he is the main point of
Doctrine in religion, but his heart is not taken with himself.

There are some who go yet further, And they are such who take Jesus Christ
into their understanding But it is into the reasoning part of them (as I may so
speak) that is, so far as they are convinced by demonstrations and evidences
and undeniable arguments, so far they receive Jesus Christ. True faith goes by
testimony, and that is the argument and chief ground of it. A man may receive
the word of God to be true upon the same ground that he may receive any other
writing, or book which teaches a man, whether it be the knowledge of Countries,
or of the hevens, or any other art whatsoever. In the scripture Isay a man shall
find the same things to persuade him, which he finds in other books. A man
believes other Books to be true, because it has good report, because it is
ancient, And the parts agree, And they interfere not, nor contradict one
another: They have experience that the things there said, comes to pass, and
the like things have been done which they report. And so a man upon the
antiquity of the scripture, and the agreement of the scripture, and upon the
equity that is in the command of the scripture, comes to think that the
scriptures are true. But now the Spirit of God joining with these, and sitting
upon these, (I say, These common arguments withal sciences) the spirit of God
improving al these, may work upon men very much, But if so be that men go no
further then these, there is not faith in Jesus Christ neither. For I beseech
you mark it. Al faith, it is an act, so far as it is saving, it is a willing
receiving of Jesus Christ. But these demonstrations and arguments, they do
compel the understanding. The understanding cannot but consent unto them, and
it is irresistibly (do what it can) bowed to give consent according to the
same, and that is an argument that it is not saving. As a man who yields
obedience, not because he loves the Governor, but because he knows not how to
help himself (or to do otherwise) being conquered. So these evidences and
strong reasons, they lead a man captive, and a man consents in his
understanding although the heart be against them: a man may join together with
them, and yet notwithstanding they be things which his heart does most of al
abhor: therefore they cannot be saving. Mistake me not beloved.

There is nothing so careful of having a good evidence, as Faith is, It is the
most secure Grace of trusting unto, that possibly can be: It will take nothing
but what is increated for its ground: It will either have a testimony from God
that cannot err, or else it will not receive.

But though Faith may look after the cleerest evidence, yet it looks not after
an evidence arising from the things themselves, but from the word of God: Not
from the Matter, but from Gods report. If God will say it, let the thing be
never so obscure, and contrary to sense or reason, yet Faith will receive it.
But that which I now intend in this, is,

That even as the Devils they do believe (the Text says in Jam. 2.19.) but
they do it, because they have experience that the things which God has spoken
come to pass (as I have showed heretofore) They are convinced by what they have
seen and found, that what they yet see not accomplished, shall be in Gods own
time. And so there is a Faith also among men, even concerning the things of the
Gospel, which is contrary unto their lusts: But yet its not grounded upon any
thing, but merely upon demonstration, upon demonstration (I say) or experience,
and therefore it does not save.

There are some therefore that receive Jesus Christ only into their reason. Into
their reason only. I have made these several steps in the laying open of this
truth, because that the Devil does with the Souls of men, even as Warriers do
when they have a place to hold out against an enemy. If so be that they cannot
keep one Wall, or one part of the Fort, they get to another, and there
strengthen themselves: They would keep them out of al. If the Devil can keep
Christ out of the fancies of men, he will. If he cannot stay him there, by
reason of the means that they live under, then he stays him in Reason, and
labors to set him up there: You shall know what I mean by it by and by.

A man may receive Jesus Christ into his reason, and yet have no good will to
him. (which is the Point that I have in hand) For as the Eye being opened,
cannot but see the light, so neither can the Understanding but take notice of
the truth that is propounded unto it. The Will has a power when the Object is
before it to refuse it, But the understanding has no such power. But when as a
thing is propounded, it cannot but observe it. A man may not like, nor own what
is propounded, but he cannot but take notice of it. And therefore (by the way)
when we say that men will not know, or men are wilfully ignorant. The meaning
is this, They will not be known to know, or do wilfully keep themselves from
reflecting upon the consideration of what they do know: for when the light
comes, It cannot (I say) but be received. Therefore for the better opening of a
man's receiving Jesus Christ into his reason.

Know, that there is a difference between Reason, and Reasoning. In the Latin
tongue, they have two words that do aptly express it. Ratio and Rationis
operatio. It is that reasoning which God has given unto men, to join truths
together, which are of one sort, and belongs unto one subject, And to collect
and gather the consequences which follow thereon. This is reasoning. And by
this many men come to be great disputers, and contenders (as you shall hear by
and by) for that Faith of Christ which they have not dwelling in their hearts.
As in the time of the Law, The Jews had some who kept their Genealogies, who
retained the knowledge of every Tribe, the heads of the families, and the
kindred, and the alliances which every one had to another by matches and
marriages. So God has given [Reasoning] in the soul this office, To keep the
foundation, or principal heads of truths and to keep also in memory the
consequences, which are as it were the kindred of those foundation truths, the
marriages which one common head has with another, the influences which one
point has into another. This Reasoning ads nothing unto truth, but does arise
from the nature of truth it self, and is in the thing, in the truth, whether or
no that it be reached by us or not. As for example.

We reason thus. If God made the World, then the World was not eternal.
Whether we collect this or not, yet in this saying, viz. That God made the
World. This, viz. that it is not eternal is comprised. And this kind of
Reasoning, the Scripture makes use of in the matters of Faith. Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but
by Faith in Jesus Christ. And in Matthew. 22.32. Upon this Jesus Christ proves
the resurrection of the bodies of men, viz. God has said; That he will be the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of those that believe upon him. If he
has said (says Christ) that he will be their God, then by consequence, They
do live unto him, and their bodies also shall live together with their Spirits.
And because the Scripture makes such use of these consequences, or this kind
of reasoning, therefore we are commanded to attend unto reading; because the
words of scripture are means whereby things comes thus into our Understanding.
And we are required to Search the Scriptures, John 5.19. which is a Metaphor
taken from Hunters, whether they be Beasts, or Men: They look after the
footsteps of their Game. As, by instinct the Dog takes the sent here and
there, and follows the Game, as if it were following the conclusion. So the
mind of a man puts things together, and must put the things together that are
in the Scripture, and conclude from them.

But besides this Reasoning, There is also Reason. which is the principles and
notions of things that are in us by nature. And these are of two sorts.

Some are common and universally true. True in every Matter or Science. As for
example. That the rule is before, and more known, than that which is ruled by
it. That the Cause is more excellent than the Effect. That the means (so far as
it is a means) is less excellent than the end. These and diverse others are
true, not only in humane Sciences, but in matters of Faith. As for example. It
is as true, that the scripture, because it is a rule, is before men's Faith, and
before the Church, and of greater authority and efficacy, Even as it is true,
that the Laws of men are in order of nature before any thing can be done
lawfully, or to have a reward or acceptance. And so again. The Body of Christ,
though it be in Heaven and full of Glory, yet notwithstanding is as well
contained there, and not every where, as it was in one place, and not in
another when it was upon the earth.

Now besides those general and universal principles of reason, there are in us
by nature particular principles or notions which do belong unto particular
subjects. As, Unto the nature of God: and unto Righteousness, and unto Justice:
Whether that righteousness be personal, and moral, or whether it be
political, or that which a man is to exercise as a Judge toward others. There
are notions which are proper unto the beings and kinds of Creatures. Now to
draw unto the thing that I would speak unto in diverse cases.

Both Reason and reasoning may argue an unwillingness to receive Jesus Christ,
and so a want of true faith. The receiving Jesus Christ may be such both into
reason, and into reasoning as argues a man not to believe upon Christ unto the
Salvation of his soul. Give me but leave to instance but in some of these as
briefly as I can. As

I. When no more is believed concerning God and Jesus Christ, (Mark it) when we
believe no more of God and Jesus Christ then can be deduced out of the
principles of the knowledge of God, which are in us by nature. Take the
principles of the knowledge of God which are in us by nature, and that not only
in nature fallen and corrupted, but in perfect and innocent nature. The
testimony which God gives us of himself through Jesus Christ (I say that which
God has revealed Christ must do for us or else we cannot be saved) cannot be
deduced from those principles and from that reason, by any understanding
whatsoever. Mark it. What God does do in and by Jesus Christ may be reduced
unto that which God has made known of himself, and is his nature: There is no
inconsistency between them. Yea, the nature of God becomes a pawn and security
for the making of that good. But out of the nature of God, these things cannot
be deduced. As for example.

There is no inconsistency between Gods holiness, and his giving his Son for
us. There is no inconsistency between his Justice to punish sin, and his
pardoning of sin, as he does it: They may well stand together. But the most
perfect and absolute understanding of the Justice, or of the holiness of God,
or of the mercy of God, cannot teach a man that God will pardon, or that God will
give Jesus Christ for him: But that a man must have knowledge of from another
relation. And that which (I suppose) does make this as clear as can be, is
this; That the things which do belong unto our Salvation by Jesus Christ, are
acts of Gods mere will and pleasure: Such unto which his nature of it self, acts
not, but because he of his own pleasure will so do. And therefore you shall find
that the Gospel is said to be hid from the Angels, even the Angels that are in
heaven, til it be revealed though that they have as perfect knowledge of God as
Creatures can have. They see the face of my father continually, says our Lord
Jesus Christ. The Angels that are in heaven, know the love of God, and they
know the mercy of God, and they know the power of God: These are the subjects
of their meditation: They are endued with such understanding, that they can go
as far, and pierce as deeply into them, as can be by creatures; And yet
notwithstanding, that God should pardon and forgive a sinner by Jesus Christ,
that they could not find out. And therefore the Apostle says in 1 Pet.
1.12.13. That the Angels did stoop down: As a man lays his ear where he can
hardly hear. So the Angels did stoop down. It was as much as they could do
when God did reveal the Gospel to apprehend or take notice of it. So you know
that the scripture says, that the things of Jesus Christ they are (in Math.
16.17.) Not revealed by flesh and blood, but by my father which is in Heaven,
says Christ. Were the matters of our Salvation the necessary effects of Gods
attributes, and his nature, then the things of our Salvation might be found out
by those that know and study that nature and those Attributes. But that you see
they cannot. The Prophets in 1 Pet. 1.12. That prophesied concerning Christ by
an immediate revelation: yet were faint to have another revelation to know the
circumstance of the time when the things whereof they spoke should be fulfilled
and come to pass. Take the divine nature of Christ as he is the second person,
of the same substance with the father, And though you should know that fully,
though you had a perfect understanding of it, yet could you not know by it,
what the heart of Christ is toward you as a Mediator. And the reason is,
because as what the father does, he does do voluntarily, and not from a
necessity of nature: So what Jesus Christ the son does, he does out of a
voluntary compact and covenant made with the Father. And therefore he says, he
comes to do his will. Heb. 10.9. And Gal. 1.4. He gave himself according unto
the will of God and his Father. Now mark it. If so be that perfect nature, Man
in innocence cannot understand by the nature of God what are the things which
do belong unto Salvation by Jesus Christ: If so be that a man must believe more
unto Salvation, then a perfect understanding (which the Angels have, if it were
in man) can reveal unto him. Then must he believe more then the corrupt and
depraved mind of man can teach him.

Beloved, let me draw it down to a little more narrow compass that may fit your
practice.

The things which God has revealed are not examined and judged by what is
essential unto the nature of God. It is lawful to examine what is the essential
nature of God. It is lawful to look into what God will do, that we may see his
attributes shining forth in them: But to examine the truth of what he has
promised, by that which is essential and natural unto God, is for a man to go
out of the way that is saving. I will make it plain to you.

You shall see many a poor soul, when he hears in the Ministry of the word
clearly asserted that God will forgive and pardon sin: The promises of life and
Salvation are with such evidence and light held forth, as that there is no
exception can be made against them, Yet notwithstanding you shall find a poor
soul keeping off from resting by faith in them, because he says God is Just
and of a holy nature, And what communion can there be between such a one as he
is, and God? Mark it. Because that the nature of God does not of it self give
forth or promise so much as the Gospel does, therefore the Gospel is called in
question by them. Who ever thou art when thou hear the promise of God in
Christ and by Christ, that objecteth that God is just, and the avenger of such
a one as I am, Unless this be thy end, viz. To learn how the Justice of God is
preserved entire notwithstanding he passes thee by, unless it be I say to this
end, Thou do lay a stumbling block before thy self in the way of faith and
believing: Yea thou do discover an unwillingness to believe upon Jesus
Christ. Thou think God is unwilling to show thee grace and mercy, because
thou think he will do no more then he must needs do by the necessity of his
own nature. We count that man to be exceeding hard, who will give no more then
he is constrained to do by law. So thou do with God. Thou countest him to do
no more then by law, if thou countest that he will do nothing but what his
nature does hold forth: if thou make his nature to be the rule, and not his
promise.

His nature does give security that that which he has promised shall be
performed, and that he will do what he has promised. How hard is that man to
believe, that will believe no more then he is forced unto? that will believe no
report unless he hears it with his own ears, and sees it with his own eyes:
And so do thou, when thou will not rest in the promise of God. It is true
indeed,

That men may be brought to believe, we teach them that the nature of God is
good and kind and merciful: But it is only to these ends, and in this sense:
Partly to show them that God is not moved by any thing out of himself: But not
to show them that he were not God by nature unless he took their cause to
heart. And partly it is to show them how his will has set his nature on work
for them, and of his grace he has laid a law upon himself that as he is holy,
he should keep his word, And as he would be acknowledged to be powerful, so he
should work for us: and as he would have the glory of his Justice, so he should
save. And therefore Christ uses these titles, Father and Holy Father, as it is
in John. 17.11.21. But this is the first thing. When men will believe no more
then can be deduced out of those principles which they have of the knowledge of
God in them by nature, when as the things that God has promised by Josus
Christ, are those things which his nature will make good, but they are those
things only which his will has given to us.

II. And again, Men do receive Jesus Christ into their reason only, when as
they will believe no more then can be demonstrated, and evidently concluded from
the scriptures themselves. Concluded from the scripture, every thing must be
demonstratively or by just consequence, and it is believed savingly: But though
it must be concluded justly, yet it is not necessary that it should be
demonstrative unto our faith. A conclusion is then demonstrative (mark it) when
it is as clear and evident as the principle is whence it is drawn. I say when
it is as clear. As for example. In 2 Cor. 5.15. Says the Apostle, If Christ
died for all, then were al dead. This is the conclusion, Then were al dead: and
this is as demonstrative and as clear as this, That Christ died. For he died
for them, and in their stead: and he needed not to die for them and in their
stead, if they had not been liable to death themselves. But al matters of
faith, al matters that shall be done for us by Jesus Christ, shall not be thus
clearly demonstrated. That is the thing in hand. For the proof of it. Consider
with your selves, that it is the self same faith whereby a man does believe his
own Salvation, and does believe the truth of the promises. The faith of
assurance it is a divine faith, as well as the faith of assent is unto what God
has revealed. A man that makes this discourse, Mark. 16.16. He that does
believe shall be saved, takes that upon the word of God, which cannot be denied:
But I have true faith, faith he and therefore I shall be saved. This conclusion
now is as divine, because drawn from that proposition, as that proposition is,
That he that believes shall be saved: But it is not as demonstrative and clear.
It is as true I say but not as clear. Then you see that more is to be believed
then can be clearly demonstrated. The scriptures are like a treasure or womb,
which contain more things in them then the word at the first face and looking
upon can make known unto the mind of a man. I would but only instance in one
thing more, Math. 22.32. which I spoke of just now. Christ goes about to prove
the resurrection of the dead from this, that God said, he will be the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. That he will be their God: that is clear. From
thence he concludes therefore that the dead shall rise: This is as certain, but
it is not so clear, unless God first explains what it is to be a God unto one.
It is required of Faith in this promise, I will be thy God, to expect as much
as God can do for one, though it be not expressed. That is the thing that I aim
at. Matters of favors are to be always enlarged: and promises are to be
interpreted in the extensivest and largest sense. And you have this proof of
it, because when God says, he will be ones God, and gives him this promise, he
is bound to believe that God will do as much for him as he can, though those
words do not express it, Therefore says Christ in Math. 22.29. You err not
knowing the Scripture, and the power of God. You think the Scriptures contain
no more in them than what the words do at first sight, and in their view tender
to you. You must (says he) interpret the scripture according to Gods power,
and know, where he has said he will be a God unto a man, there he has engaged
all his power to do for a man, or else you err. You err not knowing the
Scripture, and the power of God.

However the words of scripture are used to direct and limit the sense of our
Faith, or the hope of our Faith, yet they are not given to limit and bound the
goodness of God. The goodness of God and the love which he bears, and the good
that he will do, is far greater (because it is infinite) than words taken from
men can set forth.

There are some that go yet further in their entertainment of Jesus Christ, and
they put him into their affections. They that hold that man's Will must have the
casting voice in the matters of his conversion and salvation, use this
distinction.

They fay, the Will may be wrought upon quo ad affectum, but not quo ad
effectum. God by means does effect the Will, But that the Will should be
thoroughly effected and brought over unto the things that God would have it,
that arises from a man's own self. The distinction is good and serviceable to
the point in hand, though it be applied by them. But it has this truth in it.
That a man may have his affections stirred, and stirred under the means with
the things which do belong unto eternal life, and yet notwithstanding have his
heart full of lusts, and his will stand in the same firmness, stiffness, and
stubborness against the things of Jesus Christ, as if he had no such kind of
affections. Let me but instance in this one particular.

Suppose a man to be taken or delighted with a Jewel that is worth millions,
but the delight that he has in it, is but as the delight which belongs unto a
thing worth but twenty pounds. So there may be a delight in Jesus Christ, but
not suitable to the worth and excellencies of him. Suppose yet further. Suppose
a man should make show of love unto a man (as I said in the beginning of the
point) but yet should lodge him among vile persons whom he loathes, no man will
say, this man's affections are good. So when as Jesus Christ shall be lodged with
the Devil, and with thy lusts and corruptions, With one breath thou art for
him, and with another thou art for them, When thy sins reign and live in thy
heart, taking their pleasures, and rouling themselves with delight and
contentment, and yet thou say there is none like unto, and none can save but
the Lord Jesus Christ: A man may be affected that has sins reigning in him
(that is out of controversy) with the things of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 13.20.
They received the word with joy, who loved the world, better than the word, and
therefore when tribulation arose, they parted with the word, and fell unto the
world presently. I beseech you beloved know thus much. That as our Lord Jesus
Christ when he was to keep the Passover, Mark 14.15.
bid his Disciples go and they should find a man, and they should ask for an
upper room, and there he would eat the Passover. The Upper rooms among the
Jews were their Guest-chambers, which were far from their lower rooms whereinto
ordinary Persons came: Ordinary persons were below, but they were with their
friends in the Upper room. Know thus much, That when Jesus Christ comes into
the soul by Faith, he will have an upper room, the best of your Understanding
and Will: He will not be thrust into a room with Satan and with your lusts, and
with dirt: he will not be corrival with them in one house. In a word beloved.
If there be any Person that you have a respect unto, if there be any good thing
that you have a respect unto, and subject it not unto him: If there be any
evil that you have respect unto, he will not have respect unto you. That is
certain. That Faith shall go for nothing that can lay hold upon Jesus Christ,
and yet scrable after the world, and this and that lust, as if there were good
and happiness to be found in it. This particular point that I am upon, To
believe upon conviction, has some difficulty in it, and I would fain make it
plain to you, it is not your conviction that is the reason that your Faith is
good (Mark it) But it is a sign your Faith is not good, when you will believe
nothing but what you have convictions of, from the things themselves. For the
Spirit of God working in an unregenerate man, he does but improve things that
are common: His nature is not changed, and therefore uses but ordinary and
humane abilities to the best improvement of them.

But all that I aim at in all that I have said, is only but this. That in this
great matter of your Faith, you would look warily to your selves that you be
not deceived. Take heed least when you think you have received Christ into your
heart, you have indeed carried him only into the outward room thereof, and not
given him the chief place. Many men can dispute for Christ, and many men they
are stout, and of courage in the Doctrine of Christ, and yet notwithstanding
for all this they have not the saving Faith of him. Many men there are that
that because they think to compound all differences, and to make a way easy to
their believing by proceeding in the matters of Faith by the wisdom of men,
they lose their own Souls. How many men are there that judge themselves, that
because they cannot so mourn for sin, as they mourn for Children, and they
cannot be so carried after Christ, as they are after the things they love here:
Be it Husband, or Wife, or the like, therefore they think they have no love at
all. This is only to make the things of the Gospel subject to the Laws and
principles of reason. It Is true indeed, there is greater reason why you should
love God more than Children, And the least discovery of him, more than comfort:
That is, there is a ground why you should do so: Yet know that your love is not
judged by what you do to these things which are altogether in your power, But
by what carriage and affection you bear unto God, who is contrary unto you by
nature, but yet brought near by Jesus Christ. And it is a greater matter to a
poor Soul (though it cannot do what it should do) to love God a little, when it
has so much corruption to plead with him for to get his heart from God, than
it is for a man to love a Child so affectionately, when there is nothing in his
heart to draw him from it. Esa. 55. Says God. My thoughts are not as your
thoughts, nor my ways as your ways. The ways of men are, that if they do
good, they shall receive good: But Gods way is, to justify the ungodly, and to
do good against evil. You think says he, that if you buy you must have money,
or moneys worth, But know (says God) that my bargains are not driven on as
yours are. For know, If you have no money, you shall buy, that is, have as good
a title, as if you had money or moneys worth. This is a riddle, That a man may
buy without money, or moneys worth, whereas all kind of bargainings are by one
of them. But Gods ways are not as your ways. It is enough for you that you
have the word of God: He knows what is best for his own Glory, Therefore take
his word, And do not judge of things according to what thy reason does suggest,
and square not thy hopes according to thy sense, and as thy wisdom directs,
for he knows what is the best way to express his mercy by.

FINIS.
A Short and Excellent TREATISE OF COVETOUSNESS,
LUKE, 12.15. And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness.


CHAP. I.
The occasion and scope of the words. The Doctrine. The words in the Text [Take
heed and Beware] glossed upon. Covetousness considered more generally in three
Particulars. More strictly and specially and so it is a desire of having much
arising from an uncontentedness with a man's present condition, though he would
not by any other then lawful means mend or better it.

IN the 13. verse of this Chapter, One that was with Christ desired him to
appear an Arbitrator in a difference between him and his Brother. Master speak
to my Brother that he divide the Inheritance with me. Christ answers him with
Indignation at the 14. verse. Man who made me a Judge, or a divider over you. As
if he should have said, I have no commission: Its not my errand or end in
coming into the world to take up differences between men and men, but between
men and God: Nor am I to help men to their right and inheritances here but unto
an inheritance among the Saints. And secondly his advice to them is rather to
take care for death and another world, Then for an inheritance. Take heed and
beware of Covetousness. For: your life, that is, the end of the life and the
comfort of your life consists not in having much; And to that end he tells them
a parable of a rich man that laid up much, and made account to live quietly and
comfortably upon what he had got, but he died suddenly: he died like a fool,
and perished from the presence of the Lord. For in verse. 21. Its said That he
was not rich toward God. What need you (sai^^ our Lord) take care for much,
when you ha^^ (...) much time to live? Take care for death, and for eternity,
else after al your labor, you shall meet with nothing but eternal misery. I say
the words of the Text are an answer to a harmless motion (as one would think)
made by one that was a follower of him. His motion was that Christ would do him
right, and arbitrate the business of difference between him and his brother
about that estate which belonged to him by Inheritance. As Christ refuses the
office in the 14. verse. for he came into the world to help men's Souls, and not
to be a Judge, so he therefore warns him of covetousness which would bring forth
bitterness in the latter end, which would make him die like a fool, and hinder
him from being rich toward God. Al a man's riches cannot preserve his life one
day, and if he be not rich in God, he shall die like a fool for ever and perish.

The Point that I shall insist upon is this.

Doct. That it is the Duty of all men as they would attain to eternal life, to
take heed and beware of Covetousness.

Its the duty of all; for upon one man's speaking unto Christ about his
inheritance, he turns his speech unto all. He said unto them. That is, to all the Company at the thirteenth verse. And it is a duty as they would attain to
eternal life: for to that end Jesus Christ bids them to beware of Covetousness
that they might not die as a Pool does, as you have it in verse, 20. Men's
inordinate desires after the lawful things of this life, do as well hinder them
from Heaven, as if they were sinful things, or gross profaneness, for in the
following verses of this Chapter, you have the Anatomizing of a man that was
dead and gone to Hell, for he died like a Fool: And it shows the Disease and
Cause of the misery, he was found not to live in any gross sin, but only in
this, that he was Covetous. And because the HEED, cannot be too great,
therefore he uses two words, Take heed, and beware, a double Caution, because
there is a great and double danger, or as it is in the Greek, See, or watch to
it, and guard your selves against it. A similitude either taken (as some do
conceive) from men's going into the fields to gather wholesome Herbs, who are
very careful least they should gather any thing that is poisonous: And when
they have made a confection they set it up carefully least any poison should
come into it. The poison of al a man's Spirit and Duties, is Covetousness. And
therefore he bids them to beware of it. Or else its taken from Soldiers (for
one of the words (...), Beware, is properly a Military word) As if he should
have said, stand Sentinel, have your eyes open, look this way and that way, be
Circumspect least the love of the world get into you: fence your selves with all
the whole Armor of God, else you will not be able to keep your selves from it.
They should do as Soldiers, who do not only set Sentinels to look out, but do
set a Guard that they may keep the place that is in danger of the Enemy.

That which I shall do in the explication of the Point is to show you.

I. What Covetousness is.

II. The Reasons why you should be so watchful against it, and heedful of it

I. What Covetousness is, for the great difficulty of the Point lies in the
explication of what Covetousness is, which may be taken two ways:

Either as it is a general,

Or as it is a special sin.

In general, or as it is a general sin, and so it goes in a double Notion*

First: It is a minding of Earthly things, as the Apostle expresses it in
Phil. 3.19. It Is taken in general for that evil frame of heart, whereby a man
when he has once sinned, desires to commit the same, or another. And so it is
taken in Isa. 57.17. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness was I wrath, and I
did hide my self. The Hebrew word signifies any kind of desire whatsoever, Not
only after Riches as Covetousness is, but after any thing that is unlawful.
And it is probable, yea more than probable that the Holy Ghost does so take it,
because he says they did go on in the way of their own heart, that is, they
did what they listed, the more they sinned, the more they had a mind to sin.
And the Apostle in Ephesians. 4.19. says concerning some men, that they did commit
all sin with greediness: In the Greek, it is with Covetousness; the Apostle
there only speaks concerning the boundless appetite that is in men to do as
much as they can against God. The grossest sins that are contentfull and
pleasurable are gainful to them: so that in the Scripture Covetousness
sometimes signifies that desire of men to commit sin, after they have once
committed it, and are left by God to take pleasure and contentment in it.

Secondly: As it is a general sin in that sense, so also as it is an
uncontentedness with a man's outward condition. I say it is an uncontentedness,
in Heb. 13.5. it is said. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be
content with such things as you have. Uncontentedness is less than discontent.
For he is uncontented, who is not well pleased, But he is discontented who
frets, murmurs, repines, that thinks much of Gods distributions, and that
envies another that has more than himself. So you have it laid down in Psalm.
37.1. Fret not thy self because of the wicked: And by the Prophet Isaiah in
Chap. 8. verse 21. where he brings in men which cannot have that liberty from
their Enemies which they desire, They do rage against God, They do curse their
Ring and their God and look upwards. As a Dropsy is a thirst which is not to
be quenched: Drink, and you are still dry: So there is an evil frame of heart
in men to be unsatisfied with any thing that God does for them, and that is
called Covetousness: Because that Covetousness is an uncontentedness with a
man's outward Condition, or a desire of more, therefore it is a breach of all the
Commandments of the second Table by which men's outward Conditions are ordered.
As it is well observed, that as the first Commandment has an influence into all
the Commandments of the first Table, The Love of God, being the Sum of that: So
the last Commandment which forbids to Covet, has an influence into all the
Duties of the second Table. As for example. In 1 These. 4.6. the Apostle does
there call Adultery or men's lusting after their Neighbors Wives, Covetousness,
when a man Commits Adultery, he is there said to be Covetous. Let no man go
beyond or defraud his Brother [Defraud] But the word in Greek, is (...), Covet,
to be covetous. You have it in the Text, In any matter, but in the Grek it is,
In this matter: And which makes it appear that he speaks only concerning
Chastity, and uncleanness, for verse 7. (says he) God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto Holiness. In the eighth Commandment, Covetousness is a
breach of that liberality and bounty which men should show unto all men, but
especially unto the Saints. In 2 Cor. 9.5. the Apostle bids them that they
should not give out of Covetousness, but out of bounty: So that the seventh and
the eighth Commandments, and by the same reason all the rest of the
Commandments of the second Table are broken when as a man is not content in his
present condition. And it is a breach in Terms, for, Thou shall not Covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his. Therefore Covetousness is said to be a breach of them,
because it makes a man that he does not quiet himself in that state wherein God
has put or placed him.

Thirdly and Lastly: Covetousness is an uncontentedness in a man's outward
condition, though he would only by lawful means increase or better it. Lawful
means must be used, and a blessing prayed for upon them, but a man must use
lawful means lawfully, and be content though God does not give in success, else
he is Covetous. And the reason of that is, because Covetousness does lie in a
man's uncontentedness or discontentedness with his present Condition. In Heb.
13. verse. 5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness and be contented
with such things as you have. Covetousness lies in uncontentedness or
discontentedness. The Lawfulness of means does not take away the sin, but
rather increase it: because lawful means are then abused when they are used to
satisfy men's lusts from discontent with Gods Providence. And if you look into
this place, the way that this man took was a lawful way. It was not by any
other course that he would get his own than by referring the matter to another,
Master says he, Speak unto my Brother that he divide the inheritance with me,
and yet Christ accuses him of Covetousness, because he did see in him a want
of Subjection to the will of God. To make it more clear that a man may be
Covetous in the use of lawful means to better his estate and Condition,
consider but the meaning of the tenth Commandment, which says, Thou shall not
Covet. The meaning is this, Thou shall not Covet thy neighbors Wife in a lawful
way (though thou would not have her but in a lawful way) but be pleased with
thy own. And thou shall not covet thy neighbors ox, though thou would not
have it but for thy money: for all unlawful ways of having another man's ox were
forbidden in the eighth Commandment. To desire another man's wife or any thing
that is his wrong and injury, is forbidden in the seventh and eight
Commandments, The tenth Commandment is therefore a suppression of men's desires
in lawful ways after that which they have not. And unto this Commandment was
the sin of Ahab to be referred who did mourn and greive because he had not
Naboths vineyard upon the price and the value of it. Ahab was punished for his
Covetousness, and yet he desired nothing but only to have Naboths vinyard for a
price, or upon Exchange, which are lawful ways of bargaining. And it appears
evidently that that is the meaning of the tenth Commandment, (Thou shall not
Covet) is to make men content with that they have, although they might by
lawful means, have that which is another, because the desires by unlawful
means are forbidden in the rest of the Commandments, The desire of another
man's Wife in an unlawful way is forbidden in the seventh Commandment, Thou
shall not commit adultery, And the desire of another man's estate in an unlawful
way is forbidden in the eighth Commandment, Thou shall not Steal, As was
hinted before. Seeing therefore there is a desire in this forbidding, which is
not forbidden in the rest. It must be a desire which is in men to the things of
another, though it be by lawful means. As I said before so I say now, that
Lawful means may be used to advance a man's estate, and a blessing upon the use
of those means may be begged, but a man must be contented with the will of God
whither he blesses, or blesses not else he is Covetous. And thus I have
spoken of Covetousness as its a General Sin.

Secondly, But now you may consider Covetousness Strictly or specially as it is
a special sin, And so I describe it thus. Covetousness is an uncontentedness,
or a desire of having much, arising from an uncontentedness with a man's
condition. It is an uncontentedness with or a desire of having abundance, out
of a discontentedness with a man's present estate, though he might by lawful
means mend or better it: and so you have it almost defined in the words of the
Text, for when Christ had said. Beware of Covetousness he adds by explication,
A man's life consists not in the abundance of that which he possesses. That
therefore which belongs to this life, and the seeking of it in abundance, is
Covetousness. The object of Covetousness is riches or abundance of the things
that do belong to this life. A man may not care for money and yet be Covetous,
because money does but serve his desire after other things. And therefore when
you find that the scriptute speaks of Covetousness as a desire of money, as it
is 1 Timothy: 6.10. That the love of money is the root of al evil, the reason is not
because Covetousness lies in the desire of money only, but because money answers
al things. Men are therefore Covetous, because by loving of money they are in
love with any thing that may be gotten by it. Therefore the Apostle says, in 1 Timothy 6.8. Having Food and Raiment they should be there with contented As if he
should have said, Covetousness lies as much in the desire of Clothes, and
meat, as of money.

I call it a desire. For so the Scripture does in 1 John 2.16. When it speaks
of the lust of the eye. But every lust or desire after riches is not unlawful,
or Covetousness (because riches is made by God to be of use, and to be
instruments to many good and pious uses) but only that lust or desire which
arises from discontent or from uncontentedness rather. Therefore it is that
the scripture when ever it speaks of Covetousness, does join discontentedness
with it. And that uncontentedness may be discovered as well by a man's actions,
as any thing else. For as when a man goes about to do those things which cannot
be done by any ordinary power, he tempts God, and calls in Satan to come to his
assistance: So when a man does those things which are incompatible with his
state, he does in that desire more than God has given him at the present.
There is as well a prayer in actions, as in desires or any other way.

A man may be said to have a desire after much or abundance two ways.

Either whenas he desires to have that which he has not, and in that respect
it may be a poor man's sin, as well as the rich.

Or else when a man is content with that which he has, but is not willing to
lay it forth as God assigns him: when he would have that whereof he is
possessed, and not part with it, or lay it out to such uses which God assigns
him. Mark it: Though a man counts he has enough and desires no more, yet if he
be not willing to part with that which he has, when God commands him, he is
Covetous. In Eccles. 6.2. says he, I have seen this evil under the Sun that
God has given to a man riches, that he wants nothing, and yet God gives him
not power to eat thereof. This is an evil Disease. You may be covetous because
you will not give forth of that which you have. In 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. The Apostle
opposes unto Covetousness Distribution unto those that are in necessity: He
exhorts rich men that they would (as a fruit of their trusting in the Lord) Be
ready to distribute. When men are not ready, they are then the Servants of the
World, because they have not a heart to dispose of the world, but are disposed
and ordered by it.

And let me take in that which I said in the general explication of it, and
that is this, That it is a desire arising from uncontent, or discontent, though
that a man may by Lawful means get more. That a man may be covetous in the use
of lawful means to increase his Estate, or though he do but desire by lawful
means to have his Estate increased: A man may be covetous in the use of a
lawful Calling. It is true indeed that Covetousness is in the Scripture set
forth by the unlawful ways that men take to get riches: So the Apostle says
concerning the Ministers in 1 Tit. 1.11. that did preach strange things for
filthy lucre's sake. And as it is said, they do make have to be rich, and they
do oppress their Brethren, and defraud: But preaching strange things and
oppression, and defrauding are rather effects, than formal Acts of
Covetousness. Covetousness may bring some men to those Acts, but a man may be
covetous that uses none of them; And the Reason is apparent, because
Covetousness lies in a discontentedness, dis-satisfaction, or uncontentedness
of mind with Gods portion, or taking care for a man. I will not hold you longer
here, because I shall speak in the use of trial and Examination of the nature
of Covetousness.

CHAP. II.
Two Reasons of the Doctrine. I. The Greatness. II. The Dangerousness of this
sin. The Greatness in five things. 1. A spiritual sin. 2. Overspreading the
whole man. 3. Directly opposite to the common nature of Godliness and Religion.
4. The Womb and Seed of all sin, the Root and Cause. A Sin may be the Cause of
Sin four ways. As it is the Cause of Gods withdrawing. As one sin inclines the
heart to another. As it administers matter to another. As it is a Parent and
Ruler over other sins. 5. The sinfulness of this sin appears in the baseness of
it.

SEcondly: And therefore in the second place, Consider the Reasons why you
ought to take heed and beware of Covetousness. In Ephesians. 5.3. says the Apostle
Let not Covetousness be once named among you as becomes Saints* Let it not be
once named. That is, Let it be unknown, unpractised, as those things we are
most ignorant of, which we know not the name of. Let it be abominable to you,
for you know they would not have the name of those things in their mouths,
which were an abomination, in Psalm. 16. ver. 4. And unless it be thus, says
he, you carry not your selves as becomes Religion. In Heb. 13.5. says he, Let
your Conversation be without Covetousness. [Covetousness] your whole course of
life, in every turning and winding of it, whether you be young or old, whether
you be single or married persons: In whatever case you be, says he, yet be not
covetous. They were in troubles, yet it was a great deal worse for them to be
in Covetousness, than to be in wants. They wanted all things, for they were
scattered up and down like Chaff before the Wind, but yet then God would not
allow them to be discontented with their Estate and Condition, but to count
that best wherein they were. The word is well translated, Be without
Covetousness. But it signifies, be without the love of Money or Silver. And I
say it is well translated, be without Covetousness, because as money does answer
unto all things, so in the forbidding of a man to desire Money, he forbids him
to desire any thing which God has not yet given him: But be content with that
which you have. They might say that that which they have is less than nothing,
it is worse than nothing, yet be contented: We live among a People whose
Language we know not; we have lost the Estate to which we are born; yet be
contented: We know not when it will be otherwise, yet be contented: That which
is your present state you must make the best of, but be not unsatisfied. And
there is a great deal of reason for this, if you consider these Reasons.

I. The greatness of the sin, II. Or the danger of the sin, or the hardness to
avoid it, and to be cured of it.
I. If you consider the greatness of the sin of Covetousness. I shall instance
in five things.

REASON I.

First: It is a spiritual sin. A spiritual sin (as the Schools express it)
is such as may be committed, though there be no external or outward Act done.
It Is such a sin as a man may commit, though he breaks not forth into any
external Act, or Act of injustice. It Is a heart sin, that is bred and born
there. In Math. 15.19. From the heart comes Covetousness. It Is a sin that is
purely spiritual, as Unbelief is, for it lies in an inordinateness of
affection or Lust. As the sins of the Devils are Spiritual Wickedness. They
are set forth by this in Ephesians. 6.12. That they are spiritual wickedness,
because they do not only arise from Malice against God, from an inward
opposition to his Holiness and Glory, but because they are so done by
themselves, as the Acts only of the understanding and the Will are in us. There
may be an Act of the Understanding, and an Act of the Will (suppose it be an
abhorrence or hatred of God) and yet there not be an ill word spoken, or a
gross outward sin committed: So such a sin (...) Covetousness; This sets forth
the sinfulness of Covetousness, that it is a spiritual wickedness, It Is bred in
the Heart, it comes from thence, and it lives there. The more there is of the
heart in a sin, the greater the sin is: I say the more sinfulness there is in
any sin, the more there is of the heart in it. Therefore Original Corruption
is greater than actual sins: Now Covetousness does take up the heart, As I
shall show you more by and by.

REASON II.

Secondly: The greatness of this sin appears in this, that it is a sin that
does overspread the whole man: It rests not in any one part or faculty of the
Soul, but it does overspread the whole, and that not only by infusion, but by
formal in-dwelling. That is, Not only does it work upon the Soul, but the whole
Soul is the seat of it. And therefore you shall sometimes find that it is
described by the mind, that it over-spreads the understanding. And therefore in
Phillip. 3.19. they are said to mind Earthly things. And sometimes by the Will,
that it overspreads the will, in 1 John 2.15. Men are said so to love the World,
as that they cannot love God himself. If any man love the World, the love of
the Father is not in him. As Appetite and desire is in every part of a man.
There is no part of a man, but has an appetite and desire in it to its own
Object, So in no part of the Soul, but also may be discontent, which is
Covetousness. So that its a sin which infects from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot, and there is no part free. Of all the Graces that God has
bestowed upon men, there are but two that are principally observed to be
diffused through the the whole Soul. And they are, Faith, and Prudence. And
therefore they are the most excellent Graces, because they have the greatest
command. Of all sins, there is none that have more of the old Man, than
Covetousness has, because it has not only the affective part (the Will) but
the Consultative part, (the Understanding.)

REASON III.

Thirdly: Covetousness appears to be a very great sin, and very sinful in this;
that it is directly opposite unto the common nature of Godliness and Religion.
Some Vices are opposite to one particular Virtue: But Covetousness is opposite
unto all in it is common nature: And therefore has the greatest contrariety in
it; for this is the common nature of all Religion, to be Heavenly and Holy. And
this is the Aspect or consideration of Covetousness, to make a man Earthly.
Therefore it is said by God himself, in 1 John 2.15. That if a man loves the
World, the love of the Father is not in him. It might have been truly said,
that if a man love any sin, he loves not God, but God will rather put that note
upon the love of the World, rather than upon any thing. The Character is put
upon Covetousness, because its the most diametrically opposite unto Grace of
any sin. To open this a little. Those things differ most, which differ in kind.
As there is therefore an infinite and unconceivable difference (and one that
cannot be made up) between God and us, because he is of himself, and we are
Creatures. It Is impossible that ever we should come to be Gods, or God to
become what we are, because God and we are not of the same kind: He is of
himself, and we are of him. More plainly: There is a greater difference you
know between Gold and the Heavens, than there is between Gold and the Earth,
because Gold is but a refined part of the Earth, but the Heavens are of another
kind of Being and Creation. Things which differ in their kind, differ most. But
now the very kind of Religion and Covetousness differs. For what is Religion
but a Heavenly and supernatural thing? And what is Grace but a spiritual
blessing that comes down from above, but Covetousness fastens a man's Soul to
earthly and base things. And upon this ground it is called Idolatry in Col.
3.5. Covetousness which is Idolatry. It Is called so upon this ground, because
as the fear and love and honor of God is the Ground of all obedience, so the
taking of the things of this life into our choice, esteem, and care, is the
putting out, and the extinguishing, and eradicating of all service unto God:
That a man does take for his God, which he chooses before all other things.
When therefore a man's heart is so set that he must have riches and the things
of this life, he sets up that for his God, and denies obedience in whole to the
true God. I say Covetousness is opposite to all Religion.

REASON IV.

Fourthly: The sinfulness of it appears in this: That it is the Womb and Seed
of all sin. Therefore in 1 John. 2.16. you have it as one of the Generals, or
Commanders of all the sins in the world. All sins are summed up either into The
Lusts of the Flesh, that is, Luxury and pleasure; The Lusts of the Eye, that
is, Worldliness or Riches; Or the Pride of life, that is, Honor. In 1 Timothy
6.10. The love of Money is the root of al Evil. The root, partly because the
Devil does ingraft every sin upon that as the stock of it, and partly because
it does vertually contain al sin in it. From thence Cain murders, Judas
betraies Christ, Achan steals the Babilonish Garment, Demas Apostatizeth from
Religion: Demas (says the Apostle) has forsaken us, and cleaves unto this
present World. in 2 Timothy 4.10. Therefore you shall find what the Companions of
Covetousness are in Romans 1.29. Being filled with all Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full of Envy, Murder,
etc. And that you may not think it was the singular case of the corrupt
Heathens, you shall observe that wherever the Apostle speaks of Covetousnes, he
speaks of it as being accompanied with those sins. In 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man
be called a Brother who is a Fornicator, a Drunkard, Covetous, an Idolator,
etc. In 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Among Fornicators, Idolaters, effeminate persons, and
Thieves, there are Covetous persons and Drunkards reckoned up. In Colos. 3.5.
Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil Concupiscence,
Covetousness which is Idolatry. And that the Apostle may not seem to be in a
heat or passion, when he does thus describe the Companions of Covetousness, you
shall find that in Mark. 7.22. our Lord himself says as much, From the hearts
of men arise Theft, Adultery and Covetousness, etc. And it is worth observation,
That when the Evangelist Matthew does repeat those words, he leaves out
Covetousness: But when Mark came to add unto that which Matthew wrote (which
was the manner of the Evangelists to add unto others) he puts in Covetousness:
Because whoever is Covetous has the root of all these in him, and not because
whoever is Covetous does all these things. You shall find therefore in the
Scripture that the way which Satan takes to destroy men is expressly set out by
this of Covetousness. In 2 Cor. 2.11. The Apostle speaks of the Devices of
Satan; And he sets forth the cunning of Satan in the beginning of the verse,
that he makes advantage of us. Now that word in the Greek is (...), he will do
with us, as one that is Covetous. The meaning is this, Look as a Covetous man
does desire to be possessed of that which he has not, so does the Devil lie at
the Catch that he may seiz upon any spirit. That which I bring it for is this,
That the Holy Ghost sets out all the devices and evil ways of Satan, by this
name of Coveting. Because a man is as pat to sin, as the Devil is to tempt:
And a man is made as covetous by sinning, as the Devil is in his unsatisfied
spirit. So the greatness of the sin appears in this that it is the root of all
sin, and because of that, it is the Cause of all sin. It Is a sin that never
goes alone but ingenders many others. In whatever person it is, it does so. If
Covetousness falls upon Soldiers, then in Luke. 3.14. When they are not content
with their wages, they do violence, and accuse falsely. If Covetousness falls
upon a Magistrate, it makes him that he is partial by Covetousness. And
therefore the mark of a good Magistrate is, That he must fear God and have
Covetousness. Because Bribes blind the Eyes, the Judgment. If Covetousness falls
upon Ministers, it will in 1 Timothy 6.5. make them fall into perverse disputings,
for they suppose that Gain is Godliness. If it falls upon an ordinary Christian,
there you shall find that it goes not alone neither, for in Matthew. 13.22.
together with the deceitfulness of riches, there goes the Cares (as the Text
says) of this life. He that received seed among the thorns, is he that
hears the word, and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches,
choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful. In Luke 8.14. there is another sin
arises from it besides unfruitfulness, and that is that men take pleasure in
the things of this life. That which fell among thorns, are they which when they
have heard, go forth and are choked with Cares and Riches, and pleasures of
this life. And that you may see how strong a virtue there is in Covetousness to
bring forth these sins, mark the Text. When they have heard the word, they go
forth, that is all the reason why the word of God and all the allurements of
the word of God are not able to stay the heart from these Courses. A Sin may be
said to bring forth, or to be the cause of sin diverse ways.

1. As it is the Cause of Gods withdrawing Grace from a man, which should keep
him from future sins. And Covetousness does this. In Isaiah 57.17. For the
Iniquity of his Covetousness I was wroth with him, and he went on in the way of
his own heart. He went on: A speech in the Hebrew which is taken from the
speech of Cain in Genesis 4.14. I shall go wandering up and down, says he, and
have none to protect me, and therefore shall be exposed to the wrath of al men
and Creatures. So says God, from their Covetousness it came to pass that they
went and did what they would. And how came this? for the Iniquity of his
Covetousness I hid my self from him. Gods hiding, did go before their doing
what they would: And Gods hiding was caused by their Covetousness.

2. One sin may be the cause of another, because it inclines the heart to
another sin. And in this respect Covetousness is the root of al sin, because
the Devil does graft upon such a heart what temptations he pleases. He
observed Cain was covetous and that he had a mind to be building, He therefore
makes him neglect the means of reconciling himself unto God for his sin against
his Brother. Judas was covetous, and he suggests to him to betray his master.
Demas was an Apostate and he fell away by the means of covetousness as appears
by the third Ground where the seed was sown among thorns, that is the
covetous heart. As wood that is dry is on fire as soon as a sparkle is put to
it. In such a temper is the soul when it is full of the love of earthly things.
I shall speak more to that afterward.

3. One sin may be the cause of another, because it administers matter unto
another. And so covetousness breeds envying, and strife, or dissension with
others. But it is said to be the root of al sin in another and higher sense,
and that is.

4. Because it is both a Parent and a ruler of other sins. Its a Parent to
them. Out of the bowels of Covetousness, comes pride. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them
that are rich in this world that they be not high minded. And unbeleife: But
trust in the living God. And neglect of religion: for Covetousness is Idolatry.
And fraud and deceit, and unquietness, and hardness of heart. Take heed least
your hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of riches. Pharaoh (you know)
was made by nothing so stout and stubborn against the commandment of God to
let the people of Israel go, as by this, That his profit should go, he should
loose the labor of so many men, and so many vassals.

And as Covetousness is a Parent to sin, So its a Prince and Ruler over them.
Those sins that do respect the self same and are ruled by one another. Now
because that the end of Covetousness is to get to a man's self abundance,
Therefore Covetousness sets on work the tongue, to lie, the hand, to defraud,
the understanding to plot, the Judgment to suspect and doubt of God. The will to
make much of al advantages of Gain. Do but reckon up the children, and the
childrens children, do but reckon up the subjects that are under this Prince,
Covetousness, and you shall find that all the whole Catalogue of sins that can be
named are one way or other, either descended from, or allied unto it: In 2 Cor.
2.7. Says the Apostle Comfort them, least they be swallowed up by Satan, of
sorrow, for if you do not comfort them, says he Satan will take advantage of
us, as it is translated, but the Greek is (...), that we be not Covetous or
used by Satan, or Satan do with us as with Covetous men: What is that? says
he, he leads them into al kind of sin, and so he would us, To deny ordinances
and means of Grace, and so we should fill up our iniquity.

To lay down but one thing more, wherein the sinfulness of it may appear, And
that is.

5. In the baseness of it. There is not a lust that does more debase a man then
Covetousness does. Therefore its said that a man is a servant to Mammon. You
cannot serve God and Mammon. It debaseth the soul in its nature, for God Made
it to look after things not seen. It debaseth a man's body in its posture, for
God has made it tread upon the earth out of whose bowels it came: Look how
unnatural it is for fowls to live in the earth, So its for the soul to be set
upon the world. Because the Corrupted Gentiles did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, Therefore he gave them up to Covetousness in Romans 1.21. To show
you that its a lower step and degree of misery and sinfulness for a man to be
Covetous, Then its for a man to be borne without the Image of God by nature. It
being made a spiritual Judgment, It is therefore a worse condition then that
men are in by sin naturally. Now all this sinfulness of sin may be aggravated
these two ways.

1. That here naturally we are in a state wherein we have no reason to look
after the world and the things of it. We are Children of wrath, And what should
a reprieved condemned man do with purchasing or looking after estates and
possessions? For a man when he is dying to be gripple, and having and saving:
For a man when he has his Soul to look after, and but a little time for that,
to be looking after things which he shall never have any use of, argues a great
profaneness of spirit: Now that is our Condition.

2. And as it is aggravated from that, so from this. That it is needless too.
Math. 6.32. After al these things your heavenly Father takes Care. Christ says
the care of these outward things do lie upon God: Not only as he is a Father,
but as a Creator. Though we be sinners, yet we are Creatures. Therefore he that
cares for the Lillyes in the fields, and the fowls of the Air, will care for
man. In Mark, 7.20.21. From the heart comes Covetousness: It is not because a
man wants, nor because a man may want, It is not for any thing in the world,
but because a man loves not God and spiritual things that a man is Covetous.

CHAP. III.
The second reason is the danger^^^^^ss of this sin, it being First, Hardly to
be avoid^^ Secondly, Difficulty Cured. Some things in Scripturesaid to be easy
to God, Some things hard, Some things that are but possible unto God.

IN the second Place. As the sin is great, so it is dangerous.

It is easily 1. Fallen into. 2. And hardly Cured.


We are wont to take heed and to be afraid of such diseases, as are hard to be
avoided, as are easily gotten, and when gotten, not easily, but hardly cured.
Now Covetousness has both these evils in it.

First, It is hardly to be avoided. We count that infection to be dangerous and
very strong which kills lusty men, and that in a night, a day, or in a moment.
Covetousness has undone the most strong of men that are unregenerate, And it
has spoiled the strongest of the regenerate. You shall find it to be in all
sorts of men, more or less in all Ages. In the heathen, In Romans 1.29. In the
professors of Religion, the Jews, in Jer. 8.20. In all sorts of Professors.
David was a mighty man against sin, A man able to overthrow whole troops as I
may say, and yet this sin incounters him, and and spoils him. Our Lord Jesus
Christ was as much afraid of his Disciples because of Covetousness, as he was
of any sin, because Godly men will be over run with this sin, if they look not
to it. Take beed (says Christ In Luke, 21.34. unto his disciples) That ye be
not overcharged with the cares of this world. As often as I have read that
place, it has been a wonder to me, why Christ should speak so unto them. They
were Godly people, and through grace their hear (...) made as soy I that would
not easily bring forth much bitter fruit: They were taken into Christ's service
upon these terms, that they should look for nothing for their service but
persecution: The time that Christ bids them take heed of the cares of this life
was a persecuting time when there was not only war, and rumors of war, but
they were begirt by their enemies. Who would think that in winter time, any
weeds should appear? If this weed should show it self, one would think that
this cold blast would have been able to have nipt it: But the disciples that
were Saints, The disciples that were brought up always in persecution, yet in
persecution were very apt, and nothing would keep that down. When he would
prepare them against the Judgment of the destruction of Jerusalem, and when he
would prepare them to stand out against the times that they should meet withal
from the Apostate Jews. He bids them beware of Covetousness, In Math. 13.7.
There you shall find that the third ground went further then either the first or
the second did: That Ground signifys a sort of hearers that were not remiss and
careless of what they heard, as the first sort were, nor fearful of
Persecution, as the second sort were, They receiveied the word of God, and
suddenly upon a present apprehension as the second sort did; but they did
deliberate, and judge that it was better to walk holily, then to be at liberty,
that a man had better be in chains for a good cause then to be at liberty for
the denial of it. If you observe, The Holy Ghost charge them with no sin
almost; But with lawful things: And among them, with the cares of this world,
and the deceitfulness of riches which did choke them, and by which they did
become unfruitful. Demas was one of that sort, for he stood with Paul when he
was at Rome in his first trial, when al else forsook him. The Epistle to the
Colossians was written when Paul was in bonds: and so was the Epistle to
Philemon, for it was sent by the servant of Phylemon, who waited upon Paul in
the prison: And in both those Epistles Paul recommends Demas. Demas (says he)
salutes you, and he is my fellow labourer. No man stood by me, that is, no man
but Demas, and no man but Luke, When I came to answer it before the Emperor,
al my acquaintance were shy of me and all the professors at Rome would not know
me, but Luke and Demas stood it out: And the doctrine that I proposed they
defended: and the reasons that I gave they stuck to and argued; This he means
by being a fellow labourer. Yet this Demas that stood out one brunt, Yet when
Paul comes to a second, he forsakes him: And what is the reason, He cleaves
unto this present world, in 2. Tim. 4.10. So that the best of regenerate and
unregenerate men find it hard work to escape the power of this sin, One is
foiled, and the other spoiled by it. This sin does prevail in formal professors
of Religion, in, 2. Tim. 3.5. They have a form of Godliness: Why? A mong other
sins he says they are covetous: Men shall be lovers of themselves, and
Covetous. Do but consider how this sin does take men, and you will see it is
very hard to be avoided. You shall find what the Apostle says of the whole body
of sin. In Ephesians. 4.22. That it does corrupt men by deceit. Put off the old man
that is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. Look what Paul says there
concerning al sin, that the scripture says concerning this one sin of
Covetousness. In Math. 13.22. The deceitfulness of riches. Covetousness will
plead Conscience of a man's calling: Care of Gods command to provide for a man's
family: Yea the Glory of God. I would have more says a man that so I may do
more service, and good. Saul did save the Cattle, but its said, It was for
sacrifice. Covetousness will put a man upon al duties of morality, and civility.
The covetous man whom God abhors says the Psalmist In Psalm. 10.10. He does
crouch and humble himself, that is, he is as sweet, and loving, and affable,
and courteous, and as seemingly ready to do any office and service for one, as
any can be. Nay it will put upon any spiritual duties. Artaxerxes was a great
friend to the reformation of the Church of the Jews, But it was out of
Covetousness In 2. Kings, 6.10. And Ezra. 7.23. That so they may pray for the
life of the King and of his children, and that no wrath may come upon him, nor
his Realm. Hewould give a toleration to those poor banished ones, that they
might go to their own Country and set up the religion of their Fathers. It will
make a man keep a good Minister in his house. In Judges, 17.13. I have a good
Levite says Micaiah, and now I know that God will bless me says he. It will
make a man not fail to hear the best sermons: In John, 6.26. Ye follow me not
for the Miracles, (that is, not for the discovery of God by me in working of
Miracles, and that you may see in me more then a bare man, as my Miracles do
discover me to be) but ye follow me for the Loaves. That people did go after
Christ (the best of Preachers) a great many miles, and did run the reproach of
the people of those times. What made them to be the first at Church, but
because they thought God would the better provide for them, in 2 Timothy 3.2.5.
Those that are covetous at the second verse, have a form of Godliness. A form
of Godliness is nothing but the picture of a thing to the life: when a thing is
so like another by Art as that it can scarce be known, then it is said to be a
form. Jesus Christ is said to be in the form of God, because he was as like
God, as could be: And in the form of a Servant, because you would rather have
thought him to be born to misery than to be Lord of life. Covetousness will have
a form of Godliness: He will do the same duties that any Godly man in the world
does. Fasting and prayer is an extraordinary duty; a great affliction of the
flesh, it is a duty of the greatest seeming holiness that can be, yet in Isaiah
57.17. the Reason why they fasted so often was but for Covetousness, that they
might put a greater face and a fairer show upon their persecuting the Brethren
who did differ from them. When they had a mind to fall upon their Brethren for
that which they should have born with them in, then they call for a fast, like
the Crocodiles cry, that is only to get a prey. So like as a man may be to a
Godly man, so like will Covetousness make a man be to him. If a Godly man
prays, so will he: And if a Godly man forbears outward acts of gross sins, so
will he: If a Godly man suffers, so will he. When God commends Job that there
was not a man like him, says the Devil, it is nothing for a man to do as he,
when he has so good wages for his work. Have you not given him much Riches,
and Honor, and many Children in the world? And as it does thus deceitfully
cheat a man, and is hardly to be avoided because it seizes upon all if they
look not to it. So that you may see,

Secondly: That it is hard to be Cured. And therefore in the Scripture you shall
find (if you observe it) as many Arguments, nay more Arguments against
Covetousness, than against any sin, except it be Unbelief. In Matthew. 6. Jesus
Christ spends a whole Sermon almost against it. He does so in Matthew. 15. He does
so when he comes to speak to his Disciples of the ruin of Jerusalem. He does
so when he speaks of the Hearers. Look through the Gospel and the Epistles, and
you shall find that there are more Arguments against Covetousness than any
thing, but Unbelief: And wherefore, but because it is a hard thing to cure it?
And that you may further see that it is hard to be cured, confider how it deals
with a man: The Scripture uses diverse words to this purpose, sometimes it says
it does divide a man: So the word usually is which in the Scripture is
translated [Care] The word (...), Care, signifies division of spirit: It
separates a man's heart from God: It makes a man a Beast: To have a heart and a
heart, and not to walk perfectly with him: It makes a man take Religion by the
very throat in Matthew. 13.22. for it did choke the word: And in Luke 12.29.
says the Text, Be not of a doubtful mind. The word in the Greek is, Be not
like unto Meteors. As Meteors and exhalations that are drawn from the Earth
that hangs between the Earth and the stars; so will Covetousness make a man that
he shall not be totally profane, nor thoroughly holy, neither in the upper
region, nor in the lower region upon the dust. He has a spirit that is
mingled, and therefore is on all sides, but hearty for nothing that is good, or
for salvation. Nay it goes further in Luke 21.34. Take heed least your heart be
overcharged with Gluttony, and Drunkenness, and the Cares of this life. Christ
does join Covetousness with Gluttony and Drunkenness, because it has the like
effects upon the Soul of a man, that they have upon the body of a man. When a
man has drunk extraordinarily, his understanding is senseless; and so is a man
made by the Cares of this world. Be not overcharged. The word signifies, Made
heavy. His spirit is like lead, he has no spirit in any thing that he does for
God, further than he is acted by the world. Of a mere spiritual duty, he has
no more feeling, than a stone has. If there be not Rhetoric in prayer, and
Invention in Sermons, it is not food to him. Nothing that is spiritual affects
him, but his heart is like a stone. It Is a strange speech in Luke 18.27. to
this purpose, when Christ said, It was as hard for a rich man to be saved, as
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, And they said then none of them
can be saved, says Christ, The things which are impossible with men, are
possible with God. Are possible with God: That word, I would insist upon a
little. There are some things that the Scripture says are easy unto God. Do
but speak the word (says he) and my servant shall be healed. And there are
some things that the Scripture says are hard to God, there is more of God
required to do them, than other things: And some things that are but possible
unto God. As if he should have said: It Is all that God can do: If there were
but a whit of less strength in him, he were not able to make a man that is
covetous to believe. Give me leave to speak with reverence according to the
expression: His strength is matched, It Is as much as he can do, It is but
possible to him, to make a rich man that is in love with this present evil
world to come to Heaven. And as if the Apostle Paul could not say enough to
show the hardness of being cured of this sin you shall find him heaping up
words in 1 Timothy 6.9. There are Temptations, and there are Snares, and there are
Sorrows: The word properly signifies the pains of a Woman in Travel, which can
neither be avoided, nor prevented, and are impossible to be born long: And he
says they are drowned in perdition and destruction, having reference unto the
18. Chapter of Matthew at the 66. verse, It was a kind of death to the
Assyrians, to tie a Mill Stone about a man's neck, and to throw him into a deep
water. Look how there is no hope of saving such a man, so little hope there is
of a covetous man. Observe it, he speaks rather of such a man that was
covetous, who had made profession of Religion, and known the truth rather than
any other, and he says of them, That they Pierce themselves through. The word
signifies, they do, as its said of Julius Caesar, that they came about him so
with Bodkins and Swords, that his Body was as a Butt, or Pin-cushion, there was
not a whole place in him, he was wounded in Back and Belly, in Arms and Legs,
and in every part there was a wound. So says the Apostle; You will be by the
Cares of this world, you will be run through and through and through with Cares
and Sorrows: And what hope is there of a man when he lives thus; when sin has
such advantage of him, how hard a matter is it to be cured.

I have bin the longer in the explication because it is the sin of the times,
and the sin of Professors.

CHAP. IV.
Use 1. Foll^^ (...) Callings. Use 2. Seek the Kingdom of (...) and his
righteousness, and other things shall be added. Use 3. Let all your care be for
eternal life to be rich in God. Use 4. You shall have all the things of this
life that are needful, if you will look after Grace. Godly men never want, but
when they cannot be content to be at God's dispose. Use 5. See your life lie in
Grace, not in Riches.

USE I.

FOllow your Callings. For the living in a particular calling is as necessary
to pluck down the rankness of a man's spirit, and to make him fit to serve God,
I say it is as necessary in its kind, as the word is in its kind. There are
some sins that arise from the body, and diligence in a particular calling,
mortifies them. Follow your Callings. Take what providence casts upon you in
them: but be not sollicitous Beloved. Do not care how it may be with you, so
you may but provide for eternity: Be content with a little so you may but have
Grace: If you have Food and Raiment be quiet. As upon a day of fast a man may
eat so much as may fit him to the work: so my Beloved care for no more all the
time of your life than what may keep you from temptations, and enable you to
the work of your Calling. And that work of your calling, you may certainly do
for God, whatever your condition be. Turn all your care unto this, that you may
treasure up riches in Heaven. What matter it if you be poor, or have, or not
have, as long as you do enjoy Christ. This is the great exhortation of our Lord
Jesus Christ in this place. That time that men spend in forecasting how they
should do in ill times (that time is all lost) and should be spent only in
this, How they may (...) for a world to come. I say it is all lost; (...) use
you are not able to secure those things: And it is worse than lost, because it
is a sin to care for to morrow. Prudently dispose of what God has given you,
but be not troubled though you cannot so dispose of things as to save you from
evil. Be not afraid of any evil that can befall you: fear nothing but sin and
Gods wrath. It is your wisdom to do so. A wise man on a Journey cares not if
his lodging be hard, and diet course, because he is upon his way, and thinks to
have better at home. The love of his business makes him not think of these
things. What is your business but to provide for Heaven? What is your home, but
to dwell with Jesus Christ, and to have Communion with him! Therefore mind not
other things, never be troubled what you are in other respects.

USE II.

And let me add this in the second place. That the more care you take for
spiritual things, the more care God will take for your earthly estate. Seek
the Kingdom of God and his righteousness and all these things shall be added to
you, in Math. 6.33. For all these things your Heavenly Father cares for, that
is, if you care not. In Heb. 13.5, 6. Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, for he has said he will never leave you nor fors^ke you. God
enters into Bond to save that man harmless from all losses and evils in the
world, that does but mind the things of him. He were an unjust master to set us
a work, and to leave us to our own finding. Is it not better a great deal to be
at Gods hand than at your own? That he should find you, than your selves?
Therefore speak to your hearts after this manner. I cannot by my care add one
Cubit to my stature, and make one business go well, and get in one debt, and
take one penny the more, and get one new Customer. Let me speak to you in your
own language. If so be that I do what I can, it will be no advantage to me in
these things. But if I be careful to make my peace with God, to get my pardon
Sealed, to get my ways Sanctified, God will give me so much of these as I need,
he has enough, and he will give me liberally, so that I shall have no cause to
complain. If I have not so much as another, yet notwithstanding I shall have a
blessing with what I have, and that will be more than another much. If men did
put themselves upon this, that it is to be their care to look to their Souls,
and when they have used means for their estates and bodies, to leave all to
God's disposing, and did believe that then God would bless them, How many then
would give that precious time, strength and Spirit which now runs out to the
world, unto the service of God.

USE III.

If every one that would attain to eternal life must take heed of
Covetousness. Then let all your care be for eternal life, to be rich in God,
as Christ says in verse 21. Be rich in God, that is, in the things of God, and
in the things that are for Gods Glory. God does not call you from the world to
put you upon a loss, but to turn your affections upon the right Object. It Is
not to undo you, but to make you in better things. As Parents when they would
wean the Child from the Nurse unto themselves, they make the nurses breast
black, and they fear the Child. So says Christ, take heed, and look to your
selves, when he has no other end in it, but that he may have your love, and
you have his at length. Many will say, says David in Psalm. 4.7.8. Who will
show us any good? but says he, Thou have put more gladness into my heart, than
when Corn and Wine increase. As if he should have said, when the Devil sees
men inquiring after happiness and salvation, he does show them good: he
presently meets them as Abraham did the Gibeonites wih Corn and Wine, the
things of this life, and takes off their hearts from happiness. And it is so
prevailing a means, Math. 4.9.
that he betook himself to that alone when he tempted Christ. All this will I
give thee. When he had showed him all the Glory of the world, that is, when he
had made the world as glorious as possible it could be to the mind of Christ.
He did not do unto Christ, as unto us, deceive our fancies, but he put the
greatest Glory upon Riches that could be, and then he thought that Jesus Christ
would bow down to him. If the Devil cannot make a man as profane and as loose
as he desires, then he will make a man Religious, but mingle Covetousness with
it. He will stir up a man, as it is reported by one that writes of the walkings
and apparisions of the Devil, The Devil came to many a man in Luthers time,
and provoked them to stand for Justication and lay aside popish Religion, but
he told them also they should get so much by the bargain: And when he mingled
this Poison with that Wine, he did bring them to as much formality as they were
in before in their ignorance: They were as bad as before, because of only their
Covetousness. When he has once got a man under his power, he will make him to
grind at this mil, as they did Sampson. Therefore the Love of the world is
called in. 1. Tim. 6.9. The Devils snare and bond, And it is the sin of the
Jews by which they were and are kept from embracing Christ, They did look after
an earthly Kingdom. Be not hindered of true happiness by those things. Barter
not away your souls for an abundance of the things of this life: Let not your
minds run out after what you see, or what is to be had, besides grace and
holiness and communion with God. Our Lord Jesus Christ is moved to see one got
into good Company here in this Chapter at the 13. verse. seeming to have an
inheritance here to neglect to get Salvation and Grace. Grace and the favor of
God are true riches, and al other things are not so. They are but shadows of
riches, and therefore called a fancy. Agrippa his po^ and Glory, is but (...),
25. Acts, 23. Though a man seem to be blessed of God when he has this world,
yet it is but seemingly so: And therefore the scripture calls it a fashion. 1.
Cor. 7.31. Romans 12.2. The fashion of this world. But there is no true goodness
in riches. In Luke. 2.21. Says Christ, a man that treasures up for himself, is
not rich in God That treasures up for himself. That is, Riches are but a
particular good that may serve a man's self, but that is all it can do: It makes
a man leave God who is a universal good. That only is true Riches which does
procure to a man all good: and that, nothing can do, but what comes from God
which is Grace.

USE, IV.

You shall have all the things of this life, if you will look after Grace, All that
is needful. Godliness has the promise of this life. It gives content. 1 Timothy
6.6. That is as much as a man does either need or desire, if his desires be
rational and spiritual It gives content. The word that the Apostleuseth for
content, is a word that is used among Common wealths, that have al things in
themselves, and need not other Countries. Religion needs not be beholden to any
estate, and condition, or any thing in this world for any thing that belongs to
this life. Godly men do never want, but when they cannot be content to be at
Gods dispose. He wants not that is content: He has content, whose will is
conformable unto God. There are at the least twenty several senses of that in
Psalm. 37.25. I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread:
But that which is most probable from the Context and scope of the Psalm is, I
never saw A righteous man (...) it is, a righteous man that does not fret at
the prosperity of wicked men. (Not begging bread:) that is in want. Let any be
of a liberal spirit, willing to part with what God gives him, when God does
call, and that man never wants. Men that have dogs appetites are never
satisfied: When meat feeds humors, then parents deny their children meat: So
does God, when he sees what he gives, does not work conformity to his will. Do
you mind your work, and God will care for your maintenance. And you shall have
spiritual things at a better rate, and on easier terms then you have earthly
things. The pains you take for heaven shall bring you in communion with God,
which cannot be got by your endeavors, God will not put you to more, nor so much
in working for him, as you put your selves to in getting the world. Wicked men
have been at death convinced of this. Had I (says one) been as good a servant
to God, as to the King, I had been happy. Yea those that know better what it is
to prepare for Heaven than others, do complain that they are not so careful
for spiritual things, as they are for the things of this life. When they go
about Riches, or the things that concerns Riches, they are buried in the
business, and there their thoughts are intent, but at prayer and Hearing their
Thoughts are divided, and their Hearts are wandering: and yet still they grow
in Grace. Psalm. 127.2. It Is in vain to go to bed late, or rise up early: so he
gives his Beloved sleep: that is without this carking care, he gives them
sleep: that sleep, is a Lying in the Lap of God and being put into his Bosom,
as well as having enough of this world. Labor not for the meat that perishes,
Joh. 6.27.
but for the meat that endures to everlasting life. And because men should not
be discouraged in Christ's putting them to labor, He tells them they shall have
it upon gift ( which the Son of Man shall give) As if he should have said,
Though I will not give it for labor, yet when you have done al, you shall see, I
will give it upon mere gift, and not as a recompense of your work.

USE V.

See your life lie in Grace, and not in Riches. The comfort of your life and
eternal being, lies in Grace. Gal. 2.20. I live (says the Apostle) by Faith. 1 Timothy 5.6. Men that live in pleasures, are dead while they live. They do not
trust in the living God, they have no life from him: When you come to die call
for all your marks and evidences, sum up all your estate, and see what they
will advantage you. It Is reported of a Noble man when he had divided all his
Estate, he saw a Toad in the room, and he cries out, Oh that I were as that
Toad to eternity. Call to this and that Estate and inheritance at death, And
they will answer it is not in me, I am not able to do any thing for you: When a
man comes to die (who has lived upon God in the world) he can speak
comfortably thus, That he shall change only his place, and not his company; for
he has parted with these things before. When you appear before God, you shall
not appear as rich, but according to what you have done for him, and what you
have done through Grace: Therefore naked came I into the world and must go so
out. Men do not stand before God as Kings and Knights: But those that have done
for God, shall be honored in that day; but that which enters a man into Gods
Glory is Grace. Consider what a folly it is to strive for shadows, to undo your
selves, to tire your selves in following after Butterflies? What a madness it
is to give thousands for that which is worth nothing? To spend your time
impertinently for things in which your life is not? Therefore when you have
wearied your selves in casting, and plotting, and designing of ways for to get
an abundance for your selves, ye cover your selves and say, Had this day been
spent otherwise, or had I laid out my self as much for God, as for these
things, it had been well, All this time is lost: If I had been in spiritual
duties and services, as long as I have been for the body, it had been well.
When you have gotten the world, and have not cast up your account what you have
done, when you have cared for the Body and not for the Soul, when you have
gotten all, you have gotten but a common stone, and lost the Diamond. Therefore
when you hear Jesus Christ calling upon you to take heed, his meaning is not to
deprive you of any good that the world can give you, but to make you sure of
eternity. Therefore turn your thoughts this way. He caseth men of taking care
of this world, that so they may attend to eternity. It is not because Jesus
Christ would not have the promises of this life fulfilled, that he bids them to
take heed, but because he would have you to have abundance of the things which
are indeed true Riches.

CHAP. V.
Use 6. Believe there is something to be feared more than to be desired in
abundance. Two Signs to to prove that men do not believe, there is such danger
in Covetousness. 1. Because men come so near the occasions. Object. May not a
man take all opportunities of getting, etc. Sol. We must not do all we can in
the things of this world. 2. Because men place their happiness in Riches. Two
mistakes upon which men ground their desires of abundance, supposing. 1. If
they had more, they could do more for God. 2. And escape many evils which now
they meet with.

USE VI.

Believe and set this upon your heart, That there is something to be feared more
than to be desired in abundance: That under that Bait there lies a Snare and
hook; our Lord Jesus Christ would not warn you else. Because men will not
believe this, therefore it is that men go on, and are undone by lawful things,
by Riches. Let this word of Christ be continually in your Ears, as if you heard
him calling from Heaven, Take heed and beware of Riches. As when a man is going
on in a dangerous way, Those that know him, do call after him, and bid him take
heed, there are holes, and pits, and whirlpoles in the water that he is riding
through^. So Jesus Christ tells men, there are snares and pits in Riches: yet
men will not be persuaded. I shall give you but two signs to prove that men do
not believe there is such danger in Covetousness.

First: Men will not come near that wherein they think there is danger. When
David saw the Angel of the Lord standing over Gideon with the sword in the time
of the plague, He would not come near that place to offer Sacrifice: There was
danger there, and in that case, God would have mercy rather than Sacrifice,
Hosea 6.6. We will not come near the Persons that have the plague: we keep out
of the way where Thieves lie, though we go further about, because there is
danger. But men come near occasions of Covetousness by taking all opportunities
and advantages of getting, or employing themselves, by contemplating and
meditating of their own wants, and of others Riches. As David did confess in
Psalm. 73. that he looked upon what he found every day, and how the eyes of
wicked men (that knew not God) were ready to start out of their Heads, because
of their fatness, therefore he complains: Whereas he says, he should have gone
into the Sanctuary, and have considered the end of those men, how they stand in
slippery places. The consideration of a man's own wants, and the thinking much
of other men's abundance, is that which gives an occasion unto Covetousness.
Whenever a man comes to think of the world (as men take a Preservative when
they go into infectious Air) so men should think of the danger and misery of
rich and covetous men. So David should have done.

Object. It may be said by the way. May not a man take all opportunities of
getting and enriching himself? Is that to play with a Bait of Covetousness.

Answ. I answer yes. You may not do all you can or may do in the world. In Luke
21.34. Christ bids them that they should as well take heed of Covetousness and
the Cares of this life, in verse 34. as they should take heed of Surfeiting and
Drunkenness. Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
Drunkenness and Surfeiting, as well as the Cares of this life. Christ joins
Surfeiting and Drunkenness with Covetousness. Therefore as a man may not drink
all he can bear, nor eat all his stomach requires, but rise with an appetite:
No more must a man in the things of the world do all he can. This is gathered
from the Conjunction of those two together, Covetousness and Drunkenness. In
things that are not good in themselves, but profitable only in some way to an
end there must be a measure in the use of them. As a Builder does not lay all
the stones he can in the House, but so many as the foundation will bear, least
he over lays it. The end of a man's Calling is only this, that he may exercise
himself the more freely in the ways of God. As I have often said. It is the
laying of the soil ground fallow, that the rankness and sourness of it may be
removed, obstacles that are in the flesh unto the holy duties may be taken
away. The end of Riches is only that a man may do the work that God sets him
and calls him to do, and therefore beyond that he ought not to engage himself in
the world, nor to desire riches. But this is by the way, for I reserve other
Cases to another place. That shows that men believe there is no Snare in
riches, because they put themselves upon the occasions and temptations of
Covetousness.

Secondly: There is another sign, which is this, Because men place their
happiness in riches, which appear by this. Men's desires are more easily
stirred, more vehemently set on, and hardlier taken off from the things of the
world, of this life, than from any thing. To duties, men are drawn hardly, are
soon weary, are easily discouraged; but are not so in seeking after the things
of this life. When men have gotten riches then they count themselves happy:
Therefore it is, that when they lose or want them, they count themselves to be
in a most deplorable and sad condition. No man counts himself to be unhappy in
the want of that which would not Make him, in his own opinion. Therefore when
men think al is gone, when the world is gone, frowns upon you, It Is a sign they
make the world their God, and do not think it a Snare. To persuade you
therefore to the believing of this, that it is a snare, or that there is a snare
in it, I shall only remove (in a word or two) the ground of that persuasion.

1. Men think if they had more of the world, they could do more for God, more
good than they do. As Absalom said if he were King he would do Justice. And
relieve the oppressed, break the bonds, free men from taxes that his Father
laid upon them: So men think that if they were but as rich as another man, they
would distribute to the Saints, Cloth the naked, feed the hungry, their houses
should be like the house of Caius, an Inn for them: They would serve God more
freely. This now does suppose that there is an help in abundance, and not a
hook. I beseech you my Beloved consider it, when men have had abundance, though
they have been put in mind, and cautionated continually, that therefore they
have it that they may serve God in the abundance of all things, they have found
their hearts straigter, and their hands weaker, than when they were in poverty,
or in a mean condition. Take heed (says God unto the people of Israel, and he
reads them that lesson every morning that they took a Journey into the land
Canaan) least when you come into the land of Canaan, that you do forget the
Lord your God, and not keep his Statutes and Judgments to do them. Yet
notwithstanding for all this, when as they were come into the land, as it is
said in the Book of Deuteronomy, they did not serve the Lord their God in the
abundance of all things, but they served themselves and their own lusts. Had
you been by the self same people when they were in the captivity of Babylon,
you might have heard them groaning and sighing out for deliverance, Thus:
Deliver us and we will serve thee: our strange Gods shall be put away from us,
we will build Thy Altar, and none else, we will offer unto thee the fat of the
Calf and of the Steer, but when they came into the land as we have showed out
of Nehemiah and Ezra, they did delight themselves in the fatness of the land,
and forgot the Commandments of the Lord.

I beseech you my Beloved consider it. A man is to content himself with the
doing of that good (though it be never so little) which God calls him to do.
That Servant honors his Master as well that continually waits upon him, and goes
whither he goes, as he that does in the house the greatest drudgery. God does
not call a man to all that he thinks he could do, or it may be that he has
abilities to do. A man is called to no more than God puts him upon, and puts
himself forth unto. As for example. A man may have able gifts, but that is not
enough to make him a Minister nor a Magistrate. A man may do the work of other
callings, but that is not enough to make him put himself into them, til God
says, Do this. He must do that which God puts into his hand, let it be what it
will be. We are often times ready to think that we should do God more service in
any condition, than in that wherein we are. Like foolish children at School
that think they shall gain more by going into a new Book, than by going on in
the old, though the Master knows the best way to make them understand, is to
keep them where they are. It shows our discontent through Pride, and our
listlesness to do the work of God, that makes us say, If I had this, I would do
thus, and if I had that, I would do so. Do that which is in thy hand. Therefore
that is no ground at all for a man to desire more, because he thinks he should
do more.

2. Another Reason that persuades men to look after the things of this life,
is, because they think that if they had abundance of the things of this life,
they should escape many evils which now they meet withal. But now I shall
answer nothing more than the words that follows my Text, A man's life consists
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. You shall live never a
whit the better, nor have any thing the more to live upon for abundance. Your
life, that is, the safety of it, that lies not in abundance: for riches are an
allurement unto those that are the sons of violence. The Comfort of your life
lies not in abundance; for abundance brings forth care and sorrow: The more you
have, the more your heart will be divided into solicitousness about them. If
abundance is not able to continue your life (for as Christ shows, that your
life depends upon the word of God This night thy Soul shall depart from thee)
much less can you help your selves to eternal life by abundance, You cannot
purchase it. Psalm. 49.7. That is a Purchase that must be let alone, No man is
able to give the thousand part of the purchase of it, if he had all the world
to give. No you are not able to purchase it. Covetousness breeds listlesness of
spirit and a senslesness of the things that are eternal. As while a man looks
upon the Sun, he cannot well see other things, So while a man is in the Earth
and darkness, he cannot well bear the light of the Sun, so a man whose spirit
is accustomed to the care of this cannot well get his heart into converse with
God. Therefore set this down with your selves, that abundance is rather to be
feared than desired. Riches are rather Pricks, than Thrones, rather Rocks
whereon you dash your selves, than any thing that will do you good; to help you
to the end whereunto you are designed, and born withal for by God. That shall
suffice for this use.

CHAP. VI.
Use 7. Mortify your desire after Riches and abundance, slay it in the first
motion toward it. Motives of two sorts. First: Such as are taken out of the
Armory of Reason. I. Your happiness does not lie in any thing that does belong
to this life. These things are for you, you are their end, and your end is God.
II. You put a greater Glory and excellency upon them than does belong to them.
III. Riches are not desirable. 1. God has not made them to that end to make
men happy. 2. Desires after them is the way to hinder the getting of them. 3.
The way of Gods Riches is rather casual, than as an answer to Prayer. 4. They
will not satisfy. 5. There is no pleasure in them when we have them.

USE VII.

Mortify therefore your desires after Riches and abundance. Diet your selves
in these things, as your would run the Race, and have the Crown. In Colos. 3.5.
Mortify (says the Apostle) your members that are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Adultery, evil concupiscence, and Covetousness. That which I shall
desire you to observe is this, That the Apostle does put a great many sins
together, as those which are to be slain, and among them, Covetousness is one.
He joins it with Uncleanness. Because as you are to be afraid of the first
tickling to that sin, so you ought to be of the first motion unto the love of
the world: The first motion of discontent with a man's present state, should be
mortified, as well as the first motion to Adultery. As a severe and cruel
Conqueror follows his Soldiers, and bids them kill and slay, and not give
quarter unto any, but especially he names some persons which he would have them
be severe against: So does the Apostle bid them to mortify all sins, but
especially he names Covetousness. Cease not my Beloved therefore to pursue it,
til you have slain it: And know that you have not slain and killed it, until
you can delight your selves and rejoice in your present Condition, though you
have but a small portion of the things of this life. Then I say Covetousness is
mortified, when as a man does delight and rejoice himself, though that he has
but a very small portion of the things of this life. In Psalm. 37.4. says David,
Delight thy self in the Lord, his meaning is this, Be as cheerfully,
pleasantly, contented, if you have but God, as if you had together with him all the world: In the outward portion that God gives you, delight in God* for in
the verses before he had spoken of wicked men as those that flourished like a
Tree in the spring, and prospered and increased in all things, But says he unto
the Godly, delight thy self in the Lord, that is, though you be not so though
you prosper not, though you be like a Tree that is withered. A man's happiness
is not in abundance, for a man is not one Inch nearer Heaven for all the
Mountains of Gold that he has.

I shall therefore now unto the putting you upon this Duty, give you some
motives: And when I have done that, some trials.

The motives are of two sorts, they are either such as are taken out of the
Armory of Reason, such as the Common light which even the Heathen had from God
do afford.

Or else they are such as are taken out of the Scripture from supernatural and
Gracious respects.

First: Be contented with what you have, for your happiness does not lie in
abundance, nor in any thing that does belong to this life. Were your happiness
in riches, then your desires ought to be infinite and boundless, to be set upon
them for themselves. But if so be that you have riches, you are not the better,
and if you want them, you are not the worse: All the things of this life are for
you. You are their end, and your end is God. These do not commend you unto him.
The Poor receive the Gospel. With him it is all one whether you be bond or free,
so you be in Jesus Christ, and but a new Creature. Take all the riches in the
world together, and they are not able to take away the pains and miseries of
your bodies. A Crown of Gold upon the head will not keep it from aching. A
Scepter in the hand will not cure the Palsy. Herod's Riches and Glory could not
kill a Worm. Much less then are they able to satisfy your Consciences, or to
get you favor with God.

Nay my Beloved let me add this, that if you will not be contented with that
portion God gives you, your are further off from Gods favor by them, when the
Apostle in Colos. 3.5. had named Covetousness in verse 6. he says, For such
things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. Mark it. He
does not put Uncleanness or Fornication last, that so he might fasten the
danger, and the eminency of the wrath of God against it, but he names
Covetousness last, and he says, For that the wrath God etc. the word properly
signifies, a vindictive defire: A hanging after ones ruin; A being unsatisfied
until such time as he has destroyed: As far as such a kind of affection can be
attributed unto God justly, so far you are to apprehend it in him against those
that are Covetous. And that not sometimes but always, for says he, the wrath
of God is come, or for such things the wrath of God comes. He does not say, It
shall come, but he says it is come. I say the wrath of God is a desire of
revenge: and he says not that it shall come, but that it is come. The sin of
Covetousness is a punishment to it self, and brings punishments every day one
on the neck of the other, for says he, for this the wrath of God comes. So
that a man's happiness is not in riches, for the desire of riches keeps a man
from happiness.

Secondly, Your desire after Riches puts a glory and excellency upon them which
is not native, or which belongs not to them of themselves. For what a man does
so desire as that he cannot be content to be without it, In that very act of
desire he makes it better then al he has, and necessary for what he wants and
sufficient if he had it to do him good. He that desires them places a
happiness in them, and a best part of his happiness in the things of this life.
Happiness consists of a good that is excellent, and most desirable and
pleasurable, that gives a man delight, But especially it consists of a good
that is sufficient. And therefore when as God tells Moses that he would show
him Glory, he would show him that which would do him al good. This then being
the principal thing in happiness, as a voluptuous man gives the pleasure that
is in happiness unto his lust, And the Ambitious man gives the excellency that
is in happiness unto honor, so now the Covetous man places sufficiency in his
riches. I say he places sufficiency in his riches, And that is the reason that
you find in 1 John, 2.16. That all that is in the world is either the lusts of
eye, the lusts of the flesh, or the pride of life, and that the love of God
cannot be in those that love them. They that seek them cannot be made happy by
them. The fume of the motive is this. That as the Prophet said, the Idolater
did take a piece of Timber, and hewed it, and made an Image of it and then fell
down and worshipped it: So men do Imagine a sufficiency in riches, and then
their desires are carried after them. Now what a sin is it for a man to place
happiness in the Creature, nay the worst of Creatures, that which God (who
judges righteously) reckons to be nothing but earth and thick clay? What a
folly and madness is it for a man to be a servant to that which he has made
great? As it is folly and frensy for a man to imagine himself to be a King, and
then to swel with his own imagination, and to stand bowing unto his own shadow.
That is the second motive, you put honor and glory upon the things of this
life, if you are not contented with the portion which God has given you of
them.

Thirdly, Riches are not desirable. There is not in them that which should draw
the heart after them.

1. God has not made the things of this life the first object of desires, for
God has not made them for that end to make men happy.

2. That you know is not desirable which cannot be had: And riches cannot be
had if they be desired. Desires after them is the way to hinder the getting of
them: For either thou art good, and then God as a father will correct thee if
thou art discontented with his allowance, God will correct that disposition and
not humor it. Or thou art bad and then in Prove. 28.20.21. He that makes have to
be rich shall not be innocent; says the Text: And that Innocence is put in
opposition to abundance in the former part of the verse. A faithful man shall
abound with blessings, but he that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent.
I say, to be innocent, is put in opposition to abundance, to abounding with
blessings: The meaning is that he shall not abound with bessings, that such a
man (as a Guilty person) shall be cut off, and never see the day of great things
which he longs after. In Heb. 11.16. God is ashamed to be called the God of
wicked men, because of their Covetousness.

3. Desires will not help a man to riches, because when a man makes them the
matter of his prayer, he provokes God. The way of God giving riches, is rather
casual, then as an answer of prayer. God will not have riches come in by prayer,
that men may not set too great a price upon them. Therefore its observable when
Christ taught us to pray, There are five requests for the things of another
life but for this life, there is but one petition, viz. Give us this day our
daily bread. That is, so much bread as will serve for the day, the meanest kind
of food that a man can live upon, for if a man have food and raiment, he ought
therewith to be contented. God has appointed you to pray for daily bread, and
for a blessing upon the use of means, but he has not given a spirit of prayer
for these things chiefly. That is not the fruitfullest ground that is fullest
of Gold and Silver. They are not the best persons that have most Gold, for God
gives riches carelessly as it were.

Fourthly, Riches are not desirable because they will not satisfy; natural
desires are to be after such things, which being had will satisfy. As a hungry
man desires meat that will take away his hunger. But as Riches increase, so also
do men's desires. Men do but feed upon the wind, when they have them, they have
a lie in their right hand: A man finding himself to be at a loss, when he still
labors after more, and he thinks to have that bring him in contentment, which
will not. If any man should have contentment in the world, it should have been
those who have been conquerers of it, into whose purses what ever the habitable
earth yielded was brought, who were to command over them, as men over beasts,
who had gifts as the stones of the streets, yet these men have not been
satisfied. Ahab was a king and yet was more troubled because he wanted a plott
of ground which lay near his, then he was contented with all his Revenues.
Alexander when he had as much as he could conquer, then he began to be troubled
that there was not another world to be conquered. Yea there is a great deal of
dis-satisfaction in all riches, and therefore because a man has his soul
enlarged through a spiritual Judgment, though his conscience is convinced that
there is nothing in them but vanity.

Fifthly, Again, that is not desirable which there is no pleasure in when a man
has it. The more a man has of riches, the more he has of sorrow. As the
Apostle says in. 1 Timothy 6.10. They that will be rich pierce themselves through
with many sorrows. But besides al these things.

CHAP. VII.
The second sort of motives are such as are taken out of the scripture; That
Calls Covetousness Idolatry Adultery. Enmity against God etc. It Is a
displeasedness with Gods allowance and disposal of things. A particular
re-inforcement of the exhortation, upon the Rich, the Poor, upon the Godly,
upon all.

COnsider what the scripture says conce^ Covetousness. In Colos. 3.5. He calls
it Idolatry, not because a man makes his money his God formally, or ascrib^ a
Deity to it, but because it is before God as o^ as Idolatry is. For this is the
custom of the Hebrew and Greek tongue, when it uses the manner of Speech of
the Hebrews, when it would set forth a thing to the full, To name it by such a
sin as is confessed of al hands to be heinous. I say, the name of a thing that
is confessed of al hands to be heinous, is given unto those things which the
Holy Ghost would set forth to the full. As for example. In 1 Samuel 15.23. The sin
of Saul is called witchcraft. Rebellion is as witchcraft. Readiness sin was not
wichcraft: But only witchcraft was a confessed known sin. To set out Readiness
sin, Samuel calls it so. So that the greatness of the sin of Covetousness may
appear, the text calls it Idolatry. As if it should have been said. The
worship of another God provokes not God more to Jealousy, then the love of the
world does. And mark what he says afterward in verse. 16. For these comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience, The word is il translated
(disobedience) for the wrath of God comes not upon all that disobey him, but the
word signifies, upon all that are intractable, upon all that will not be
persuaded, and drawn from their sinning against God. Why does not the Apostle
say, the wrath of God will come upon the unclean Person, but upon the Children
that are not to be persuaded, that are stubborn hearted? The Reason is this,
because Covetousness is one of those sins which makes a man to be incapacious
stout-hearted, obstinate, irrational, and not to be subdued by any of the
ordinary means (...) which God brings men's thoughts into subjection (...)
^^^self. As the wise man says concerning the (...), that she is a deep pit,
and there is no persuading men from her, though she lead a man like an Ox unto
the shambles: So the Holy Ghost says there is no making a Covetous (...) leave
his course, til the wrath of God meets with him. And its not only in that place
called Idolatry, but you have as ill names given it elsewhere. James 4.4. You
Adulterers and Adulteresses, know you not that the love of the world is enmity
unto God. It is called Adultery. And as Adultery does break the bonds between
the Husband and the Wife, And as Adultery is a sin that is committed when there
is no need, because the party has a remedy which God in the state of marriage
has given: So the love of the world strikes at the knot, at the uniting
Graces, Faith and Love, It puts a man into a Condition wherein (if in any) he
is capable of a divorce from God. If I would say there was a possibility of a
man's falling from Grace, I would say so of Covetousness and Idolatry, because
both these are called Adultery, which does dissolve the bond. What need you
take care, when God does? What reason have you, when God makes it his work to
provide for you, as he does for the Lallies of the Fields, than which you are
much better? What reason is there then that you should set your selves to that
business? Is it not enough that you have God? And that God will be sure to find
you all the stock that he will have you to work withal for him? It is Adultery:
And mark what follows, The friendship of the world is enmity against God. That
is, A Covetous man does (as it were) send an Herald of Arms and bids defiance
against God himself. In 1 John 2.15. If a man loves the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. Mark it. As it is an unnnatural thing for the Child not
to love the father that begat him, so it is an unnatural thing for a man not to
love God, And yet Covetousness will make a man to be so unnatural. Sometimes
you shall find in the spirits of good people a carelessness of God: The
indearedness that they had to him at another time, is not to be found upon
them. They are not tender of his displeasure. They are not desirous to live in
his favor: What is the Reason? What is it that makes a Soul so unnatural? It is
because his Soul is So taken up with the things of this world.

And that you may yet see further the evil of this sin, know, that it keeps
Gods love from a man. For if the love of God be not in a man that loves the
world, then the love of God is not shed abroad in the heart of that man that
loves the world. For whom God loves they shall certainly love him again. But
above all, that which is the great Motive, and with which I would persuade you,
Is this.

You ought to be conformable to the will of God. Either his will or yours must
rule. Either he or you must be acknowledged to be the wise, and right Disposer
of things. If there be wisdom with him, and that all things are under him, and
his power, Why are you not then contented with that which is his allowance to
you? It is fit the Physician should prescribe the Diet, and not the sick
person. It Is sit the Master should set down how he will keep, and not the
Servant how he will be kept, by the Master. Conformity to the will of God does
extend not only to spiritual things, so that a man may not sin against any
moral precept, but unto lawful things, so that a man should think it best with
him, according to Gods way of dispensing to him. And there is no reason in the
world why a man should think that he is dealt hardly with, if his portion be
but small, for was not the state of Jesus Christ very low? He became poor, he
had not whereon to lay his head. Were not those Princes (as I may call them)
that sat upon the Throne, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, I mean the
Apostles and the primitive Saints, Were not they in hunger and nakedness, and
in want of all things, clothed in Goats and Sheep Skins? of whom the world was
not worthy? Will it not content you that you are kept in the same manner that
God kept his Son, while he was in the world?

Object. You will say. Therefore Jesus Christ was poor, because by the want of
all things he was to satisfy

Answ. But for whom was it, that he was to satisfy? was it not for you? If it
was for you, Is there not reason that you should be contented to be poor if he
please? Shall the Creditor be willing that the Surety should pay his debt, and
shall not the Principal or he that is the Debtor be willing himself to part with
that which he has? Jesus Christ, It is true did merit by the want of these
things, But what did he merit? He merits this among other things, that you
should be an Example that he had taken the sting and misery out of poverty and
the want of all things. As we are therefore tempted that God may show that
Jesus Christ conquered Satan, so we are therefore poor, that though our sins
have robbed us, yet there is no curse in our poor Estate. Let me therefore for
a conclusion of al at this time, stir you up, that you would not desire after
much.

Let me speak to you that are rich. Be unto all you have, as a man is unto his
meat who is sick, having no desire at all to it. Have such a stomach to riches,
as a man of a full stomach has to his meat. Let it be al one to you whether you
have or have not. Though you have Estates, let not your Estates have your
affections. You that are in the ways of gaining and getting, that are in the
spring of the world, that have full trades, and great advantages, Take what God
gives you, but take it as that which is to be laid by you, not as your own, but
as that which you must lay up, and lay out for God for the use he calls for, and
not as that which is given to make you great. Use Riches as God appoints.

You that are poor, be content, and murmur not: for riches are rather things to
be feared than desired. Beware of Covetousness. Feed upon God and Christ, and
the hopes of another world, If you have not enough to satisfy the outward man.
And that is no hard Counsel: for if a covetous man can satisfy himself with a
little, by feeding upon the hopes of what he shall heap together, either for an
after day, or for his posterity, there is then a nourishment, and a succor, and
a food much more in the feeding upon and thinking of Honor, and Glory, and
Immortality, and eternal life. If you be content to want, God will let you
have: If you be contented, God will provide for you. In Heb. 13.5. Let your
Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with that you have, for he
has said, he will never leave nor forsake. Feed upon God and Christ and the
hopes of another world, and the more you do so, the less will your condition be
discontentful to you.

Yea my Beloved, Let me speak to you that are Godly. How uncomely a thing is it
for you to mind earthly things? Is your God your Belly? Are your hopes and your
treasures here? The more Gospel Christians you are, the more contented you will
be with a little of the world. For when God in the old Testament gave but
little Grace, then he gave much riches: The Land of Canaan and their great and
large inheritances, were all of them but so many Ceremonies, and shadows and
Types of the large portion which the Saints are to have in spiritual things by
Jesus Christ. As the Apostle therefore said unto the Galatians when they were
returning unto the Circumcision, Have you begun in the Spirit, and will you
make an end in the Flesh? So I say unto you, you go back again unto Types and
shadows. You do so when God has brought you to the land of true good, if you
return unto the desire after riches. Clothes that are too big for a man have
neither warmth nor comeliness in them. If you desire more than God gives, you
have lost the comeliness and the profit and health that may be by the blessing
of God in Riches to you.

A word let me speak to you all. Covetousness is the sin that now does begin to
sprout and bud. And there is nothing that is a sadder presage of the wrath of
God against us, than the straightness of men's hearts. It is reported there was
a great deal of wealth in Constantinople when the Turk took it, but he took all
and brought them into slavery, because they would not lay it forth to maintain
a just war against him. Of another place it is reported, that it was lost, not
so much by the force of the adversary, as by the Covetousness of those that
should have provided opposition against the enemy. If you do but lend you ears
a little to men, you shall find them murmuring at their Taxes; you shall find
them complaining at their not getting as they have done, That they are willing
to be any thing, rather then further to be at charges: To loose what they have
taken in hunting, rather then to be at the charge to dress and roast it, As I
may use that expression of the scripture. In the beginning of these late
troubles, I wish it be not laid to our charge, the charge of those who were so
forward and free to lend in an animosity, when that which they fought for is
now brought to their doors, is scarce worth acceptance. A folly, Like unto
those who travel to the East Indies to fetch home things that are not of a
price and esteem. Some indeed have been overcharged and burdened: But it is
better a great deal that a man should lay out much for God then a little. God
will make good all that faith that you have had in him for the public good: If
you should loose what men have promised you, yet so far as it was for his name
sake, God will become a debtor to you, and pay you well. And I look upon the
times when I hear men complain, Truly I cannot tell how better to compare it,
Then as if an heir should grievously complain that he is put to charges to
take up the possession of his great inheritance, Or as if a man should complain
that has laid out all the money in his purse, when he has good commodities in
the room of it. God has begun to give you what you have fought and prayed
for. And let me say thus much, that though some men cry out Persecution,
Persecution: Yet is it any persecution for the servants to take their wages? Is
it any persecution to call upon you for that which may prevent them that would
bring about a war, and to keep those beasts that would devour from being able
to break in upon you? Is it persecution for men to sit under their own vines,
and eat the fruit of their own fig trees, In their houses, and be quiet, and
none to make afraid? Is this persecution? for men to be free from oppression,
and to be called upon for nothing, but that which is for public use and
charge? Is this persecution? When men have no enemies, but because themselves
would be great, and over al, and are not satisfied? Is this persecution?
Confer with the primitive times, and tell them you are under persecution, Such
as they never felt: for you dwell at peace, and none molest you; you are at a
better allowance and maintenance then many have heretofore had for more work.
What rate would men have given some years agone for that which they now do
enjoy. It is not therefore any just reason that men have to complain thus, but
only through the wretchedness of men's hearts, who are also unsatisfyed because
they know not well what they would have, therefore it is, that there are such
complaining in the streets. It is not from persecution, but from Covetousness,
because men have not al they would have. The great sin of al is Covetousness,
because men are drawn nearer to the world and to themselves. Men think al
disswasions from the world, to be but an art to keep men from their good. When
Ministers dehort from loving the world, Men think it is that al may come to
them. It is not unlawful to take for that which a man lends for the
preservation of the public, no more then it is for a Labourer to take money
for making a fort to preserve it. But Covetousness in some men makes them take
money of others who had it for their own preservation. I beseech you my beloved,
Cure but your hearts of this distemper of Covetousness and self seeking: Seek
nor great things, but just and righteous ones for your selves: set a price upon
them, And then you will find that there is neither too much spent, so far as
has been laid out and employed that way, Nor is there any hard dealing with
you to call for more, that that which is got may be preserved. I thought to
speak of this by the way, because that Covetousness is the great underminer of
States, Especially in the change of things: It is that which does give away
what God has purchased for a man at a dear rate, rather then he will be at the
charge to keep it. The Times have brought forth this Man-child viz freedom
from those that did labor to destroy and ruin you: Now my beloved let there
be nothing wanting. When Ireland calls upon you, that you would help them,
distribute freely: when as the necessity of this nation calls upon you to
relieve it, Give it as freely: Why? because you must beware of Covetousness,
And it is Covetousness for a man not to lay out what ever he has for God, to
the uses which God calls it for.

Object. Is a man to reserve nothing for himself.

That I will answer afterward when I come to the Cases of this point. This is
certain, That a public good is to be preserved before a private: And your
happiness is more in doing good to a Kingdom then in providing for your own
Families. You get more your selves. For if there be a doing of much good, there
shall be an offering up on your behalf many prayers, and those God will hear A
man had better be rich in prayers, then rich in Jewels. He does more for a man
that prays to God to take care for him, then he does for himself that keeps
thousands. Take heed and beware of Covetousness. When God has saved you so
miraculously, suffer not your selves to be destroyed by a base lust. When you
have given so freely before for liberty and freedom, do not loose it for a
penny more. He is a fool that comes to buy a Commodity, that will not give a
penny more for it, if he need it. You may as well be destroyers of the nation,
by not giving your help at the last, as you would have been, if you had held
your hands in your bosoms, and not have given at the first. There is a great
speech of Malignity in the world, But this is the greatest, for to loose that
which you may easily have, not to fight for that which was so hard to get: I
may say of Covetousness when I come to the sinews of it, that it will lay a tax
and charge upon all the world. Few men will be free. Go to the State, and Army,
to Godly men, and Trades men, of al sorts and conditions, still you will find
this sin he grubbing, and like a Pyoneer digging at the root in men's spirits,
that it may first or last rob a man of the Enjoyment of God at the least, if it
does not do him an il turn at the present in this life.

CHAP. VIII.
Covetousness hard to be discovered, being a spiritual sin and lying so near
upon the horders of Duty; An act may be done that seems contrary to
Covetousness, and yet the man be Covetous. Though the end seems to be against
Covetousness, a man may be Covetous in desiring.

Quest.

BUT how may this Covetousness be discerned?

Answ. Its hard to be discovered, It grows between the Stones of the Temple:
between the Saints themselves. Its a sin that blinds the Judgment, As gifts
blind the eyes of the wise. It is a more then ordinary crafty and deceitful
sin. Therefore they are called deceitful riches. In 'Mark. 4.19. And it is used
in the Similitude of care, and providence, and faithfulness to the
opportunities God puts into a man's hands. It is a spiritual sin, born in the
heart, And may live there without breaking forth into any external evil Acts.
As hypocrisy is hard to be discovered, because it is between God and a man's own
soul: So is Covetousness, because it may be, and yet no external evil act done:
For it lies in an inordinate desire. A man may do all that is good, he may
neglect no duty of Religion, nor transgress any Law of Justice in his calling,
and yet notwistanding be Covetous. Therefore in 1. Cor. 5.11. He distinguishes
Covetousness from extortion, or unjust gain. It is a sin that lies so near the
borders of Duty, that as two colors alike or two persons are hard to be known,
So its a hard thing for a man to distinguish between Care, Providence,
Faithfulness and Covetousness. It is a sin which lies in the measure of the
act, and not in the act it self. It is lawful to desire riches, but so to
desire them, as not to be satisfied with what God gives, make it a sin. To show
how hard it is to be discerned. Consider,

A man may do an act that may seem to be contrary to Covetousness, and yet be
Covetous

There are two acts of Covetousness.

One is, desiring more then a man has.

The other is, Retayning that which a man has and not laying it out to the
uses which God assigns them. Now a man may be free from Covetousness in the
one, and yet not in the other. A man may not keep that which he has, and yet
be covetous in desiring to have that which he has not. For a man to desire
such a stock to the end that he may do good unto others, is Covetousness: And
yet that end seems to be against Covetousness. Covetousness will put a necessity
upon earthly things for spiritual ends. Earthly things cannot be necessary
ends. Riches are profitable and necessary only in a degree, in regard of
external circumstance. As if a man think he cannot carry himself as a member of
Christ, nor do as religion requires of him, without such an estate; He is
guilty before God. Children are good, But if you must have them or else you
die, you over love them. So if you think you must have riches or else you
cannot walk with God as you should do, you fall into Covetousness: which is a
great sin. for it makes the service of God depend upon things which are of
common distribution. Yet Covetousness may be found out, as appears by 1 Cor.
5.11. Where he advises that the Covetous man as the unclean person should be
excommunicated, For with such a one, eat not. A Covetous man is as dishonorable
to God, as an unclean Person, therefore eat not with him: The Consequent being
put for the Antecedent: It is cast him forth: for that does enjoin men not to
eat with Persons excommunicated, unless it be in cases of necessity, As the
Wife with the Husband, But not to in vite them. Therefore the Apostle calls it a
Judging of them.

CHAP. IX.
Ways for discovery of Covetousness. In General. More Particularly. 1. He
that has a quick and acute understanding in the matters of this life, but is
really dull as to spiritual things, is a Covetous man. The Reasons of this. An
Objection Answered. 2. The trial of our affections to these things is when God
calls us to part with all. 3. He is Covetous who takes all opportunitits of
getting, and who is having and craving in his Spirit. An Objection Answered.

Quest.

HOW shall we know that we are Covetous?

Answ. Take General and Particular ways. Consider by the way that Covetousness
is not only a particular sin, but it is the universal distemper of all men's
hearts that are unregenerate. When the Ground is free from Weeds it is fit for
the Seed of God.

First: In General. When that time is counted long which is not spent in a man's
calling and ways of getting. Amos. 8.5. When will the Sabbath be gone that we
may buy and sell?

Again: When a man does Duties of Religion to get places of gain or Loaves, or
blessings from God. Ezekiel. 33.31. They come before me and seem to be as my
people, but their hearts run after their Covetousness. There is difference
between a wordly thought in a man's mind in Duty and making the world his end.
He that makes the world his end, is Covetous. Though he makes it not his last
end, yet if he sets it in an higher place than those that are subordinate to
God himself. God will allow a man to look to himself, but after God: But the
last thing that a man is to take care for, is for the things of this life.

Again: Covetousness is not mortified when other Lusts are not. All Lusts do
live and die together. In Colos. 3.5. where he bids them to mortify
Covetousness, he bids them to mortify inordinate affections and evil
concupiscence, etc. Inordinate affections belong unto the Irascible passions or
faculties, by which we oppose evil. And evil Concupiscence belongs to the other
faculties, which belongs to the things of a man's good. Now these take up a man's
whole Soul: But if these two be not in order, Covetousness is not mortified.
The Lust of the eye is the Steward which provides for the lust of the Flesh,
and the pride of life. If you will pluck up Covetousness, you must dig up the
whole heart, mortify all Corruptions. If any be left, this will grow with it

But in Particular. When a man has a quick and a large understanding,
apprehension, and Judgment in the matters of this life, but to the discerning
of spiritual things is dull. When a man is acute and sharp in understanding the
things of this life, but is really dull unto spiritual things, A man is then
Covetous. And the reason is this. Because the ground why a man's knowledge is
more excellent in one thing than in another, and why he is more attentive to
know one thing more than another, is, because his affections are to one thing
more than another. Therefore if a man be quick in the things of this life, and
dull in the things of God, he is covetous. The worldly man is described by the
Cares of this life which choke the word. When a man is truly dull; I say not
when he is so in his own Judgment. As the wisest men think they err in wisdom,
As a Seaman thinks no horses go fast, because they go not so fast as a Ship:
So a wise man in spiritual things thinks himself a Fool. In Prove. 30.2. He
says He had not the understanding of a man. He spoke of things beyond a man's
understanding, and yet he says of himself. A man may be dull in his own
apprehension, and yet not so really.

Again: The time must be considered, and the means which we have had to make
them understand the matters of Godliness. If a man have lived under a rational
and scripture teaching Ministry, and have had a long time of it, and yet is dull
in the things of God, and is grown wise in the things of the world: It is a
great sign that a man's care is for the things of this life, and not for the
things of God.

Object. A man may have larger parts than Grace, therefore a man may be wiser
in the things of this world than in the things of God.

Answ. That is without controversy. Yet Grace sets a man's mind so upon
spiritual things that a man's parts are set upon the things of God, and they die
unto the things of the world. Diligence will make up and repair a man's parts:
And Grace makes a man diligent. I speak of real dullness. When a man is not dull
in one paint of Religion, but in all: not only dull under one Ministry, but under
all. I not when a man is heard to come to knowledge: For men that come hardliest
by knowledge, when they have it, do keep it longest. And do you Judge of this
Particular. If your strength lies in the things of this world, that you are
exquisite there, that you can go through all the turnings of this life, and do
any thing in the business of this life, but in the things of God you speak
notionally, and not spiritually, as one that heard the story, and not as one
that knows the things, then you are Covetous.

Again: See how it is with you when God calls you to part with all. Men are such
as they are, when they are tried. Nothing tries men's affections to a thing so
much, as parting with it. When things do come in competition, and a man cannot
have both, he will then take that which he loves. Therefore Solomon commands the
Child to be cut in pieces, because motherly affections would appear. Sometimes
God threatens to take al: And sometimes God takes all. And sometimes a man is in
his spirit as if he should lose all. What are your hearts then? In 2 Timothy 10,
11. it is said when Paul was ready to be offered up, that Demas did forsake
him, and did cleave unto this present world. His heart was in the world,
because he did for the saving of his estate, forsake and leave Paul. To open
that place.

Object. It may be said that Demas did suffer Persecution, for he was with Paul
in his imprisonment, and Paul recommended him unto Philemon, and unto the
Church of Colosse. Every one of the grounds by which the several sorts of
hearers are to be understood do go beyond one another. The High way ground does
give the word the hearing; but repeats it not, meditates not of it, remembers
it not, but the stony ground went further, and they did so, but they thought
the word of God dot worthy enduring the troules that it brought, but the thorny
ground, the Covetous ground that came under Persecution: Now how can it be a
sign of Covetousness if they endure Persecution? This is the Objection.

Answ. First the meaning is not, that they will endure any kind of Persecution,
but such Persecution as is against the plain and clear points of Religion. For
that which the Highway ground regards not, the Principles of Godliness, that
the other grounds suffered for, and stood to. But those were the Principles of
Religion, converting points, for the Text in Matthew. 13. speaks of converting
points of Religion, Such points which distinguish regeneracy and unregeneracy.
One sort of people minded not these things: The other rather suffered for them,
than that they would part with them. Rather than Demas would say the Gospel was
a lie, and that Jesus Christ was not God, he would die presently: That was so
rooted in his Conscience that he would have thought himself unhappy to have
given any check to it. They did not come down right upon him, but by cunning
ways, the Devil ^^kes men by crast and not by fair strength. However Demas did
not love his life in this Case, yet he loved his riches better than his life.
He cries better live not, and be not, than be in want. When he was with Paul,
there was no great hazard run, for it is said that Onesiphorus enquired him
out, and was not ashamed to walk with Paul when he had chains about him. Now if
men might go to men in Prison, and walk up and down with them in the streets,
there was not much hazard and danger. That Demas could bear. But when he must
part with all, the Text says, He cleaves to this present world That is, such a
kind of cleaving as is in the heart of God unto Christ and his people: for by
that word the heart of God is set out in the Scripture. It signifies content,
and rest, and full delight and satisfaction in a thing. Demas his heart was thus
swallowed up in the things of this life. And therefore though he could have
lost his life at the first rather than to have denied the Principles of
Religion, yet he would rather have lost his life than endured want. If when God
calls for all, you would spare some, you are Covetous. And say not that great
degrees of Grace is required unto this, for when the will of God is showed, and
determinately known, a Saint sits down under it and quels al motions against
it. When a Godly man sees God will have al, he says, Thy will be done.

Especially is a Godly man ready in the things of this life. because at
Conversion there is a mean esteem in him of the things of this life: he looks
not for things that are temporal, but for what is eternal. It is in the nature
of a Beast to look after grass, and the fields, to live in the Air: So for a
Christian to have a mean esteem of this world, either for his end, or means: He
slights it for means, and despises it (...) his ends. Look what you are when
God takes away the things of this world? Are your hearts in a quietness and
composedness?

Again: A man is then Covetous when he takes al opportunities of getting.

Again: When a man is having and craving in his spirit, when his prayers savors
of the world, like a vapor out of a Dungeon; when his affections are strong in
the matters of this life. A man's Covetousness is not cured, when his desires
are hot.

Object. Is it not lawful for a man to desire more than he has, or so much as
may Act all his parts and abilities in him? Whether a man's observing what
abilities he has for public service, may not desire such a portion of this
life, as may Act him therein?

Answ. Oftentimes it is not so much the love of a man's work as the love of a
man's ways. A man thinks he desires to love God when he loves the world.

The world is not worth the having. You are in the world for Heaven. When your
thoughts are bowed down, be afraid of that: Trade not with those thoughts.
Remember Christ's words, Take heed and beware of Covetousness: Arise ye dead and
come to Judgment. There is a Snare in your Calling, you may be Covetous in
desiring nothing but your due, As this young man in my Text.

FINIS
Scriptures Opened in the Book of John, 1.12. And Luke, 12.15.
Chap. Verse. Page Genesis, 4 14 229 42 1,2 48 Joshua, 3 21 109 7 21 98 Judges,
17 13 236 1 Samuel, 15 23 263 1 Kings, 1 17 152 2 Chronicles, 30 8 125 Bzra, 7
23 236 Job, 27 5 46 34 36 164 Psalms, 1 2 156 4 7,8 244 8 2 171 9 10 37,41 10 3
236 15 1 140 16 4 222 7 48,53, 71 19 1 110 36 18 33 37 1 75,215 4 257 25 246 44
3 140 49 7 255 51 3 52 50 6,7 162 73 15 147 24 152 84 11 14 109 4 89 110 3 148
119 55 52 127 2 247 145 19 91 Proverbs, 3 5 117, 132 13 12 165 14 15 41 21 15
151 28 20,21 260 30 2 277 Ecclesiastes, 12 1 52 Solomon's Song. 1 3 157 Isaiah,
8 21 215 50 10 75, 118 53 1 44 11 37, 108 55 1 5 3 45,50 57 17 214, 229 237
Jeremiah, 32 40 167 Ezekiel, 33 31 276 36 31 22 Hosea, 6 6 250 Amos, 8 5 276
Matthew, 4 9 244 5 42 103 6 30 127 32 232 33 101, 242 2 26 127 9 29 19,93 10 8
33 14 144 41 144 11 27 188 12 20 121 13 4 52 7 234 11 68 20 150, 207 22 229,
236 238 44 to 46 149, 163 58 93 14 31 93, 116 15 19 224 23 to 28 24 16 16 55 17
201 19 12 35 21 22 25 30,31 83 22 4 82 8 49 22 205 29 206 32 198 23 25 17 27 43
131 Mark. 4 10 273 7 22 228 14 15 208 16 16 20,93 205 Luke, 2 21 245 3 14 228 8
14 229 12 13 211 14 212 20 213 21 212 29 238 48 26 14 18 176 16 22,28 182 17 5
7,110 133 18 27 239 19 5,6 145 20 9 to 17 144 176 21 34 234, 239, 251 John, 1
11 6,82, 111 131 14 174 16 5,14, 20,26 2 25 193 3 12 66 19 170 21 76, 109 33 44
5 19 198 40 111 44 132 6 26 236 27 247 37 122, 183 44,45 38 48,49 64,115 143 53
5,160 68 18 8,44 56 148 167 10 3 45 38 36 11 15 107 15 1 76 16 21 16 24 19,96
17 11,21 204 Acts, 1 4 102 2 17 189 41 149 4 10 133 12 100 7 59 3,144 8 37 145
9 6 161 11 8 13 42 156 45 83 46,47 27 84 15 9 9,87 16 14 84,112 16 14 125.136
20 35 2,129 25 23 245 26 7 7 Romans, 1 16 31 21 172, 232 29 111, 227 233 2 20
193 3 27 132 28 198 16 130 19 89 4 20 71 21 44, 159 6 17 193 8 19 7 10 3 131 10
6,7 50 8 50,182 10 148 11,12,13 7,103 14 32,41 15 148 155 17 31,38 12 2 63,65
245 14 1 35 1 Corinthians, 1 26 119 28 119 30 41 2 2 155 7 38 9 to 14 38, 9 to
14 55, 9 to 14 104 9 to 14 134 9 to 14 142 14 6,35, 63,81, 82,87 15 46, 152 16
153, 190 4 7 32, 129 13 109, 5 7 88 11 274 273 227 6 9,10 227 7 31 245 13 13
135 14 1 29 15 10 133 140 16 22 175 2 Corinthians, 1 6 185 2 7 231 11 228 3 18
65 ult 157 4 13 10 ult 89 5 5 108, 142 15 51, 205 6 1 6 8 5 74 9 5 216 10 5 117
132 167 Galatians, 1 4 202 2 20 9,75 109 132 247 3 7 81 4 9 108 5 6 6 6 8 97
Ephesians, 1 8 41 18 38 65 113 19 113 2 3 141 8 110, 113 3 4,5 38 17 8 19 38 4
8.11 31 19 215 20,21,22. 64, 236 5 3 222 31 5 6 12 224 Philippians, 2 8 107 12
139 13 113, 139 3 3 73,148 162 10 156 11 108 19 214, 225 Colossians, 1 12 163 2
6 6,10 12 110 3 5 226,227 3 5 256,258 3 5 263,276 6 263 1 Thessalonians, 1 5
149 2 13 175 4 6,7 216 5 23 63 2 Thessalonians, 2 10 150 12 61 3 1,2 50 1
Timothy, 1 5 149 13 141 163 17 163 19 192 5 6 247 6 3 192 5 229 6 246 8 219 9
240, 245 10 219, 227 262 17,18 230 220 2 Timothy, 1 12 134, 154 13 191 2 13 93
3 2 237 5 193,235 237 4 10 227 235 10 11 278 Titus, 1 11 221 2 2 192 Philemon,
12 Hebrews, 2 1 52 3 12 150 4 2 12, 96 6 1,2 190 7 9,34 107 10 9 202 29 84 38
22,27 51 11 1 16 3 36,38 152 16 261 25,29 146 39 3 12 12 23 13 2 3,144 5 215
217 222 243 267 James, 1 4 16 4 to 6 26, 29 7 107 17 92 21 21,83 2 19 196 26
123 4 3 23, 96 4 264 6 23, 137 1 Peter, 1 8 165 1 9 4 9 to 13 21, 201 11 109 23
31 2 2 103 3 157 6 103 12 21 3 21 126 2 Peter, 1 4 166 9 65 ult 113 3 9 178 1
John, 1 4 164 2 15 225 265 16 219 227 3 23 101 102 5 4 9 20 39 2 John, 10 61 3
John, 9 144 Jude, 4 176 Revelation, 22 17 182

ERRATA.
In the Treatise of Faith, on John 1.12.
PAge, 8 line 33 for expound read expect, p. 16 l. 32 for opeative r. operative
p. 27 l 6. for Gods r. God, p. 61 l. 32 for rank r. ranked, p. 66 l. 18. for
similitude r. similitudes, p 83 l. 34 for (the Apostle exhors r. the Apostle in
James 1.21. exhorts, p. 84 l. 10 for Ammon r. Amnon, p. 87. l. 4. for Acts
26.8. r. Acts 15.9. p. 87 l 12. for (Subject that i^ free and fit the
receiving) r. Subject that is free and fit for the receiving, p. 87 l. 32 for
trouble more r. trouble him more, p. 93 l. 15 for good words r. good works, p.
107 Margent for John 11.15. r. John 11.25. p. 113 l. 26 for can believe r.
cannot believe p. 119 l. 13. for nor chosen r. are chosen, p. 121 l. 26 for
embrie r. embryo, p. 134 l. 17 for from Christ art more r. from Christ more
ashamed, p. 167 l. last for the nit stops its ear r. then it stops in ear, p.
268 l. 16 for until you will be r until you will be, p. 3^6 l. 18 for th^^ so
that those (...) pass r^ that so those that pass, p. 187 l. 9. for indepently
r. independantly, p. 207 l. 2 for does affect the Will r. affect the Will, p.
207 l. 6 for though it be applied r. though it be ill applied, p. 209 l. 11 for
three are that r. there are

In the Book of Covetousness.
PAge 217 line 35 for that is his wrong r. that is his to his wrong p. 218 l.
11 for is to make r. to make, p. 234 l. ult. for suddenly upon r. not suddenly
up on, p. 236 l. 17 for Psalm. 10 10. r. Psalm. 10.3. p. 240 l. 11 for 66 r. 6.
p. 244 l. 2 last, for because of only, r. only because of, p. 248 l. 22 for ye
cover your selves r. recover your selves, p 251 l. 27 for soil ground r. soil
and ground, p. 255 l. 13 for care of this cannot r. care of this life cannot p.
259 l. 35 36 for lusts of eye r. lusts of the eye p. 263 l. 29 for verse 16. r.
verse 6. p. 274 l. 24. for necessary ends r. necessary theans, p. 277. l. 1^
for says of himself r. says so of himself, p. 277 l. 23. for to make them r.
to make us, p. 278 l. 5 for paint r. point, p. 278 l. 6. leave out 1, p. 279 l.
8 for dot worthy r. not worthy, l. 9 for covetous ground r. covetous ground.


