A SHORT DISCOURSE Upon the Desires of a FRIEND:

WHEREIN, Upon Observation of the late Governments and Revolutions, it is made
evident, What alone can be the perfect Settlement of this Nation, and the
Composure of all Differences.

LONDON, Printed for H. H. Anno 1660.

A SHORT DISCOURSE Upon the Desires of a Friend.
SIR,
COuld I ever deny you any thing, I should now believe it as reasonable as ever
it could be; your questions being equally as hard to be determined, as the
breasts of men are to be known: yet, as far as I am able, I will give you my
judgment what is the design of many, and what will be the necessity of all;
for it is not now as immediately after the end of the War, before designs of
Self-ambition had been practiced, and the Nation had not been made wise by so
many cheats; for now, succeeding Juglers must have the disadvantage to go about
to practice those tricks that have been done before. Demonstration only makes
common people wise; and till experimental feeling gives the sense, profession
takes up the place in their opinions. But no new promise can now be made to
restore them their Trade and Freedoms, but it must be of some of those natures
which has been imposed upon them already; for so various have been the
Revolutions that have cast power unto men of several judgments, that there is
little that bears the name of Government, that has not been resembled in
something lately obeyed. Those two grand Contestors for the best Government, a
Single Person, or Many; Monarchy, or a Commonwealth; have both been here
practiced, little to the composure of the Nation in Peace and Plenty; whence
justly may arise a Question, What else can possibly protect, where neither of
these two can prevail; they being, without dispute, the best of others, what
ever precedence they have with one another? The Solution of this Question will
bring me to answer your Demands, I hope, with a truth, that I wish were
convincing to all Mankind, that too great a fondness might be no longer showed
to Power, which always must prove as certainly mutable, as it is evidently
unjust.

After the end of this War, we saw, how many sunck under the temptation of
Ambition, when Success gave it a tongue to speak; and many without doubt, that
suspected no such guilt in themselves, found it lay concealed from all things
but the search of Interest and Ambition. I know not where I may fix this modest
Character upon one, Whether he designed as little as the most moderate, since
he reached at more than the most ambitious; I mean, the first Protector, Oliver,
who wrought himself by degrees into power, that he kept almost as unexpectedly,
as it was unjustly gotten; but all things so contributed to his attempts, that
he received not less capacity from accidents, than he did from his own
abilities. His reputation was highest, in the declining time of the War; and
when he was ready for Fortune, Fortune appeared prepared for him; and Victory
was fully got whilst he was amply famous, before time or chance could work any
thing to the lessening of his Reputation; The Nation too was as ready to obey
any thing, as he was to command all things; and, wearied with War, disputed
not the nicety of a Person, but the necessity of a Peace; they had yet
something left, and feared more the effects of a War, than the the Usurpation
of Any. Peace and Plenty caused the people to be wanton at first; War and
Scarcity, by the same reason, brought them to be tame at last. To enlarge their
obedience to him, a victorious Army was at his command; having first made
himself General of them, before he attempted to be Prince of others, creeping
by degrees into power, and leaving himself at a latitude to obey what success
offered to him: Thus, as Peace grew slighted by long enjoyment, and was the
fate of one Man's Power, the want of it now was the life to his; The disesteem
of Good brought an end to what was Just, and the want of the same Good gave a
being to what was Bad; showing, Man necessarily must be miserable, unless
moderation and firm principles govern his opinion; that the real nature of the
thing, and not want or enjoyment, makes it more or less.

Upon these Bases he stood, whilst that which was his preservation seemed daily
turning to his ruin; The want of a just Title grew chargeable, and the Army
grew every day sensible they could as well make Power, as preserve One; and he
had no balance upon them but his own subtlety. The expectation of the people
grew every day less and less answered; they began to discern, that the Charge
to maintain an usurped Power was the same as the expense of War; and the
preservation of such a One needed more Intelligence, and as many Arms, as was
requisite to purchase Conquest; for the same numbers that reached Victory, were
not judged enough to preserve what was gotten, but Militia's in every County
were added to the Militia of all the Nation; feigned Quarrels too, were as
necessary to keep the Army in peace, as Play-games are to keep children quiet,
the Mutiny of the Nation being looked upon of less consequence than that of the
Soldiery: This employed the Navy in Voyages to the other World, found out
War with the Spaniards and Dutch, and rendered Peace almost as ill-favored as
War; their esteem grown equal by their resembling charge. Hence a Debt grew
contracted, of so vast a proportion, that the Nation must needs tremble at it,
who were sure to be the Pay-masters: Like the feigned torments of Titius,
feeding a Vulture with his own Liver, they fed a gnawing Army with their own
Subsistances.

Whilst thus evidently every thing was contributing to his fall, the Army
beginning to be too wise and insolent, the Nation to be too knowing and poor,
and he had met occasions enough during his busling in Power, to act all his
cheats and subtleties, which, like Juglers tricks, were not so fit to be showed
again, of consequence the Army appeared designing to be the Judges of all
power, the Nation inclined to obey none, and he sinking from the capacity of
cousening either, longer.

Whilst all things seemed thus ready to contribute to his ruin, Fate seemed to
prevent that which Fortune designed for him; and that reputation which his life
could not long have held up, his death preserved, and by dissolution lived in
his ill-coveted fame.

He left behind him a vast contracted Debt, vast in it self, though not so
great, circumstantially considered, for one to run into, that had an unjust
Title to maintain, a Nation to cosen, and many Parties to betray; so that none
needed more Power or Intelligence to preserve himself, and ruin others.

These fatal circumstances he left fixed to that Throne that his son Richard
was to ascend, who quickly found that ruin, which perhaps would have been
slower-pac't to his father; since the assistance that nature and fortune gave
to one, was wanting to the other. The father made his steps to power by the
knowledge of men and victory; the son was wholly unpractiz'd in either, to whom
the Army had no Obligation; nor was capable of laying any on the Nation. He had
never been engaged so much in War as to attempt the one. And his father had
left him too poor to perform the other. All he was able to do, was to increase
the Armies insolence, by courting them; and the Nations disobligation, by
paying them: Yet, in the Parliament he called, he found a temper exceedingly
civil to him; certainly to have preserved him great enough by another, or too
great by himself; and by so public an endeavor of his preservation, speedily
urged on his ruin; rousing the suspicious Army to put an end to his power,
before they knew what to set up in his place; that principle ever being
prevalent with them, never to like what the Nation would preserve. This
appeared merely the rash reason of the Army for what they did; for when they
had threatened him so fax as to make him dissolve all his interest and honor
with the Parliament, these were still to seek what to do, making it evident
that the destroying part only, dwelt with Armies; and rendering it as visible,
that the Nations interest and theirs were very different, What they did next
could not appear the design of those near relations to the Protector that
managed the injustice they offered him; and forced him to offer others, by
doing as much to his power, as they compelled him to do to the Parliament's,
making shipwreck of their own Soul, and his Honor, in their sins by the breach
of Oaths; in his Crimes, by his breach of Honor. In this giddiness, the next
object their violent eyes laid hold on, was a remnant of a Parliament, which
before had joined with them in such an injury to the Nations freedom, that the
Army could not doubt they would be now less ready for actions of the same
nature. These people famously know by the name of the Rump, resumed their Seats
again by the favor of the mad Soldiery; and presently made an Order to keep
out those Members that they had joined with the Army in secluding before,
making haste to show they continued as bad as they had ever been, or as they
could now desire them to be, believing it perhaps their only interest to
appear to the Army worse then others, that they might think of employing none
else.

These parcel of Ambitious men, notwithstanding forgot not their old, fair, and
religious pretenses, though they could not be ignorant that the people had as
little belief for them, as they had real designs to merit it. The first thing
they complained of, was the vast debt the Protector Oliver had contracted; as a
blemish to the Government of a single person; believing the dispute was only
between One and Many, when it was indeed only in matter of Title; being
apparent, all Government was ill alike that was equally chargeable; which any
must be, that depended more upon a mercenary force, than a National interest.
For these could not forget, nor was the Nation ignorant, they had been as ill
husbands for them before as the Protector had been, and could not expect they
should be better now, whilst their Title was no better to their power, nor
their kindness more to their freedoms, hardly believing those would redress
their grievances, that denied them their lawful means to have them
represented. Nor had they given small demonstration what expencefull Governors
they were, when the Treasure of all those vast Sates was not enough to defray
the charge of their Ambitious ruling nor did it seem rational that they should
condemn a Government, for the same Crime that their's was sure to be guilty of.
But their policy was only by expectation to keep others quiet till they were
safe, that none might use power till they were fast in theirs; not caring how
many faults the Nation could find in them, when they were rendered too weak to
redress them.

They presently next made it appear they were sensible that the services they
received from Fleetwood and Disborow (especially) was more from accident then
inclination, and rewarded them accordingly, giving Disborow cause to lament his
affected roughness and imprudent rashness, and leaving Fleetwood stupid in
his old insensible easiness.

The Army having thus forsaken the Protector, they immediately called in all
those Officers that both the Protectors had forsaken. Among the rest Lambert
appeared, and in a little while commanded their forces against the Rising in
Cheshire; where he gained a victory more fatal to himself then the worthy Sr.
George Booth, whose sufferings for a free- Parliament, rendered him more safe,
than the other was by Conquest that fought against it. So heavy must the
Nation's interest weigh in any Scales, held by the hand of time.

The victorious Lambert now returning, brought more fears than joy to his
Governors; he seemed too great and glorious to obey, unless he were willing:
and they doubted his inclination to obedience, when ever he believed his
Commands would be received: nor durst they stay long from attempting to lessen
him, since they doubted not but his abilities, and interest in the Army after
this success, would make him capable of improving time more then they could
do. Judging therefore his power might be more; and their's not increase; they
presently let him see what he was to expect, and forced him to attempt their
dissolution, with the same men that had before brought them together: this too
with some little difficulty he performed, and in their places erected a
Committee of Safety; every Bear bringing forth a Whelp, that was never to be
licked into any form.

The news of these alterations came to General Monck in Scotland, who soberly
weighing the difference between something like a Government, and that which had
no resemblance to any, and looking perhaps with a prudent eye upon the effects,
that the declared spirit of the Nation would at last produce; with a wise
swiftness, and a bold spirit, suddenly alarmed his Army: and having snatched
them into a Declaration for himself, presently declared his dissent for what
the Army had done in England, toward whom Lambert speedily advanced, equally
full of error and haste: and Portsmouth presently after General Monck, declared
also, and received some of the forc'd-out Members.

These various Turns a little time produced, and showed the Nation that alike
misery attended the Impositions of all Parties, and nothing could be true
judges of the way and means to their setlement, but their own Representatives,
free, and fully chosen: any thing less is but imposition; and all other
pretended paths to setlement, are indeed but highways to confusion, since any
thing contrary to the Nation's judgment, must be chargeable to their purses.
Under the want of the least pretense to this, Lambert and his party sunk, the
Nation declining that most which had the least show of Government. All these
things alarmed that part of the Army that Lambert had left behind him in
London, who immediately fell to their ancient custom of undoing what they had
done, not seeming to believe that actions of contrary natures could be
blemishes to their infallible purity; and presently drawing together, did
invite that parcel of men to sit again, whom they had forced from their Seats
before. This act of theirs here in London took the same impression in the Army
under Lambert's command at Newcastle; so that without a blow he found himself
o're-come, and forsaken by all those Troops, which a little before seemed
unquestionably at his Devotion.

Thus, freed from a Potent Enemy, General Monck, victorious without a
Conquest, marched toward London, receiving from all Counties as he past along
their Resolutions, to assert their own Right in a Free Parliament; and coming
within a day's march of the City, he received from them an Address of the same
just nature. He was no sooner come to White Hall, but immediately the violent
Rump prepared an employment of an unheard of nature for him; which he obeyed,
and entered the City, imprisoning some of the considerable men, throwing down
all their Gates, to make them look as ready for ruin as was possible, so to
frighten them into obedience; and spread his Tent to the public view,
beholding him gone in to deflowre their Freedoms. These two things the
passionate Rump designed, to render all people they had to do with, either by
oppression or odium, incapable to hurt them, having an equal kindness for him
that professed their service, and for those that avowed the contrary, their
jealousies being the true issues of their crimes, unlimited to all alike.

Yet this storm battered not the City's Resolution, who still continued
resolute to keep those poor, that designed to make them miserable; with whose
just and generous resolution the Nation complied, and it grew presently
discernable, how hard it was for any Power to subsist, upon the dependence
only of an Army's strength, if the Nation did once resolve to overcome them by
those silent wounds, of denying Payments and Taxes of all natures, but such as
should be imposed by all their Representatives. This, with the remembrance of
those Addresses he had received, seemed to waken the General, and presented to
his new opened eyes the strange employment he had undergone, together with the
just apprehensions that others of the same injurious nature would suddenly be
imposed upon him, to make him incapable of any thing but their passionate
commands, by rendering him as infamous as themselves: These considerations
perhaps threw him upon treating with the secluded Members; at which alarm, the
Rump presently voted the filling up themselves, but with such Qualifications,
that they showed as little kindness to the Nation in their submitting to fill
up the House, as they did before in their denying to have it enlarged. This
unlegitimate Child therefore dyed in its birth, and left none to mourn the
loss of such a loathed Issue from such hated Parents; and the Secluded Members
were now looked upon as the only present show of Power, that was ready, in this
exigent of time, to act some sudden relief for the Nation.

All this while the General stayed retired in the City, hearing the reasons of
both sides, which were with so many advantages excelling on the Secluded
Members part, that assisted by the danger of ever more trusting the always
furious, and now disobliged Rump, he permitted them to enter into those places,
from whence they had been withheld by force.

This Prospect, Sir, I thought fit to give you of things past, that you might,
by the fresh remembrance of these changes, judge of the reasons I shall offer
in relation to future Events; it being now seemingly probable to guess, what
all things must center in, though it be impossible to judge of man's
intentions; affairs being now as much governed by Necessity and Exigence, as by
Design or Intention. Nor perhaps is there much of either now grounded in many
men by right principle, since Occasion every day is seen to soften men, like
Wax, ready to receive the impression of the next Honor or Advantage. The
General and the Secluded Members are now upon the Stage; and no doubt there
are yet mingled with the last some persons, so wholly wedded to private
interest and ambition, that they daily endeavor to obstruct the common
advantage, being such as would engrosse the Sun, not share in its influence;
that would subject Power to their selfish Passions, and not submit to it
reasonably placed, impudently laying their own private interest in one balance,
against the Nation's weighing in the other. The effect of this has already
appeared by obstructions that every day happen to that haste that is required
to be made, for the determination of this Parliament; and by the harsh and
splenetive clauses that are offered to be added to every Act and Qualification,
it being their interest that have always lived in blood to keep all wounds
still open. Nor does less suspicions and jealousies attend the General, who so
darkly carries himself, that he rather seems to wait upon opportunity then
principles, and yet seems more affected to his private opinion then the Nations
judgment, having declared his own, before they have given their's. But to how
little purpose it is, as well as how unjust, I hope I shall easily show you;
and I doubt not but it may as easily be discerned by any that will consider
(with passion laid aside) the late revolutions I have presented to you, by
which their reasons may be directed to find the one ly grave to bury all former
animosities and future charges in.

The dispute of late years has fondly been concerning what Government is best,
and in this many have engaged as their interest have led them, and it is very
true, it might in respect of many of their particulars merit the name of a
Question; especially in all those that judge their power and advantages would
be greatest by one or to other: but admitting nothing to receive any
consideration but the Nations good in general, then it will not seem a
question, for both have been tried in a resemblance enough to demonstrate, that
they are equally prejudicial to the Nation's good, for both alike must of
necessity supply their want of Title with Armies; and the charge being the
same, it matters not to dispute the difference of the imposers, the Nation
being too poor to wait the tedious effect of any pretended good cause: nor is
it reasonable to expect good from profession and opinion; when it is sooner to
be compassed by demonstration and action.

I call that a true Title that the Nation will judge so, for that of
consequence is the best, whether by one or many, since that Government may
venture to depend soly upon the National, not the Military interest, whereby the
Nations charge may be contracted, their Trade restored, which under a power
preserved by force is impossible to be, no more then housekeeping is to be
made less chargeable, and the family still left uncontracted.

The General cannot but see this; If he design's to make himself great, he must
surely reflect upon the certain ruin he run's into, if he remembers but what
success others had in the pursuit of it, and how much more fair it stood when
Oliver Protector attempted it, than it now does for him. The reasons I have
laid down before, and in short they are to be thus reduced. The Nation is grown
wiser and poorer, and therefore the unlikelier to be cousen'd again, or to be
longer fantastic. He will discern too, he cannot subsist without power enough
to force the Nation to a subjection they are not inclined to, and he may as
well fear he must be put to pay them by some other means, than out of the
purses of those, he fixes slavery and discontent on. Next, the uncertainty of
Soldiers may shake his unjust thoughts (if he has any,) and let him see he
ought not to depend upon a certainer temper in them, than they have always
expressed inherent in themselves. His Army now cannot show greater affections for
him, than they themselves and the other Army have expressed to others, and yet
have turned from all that profession into a violent extreme. Lastly, it is
evident the Nation's poverty and disaffection will make him incapable of
rewarding the expectations of those that should raise him to a desired
Greatness: they would set so vast a rate upon their merits, that he must be
their glorious slave, and wear a mingle of Majesty and Shackles; not daring to
command those, whom he is unable to reward; and from natural necessity they
must become the executioners of that power they gave him. All this by
experiment and reason must be visible to him; unless the temptation of present
Ambition dazels his eyes from seeing the future hazards: few men being warned
enough by the destiny of others; but are so fond as to believe that they have
kinder Stars then the whole World besides. I wish, this may not be the
General's fatal persuasion, but that he may perpetually preserve himself in
just honor, and reasonable safety, answering the wishes and expectation of the
whole Nation; in continuing to defend them, in what they shall judge fit for
themselves, and to confider how all previous engagement, of never so fair a
nature, is but robbing them of that judgment which purely ought to flow from
themselves. Of equal fate and injustice it will be for him to persist in the
imposing many Governors: to tender his opinion may resemble duty, but to
second it with force is usurped Dominion: and he will appear equally just, and
kind, to usurp Dominion himself, or to assist others in the usurpation of it,
since every Government contrary to the Nations judgment, must be as chargeable
in their own defense, as they are unjust in their own impositions. Nor can such
ill men as now perhaps add to his temptations agree long with him, or one
another, in the sharing of power; The modesty that is found in the pursuit, is
lost in the acquisition. And late experience is seconded by reason to assure
us, that such men's knowledges of one another Crimes and Subtilities, divide
those plots among themselves they once destroyed others by. Like those that
rose together from the earth by the sown-teeth of Dragons converted presently
their original malice among one another.

No Stories has shown us precedents of mischiefs that we have not equaled in
our Revolutions. The Roman Army, never made and unmade Emperors faster, than
Ours has set up and pulled down Governments; so that a reasonable man would
think it impossible, that ever any person should be so infatuated as wholly to
throw himself upon them more;or so unchristian-like as to suffer the
almost-shipwrackt Vessel of the Nation to be yet exposed to more Army-storms,
since things are now growing to that Exigence, that the General must choose
safety and honor with the Nation, or hazard and uncertain glory with an Army.
It being possible that an Army may be preserved under the Nation's Government,
but never the Nation under the Armie's.

And now, Sir, I shall give you my judgment of what I suppose the Nation will
only be able to reston. It will be, To find out such a Government as may
compose all differences, confirm all sales, and make Oblivion and Indemnity
perfect: and when none shall want pardon or security, there will not be so many
enemies left, that will put the Nation to maintain such chargeable defenses for
their ruler; That which only can do this, is the ancient constitution of King,
Lords, and Commons. For to defend any Usurper against the King's title will be
chargeable; to keep him out makes all indemnity imperfect; and none can
imagine they shall safely enjoy their purchases, unless they were sure that no
chance, or revolution, shall ever throw that into his power, which we deny to
give him; nor will the Nation ever be content to pay the Soldiers Arrears,
till they purchase by it a setlement according to their own judgment.

The King is now fit in all respects to be treated with: The preservation of
his religion, his being free from engagements with foreign force, unblemished
from any injury he ever did the Nation, may reasonably assure us, that he is
both capable to forgive, and would be willing to confirm; rather to make a
grave to bury all disputes, than by ravelling into former actions raise new
ones; and would certainly be convinced that the Justice of restoring all
purchased Lands, would be over-weigh'd by the necessity and justice of
confirming them; since the injuries by confirmation may be sooner repaired,
then the prejudice restoration will bring. For by such moderate ways they may
be settled, that no parties will have cause to be grieved, if all will be
content but to share with the whole Nation in some damage.

And if the Nation makes not themselves capable thus to receive an obliged
Prince, they will probably admit a victorious One, and be ever wretched under
the effects of Conquest; he notwithstanding will be free before God for
recovering his rights by such a way, when he is denied it by a Moderator, and
at their doors the sin will lie, who still design the Nation to be their
slaves, or force them to be so unto another, unless his virtue frees them from
that condition, which the Crimes of others threw them into.

Thus, Sir, I have delivered my particular opinion, and I hope there is no man
living that owns this Nation for his Country, but will submit to the judgment
of it, obliged to no particular designs by private passions, but bound to obey
the judgment of those, who only can determine what is convenient for
themselves; so that it is not the Title of any single man, nor the pretenses of
many, that ought to be preferred before the Nation, or to be imposed upon the
people; nor either of these justly to be refused, if the Nations good shall
appear to consist with the Government of either. To the free Parliament
therefore, let every man appeal, and there indeed he may embrace a certain good
cause, since such a one is sure to be for his Countrey's good, that wholly
resigns himself to their judgments.

I hope, Sir, these Reasons will make an impression in your breast, and I wish
it were possible they might have the same effects on every individual man, that
the Nations conscience and interest may at last meet, which has been so long
separated by the succeeding ambitions of a few men, nor have I delivered you
any opinion, which shall not be asserted, when occasion requires it, with the
life and fortune of

Your humble Servant.

FINIS.

