Infant Baptism AND Church Membership PROVED: And also the Mode of Baptism TO
BE By SPRINKLING, etc.

In Answer to Mr. Benjamin Dennis's Book.

By Giles Shute of Limehouse.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. and are to be sold by Nath. Hiller, at the
Princes-Arms in Leaden-Hall-street; and at the Author's House in Limehouse.
1695.

Price Three Pence.

Here follows some Observations I have made upon the Principal Arguments Mr.
B. D. has produced against Infant Baptism and Church Membership, in his Book,
Entitled, Brief Remarks upon the Epistle of Mr. Fran. Mence 's Book,
Entitled, Vindiciae Foederis.
I Cannot but acknowledge with deep regret of Spirit, that I should have such a
just occasion offered unto me, to controvert these Points with my indeared
Friend and very good Neighbor Mr. B. D. whom I esteem and honor, who of
himself, separate from that part of his Principle, is very moderate and civil:
But I cannot possibly avoid this my Proceedings, in point of Honor and
Veneration to that Eminent Servant of the Lord, Reverend Mr. Mence, subordinate
to the Honor and Glory of God, which is that I aim at above all.

1. Because while he was Answering Mr. H. C's. Book, in vindicating and
clearing himself from the many abominable false Accusations and Calumnies which
Mr. C. laid to his Charge, just as Mr. Mence's Book was ready for the Press,
Mr. B. D. very ungentily falls upon him also publicly in print, so that Mr. M.
had not time to Answer his whole Book; but he has fully Answered that part of
it wherein Mr. D. bore so hard upon his Credit and Reputation, by his
endeavoring vindicate and justify Mr. C. as may be seen in the Postscript of
Mr. M's. Book.

2. I have as much reason, and as clear a Ca^ to vindicate and justify Mr. M.
as Mr. D. had t^ vindicate and justify Mr. C. and a great deal more for the
former had Truth on his side, but the latter had not.

3. My Third Reason for it is, Because Mr. D. has shot at me through Mr. M.
Sides, although he has not mentioned my Name, viz. in hi^ gross Reflection
upon something I writ former^ concerning the preventing Grace of Habita^ Faith,
in my Replication to Mr. H. C's. Book again it; which Doctrine I shall, in my
way, plain^ prove and vindicate again in this ensuing Di^course.

4. I have not engaged at this time in this Controversy, to undervalue nor
diminish the Rep^tation of worthy Mr. M. whom I highly este^ and honor, as if
he had not been able to ha^ Answered his whole Book himself as well as part
thereof; but, as I hinted before, he v^ straitened for time.

5. Neither did I undertake it without Mr. M. consent and approbation.

6. And Lastly: I shall take all the care I ca^ to avoid all undue, unbecoming
Reflections, more than purely what the nature of things calls for and will
justly bear, because I will not give an^ just occasion of offense. Thus having
cleared (...) way, I shall now proceed to the matter in han^ And,

First of all: I shall begin with Mr. B. D's. First Argument, which is as
follows:

In page 2. says he, It is none of the mea^ Arguments with me against
Infant Baptism, tha^ Authorities brought for it are so often changed, ^ the
Mediums to prove it so contested among the persons who agree in this only, To
practice it.

To which Argument I thus reply:

1. It is none of the meanest Arguments with me (says Mr. D.) against
Infant Baptism, etc. Therefore it must be one of his greatest and chiefest
Arguments against it. But let us see what this Logic of our Opponents will
afford us.

1. If difference in Opinion be such an infallible Argument against us, so as
to decide the Controversy, then those that have the greatest difference among
themselves in Opinion, must yield and submit unto the other Party that has the
least: And if this be granted, as inevitably it must according to Mr. D's.
Thesis, then I doubt not but that we shall find a great opportunity to furnish
our selves, out of our Opponent's Arcenal, to prove Infant Baptism to be
Authentic; for I know not of any sort of People among us Protestants, that
differ so much in Opinion as those do that are against Infant Baptism; and
therefore I shall proceed to name some of them.

1. There are Arminians, that hold General Redemption and Falling away from
True Grace, etc.

2. There are those that hold the mortality of the Soul with the dissolution of
the Body, etc.

3. There are a sort among them that are called Seekers; and these are the
moderatest of them all.

4. There are those that hold the Seventh day of the Week to be the weekly
Sabbath, even as he Jews do; and I have heard of some that have ^ravelled
further in that Jewish Road, viz. to Cir^umcision.

5. There are those to be found among them, that are Socinians, who deny the
Deity of Christ,

6. There is another sort among them who provide Legs of mutton for Supper at
the Lords Table, just before they Celebrate the Lord's Supper: But I know not
what Reason they can produce for such a practice as that, unless it is because
o^^ Savior Christ did eat the Passover just before he instituted the
Lord's Supper; at which time be abolished it, with all the rest of the
Ceremonial Law, Sabbath and all, and freed us from the Passover for ever.

7. There are some few among several sorts o^ these, that are for Singing of
Psalms.

8. There are a sort of this Opinion in Germa^ that are for sprinkling and
pouring water on (...) Head and Face only in Baptism; and I have lat^ heard,
that some of them practice sprinkling ^ Baptism here in England.

9. And Lastly: There are another sort of the who are reckoned the soundest of
them, and the differ from most of all the rest.

Now it has been observed by some, that the is not Two Congregations to be
found among (...) one sort of these I have named, that agree in ^ points one
with the other, but differ in Opi^ in themselves: No, nor one Congregation it
se^ but differs in their Opinion one with anoth^ Now all these agree in nothing
but in the Subj^ and mode of their Baptism, namely, in dipping ^ Adult (those
only excepted that are for sprinkling Now if Mr. D. cannot find out so many
diffe^^ Opinions among us Protestants, who are for Pa^ baptism, then the
Argument is clearly fallen our Side; Therefore I challenge Mr. D. to (...) out
so many sorts among us who are for Infa^ baptism, that do so vastly differ in
Judgment o^ from another, as those do which I have (...) Nay, as for Mr. D.
himself, should his Book ^ strictly examined, and compared with Mr. H. C. and
Mr. B. K's. Books, it will evidently appear, that as those Two Noted Authors
contradicted one another, and themselves to boot, even so has M. D.
contradicted them both, and himself into the bargain, as I shall clearly prove
upon him hereafter.

Thus you see one of Mr. D's. Topping Arguments against Infant Baptism utterly
destroyed, and himself out-shot in his own bow.

2. Says Mr. D. in page 2. That a positive Right that flows only from the Will
of the Legislator, such as Baptism is, both as to the Subject and the manner of
its Administration, should have by you its foundation in the Covenant made with
Abraham in Genesis 17. relating to his Natural posterity, etc.

To which I Answer as follows:

1. Says Mr. D. A positive Right, both as to the subject and the manner of its
Administration, -- By which he intends dipping of the Adult only: But he has
not proved it, neither can he (I am sure) so long as he lives: For first, he
cannot prove it by St. John the Baptist, who was the first that ever
Administered that Ordinance after the coming in of the New Dispensation of the
Gospel; for he baptized Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round
about Jordan, Mat. 3. Now if Jerusalem was baptized, then Infants were
baptized; for otherwise it could not be said, that Jerusalem was baptized; for
no doubt, but there were abundance of Infants in such a great and populous City
as that was: Therefore John baptized Infants as well as Adult persons, or else
he could not baptize Jerusalem.

2. He baptized all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan; he baptized
all that came, or were brought, unto him; and the Scriptures are true, and
cannot be broken.

3. This all here mentioned could not be comprehensive of every individual
Person; but if it had been so, young Infants must have been included therein
also.

4. I humbly conceive this all is to be understood of some of all Ages and
Sects, viz. men, women, and children; and to deny both these Senses of it, is
to lay violent hands upon the Sacred Scripture, for if either of these had been
excluded, it could not have been all. But,

2. We do not find that St. John did baptize any but those of the Circumcision.

3. He did not refuse any of the Jews, the Stock of Abraham, that came to his
Baptism, the did not wilfully and obstinately reject it themselves, though ar
the same time he forbad them to take up and rest in their Covenant Relation to
Abraham.

4. All those that were baptized by St. Jo^, were not all true Believers,
because we find that many that were Followers of Christ, and cried Hosanna unto
him at one time, cried Away with him, Crucify him at another: For St. John
baptized with water unto Repentence. Thus you see I have clearly proved from
the Scripture, That John baptized Infants as well as Adult Persons: Therefore
on whose Side lies the positive Right now, on yours or ours, think you?

2. I observe that when ever our Opponent have occasion to mention any thing
about Gods Covenant established with Abraham, they will not lay down the
Covenant fairly at length, and open all the parts of it, and rightly divide and
explai^ it, that People might readily see the extent of it, whether it was
extended to the male children only (as some without ground suggest, because the
male children only were circumcised) or to both ma^^ and female; Therefore I
will lay it down i^ them, and make some Observations on it, and draw some
Conclusions therefrom.

Genesis 17.7, 11. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant; to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

1. All those with whom God established his Covenant are included in the Token
thereof, the female Seed of Abraham as well as the males, unless it could be
proved that the females were no part of Abraham's Seed: For,

2. Though Circumcision, as to the Letter of it, belonged only to the male
Seed, yet the virtue and efficacy thereof extended to the female seed also,
because after God had established his Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, he
said, without variation or change of Speech, in verse 11.

Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be [a] token of
the covenant betwixt me and you.

Who are these [you] that God established the Covenant with? Were they Abraham
and his male Seed only? No; it was Abraham and all his Seed, both male and
female, very few excepted.

3. Here is another thing to be observed which is very important, with a
respect to the Controversy in hand, and that is this, viz.

1. This Token of the Covenant is called [a] Token of the Covenant; but the
Token of the Covenant God established with Noah, is called [the] Token of the
Covenant: And the Reasons of it, I humbly conceive, are principally these Two.

1. Because the Rainbow is perpetual, and was to have no Successor; and
therefore it is emphatically called [the] Token of the Covenant.

2. The other was called [a] Token of the Covenant because it was to have a
Successor, being it was to expire, and come to an end, with the Ceremonial Law.

3. What was to succeed and supply the room of Circumcision if Baptism does
not? For there were no other Ordinances of God, that either then had, or now
have, to do with the Subjects external part of the Flesh, but these Two,
namely, Circumcision and Baptism.

4. Neither were there then, nor are there now, any other Ordinances of God
wherein the Subjects were then, or are now, wholly passive, but these Two, viz.
Circumcision and Baptism: For, as none were to circumcise themselves then, so
none are to baptize themselves now.

5. For a further confirmation of what I have said touching these things, pray
observe, and take good notice, and you shall find, that Circumcision and
Baptism are both joined together in the Antitype, viz. 1. Circumcision of the
Heart; and 2. Baptism of the Holy Ghost; i^ which all the Subjects are passive:
And these are both one and the same; for Circumcision of the Heart is Baptism
of the Holy Ghost, and Baptis^ of the Holy Ghost is Circumcision of the Heart
that is, Regeneration and Sanctification, which ^ pure preventing Grace.

Mr. H. C. has so far yielded unto the Truth these Things aforesaid, as that
he has public declared in Print, viz. That as Circumcision (...) the door of
entrance into the Jewish Church, which (...) national, so Baptism is the door
of entrance now i^ the Gospel Church, which is congregational.

Now if the female Seed of Abraham were (...) as much interessed in the benefit
of Circumcis^ as the male seed were, then no women could (...) entered in at
that door into the Jewish Chu^ and been Members of it; for that door (...) have
been shut, and fast barred against them ^ This must be granted, viz. Either the
female seed of the Jews had a benefit by Circumcision as much as the male seed
had, or they could not have been Members of the Church with them; for
otherwise, they must deny all Women entrance into the Gospel Church by the door
of Baptism, because as Circumcision was the door of entrance to all the Members
of the former, even so Baptism is now the door of entrance to all the Members
of the latter. Thus you see all the Arguments to prove the contrary are
confuted, notwithstanding Mr. D's. saying, that the male children of Abraham's
natural Posterity were only to be circumcised; and his wondering, that from
this Covenant should be devolved a Right on the Gentile Church to baptize their
Children, both males and females, is brought to naught.

6. And lastly: I shall humbly offer some Reasons why the male children were to
be circumcised, and not the females.

1. It was to praefigurate the death and sufferings of Christ, who was given
for a Covenant of the People, and was to be cut off and die for the Sins of his
People: Therefore as St. Paul says in another case, Was Paul crucified? so say
in this, viz. Was a female to be crucified for the sins of the People? I think
there are none but will deny, that

2. This also was the reason why the Paschal Lamb for Sacrifice must be a male
of the flock without blemish, and not a female; which did likewise praefigurate
Christ's Incarnation and Crucifiction: For, 1. He must be a man, and not a
woman: 2. He must be a man without sin: 3. He must be taken out of the flock of
God, namely, the Tribe of Judah: 4. And lastly: He must be offered up without
spot to God, for the sins of his People, 1 Cor. 5.7.

Therefore, for these Reasons, the male children were circumcised, and not the
female: But yet notwithstanding, the female seed of Abraham were as much in the
Covenant of Grace, and shared as much in the Redeeming Love of Christ, as ever
the male children of Abraham did.

3. The Token of the Covenant was, and still is, to be on the flesh, because
all flesh had corrupted its way; therefore nothing short of the death and
sufferings of Christ could appease the Wrath of God, and reconcile him unto us,
and retrieve us from that lost and condemned state of sin and misery, into
which the Fall of Adam had involved us: But Christ's Deity did not suffer, for
it was impossible; it was only the Humane Nature of Christ that suffered, and
was cut off, but not for himself, but for the sins of the People, Dan. 9. And
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off: There was the
Antitype, or end of Circumcision; for he suffered both in body and soul, Isa.
53.11. His soul was made an offering for sin. Thus I have proved, That the
female seed of Abraham were interessed in the Token of the Covenant as well as
the males; and so are all the seed of Believers now, and have all a Right to
the Ordinance of Water Baptism, the successive Token of the Covenant of Grace:
For as Circumcision of the Heart, and Baptism of the Holy Ghost, both
signifies one and the same thing, even so Circumcision in the Letter, and
Baptism with Water, signifies one and the same thing, namely, Regeneration and
Sanctification by the death, merits, and Spirit of Christ.

3. Mr. D. has positively asserted, That the Covenant God established with
Abrahnm, and his Seed, was a Covenant of peculiarity, viz. a Covenant made
peculiarly with Abraham, and (...) Natural posterity; but this I shall make
appear to be a very gross mistake, for several Reasons:

1. Because it was not a new made Covenant with Abraham which never had a being
before, as appears by the very words in Gods Declaration to Abraham, viz. for
thus says the Lord, And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, etc. Though it is true, that it was new to Abraham and his
seed, because they were never in it before.

2. This Covenant which God calls my covenant, which he established with
Abraham and his seed, is the same which God made (first,) with Adam, and his
seed after the Fall, Genesis 3.15. and (secondly,) it is the same which God
established with Noah, and his seed, after the Flood; for God used the very
same frame of Speech with Noah as he did with Abraham, as you may see Genesis 9.9.
And I, behold I, establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you:
That was with Noah and his Household, and their Posterity. Genesis 7.17. And I will
establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee.

1. Behold, I establish my covenant, etc.

2. And I will establish my covenant, etc.

What difference is there between these Two establishments of the Covenant?
Even none at all. Then it must be one and the same Covenant; nay, God tells
us so; for both to the one and to the other, God calls it emphatically my
covenant. So it was not a Covenant made peculiarly to Abraham and his natural
posterity.

2. Let us address our selves to Gods frame of Speech concerning the Tokens of
the one and of the other.

1. In Genesis 9.12. And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make
between me and you: That was Noah and his Household.

2. In Genesis 17.11. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it
shall be a token of (...) covenant betwixt me and you. But it may be Objected,
What congruity or agreement is there between these two Tokens of the Covenant,
to the Rainbow and Circumcision? Why there is a very sweet agreement between
them both; (...) in effect, it is one and the same; for they are bo^^ Tokens of
God's Love and Grace, primarily an^ especially unto his own covenanting people.

3. Persons may as well say, That the Rainbow is the Covenant, as to say that
Circumcision is the Covenant, being both but Tokens thereof.

4. The Covenant of Grace had its beginning at the Fall of Adam; for had our
First Parent stood in their primitive state of innocence, the^ would have been
no room for the Exercise o^ Grace and Mercy; for misery, in a sense, may be
said to beget Grace and Mercy; for in Genesis 3.^. there came in all our misery;
and in verse 15 there came in Gods free preventing Grace a^ Mercy, which is his
Darling Attribute; for Mercy is his delight.

5. The Covenant of Grace ran down in a ^neal Descent from Adam and his
posterity, (...) Noah and his, and took in Job, Melchizedec, Eli^^ and Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Dav^^ and all the Patriarchs; and last of all; it
^^volved upon the Gospelized Gentiles, and all the posterity; and this only is
the Covenant of Grace for was it not great Grace, that God should (...) only
spare Man when he first broke out into open Rebellion against him, but found
out a Ranso^ for him.

6. All those that are, or have been, or may be in the Covenant of Grace, are
not, nor new may be in the Covenant of Redemption; but a^ that are in the
Covenant of Redemption, (...) go through the Covenant of Grace to Glory.

7. All the Elect of God are in the Covenant of Redemption, and were so from
all Eternity; for that Covenant was made between God the Father and his Eternal
only Son, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling;
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began: But the Covenant of Grace
was made with Man by God the Father in his Son Christ Jesus, in the beginning
of Time, immediately as soon as man Fell, Genesis 3.15.

8. Not one Soul of all those in the Covenant of Redemption, shall ever sin to
such a degree as to fall short of eternal life and salvation; for they are all
in the hands of Christ, and none can pluck them thence, John 10. My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life: And they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.

1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God.

This respects the believers perseverance in his spiritual state, and not his
spiritual frame of heart; for the same Apostle says, in the same Epistle,
chap. 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. Many Thousands have sinned themselves out of the Covenant of
Grace, and fallen short of eternal life and salvation: For as God's eldest Son
upon Earth, namely Adam, sinned and broke the Covenant of Works, so Adam's
eldest Son, namely Cain, was the first that sinned himself out of the Covenant
of Grace; and Ham was the first that sinned himself out of the Covenant of
Grace after the Flood; and Judas sinned himself out of the Covenant of Grace
under the Dispensation of the Gospel, and all those Jews we read of in Romans 11.
where it is thus said;

For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root be
holy, so are the branches:

And if some of the branches be broken off, and the^ being a wild-olive tree,
were graffed in among the^, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of
the olive tree:

Well; because of unbelief they were broken off.

9. This Olive Tree, which the Jews were broken of from, and the Gentiles
graffed into, was the Covenant of Grace: Mistake me not; for I do not hold
[that] popish Doctrine of falling from true saving Grace; for it is impossible
for any to fall out of a state of Grace, though they may out of the Covenant of
Grace, because they are in the Covenant of Redemption, which is the inner
Court, viz. Sanctum Sanctorum.

10. And Lastly: All that are in the Covenant of Grace are the Subjects of
Water Baptism; they are either baptized, or ought to be: But none but those
that are in the Covenant of Redemption, are circumcised in heart, and baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire.

2. Says Mr. D. in pages 2, 3. How came it to pass that holy men, such who
were interessed in the Covenant of Grace, at the very instant of making this
Covenant of Circumcision with Abraham, were not concerned in that Covenant, and
the Token of it? such as Melchizedec, etc. and the Fathers before the Flood to
Abraham 's Time, and after to Job and his Family, and the Saints of God
contemporary with him, such as Elihu and Job 's Three Friends, etc.

The Learned Mr. N. Cox has so solidly opened this Covenant of peculiarity
made with Abraham etc.

Here are several things to be observed from these Words of Mr. D's:

1. Is this; He calls the Covenant which God established with Abraham, and
his Seed, a Covenant of Circumcision.

2. He queries how it came to pass, that these holy men were not concerned in
that Covenant, and the Token of it: Which is a contradiction; for first, he
asserts the Token of the Covenant, viz. Circumcision to be the Covenant it
self; and how and where he will find another Token for the Token of the
Covenant, I know not.

3. I observe Mr. D's drift and design in calling God's Covenant with Abraham,
and his Seed, a Covenant of Circumcision, is to make way to lay a foundation to
build their Covenant of peculiarity on; but this I will prove to be a gross
mistake, for these Reasons following.

1. Circumcision could not be the Covenant it self, because (according to their
own Principles,) all the female seed of Abraham would have been excluded and
shut out; for they will not grant, nor allow, that the female seed of Abraham
were any way concerned in Circumcision, or had any benefit by it.

2. Circumcision could not be the Covenant, because it was but a Token of it,
Genesis 17.11. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall
be a token of the covenant between me and you: That was with Abraham, and all
his Seed, both male and female.

3. Circumcision could not be the Covenant, because in the Covenant it self God
promised to be Abraham's God, and the God of his Seed after him, in their
Generations, Genesis 17.7. Ay, and to a thousand Generations, Psalm. 105.8. And God
said, I will make an everlasting covenant with thee, etc. Now Circumcision as
to the Letter of it, was not everlasting, for it expired with the Ceremonial
Law.

4. And Lastly: Circumcision could not be the Covenant it self, because then
Ishmael would have been in it; which is repugnant to the holy Scripture; ^^r he
had neither part not lot in the Covenant, Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21. But they run
upon this mistake to prove Gods Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed, to be a
Covenant of peculiarity, with a design to exclude all the Gentile Believers and
their Seed, purely to destroy Infant-baptism^, for they know, that unless they
can do that, they cannot bring it to pass; and this is the reason why they
press these holy men aforesaid into their service, viz. Melchizedec, Job,
Eli^^, etc. because they were not circumcised.

2. I shall humbly offer my Reasons to show why Abraham and his posterity were
circumcised, and not those holy men aforesaid.

1. The first is, because God never required it of them, and therefore it would
have been superstition for them to have done it.

2. Because Abraham was chosen by God himself, and fixed in a public station
to be a sub-representative Head, and father of the faithful to the end of the
World; and so was not any of those Worthies aforesaid.

3. God's Covenant was with Abraham several years before Circumcision was
annexed unto it, Genesis 17.4. As for me, behold, my covenant is wit^ thee, and
thou shall be a father of many nations. Now to which of those Worthies did God
ever say, he would make him a father of many nations?

4. In Genesis 12.3. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curses thee: And in thee shall all the families of the earth, be blessed. This
was Gods Covenant with Abraham some years before Circumcision.

5. In Genesis 13.16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that
if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

6. In Genesis 15.5. And he brought him forth abroad, and said, look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able to number them: And he said unto
him, So shall thy seed be. God did not make any such peculiar promise unto
Melchizedec or Job, etc.

7. The blessing of Abraham was to come upon the Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. God made
Abraham a public blessing, both to Jew and Gentile.

8. It was said of Abraham, In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed, Acts 3.25. In thy seed, that is in Christ, Gal. 3.16.

9. My Ninth and last Reason why Abraham and his Seed were circumcised, and not
those holy men, was, because our Savior Christ was to be born of the Seed of
Abraham; and therefore it is said, In Abraham 's seed shall all the kindred of
the earth be blessed; for our Savior Christ was not to come out of the Loins
or any one of these Worthies, but from the Lineage of Abraham, Mat. 1.1. The
book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham:
Not the Son of Melchizedec, nor the Son of Job, etc. but the Son of Abraham:
Therefore because he was to come from his Loins, both Abraham, and his Seed,
must wear the Badge or Token of his Incarnation and Crucifiction, which were
both prefigurated in Circumcision, which was then a Badge of Honor as Baptism
now is, and centered in the Covenant of Grace as Baptism now does; And for
these Reasons aforesaid, God was pleased to give unto Abraham, and his Seed, a
Token of his Covenant-Love and Grace, in that distinguishing way and manner
above all other Saints contemporary with them, who were also in the same
Covenant with them; for God had not Two Covenants of Grace, one peculiar to
Abraham and his Seed, and another for the rest of his Saints; but give me leave
to tell ye, that all those Worthies aforesaid, though they were not circumcised
in the flesh, yet they were all circumcised in heart, with the Circumcision
made without hands; for what though God was pleased to deny them the Token or
thing signified at that time, for Reasons best known to his holy Wisdom? yet
they had the thing signified, which was infinitely better: Ishmael had the
Token of the Covenant, which was but the shell, and not the kernel; but all
those holy men, which Mr. D. spoke of, had the kernel, though they had not the
shell; they were in the same Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, though they
had not that Token of the Covenant as they had.

Now let us hear what a Gentleman of New England said, in his History of
Baptism, in page 8.

1. A promise to Adam 's believing; in this declaring A promise of the
Messiah^s, That he will be his God, and the God of his seed in their
Generations, keeping Covenant or Command revealed to them; for when this
promise was made to Abraham, it is (...) to be supposed a new thing not in use
before, but it was renewed to him with a peculiar respect to his seed, when the
Gentiles were cast off for sinning against this promise, as the Jews now are:
And there is no doubt but that the Family of Adam, who was the first Believer,
and of Noah and his seed, were the Church of God, because God exercised
Excommunication on the apostate Members; and there is no Church-hood but to
such as are under the promise: Those who cannot say, God is their God, and the
God of their seed, in their generations keeping covenant, have little to say
for, their Church-hood.

2. Let us hear what that eminent Servant of the Lord, Reverend Mr. Samuel
Pomfret, said to this which Mr. D. writ about Melchizedec, Lot, and Job, etc.
when he saw it in his Book, which is as follows:

Touching Mr. D 's doubt about these holy men, Melchizedec, Job, Elihu, and
Lot, etc. why they are not mentioned as well as Abraham concerning the Token of
the Covenant, viz. Circumcision, his judicious Heart and Head might quickly
have perceived, if he please but to consider the lineal descent: The God of all
Grace was pleased to call out Abraham, as the Father of the faithful through
all ages to the end of the World, both down the Gospel as well as the Old
Testament Dispensation; as he may know in the Epistle to the Galatians is
clear, especially the third chapter, where it is said, the blessing of Abraham
is devolved upon the Gentiles.

3. Let us hear what Mr. Cobbet of New England says also to this: 1. Says he,

Let us address our selves a while to consider of the external and Church right
of little ones to the initiating Seal and Church right which follows thence;
for the initiating Seal follows the Covenant: We speak not of an extraordinary
time of the Church, when either it has no particular express initiating Seal
distinct from another sealing Ordinance, as before that solemn covenanting of
God in reference to the Church in Isaac 's Race, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. with the 19.
so there is some peculiar state of the time not applicable to the ordinary time
and way of a visible politic Church and its Administrations, as then also were
Family Churches as that in Melchizedec's and Job 's Families, which being not
successively to continue, were not so immediately eyed, in point of solemn
Institution and Church Laws, as was this of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob 's Race,
wherein the visible Church was to be continued: Such extraordinary times and
cases are very impertinently urged by some to infringe the force of ordinary
Rules and principles; they know a extraordinary case of eating shewbread by
such as were not priests, and of plucking ears of corn on the sabbath day, of a
private disciples baptizing, Acts 9. and Zipporah 's circumcising of her son:
And these do^^ nullify or invalidate ordinary rules and principles touching
Circumcision or Baptism, or the sanctifying the sabbath. In ordinary times and
cases respecting the political visible Church and its administrati^^ such
little ones as are of parents in such visible Ch^^ estate, they have external
right unto the enjoined ^^tiatory visible seal, of which they are outwardly
^^pable, and ought not to be denied the use and ben^^ thereof: Ordinary times
then, and not extraordina^^ are here considered: Let none object then, Child^
of Members of an ordinary political visible Church (...) here considered: Let
none object an extraordinary (...) of Job's or Melchizedec 's Families a
visible (...) enjoined; not a case wherein actually any such sed^ not enjoined,
is here also considered, or at least ^ view at the present making of the
covenant with the reference, as in the case Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. And (...) none
object Adam and Noah 's time, and cases aga^^ our Thesis; external right in
such a church seal propounded: Let none confound this with inward (...) saving
right, which is visible to God, and not to (...) man the initiating seal is
propounded, not all these or church privileges, as choice of officers, and
(...) in other church occasions, etc. A male child of (...) days old might be
circumcised, but was never intend to be enjoined personal appearance at the
solemn ^bration of the passover: Let none then object, tha^ may as well plead
for Infants coming to the (...) Supper as in Cyprian 's time. In a word; we
spea^ initiatory sealing of persons outwardly capable (...)

Thus you hear what this Author says.

5. And lastly: When they have said all that can be said concerning
Melchizedec, Lot, Job, and Elihu, why they were not circumcised; I cannot find
that they were under any obligation to it, and the reason is plain, Because
they had not Gods command for it; for if they had Gods command for the doing of
it and neglected it, then they were guilty of a great sin, for not complying
with it.

2. If there was no command for it, then they had sinned if they had done it.

3. God may make that an Ordinance at one time that may not be so at another
time; of which I shall give you an instance in the case of Israel's departure
out of Egypt, Exodus 12.7, 13. And they shall take of the blood, and strike it
on the two side-posts, etc.

And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you are: and
when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon
you to destroy you.

This Ordinance was but for that night.

4. It is a sin for any man to be circumcised now God does not require it, and
it would have been a sin in Gods Israel under the Law, if they had neglected
it; for he that was not circumcised at eight days old, was to be cut off, Genesis
17.14.

5. If these holy men had done it, namely, Melchizedec, Lot, and Job, etc. they
would have been as deeply guilty for the doing of it, as Abraham and his seed
would have been for the neglecting of it.

6. And lastly: It would be a great sin in a Gospel-Minister, that was duly
qualified for it, with Gifts and Graces, and a right call to the work of the
Ministry, if he should refuse and neglect it; and it is as great a sin for any
to intrude and undertake that great Work without being duly qualified with
Gifts and Graces, and not having a clear call unto it, as too many Novices do
i^ this our day, that do not understand Covenant-Mysteries; for the Scripture
says, in Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and
he will show them his covenant.

So that this case of these holy men is fully answered; For if Circumcision had
been a Duty incumbent on them, as they were good men they would not have lived
in the neglect of it.

Thus you see this quaint, newfound Notion of a Covenant of Peculiarity made
with Abraham and his natural Posterity fairly laid in the Dust; for dust thou
art, and to dust thou art returned.

2. I shall prove Infant Baptism, and Church Membership, to be of Divine
Institution.

1. From Acts 2. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that sa^^ Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Now when they heard this, they were pricked i^ their heart, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest ^ the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
(...) the holy Ghost.

For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lo^^ our God shall call.

First, Here we may observe, that whatsoeve^ the Promise was unto the Jews, and
to all the^ children, in the former part of the verse, the Promise is the same
to the called Gentiles and (...) all their children, in the latter part of the
sa^^ verse: But by the way, before you go any furthe^ What Promise is this that
is here mentioned? (...) when was it made to the Jews and their children and to
the Gentiles and their children also? (...) it is no other than the Covenant
that God established with Abraham, wherein he promised that he would be his
God, and the God of his children after him, and that this Blessing, or Promise,
should descend, and devolve, upon the Gentiles, and their children also: And
for clear proof of this, mind these Scriptures, Genesis 12.3. here is the first
broaching this Celestial Liquor of Life to Abraham, Acts 3.25. Genesis 13.16. Genesis
15.5. Genesis 17.2, 4, 7. Gal. 3.8, 14, 16, 17. Thus you see this Promise is the
Covenant in which are comprehended all Gospel-believers, and all their
children; so that if we went no further than this, here is sufficient Authority
to administer the Initiatory Seal of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of
believers.

2. But secondly; when they heard what the Apostle charged them with, (which
was with the blood of Christ) they were convinced, being pricked in their
consciences, and then they said, What shall we do? Even as the Jailer that had
been tormenting the Apostles, when he was convinced said, in Acts 16. Sirs,
what must I do to be saved? so these here, What shall we do? Pray observe; the
Apostles Answer unto them was mandatory, viz. Be baptized every one of you:
That was, themselves, and every one of their children that did belong unto
them: This must needs be so, because the Apostle, to reinforce his Mandamus
with a clear inclusive Argument, said, For the promise is unto you, and to your
children.

Now what need Baptism have been commanded, and the children presently
mentioned, if they had not been to be baptized as well as their Parents; for
they were as much in the Promise as their parents? Pray where lies the
difference? For the promise is unto you, and to your children; and upon which
Baptism is intailed, for it mentions no conditions in the Promise with a
respect to children: And therefore it is as clear as the sun, that the children
of believing parents ought to be baptized, let who as will, or dare, deny it.

2. There is Christ's positive command for the baptizing of Infants as well as
others, in his general commission to all his faithful Laborers in his
Vineyard, in Mat. 28. Go, and disciple all nations: That was, baptize them; for
the Learned do say, that Baptism precedes Teaching: Now children are included
in this commission, or else they are no part of a nation; which is nonsense to
assert or imagine; for they are a very great part of a nation, and therefore
they come under the command of Christ to be baptized, every one of those
children where their parents did submit to the discipline of Baptism. Thus I
have proved Infant Baptism and Church Membership to be of divine Institution,
and therefore have a right to the Ordinance of Baptism by virtue of Christ's
command, and the Apostles argumentative mandatory Exhortation, and also their
covenant interest.

1. Therefore I challenge all our Opponents to prove that ever the children of
believing parent were once denied the Ordinance of Baptism is our Saviors
time, or his Apostles.

2. I also challenge them to prove, by any one Text of Scripture, that none but
adult believer^ were to be baptized.

3. Let them give us but one single Instance, among all those Households which
were baptized, that any one child was exempted.

4. And lastly: Let them prove that Infant Baptism is any where forbid in the
holy Scripture: But if they can do neither of these, as I am sure they cannot,
where then is divine Right which they so highly boast of, and so confidently
la^ claim unto? Why, it appears clearly to be on our side, and not on theirs;
and the Reason for it is undeniable, For nothing can be of divine Right that is
repugnant to the holy Scriptures: But to deny the Infant Seed of Believers to
have an Interest in the Covenant or Promise of God, which intitles them to
Baptism, is repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and therefore cannot be of divine
Right, as is clear from Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.14. and Genesis 17.7.

5. Some of those that are against Infant Baptism have publicly and
confidently asserted in print, that the children of Turks and Heathens have as
much privilege as the children of believing Christians; but Mr. D. seems to be
of another mind, if he had but held tightly to it; for says he, in page 2.
Many of those you call the outward privileges of the covenant of Grace, our
children have as well as yours.

Pray note by the way, Mr. D. says, we call these Privileges so; he does not
own them to be really so, and yet at the same time, he says, their children
have them: This is a contradiction in it self; for it is to have and enjoy that
which they hold, is not in being.

6. I will prove that the children of believers have a far greater privilege,
than the children of Turks and Heathens.

1. First of all; when the ungodly World was drowned, and all destroyed, all
those children whose parents were not in the covenant, were destroyed with
their parents, not so much as one of them escaped: Pray take notice; I do not
judge nor meddle with their future estate.

But holy Noah and all his Household were saved, Heb. 11.7. not one of his
children perished in the Flood, because they were all in the Covenant of Grace.

2. When Sodom and Gomorah were destroyed by Fire from Heaven, all those
children, whose wicked parents were not in the covenant, perished with them in
that conflagration; but righteous Lot, who was in the Covenant of Grace, was
saved and all his own children.

3. Where is the chapter, or verse, to be found in all the Book of God, that
does declare, that the children of Turks or Heathens are holy children, as it
does the children of either believing father or mother, in 1 Cor. 7.14.?

4. And lastly: Where is it said in Scripture to Turks and Heathens, (while
such) that The promise is unto you, and to your children, as in Acts. 2.39.?

Thus you see I have proved, That the children of Christian believers have a
far greater privilege than the children of Turks and Heathens; by which I have
utterly destroyed that carnal, ignorant, presumptious Assertion of theirs.

6. Says our Opponents, What benefit is it for a child to be baptized: To
which I Answer thus; So might proud carnal Reason, and natural Affection, much
more have queried in the time of the Mosaic Law, What good does this smarting
Ordinance do to our children? Or, what benefit is it for them to be circumcised
at eight days old? which the Apostles themselves counted to be an intolerable
yoke, which they were not able to bea^, Acts 15.10. and yet in Romans 3. he
counts it a very great privilege and advantage; for says he,

What advantage then has the Jew? or wh^^ benefit is there in circumcision?
Much every way chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of
God.

Here you see the Apostles Answer is very compatible to this Query; but says
he farther:

For what if some did not believe? shall their (...) belief make the faith of
God without effect?

Here you see those eight-day disciples were capable of receiving the Oracles
of God, or else they would not have been committed unto them.

6. Says Mr. D. in p. 3. The primitive Fathers, for six hundred years after
Christ, had a far different Medium to prove Infant Baptism by, viz. The
necessity of it to salvation: Your notion of covenant-right from Abraham, and
habitual faith, is not to be found in their Writings.

To which I Answer; We are not bound to sail by their Compass; if the Fathers
were mistaken, must we be so too? I can produce some that were mistaken in a
paraelel case, long before their time; and some of Mr. D's. own Opinion, that
have been mistaken also in this Point, in our Time.

1. Some of those Jews that were converted to the Christian Faith in the
Apostles time, who were Teachers of others, Acts 15. And certain men which came
down from Judea, taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after
the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Here those men laid a very great
stress upon the very manner of circumcision; it must not be after the manner of
Abraham, but Moses.

2. I have heard of some, (even in our Time) that are against Infant Baptism,
that have held the same thing in effect; for say they, No baptism, no
salvation; and they hold, That there is no Baptism but that of dipping; which
is to reprobate all those who are not for dipping in baptism, and all their own
children also, that die before they are dipped; which is to place an Ordinance
in the room of Christ's Righteousness: But my good Friend, It is safer relying
upon Thus says the Lord, than upon Thus say the Fathers.

2. I shall in the second place prove that the mode of baptism is by
sprinkling, or pouring water on the subjects in baptism; and this I shall do
partly to satisfy my much esteemed friend Mr. B. D. who gave me a strict
charge on the Royal Exchange so to do, though I have been very large already on
this subject in my Replication to Mr. B. K's. Book.

1. I shall begin and make some Observations from Acts 2. where we find a great
number that were baptized at one time; but we do not find that the Apostles did
lay any Injunction upon them to change their Raiment to be baptized in; 1. They
did not command the men to strip themselves, and put on other Garments proper
for the Ordinance, and then come and be baptized, neither did they say unto the
women and maids, Go and get ye Gowns made with lead in the lower end of the
skirt thereof, and shift ye, and then come again to us, and we will baptize
every one of you.

3. How could it be possible that so few as the Apostles were, not exceeding
Twelve in number, (if they were all there) should be able to trip and dip three
thousand men, women, and maids, according to their Principle and practice, in
so short a time as but part of a day?

2. I shall prove Baptism to be by Sprinkling, etc. from the Levitical Law, and
not by Immersion of Dipping.

1. Negatively: If there is nothing to be done in Gospel Worship and
Ordinances, but what there must be an Example or Shadow from that Pattern which
God showed unto Moses in the Mount, with all its Appendix that were then in
force, etc. then baptism cannot be by dipping: But nothing ought to be done in
Gospel Worship and Ordinances, but what there must be an Example or Shadow for,
from that Pattern which God showed unto Moses in the Mount, with all its
Appendix that were then in force, such as Circumcision and Sacrifices, which
were then in being, and long before the Ceremonial Law.

Therefore baptism cannot be by immersion or dipping under water, because there
is no manner of shadow or Example for that way of baptizing in all the
Ceremonial Law, nor its Appendix thereunto belonging: Now for proof of which,
let us address our selves to the Scriptures gradually, as we go along.

1. In Heb. 10. For the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things.

Pray mind; the Law was but a shadow of good things to come; and what these
good things are, I shall have occasion to declare by and by.

2. I shall prove that baptism ought to be by sprinkling, and pouring water on
the subjects baptized.

1. Thus: If there be an Example or Shadow for sprinkling in baptism, from that
Pattern which God showed unto Moses in the Mount, then baptism is by
sprinkling, etc.

But there is an Example or Shadow of sprinkling, etc. from that Pattern which
God showed unto Moses in the Mount:

Therefore baptism is by sprinkling.

Now for the Proof of this, I shall call in many Scriptures to testify the
truth of it, and the first shall be that

1. In Heb. 8. For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that
there are priests that offer gifts according to the law:

Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle. For see (says he)
that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount.

Pray observe; these all things that were then to be made according to the
pattern shown in the Mount, were the Example and Shadow of the Heavenly things:
which is the same with that aforementioned Text, A shadow of g^d things to
(...), namely, the Gospel Ordinances and Worship; which must be according to
the pattern shown by God to Moses in the Mount.

2. The Apostle reproved the Hebrews that were reconciled to the Christian
Religion, for cleaving to, and hankering after, the abolished Ceremonial Law;
for he told them in effect, that they robbed Christ of the Honor and Glory of
his priestly Office; for says he unto them, If he (that was Christ) were on
earth, he should not be a priest, seeing there are priests that offer gifts
according to the Law; and then he proceeds to tell them, that the Law was but
an Example and Shadow of the Gospel Ordinances and Worship, those heavenly
things, and a shadow of good things to come, not the very Image or Substance of
the things.

3. If there were no Example or Type for dipping in baptism, then there can be
no Antitype; Therefore it cannot be baptism; for there was nothing among all
the Examples and Shadows of the Heavenly things, that was any thing like
dipping in baptism.

4. But fourthly; I will produce you a Cloud of Witnesses, which all center in
a Type for sprinkling in baptism.

1. In Exodus 24. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord has made with you.

Now was not this a lively Type or Seal of the Covenant, namely Baptism? for it
signifies the same thing as Baptism does, viz. Regeneration, Sanctification,
and renewing Grace, which cost Christ the price of his precious blood, which is
the blood of the covenant; for he was given for a covenant to the people, and
therefore Moses said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord has
made with you; and yet that blood, in it self, was but the blood of a beast:

2. In Exodus 29. And thou shall stay the ram, and thou shall take his blood,
and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

3. In Levit. 1. And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord: and the priests
Aarons sons shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the
altar, that is by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

4. In Ezekiel. 36. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you.

A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh.

Here is God's Promise to the Jews, the Race of his old covenanted peculiar
People, predicted, which is to be renewed and fulfilled in this latter day of
the Gospel, as in verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. compared with Romans 11.25, 26, 27.
First, here in Ezekiel. is their baptism predicted, viz. Then will I sprinkle
clean water upon you; for as they were a baptized Church under the Law, so they
shall be again under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. And that was also by
sprinkling. Secondly, here is their Calling and Conversion predicted and
promised, viz. A new heart also will I give you, etc.

4. And lastly: Pray mind these Scriptures, for they are all for sprinkling,
Levit. 9.9, 18. chapter 4.6, 17, 18. chapter 5.9, 13. chapter 8.11, 24. chapter 14. 7, 8, 9,
16, 51. Numb. 19.18, 19, 20, 21. ^2 Chro^. 29.22. chapter 30.16.

Now what could all these sprinklings and pourings of blood and water be an
Example and Shadow of, if not of baptism?

Therefore I demand Two Things of our Opponents.

1. If sprinkling in baptism be not the Antitype of all these sprinklings and
pourings aforesaid? Then I challenge them to find out, and discover unto us,
some other Gospel Ordinances wherein the subjects are all passive, as those
were of these Sprinklings under the Law, that is more apposite to it, than
sprinkling in baptism is, to the Examples and Shadows of the Heavenly things,
which were the good things that were come.

2. Let them produce us a Type under the Ceremonial Law for immersion or
dipping in baptism, otherwise let them cease from such an unwarrantable
practice.

2. In the Second place, Let us observe how excellently the Apostles have
conjoined and applied those Heavenly things in the Gospel new Dispensation,
their proper center.

1. In Heb. 9. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an
heiser sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.

Here is Sprinkling and Sanctification joined together.

2. In Heb. 10. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water.

Here is Sprinkling and Washing joined together.

3. In Heb. 11. Through faith he kept the passever, and sprinkling of blood.

Here is the Passover and Sprinkling of blood joined together, the one a Type
or Pattern of the Lord's Supper, and the other of Baptism, the two Seals of the
Covenant, and both pointing to the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, the
Essential Covenant; and also Regeneration and Sanctification, as Baptism and
the Lord's Supper most compatibly do.

4. In Heb. 12. And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the
blood of sprinkling.

Here the Covenant of Grace, under the new Dispensation of the Gospel, and
Sprinkling are joined together, namely, Baptism the Seal or Token thereof.

5. And lastly: Here is the Foundation of all these Sprinklings clearly
explained by the Apostle St. Peter, in these Words, in 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Here is the Covenant and Sprinkling the blood of the Covenant joined together,
namely, the blood of Christ: And what God has joined together, let not proud
carnal Reason part asunder.

Thus you see I have clearly proved from the Ceremonial Law, That baptism is by
sprinkling, and pouring water on the subjects baptized; for nothing can be the
Antitype of all these Sprinklings, but this Heavenly Thing, namely, the
Sacrament of Water Baptism: Therefore baptism cannot be by dipping, because
there is no Example or Pattern for it among all the Ceremonies; for if it had
been one of the Heavenly Things, then there must have been a Pattern for it;
but there is none as I know of, unless it be those two which are not of the
Heavenly Things, here mentioned, but a Dispensation of Wrath from Heaven,
namely, the drowning the old ungodly World, and proud Pharaoh and all his Host,
they were all immersed, or dipped, and drowned: Therefore dipping in baptism is
of the Earth, and but a humane Invention.

Now to bring things nearer home still; Wha^ did all these Sprinklings with
blood and water signify under the Mosaic Dispensation, which are brought down
into the New Testament and applied by the Apostle.

1. As they were Examples and Patterns of Water Baptism, so they pointed unto
the same things as Water Baptism does. viz. Regeneration and Sanctification,
both which we have in John 3. Jesus answered, Verily verily I say unto thee,
Excep^ a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cann^^ enter into the
kingdom of God.

2. Sprinkling under the Ceremonial Law is baptism under the Gospel; for they
both point at one and the same thing, namely, the Death and Sufferings of Jesus
Christ; without which there had been no Regeneration or Sanctification; for
without shedding of blood, there could have been no Remission of sins.

1. Sprinklings under the Law pointed forward to the Death of Christ, to show
that he was to come and suffer.

2. Baptism under the Gospel points upward, to show that Christ is come, and
has suffered, and is ascended, though baptism was instituted before Christ's
Sufferings; just as things are spoken in the present Tense for the future, as
concerning Christ's birth and nativity, in Isa. 9.6. For unto us a child is
born: Christ came by water and blood, 1 John 5.6. For even Christ our passover
is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.

Therefore Christ called his own Sufferings his baptism:

That is, calling the thing it self by the name of that which represents it:

And Christ was really circumcised and also baptized, both which pourtrayed his
Death and Sufferings, Col. 2.13, 14.

Thus you see how the Ceremonial Law, and the new Dispensation of the Gospel,
were related one to the other; the Ceremonial Law was a Shadow of the Image of
Christ in his Ordinances; And in the Gospel Ordinances, those Heavenly Things,
the Image of Christ himself is held forth unto us, Heb. 10. For the law having
a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things.

5. Those that are baptized by the Holy Ghost, are not said to be dipped into
the Holy Ghost; but the Graces of the holy Spirit are poured out upon them, and
shed abroad in their Hearts, Isa. 44.3. Joel 2.28. Acts 2.18. Thus you may see
that I have proved from the Ceremonial Law, that baptism is by sprinkling, and
not by dipping.

6. And lastly: I shall add one Scripture more, to corroborate that which has
been said touching the mode of baptism, which is that famous Text in 1 Pet. 3.
When once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark
was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls, were saved by water.

The like figure whereunto, baptism does also now save us, (not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward
God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Here are several things of great note in this Text of Scripture.

1. Here is the twofold patience of God; first he waited patiently on the old
ungodly. World for their Repentance.

2. His patience in waiting on Noah until he had prepared the Ark for the
saving himself and his Household.

3. Here is the fewness of the Number of these which were saved, among the many
Thousands of Families of the Earth, viz. but eight persons, and they were saved
by water; that which was a most dreadful dispensation of Gods Wrath to the old
ungodly World, was a dispensation of distinguishing Love and Grace unto Noah
and his Family; for the Text tells us, they were saved by water; the like
figure whereunto, even baptism does also now save us.

4. Here are two things enveloped in these words; First, As Noah's temporal
preservation and deliverance in and by the Ark was typical of eternal Life and
Salvation, by Jesus Christ the Ark of Gods Covenant, so is baptism also.

5. None are eternally saved by, nor for, their being baptized, no more than
all were saved eternally that were in the Ark; for if it were so, then all
would be saved that were, are, or shall be, baptized; for external holiness
will not give them a Right to eternal Salvation, nor foederal holiness neither,
though inherent holiness does: Pray mind the Apostles Words; for says he, The
like figure whereunto, even baptism does also now save us, (not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, (that is external holiness) but the answer of a
good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

There is Internal Grace and Holiness; Temporal salvation and deliverances are
not a sure sign of Eternal salvation; nor external purification, or putting
away the filth of the flesh, without inward heart-purification by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, of which Noah's preservation was a true Type or
sign, and Water Baptism is no more.

6. What analogy is there between Noah's preservation and dipping in baptism?
for the Text says plainly, that baptism makes the like figure unto it: To
which I answer in the negative, There is none at all; it is altogether
incongruous; all that can be said of it is this, namely, It makes a true figure
of Gods Wrath on the old drowned World; for they were all immersed and
destroyed.

7. And lastly: What analogy or congruity is there between Noah's preservation
and sprinkling in baptism? To which I answer in the affirmative, There is a
sweet harmonious Agreement between them; for sprinkling in baptism is the like
figure.

1. As Noah's Preservation and his Family, was a Mark and Token of Gods
distinguishing Love and Grace unto them above all the rest of the World, even
so is Baptism now to all true Christian believers, and their children, which is
the Figure thereof, a Mark and Token of Gods distinguishing Love and Grace unto
them, above all other persons in the World; for baptism is a sealing the Name
of God upon them, whereby they are externally received into the Family of
Christ; for whosoever shall receive one such little child in Christ's name, receives
Christ himself.

2. As Noah and his Family were all in the Ark, even so believers and their
seed are all in the Covenant, and therefore they all ought to have the Figure
of Noah's Preservation administered unto them, namely, Water Baptism, and that
by sprinkling, otherwise it cannot answer to the Figure of Noah's Preservation;
for he nor none of his Family went overboard into the water, and were dipped,
but was sprinkled with the Rain from Heaven, and with the water that did fly
over into the Ark by the beating of the Waves against it, even as it does
against a ship at sea in a stoo^ by which the Mariners are often sprinkled; and
know this my self experimentally; but if any ^ the Mariners are dipped in the
sea, they are commonly drowned.

3. And lastly: As the Waters in mercy b^^ up the Ark and saved Noah and his
Family, eve^ so in judgment it drowned all the World besides for the Text says
that Noah was saved by wate^ unto which baptism is annexed. Thus I have p^ved
that sprinkling in baptism is of Divine Institution, and dipping for baptism
but a human Invention.

7. Says Mr. D. Habitual Faith is not to be f^^ in the primitive Fathers
Writings. To which ^ thus reply:

What is that to us? I will put it to a fair and short Issue; which shall be
this: Either Mr. D. must grant, that all elect dying Infants have Habitual
Faith, otherwise he must totally deny Original sin; which he please; here is
his choice; for this is the genuine consequence of it, witho^ offering the
least force or violence unto his Allegation.

1. For First, If all young Infants by nature are guilty of Adam's
Transgression, then they cannot be saved without Regeneration; for there is no
passing immediately out of the Kingdom and Dominion of Sin, and Satan into the
Kingdom of Glory; for there is a great Gulf fixed between them, Luke 16.26. And
if they are not in the Ark of Gods preventing Grace, to ferry then over, they
must perish; for the only Road to the Kingdom of Glory lies through the
Kingdom and Dominion of Gods free preventing Grace for all old and young that
are saved, Ephesians. 2.8.

2. All young Infants by nature are guilty of Original Sin and depravation,
Psalm. 51. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.

Romans 3. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.

Therefore they must have Grace poured into their Souls, to subdue and conquer
that original depravation, or they cannot be sanctified, nor saved; for we all
received our very shape and first being in sin: Therefore they must have Grace
to unite them to Christ; the lost Image of God by the Fall of Adam, must be
restored unto them, and re-instamped upon them; and Christ, with all the Graces
of his Spirit, must be formed in them, or God will never save them, nor be
reconciled unto them, no more than he will to the Fallen Angels; and this must
be done by the Infusion of Gracious Habits into their Souls, 1 John 3.9.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him:
This Seed of God is the Principles and Habits of Grace, which is a Fruit of the
Spirit; but Grace in Act and Exercise is called the Fruit of the Spirit.

3. Habitual Grace is sufficient by the powerful Agency of the Spirit, to
subdue and conquer original Depravation in regenerating and changing their
state, and making them Partakers of the Divine Nature by the application of the
Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, for Justification and Sanctification,
by the aforesaid Habitual Grace, instrumentally of which Faith is supreme,
because without Faith it is impossible to please God.

4. The salvation of all Gods Elect, both old and young, is begun, carried on,
and finished, by the Work of Christ without us, and by the powerful Operation
of his holy Spirit within us; Christ ever lives to make Intercession at the
Right hand of God, for the Application of his Satisfaction to the Fathers
Justice for us; and his Spirit abide^ in us, to help our infirmities, in making
Inte^cession for us also, with groanings which cannot (...) uttered, Romans 8.26,
27.

And thus all Elect dying Infants are made me^ to partake of the Inheritance
with the Saints ^^ ^ight, even as all Adult believers are; for this (...) the
only way in which God does justify, sanctif^^ and save all his chosen People,
both old and young and therefore it is emphatically called the Fai^^ of Gods
Elect, Titus 1.1.

5. Wherefore if any dying Infants are any pa^^ of Gods Elect, as that they
are, then they m^^ have this Faith, because it is peculiar to God Elect and to
none else, which is the Faith of the Operation of God, and not by maturity of
yea^^ for he is the Author and the Finisher of it, (...) 12.2. And it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. We reverence be it spoken, God may be compared (...) a
man that makes a Watch, with all the Wh^^ and Pins, and Members thereof; but
it may be, (...) does not wind it up, and set it a going as soon (...) he has
made it; but the Watch is a complea^ Watch notwithstanding, though it should
never (...) set a going; but it is ready to go, whenever the Watch-maker
please: Even so God forms and fashions the new creature with all its lineaments
and members in the Souls of his Elect, namely, all the Graces of his Spirit;
but the new creature ca^^^ act nor move without Divine Influence, no more than
the Watch can go of its self; and God m^^ take either old or young into Glory,
as soon as the^^ are regenerated and born again, and never give them time to
act Grace; the Thief upon the Cro^^ had but very little time to act Grace in.

6. For Persons to imagine or dream of San^^fication and Salvation by the
Imputation of Christ Righteousness and Merits, without the Instrumen^allity of
Habitual Faith to regenerate and change their Natures, is mere spiritual
Nonsense; for Christ's Righteousness and Merits are not to be applied, nor
exposed in any other way, nor by any other means, but what God himself has
appointed and revealed unto us, and therefore it is called the Righteousness of
Faith; but according to our Opponents Principles, it is a Righteousness without
Faith: Pray, dear Friends, consider of this, and be no longer deluded.

7. I challenge all our Opponents, every Soul of them, to produce but one
single Text of Scripture, throughout the whole Book of God, that does give the
least shadow of countenance to this kind of Doctrine of theirs, namely, That
Elect dying Infants can be sanctified and saved without Habitual Grace, of
which Faith is the chief.

8. That salvation of dying Infants, which our Opponents stickle so strenuously
for, is a Salvation without Justification and Regeneration, which in plain
English is to save them in a state of original sin and depravation; for the
Antipaedobaptists will not by any means, allow young Infants to be capable of
receiving the Habits and Seeds of Grace, to regenerate and change their
Natures, though Christ himself (who spoke as never man spoke like him) has
told us plainly, that Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God: And the Scripture also says, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

9. A young Infant in the Womb, or in the Cradle, is as much polluted, and
depraved by nature, as the oldest and vilest sinner upon Earth, and as much a
child of Wrath as he, and he has as much need to be justified, regenerated,
and sanctified, as he; therefore all those that deny this, must deny original
sin; which is to overthrow the very Foundation of man's salvation.

10. I never read one word in all the Writ^ of our Opponents about the
Controversy, that ^ declared, or once discovered, the absolute ne^sity of
Justification and Regeneration, in order^ the salvation of Elect dying Infants;
I desire the to produce us the Book and Page if they o^ where there is any such
Doctrine: It is true (...) tell us fine quaint Stories of Sanctification, a
Application of the Righteousness and Merits Jesus Christ, for the salvation of
Elect dying ^fants, and of their great hope and charity (...) have for them,
and yet, in the same breath, (...) tell us, that they are not capable of
receiving (...) Graces of the Spirit, by which it is to be brou^ about and
effected; which knocks all their ch^ and hopes for dying Infants on the head,
concer^ing their future state of Happiness; for Mr. ^. ^ very ingenuously has
published and confessed his Book, that he is not capable of understands the
Notion of Habitual Faith; for (says he) it is (...) fine for my uncultivated
head: That is, His (...) Reason cannot fathom it.

11. I do positively affirm, as I shall Answer at the great day of Judgment,
that all those (...) will not allow Elect dying Infants to be capable receiving
Habitual Grace, to regenerate, sancti^ and change their Natures, do at once
reprob^ them all by their Principle, and bar the Gate (...) Heaven fast against
them: For,

12. And lastly: If the salvation of lost sinne^ is a pure Design of preventing
Grace, then I (...) affirm, That a young Infant is as capable of salva^on, as
any Adult person is whatsoever; but (...) salvation of lost sinners is a pure
Design of p^venting Grace: Therefore a young Infant i^ capable of salvation as
any Adult person is w^soever.

1. It is a pure design of preventing Grace, with a ^espect to God the Father
that contrived it.

2. It is so with respect to Christ the Son, that accom^lished it.

3. And lastly: It is so with a respect to Man, that has the benefit of it.

First Grace and subsequent persevering Grace unto Eternal Salvation, is all of
pure preventing Grace, and ^t is brought about by effectual Calling,
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification; for preventing Grace ^uns through
them all; As has been most elegantly ^llustrated, amplified, unfolded, and
applied, by that ^minent Divine, who is worthy to be ranked among the rest of
our Stars of the first Magnitude, in this Hemisphere of Gods Heaven upon Earth,
the Church, namely, Mr. M. M. of Stepney, from that Famous Text of Christ's
wonderful preventing Grace, in St. Luke 19.10. For the Son of man is come to
seek and to save that which was lost.

1. That the salvation of lost sinners is a pure Design of preventing Grace,
appears in these following Particulars.

1. In that men by nature are spiritually dead, as in Ephesians. 2. And you has he
quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins.

The sinner being dead, is not able to quicken nor raise himself, but God does
it; -- you has [he] quickened, etc. that is God: Therefore it is preventing
Grace.

2. If the sinner be lost, and God is found by him, when he sought him not,
then it is pure preventing Grace; but so it is, as you may see in Romans 10. I
was found of them that sought me not, I was made manifest to them that asked
not after me; Compare with Isa. 65.1.

3. In Ezekiel. 16. -- thou wast cast out in the (...) field, to the lothing of
thy person, in the day that the wast born.

And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said
unto thee when thou wast i^ thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, Live.

4. Man by nature is not only in a state of separation from God, but also in a
state of Enmity against him; and until that Enmity be slain, and the Soul
united to Christ, which is done by Habitual Faith instrumentally, there can be
no hope of Reconciliation nor Eternal Salvation. I say again, God will as soon
save the Fallen Angels, as save any Fallen sinner, old or young, in the Womb or
out of it, that dies in a state of separation and Enmity against God, as all
Mankind by nature are, Psalm. 51. Romans 3.11, 12, 23.

It must be Habitual Faith instrumentally that must justify the sinner, by
taking hold of the Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, and applying it to
the sinner, by the manuduction of the holy Spirit; for God is the Author and
the Finisher of our Faith.

5. In the fifth and last place, to conclude this Head: No Saint of God ever
was, or ever will be, justified, neither for, or by, the Act of Faith; and the
reason is plain, because that would be for a man to be justified by Works,
which would destroy Justification by Faith in the Righteousness of Christ;
which is Popery all over; for there is no Justification without the Grace of
Faith, though not for the Acting of that Grace.

Therefore it is all a pure Design of preventing Grace, from the Foundation to
the Top-stone of man's Salvation; it is all Grace, Grace, pure preventing Grace:
And therefore an Elect dying Infant is as capable of Justification,
Regeneration, Adoption, Sanctification, and Eternal Salvation, as any Adult
person is whatsoever. And thus I have proved, That Habitual Faith is
essentially necessary for the salvation of dying Infants, as well as Adult
believers: None can be saved without it; for there can be no Acts of Faith,
where there are not first Habits of Faith; it is as impossible, as it is for a
Tree to grow, and bear Fruit, without a Root.

8. Says Mr. D. in page 6. It Is to be wondered at, how you come to stop at
Baptism, and do not let children partake of the Lord's Supper, etc. Mr. D. can
see no reason why Infants should not be perfect Members of the Church visible,
if they are any at all.

To which I reply,

1. Truly it is to be wondered at, that such an insipid Argument should be
destilled from the Brain, and drop from the Pen, of a Person of such natural
Endowments, as Mr. D. is generally taken to be: But such is the unsearchable
Wisdom of God, to confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and to entangle them in
their own Devices, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Now I shall make
good what I have said, with a respect to this Argument.

1. It cannot be denied but that the Jews children were perfect Members of the
Church visible when they were circumcised at Eight days old; for the Apostle
tells us, that unto them were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2. But
yet notwithstanding, they did not partake of the Passover; and this I am sure,
that the Gospel of Grace, and Christ the Purchaser of Grace, did not at all
diminish the gracious Privileges of the children of Christian believers.

2. Circumcision was instituted about four hundred and thirty years before the
Ordinance of the Passover was in being; and were there not perfect Members of
the Church visible before the Passover was instituted, which was just the Night
before they were delivered out of that Egyptian Bondage?

3. To come nearer home: All those men, women, and children, that were baptized
by John the Baptist, were perfect Members of the Church visible, by virtue of
their Covenant Relation to Abraham, who was a Type of Christ, the Father of al^
the Faithful, and yet they did not partake of the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper; for it was impossible they should, because that Ordinance was not
instituted until about thirty years after; for as Circumcision was instituted
before the Passover, so was Baptism before the Lord's Supper; and as the
Passover was not instituted until the Night in which Israel was delivered out
of the Egyptian Captivity, so the Lord's Supper was not instituted until the
Night in which our Lord was betrayed, when he Actually delivered us out of
Spiritual Egyptian Bondage.

3. If none are perfect Members of the Church visible until they partake of the
Lords supper, there if any of their own Opinion die, after they are dipped,
before they partake of the Lord's Supper, (as no doubt but that many do) then
they dye imperfect Members of their Church visible.

4. Baptism was in force long before the Passover was abolished; for our
Savior Christ did eat the Passover, and institute the Lord's Supper, both at a
Meal, the very Night in which he was betrayed; which was the total abolition of
the former, and the establishment of the latter.

5. Our Savior Christ himself has in effect, declared the Infant Seed of
Believers to be perfect Members of the Church visible, in Mat. 19.1^ these
Words, viz. Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should
put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. But Jesus
said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such
is the kingdom of heaven: That is, the Church. Surely the Kingdom of Heaven is
not comprised and made up of imperfect Members, or Subjects.

Thus you see this Argument is plucked up by the Roots.

9. Says Mr. D. in page 6. Many of those you call outward Privileges of the
Covenant of Grace, our children have as well as yours: 1. We dedicate them to
God by our Prayers for them as soon as born, and those of the Church, into
which in time we hope they will incorporate: 2. Our Example: 3. Religious
Education; by catechizing, and by daily Prayers for them, etc.

Here are several things worthy to come under our consideration, from these
Premises aforesaid.

1. Mr. D. asserts and declares, that their children have many of those we call
outward Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, as well as ours; but he will not
allow them to be outward Privileges, etc. but says, that we call them so.

2. Either they are Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, or they are not; and
if they are not so, then they are no Privileges at all; for they must be of
the Covenant of Works; they must be of Grace or of Works; this is clear from
the Scripture, in Romans 11. And if by grace, then it is no more of works:
otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more
grace: otherwise work is no more work.

Therefore if those we call outward Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, of
which our Opponents children partake of as well as ours, are not outward
Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, then they are of the Covenant of Works,
which is no Privilege at all thus to boast of.

3. This destroys that common and unclean Nation of theirs, viz. That the
children of Turk, and Heathens have as much Privilege as the children of
Christian Believers; for Turks and Heathens do not dedicate their children to
God in Christ, as soon as born: Which I take to be Mr. D's. meaning, though he
will not allow them one Dram of Habitual Grace; which renders it wholly invalid.

4. This Dedication of their children as soon as born, and Prayers for them,
must not pass without a strickt Examination, for fear least it should prove to
be but blear-eyed Leah, instead of beautiful Rachel, to use our Author's own
Phrase: Therefore I will bring it into the Balance of the Sanctuary, and try
whether it be weight or not.

1. How can Mr. D. dedicate his children to God in prayer for them as soon as
born, seeing he will not allow them to be capable of receiving the Seed and
Habits of Grace to unite them to Christ? For it is Habitual Faith that is the
Grace which does that instrumentally; for it cannot be Actual Faith that unites
a Soul to Christ; that is impossible, because that would be for Faith to act
before it received its being; there must be the Root before there can be any
Fruit; there must be Habitual Faith before there can be Actual Faith: Therefore
it is Habitual Faith that unites the So^^ to Christ in Regeneration,
notwithstanding Mr. D. and those of his Opinion's deriding and ridiculin^ of
it; for it is called the faith of Gods elect.

2. I observe that Mr. D. does own, that those children that are saved dying in
their Infancy are Elected; therefore I desire Mr. D. to tell us what sort of
Faith that is which does of right belong unto them; for it is evident from
Titus 1.1. tha^ there is a Faith which does peculiarly belong unto all Gods
Elect, and to none else; and our Opponents themselves will not allow Infants to
be capable of acting Faith in their own persons, neither indeed can they in an
ordinary way, as Adult believers do: Therefore it must be Habitual Faith that
unites them to Christ, their Head and Husband; and Mr. B. D. must own it too,
or raze [that] Notion out of his Book, viz. That all dying Infants that are
saved are elected: What are they elected, and shall they not have the Faith of
Gods Elect? Where is the sense of this? for there is but one Faith, as well as
one Baptism, which belongs to all the Elect of God, and therefore
emphatically called the Faith of Gods Elect.

3. Though young Infants are not capable of the profession of Faith, yet they
are of the reception and possession of Faith; for God is the Author and the
Finisher of our Faith, who works all things according to the counsel of his
own Will.

4. The very first Moment of Gods Infusion of Grace into the Soul, that Soul is
united to Christ: in which the creature is wholly passive: Therefore without
the hope of this, they dedicate their children to God in their own unbelief,
and their childrens original sins and depravation; which is to offer unto God a
corrupt thing, which God abhors, Mal. 1.14: For no unclean thing shall enter
into Heaven.

5. Though I do not hold that all Infants are saved that are dedicated to God
in baptism, yet we do not bar the Gate of Heaven against them by Principle,
viz. by denying them to be capable of receiving those Habits of Grace that must
qualify them for eternal life and salvation if ever they are saved.

6. The consequences of this kind of dedication and Prayers for their dying
Infants are these, That God would accept of them and save that in their sins,
viz. in a state of depravation and separation from Christ; which is for them to
go to Heaven, and be saved in some other unknown way which God never appointed.

7. For unless they are united unto God i^ Christ, they are not only in a state
of separation from God, but also in a state of Enmity against him: Therefore
unless they pray unto God for their dying Infants, and believe that their
children are capable of receiving, and God of infusing Grace into their Souls,
to unite them to Christ, to justify and acquit them from their original sins,
and to sanctify and change their Natures, and make them partakers of the
Divine Nature; all their Prayers for them on this Topic, are but like a fine
gilded painted Sepulcher, which appears very fair and beautiful without, but
full of dead men's bones and putrefaction within.

8. All Prayers (of this kind especially) ought to have some footing in a
Promise; for otherwise it is but presumption, to pray for that which God never
promised to grant; and also, that they do not believe the creature can be made
capable to receive: And this is the sum and substance of their Principle on
this account.

1. For first they deny that the Seed of Believer are in the Covenant of Grace,
or that they have any thing to do with that Promise which God made unto
Abraham, though it is the same Promise which the Apostle says belongs unto
then and their children, in Acts 2.39.

2. They deny that young Infants are capable of receiving Habitual Faith,
though the whole current of the sacred Scripture is against them, as in Genesis
17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, etc.

Now that this Promise is devolved upon the believing Gentiles, and their Seed,
I have already proved, as in Isa. 44. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thine offspring, etc.

And in Acts 2.39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to
all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord your God shall call.

Romans 3. Comes this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, (these were
the Jews) or upon the uncircumcision also? (these are the Gentiles) For we say
that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.

And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the
faith, (Here you see what Circumcision was: It was a Sign and Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith.) which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be
the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that
righteousness might be imputed to them also.

Now if they do not go to God in prayer for their children in the Faith of this
Promise, their Prayers will avail them little or nothing.

9. I observe that Mr. D. is so true to his Principle, as that he has not said
that he dedicates his Children to God by Faith and Prayer as soon as born, but
he has said, We dedicate them to God by our Prayers for them as soon as born:
For if his Prayers had any regard to Gods Promise to believers and their
children, then it would have been by Faith in Prayer; for what is not of Faith
is Sin.

10. How can those persons who are against Infant Baptism, and deny that young
Infants are capable of receiving Grace, or that they have any relation to the
Promise, pray for their Infants, either dying or living, when according to
their avowed Principle, there is nothing for them to act Faith upon, being they
will not allow them to be capable of receiving the Promise, in which Christ and
all the Graces of his Spirit are conveyed it to their Souls? And to deny this,
is to deny all; for to exclude them of the Promise, is to exclude them from
Heaven, and destroy the very foundation of Prayer.

^^. The ^^st construction that can be made of these (...) of Prayers for their
dying Infants, is only this, viz. That God would be pleased to spare and
continue their Lives until they came to Years of discretion and maturity, that
so they may be capable of receiving Grace by their own natural strength and
ability, and exercise it by the aforesaid power and ability: This is the
natural genuine tendency of this their Principle; and whosoever dives into it
seriously and judiciously, will find it to be so; otherwise, why do they say
that children are not capable of receiving the Habits of Grace? which highly
reflects dishonor on the Free Grace of God, and also the omnipotent Power of
God; for, unless they do pray for their dying children, or living either, that
they may be united to Christ, and be begotten and born of God, and justified by
the Righteousness and Merits of Christ, and have their original sins subdued,
and their Natures sanctified and changed, and the Image of God impressed upon
them, that they may be made meet to partake of the Inheritance with the Saints
in Light, which must be by infusing Grace into their Souls; all their Prayers
signify no more than their Prayers do for any other outward Mercy and
Enjoyment. But how can they pray for their young Infants union with Christ,
when at the same time, they declaim the very instrumental Bond of union, viz.
The Grace of Faith, which is peculiar to all Gods Elect.

2. You shall see how incongruous Mr. D. is in himself: For,

1. Says he in page 5. God knows how to sanctify and save our dying Infants
without our application of Ordinances unto them, etc.

2. In page 6. he says, We dedicate them to God by Prayers for them as soon as
born, etc.

1. He says, God knows how to sanctify and save our dying Infants without our
application of Ordinances unto them. Now by the same parity of Reason, Adult
believers may cast off all Ordinances, and say, I am in the Invisible and
Catholic Church, and God knows how to sanctify and save me without the
application of Ordinances. This would make a notable Plea for those that do
cast off Ordinances.

2. It is true, that God does know how to sanctify and save all Elect Infants:
But here I must stop, for I dare go no further with Mr. D. because I see a
dangerous Precipice.

2. It is also as true, that God has revealed unto us how he does sanctify
and save Elect dying Infants; for it is in the same way in which he does
sanctify and save all Elect Adult believers, as I have already sufficiently
demonstrated and proved: For as there is but one Lord, one Faith, and one
Baptism, even so there is but one way to Heaven, and that is through Christ, by
Justification, Regeneration, Adoption, and Sanctification; for Christ himself
says, I am the way; and in Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other:
for there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be
saved.

3. Is not the dedication of our children to God an Ordinance of God? and, Is
not Prayer also an Ordinance of God?

1. If the dedication of our children to God be not an Ordinance of God, why do
our Opponents practice it? Secondly, If Prayers to God for them be not an
Ordinance of God, why do they use it? Why does our Author himself apply these
Ordinances of God to his children as soon as born, seeing he thus declaims them?

2. If they are not Ordinances of God, then it falls under the sin of
Will Worship and humane Invention; and if so, then it would be said another
day, Who has required these things at your hands? But,

3. If they are Ordinances of God, then they ought not to be against the
application of Ordinances unto them by others, seeing they allow it in
themselves; for Dedication without Institution is downright Superstition: Get
over this Sir, if you can.

For we are to do all things [spiritually,] in the Worship and Service of God,
according to the Pattern shown by God himself unto Moses in the Mount.

4. Baptism (as has been proved) is one of the Heavenly Things, or
Gospel-Church-Ordinances, which is a public solemn dedication of the subject
baptized, unto God in the Church, in the presence of God, Angels, and Men, by
Thanksgiving and Prayer; for as we receive our children from God, so it is but
reasonable we should offer them up to God through Christ from whom we received
them: But yet notwithstanding, we ought to dedicate them to God secretly as
soon as born, and privately in our Families; for as in Prayers, there i^ (1)
secret Closet-prayer; (2.) there is private Family Prayer; (3.) and lastly,
there is public Prayer in the Church Assembly; And the (...) former may be
said to be preparatory to the latter; secret Prayer in the Closet ought not
(...) or hinder private Prayer in the Family, (...) ought both these to excuse
or impede public Prayer in a public Church Assembly.

Even so ought we to do in point of dedicating our children to God; first, it
ought to be from the very Womb as soon as born, in secret devotion in our
Closets, and in our Hearts by Faith, praising of God on the Child's behalf, that
the Womb was not its Grave, and for that its Members were written in Gods Book
of Creation; and also to pray unto God, that the name of it may be written in
the Book of Life, that it may be regenerated, renewed, and sanctified, and be
sealed up unto the Day of Redemption by the Holy Spirit.

2. We ought to dedicate our Children to God in like manner aforesaid, in our
Family, with those Neigbbours and Friends that are there as Instruments to help
usher them into the World.

3. And lastly: These Dedications aforesaid of our children as soon as born,
must not hinder nor prevent our public solemn Dedication of them afterward in
that Church Ordinance of Baptism in a more public solemn manner, in the
presence of God, Angels, and Men; for the Angels are present in Church
Ordinances and Discipline, and are strickt Observators of all our Behavior and
Deportment, as in 1 Cor. 11.7, 10. Which brings me to the second thing, viz.
That the Angels attend the Church in their Ministry, and in special manner
their Ministry is extended to the Elect Infant-members thereof, as does plainly
appear from the Words of our Savior, in that Rebuke he gave to those Disciples
that were of his own peculiar Family, when they were striving among themselves
who was the greatest in the Church, as in Mat. 18. At the same time came the
disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

Pray observe; they did not ask who should be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven
hereafter, but who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven now, in the present
tense: That was as much as to say, Who among us Disciples is greatest in the
Church of God now? for they knew that Christ was the greatest in the Church,
and that God is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven in Glory.

Now pray mind Christ's Answer unto them:

And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This Christ spoke to cure them of their Itch of Pride and Ambition, which he
perceived they began to be contaminated with, and therefore he said unto them,
Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in
the kingdom of heaven.

Pray note, by the way, that Humility is the first step unto true greatness in
the Church: But to proceed f^rther on our Saviors Words,

And whos^ shall receive one such little child in my (...), receives me.

1. That is, Whosoever shall receive little children of believing Parents into the
bosom of the Church in Christ's Name, receives Christ along with them, because
Christ is externally formed in them.

2. How can little children be received into the bosom of the Church in
Christ's Name, but by Baptism? And for a clear demonstration of this, pray
observe strictly the Words of Christ's general Commission unto his Ministers and
Servants, and there you will find that Christ commanded them to baptize all in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: This is in the
Name of Christ, and to receive them into the Church in the Name of Christ,
which is by a public solemn dedication of them to God in Baptism, Act. 2 38.

But whos^ shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea.

What a dreadful threatening is here against all those that offend these little
ones! And for my part, I declare that I do not know who among Christians there
are, that do offend young Infants so much as all those do, that are against
their being dedicated unto God in the Ordinance of Water Baptism. Pray mind our
Saviors threatening, all you that oppose Infant Baptism, and be no longer
wilful and obstinate, for it is a most dreadful one, viz. But whose shall
offend one of these little ones, etc. How [so] offend them? If you observe
narrowly it will appear, that the ground of the offense is the not receiving
them into the Church in Christ's Name; for the threatening follows upon that of
our Savior Christ's saying, And whosoever shall receive one such little one in my
name, receives me: But whosoever shall offend me of these little ones which
believe in me, etc. The offense comes upon the contrary of receiving them in
Christ's Name. This could not be meant of their Parents first reception of them
into the World, at their Birth and Nativity: But some of our Opponents have
been so confident in Print, as to say, What offenses are young Infants capable
of taking? which is carnal reason all-over; for though they are not personally
capable of taking offense, yet Christ himself is; f^r as those that receive
them into the Church in Christ's Name by baptism, receive Christ himself, even
so all these that offend them, offend Christ himself, even as those that
persecute his People, persecute Christ himself, because by their not receiving
them into the Church in Christ's Name, they shut Christ himself out of the
Church; theref^re Christ's must need^ be offended at them, Mark 9.41.42. These
little ones which were brought unto Christ to be blessed by him, were (...) of
believers; and this will clearly appear to be so, if we do but consider these
things: 1. The old Dis^iples which were of Christ peculiar ^amily, rebuked
those that brought them, for which Christ rebuked them, and said, Suffer little
children, and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such to the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 19.13, 14. and ^^ Ma^k 10.13, 14. Luke 18.15.

2. Pray who had to do to bring young Infants to Christ for his blessing on
them, but their Parents? And if they had not been believers themselves, they
would not have brought their children to Christ to be blessed by him; And for
this reason, they must be the ^^ed of believers; nay, they had the Grace of
Faith in them, for they believed in Christ, Man. 18.

Therefore I demand of our Opponents, Two Things:

1. If the receiving of young Infants, the seed of believers, in Christ's Name,
was not to receive them into the Church? Then I demand, where they are to be
received? for they mentioned in the Text were not to be received into Christ's
peculiar domestic Family, for he had his select number of them, viz. the
Twelve Apostles.

2. If this receiving them in Christ's Name be a receiving them into the Church
in some visible way, being of the Church before, by descent of believing
Parents, 1 C^^. ^.14. If it be not by the Ordinance of Baptism, then I desire
them to tell us in what other way, or public Ordinance in the Church it is to
be done in Christ's Name; for you see it must be done, or else they that reject
them are (...) to the threatening.

2. In the second place, Christ proceeds farther to inform us of the great
Privilege that those little ones have by being in the Church; for they are
under the Ministry and Charge of the holy and blessed Angels, as in verse 10.
where we have Christ introducing it with a caution to all those that despise
these Infant-disciples, viz. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven [their Angels] do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven.

But as they offend all th^se little ones, by refusing to receive them in
Christ's Name into the Church visible by Baptism, even so they despise them by
saying, What good does Baptism do a young Child? And what Grace is a young
Infant capable of receiving? And thus they both offend and despise them.

3. If there be such a dreadful threatening against him that shall offend but
one of these little ones, which belong unto Christ, viz. the Seed of Believers;
what then is it against them which boldly adventure to offend and despise them
all, by not receiving them in Christ's Name into the Church by baptism, and
justify themselves therein? It is better for them that a millstone were hanged
about their neck (says the Scripture) and that he were drowned in the depth of
the sea, than to offend one of these little ones which believe in Christ. It is
very strange to me, that our Opponents will allow them to be of Gods Family
Royal in Heaven, the invisible Catholic Church, and yet will not allow them so
much as a Name in the House of God, the Church militant here on Earth; which is
a spacious pretext of allowing of them the greatest Privilege of all, and yet
at the same time deny them one of the lesser.

4. Mr. D. has publicly owned and declared that Elect dying Infants shall be
saved, which I own to be true; And if dying Infants are elected, then are they
Heirs of Salvation; and if they are Heirs of Salvation, then are they under the
conduct and ministry of the holy and blessed Angels, and do share as much in
their Ministry as any of the Adult Elect do, as is clear from that excellent
Scripture in Heb. 1. But to which of the angels said he at any time, Si^ on my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

Are they not all ministering spirits; sent forth to minister [for] them who
shall be heirs of salvation?

I humbly conceive these Angels here are not to be understood of the Bishops,
Elders, or Pastors of the Churches, but of the invisible Heavenly Host, because
it is said in the very next Chapter, verse 16. He took not on him the nature of
angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

Pray what account is an adult Believer capable of giving concerning the
Ministry of Angels, these invisible blessed Spirits of their Ministry for them,
any more than Elect ^abes in Christ can of their Ministry for them? Even none
at all. Pray take notice by the way, that it is not said that they do minister
unto them, but [for] them: And therefore a young Child is as capable of the
Ministry of of those Angelical Spirits, as any Adult Believer is whatsoever. O
what a blessed Privilege is it for persons to be under the condu^t and
ministry of Angels! for they are their Lifeguard, Psalm. 91. For he shall give
his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall hear thee
up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. What an Honor is
this? that the great and glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth should condescend
to Men of such a low degree and extract, as to provide such a guard as this is
for them; and this Honor have all the Saints, both old and young. O the
admirable preventing love and Grace of God!

5. The Ministry of Angels lies principally next unto that in the Church in
assisting and ministering for the Elect when they are least capable of the
ministry of Men; and that especially with a respect to two Seasons, namely, the
hour of the believers death, and to Elect Infants, as appears by our Savior
Christ's words; first at the believers hour of death, in Luke 16. And it came to
pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom,
--

2. The Angels ministers for Elect Infants in the Church, who are Heirs of
salvation, Mat. 18. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for
I say unto you, that in heaven [their] angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven.

Therefore we ought to dedicate all our children to God in baptism, by which
they are more nearly received into the bosom of the Church; for we ought not
to reprobate our own children, but to deal with them as if we knew they were
all Elected; the particular knowledge of which God has reserved to himself;
for it is his Prerogative to know that, and not ours.

Thus I have proved that the dedication of our children to God by Faith in
Prayer, in secret, private, and public, is an Ordinance of God; for it is a
solemn offering up our children as a Sacrifice to God through Christ, and not
to Moloch, as some of our Opponents have blasphemously styled it.

3. Mr. D. does grant that all elect dying Infants are in the Invisible and
Catholic Church, but will not by any means allow them to be in the Church
visible: And farther says, We have no Rule to put them into the Church visible
by baptism: To which I thus reply, viz. Mr. D. should first have shown himself
a skilful Logician, by proving that [ever] the Infant Seed of Believers were
cast out the Church visible, by the personal coming of Christ in the New
Dispensation of the Gospel, before he had talked of putting them into the
Church visible by baptism. Indeed, Baptism is a visible receiving them nearer
into the Church than they were before; for they were in Christ externally
before they were baptized, by virtue of their Covenant Relation, as being the
Seed of believing Parents, 1 Cor. 7.14. though all that are thus in Christ, may
not be saved; for Christ has external Branches in him, which he will never own
at the Great Day, John 15. Every branch in me that hears not fru^t, ^e (...)
away. And thus whosoever receives these little ones in Christ's Name into the
Church by baptism, receives Christ himself.

2. Mr. D. should also have clearly demonstrated and proved, what personal
Actual sin and transgression those young babes committed against God, which
provoked him to cast them all out of the Church visible, in which they had been
from the beginning, in the first Being or Formation of the Church, before he
had told us we have no Rule to put them into the Church visible by baptism; for
otherwise, all his Arguments against Infant Baptism do but puzzle the Cause,
and are but as so many Arrows shot against a brazen Wall.

3. Because all the Infant Seed of the Jews and Proselytes were Members of the
Church visible under the Ceremonial Law, and the Gospel of Grace, did not
diminish the Privilege of the Infant Seed of Believers, it did not bring less
Grace, but more than there was in the Ceremonial Law: And therefore the
Infant Seed of believing Church members are still members of the Church visible
now under the New Dispensation of the Gospel, and have a Right to the Ordinance
of Water Baptism.

Thus you see Mr. D. has drawn a Conclusion without any Premises; which is to
build a House without a foundation, or a Castle in the Air: And this brings
me to the Ninth and last Thing.

9. And lastly: Says our Author in page 4. The Gospel Church has its Matter
and Form fully prescribed in the New Testament, its Laws and Ordinances of
Worship, and Subjects that are to be found in the practice of these. And their
qualifications; this is what we stick by, and dare go no further; the frame of
the Jewish Church having had its day and end, we look upon it as taken down to
admit a more glorious Dispensation.

Now our next business is to inquire what difference there was between the
Church frame under the Ceremonial Law, and the New Dispensation of the Gospel,
and try whether we can find any such capital difference as will favor our
Authors Principles.

1. Therefore in the first place, What is all this which Mr. D. says, to the
purpose? For he has not told us where it is to be found in the N. Testament,
that the Matter, Form, Laws, and Ordinances of Worship in the Gospel Church,
are so fully prescribed as to exclude the Infant Seed of Believers from being
Members thereof. But I find many Queries not answered, and the most of our
Authors Positions unproved: But I have already fully proved that there must be
nothing in the Gospel New Dispensation of the Matter, Form, Laws, Ordinance of
Worship and Subjects, etc. but what must answer to the Matter, Form, Laws,
Ordinances of Worship and Subjects of the Church under the Ceremonial Law; and
I shall now corroborate it, by what I shall add by clear Scripture Proof, as
follows in Exodus 25.40. Acts 7.44. Heb. 8.4, 5. Heb. 10.1.

2. That the frame of the Jewish Church was made more glorious at the coming in
of the Gospel New Dispensation, I readily grant; but the state of the Church
was never altered, and the Materials or Subjects are still of the very same
kind without any substantial variation. 2. Their spiritual Food in Gods House,
the Church, is still the very same, though under a better and more glorious
Dispensation.

3. If Mr. D. could have proved that the state of the Church had been plucked
up by the roots, and the Covenant dissolved, and that it was but a carnal
Constitution, as Mr. H. C. and Mr. B. K. labored in vain to do, as may be seen
in their Books against me; then Mr. D. might have gained the Point; but he is
wiser than to attempt such a gross Absurdity, which borders upon blasphemy, and
therefore he has rather chosen to contradict those two populous Authors or
Champions.

4. The Jews and all their children under the Law, were Members of the Church
visible, and the state of the Church was never altered: Therefore all the
children of Christian believers are Members with their Parents of the Church
visible [also,] now under the Gospel Dispensation, unless any of them sin
themselves out of it when they are grown Persons, John 15.2. Romans 11.17. But
that the state of the Church was never altered, I shall prove as follows.

1. The Jewish Church state was built upon the Rock of Ages, namely, that
spiritual Rock Christ Jesus, as in 1 Cor. 10.3.

2. The Church has its Foundation in the Covenant of Grace, of which Christ is
the chief Cornerstone, Isa. 28.16.

3. The Covenant of Grace was first declared and made with Adam, immediately
after the Fall; for Adam had the Gospel Preached first to him by God himself,
who spoke as never Man spoke like him, Genesis 3.15.

4. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. that was, he Preached the
Gospel; for he that does not preach up the Righteousness of Christ, for
Justification, Satisfaction, Sanctification, and Salvation, does not Preach the
Gospel; for the Righteousness of Christ is the very Marrow and Quintessence of
the Gospel.

5. Abraham had the Gospel Preached unto him, as in Gal. 3.8. And the scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham: saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. Pray
observe; The Gospel is that which was Preached before unto Abraham, that was
when God first blessed Abraham; and in him both Jews and Gentiles, at his first
establishing his Covenant with him, in Genesis 12.3. And I will make of thee a
great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shall be
a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses
thee: and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

2. This Preaching the Gospel before unto Abraham; 1. It was before the
Covenant was so fully declared and established with him; And 2. before God had
changed his Name: 3. And lastly, It was before God had fixed [a] Token unto the
Covenant. All which you have in Genesis 17.5, 7, 11. Neither shall thy name any
more be called Abram; but thy name shall be called Abraham, for a father of
many nations have I made thee. And I will establish my covenant between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be [a] token of the
covenant betwixt me and you.

The Covenant was as much a Covenant to Abraham before God added [^] Token unto
^^, as it was unto him after, as is also clear from Verse 4. As for we, behold,
my covenant is (...) thee, and thou shall be a father of man^ (...) God did not
change nor alter his Covenant with Abraham when he added: Token to it, though
he changed his Name.

Thus you see (1.) by whom the Gospel was preached unto Abraham: (2) When it
was preached unto him: (3.) How is was preached unto him: (4.) And lastly: What
the Gospel was that was preached before unto him: Why, it was the Covenant of
Grace it self in the first broaching of it to Abraham: Which utterly destroys
that new invented Notion of a Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham of
Circumcision: That is to place the Token of the Covenant in the room of the
Covenant it self, which is absurd and false. And this we must observe also,
that this was not the first broaching of this Celestial Liquor, viz. the
Gospel, though it was so to Abraham and his Seed; for it was first broached and
set a running to Adam, immediately after the Fall, and has run down upon his
Posterity ever since, from Generation to Generation, and will continue to the
end of the World: So that to Preach up the Covenant is to Preach the Gospel.

Hence by the way I infer, How unfit all those are who take upon them the
Ministry of the Gospel, that disown the Covenant, that are so ignorant of these
profound Mysteries, that cannot distinguish between the Covenant and the Token
thereof.

2. That the Church State is still the same, and the substantial Matter and
Form the same now as it was under the Law, plainly appears by our Saviors
Words to the unbelieving Jews, who were then Members of the Church visible, as
in Mat. 21. Therefore the kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and gives
to a nation bringing forth the fruit thereof. And in Mat. 8. A^^ I say unto
you, that many shall come from the east, and west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. That is, they shall be
brought into the same Covenant which God established with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and into the same Gospel Church as they and their Seed were in; for this
cannot be meant of the Kingdom of Heaven above for none can be cast out of that
as these were to be in the remainder of the Verse: Mind it: -- but the children
of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping
(...) gnashing of teeth.

1. From hence we may observe, that the unbelieving Jews were to be cast out of
the Church or Kingdom of Heaven, and the Elect Gentiles were to be taken in for
them in their room; which did not destroy the Constitution of the Church no
more than the casting out of Hypocrites out of a Church does now; but it was to
purge and refine the Church from all its chafe Hypocrites, and to gather in
the Elect Gentile-wheat into the Garner, Mat. 3. Whose fan is in his hand, and
he will thoroughly purge his floor and gather his wheat into the garner: but he
will burn up the ch^ff with unquenchable fire.

2. When this Threatening was executed, viz. when the unbelieving Jews and their
Children were ^^st out, the believing Jews which remained in the Church, their
Children remained in the Church with them, and God did take the Adult Elect
Gentiles and their Children into the Church together; he did not take in their
Parents, and shut out and exclude their Children, as is clear from Acts 2.39.
Romans 11.17.

3. The Church state, which is the Kingdom of Heaven, is the same now as it was
in the Beginning in Adam's Time, after the Fall, and ever will be to the End of
the World; and the Covenant of Grace is the same, in which all the Matter,
Form, Laws, and Ordinances of Worship, and Subjects are contained, though some
of the unbelieving Jews and their Ch^ldren were cast out, especially of those
who were actually concerned in condemning our Savior Christ, by which they
intailed a Curse upon their Posterity [when] they said, His blood be on us, and
on our children, Mat. 2^.25.

4. And lastly: The state of the Church is, and ever was, indissolvable, though
it is locally m^table; God may, and he has taken it from one place and fixed
it in another, and remove it from one People of Nation and bestow in upon
another.

2. I shall also prove the Church state is the same now as it was under the Old
Testament, and the Frame the same substantially, but in a more glorious Dress,
as farther appears from the Apostles Doctrine in Ephesians. 2. Now therefore ye are
no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God; And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; In whom all the
building fuly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord; In whom
[you also] are builded together for an ha^itation for God through the Spirit.
Here are several Things to be observed.

1. Those whom the Apostle Preached this Doctrine unto were the then called
Gentiles, who were come from the East, and West and were sat down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; and the Children of the Kingdom,
viz. The Reprobate Jews and their Children, were cast out.

2. The believing Jews, which kept their station in the Church, were these
Citizens and Saints.

3. That the Gentiles before their Conversion were Strangers and Forreiners to
this City, but were then Fellow-citizens with the believing Jews and their
Children, the Citizens aforesaid.

4. They were taken into the Family Royal of Heaven, the Household of God, who
before were Gentiles in the flesh, with out Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, a^^ strangers from the covenants of promise, having no
hope and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.

5. These Gentiles, as miserable and vile as they were, (...) that Time, were
not only made Fellow citizens with the Saints but also fellow heirs with them,
of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ, by the gospel. Now
thi^ was spoken to the Gentiles by name, as in Ephesians. 3.6.

6. The foundation of the Church of Christ was to be (...) in the Doctrine of
the Prophets in the Old Testament, which ^ the same with the Apostles Doctrine
in the New Testament and Christ himself is the chief Cornerstone, in whom all
the Building is joined exactly together, and grows unto an holy Temple in the
Lord, an Habitation for God.

7. And lastly: All the believing Hebrews, and all their children, and all the
believing Gentiles, and theirs, makes but (...) Mystical Body, which is the
Church, Ephesians. 3.6.

4. The Church under the Law was a Golden Candlestick, Exodus 25. And thou shall
make a candlestick of puregold, etc. Zech. 4. -- What see thou? And I said, I
have looked, and behold, a candlesti^k all of gold, etc. This was the
Gospel Church in the Old Testament-Times: 1. Gold to signify the Matt^^ and
Subjects of it: 2. Pure Gold to signify the holiness and purity of it: 3. A
Candlestick to signify the Form of it: 4. And lastly: A Candlestick to
signify the usefulness of the Church; for as a Candlestick is to set up a
Light in, even so ^^ the Church: It is a City built upon a Hill.

2. Compare this with the Churches in the New Testament, in Rev. 1. And I
turned to see the voice that spoke with me. A^^ being turned, I saw seven
golden candlesticks. -- and the seven golden candlesticks which thou saw,
are the seven churches

Now I would fain know of our Author where lies the difference; for my part, I
can see none but this, namely, There was but one Candlestick of pure Gold in
the Old Testament, th^^ was but one Church or Congregation, which was all the
Nation; and there are seven in the New Testament, which is a certain number set
for an uncertain; but all of Gold under both Dispensations, viz. all Gospel
holy Churches.

3. And lastly: The Gospel Church in the Old Testament lived upon the same Food
as the Gospel-Churches of Christ do now in the New Testament, and as these
Churches are baptized Churches, so was that one Church in the Old Testament,
for all the Members of it, men, women, and children, were baptized. Hear is a
clear Scripture Proof for it, let who as will or dare deny it: 1 Cor. 10.
Moreover, brethren, I would not that (...) should be ignorant, how that all our
fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; And were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea: And did all eat the same
spiritual meat; And did all drink the same spiritual drink: (For they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock wa^ Christ. On this Rock
the Church was built, immediately after Adam's Fall, and on this Rock it has
stood ever since, and ever will to the end of the World, and the gates of Hell
shall never be able to preva l against it, for Christ does watch over it and
keep it.

Thus I have proved what the Prescription of the Church in the New Testament
is, though Mr. D. was not so kind as to do it; and also of the Old Testament,
and demonstrated the Matter, Form, Laws, and Ordinances of Worship, and the
subjects also, and I find them joined together, and so I leave them; for I dare
not part them asunder: For though this Dispensation is more glorious than that
of the Old Testament was, yet it is the same for substance: 1. It was made of
the same Mettle, viz. Gold: 2. It was of the same quality, fine Gold: 3. The
same Subjects, viz. Parents and Children: 4. The Church was of the same Form,
viz. a Candlestick: 5. It was of the same use, viz. it was for Light; for the
Laws and Ordinances of Worship are for Light: Indeed, Satan's Kingdom is a
Kingdom of Darkness; but Christ's Kingdom is a Kingdom of Light. 6. And lastly:
They lived upon the very same Food as the Churches of God now do.

And thus I have proved the Title of this my Book: For Infant Baptism and
Church Membership is of Divine Institution, and the Mode of Baptism I have also
proved to be by Sprinkling; for it is one of the Heavenly Things.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving finished my Discourse at this time, concerning the Infant Seed of
Christian Believers, I now come in the first place to address my self in
particular unto my loving Friend Mr. B. D. who has said in p. 8. as follows:
For many Years I have attended to see what could be made of this Argument, of
the necessity of Baptism to Infants; and could I have found it proved, I would
not have been an Hour out of your Tents.

Now, Sir, you have seen it proved to be of as much necessity as Circumcision
was under the Law to the Eight-day Disciples; for the Infant seed of Believers
are fixed in the same station in the Church now, as the Jews Children were
then; for they were never excluded. 2. It is necessary it should be so; for you
see I have fully proved that God commands it. 3. It is a Badge of Honor, and
Token of Gods Covenant-Love and Grace to the Seed of believing Parents, who are
styled holy Children, 1 Cor. 7.14. 4. And lastly: Circumcision was the Type of
Baptism, which is (...) Heavenly Things. Now my good Friend, if you dare ve^^^
There was no necessity for those Things aforesaid, then you ^ that there is no
necessity for Infant Baptism; for you see th^^ proved Infant Baptism and
Church Membership, 1. From ^ample of John the Baptist: 2. From Christ's Command
(...) the Apostles Argumentative Exhortation, or Mandamus. (...) lastly: From
their Covenant Relation to God, who has pro^ be the Believers God, and the God
of his Seed, and of h^ Seed, Psalm. 105.8, 9, 10. Wherever God lays his Co^
there is an absolute necessity of Obedience.

Now, Sir, I expect you should comply with your Pr^m^ make haste, and delay not
to come into our Tents, or show cause in Print why you will not; for I humbly
(yet boldly long you to do one or the other; either to confute it, or of it.

2. I address my self to all you that are of this Opinion, i^ not read our
Books about this Controversy, but pass a de^ Sentence upon them, and condemn
them without Book (...) Popish Priests and Jesuits do; for they judge and
c^^de^ Books and Doctrines to be heretical, and charge the People hear them on
pain of damnation. But methinks, no^^ that are called Protestants should be
found guilty of imita^ Papists. Pray, for the future, either forbear that ung^
christian Practice of yours, which some of you are guilty ^ knowledge, by their
own confession, of judging Books withouing them; And if you cannot confute
them, then comp^ them: It is a greater Honor to recant and renounce (...) when
detected, than to cleave to it. Lastly, Do not me^ Truths of God by the
Passions and Infirmities of the In^i^ which God makes use of to declare them;
for Martin Lut^ an Eminent Saint in his Day, yet very passionate: And, that is
perfectly clear of this Sin, cast the first stone at ^ thus condemn.

Thus I leave a Challenge with you all, to Answer this my ^ the Lord give you
spiritual skill and understanding in these ^ Covenant-Mysteries, that we may
all embrace the Truth, a^ Jesus, and be of one Heart, and one Mind, fervent
(...) serving the Lord with one Consent: And so dear Friends, to you all.

FINIS.

