Sir JOHN PAKINGTON's Case at Droytwich.
KING John granted to the Burgesses of Droytwich, and their Heirs, the
Salt-springs there, with diverse privileges and franchizes, rendering the yearly
fee farm rent of 100. l. Sterling, and the Salt water has ever since been
divided into four hundred and four Shares called Bulleries, which Bulleries
have ever been bought, Sold and Descended as other inheritances at the Common
Law,

The grantees of King John and their Heirs have long since aliened and sold
their whole inheritance in the Salt-springs to several Persons, who at this day
stand seized in fee of the same and pay their proportions of the fee farm Rent
reserved on the first grant: And from the time of King John's grant to the Reign
of Queen Mary the first, the Inheritors of the Salt-springs were deemed
Burgesses of Droytwich, and whoever sold his Inheritance ceased to be a Burgess.

Queen Mary Inco^porated the Burgesses of Droytwich, by the name of Bailiffs
and Burgesses, and granted them diverse franchizes as a Corporation* and
confirmed King John's grant, but takes no farther notice of the Salt-springs,
Nor appoints any select number, to govern the said Borough or Salt-works, or
any power to Elect new Burgesses, or to exclude any who in Right of their
Estates ought to act as Burgesses.

But of Late years the greatest part of those ancient Inheritances coming into
the hands of Gentlemen of Quality, and persons who lived remote, the Bailiffs
and Burgesses inhabiting in the Corporation, taking advantage thereof, set up
several contrivances whereby they assumed to themselves, not only the Governing
and taxing the Salt-works at pleasure, but of excluding the greater number of
the inheritors (by a single negative voice) from acting as Burgesses of the
said Borough, either in giving their votes in Electing their Representatives
in Parliament, or Governing their own Estates. and at the same time admitting
mere strangers into the Corporation to strengthen their own party, by which
undue practices in less then twenty years, they imposed above twenty thousand
pounds, upon the Inheritors Estates in the Salt-spring without their consents,
wherefore for prevention of the like oppressions for the future, the Principal
Proprietors did obtain an Act of Parliament in the first Sessions of their
present Majesty's Reign, but did not then at all insist on their Right of
Electing their Representatives in Parliament.

That the Inheritors of the Salt Springs are the undoubted Burgesses of
Droytwich will appear.

I. The Fee-farm Rent on the first Grant is reserved from the Burgesses's of
Droytwich, and to this day charged on, and paid by the Inheritors of the
Salt-Springs.

II. The Borough of Droytwich sent Members to Parliament long before the
present Corporation (which had its beginning but from the first year of Queen
Mary) as appears by Records in the Tower.

III. By diverse Ancient Orders and Bylaws of the said Borough made, etc.

March the 6th. 1689. Droytwich Election.
For Sir John Pakington, Baronet. For Philip Foley, Esquire. Bull. Pts. Bull.
Pts. P. Crn. Gilbert Coventrye, Esquire. 0 2 Mr. Edward Davies 2 0 0 Mr. John
Newport 0 1 Mr. Edw. Lench Pepper corn Mr. Tho. Rastell 9 3 Mr. John Newport,
Junior pr. c. John Winford, Esquire 3 0 Geo. Lench, Barber pr. c. Mr. Edw.
Rastell 1 0 Mr. Edw. Butler, Senior pr. c. Mr. Tho. Lench 0 1 Mr. Arnald
Burgill 0 1 Mr. Nicholas Harris 0 1 Geo. Harrison, Labourer 0 p. Mr. Francis
Hill 0 2 Sir Walter Kircum Blount 20 1 0 Mr. Edward Phillips 3 1 Mr. Henry
Hodges 4 0 0 Mr. John Sparrey 0 1 Mr. Burgbill Conard 0 p. Mr. Tho. Norbury 0 1
Mr. Edward Clifford 0 p. Mr. John Phillips 0 1 Mr. Weinter Harris 0 1 0 Mr.
John Stone 3 1 Mr. Ed. Butler, Jun. 0 p. Mr. Henry Johnson 5 3 Mr. Ed. Wheeler
5 0 0 Mr. John Watts 11 2 Mr. William Norrice 0 p. 0 Mr. Richard French 1 0 Mr.
William Wilks 0 p. 0 Mr. John Newman 3 0 William Beedle, Labourer 0 p. 0 Mr.
John Watts, Junior 1 0 John Evett, Labourer 0 p. 0 Mr. Tho. Amphlett 0 1 John
Lacy, Cooper 0 p. 0 Mr. John Nash 2 0 Philip Pardoe, Labourer 0 p. 0 Mr. James
Roberts 1 3 Walter Pardoe, Labourer 0 p. 0 Mr. John French 5 0 Will. Beedle,
Jun. Labourer 0 p. 0 Mr. William Bookey 3 0 32 1 0 Mr. Geo. Harris 9 0 Of these
22 Persons, 12 of them have only the bare Qualification of a Pepper-Corn, and
of the 32 Bulleries and Quarter, Sir Walter Blount is the owner of 20 and a
Quarter. Mr. Richard Norbury 6 1 Mr. Tho. Roberts 0 1 72 2 These 26 Persons
have the Inheritance of 72 Bulleries and a half.


