A Short State of the CASE Between the Physicians and Surgeons, Relating to the
Surgeons Bill, now before the Honorable House of Commons.
I. THIS is now the third time that the Surgeons have preferred A Bill of the
same Nature to the Parliament, which has hitherto been rejected: As likewise
their many Attempts to the same purpose, before the Right Honorable the
Privy Council, as by our Historical Account (to which we referr) at large
appears.

II. The Substance of what is desired in their Bill, consists chiefly in these
Particulars. (1.) That they may have liberty to give Internal Medicines in all
Chyrurgical Cases, (that is indeed in all Cases) for by pretense of Blistering,
Cupping, Bleeding, applying Leeches, or the like, there is searce a Fever, or
any other Disease, which they will not account a Chyrurgical Case. (2.) That
they may be Consulted with by Physicians in all Cases whatsoever; which most
plainly discovers the extent of their Design. (3.) That the Examination, and
Licensing of Surgeons to practice in the manner aforesaid, may be in
themselves, as sole Judges of the sufficiency and abilities of their Members
for that purpose.

Now the Reasons they allege for all this, are, (1.) That they have formerly
had the like Powers. (2.) That these Powers are of absolute necessity to fit
them for the Kings Service. (3.) That the Physicians have 'till of late always
Consulted with them in Cases where Internal Medicines were to be Administered.

To all which it is briefly replied, That both by Acts of Parliament, and
Orders of the Privy Council, we find the Surgeons have always been forbidden to
give Internal Medicines in any Chyrurgical, or other Case whatsoever; to which
the Opinions of the Judges have also Corresponded, and therefore their first
Reason is a manifest untruth, as is the third also. The second indeed has some
seeming weight in it, since all due Care ought to be taken, that their
Majesty's Fleets and Armies should be furnished with Persons fit and able for
that Service, and Skilful in the Administering of Internal as well as External
Remedies.

To this we answer, That the College of Physicians has been always ready to
License such Surgeons to practice in all Cases, even where Internal Medicines
are required, as have upon Examination approved themselves fitly qualified so
to do; of which there have been, and are at present many instances, as they
themselves well know. But since the College of Physicians was therefore
Instituted, on purpose to take care that none but very able and already well
Skilled Persons should Practice Physic in London, or within seven Miles
thereof; because the King, Queen, and Royal Family, the Nobility and chief
Gentry usually resided, and Parliaments ordinarily met there: We humbly
conceive it will not be thought reasonable, only for the sake of the Surgeons,
to permit raw and unexperienced persons to pick up their Skill of giving
Internal Medicines, by practicing upon the Kings chief Subjects usually
residing within that compass, which is never granted, even to those bred at the
Universities; till by long study and experience in the Country, they have first
so qualified themselves as to pass three solemn Examinations by the President
and Censors, before they can be Licensed to the Practice of Physic within
London, and seven Miles; so that, in fine, the only Dispute between us is,
Whether the President and Censors of the College of Physicians, with whom the
Law has already entrusted the Examination and Licensing of all Practisers in
Physic, or the Masters and Wardens of the Barber-Surgeons (who never had any
suitable Education or Learning for it) should by a new Law be made Judges of
men's sufficiency in a Profession of which they themselves are wholly Ignorant?
which We humbly leave to the Judgment of this Honorable House.

And, whereas it is by them suggested, that the Physicians have always declined
their Majesty's Service in their Navies and Armies, the contrary sufficiently
appears by the Annals of the College cited in our larger Historical Account,
wherein we find that several Persons, such as Dr. Hawley, Dr. Hamey, Dr.
Goddard, Dr. Dawson, the Great Dr. Harvey, Sir Alexander Frazier, Sir Charles
Scarburgh, and our present Learned President Dr. Charleton, with many others,
have heretore, and lately served the Crown both by Sea and Land; and there are
now many very ready to undertake the same Employment. But on the other side, it
is but too notorious, that the Surgeons of any Ability or Name in Town, do
generally avoid serving in their own Persons, and substitute their Apprentices
or others (who were not bred in this Town and for the most part live out of it)
of little or no experience even in their own Trade, in their places; who are
rather fit to try Practices upon the King's Seamen and Soldiers, than any way
qualified for the Practice of Physic, or indeed of Chyrurgery it self, as the
Officers both by Sea and Land do generally complain; though these Persons have
been always first approved by such as are the Surgeons usual Examiners.

So that it is apparent, that the Surgeons by this their Bill intend not the
Public good, but their own private advantage, and much to be suspected, when
under the notion of giving Internal Medicines in Chyrurgical Cases, they have
drawn to themselves the entire Practice of Physic, they will then be much more
backward to serve at Sea and in the Armies than already they are to the yet
greater prejudice of the Commonwealth.

In the last place, We humbly submit it to the Consideration of this Honorable
House, what Prejudice it must needs be to both our Famous Universities, if such
great numbers of Surgeons, and perhaps many mere Quacks, under that Name, shall
be suffered to Invade one of the Learned Professions, to the great
discouragement of all Students therein.


