A SHORT DISCOURSE CONCERNING The WORK of GOD IN THIS NATION, AND The DUTY of
all good People, BOTH Governors and Governed, IN This their DAY.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the Sign of the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, 1659.

June. 25

A short discourse concerning the work of God in this Nation, and the duty of
all good people, both Governors and Governed, in this their day.
THe various dealings of God with his people in these Nations, have all along,
of late years, to some discerning spirits, appeared full of Fatherly love and
tenderness. The Faith of these Watchmen in Israel staggered not at all,
notwithstanding the great stumbling blocks which have by our backsliding, been
cast into the way of Gods work. I hope the Lord is now arising to make good
their word; yea, and that the very snares wherein he has permitted some honest
persons to be entangled, and the scourges with which he has visited us for our
Apostacies, will be made effectual means of recovering, strengthening, and
perfecting a testimony for Liberty, Righteousness and Judgment upon the earth.
For though some of them of understanding have fallen, yet this has been but to
try them, to purge and make them white, even to the time of the end, because it
is yet for an appointed time, Dan. 11.35.

Certainly it was the admirable wisdom of God, to suffer so many interruptions
of his glorious work, as have for these last years sprung up amongst us. He
only acted herein the part of a wise Master Builder, who for a time desists
from raising his intended Fabric, till first he has prepared all materials
requisite to the carrying it on. Now if we impartially search into the defects
and imperfections of the whole body of good people, which formerly rendered them
unfit to proceed in the work of Reformation, and obstructed the establishment
of Freedom and Equity in the midst of us, we shall then find good cause to
acknowledge, That the Lord in great goodness and wisdom (though also in
judgment and displeasure) let some of us run back toward Egypt into the
Wilderness, and chastened others by the strokes of their own Brethren and
familiar friends; that thus he might show us what was in our hearts, and what
folly and falsehood is wrapped up in the minds of his children, even of the best
of his children, which requires the rod of correction to drive it out. And if
it shall please the great God of Heaven, the searcher of all hearts, now at
last to sanctify unto us his chastisements and our stumblings, we shall enjoy
a sweet and precious fruit of all. For by what has befallen us these last
times, we are well cautioned how to steer our future course, both in public
and personal exigencies, off from those dangerous Rocks which we our selves or
others in our observation have split upon, to the profanation of Gods Temple,
and the Shipwreck of their own good name and conscience.

The intent therefore of this short paper is to discuss a little the grounds,
why we stayed so long in the birth, why God hitherto has so long disappointed
our expectations, and made such delay in satisfying our hungering desires after
Liberty and Righteousness in the Government and Frame of these Nations: and
withal to awaken all good Persons, Parliament, Army, and all that love the
righteous Old Cause, to meet the Lord in the present Overtures which his
Providence makes to us with meek and broken hearts, fitted to become the
subjects of that blessed and saving work which God has yet to work out among
us.

Only give me leave first to consider with you a while how thoroughly the tender
mercies of God do allure us to the performance of our duty before expressed. No
people in the whole earth have had amongst them more evident footsteps of
divine Wisdom, Power and Compassion, then this sinful Nation; especially those
in it who have been honest and faithful, whose hearts and eyes were ready to
fail for the salvation of God. Their own souls could not have wished or expected
a more seasonable revival of Gods work, nor a more explicit and public
approbation to the Ancient good Cause, then God himself has been pleased to
give in the eyes of our own people, and of all Nations, in calling this
Parliament to the exercise of their just authority after so long an
interruption.

As for the seasonableness of this notable turn, the low ebb whereunto the
Nation is reduced by male execution of Government (to the exhausting of the
public Treasuries, and contracting of debts, to the deadning of Trade both
Foreign and Domestic, and giving all our Enemies abroad and within our
bowels, advantages against us) does sufficiently discover that nothing could
befall us more agreeable, nor more in season; though indeed of this the
Parliament it self must be left to give more full evidence by their future
counsels and actions: yet the good condition in which things stood, when by an
usurped force the Parliament was interrupted, comparatively unto what they have
since declined into, may justly quicken our hopes, of being again, through Gods
blessing, recovered into as good, yea a much better condition then ever. For
what has God designed by permitting such disorderly and impetuous endeavors
of men toward Tyranny and self-exaltation, and that of men obliged to the
contrary by all the Obligations that Vows and Conviction could lay upon them,
as of late years he has, unless to show us all in their examples, what we are,
how frail and deceiveable in all the zeal and goodly appearance of our own
righteousness; and to show us also how inconsistent a private selfish mind is
with righteous rule; which truths once thoroughly learnt and experienced by our
Governors, will admirably fit them for a right discharge of those weighty
trusts which are committed to them.

This late remarkable passage of Gods Providence in restoring the Parliament of
this Commonwealth to the Throne, has not only been seasonable, but likewise a
very express and open an Ownal of the Good Cause formerly engaged for, and that
greatly to the honor of them the Grand Engagers therein; as also of them in the
Army, whose hearts the Lord moved to earnestly request and make way for their
Session. God himself has honored you in the sight of all people, and made
your cup run over in the presence of your Enemies; God seems willing, that you
above others, you who have already heretofore through his blessing, made good
progress in his reforming work, should now proceed toward the accomplishing
thereof. Some of you he has refined in the furnace of sufferings. Others of
your Number, troublers of Israel, he has cut off with the stroke of his hand;
and some whom he suffered to fall back with the torrent of the times, he has
since touched, I hope, with a deep and godly sense of their fallings: and all
this to try and to humble you, that he may do you good in the end. The Lord
has been hewing and polishing you for some more noble use then ever before you
were prepared for, and has now with a high hand, and an outstretched arm
gathered you together to put you yet again upon the proof, whither you will be
a willing and obedient people in the day of his power. It greatly therefore
concerns you and all the good people, diligently to search out what the holy
acceptable and perfect will of God is, which by all his various dispensations
he would discover to us, and incline our hearts to the obedience of; what the
reasons of his carrying us back from the borders of liberty and rest, which
once before we were entering into, under the conduct of this Parliament, into a
Wilderness of confusion, sufferings and oppressions during the late usurpation;
and what his designs in thus mercifully rallying us, in order, if we be not
rebellious, to our more complete entrance into the Land of Rest and Truth, and
fuller conquest over all the Canaanites.

The main thing in which all Gods people, generally from the highest to the
lowest, have been too unskilful, is denying of self, (not corrupt sinful self
only, but righteous and holy self) and contemning those allurements of gain,
which puffed up the mind of man with boasting and vainglory. This surely is that
which we are called to be more fully instructed in; and in the first place
those that are Rulers. The Changes and Overturnings we have had in this corner
of the world, do loudly proclaim to us, that which the Rock of Israel said to
David, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must he just, ruling m the fear of
the Lord; that is, he must receive the Pattern for his Rule, and the motives to
it from Jesus Christ, the Fountain of all just Government, and not seek them in
himself, in his own single interest or glory. A self-glorying and
self-inriching spirit is perfectly opposite to the Kingdom of Christ, and to
the common advantage of our Neighbor. Our Lord himself (though so spotless and
righteous as he was) says, I seek not mine own glory. If I honor my self, my
honor is nothing. I speak not of my self; and again, Not my will be done: by
all which expressions, and others such like, we see plainly, that Christ
having, consideration of himself as single and alone in his righteous Manhood,
utterly refuses to speak or act in that capacity. I do (says he) nothing of my
self, but as my Father has taught me, I speak these things; he that sent me is
with me; the Father has not left me alone; For I do always those things that
please him; Look how Christ in this respect deports himself in the exercise of
his rule toward his Head, the Father, (so ought you most Renowned Patriots, in
Parliament and Army) to demean your selves, in the exercise of your Rule,
toward Christ, who is your Head; you ought to see an insufficiency in the
wisdom and strength of flesh, a weakness in your selves left alone, even in
your best estate; and that your safety and force lies in being yoaked to Christ
through meekness of spirit and submission of will to him in all your
enterprises.

Although Popular Government in a Free State, considered in it self, may justly
of all others be accounted here with us the most natural and adequate medium,
whereby to attain and secure the peoples Liberty and welfare, (which is one
great end of Magistracy) yet if the persons managing this Government, be slaves
to their ambitious lusts, and servants to gain, the Government will be
difficultly preserved from corrupting. Good rules indeed in its constitution
(as frequent change of office and residence, and the balancing particular men's
interests, and setting bounds to their riches and greatness, with the like) may
greatly avail to its preservation, and are needful. But we shall never be
settled upon the right Basis of good Government, till Christ reveal himself in
our Rulers, as the Cornerstone of the whole building, teaching them to deny
themselves, and naturally to take care of the Commonweal, by faithfully and
impartially distributing to every man his portion of Freedom, Justice and
Encouragement in due season, and doing right to all without respect of persons;
not siding with part of the good people in neglect of the rest, nor engrossing
to themselves the benefits of power and rule, to the unjust exclusion or
oppression of any; the discovery of this just upright spirit in our Magistracy,
will terrify their enemies, make glad all honest hearts, and convince the
disaffected of the excellency of the Good Cause so long contested for.

The wise King of Israel tells us, Eccles. 8.9. there is a time when one man
rules over another to his own hurt. And when is that, but at such time as he
rules in a self-promoting and self-securing way, contrary to Gods heart, and to
the common right: for this corrupts his spirit, mis-leading him from the fear
of God, and sets him at defiance with the popular Interest; so that he is
exposed to their severe judgment, when they shall recover power and liberty;
as also to the wrathful displeasure of God, whose powerful arm executes his
righteous will everywhere, and upon all persons without control or limitation;
that therefore which next follows in the same Chapter is considerable; And so I
saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the Holy, and
they were forgotten in the City where they had so done; this is also vanity
which we have seen too in part fulfilled upon some great men of this last age
of the world, that a long time went together with the upright to the House of
God, and had a mighty name in the visible Church, the Jerusalem below: But in
the generation to come their name shall be blotted out, and the memory of them
be cut off from the earth, because they were enemies to the Crucifying work of
Saving-grace.

It is observable, that God has suffered some bitter degenerate root or other
to grow up and show it self in so many visible forms of Worship, and sects of
Religious Professors successively, from Popery to Episcopacy, and so downward
even to these very times: when they have once come to greatness, and increased
into a Kingdom, what envy, pride, self-confidence, bitterness against
dissenting Brethren, and other such fruits of a private self-magnifying spirit,
have suddenly sprung forth and obtained deep rooting in the midst of them! It
is worth observation also on the other hand, that some gleanings may be found
in various and differing forms and sects of persons, who we cannot but in our
consciences judge and hope are accepted with God, and faithful in the main:
From hence certainly the Lord would instruct us how empty a thing the form of
Godliness is without the power of it, and that the power of Godlinese does
nevertheless well consist with diverse forms. Circumcision is nothing, nor
uncircumcision, but the new creature; and the peace of God is upon all those
that walk according to this rule. But, alas how? how greatly do we yet deviate
from it, whilst every one is apt to measure his Brother from his harmony or
dissent in opinion and worldly interest, rather then from the new Birth, and a
meek Godly conversation? Such as worship God in Spirit, rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in flesh, such are the true circumcision: they
have the end of the Law, and of all Gods Ordinances and Institutions fulfilled
in them. Nor does this consideration slightly concern our Magistrates. Every
sort almost of professors is eagerly desirous of your countenance, and too
many endeavor to monopolize it to themselves; nor only so, but they would
engage your Authority in suppressing whatsoever is contrary to their way. But I
trust the Lord will fully open your eyes to see the falsehood and deceit of
this spirit, which is so much the more dangerous, as the form wherein it is
enthroned is more glorious then others, or the people in whom it rules more
zealous, and in appearance holy.

There is but two sorts of Religion in the general, of those who call
themselves Christian. The one has its center in self or nature, (I mean not
degenerate and polluted nature, as in the Fall; for nothing can dwell there
except irreligion, but) renewed through the common light and grace of God, to
its primitive luster and purity (in kind, though not in measure) wherein man
was first created. This sort of Religious persons are cleansed from the common
pollutions of the world through lust, by the knowledge of Christ. They are a
knowing enlightened people, forward in serving God, and strict in the obedience
of his Ordinances, according to their interpretation of them. But their fear of
God is taught them by the precepts of man, it is derived to them in a humane
natural spirit and light. Self is indeed the ultimate scope of these men's
Religion: And therefore they delight to distinguish themselves by somewhat in
the formal part or outward circumstances of their Religion, that may serve to
embody them in a right understanding between themselves, and an open
distinction from other; and then from their own interest, as thus a simple
distinct body, make judgment of all dissenting parties, favoring or
dis-affecting them, as they do or do not conform to their model and opinions.
This kind of Religion wherever it is, will unavoidably harbor a persecuting
spirit, which is the brand of Antichrist; self-love is the very soul of this
Religion. Those that are of it, can follow God so far as some gain accrues to
their fleshly mind by his service, but no further; they would have somewhat
whereof to glory in the sight of God and before men, and would not glory in God
himself only; prosperity detects their filthyness, and destroys their souls.
Affliction shakes them off like untimely fruit, but they must and will grow
together with the Wheat, until the Lord root them up, and consume them at his
coming.

The second kind of Religion has its foundation and center in the love of God,
and unity of Spirit with Christ who is the Head of the Church. Such as are of
this Religion, love Christ for himself, and all his members for the love of
him. They judge of the members by their proportion and Symmetry with their
Head; not by comparing others to themselves. They would have none follow them
further then they follow Christ. Nor do they comply with any implicitly, having
men's persons in admiration for advantage, but receive and cherish the truth
wherever they meet it, for the love of it self. They fight against error with
spiritual weapons; and their faith stands not in the wisdom nor strength of
man, but in the power and free grace of God. The Kingdom of God in which they
are, is not in meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost. He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of them; so far as bodily exercise may profit themselves or their
Brother in the best things, they are willing to use it, but Godliness is the
thing they chiefly intend, which has the promises of this life, and of the
life to come. The variety of forms cannot so disguise the true Saint, as to
deter these from acknowledging him; nor so beautify the natural man or carnal
professor, as to induce these to magnify and exalt him. Fullness cannot utterly
alienate their hearts from God; sufferings can never separate them from the
love of Christ, or a faithful patience in well-doing. Gods outgoings in the
midst of us, have clearly discovered this distinction in Religion; he now
expects, that the former of them, which is outward in the letter and form only,
should not suffice us, and the latter which is inward in the power and spirit,
should take place in us.

I know no greater sign of Christ's hastening to set up his righteous Rule openly
in the world, then the embodying of all his Saints in a free fellowship with,
and hearty owning of one another in the substance of true Religion, which is to
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God. For when Zion, the
Mountain of the Lord, his holy City, shall once be raised out of the dust, her
King will soon show himself in the midst of her, in the apparent exercise of
his glorious Dominion upon the earth: Now the constitution of this Holy City
the New Jerusalem is such as is described, Rev. 20. at the end.

First it is comprehensive of all Saints, so as to receive, and gather into the
Unity of the Spirit, all godly and righteous ones every where, whom God
acknowledges to be his Beloved Seed, though their measures be diverse, their
haltings and blemishes great. The Nations if them that are saved shall walk in
the light of the glory of God and the Lamb which lightens this City. And the
Rings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it. And the Gates of it
shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no night there: and they
shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations into it. All the children of
light must have free admittance into this New Jerusalem; they are by the New
birth made free of this City. None may upon any pretense, deny them free
commerce in it: Those Societies therefore, that have not this largeness of
heart, to receive into the bonds of Brotherhood all the members of Christ,
(from the most honorable to the most abject and the outcast) are not to be
thought the Heavenly Zion, or Holy City of God, wherein God shall tabernacle
with men, as is promised, in order to subject the Kingdoms of the world to his
Scepter. It Is true, such Societies may have many in them that are precious to
God, and actually Saints, but they lie yet among the pots, scattered abroad in
the rubbish of Babel: they are not framed together, and built up in the visible
frame and constitution proper to Zion. This Holy City when she shall once
manifestly appear in her beauty, will send forth a collective influence, able
to attract and knit together the hearts of all Gods dear children, out of every
tongue, Nation, Language and people.

Secondly, This New Jerusalem from above, has also in its constitution an
exclusive power, by which all the wicked and hypocritical are kept out of her,
verse. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are
written in the Lambs Book of Life. That very light and glory of Zion, which
unites and gathers into one professed Body her own children, shall be as a thick
cloud and gloomy darkness to all her enemies: And this by reason of the
opposition between Zions constitution, (which is public, large and capacious
for the receipt and entertainment of all the meek subjects of her King) and the
constitution of the worldly Church, which is private, and restrained within the
compass of self glorying principles.

The Lord I hope has begun this great work of uniting his Saints, and
embodying them, to the view of all, in the Spirit of holiness, and in that love
which is the Bond of perfectness: the speedy progress whereof all the godly
ought to endeavor. As the defection of the Churches from their Primitive
simplicity, came through their cleaving to the persons, opinions, Ministry or
Interests of men (though good men) saying every one, I am of Paul, I am of
Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: so their return to the same
simplicity will be by ceasing to glory in men, and cleaving entirely to their
Head Christ Jesus. In so doing they shall have a sanctified use of all things.
All is theirs, they are Christ's, Christ is Gods.

Happy are we, if after all the shaking work that God has wrought in these
Nations, we can be brought to sit looser from whatsoever may be shaken and
removed, that so an entrance may be given us into the Kingdom of Christ that
cannot be moved. But if upon the proof which the Lord is now bringing the good
people of the Nation to, they start aside from him, and corrupt through
prosperity and power; if they apply not themselves, with self denial and
singleness of heart, to the advancement of liberty, common good, the power of
godliness, and the unity of all Saints, we may well expect that God will yet
proceed to shake us more terribly then ever.

FINIS.

