THE SAINTS TESTIMONY Finishing through SVFFERINGS: OR, The Proceedings of the
Court against the Servants of Jesus, who were called before them to be tried at
the late Assizes (or Sessions) held in Banbury in the County of Oxon, the 26
day of the seventh Month, 1655.

Also a Relation of Margret Vivers, going to the Steeple-house in Banbury,
after the Assize (or Sessions) as aforesaid: And a Testimony against False
Prophets, and false Doctrine; with an Answer to the Objection about the woman
forbidden to speak in the Church: And some passages about the Lords former
sending of his Servants and Messengers. And who are no Jesuits, Fugitives, nor
Vagabonds. And the manner of Richard Farnsworth imprisonment at Banbury, with a
short Examination and Answer. And the cause of his detainment.

Also, A Warning from the Spirit of the Lord (in his handmaid Anne Audland) to
the persecuting Priest and people, etc. And a Letter of Robert Rich to the
Magistrates of Banbury, and to John Griffith, Deputy Recorder, who sat Judge
in their Court, at the Assize (or Session) as aforesaid. Likewise a Letter of
Tho. Curtis to the professed Minister called Samuel Wells in Banbury. And a
Certificate wherein is manifested the diligence that was used to know the
causes of the prisoners commitments that were called to a trial at Banbury, (
Anne Audland, Jane VVaugh, Sarah Tims, and Nathaniel Weston) as well as Robert
Rich, who was that day committed out of the Court to prison in Banbury. With a
Paper relating the sufferings of the Innocent.

Rev. 12.13. and 17. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth,
he persecuted the woman which brought forth the Manchild: and the Dragon was
wrath with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which
keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's. 1655.

THE Saints Testimony Finishing through SUFFERINGS.
THere being a General Sessions (and pretended Jail-delivery) holden at the
Town and Borough of Banbury, the fourth day of the week, being the six and
twentieth day of the seventh month, 1655. and to many known, that several of
the Servants of the Living God were there imprisoned, whom the world in scorn
calls quakers; so many friends to them and the truth of God, were moved out of
Bristol, Glocestershire, Barkshire, and other parts of the Nation, to come and
visit them, and to use their endeavors that justice and equity might be done
them; at the beginning of the Sessions we were there, and heard the Charge
given, and was present the whole time all our friends were tried, and observed
as follows.

After awhile, one Thomas Colle was called into the Court, (who bore some office
in the Town,) when he appeared, it was observed great rage against him role,
yet little was said to him, but that he was unmannerly in that he kept on his
hat; and they asked him, if he knew where he was, or before whom, and said that
he affronted the Court, and words to that purpose, although the man uttered not
one uncivil word; whereupon the Deputy Recorder called John Griffith, who sat
Judge in the Court, fined him to pay five pounds, and condemned him to prison
til he should pay the same, and he was fined forty shillings more for neglect
of his office, as they said, and because be refused to pay the money, was sent
to prison accordingly, as they had commanded. This hard sentence being thus
passed, was a great burden to them who loved Righteousness, and expected
equity; And clearly seeing that the said Thomas Cole for conscience sake could
not respect any ones person, he being enlightened with the light of Christ
Jesus, which respects no man's person, and in obedience to him and the Apostle
who was guided by the same spirit of Light, who says; My brethren, have not
the faith of our Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, for
if ye respect person ye commit sin, James 1.9.
and are convinced of the Law as Transgressors. After that the said Thomas Cole
was sent to the prison as aforesaid, one Robert Rich (standing not far from the
place where the Judge sat) who is a friend to all that love righteousness, was
made a witness for the just GOD against all injustice and deceit, he seeing and
hearing the said Judge, and some others that sat near him on the Bench,
earnestly inviting two men (that was in the Court with their hats off) whole
names (as was afterward informed, were two Priests, viz. Priest Smart, and
Priest Jones,) to the transgression of the same thing, for which a little
before they had fined and sent to prison Thomas Cole, namely to the putting and
keeping on their hats; the aforesaid Robert Rich taking notice of their
partiality, and unjust proceedings herein, and to see the Law of God not
regarded by them, but threw behind their backs, which says, Thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor; was moved of the Lord to speak
after this manner: Christ Jesus who respects not the person of any man, and
judges righteously, will give unto every one of you according to your deeds,
and they that judge ought to judge righteous Judgment, without respect of
persons; some small enmity arose against him, and one sitting on the Bench
asked what business he had in the Town, who answered, he came to visit some
friends; they asked his name, and where he lived, to both which he gave a meek
and a just answer; presently after this the court a journed til the afternoon.

In the afternoon friends came again to the Court, where the Magistrates was
set, and within a short time she (who is called Anne Audland) was called to the
Bar, and there in the Court an indictment was read against her, charging her
with blasphemy, and on they did proceed to trial, called a Jury and brought in
their witnesses, which differed one from another, and was in confusion, though
they pretended to bear witness to one and the same thing, but falsely was the
accused, and there did declare against, and deny in the presence of the living
God, those things charged upon her: so he that sat as Judge in the court, spoke
to the Jury, that all which was proved could not be found, or would not prove
blasphemy, and words to them to that purpose; so they went aside to consider of
it, and being together, where by the Law they ought to have bin kept alone, til
they were agreed upon their verdict, and being together could not find the bil,
for some of the Jury said, why should we find this bil, seeing we have not
evidence to prove it? or words to that purpose, and so threw it by; but one of
them that sat on the Bench that same day, and is called a Magistrate, came in
to the Jury, when they were together, to corrupt and instigate them, as some of
the Jury has confessed, which was contrary to the known Law of the Nation in
such cases provided, and contrary to truth and equity, which is a greater crime
and breach of the Law, then those things which many of the servants of Jesus
are imprisoned for. And after awhile the Jury came into the court, and was
asked if they were agreed, to which they said they were; and gave in their
verdict for the Protector, but they said they found not blasphemy, it was then
demanded what was found? to which they said misdemeanor; then she desired to
know what she was accused of, for they read then bil, and called their
witnesses for blasphemy, but blasphemy was not found; then they said they found
misdemeanor against her, the asked in what? they said in calling the Minister a
false Prophet, but she denied that she did, as they said, although its no
transgression to call them false prophets who are false prophets, which does
not abide in the doctrine of Christ, and their minister being then on the bench
in the Court, was asked what he had to accuse her of; he answered, he
deserferred his cause to God, and said he desired she might have what favor
the Law would afford; yet for all this, though the Bil was not found, and
though their as they call him, there present, did not accuse her of any thing,
they committed her to Prison again, who had been there prisoner nine months
before, and fasly accused at her first commitment, for no other thing did she
speak but the truth, according to plain Scripture, a true Relation of which is
published and declared in a printed paper, being entitled, A true Declation of
the suffering of the Innocent, who is hated and persecuted without a cause,
which is made manifest daily, for which the righteous Judge of all the world
will deal righteously, and call you to an account, and weigh you in an equal
balance, and measure you in a just measure, and from the hand of the Lord must
you receive a reward according to your deeds.

After that, then there was one Jane VVaugh called to the Bar, who had been
imprisoned about sixteen Weeks before, in the Town of Banbury, who at first
coming thither, was in obedience to the Lord, to declare his truth, and witness
against deceit, for which she were beaten, and abused, persecuted and
imprisoned, and evilly entreated in the said Banbury, as the servants of the
Lord in former ages (as well as this) were, by such an evil generation, and
seed of evil doers, as they are, whose fruits makes them manifest, to be guided
by the same spirit (though under a refined subtilty) that other persecutors of
the innocent, spoken of in Scripture were. The said Jane VVaugh, as foresaid,
who had been a witness to the truth of God, and against the deceit of the
world; and after she had been sore abused in the said Banbury, persecuted,
imprisoned, and put forth of the Town, for witnessing the truth against deceit;
and after a certain time, being moved by the Spirit of the Lord to come into
Banbury again, and being with a friend getting him to write a Letter for her;
the Magistrates hearing of her being there, sent for her to come before them;
John Austine who was then Mayor, caused the Oath of Abjuration to be tendered
unto her, and because in obedience to the commands of Christ Jesus, who says,
Swear not at all, she refused to swear, being faithful to him, abiding in his
Doctrine; and although she so did in obedience to his Command, out of love to
him and his truth; and there in their court, when the said Oath was tendered,
she utterly denied all things contained in that Oath, and Witnessed against all
Popery, and Popish, Jesuiticall Opinions whatsoever; yet the was then
(notwithstanding all that) committed to Prison, where the remained (though the
breach of any Law were not laid to her charge) til the General Sessions,
Assize, or pretended Jail-delivery, when and where she was called to the Bar,
as abovesaid, and appearing there that day, where no Accusation and witness
came in against her, nor any breach of the Law or mis-demeanor laid to her
charge; but notwithstanding, she was asked to put in sureties for her good
behavior; then she asked them on the bench, what Law she had broken, and would
have had them to have convinced her of a transgression, by making known to her
the breach of some Law, the which they refused; but she could get no other
answer, but that if she would not give in sureties, she must to prison again,
which was done accordingly; now let all the wise in heart, that truly fear God,
consider whether these proceedings against the innocent be either legal or
just; and if they do not exceed the proceedings of heathen Magistrates, who
sat Judges in trials against the Christians and servants of Jesus in former
ages, as in the Scriptures are left upon Record.

Consider, and see the actings of the persecuting Jews, who had the form, but
wanted the power, and so out of a blind zeal persecuted the Servants of Jesus,
who were in the power and life of truth, and they were sore moved and offended
at the Servants of Jesus, and exceeding mad against Paul, who was pressed in
Spirit (being in Macedonia) to testify to the Jews that Jesus was Christ; and
when they aposted themselves and blasphemed, he shoke his Raiment, and said
unto them, your blood be upon your own heads, and having cleared his conscience
to them, he departed, and went to the Gentiles, and so entered into a certain
man's house that worshipped God, and being moved of the Lord, he spoke and was
not afraid, the Lord being with him, and having much people in that place,
where he continued a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them;
and the Jews which made insurrection against Paul, when they brought him before
the Deputy of Achaia for teaching the word of the Lord, which their dark minds
(who lived in Envy and Malice against the truth) could not receive: And now
observe the actings of the Deputy of Achaia (who though he might be accounted a
heathen or an Antichristian) whose proceedings in that case might preach or
teach wisdom to some who profess themselves to be Christian Magistrates; for
when Gallio was the Deputy of Achaia (as John Griffith Deputy-Recorder was
Judge in the Court, at the assize or sessions in Banbury; before whose
judgment seat the servants of Jesus was brought, by such as had made
insurrection against them in their Market, Steeplehouse, and Steeplehouse-yard,
in nature, like the envious persecutors of the Servants of Jesus: For, the Jews
made insurrection against Paul, and brought him before Gallio to the Judgment
Seat, and laid down their accusations against him, (according to Law, there and
then accusing him to the Deputy, who sat as Judge, saying, in their
accusation, this fellow (to wit, Paul) persuades men to worship God contrary
to the Law; and when Paul (the accused) was about to open his mouth to answer
(against that accusation and) for himself (the Deputy of Achaia which Paul was
brought before, to wit) Gallio, answered and said unto the Jews (very wisely in
the Prisoners behalf, who it is likely in his conscience was convinced of their
envy and malice against him, he said to the accusers) if it were a matter of
wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews (being troubled to see their unjust
accusations, and unreasonable actings) reason would (says he) that I should
bear with you, but if it be a question of words or names; and of your Law, look
ye to it, for I will be no Judge in such matter, and he drove them from the
Judgment seat, Act. 18.12, 13, 14, 15, 16,

So where wicked lewdness or a matter of wrong is committed, reason does
require to hear it; and reasonable men to determine or judge according to
equity; that are to judge in that case, and to hear the accused as well as the
accusers, that Justice may be Ministered according to the offenses, but if it be
a question of words, or names; or telling hireling Priests or false Prophets of
their deceits and false worships, who profess themselves to be Ministers of
Christ and are not, let them either plead their cause from the Scriptures, if
they can, to procure their practice to be according thereunto, or else let them
cover their faces for shame.

After Paul, who was brought before Gallioes Judgment seat, had taken leave of
the brethren, (being at liberty) he went thence into Syria, and from thence to
Ephesus, and there entered into the Synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews, and
went from Ephesus unto Cesaria, and when he had saluted the Church, he went
down to Antioch, Act. 18.18. to the 24.
and spent some time before he departed (and having his freedom) departing from
Antioch, he went over all the Country of Galathia, and Phrygia, strengthening
the Disciples (and although he thus wandered or went through the Countries, yet
were he neither Jesuit, Fugitive, nor Vagabond) and passing through the upper
Costs, came to Ephesus, and there finding Disciples, he laid his hands on
them, and were strengthened by him, and he went into the Synagogue, and there
boldly declared the things which concerned the Kingdom of God, where some
believed, as others who believed not were hardened, and spoke evil of the truth,
(as they do now.) And there were seven Sons of one of the Jews, with certain
Vagabonds Jews, and chief of the Priests, who were hypocrites, that imitated or
counterfeited the way of God, and had a just recompense for their reward, so
that they fled out of the house naked and wounded, so there arose no small stir
about that way, for they that were in the false worship made a great uproar,
but the Town Clerk appeared the people, and did not impute it to Paul, but said
to the rude multitude and false worshippers, that they ought to be quiet, and
to do nothing rashly, and told them that they were in danger to be called in
question for that days uproar; and did not lay it to Paul's charge, that he was
the cause of this their Tumult and misdemeanour, although he had declared
against their deceit and false worship; and after the uproar was ceased, Paul
called the Disciples unto him, and embraced them, and was not at that time
committed to Prison, but departed from thence and went into Macedonia, and when
he had gone over those parts, and had given them exhortation, he came into
Greece, and passing through several places and countries, strengthening the
Disciples, and preaching the Kingdom of God, freely declaring the counsel of
God, coveting no man's silver nor Gold, and as he finished his course, the Jews
(and false worshippers) which were of Asia, when they saw him in the Temple
(who had not the command there, but the chief Priests and persecuting Jews,
their party, who) crying out and said, Men of Israel help, this is the man that
teaches all men every where, against the people and the law and this place;
(meaning the Temple,) and all the City was moved, and the people ran together,
and they took Paul and drew him out of the Temple, (as they now do out of their
pretended Churches, or Idol-Temples, such as are witnesses against deceit) and
forth with their doors was shut, Acts 21.27, 28, 30, 31, etc.
and as they went about to kill him (their envy being great, and their rage
high) Lissius the chief Captain hearing that the whole City were in an uproar,
and finding the Jews going about to kill Paul, they seeing the Captain and
soldiery coming, left beating of him, so the chief Captain took Paul out of
their hands, demanding who he was, and what he had done, and the multitude
being confused, some crying one thing, and some another; and not knowing the
certainty, he commanded him to be carried into the Castle, and on the Stairs
he was preserved, and born of the Soldiery from the violence of the people,
who tumultuously followed after him, crying, away with him; and when he was on
the Stairs, the Captain gave Paul License and liberty to clear his conscience
to them, which, when he had done the Zealous falseworshippers, and
antichristians, lifted uptheir voices and cried, away with such a fellow from
the earth, it is not fit that he should live, Act. 21.40. and the 22.1. to the
23. ver. And their malice and envy being great, after they had judged him not
fit to live, and had not the Magistrate preserved him, they had taken away his
life, when they cried out against him, cast off their Clothes, and threw dust
in the air. Then the Captain commanded him to be brought into the Castle, to
be examined, that he might know wherefore they cried so against him; and the
Captain (through misinformation) caused him to be scourged and bound with
thongs, contrary to the Law of the Romans, being un-condemned, who after he
knew that Paul was a Roman, he was afraid, because he had acted contrary to the
Law: and after he knew the certainty wherefore Paul was accused of the Jews, he
dealt justly, and loosed him from his bonds, and commanded the chief Priest and
all their counsel (his accusers) to appear, and brought Paul down, and set him
before them, giving him liberty to speak for himself; and after he had spoken
for himself, and the truth being cleared, there was a Division amongst the
people, and many received it, though it were by others rejected, who continued
in their persecution; and the Captain fearing lest they should bave pulled him
in pieces, preserved him out of their hands, and after that the chief Captain
heard that the chief priests and jews had conspired against Paul to take away
his life, and forty of them had bound themselves under a great curse, that
they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed him; but the Governor
preserved him out of their cruel hands, and sent Paul away by night unto
Cesaria, (providing with him necessaries meet for that journey, and so sent him
safely to Faelex the Governor, with an Epistle showing the cause wherefore he
was committed, or taken into his custody, with the Jews accusations laid to his
charge, or spoak of the Jews that accused him, who sought to take away his
life, which he understood to be worthy neither of death, nor of bonds; and
therefore he gave commandment to his accusers to appear before Foelex, to say
what they had against him. And when the Soldiers came to Cesaria, they
delivered the Epistle to Foelex the Governor, and presented Paul also before
him, who when he had read the Epistle, and asked of what Province he was,
understanding he was of Celiscia, dealt nobly with him, saying, He would hear
him when his accusers was come: And after they came with a certain Oritor, who
informed the Governor against Paul the Prisoner, and begun to accuse him,
laying many false accusations against him as at this time they do against the
servants of Jesus, who abide in his Doctrine as Paul did, whom they in their
accusation said he was sound a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition
amongst all the Jews throughout the world, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the
Nazarens; and when Tertulus the Oritor, which the High priests and Elders
brought, to carry on their deceit in a plawsable manner, had laid down their
false accusations, the ( high Priests, Elders and) Jews assented to the same,
saying they were so.

Then Paul, after Poelex the Judge had beckned to him to speak, he answered the
more cheerfully for himself, and to clear his innocence, and make their
accusations appear to be false; he let the Judge understand, that there were
but twelv days since he went down to Jerusalem to worship, and letting him
understand the whole matter, that there was no such thing done by him, as they
had laid down in their accusations against him, neither could they prove the
things whereof they accused him: And Foelex who sat Judge, hearing these
things, Act. 23.23. to the end.
that he might act according to Law, deferred til Lissius the chief Captain
should come that he might know the uttermost of their matter, and commanded
that Paul should be kept til he came; Act. 34.1. to the 24. verse.
he also commanded the Centurion that kept him, to let him have liberty, and
that he should not forbid or hinder any of his acquaintance to minister or come
unto him. By all this you may learn how to act and do in such cases, whose
unrighteous acting against ( Anne Audland, Jane VVaugh, Sarah Times, Nathaniel
Weston, etc.) the Servants of the Lord, that gives not the liberty to them,
that the Heathens did to Christians in former ages.

One Sarah Tims, who had been imprisoned in Banbury eleven weeks, who met the
Priest in the Grave-yard, and said, M^n, fear the Lord (in obedience to his
command) not uttering abuse to any, and when she had so spoken, the rude
multitude hurried her, and struck her with their hands, others kicked her, and
stoned her with stones; and John Austine being Mayor, and other Magistrates
there present, rebuked not the rude company, as is certified in a Letter, and
sent in writing to the Priest and Magistrates in Banbury; and after she was
beaten and abused, she was sent to the Prison, though no Law was by her broken,
as did appear at her examination at the Assizes or Sessions at Banbury, the day
as aforesaid; and being called to the Bar, appearing, it was asked to give in
Sureties for her good behavior, so she desired to know first what Law she had
transgressed, and what they had against her, to which they answered, if she
would not give in sureties, she should to prison again; then she desired to
know by what law they committed her, and one John Austine, called Mayor,
answered, that sweeping the house, and washing the dishes was the first point
of law to her (or words to that effect) so sent her back again to the Prison,
she not being charged with the breach of any Law, nor witness brought in
against her: but it will be hard for any to believe these things, who were not
eye witnesses of the in, that such in justice should be acted in this Nation,
where there has bin so much freedom and liberty of conscience talked of.

Then one Nathaniel Weston, an inhabitant in the said Town, was called to the
Bar, who had bin commanded by the Lord to go to the Steeplehouse in Banbury,
where the people were assembled together, whilst the Priest of the Town
(called Samuel Wells) was speaking to them, who suddenly gave over preaching
(as they call it) and spoke twice so the people, saying, there was one, he
feared, come into the congregation, which would breed a disturbance, and he
called to some to take him forth, for he said, he could not proceed to prayer
whilst he was there; then one William VVheatly, a Magistrate; with others,
haled him forth of the synagogue, or steeplehouse, and afterward Nathaniel
Weston being sent for before the Mayor, was tendered the Oath of Abjuration,
when in their consciences they might know he was never addicted to popery, but
always an enemy to their Opinions, and from his childhood observed, (and to
them well known, being born and bred in the said Town, and was accounted) to be
a strict professor of that which was accounted the reformed religion, and
continued a diligent hearer of those Ministers who were counted godliest and
strictest in their conversation, till of late, in the light of Christ Jesus, he
saw them to be out of the Doctrine of Christ, and the power thereof; and
although they preached to others, yet themselves were as cast-awaies, not
living the life of them who are declared of in the Scriptures to be the
Servants of God and Ministers of Christ, but live in the pride and
covetousness, in the strife and envying, and in the love and lust, customs and
vanities of the world, (and preaching by their conversation the same things)
things) being thereunto guided by a Spirit of deceit, which is the reason their
hearers live so wickedly, and so they are loved and upheld by the wicked world,
and the love of the Father they know not who live in such practices; therefore
all people behold and see (if you can) the subtle enmity of this Generation, to
be the same that ever was against the true worshippers of God in Spirit, who
use all unjust ways and means as the serpents seed ever did, falsely to accuse
and persecute the innocent. And although it cannot be unknown to the
Magistrates of the town of Banbury, that papists live in it, yet when was it
ever known that they tendered the Oath of Abjuration unto them, as if it were
for no other end, but a snare to entrap the innocent; but the Lord God in his
power is risen, and into the pit must they go, which for others they have
dug, and a just reward shall they receive from the hands of the Lord, whom
we know lives, and will plead the cause of the innocent: and although the said
Nathaniel Weston, when the Oath of Abjuration was tendered to him, did utterly
renounce and deny there openly, all things contained in the said Oath, and
witnessed against all popery, popish, and Jesuitical opinions, or tenants
whatsoever; and told them, that in obedience to the command of Christ Jesus,
who says, swear not at all, he could not swear, lest he should go out of the
Doctrine of Christ, in which he did abide; yet notwithstanding was he sent to
the Prison, where he had lain 14. weeks at their Assize or Session, holden in
Banbury, who was there called, and appearing before them it was demanded of
him, to put in sureties for his good-behaviour, whereupon he desired to know
what Law he had transgressed, which they would not, neither was there any
appeared that laid any misdemeanour or breach of law to his charge,
nevertheless was he sent to the prison, where he does yet remain: So all people
that hear and read these things, you may see with what justice the Magistrates
of Banbury proceeded against the innocent, and servants of the living God.

So there was one Robert Rich (as many others) standing by, who with them was
an eye witness to many of these things thus acted, as before is related, in
their proceedings that day, and saw that there was great Rage in them against
the Innocent, and how they plotted and took Counsel together against the
servants of God, (laying traps and snares to catch them,) and after they had
consulted together, one of the Magistrates there sitting on the Bench (called
Thomas Hathead) said to the Judge, and to some of the rest of the Magistrates, I
suspect them to be Jesuits, whenas that in his conscience would tell him the
contrary, and that out of his Envy he accused them, and desired to have them
tried by the Oath of Abjuration (who in obedience to Christ Jesus durst not
swear, to transgress his Doctrine, and break his command,) so at length they
agreed together, and gave order to have them brought into the Court, and then
the Lord God moved the aforesaid Robert Rich to declare unto them their unjust
proceedings, so according to the command of the Lord, he spoke and said, that
he was a Witness for the righteous Lord God, against their unjust proceedings
in the Court that day, who desired to speak, and to clear his Conscience unto
them, whereupon the Judge and others on the Bench, bad him come up and speak,
and when he was come up and began to speak, they cried away with him, away with
him; pull him down, pull him down; so their Officers, as was commanded them,
pulled him down, and haled the said Robert Rich to prison, not permitting him
to speak, as they had promised.

These things are written and published to the world, that people may not be
ignorant how unjustly the innocent Lambs and servants of Christ Jesus suffer,
and are persecuted in this Nation, which exceeds the persecutions that were in
former ages, either by the jews, or from those in Queen Mary's days, for they
had a Law gave them power, according to which they acted, (so the more to be
excused;) but this Nation has no such persecuting Law in force, and Liberty of
conscience has been proclaimed, and pretended, yet men and women are beaten,
buffetted, haled, stoned and stocked, and after that thrown into prison, holes
and dungeons (the breach of no known Law proved against them) and not so much
freedom afforded them in prison, as to thieves and murderers, whose friends
are not kept from visiting them, as has been known in Banbury, etc. People,
lay these things to heart and repent, that the righteous judgment of God fall
not upon you.

A Warning from the Spirit of the Lord (in his Handmaid) Anne Audland, to the
Priest and persecuting people in Banbury, and all such as may be found in their
nature, and falsely accusing and imprisoning the Servants of the Lord Jesus.
ALthongh I was unjustly imprisoned at the first in the town of Banbury, for no
other thing but speaking the truth, as in a true Declaration of the suffering
of the innocent, who are hated without a cause may be seen, as it is declared
in a printed paper, which was a Letter sent to William Allen, called Justice of
peace; With an answer to the false accusations charged upon the innocent,
wherein their proceedings are laid open, and proved to be contrary to the
Scriptures; as also their proceedings at the last Assize or Sessions holden at
Banbury, the 26. day of the 7. month, 1655. Where I was called to a trial
after long imprisonment or bonds, and there in the Court an Indictment was read
against me, charging me with blasphemy, and on they did proceed, called a Jury,
and brought in their witnesses, which differed one from the other, and was in
confusion, though they pretended to bear witness to one and the same thing, and
falsely was I accused, as it did appear, when the Jury gave in their verdict,
they found no blasphemy, though for it I was accused, as the unchristian
proceedings may further be seen both in the printed paper, (called, The
sufferings of the innocent;) and in what before is said in this Book, about my
Examination and Trial, which is plainly made manifest daily, yet more in these
things before mentioned, and in many other things which are committed, for
which the righteous Judge of all the world will deal righteously, and call you
all to an account, and weigh you in an equal balance, and measure you in a
just measure, Act. 17.31. Rom 2.5, and 6.
and from the hand of the Lord shall you receive a reward according to your
deeds, good weight, pressed down, and running over, such measure as you meeted;
and in the day of your calamity an outside profession in words, when you live
not in obedience to the Lord, will not hide you and cover you, and although I
may be accounted as your Enemy for speaking the truth, yet once again I do warn
you, as from the Lord to repent, Romans 1.18, 19, and 27, 28, etc. Ephesians. 5.6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and turn from the evil of your ways; if there be any Remembrance of your
latter end, when you must come to be judged according to the Light in your
Consciences, which secretly in you bears witness against deceit and
unrighteousness, envy, wrath, and persecution, for which things the wrath of
God comes upon the children of Disobedience; and because judgment is not
speedily executed upon you, do not think you shall escape, for (your deeds are
written in a Book of Remembrance, and) the Book of Conscience willl be opened
and the wicked must not go unpunished. Oh ye foolish people and without
understanding How long will ye walk after your own inventions? Ier. 5.21. and to
the end. Act. 7.51, 52.
How long will ye harden your hearts against the Lord? How long will ye resist
his Holy Spirit? Ye stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in heart and ears, how long
will it be ere you return to him who has often smitten you? shall the innocent
always be your mark to shoot at? and will you make a prey upon the harmless
Lambs of Jesus Christ? truly you will be found as stubble before the fire, and
as dust before the wind, the whirlwind from the Lord God is gone forth, which
will scatter the wicked, and the fire is kindled which will consume you; Jer.
23.19, 20. Mal: 4.1. Matthew. 23.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, etc. Isa. 29.13, 14, 15.16.
Mat. 23.34. Mat. 7.1, 2, 3, 4
thus says the Lord God unto you, ye hypocrites and dissemblers, who make a
profession of my name but not in truth; and calls upon me, but not in
righteousnessl and dcaws near me with your mouth, and enquires after me, like a
people that did delight in uprightness, whenas your hearts are far from me;
Your ears are heavy, and your eyes are dim, and them whom I sent to warn you in
my name to repent, and cease from persecution, ye will not receive, but ye
imprison some, and shamefully entreat others, and same ye send empty away; and
so ye hasten to fill up the measure of your iniquity, the least of you is a
bryar, and the most upright sharper then a thorn hedge, and ye refuse to
return, therefore shall trouble come upon you, as pain upon a woman in travel,
and misery shall come upon you as an armed man: Do you think the Trumpet is
sounded, and the Allarum given for nothing, or will you gather together your
selves against me, and set the briars and thorns in battle? the fire is kindled
which will go through you, and consume you together, for your transgression is
multiplied before me, says the Lord, judgment is turned away backward, truth
is fallen in your streets, Isa. 59.14, 15. Isa. 66.15, 16. Zeph. 1.4, 5, 6, 7
Isa. 9.13, 14, 15. Isa. 1.25, 26. Dan. 4.
and equity cannot enter, therefore says the Lord God, I will plead with you,
and I will judge amongst the Judges, and san the Nations, and cleanse the land of
evil doers, and the wicked will I overturne, and cut off head and tail; the
ancient and honorable he is the head, and the Prophet that prophesies lies, he
is the tail; and Root and Branch shall be consumed, the Lord has spoken it,
and will raise up Judges as at the first, and Counsels as at the beginning, and
the ancient of days shall rule, and the Saints of the most high God shall take
the Kingdom, and the Dominion shall be the Lords: The Lord of Hosts will
accomplish his word by his mighty power and outstretched aim: Therefore now
Magistrates, people and Priest, take warning while you have time and return;
consider of it, what account can you give in the day of your calamity? How will
you stand before the righteous Judge, and to him answer it, your persecuting
the innocent, and your shamefully entreating the harmless? Ye devouring wolves,
Isa. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. Mat. 25.41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
who would tear the poor Lambs of Jesus, how will you stand before the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, it they shall depart into utter darkness that visits not
Christ's little ones in prison? How shall those escape that casts them into
prison? And in as much as you do it to one of the least of his, ye do it unto
him, and better had it been for you that a Millstone had been hanged about your
necks, and you drowned in the depth of the Sea, than to have offended the
little ones of Jesus Christ. My Conscience I do clear unto you, in the presence
of the Lord God, in vain do you dig deep to hide your counsel from him; in vain
do you gather together against the Lord, the burdensome stone which you have
taken upon you, will grind you to pieces; to the light in all your consciences
do I speak, which will witness for God, and against all unrighteousness, in the
day of the Lord, when his righteous judgments shall be revealed from heaven
against all unrighteousness of men, and every tongue shall confess the Lord is
just, and his ways equal; and the witness in all consciences shall answer his
judgments; so in love to your souls, faithfully is the word of the Lord spoken
unto you, and a lamentation there is over you, because you reject the day of
your visitation: Remember you are once more warned in your life time, by the
innocent, who waits in the will of God, patiently to come through the trial,
and following the Lamb in the tribulation, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, and 13, 14. ver. Heb.
12.23. Mat. 26.65, 66.
having fellowship with Jesus Christ in his sufferings, who endured the Cross
and despised the shame, and by the envious Generation was called a Blasphemer,
and in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong cryings, and tears unto him, that was able to save
him from death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7, 8, 9.

A. A.

A TESTIMONY Against False Prophets, and false Teacher: And also the Objection
answered, concerning the woman forbidden to speak in the Church With a Relation
of Margret Vivers, was moved of the Lord to go speak to the Priest in the
Steeplehouse in Banbury: And also concerning the imprisonment of Richard
Farnsworth, etc.
UPon the first day of the week, being the 30. day of the 7. month, one Margret
Vivers, a servant of the Lord, (inhabiting in the Town of Banbury) was moved of
the Lord to go in to the Synagogue, or Steeplehouse in the said Banbury, and
waited upon the Lord, whose power moved her to go to be ordered by him, who
works after the counsel of his own will; and when the Priest of Banbury (
Samuel Wells by name, their professed Minister) had ended and done, she was
moved of the Lord to speak something unto him who had in his Doctrine, or
preachment, been speaking against self-denial, and exhorting his people that
they that had not the spirit might pray for it; saying most of them remained in
unbelief, etc. But the Prayers of the wicked is abomination unto the Lord, and
such as are without the Spirit of Christ (and have it not) are none of his, and
they are the wicked that are in unbelief, and the enviors, mockers, scoffers,
Romans 8. Romans 1.28, 29. Psalm. 66 18. Iud. 18. Mat. 16.24. Mat. 10.38. Luke
14.26, 27. Heb. 2.10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.22.23.
and such as walk after their own ungodly lusts, who are persecutors of the
servants or Jesus, like those (malicious wicked ones, and unbelievers) here at
Banbury, and whilst you regard iniquity in your hearts, God will not regard
your prayers; and to speak against self-denial, is to speak against the
Doctrine of Christ, so no self-denial in obedience to the Doctrine of Christ,
no Disciple or follower of Christ, and no Disciple, no Saint; for says Christ,
he that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself and take up his Cross and
follow me, here the necessity is laid down by Christ himself, therefore he that
denies not self, in obedience to Christ to follow his light, but continues in
sin and unbelief, abiding in darkness, is (no Saint but a Servant of sin, and
so) out of the Doctrine of Christ, and he that abides in darkness, speaking
against self-denial, saying it makes no Saint, (though in obedience to the
Spirit and word of God) he is a contradictor of the truth, and a denyer of the
Doctrine of Christ, and neither knows a Saint nor him that sanctifies, but
is ignorant of the turn and the Apostles Doctrine, who says, seeing you have
purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, love one another
with a pure heart fervently, being born again (contrary to self, and the
corruptible seed) for witnessing him that sanctifies, John 8.12.
and that which discovers sin and self in the ground of it, with its fruits
and effects, which is the true light of Christ who calls to repentance, and a
denial both of sin and self, and in obedience to his call, such as follow his
light are thereby led out both of darkness and self, out of self-love,
self-seeking, self-conceitedness, and all unbelief and sinfulness, as well as
out of self-righteousness, error, delusion, and deceit; and into the love and
joy of the Lord, righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and so into
the mavelous light, even the light of life, according to the word of the
Lord, in obedience thereunto, through the working of the Spirit and power of
God; but such as are servants of sin, and do not envy self, but disobeyeth the
light of him that sanctifies, they are in the unrighteousness, denying the
Doctrine of Christ, and turns persecutors of them that deny self in obedience
to him, as their fruits makes manifest (who continue in felse undenyed) as well
as the Priests (antichristian or) false Doctrine, for after the Priest of
Banbury had been spoken unto for the same, instead of vindicating by Scripture
what he had delivered contrary to truth, when he was spoken to for it, he
suffered the servants of the Lord Jesus (as antichristians aforetime did) to be
haled out of the Synagogue, and haled down to the Goalers house, attended with
a great company of people which, showed much rudeness and wildness, and what
little effect their Ministry had wrought, and so it were a clear manifestation
that they were unbelievers, and those that regarded iniquity in their hearts,
and lived in sin, and self undenyed, and were not guided by the spirit of
Christ, but of Antichrist, as persecutors and such in their nature aforetime
were, Act. 17.5, 6, etc. Afterward, one was moved to go down to the Goalers
house, to the friend that was in custody at that time, and some they pushed and
abused him, and some others began to reason with him, and would have had the
Steeplehouse to be the Church, but could not prove it so to be; and there they
showed again that their Priests Ministry had neither taught them civility nor
good-behaviour, that were so wild and disboist, neither had his Ministry taught
them (as was said) to know what the Church of Christ was, for the Church is the
body, of which Christ is head, and he is the head of the body his Church, Ephesians.
1.22, 23. Coll. 1.18, 19.
as the Scripture witnesses, but Steeplehouses are not the body of which
Christ is head, neither is Christ the head of the body of Steeplehouses (as he
is of his Church (therefore the Steeplehouses are not Christ's church, and yet
poor deluded creatures, have been taught by the Priests to believe that
steeplehouses are churches, and so they call them, and rests in the perishing
and visibles, that are so ignorant of the true church, the pillar and ground of
truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Heb. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.20.21, 22. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 32.
ver.

And after that when they had confessed that they had Margret Vivers, (who had
spoken to the Priest in the Steeplehouse, after that he had ended that day)
there, neither for whoredom, felony, nor theft, and words to that purpose, yet
it was the Mayors mind that she should be there; but whether she had committed
any offense or no, they could not tell, (as they said, and words to that
effect;) and the man that kept her there upon such uncertainty, when they was
about to put her in Prison, and had her at the door, but did not put her in;
for no Law by her was transgressed at that time, as it was said, that could be
proved for witnessing the truth in obedience to the command of the Lord; (yet
though they did not commit herto Prison, other two they did, one that stood by,
and another that was quietly passing up the street at that same time) and the
man that had kept her in custody, did object against a woman speaking in the
Church; it was asked whether the Spirit of God might not be permitted to speak
in the Temple of God, yea or nay; the which by some was answered and granted
that it might.

Answer. To the Question about the woman forbidden to speak in the Church, and
proved that the spirit of God may speak in his Temple, either in the Body of
male or female, let the woman keep silence in the Church, as it is said, and
let God speak by his spirit in his Temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. Either of male or
female, whose bodies are the Temples of God through the spirit, 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. For in Christ Jesus the spirit of God in male and female is both one, Ephesians.
2.19.19, 20. Gal. 3.27, 28. And Paul he commended Pheba in his Epistle to the
Romans, which Phebe was a servant of the Church which was at Cenchrea, Romans
16.1. and in the same Epistle he saluted Priscilla, and also gave thanks with
the Churches for her labor, who had been a helper of him in Christ Jesus, and
she was a woman labourer in the Gospel by the Spirit of truth; so was there
woman laborers with Paul in the Gospel, which he writes of in his Epistle to
the Philippians, as well as them he speaks of, whose names are written in the
book of life, Romans 16.3, 4. Phi. 4.3.

So was there women guided by the Spirit of the Lord, that were the Lords
Prophetesses, as well as there were men that were his Prophets; and the Lord
spoke his word by his own Spirit, in and through the one as well as the other:
Miriam, Arons Sister, was a Prophetess, and spoke forth the praise of God, in
that dispensation and administration, by the spirit of God that teaches to
prophensie, as well as the manifestation of it is given to profit withal, Exodus
15.20, 21. Isa. 8.16, 17, 1 Cor. 12.7.

And Deborah a Prophetess by the Spirit of the Lord which taught her to
prophecy, she therewith judged Israel, and were a Minister of Justice amongst
the Lords people in her days, and in that dispensation, insomuch, that the
Children of Israel came up to her for judgment, and did not despise the
counsel of the Lords spirit in a woman preacher, or a Judge in Israel, and a
Prophetess of the Lord, Judge. the 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

And in the days of Josiah King in Israel, there was one Huldah a Prophetess,
that lived in Jerusalem, a woman Preacher, or one, who by the Spirit of the
Lord, declared and spoke to the people the word of the Lord, and to her the
Priest and people went to enquire and hear the word of the Lord, according also
to the Kings command, 2 King. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. Besides, several other
Prophetesses as well as Prophets, there was in the time of old among the Lords
people, Issa. 8.3. Nebe. 6.14. Luke 2.29, 30, 31, 32.
as the prophetess in Isajahs time, and in Nehemiahs time, so there was in the
Apostles time a man in Cesaria had four daughters that were virgins did
prophecy, Act. 21.8, 9. And at the coming of Christ when Simeon that just man
spoke of him, the light of the Gentiles and the glory of the people Israel,
there was one woman a widow, of above fourscore years of age, that had no
outward huusband at home to ask, who was a preacher, or one that spoke of the
Lord Jesus to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2.36, 37, 38.

And Tryphena, and Tryphosa, and Persis (three virtuous godly women) did labor
much in the Lord, which Paul (in his Epistle to the Romans) did salute; and as
the wife is in subjection to her husband, so is the Church subject unto Christ,
who is the head thereof, as the husband is the head of the wife; and Chsist
being the Head of his Spouse, or husband of his Church, the Spouse of Christ
united unto him, and betrothed in Righteousness, both asks of him, and
staying at home takes counsel with him, though the Harlot from home, and the
stranger unto him, knows it not; and says the Lord, ^el 2.28, 6.
I will pour out of my spirit, that sons, and daughters, and handmaids also
shall prophecy; and who are they that are offended hereat now? that the Lord
does see, but proud, covetous, self-seeking priests, (who never knew God,) and
their hearers that are deceived by them, and such in their nature who know not
the sure word and spirit of prophecy, but are ignorant both of the mystery of
godliness, 2 Pet. 1.19. Col. 1.27. Rev. 19.13. Heb. 17.8.
and so of him whose name is called the word of God, and knows neither the
teachings of God, not the life of the Scriptures, and the work of the Spirit of
God, who would not have him to be the same now that he was, and Christ to be
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; who are such opposers of the work of
the Spirit of God, and persecutors of the servants of Jesus, in whom it is
bringing and brought forth, as their Generation and seed of evil doers ever
was; Mat, 23.33, 34, etc. Holy men of God spoke forth the Scriptures.

The Scriptures or Writings that proceeded from the Spirit of truth, were not
spoken forth by the seed of evil doers, that were haters of God, and
persecuters of his, neither were they spoken forth by such as preached for
Hire, barerule by their means, 2 Pel, 1.21. Ier. 26.9, 10. Ier 20.2 Ier. 37.16.
2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
nor such as laid heavy burdens upon the people, and sought for their gain
from their quarter, (like the Priests of England, the false prophets, and
pharisees) but Holy men of God, who witnessed against such, spoke forth the
Scriptures, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, who were persecuted, mocked,
stoned, haled out of the Synagogues, set in the Stocks, most shamefully abused,
evilly entreated, and sore punished, smitten, put in the Dungeon, and often
imprisoned, and such a portion from the world and seed of evil doers does the
servants and messengers of God meet withal now, that witness against them, who
make a trade upon their words, also denying them, and owning the teachings of
God, and the life of the Scriptures again now, as they that spoke them forth,
who suffered for witnessing the truth in the life and power of them aforetime
did.

A short Relation betwixt the true Prophets and the false, and how they may be
known a ssunder.
First, THe true Prophets of God, had the word of God revealed to, and inspired
in them, and the moving cause of their speaking, was from the light, life and
power of the Holy Ghost within them, who dwelt in the light which discovered
deceit, whereby they know the false Prophets, and declared against them, and
against such as spoke the words of others, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.10,
11, 12 Isa. 48.16, 17. Ier. 23.
saying thus says the Lord, when the Lord spoke not unto them, or by them, and
so they speak a Divination of their own brain, (as do the Hireling Priests and
Deceivers) and not from the mouth of the Lord, as to those that dwell in the
light, as the true Prophets did, they now are very well, known, and against
testified, though it be not received by the besotted, turned from the light;
and the deceived, who persecutes those that are sent to witness against them
(contrary to the will of man) as the true Prophets were, who were not sent by
the will of man, but by the Lord God and his spirit, Isa. 48.16, 17. which the
world could not receive, nor the will of man, no more than it does now, John
4.17 and therefore do they persecute, and put out of their Synagogues, for to
fill up the measure of their iniquity, and to fulfill the prophecy of Christ, ye
a these things they do, because they are in enmity against the living truth,
and know neither the father nor the Son, John 16.2.3. and so manifest what an
evil and a wicked Generation they are on.

2. The true Prophets of God, who were endued with his spirit, and dwelt in the
light, and spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and were not sent of man
(contrary to the will of God,) but of God, (contrary to the will of man;) and
such as are sent by the Lord God and his spirit now, have their commander near
them, and by his holy Spirit are moved to speak as he pleases, and as they
was, who were not sent by the will of man, neither did man's will receive them
that went contrary to it (and stood in the counsel of God) no more than it does
now, but rather persecured and imprisoned, as they do now; and the true
Prophets that were sent of the Lord, and stoood in his counsel, neither
preached for hire, nor sought for their gain from their quarter, nor sought for
the fleece, but preached or declared freely the word of the Lord, and said,
come freely without money or price Isa. 55. And also declared against the
deceit of the false Prophets, and hireling Priests, and such as sought for
their gain from their quarter, Ier. 5.30, 31. Isa. 56.10, 11. And the true
prophets declared against such as cried peace, peace, to the people whilst
they put into their mouths, but when they could not for conscience sake uphold
them in their deceits, nor put into their mouths, then the false prophets, and
such as preached for hire, either shut up in prison or prepared war against
them, Mic. 3.5.11. Hos. 6.9. 2 Pet. 2.
And the false prophets and Hireling priests do the same now, Jude 11.
and therefore they walk in their forefathers steps, and are known by their
fruits, which is marks; and the way to know them by according as Christ has
said, Mat. 7.15, 16. etc.

3. And the true prophet that stood in the counsel of God and preached or
prophesied, and declared the word of the Lord freely, they neither persecuted,
imprisoned, nor caused any to be persecuted and imprisoned, as the (false
prophets and) priests that stood not in the counsel of God aforetime did, as
well as their offspring hireling Priests, false prophets, and seed of evil
doers do now: Ier. 5.30, 31.
Jeremiah was a true prophet, and were sent of the Lord to declare against the
false, and against such as bore rule by their means, and held up the filthy and
horrible thing, which he then saw committed in the Land, as the false prophets
and hireling priests do now; and Jeremiah the true prophet neither put others
in the Stocks, nor persecuted and imprisoned any, but he himself were
persecuted and imprisoned, put in the Dungeon, and set in the Stocks in the
high gate of Benjamen, Ier. 20. And when Jeremiah went to the Cities of Judah,
who were in the disobedient nature, and come up then (to worship) the Lord
commanded Jeremiah to go stand in the Court, and speak to them the words which
he commanded him to say, without diminishing of them, and he did so in
obedience to the command of the Lord, then the Priests asked him why he had
spoken such words, and they were sore offended at him for it, that they judged
him worthy of death, and said he should surely dye, and so sought to take away
his life for it, and Jeremiah answered the Priests and their party that were so
in rage against him for speaking the truth, and said unto them, As for me,
behold, I am in your hands, as for me, do with me as seems good and meet unto
you, but (be sure, or) know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye
shall surely bring innocent blood both upon your selves and upon your City, and
the inhabitants thereof, and of a truth the Lord has sent me to speak all
these words in your ears: Jer. 26. Ye persecutors and blood-thirstie ones, who
cannot receive the truth that bears testimony against your deceit, but seeks
the blood of the innocent, the persecuting priests and their party aforetime
did, from whence you are sprung; stop your mouths, cover your faces and blush,
observe your root, and see both the fruits of the persecuting priests and their
party. And likewise behold your Spirit, and repent of your cruelty and madness
(at Banbury) for there is like priest like people, as says the Prophet: Hos.
4.9. And as a troop of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder
in the way by consent, as it is written and witnessed, Hos. 6.9.

The Priests cruelty manifested, etc.
When Christ Jesus (the Dear Son of God) came to testify against the world,
that the deeds thereof was evil, John 7.7. Mat. 2. Mark 5. Mat. 26. and 27
chap.
the Priests and their party held counsels against him, and sought false
witness to take away his life, and they accused him for blasphemy, and said,
what further need had they of witness against him? Herod also, and his men of
war, they set him at naught; and both Pilate and Herod became friends to join
persecution against him, and that evil seed had their hands in shedding his
innocent blood; and after they had done so by him, John 18 and 19 chapt. Act.
4.1, 2, 3. and the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 verses.
his Servants were evilly entreated from the persecuting Priests, and seed of
evil doers; Peter and John were put in the Prison, and afterward beaten, and
commanded to speak no more in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, but for all
that they could not but speak the thing which they had heard and seen: And
Stephen were judged by the priests and their counsel, to be a Blasphemer,
though he was a man full of the Holy Ghost; and so ignorant were they of the
Spirit of truth, that they persecuted them that were guided by it; and out of
envy and malice and shed innocent blood, and took away Stephens life, by
stoning him to death as a Malefactor, under the pretense of a Blasphemer, when
no such thing could be proved against him, though the Greeks, Libertines,
Stoics, Act. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, 1^. Mat. 43, to the 10. Mark 6.20. Act 21.28,
29, 30, Act. 24. Act. 17.17, 18. and 24, 25. verse. Act. 18.12, 13, 14, etc.
Act. 24.5. Act. 26.16, 17, 18.
and Epicarians sought to encounter him. And John Baptist he were behaedded by
Herod's command, though he were convinced, and knew [by that in his conscience]
that he were an upright Man. And Paul he were counted a Pestilent Fellow, a
mover of Sedition and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, and they cried
out, Men of Israel, holy, this is the man that turns the world up-side-down;
and they drew him out of the Temple, and forthwith, the doors were shut, he
were beaten and abused for going into their Markets and Synagogues to reason
and dispute with the Jews, and for testifying against the outward Temple, and
that Temple-worship, and bearing witness against their deceits, who also was
called of Christ, and both chosen and sent, to turn people from darkness to the
Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. Yet so blind and
ignorant of the life of truth were the Priests and their counsel, that they
persecuted Paul as they did the rest, and said he was a mover of sedition, and
accused him as a heretic, and sought by all means to take away his life,
though he told them of his choosing and Call, Commission and sending, they
could not believe him, that knew not the Spirit by which he were guided and
sent, who also told them, that in the way which they called heresy, did he
worship the God of his Fathers; yet for all that were he imprisoned, beaten,
and set in the Stocks: Act. 24.14, 15. Act. 26.22, 23 24.
And the same portion from the Priests and their party does the Servants of
Jesus meet with in the world: Woe to the wicked seed of evil doers and
persecutors; Priest and people, you are seen with the Light, and you Spirits
are tried, 2 Pet. 2. Mat. 6.5. Mat. 23.4, 5, etc.
and your ways comprehended, and all your false worships and you are found out
of the Doctrine of Christ, and in the steps of the false prophets, and amongst
the Scribes and pharisees, called of men Masters, and has the chief place in
the Assembly, stands praying in the Synagogues, and bind heavy burdens upon the
people, and grievous to be born; and as Christ cried woe to your Fathers, the
same Woes are to you their offspring, who are found with their Marks, and
following their steps, you are clearly seen with the light, and comprehended,
and with the Light judged and condemned, though to some you appear like Graves
which men pass over and are not aware; woe unto you whited walls, and painted
Sepulchers, ye serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how shall you escape the
damnation of hell, as Christ has said, Mat. 23.33, Luke ^^.44. ver.
etc. Mark 12.38, 39, 40.

A few Observations of the Lords sending his Servants informer days, etc.
First. THE Lord God of Power, in former Ages, sent forth his Prophets and
Apostles, Messengers and Servants, his Spirit, in the power and life, Isa.
58.1. Amos 5.10. Isa. 3. Isa. 8.18. Isa. 30.3.3.
to deliver his massages and do his service, to witness also against the world,
and the wickedness thereof; some to tell the people of their sins, and cry
aloud, and spare not, and to reprove in the Gate, and cry out against pride and
oppression, and were signs and wonders in Israel, and none could believe their
report and witness with them, where the Arm of the Lord was unrevealed, yet
they might do it in obedience to the word of the Lord, though they became
signs and wonders also to the world, as Isajah was, that went naked and
barefoot three years, in obedience to the Word of the Lord, as a sign and
wonder unto Egypt and Ethiopia, as it is said, Isa. the 20. Chap.

2. Some went in obedience to the command of the Lord to cry out against
preaching for hire, and against injustice, and judging for rewards, and not
suffering the cause of the poor and needy to come before them, Zeph. 3.1, ^, 3,
4 Isa. 27.1.23, 24
etc. and so told their Princes were rebellious, and companions of, or with
thieves, as well as their Judges were ravening wolves, and some amongst them
roaring Lions; as Micah, and Zepheniah, and the Lords prophets did, Isa. 5.21,
22, 23. Mic. 3.8, 9, 10, 11.

3. And some were sent from one place to another, in obedience to the word and
spirit of the Lord, and sometimes knew to whom to go, and what to say; and
other sometimes they knew to whom (and whither, or where) to go, and not at
that present time what to say, yet they did well for to obey, though they sat
where those they were sent to sat; and remained where they remained (if in
silence) as Ezekiel the Lords Prophet did, Ezekiel. 3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
seven days before the word of the Lord came unto him what to say, when he was
sent to them of the Captivity of Tel-abib, that dwelt by the River Chebar; and
as Ezekiel, the true Prophet of the Lord, went amongst them, in obedience to
the word and spirit of the Lord, and sat (silent) amongst them seven days,
before the word of the Lord came unto him what to say; it were no delusion nor
deceit: And if any of the Lords Servants, in obedience to the word and spirit
of the Lord, should be thereby guided so to do, they would neither be deluded
nor deceived in (and by) so doing, no more then he was, though the world know
it not (who were ever strangers to the Lord;) therefore let flesh be silent at
the work of the Spirit of God, and all such as knows not the eternal word and
message of God.

Who are no Vagabonds nor Jesuits, and who are the Vagabonds, as herein will
appear.
First, THe Ministers of Christ that went up and down, preaching the word of
eternal life, and were sent to turn people from the darkness to the Light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, and though some of them might have no certain
dwelling place, Act. 8.4. Act. 20.25, 26, 27. Act. 26.17. to the 22. Mat. 8.20.
yet were they neither Jesuits, Fugitives, nor Vagabond fellows, no more are
such as in obedience to the power of the Spirit of God that do so now: The Son
of man, though he had not whereon to lay his head, yet he were no Fugitive,
Jesuit, nor Vagabond, nor such as in obedience to the Lord, that wandered
sometimes to and fro, and were in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, as well as in
dens and caves of the earth, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.36.37,
38. they were neither Jesuits, Fugitives, nor Vagabonds, no more are such now,
to do the work of the Lord, and work in his Vineyard, whose being is in God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, though they may go to and fro to preach
the word of life, in obedience to the commands of the Lord, and doing his will
as he of them requires, though contrary to the will of man, who lives in
Disobedience to the power and spirit of the Lord, as Cain the Fugitive and
Vagabond did, and as such in the envy who are in that nature contrary to God,
and walking in Cains way now do, Genesis 4.11, 12, 13. 1 John 3.13. and 19, ver.
Romans 1.27, 28. Act. 17.5.
and to them is the curse and the woe, Jude 11.

2 The Ministers of Christ aforesaids did witness against deceit, in streets,
markets, and Synagogues (yet were they neither Fugitives nor Vagabonds) though
for it they were haled out, and stoned, persecuted, by the chief Priests
consent, and abused by their party, and Vagabond fellows, who in persecuting
the truth deny the Lord, as such Vagabond fellows that parakes with the chief
Priests to persecute the Saints and servants of Jesus do now, Act. 18.4, 5, 6.
Jude 11.
as well as the persecuting Priests and Vagabond fellows that lived in Cains
nature, as their forefathers formerly did, who persecuted the Servants of Jesus
for witnessing the truth, and testifying against deceit, in Streets, Markets,
and Synagogues, or Idolls-Temples, as their off spring do now, persecute those
that do as the servants of Jesus therein did, and against them they act and
vent forth their envy and cruelty, by the chief Priests consent, and their
pratakers act, and thereby they manifest themselves to be of Cains stock, and
their sacrifices to be rejected, as his was, who make it appear what a seed of
evil doers, and a cursed Generation they are.

An Account of Richard Farnsworth's Commitment to Prison in Banbury, the 30th.
of the 7th. Month; and his Examination and Answer, in brief, at the Court
before the Mayor and Justices the day following, being the first of the eigth
Month, 1655.
AS he with another friend was walking peacably up the street to a friends
house in Banbury, meeting in the street Aholiab West, called mayor, and
William Allen called a Justice, with many other people of the town, etc. The
said Mayor and Justice, as aforesaid, so called, came to him very much enraged,
as he was walking on the Street, and William Allen a Justice, so called,
belonging to the Borrough, he did strike, or pluck off his hat, and grinn'd at
him, and heaved his fist in his wrath, and could scarce hold his hands; and
then to fulfill his envy, he cried have him away to the Stocks, the which they
were doing in obedience to his will, and after they were gone from the place,
and ha^likg him toward the Stocks, the said William Allen to show his
confusion in his actings, as well as his self-contradictions, he came to the men
and said, bring him back and have him to Prison, and they did not delay, his
words to disobey, but with all expedition haled him down to the prison out of
the Street, and then (R. F.) he asked what fact he had committed, that deserved
either Stocks or imprisonment, and desired of the Justice, so called, to know
the Fact and the Law, by virtue whereof the Fact became a crime, which were
denied to be made known unto him; but with violence were he haled, and thrust
into close prison, and there remains. The next day they held a Court, and
called him before them, being the first day of the 8. month, 1655.

And the Mayor and Justices (so called) being set, and R.F. brought before
them, according to their command; Aholiab West, called Mayor, he asked (R. F.)
his name, and where he lived; to the which he answered very mlidly, and said,
said, That as he stood in Relation to God, in whom his soul lived; and as were
a witness of the immortal seed, in the Regeneration born of the Spirit, and
begotten by the eternal word, which endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23: he
said in that relation as he there stood, he had a new name given him of God,
which no man knows, but he that has it, Rev. 2.17. And as he was in Relation
to man, he had a name given him by man, to be known by to man, according to the
account of the world, called in the outward by the name, Richard Farnsworth.

Then the Mayor asked him again where he lived; to the which he answered and
said, in the first place in God, (and as the Apostle, as well as the Poet has
said) in whom we live, move, and have our being, etc. (Act. ^7.28.) Then said
the Mayor, But have you not a being in the world? I answer, said he, That
residence is being, my being is with the Lord; but an outward residence, or
being I have, said he, at a place called Tickhill in Yorkshire: Then said the
Mayor, But how long have you been here in this Town? To the which (R. F.) he
answered and said, Four or five days, if not a week. The Mayor asked him what
he did there, to the which he answered, he came to visit his friends, etc. Then
the Mayor asked him where he had been since he came into the town; he answered,
The most at Edward Vivers: then John Austine (who is called a Justice, he asked
him if he were the Messenger of God, to the which he answered, There was but
the Messengers of Christ and of Antichrist (in them two relations) and the
message of Antichrist he did deny.

After that, the Mayor said, how might they know that, for they might not
expect Revelations now? to the which he answered and said, Though he (to wit,
the Mayor) and they did not expect Revelations, etc. that did not hinder the
work of the Spirit of God for being to them who did expect and wait for them,
that wait for the grace which is brought unto such at the revelation of Jesus
Christ, according to the Apostles Doctrine, (1 Pet. 1.12, 13.) For the deep
things of God are revealed by the Spirit of God unto his servants and children,
as it is written. And says Christ ( Mat. 11.21.) i Cor. 2.i0. Mat. 11.27. Luke
10.22.
No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father,
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: Then such as deny
Revelations by the Son, they deny the appointed way and means of attaining to
the true knowledge of God the Father, and the Son. And Christ has said the same
concerning the knowledge of God by Revelation, as a second confirmation, in Luke
(the 10.22. ver. witnessing and agreeing with that in Matthew (the 2.27.) And
Paul an Apostle, not of man neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead, did certify unto the brethren that the
Ghospel which he preachnd was not of man, for he neither received of man,
neither was he taught it of man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal.
1.1. and the 11, and 12. ver. Then William Allen (called a Justice) said it
was not the Revelation of Jesus Christ in him, but by Christ unto him; then
(R.F.) he answered, that the same Paul said, when it pleased God to reveal his
Son in him, that he might preach him among the heathen, he immediately preached
him, not conferring with flesh and blood, after he were so revealed in him,
Gal. 1.15.16. So there was a Revelation of Christ within, and after he was so
revealed (within) in Paul, he went to preach him forth among the heathen, and
gentiles, and said to the Collossians, great is the mystery of godliness,
Christ in you the hope of glory, whom we preach and teach, warning every man
every where, that we may present them perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.25, 26,
27, 28. ver.

And after that there was a few words spoken concerning the Objection of the
woman's non-permission, which before is answered; and when it was asked them on
the Bench, if the Spirit of God might not speak in the Temple, they were then
put to a stand, or partly silent about the same; and R.F. then and there said,
if any of them would deny it, he would by plain Scripture prove that the Spirit
of God might speak in his Temple (meaning either in the body of male or female)
as aforetime it did; 1 Cor. 3.17, i7. Gal. 3.27, 28. 2 Cor. 3.17.
and little was said thereunto at that present, then when R.F. was there
speaking about the Saints bodies being the Temples for God to dwell in, as God
has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. Then said John
Austine, who is called a Justice, if God did dwell in them, he said where was
his legs, etc. for the which William Allen, called a Justice, gave a secret
check, seeming to be troubled thereat: And (R.F.) he told John Austine Justice
(so called) that God was a spirit, and is as the Scripture witnesses, John
4.23, 24. And Christ is a mystery, Col. i, 26, 27. and therefore it may be
said, that great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest inflesh, for the
would by their wisdom cannot find it out. Read and consider, Isa. 29.10, 11.

And now that I have left that place of Scripture upon you, that was spoken to
such in your natures; I shall come on to what was said by you, in some things
at the bench, with answers and enlargments thereunto by proof from the
Scripture, or as follows.

Aholiab West the aforesaid Mayor of Banbury, who sat in the Court with the
two Justices, he asked the Town Clerk for the Oath of Abjuration, and the
Town Clerk said he had it not there, but he would go for it, the which he did,
and tendered it unto (R. F.) the servant of the Lord, and as he read it, the
said Richard Farnsworth did in the Court there, in the presence of God by whose
power he were kept and upheld, utterly deny and detest all Popish ways, and
Jesuiticall Opinions, whatsoever, and those things contained in that Act, or
oath of Abjuration, and stands a witness against all Popish ways and false
worships, but to Swear, as they would have had, he said he could not for
Conscience sake do it, for it was (and is) contrary to the command and Doctrine
of Christ; then they alleged that an Oath was for the end of all strife and
controversy amongst men, which is answered as follows; yea, in the time of
old it was so, when Oaths were ordained for that end; but Christ (the Oath of
God) ended all Oaths to his, Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36. Iam. 2.12.
and where strife and controversy is, there Christ is not yet learned, who
brings good will and peace to such as in his Doctrine abide, who has said,
That in the time of old it was said; thou shall perform thine Oaths unto the
Lord* But says he now, I say unto you swear not at all, Mal. 5.

Then it was said to R.F. by one, that if he read on, he might see that Christ
Jesus said, in all communications let your yea be yea, and nay, nay; to the
which he answered the party before the bench, that he might observe that Yea,
and Nay in their places, was as binding in the Doctrine of Christ, and the
New Covenant, as Oaths was in the Old-Covenant, and therefore Christ forbad
all Oaths; and now they that own Christ and his Doctrine, who abide therein,
are to let their yea, be yea, and nay, nay: and deny all Oaths, for so has
Christ commanded; And the Apostle says, Above all things my Brethren, swear
not at all, least ye fall into condemnation. Iam. 5.12. But let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, nay: So they that swear, (and they that cause men to do it)
are in the evil, under the condemnation, and out of the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and the Scripture says, That he that transgresses, and abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; considder of this, 2 John 9. But
be that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the Son.

They alleged that the Prophet said they should swear ( the Lord lived, and
swear) in righteousness. Answer, Yea it was so, and there was in the Prophets
days that swore the Lord lived, and swore (in unrighteousness, for they swore)
falsely, as the true Prophet has said, Ier. 5.2. and though the Prophet did
say they should swear the Lord lived and swear in righteousness, Christ Jesus
the (end of Oaths to his, and) substance of what the Prophets prophesied of,
he is come, and forbids all Oaths, and says, Swear not at all; and if it be
alleged that Joseph in Egypt swore, it is answered, for thus says the Lord,
Out of Egypt have I called my Son, hear him, and he says, swear not at all:
and if it be alleged that Jacob swore, Christ he reigns over the house of
Jacob, who says, swear not at all; and if it be alleged that Solomon swore, I
answer, Christ is greater than Solomon, who forbids swearing, and all Oaths,
saying, swear not at all. And if it be alleged that the angel swore, true he
did so, but thus says the Lord, I bring forth my first born, and only begotten
Son, let all the Angels worship him, hear what he says, and he forbids oaths,
who says, swear not at all, and they are Christ's friends (as he has said)
that keeps his commands; and says he, if ye love me keep my commandments; and
they that loved him, as his do now; said, By this we know we love him, because
we keep his commandments; then blessed are they who abide in Christ's doctrine,
and swear not, in obedience to Christ, and keeps his commands, that they may
have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the
city; Rev. 22.13, 14. For the unrighteous, and such as disobey the truth, who
keeps not Christ's commands, but lives in the transgression, serving the evil,
and so fall under the condemnation of the Devil, they and such like are shut
out of Gods Kingdom, and enters not into the holy city, as they may read; and
the scriptures stands a witness against them, and all such as are of the evil
seed, persecuting the godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6,
7, 8, 9. 1 Cor 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Romans 1.27, 28, 29. etc. Rev. 20.10,
etc. Rev. 21.8. and 27. Rev. 22.15, etc.

And when the servant of Jesus could not break the command of Christ, nor
transgress his Doctrine to swear, they said they would return up his name to
the Exchequer; who told them, they might do as they were ordered; then the
Mayor said, if he would pay his Fees and go out of the Town that night, he
might go free; and Richard Farnsworth answered, who could not be a friend to
deceit, that he could not pay fees for a nights false imprisonment, and
withal, asked what Law he had broken or transgressed, and withal said, if
they knew any evil by him acted or done, they might there declare it, but they
said he justified himself, and they feared he was deceived, who bad them lay
open the ground of self, with the fruits and effects of it, if they could, and
convince him of it, but they said they would not meddle with that, and words to
that effect; and one John Austine, called a Justice, asked him whether the
Spirit were created or in-created? to the which ( Rich. Farnsworth) he
answered, That the spirit of God, which is the Saints guide, is eternal, and
they that are guided by the spirit of God, John 1.12.23. 1. Pet. 1.23.
are the sons of God, as it is written, Romans 8.14. And God has sent the spirit
of his Son into our hearts, whereby we cry abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Then the
Mayor said, he had need to take heed he spoke not blasphemy, would he say that
he was a son of God? whose answer is, That such as were, and are born of the
spirit of God, and guided thereby, are, and were, the sons of God, that were
and are so born. 1 Pet. 1.22, 13. and guided by the spirit of God into the
truth, and the Holy Unction its self. John 16.13. 1 John 2.20.27. And they
said, (as such with them and the same spirit, being guided thereby, so may say)
Behold! what manner of love is this that the father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God? And now we are the Sons of God, therefore
the world knows us not, because it knew him not, as says the Scripture, 1
John 3.1. and to witness with the Scriptures by the Spirit of Truth, according
to the work of the power and spirit of God, according to measure and
manifestation (is no blasphemy, though the Jews said it was) and that may be
witnessed unto, though persecutors and the world know it nor, nor receive it,
yet he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are of him, and are of
one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, as it is written
and witnessed, Heb. 2.10, 11. and when he would have disputed the case with
them, if they would have stood to Dispute according to the Scripture and the
work of the spirit of God, then Justice Austine (so called) said, Had he the
same spirit that the apostles or Christ had? Who answered and said, that if any
man that had not the spirit of Christ, he was none of his, as they might read
in Romans the 8th. and the spirit that the apostles had, or received of God,
was the spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.8. and of the Father, 1 John 3.23.24. and
Christ said it was not them that spoke, but the spirit of their Father that
spoke in them: then the said Justice Austine, so called, said to R.F. hold thou
thy tongue, and see if the spirit will speak, to the which answer was given,
the spirit made use of the tongue to speak forth the praise of the Lord; and
let John Austine here observe his ignorance of the teachings and work of the
spirit of God, for the Lord opening the mouth the tongue and lips shows forth
his praise, and God having sent the spiri, of his Son into our hearts, we cry
abba, father, and to him return all praiset

But to conclude and be short, observe this all you that read it, and take
notice of the actings of the Magistrates here at Banbury, who caused Richard
Farnsworth to be taken out of the streets, as he were passing quietly in them,
and put him that night in prison, and called him the next day before them,
where they held their Court, and after some dispute, but the breach of no Law
laid to his charge, nor any accuser were against him (but such as sat to
Judge) and no Law mentioned, though desired, that were transgressed, and after
they had tendered the Oath of Abjuration unto him, who denied what was in it
contained, and all Popish ways, and Jesuiticall Opinions whatsoever; then the
mayor and others said, if that Richard Farnsworth would pay the Sergeant his
Fees, and go out of the town that night, he might go free, but if not, he
should be re-committed, or sent to Prison again; but Richard Farnsworth could
not be a friend to deceit, nor pay sees for a nights false imprisonment, taken
as he were quietly, with another friend, walking up the street, and so they
made a Mittimus and gave to the Jailer, and both before and after he had it
given to him, they made a speech, and said, if he would pay his sees in the
Court, he might go free; and when he could not for conscience sake toward God
then do it; after that one of their party said, Who was self willed now? to
which he (to wit, R. F.) answered and said, Not he that denies to pay sees for
a nights false imprisonment, but such as did so in their wills, wilfully
persecute and imprison the servants of Jesus, contrary to Law and Gospel both,
and here it is to be observed, that Richard Farnsworth's detaining in Prison,
is because he could not be a friend to deceit, and acknowledge a false
imprisonment, and pay fees for the same, being taken out of the high way or
street, as he were passing quietly on, and sent to Prison; and to color over
their deceit withal, they have added several lies in a Mittimus, and here is
kept in prison for standing faithful to the Lord, and cannot have any
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
Ephesians. 5.11.

And their partiallity is to be observed here in this case as well as the rest,
for two were committed to Prison in Banbury, and kept three days and three
nights, and no fees, as it is said, were demanded of them, but put out of
prison, and one out at one end of the town, and another at the other end, and
yet though they did so, being then, they may be ashamed of what they had done,
but hardening their selves against the truth, to act wilfully in their wills,
they detain one for not paying sees for one nights imprisonment, for the breach
of no Law, then either proved against him or laid to his charge.

Written in Banbury the beginning of the 8th. Month, in the Year, according to
the worlds account, October the 7th. 1655.
A TRUE DECLARATION OF The Suffering of the Innocent, who is hated and
persecuted without a cause.

Wherein is discovered the zeal of the Magistrates and people of Banbury,
persecuting and imprisoning them that are sent of the Lord in love to their
souls, to warm them of the evil of their ways.

Declared in a Letter sent to William Allen, called Justice of Peace, with an
Answer to the false accusations charged upon the INNOCENT.

Also, their Proceeeings laid open, and proved to be contrary to the
Scriptures.

By Anne Audland, whom the world scornfully calls QUAKER.

1 Samuel 2.20. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces: out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them. The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth:
and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed.

Acts 2.18. And on my servants and on my handmaidens, I will pour out in those
days of my Spirit, and they shall prophecy.

WIlliam Allen, Justice of Peace so called, but little peace I find in thee;
We came to the Town of Banbury on the thirteenth day of the eleventh month,
and being strangers, we took in at the Lion: The next day being the first day
of the week, we went to a meeting which we heard of in the Town; and when the
meeting ended, we were moved to go to the Steeplehouse, to speak the word of
the Lord to Priest and People; and in obedience to the Lord, we went, and
stayed till the Priest had done, and then my friend spoke to the Priest, and
the rude multitude came and hurried her forth, as the customs of the Heathens
is; Then I spoke to the Priest, Man, here see the fruits of thy Ministry, and
presently the rude people hurried me forth: Then came one and took me by the
hand, and questioned me, what untruths their Minister had spoken; and J
answered, That they that are out of the Doctrine of Christ, all they spoke was
untruth, And though they say, The Lord lives, surely they swear falsely, Ier.
5.2.

Then another asked me, If the Lord did not live; I answered, Yea, I know he
lives. Now there are two Boys that has sworn against me, that which I did
not speak, their blood will be required of them that caused them to err: And
know this, O man, that the Lord God will be avenged of all unjust Justices, and
he will make his power known in the destruction of his Enemies; Therefore fear
him, and beware of persecuting his servants, for justly shall thou be judged,
according to thy deeds done in the body shall thou receive thy reward; To the
light in thy conscience do I direct thee, it will let thee see all thy actions,
and from whence they arise, whether from the Spirit of Meekness, or from thy
perverse will, which the Lord will judge righteously; To that in thy conscience
I speak, which will witness for God against all deceit.

This was I moved to write to clear my conscience of thee, and leave thee
without excuse, that when the Book of Conscience is opened, thou may
remember that thou wast warned in thy lifetime. A friend of the Truth, and a
lover of thy Soul, who is a prisoner of the Lord for the truths sake at
Banbury, whose name (in the flesh) is,

Anne Audland.

WHeereas I am accused in a Mittimus for certain blasphemous words, saying,
That the Lord lives not; I answer, these words are false, and never spoken by
me: The Lord is my Redeemer, and I know that my Redeemer lives, and my Soul
magnifieth him, and my spirit rejoices in him; and here I deny your false
accusations and blasphemy, it is your own words, and not what I said; and you
that accuse falsely know not the living God, the Heathens knows not God, and
the Heathens rage, but the Lord will be avenged of all his Enemies, and plead
the cause of the innocent: And they are blasphemers, which say they are Jews,
and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. And whereas I am accused for
causing a tumult in the Church, when the Minister was going to execute part of
his Function, and likewise to assault the Minister; I answer, This is likewise
false; Liars must be cast into the lake; The Church is built of living stones,
elect, and precious, and there is order kept in the Church; And I did not cause
a tumult neither did I assault the Minister, (as you call him) and that which
is called part of his function, is an invention; and there is neither command
nor example in all the Scripture, that ever any of the Ministers of Christ did
sprinckle Infants and call it a Function; and here you have no Scripture to
prove your Function, as you call it; And he that practices such things, for the
which there is no Scripture, leads people into the inventions, and so they are
not profited at all, as it appears by your own words, that they were in a
tumult. O blush, and be ashamed of that which you call your Church, who are so
suddenly in a tumult! Was there ever such a thing heard of amongst the Saints,
that they would be in a tumult, when one came in peaceably among them, not
offering wrong to any? Here you drew your selves to be children of your
fathers, who lived in envy, haling out of Synagogues, carrying them before
Rulers, and casting into prisons them who was called of the Lord to bear
witness against their deceit; and here (him called the Minister) is made
manifest to be one that runs before he was sent, and so never profited the
people; and so like Priest, like People. Therefore give over, and never call it
a Church, who are fighters and strikers, scoffers and scorners, tumulters and
false accusers, as your fruits makes it daily appear; And some of you confess,
that they are in danger of their lives that comes among you, the people are so
rude. Now you that are Magistrates, ought to punish evil Dors, Fighters, and
Liars, and false Accusers; but such have liberty, and dare do it in your Church
(as you call it) and you present, as he that caused the Mittimus to be made
does confess, That there was a tumult when he was present, and they that
tumulted are not punished, but the fault is laid upon the innocent, who was
beat and abused, but offered violence to none: And so they said Paul was a
pestilent fellow, and they tumulted Paul, but Paul did not cause the tumult: So
you are made manifest of what generation you are, and you shall be reworded
according to your deeds: And from the Lord I declare, That he will visit for
these things, and plead with you for all your hard speeches, and all your
ungodly deeds, and give you your portion with hypocrites, except you speedily
repent: and when you come into the pit, remember you are warned in your
lifetime: And so your false accusation and blasphemy I do deny, and the living
God will judge between me and you.

The Borough of Banbury in the county of Oxon. Anne Audland.

THe righteous Judge of all the world is now arising, to judge the world in
righteousness, and the people with equity: And every tongue shall confess that
the Lord is righteous, when be comes to judgment, and he will reward every one
according to that deeds; And every tongue shall confess the Lord is just, For
according to that in the conscience, which is just and equal, will the Lord
judge, whose Judgments are just and equal; and every Tongue shall confess him
just, when he takes Vengeance upon the unjust: And behold the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken: And such are
they that walk after their own Lusts, and their mouth speaks great swelling
words, having men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, such will the
Lord execute Judgment upon in righteousness: All you that are ungodly, the Lord
will reward you according to your deeds: And all you that utter hard speeches
against the Holy One, and blaspheme God in his Temple, The Lord is coming with
his Saints to execute Judgment upon you; and you shall confess his judgments
is just, that which convinces you of your ungodly deeds, and hard speeches, by
it you shall confess the Lord is just, when you are judged for your ungodly
deeds, and hard speeches: And all you that have men's persons in admiration
because of advantage, you shall be judged righteously, and you shall confess
that God is just, and his ways equal, and God respects no man's person; nor
the Saints who comes with him to Judgment, respects no man's person; for he that
respects persons commits sin, and is convinced to be a Transgressor of the
righteous law of God; but they who are guided by that which convinces the
transgressor, they are kept out of the transgression, and they do not admire
men's persons, nor respect men's persons. But you that do, are convinced to be
transgressors, and according to that which convinces, will you be judged by
the righteous Judge, who comes with ten thousands of his Saints, and he will
judge all you that respects persons, for the Lord regards the rich no more than
the poor, but this is he that the Lord regards, who is of an humble and
contrite spirit, and trembles at his word: Such you do not regard, who are
poor, and trembles at the word of the Lord: but you that respects persons,
scoffs at such as they go along the streets: But the Lord will plead the cause
of the poor, who is now despised amongst you that respects persons: You admire
some men's Persons because of advantage, and ye despise others, and Persecutes
the Poor, and goes about to make one an offender for a word, which is none
indeed; and you set a snare for them that reprove in the Gate, that so you
might catch the innocent, and they that are offenders indeed, who can lie, and
swear and accuse falsely, such have liberty, and such are set to ensnare the
innocent, and to be as Judges against the innocent, and yet you profess your
selves Christians. Oh that you were wise* Oh that you would consider your
latter end! How will you stand before the Judgment seat of God, in the day when
the secrets of every heart shall be judged by Jesus Christ, who has all
judgment committed to him: And behold he comes, and all the Saints with him,
and he rules and reigns in his Saints, and sits upon his Throne: But how will
you stand at that day, who now sits as judges upon the Saints, and calls them
deceivers, and persecutes them, who are made free by the Son of God, and in
obedience to him suffers the loss of all things, and are killed all the day
long, and are accounted as sheep for the slaughter; and are become a reproach,
and a byword, and a scorn, even among you that profess your selves Christians,
and so the Scripture is fulfilled, They that work wickedness are set up, and
they that departs from iniquity becomes a prey to the wicked, and the
Sufferings of the Saints is become a sport amongst you; and you can stretch
your selves upon your beds of ease; and you do not remember the affliction of
Joseph, nor you have not known, that all who live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution; and says Christ, As they have done unto me, so will they
do unto you: And the Servant is not greater then his Lord.

Now if you were Christians, as you profess your selves to be, then would
persecution cease and not be found amongst you; for Christians does not
persecute, but you that live in such things, are made manifest, (to all the
children of Light) whose servants you are; and you that are Magistrates who
should punish evil Doers, such have liberty in the Streets to scoff and scorn,
to swear and lie, and be drunk, and you pass by these things; but if any come
amongst you to declare the word of the Lord against such things then the
innocent are accused by them who live in such things, and the innocent are
persecuted and sent to prison, and may not know from you who prisons them, what
they are accused of, nor see their accusers face to face; Is this according to
the Law of God? or is this as you would be done unto? Consider of it, and lay
it to heart, for the Lord will visit for these things, I speak what I know, and
find amongst you; for I was accused and committed to Prison, but I did not know
what the accusers swore against me, neither could I see my accusers; but you
took an oath in secret, and so I was accused and committed for that which I
never spoke, and had not liberty to answer for my self, nor others had no
liberty nor could be heard on my behalf, who was by when (they say) I spoke
these words, for which I am accused, which would bear testimony, that they
heard no such things spoken by me, as I am accused of, and so the innocent
suffers innocently; and in the mean time wickedness is at liberty, and not
only in a corner, but in your streets; men lie, and swear, and are drunk, and
the innocent is a prey unto them; and yet you do not lay it to heart; woe is me
for you, that you should so slight the day of your visiitation, and so wickedly
requite the Lord for all his goodness, as to persecute his servants, who are
sent to warn you; and despise his Witnesses, and shamefully entreat his
Messengers, and them that comes to you in their own names such you receive;
but them that come to you in the name of the Lord, such are a reproach amongst
you; and the Lord is highly displeased with you for these things; and he will
make enquiry for blood; you know that the blood of the innocent has been shed
in your Streets; one that came amongst you, and offered violence to none, was
beat and abused, and lost much blood amongst you, and yet you are not ashamed
to profess your selves Christians, when as these actions proceeds from you; and
your care is how to wound the innocent secretly, that so your deeds might not
be brought to the light; but it is in vain for you to dig deep to hide your
counsel from the Lord; VVoe unto you that devises to work mischief in the
dark, and say, who sees us? and consults together to shoot your arrows
secretly against the poor. The Lord sees you, and knows your hearts, and your
very thoughts which you think against the King in your bedchamber; there is a
bird of the air that carries the voice; And the Lord will bring every work to
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil; and the oath
in secret shall be tried; and the Lord will sit as Judge amongst the Judges; and
you shall all be weighed and those of you that are found wanting, the Lord will
cast you by, though you be as high and mighty as Belshazzar was; and if you be
angry with me for telling you so, and forewarning you in your lifetime; the
Lord will judge you for it; for he is tender over his little ones; and in as
much as you persecute one of them, ye do it unto him; and you that imprison the
innocent, and they may not see their accusers; is this according to the Law of
God? or, is this to judge for God, and not for man, nor self ends without
respect of persons? They that were set over the people to judge them according
to the Law of God, were just men fearing God, and hating covetousness: just men
were to judge the unjust; for the unjust cannot judge true judgment: See what
charge Ichoshaphat gave unto them he set over the people, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7, 9,
Saying to the Judges, take heed what you do, for you judge not for man, but for
the Lord, who is with you in the judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, and take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the
Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts: And he charged them
saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect
heart: Now all you that denies a perfect heart, and are respecters of persons,
you cannot judge with a perfect heart; and such are not Judges for God, who
judges not with a perfect heart; but are respecters of persons; but they who
fear God, and do faithfully with a perfect heart, such Judges and Magistrates I
own who are just men; such rules for God, and is a terror to the wicked, and
for the praise of them that do well; and such I am subject to for
conscience sake; but they who were the servants of Christ and ministers of
Christ, when they were commanded by the rulers that which was contrary to the
command of Christ, they said, whether is it better to obey God, or Man, judge
ye; and I say the same, and they which command any thing contrary to the
command of Christ, which rules and reigns in his people, and is one in the male
and in the female; such are not just men fearing God and judging faithfully
with a perfect heart; and such who do not fear God and have not a perfect
heart, such knows not the voice of God; but Christ's sheep who follow Christ,
and are sent of God knows his voice: Now Magistrates and People will say, how
may we know that you are sent of God? as Pharaoh said to Moses, Who sent thee?
and he answered, The Lord sent me, to bid thee let Israel go free; and Pharaoh
said, I know not the Lord, neither will I obey him, and let Israel go free;
Such are they who fear not God nor know not his voice; and such cannot discern
the things of God, Magistrates nor People, who fear not God, and have not a
perfect heart: Now consider if you judge me according to the Law of God, when
you heard all that was against me, and did accuse me, but would not hear the
accused, and the accusers face to face, nor those that was by, who would have
witnessed against those untruths charged upon me, but put them forth and said,
What have you to do here? notwithstanding, they said they came to bear witness
to the truth: See how Moses charged the Judges, Deuteronomy. 1.16.17. saying, Hear the
cause between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him; ye shall not respect persons in
judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be
afraid if the face of man; for the judgment is Gods: and Deuteronomy. 19.16,18, 20.
The Judges and Officers was to judge the people with just judgment; thou shall
not wrest judgment; thou stall not respect persons; neither take a gift, for a
gift does blind the eye of the wise, and perverts the words of the righteous;
that which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee: Now this is true judgment,
and takes hold upon the unjust; but here you do not act according to the Law of
God, who does respect persons, and does not hear the small as well as the great,
which you have not done who have committed me to prison, and I had not liberty
to speak face to face with my accusers, and so I am falsely accused and
imprisoned upon a false accusation, he that knows all secrets is my witness;
and he will plead my cause, and he will judge righteous judgment upon all the
Heathen; and the Lord comes with his Saints; and this honor have all the
Saints, to execute upon the Heathen all the judgments written; but the Heathen
ought not to judge the Saints; but the Heathen rages, and the heathen persecutes
and imprisons, and falsely accuses the Saints, and the viols of wrath is now to
be poured out upon the wicked; and the Saints shall take the kingdom and
rejoice in God for ever and ever, which gives them victory over the world, and
gives them strength to rejoice in tribulation; Praises to the living God for
evermore. And so I warn you all People, Magistrates, and Teachers, to fear the
Lord God, lest his wrath and indignation break forth against you, and the
decree be sealed, and he take you away with his grievous stroke, and there be
no remedy; for God is my witness, that my desire is for you, that you may know
the things that belongs to your peace; so to you all I have cleared my
conscience, and I am free from your blood, glory to the Lord for evermore, who
has given me to believe and suffer for the testimony of Jesus; so I remain a
witness for the truth, and a prisoner in bonds at Banbury, for the truths sake,
who am innocent, but falsely accused and slandered and reproached; but the
reproaches for Christ is my riches, whose name in the flesh is,

Anne Audland.
The 5 day of the 12 month. 1654
To you Magistrates of the Town of Banbury, and to thee John Griffith, who was
called Deputy-Recorder, and sat Judge in the Sessions (or pretended
Jail-delivery) holden the 26 day of the 7 month, 1655.
IT is likely, the heat of pour passions being over, you may since (in the cool
of the day) better have considered your actions don that day in your court,
which if with the light of Christ Jesus you have, Genesis 3.8.
it will show you that those who respect the person of any man, commits sin, and
are found transgressors of the pure and righteous law of God, Iam. 2.1, 9.
which says, thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty; but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor, Lev.
19.15. which if you hearken to, and regard the Law written in the heart, Ier.
31.33. it will reprove you for your partial actings that day, and tell you,
that you did not do well to fine Thomas Cole five pounds, and for to imprison
him till he should pay the same, (and to be angry with him) for keeping on his
hat in your Court, and afterward invite two other men for to put on their hats
in your Court, (namely Priest Jones and Priest Smart;) consider, if this were
not partiality, and to respect persons, and for to act contrary to equity and
truth, as that in your conscience will let you see, and with me bear a true
testimony; And whether your sending of Jane VVaugh, Sarah Tyms and Nathaniel
Weston to prison again, (they neither convinced of, nor being charged with the
breach of any known Law, nor so much as one witness proving them guilty of the
least misdemeanor,) were not injustice yea, or no; And whether if you had set
them free (seeing there was nothing laid to their charge) you had not done
justly, and according to Law, Equity, and good conscience, (what the Law of the
Land requires) and what you are sworn to do, yea or no; If so, consider then,
and let me know what Law I have transgressed, and wherefore you have committed
me to prison; which thing if then you had done, I should not now need to have
required of you; so if with the true Light of Christ Jesus, wherewithal you
are enlightened, (which light opens the blind eye) you weigh and duly consider
your actions that day, you will see they were not wrought in God, John 1.9.
John 3.20, 21. Heb. 6.8. John 3.19, and^.
but proceeded from that ground and tree which God has cursed, and brings
forth the same evil fruit which the chief Priests and Elders did that crucified
CHRIST JESUS, and has persecuted the Saints in all ages, as may be seen in the
writings of the Apostles, (and in the Histories of the Books of Martyrs) which
light of Christ Jesus if you love, (and bring your deeds to it) it will cause
you to repent, and to forsake your evil deeds, Ephesians. 5.11. Isa. 35.8. Gal. 5.24
-- Ephesians. 2.10. Act. 10.35. Mat. 25.23. John. 8 12. Ephesians. 5.13. John 16.8. Mal.
25.15. Romans 1.19. Mat. 25.29, 30. Rom 1.28.
and for to testify against the like evil ways in others, it will lead you in
a new way, which is called Holy, and will crucify and change your nature (that
was accustomed to sin,) 'twill bring you to the New Birth, and the New Man, you
will know which is treated in Christ Jesus to walk in good works, which New Man
will love God, and do his will, and work righteousness, such as he therein
accepts; and all this by his spirit will he work in all them that believe and
follow him, who is the Light of the world, and this is the measure of light
that comes from him, which reproves you of sin, and is your Talent which God
has given you, which Talent (or measure of Light) if you improve not, but hide
it under your earthly minds, (cover it under the love of the World, as
pleasures, profits, and respects and honors from man, and love these things
more than it) you hate Christ, who rejects his light, and are the unprofitable
servant, whose Talent will be taken away, and you cast into darkness, and there
you are in the transgression, in the fall, in the old man, in Cain and Esau's
nature, which is the first breach which God hates, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 8, 7, 8.
and his curse is to, and his wrath abides upon, which nature can never please
God, but is the envious nature that slew Abell, released Barrabas, and
crucified Christ Jesus; and as it was then, so it is now, they that are after
the flesh, and abide in that nature, which is turned from the Light, persecute
them that are (guided by the Light into the new life, and walk) after the
spirit, Gal. 4.29. And they in the first nature (turned from the Light)
although they have eyes, yet see not; have ears; John 12.40.
but hear not, and have a heart, but cannot contain aright of the things of
God, therefore they in it, call evil good, and good evil; And although those
that be in this first nature talk of the things of God, Isa. 5.^0. 1 Cor. 2.14.
and saih the Lord lives, yet surely do they swear falsely, Ier. 5.2. (although
he lives for ever) for the life of God was ever hid from that nature; and
although they who live in that first nature (that obey not the Light) pray or
perform any other duty, which God had commanded, yet it is an abomination to
him; whose ear is turned from the Law, by the light written in the heart, Pro.
28.9. And as in the Scriptures may be read, Ier. 31.^3. Romans 10.8.
Isa. 66.3. They who choose their own way, that delights in abomination, if
they kill an Ox, it is as if they slew a Man; if they sacrifice a lamb, as if
they cut off a dogs neck; if they offer an oblation, as if thy offered Swines
blood: So you and your Priests, who are still in the old nature, in the works
of darkness which hate the Light, and know not the new birth, as your fruits
makes manifest, may see what your preachings and prayers, fasting, and
Ordinances will avail you, Isa. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
while you live in envy and persecution, in pride and love of the world, they
(are Cains sacrifice, not accepted, and) will stand you but in little stead, no
more than they did your forefathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, who talked of
the Scriptures, and knew many things outwardly from them, and spoke of a
Savior that was to come, and made their brags of Abraham, Moses, John 8.39.
Isa. 29.13. Ezekiel. 33.31.
of the Law and the Prophets, and could cry Lord, Lord, and drew near him with
their lips, when their hearts were awhoring after their covetousness, pride,
love of the world, and praise of men; and while they were crying up the Temple,
and outward Ordinances of God, Romans 10.4. Mat. 5.17.
they crucified Christ Jesus who was the end, or substance, of the Law and the
Prophets, and of all those outward Types and Figures, as you do now, who talk
of the Scriptures, and of faith and love in Christ Jesus, whenas you hate his
light, and persecute them that follow it, and with it are led out of the worlds
ways, fashions and traditions, into the life and practice of those which writ
the Scriptures, 1 John 2.15, 16. 1 Pet. 1.14.15. John 15.16. John 7.7. Rev.
2.9, 10.
who were not of this world, but were chosen out of it, to testify against it
that the works thereof are evil; so whilst your bodies are the Synagogue of
Satan, and by him you are acted into envy and persecution, and do not those
things which Christ Jesus calls for, by his pure light in your consciences, all
your talk and profession (being in the nature hating and turned from the light)
is in vain, and you still remain in your sine: therefore to the Light of Christ
Jesus (which makes the tree good, that makes the fruit good) I direct you,
which Light, if you love, believe in, and follow, it will reach you to deny all
ungodliness, worldly lusts, and to live soberly, Mat. 12.33, 34, 35. Tit. 2.14,
1^. Mat. 11.29. Prove. 20.27. Ier. 17.10.
and righteously in this present world, to be meek, and to be humble, and to do
unto all as you would be done unto; so in love to your souls have I writ this,
that with the Light of Christ Jesus in your consciences (which searches the
heart and tries the Reins) you may see your selves, and what it is that guides
you, and whose servants you are, and from what root and ground (the offspring)
your words, actions, and thoughts do proceed, there being only two roots, from
whence all words, actions and thoughts do come, good and evil, and his servants
you are to whom you yield obedience, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness, Romans 6.16. Therefore friends and people, be not deceived
with a vain talk, Mat. 12.35. Romans 11.16.
and an outside procession, your lives being contrary, and (ye cannot serve two
Masters) God will be no longer mocked by you, for such as you so sow, such
shall you reap, and what measure you meet, shall be measured to you again, well
heapped, pressed down, Mat. 6.34. Gal. 6.7, 8,
and running over; wherefore while you have time prise it, and reject not the
day of Gods visitation, neither harden your hearts against him, as he calls
you to repentance, and so you continue in your evil practices, Heb. 3.7, 8.
and you be destroyed by his just hand. And now seeing the Lord God is risen in
his Servants to testify against your evil ways: beware you are not found
fighters against him, he will be too hard for you to kick against. So I have
cleared my conscience unto you, Jude 14.17.
and remember that in your life time you have bin warned; By a Servant of the
Lord, known by the name of

Robert Rich.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Thomas Curtis, who had been a Captain in the
Parliaments Army, to Samuel Wells, professed Minister of the Town of Banbury,
and sent to him into the Court or Sessions, then holden in Banbury, the 27. day
of the 7th. Month, 1655.
Friend,
I Am not a stranger to thy former conversation, and now am witness of thy
unjust actions, thy deeds make manifest of what Generation thou art, and on
what foundation thou stand. Call to mind thy former Prayers, when we were in
the Army, driven from our Homes, persecuted by Cavaliers, put to fight for our
Freedoms and our Religion, as then thou told'st us of; is it all come to this?
Have thou forgotten thy Vows, Protestations and Promises then made in thy
Prayers, How that if God would deliver us, how we would walk in newness of
life, and now the Lord has delivered, How art thou turned persecutor if the
righteous seed of God? Call to mind how thou would cry out against Parents
that did not breed up their Children in wisdom and soberness: Now thou have
gotten a great living, and no place that ever I came in (as I can remember) so
vile as this Town (of Banbury) under thy teaching; Oh see the fruits of thy
ministry! children scoffing, haling, stoning, and evil speaking, and their
Parents looking on, and countenancing them, laughing at them so doing: it is a
sad sight to see such a reformation, and will not the Lord visit for these
things? Hos. 4.9.
what may we look at, but that it is like people like priest? Call to mind thy
persecuting of the innocent, and causing the Peace to be broken by thy own
self, and casting it on the innocent, making them to suffer for it; Can thou
behold these things and not blush? How durst thou call thy self a minister of
Christ and persecute? Was ever any of the true Prophets, Apostles, or Jesus
Christ a persecutor? Did ever they, when one came into their meeting, and stand
silent there, call to the magistrate to take him away, and out him in prison,
and say they could not go on in their prayer, and then after a long
imprisonment, see him arraigned at the Bar for breaking the peace, whenas thou
was the cause? Was it not thy self that caused the people to be breakers of
the peace, and then make the innocent suffer for it? Is this according to
Scripture? Did the Lord send his Prophets to cry against them that made men
offenders for a word, and set snares for them that reproved in the Gate? And
can thou escape, who make a man an offender before he spoke a word? The
just God will surely find thee out and al Deceivers; for woe to them says the
Lord God, that has caused my people to err, and daub with untempred Mortar,
and cry peace to them to whom God has not spoken peace, Isa. 9.16. Ezekiel 13.10.
and so strengthen the hands of the wicked; just as it was with the false
Prophets so is it now, The Prophets prophecy false things, the Priests bear
rule by their means, and the people love to have it so. But read thy portion;
what will thou do in the end thereof? See again thy subtle dealing with Anne
Audland, Ier. 5.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
that when all the persecution that wit could invent to take away her life for
blasphemy, would not reach, but she was acquitted by the Jury: There must be
brought her calling the false Prophet, and this must be called scandal, when
by the Scripture it is soon proved, and to thy shame, remember I know thee
Scandalous: How often have thou sat night after night at Cards, and sometimes
whole nights playing (and sometimes compelling me to play with thee) for money,
then wast thou called of the world a Minister, and now art thou turned
persecutor? in the close, see thy unjust dealing, when thou have gotten what
the uttermost will of man can do, then thou in thy deceit put off thy hat,
and desire that she may have as much favor as the Law will afford her (thou
art content to commit thy cause to God:) Oh cruel deceit to cover withal! But
thy covering is too narrow, it will not hide thee. Friend, to the pure Light of
God in thy conscience do I speak, and that witness in thee knows these things
to be true, and that an account thou must give to the great God of all these
things; in love to thee do I write, that thou may be warned and repentance
witness, lest the indignation of the Lord be poured out upon thee: I have not
much more to say at present, but desire the Lord that he will open thine eyes,
that thou may see the evil of thy heart and live; which is the desire of
him, how ever thou esteemest, is a lover of thy eternal peace, and one that
suffers with the righteous seed, called of the World,

The 27th. day of the 7th. Month 1655. Tho. Curtis.

A Certificate of the endeavors or certain Friends which went to the
Magistrates of Banbury, to have had Copies of the Causes of the Prisoners
Commitment at their late Sessions, and pretended Goale-Delivery, etc.
WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, do hereby declare to all unto whom
this Presents shall come, that there being a Sessions (and pretended
Jail-delivery) appointed to be holden for the Borough of Banbury in the County
of Oxon, upon the 26* day of the 7th. month 1655. Within which Borough,
several servants of the most High God, whom the world in scorn call Quakers,
were imprisoned, and at the same Sessions to be brought to trial; We repaired
to the said Town of Banbury, and went unto Tymothy Harris, the Town Clerk
thereof, and in a civil manner desired Copyes of the causes of their
Commitments, who absolutely denied to give any; whereupon we went to John
Griffith Deputy-Recorder, the Mayor, and others celled Justices of the said
Borough, who were all met together at the Mayors house, and desired of them
that we might have Copies of their said commitments, whereupon they advised us
to repair to the Town Clerk for the same; and they being informed that he had
denied it, said we might demand it in Court; whereupon we repaired to their
Court, and when their Court was about to be adjourned one of us desired, that
if any Bills of Indictment were there preferred against the aforesaid friends,
and particularly against Anne Audland, he might have Copies thereof; and the
said Deputy-Recorder said he should have it, but going to the Town Clerk for
the same, he refused it, and the Deputy-Recorder being informed thereof, took
no course that we might have it; in the afternoon Robert Rich, Nathaniell
Weston, Anne Audland, Jane VVaugh, and Sarah Tims, were by the said Court (for
ought appearing to us, then present in the Court) committed to prison, no
breach of the Law being charged upon them, whereupon the next day we went to
the Deputy-Recorder again, after the Sessions was ended, and desired of him
that we might have copyes of the causes of the commitments of the persons
aforesaid, who said he was but a Deputy-Recorder, and had no power to do
further therein, the Sessions being ended, but advised us to repair to the
Mayor and Town Clerk for the same; whereupon we went to the Town Clerk, and one
of us informed him that the persons aforesaid being committed in Court, he
conceived the causes of their commitments were entered upon record, and
therefore desired copyes thereof: who absolutely denied the same, saying, we
lacked something to be prating, and said that they were committed til they did
find sureties for their good-behaviour, and there they should stay until they
had so done, or words to the same effects. In testimony whereof we have
hereunto set our Hands,

Thomas Gouldney, Thomas Curtis, Edward Pyat, Walter Clement.

Some CONSIDERATIONS upon the Proceedings against the PRISONERS, or the
Innocent sufferers for the Testimony of JESUS in Banbury, at the late Assize,
Sessions, or pretended Jail-delivery.
NOw all you that desire to fear God, and such as do fear God, these things are
left to your considerations (as well as the actors against the innocent,)
consider of these things and lay them to heart, for by this may appear the
cruel persecution of the innocent at Banbury; first, one Anne Audland that were
imprisoned upon a pretense of Blasphemy, (though not found) and after long
imprisonment or bonds, appeared at the Assizes or Sessions, and a Jury called
(of life and death) and the sufferer called to the Bar, and could not by any
means (though endeavors were used) have a Copy of what was preferred against
her (though in danger of life;) was not this as much as in them lay to bind her
from answering for her self, and for making her defense against her
adversaries? And was not this to make them guilty of the blood of the innocent,
if the Lord had not preserved from the wrath and violence of unreasonable men?
Oh the subtilty and cruelty of the enemies of the children of God! Was it ever
known that the like (amongst those that bear the name of Christians, or
reasonable men) were ever so acted before? And was it not a great crime, or
high misdemeanour, and contrary to Law, for (one called) a Magistrate, who had
sat on the bench, to go amongst the Jury of life and death, and to endeavor
to corrupt and instigate them? After their ends about blasphemy were
frustrated, who could not find the Bill for blasphemy against the Prisoner, but
threw it by, not having Evidence to prove it: Did not he labor against the
truth, lest the innocence of the Prisoner should have been cleared? And was it
not to hinder the Prisoner from being by due course of law freed? Was their
actings therein either according to equity, reason, or justice? Consider well of
it: And are you offended to be told of your unreasonable or unjust proceedings
against the innocent? And although the Bill against the prisoner was laid for
blasphemy, yet blasphemy was not found (by the Jury;) but to color over deceit
withal: Was not a lie added in saying she was scandalous, for calling the
Minister a false Prophet (when she did not) and so re-committed her to prison
again for that? Was not that contrary to Law, Equity, and Reason? Let all
reasonable men and such as know the Law of God, and obey the same, herein be
Judge; Is there any Law of God that says it is scandalous to call a false
Prophet by the name of a false Prophet, and for so doing commit them to prison?
If so, Might not all the true Prophets have been Prisoners by it? and if there
be no Law of God that does so, is there any Law of the Nation contrary to the
Law of God in that respect that does it? and if not, whether have not these men
that committed one for saying, as they say, she called the man a false Prophet,
when the did not, although he may easily be proved one, and made that a cover
to hide themselves under, when their ends about blasphemy were frustrated. Have
not they committed a double offense, and acted contrary to the Law of God and
the Law of the Land in so doing? Tit. 1.16. Rev. 2.9. Rev. 3:9.
Was this at all either to honor true Justice, or set up a Court of true
Equity, and do as you would be done by? Or is it not to manifest your malice
and cruelty to all that behold your proceedings, and to lay open the fruits of
your Ministry and spirits to appear one with them that say they are Christians
and are not, as they that said they were Jews and were not, for Christians are
ashamed of such Fruits, and they never so acted, that the Scripture relates;
nay, Does not your actions herein exceed the heathens? Would not they act
according to Law? and do not you act clear contrary? For one had been
imprisoned for standing quietly in the Steeplehouse till the Priest called to
take him away, for whilst he stood there he could not proceed to pray, though
he spoke not a word till he were taken away, and when he were after long
imprisonment arraigned at the Bar, never a witness nor prosecutor came
against him, not any breach of the Law laid to his charge; yet notwithstanding
he might be re-committed to ward or Prison again, except he would find sureties
for good-behaviour, (and if it be evill-behaviour to go stand in a steeplehouse
to hear a Priest, and say nothing till the Priest spoke first unto them, they
would make many in England to be in the mis-behaviour: From hence observe and
see if that which they call mis-behaviour be not to go hear the Priest and say
nothing, till the Priest speak first, according to that account;) but no
mis-behaviour was proved against him, nor the Law transgressed in any one
point, neither did any appear to prosecute any thing against him, nor to lay
any thing to his charge, yet he might be re-committed to Ward or Prison again,
and if that be not contrary, both to the Law of God, and to the Law of the
Land, what is? Consider of it: And was it not unreasonable and contrary to Law,
to commit to Prison, and after long imprisonment, being called to the Bar, and
then to demand sureties for good-behaviour, and no misdemeanour proved, nor any
one came against the prisoner, either to accuse or prosecute; Ought not that to
have been according to Law, before the other was or ought to be demanded. And
was it not an unjust thing to commit to prison again for the same, when no
breach of law was proved against the prisoner, neither at his first commitment,
nor after long imprisonment, when he were arraigned or called to the Bar: Is
these actings either according to Scripture, Law, Equity, or Reason? Are you
not beside Scripture, Law, Equity and reason (as well as true Justice) herein;
or do not such as so act, bear the Sword in vain? the Lord help you to consider
of it, that you may learn wisdom (that the heathen may not laugh you to
scorn:) Ought not the Prisoner by law have been acquitted in the Court after
long imprisonment, when none came either to accuse or prosecute against him
there? and likewise Jane VVaugh, and Sarah Tims, who had been long imprisoned,
and called to the Bar, neither accuser came against them there, nor one
prosecutor, and yet they must be re-committed to prison again, except they
would find sureties to be of good-behaviour, when none appeared against them
to accuse them, or prove against them any mis-behaviour, and neither any breach
of Law either proved against them or laid to their charge: is these actings
either according to Scripture, Justice, Law, Equity, or Reason; are they not
beside all these in their actings herein? and can they be said to be reasonable
men that so act against the innocent sufferers and servants of Jesus, as they
at Banbuoy have done; consider well of it, (and keep passion and malice down)
and the Lord deliver me, says Paul, from unreasonable men; Act. 25.27. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Isa. 57.1, 2, 3, 4.
and it is a true saying of the Prophet, the righteous suffer, and no man (in
his unrighteous nature) lays it to heart, yet blessed are they, as Christ
has said, that suffers for righteousness sake, for the Lord Jesus does take
their parts, and so the spirit of grace and glory rests upon them, as is
written and witnessed, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4 13, 14. Now consider if all
these prisoners and innocent sufferers would not have been freed by dew course
of Law, if it had been executed aright, and if any had transgressed the Law,
ought not they then to have been proceeded against according to Law, and so
have had the punishment inflicted according to the transgression, and have been
acquitted; or if no Law could be proved against them that they had
transgressed, ought not by Law their accusers, instead of them, to have had the
punishment which they should have had upon them inflicted, and they by the Law
released or remedied: Do you know what use the Law is of, or how to act
according to it; have you done what you did out of malice or ignorance;
consider of it, and lay these things to heart, for be sure the Lord will call
you to an account for your proceedings against the innocent, as well as for all
your evil deeds, and then what account will you give, and how will you answer
before his Judgment seat: And withal consider of this; Was (or is) there any
Law, either of God or the Nation, that commands a man to put off his Hat, and
if he do not, to fine him five pounds, and commit him to prison till he pay the
same (as one Thomas Cole an inhabitant in Banbuoy was;) and was it not partial
and contrary to Law, if it had been so, for to fine and imprison one for the
same, and persuade other two to the like even in the Court to put on their
hats; was not here both partiality and malice made manifest, and is not that
contrary to the Law of God, and a contempt to the higher power and Authority,
Lev. 19.15. Iam. 2.1. and 9. Isa. 1.24, 25, 2^ etc.
which forbids such things, but be sure you will nor go unpunished of him, who
bears not the sword in vain, for thus says the Lord (by his servant the
Prophet) Oh! I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies, and
restore Judges as at the first, and counsels as at the beginning, when no such
things were by them neither acted nor done, which can be anywhere proved by
Scriptures, which stands a witness against them that profess God in words, but
in works deny him, as it is written and witnessed, Tit. 1.16. Likewise when one
Robert Rich was moved of the Lord to speak something unto you about the
proceedings in your Court, did not you that sat as judges bid him come up and
speak, and presently changed your minds, or else your words, crying out; Pull
him down and have him to Prison, before eyer he had said to you what he had to
speak; was that according either to christianity, truth, equity; or reason;
could heathens have done any more? Or would not reasonable men have regarden
their word? The Lord set these things home to your hearts, that you may a
little better consider and lament (as well as repent) least the evil day come
upon you al^ unawares: Did not you at Banbury pretend a Jail-delivery that day
(the Prisoners were called,) but did you intend any such thing; do not your
proceedings declare the contrary, and does not the witness of God in your
consciences witness against you for it, as well as your actions: Was not the
servants of Jesus that were called before you at the Bar, the greatest cause at
your size or Sessions held in Banbury that day; and was there any Law proved
against them which they had in any one point transgressed or broke; or had they
proceedings according to Law; and was there one of than freed by you, nay, but
more added to them, and afterward one taken out or the highway, or street, and
haled to prison, and no breach of Law laid to his charge, though it were
desired, and also the Fact as well as the Law, by virtue whereof it became a
crime, yet it were denied, and they kept close under the Earth, shut up in a
hole or dungeon in Banbury, as if they were some great Malefactors, and no Law
yet laid to their charge that has been either broken or transgressed by them;
but such as are friends to Christianity and Equity, Truth and Justice, and all
such as truly fears God, will consider of the sufferings of the Innocent, and
lay these things to heart, though the wicked, and such as are without the fear
of God, regard it not.


