Sir Thomas Fairfax's PROCEEDINGS About the Storming of EXETER: The Majors
house taken, and four Companies of Foot put into it. A Bridge made over at
Apsem.

The Princes Horse forced back toward Barnstable. A Major, and diverse
Prisoners and Horse taken. Nine of Gorings Lifeguard, and many others brought
in. Fifty Soldiers ran away out of one Regiment; and all those raised by the
Posse gone home; and the Prince and his Forces flying further into Cornwall;
and one piece of Ordnance left at the Princes Quarters at Launceston; with the
state of the whole account of the West.

By a Letter brought to the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons, commanded to be printed.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbank, Febr. 9. 1645.

SIR,
I Found the West country indeed craggy, and the people and entertainment for
the most part crabbed, yet I thank God, what is to be had, we have the best in
our quarters, being content with the Enemies leavings, who has left very
little provision for man or horse in these parts: For Intelligence at present
what we have is, That we have settled our Quarters about Exeter; Col: Harlo^s
Regiment is about Exminster, three companies of Col: Herberts Regiment are at
Peymouth, and in the lanes between that and Exminster are Horse Sentinels:
Another Quarter is at Shellingford house, maintained by three companies more of
Col: Herberts Regiment: A fourth at Bouvy in Mrs. Peter's house; the other
Forces, amongst which Col: Hamonds Regiment are, about Affington and other
places a mile from Exeter, and some at the Majors house at Barley within
Musket shot. The General has sent to all the Hundreds hereabouts for
Ladders, and we hope to be in Exeter yet before the first of March. Col:
Lamberts Regiment is yet at Dartmouth, Col: Fortescues at Totnes, and Col:
Ingolsbies at Chidley; yesterday we had a rumor here, that the greatest part
of the Enemies horse were come to Chimleigh, twelve miles from Tiverton (where
the General then was) and intended to go thence to relieve Dunster castle, and
so (if possible) to join with those Horse about Blandford; but this morning we
have certain Advertisement, That they plundered in Chimleigh yesterday the worth
of Five hundred pounds, and returned to their quarters, there were not above
three or four hundred of them, and they were gone by morning. Barstaple horse
have contracted their Quarters into Newport near the Town, having left Tanton
their former Quarters; for, Gorings horse have advanced their Quarters East, as
far as Branton and Bray; they returned yesterday morning into North-Tavestock,
Alschot, and keep a Guard at Newbridge over the River Tau, three miles on this
side Barstaple, they have also placed a Guard at Winckley Beacon; they were (as
this day) to receive at Sunbridge and the parishes adjoining, six weeks pay,
and afterward the proportion of a weeks pay every day. Tuesday last diverse
ploughs and horses, all laden, some with provisions, have been sent out of
Launceston Westward; there was also great store of Bread baked, the Bread was
brought in flaskets from a Bakehouse in that town, where it was baked by the
Princes Baker, and was immediately sent away Westward; six or seven ploughs
more were drawn out of Launceston on Wednesday night Westwards, also further
into Cornwall, much of their Lading was Muskets, Pikes, and other Ammunition;
the rest of the Lading was Victuals, as poudred Beef and Cheese, with them were
about forty horse, laden with Powder, Match, and Bullets, and Lead which they
had taken off from the Castle, so that it is all unleaded; much of the
Ammunition was loaded out of Guild Hall, which is their main Guard; on Thursday
night near fifty more horse laden with provisions, as Bacon, Pork, and such
like, were sent the same way, all reported to be for the Princes Court, who it
seems, perceiving his assuming Title of Prince of Great Britain to fail him, is
now resolved to content himself with the furthest part of his Dukedom of
Cornwall: Thursday also the prisoners in Launceston were turned over from
Greenviles Marshal to the Lord Hoptons Marshal; fifty Soldiers ran the same
day out of one Regiment; those that they gather out of the country run away
daily: Friday, six ploughs more were drawn into the castle green to be loaded,
with them were forty horse, with pack Saddles, Crooks and Paniards; these were
all reported to be sent after the rest: That day thirty Hogsheads of Syder were
brought into Launceston from Merrington, which were likewise to be sent
Westward for the Prince; and the Marshal gave order this day, that the
prisoners in Launceston should be carried to Truro, which is about thirty miles
farther into Cornwall: The Enemy endeavored to raise the Posse Comitatus, some
they got together, but they staid not, but ran to their own homes; the
Trained-Bands of the town of Launceston get others for money to serve in their
rooms; the Trained-Bands further West will not rise at all. There is now but
one Iron Gun in Launceston, which is an Iron piece planted between the Princes
Quarters and Guild hal; the poor people pull down the Works about the town to
get away the Wood, none hindering them; the Prince and Hopton were Saturday,
Jan. 31. both in Launceston: Upon Intelligence of a party of the Enemies
advancing from Oxford, Farrington and those parts, toward Corf-castle, the
General sent Col: Cook from Tiverton with three Regiments of horse to attend
their motion, but we now hear they are gone back: The Enemy come daily in unto
our Quarters from Cornwall; this day there came a Lieutenant and nine of Gorings
Lifeguard well mounted, and armed with Pistols and Carbines, came to Sir
Hardres Waller who quarters at Crediton; our men have this day finished the
bridge by Apsom near Exeter; so that now we may have a free intercrouse; The
Ladders come in this afternoon apace. I pray commend me to all our Friends;
tell them I am (thanks be to God) in health, and want only two things
respecting my inward and outward condition; the one, a Preacher like Mr.
Stirry, the other, a cup of London Beer. There is a scarcity of the former
here, and the latter not to be had, only a little sour Syder. If ever I return
to London again, I shall (through the Grace of God) endeavor to have an higher
esteem of those precious opportunities which are there. Thus committing you to
the Protection of the Almighty, I rest.

Chidly, Feb. 2. 1645.
Just now the General is returned hither from Tiverton. This Afternoon Lieut:
General Cromwell went to view our Quarters before Exeter. We have four Companies
of Foot in the Majors house, called Barley, which is within less then Musket
shot of the Enemies Works; they daily shoot into the house, and we against
them; they can also talk one to another, they call our men Round-headed Rogues,
our men return them answer. We make it a Garrison for the present: Our
Soldiers are very cheerful, and desire nothing so much as to storm the City.
The Enemy come in to us daily from the City, but their spirits are so daunted
that they dare not come out against us. To morrow the General goes to settle
Posts at Barley house. The Plymouth Regiment last night took a Major and twenty
Horse from the Enemy near Barstaple. The Regiment late Col: Pickerings, now
Col: Overtons, is marching toward this Army from Corfe Castle. Clothes are
come. A Council of War sat this last night. The General, Lieut: General,
Officers and Soldiers, have great inclinations to storm, though the city be
very strong, a Line about it, with Barracadoes and a strong Wall.

Published according to Order.

FINIS.

