Wonderful PROPHECYES REVEALED TO NICHOLAS SMITH Shoemaker, Living at
Tillington near Petworth in SUSSEX,

As he was about 30 Years ago in the House of one Vickers living in the Stert
at Abbington in Barkeshire; spoken to him by a Man, whom he affirms was his
Lord and Savior,

In the presence of the said Vickers (master of the Inn) one Katharine Smith,
one Carpenter's Wife, and a Maidservant of the House, who all both saw the
Vision, and heard all the words of this Prophecy.

1. Concerning his own life and conversation. 2. Concerning the Bible, and Book
of Navigation. 3. Concerning the day of Restoration of the Creatures, to be on
New Years Day next, 1653. 4. Concerning this Nation, and the whole World in
general.
Manifested unto me Nicholas Smith on Matthias Day last, by a Spirit from God;
and am now come up to London to do the Work I am commanded, and lie at the
sign of the Flying-Horse in Thames Street, where I will by the Grace of God be
ready to attest the truth hereof with my life.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1652.

VVonderfull PROPHECIES.
IN the latter end of the reign of King James, at Abbington in Barkeshire,
being at one Vickers his House in the Stert, I saw a Man that told me the
things that should happen unto this Kingdom; One remarkable thing was, One Army
should lie at Abbington, and another Army at Oxford, and, That these two should
fight one against another; but God would judge them for their Brothers blood;
He told me many remarkable things concerning my own Conversation which have
already come to pass, and many things that are yet to come, which is
admirable; many things are yet to come to pass concerning the whole World; He
told me, That all the Books in the World should be taken away from the use of
man, the Reason was showed me, some had Books, but they would have no body but
themselves to read in them, therefore they shall have none to read in; some
said they were Litterall, therefore they shall not have a Letter to see; some
say, They must be more spiritual, they shall have 5 Years time to Exercize the
Gifts of the Spirit; At that time the Creature shall be delivered from the vain
Conversation of men that are now subject unto vanity; Every one must confess
their sins one to another; Every Woman that bares Children, must after that
time confess the true Father of them; he must take them home, and keep them
whilst they are young, and they must work for him when he is old: at that day,
every one will be in perplexity, God judges every man according to his works,
all men shall be judged accorning unto him that earneth but 10d. a day; if one
earn 2 s. 6d. a day, he must work three times so hard, else he will be judged
for a Thief; He appointed me to make Paper according to his direction, and to
present it to him whom they that love him not, call him their King; and bid me
tell him, That He shall cause the Scripture to be Printed in that Paper; tell
him, There are great abominations committed in the Land; some men find fault
with the Pride of other men that ride in Coaches, yet pull them out, and go
into them themselves in the sight of the People, and the People find fault
with it, if he will not hear thee, carry it to the Speaker, tell him what he
shall do with it; if he neglect it, tell the Major and the Sheriff of ^t,
carry it to the Exchange, and give it to the Mercbants freely, if they neglect
thee, it will be ill for them all; get one to go with thee to set men at work,
make a Box, let him carry it, see that thou do not touch it, if there be a
Stone-wall before thee, if the wall remove, thou must go forward; advise them
in the Cities to carry their necessary goods into the Country, God will not
have so many to live so near togeth^r, every man shall be restored to the
condition as Adam was after his fall, he was ashamed of his sins, humbled
himself before God; but men are fallen so far now, they sin in the presence of
God, saying, They will confess their sins to God, yet Act it in his Presence,
and are proud of it; Ask them if they know God in their own bosom? ask them if
they know the Image wherein they were created? advise all men that they spoil
not Barley, for they must learn to drink water, they should do good to their
Enemies, they should feed them, but they will not feed their Children for fear
their enemies should eat part of it; they had rather plant Thorns and Briars,
then to plant fruit trees; they should have repaired that which Satan defaced,
if they had planted Fruit Trees in the fields, they might have had the leaves
of them; thou shall see a Cart-load of Skins, being Records; Prophecy against
them, say they shall bear record no longer, Prophecy to them on the right hand,
and on the left, Tell them, they should take heed, the place where they sit
shall burn like a furnance, they think they can easily get forth, but they that
are withoutside shall keep them in; Chancery there will be new money, at that
place beat out the stamp which was before; say, He knows what it is to be a
King? Caesar must account for what he has taken more then what is his, The
Kings of the Earth make money, and buy such things as they lack, and when they
lack money, they send for it again, Tell them how they shall agree with their
Adversaries that would make Peace with them; Give them Peace Offerings rather
then take any Impose upon them the Gospel, as all men may understand it; show
them how they should subdue all their enemies under them, kill none of them,
but take opportunity to do them good; you can send a man a thousand Miles, and
he finds him to whom you send; you find not the way way to Jesus Christ: I
have sought Counsel and Instruction of the wise and Learned men of this
Kingdom, whom this Person that appeared to me may be, but they all refuse to
give me Instruction; when all men neglected me, the Lord manifested himself
unto me, entering into me by the Power of the Spirit, judgeing of me what I had
done in the flesh, manifesting himself to be my salvation, whom I saw at
Abington: the manner of the coming of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus upon me,
was by touching lightly the hair of my head, so soaking down into my head, it
made all my neck and shoulders to rise; after two hours, it entered into my
soul; whereupon I being in great fear and trouble, cried unto my Lord and
Savior, beseeching him to interceed for me unto God my heavenly Father, and I
heard a voice to my understanding, saying, Thou do not pray; my Answer was,
Lord thou know I do pray: he answered again, not with all thy heart; I
entreated the Lord to search my heart, and try it, feelingly it removed from
the Place where it was, to my heart, bringing my Prayers to remembrance, asking
me, Whether God would except of such Prayers as I had prayed formerly, I was
questioned of all the intents and purposes of my heart, what I had done, and
what I intended to do, asking me, Wherefore I did work? answering him, I told
him to live; he said to me, That I was not willing to die to live with Christ;
I said, I waited the Pleasure of the Lord, I was adjudged for the Transgression
of the whole Law of God, and for opposition against the Government of my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; my understanding was opened, and I was showed what it
was, and I was showed his Government, and what it was. He told me, I should be
first up in my family, and last abed; I should see all things in good Order in
the morning, I should cause all my family to come together, cause a Chapter to
be read, and pray with them and for them, I should earn my own bread, and fetch
my own Water; I must give to every one rather then receive, I should use as
much as I could of the Talent which God gave me, but as little as I could of
that which is committed unto Satan; Gods Talent is a reasonable understanding
soul, which every one ought to improve to the glory of God, the good of himself
and others; that which is committed to Satan, is the earth and the glory
thereof, I was judged for emnity against God my heavenly Father, I acknowledged
it was true, I was asked then, How I thought to escape the damnation of hell? I
said it was that wound which we received in our first Parents, and it cost the
precious blood of my Lord and Savior: It was asked me, Whether I had no other
hope? I answered, No, There was no other Name under heaven whereby I may be
saved: And I said, I knew, if my Lord and Savior was pleased to apply one
plaster of his precious blood with his own hand to this my wound, which was a
pain upon the midst of my belly: immediately upon my Faith and confidence the
pain departed from me; then I gave thanks to my Lord and Savior: he said, yet
thou may sin a sin and be damned: I entreated him to tell me what it was, he
opened my understanding and showed me what it was, and showed me the revelation
where it is to be found: Take heed that ye are not ashamed to behold the
appearing of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, glory, honor, and worship to
his holy Name for ever.

Would you not have me tell you what God has done for my soul: I wish that all
men did fear the Lord.

I have sought the Counsel of several Ministers this many years; I spoke of it
to Mr. Hilton Minister of Billinghurst in Sussex 14. years since, and diverse of
his neighbors: I asked seven Ministers at one time, what I might do to be
saved; they said it was a necessary question to be asked, but they said it was
not the business of the day, therefore they deferred it, but said it should be
answered; the time past one year, I desired to be satisfied of some
instructions of the Scripture by some learned men; and desiring them to tell me
whom they thought he might be that spoke to me at Abington; I invited Doctor
Chanel to my house, and twelve Ministers besides to try my Faith, whether it
was rightly grounded upon the Word of God according unto his will; and I
desired them to tell me whom they thought it might be that told me all things
remarkable that had and should happen unto me; he said that there was no man
able to tell me such things; he said I was deluded: I told him how he should
know whether I was or not, for he bid me invite you to my house, but he said
you would not come; if you would come to morrow then I shall think that I am
deluded; when the morrow was come, there came never a man which I invited. My
Lord and Savior told me 28. years before, there would a Minister send me word
that he would come to me upon a Tuesday, he said I should take heed, for he was
the Devil; he said make thy Will, set thy house in Order, make clean thy house,
humble thy self before God, fetch a burden of Straw, and lie naked in it all
night: so I caused Doctor Chanel to make my Will; I lay in the straw, a
Minister came to persuade me that I should grant him one thing before I knew
what it was; that I should put no more trust in my Lord and Savior which I
spoke with at Abington; then I remembered four men that was assigned unto me,
which were Ministers, I was appointed to go to them and command them to choose
two a piece, whom they pleased, and come to my house and Judge me, and things
which I should make known unto them; I was appointed to choose a Witness in the
morning before they came, and tell him what they would say when they did come,
and what I was appointed to do, and say to them: I asked four questions in
seven years; the first was, How I should be born again; the second was, What I
should do to be saved: the third question was, The hones of the Paschal Lamb
being not broken, whether it signifies any thing in our days or not: The
fourth, If a man take his wife in the Act of Adultery, whether he ought to put
her away or not? But they gave me no satisfactory answtr; one was angry with
me, because I said that a man could not be born of the water of Baptism. I
thank the Lord he has satisfied me that all men that will enter into his
government, must be born up by his Word and by his Spirit: he that will be
saved must be zealous of the honor and glory of Jesus Christ which was
crucified at Jerusalem; they that will be his body must keep his instructions;
they that will be his Sponse should not join themselves unto an Harlot; ye that
have received the first fruits of the Spirit, sigh and groan within your
selves, waiting for the manisestation of the Sons of God, to wit, the
redemption of our bodies, I mean our deliverance from the power of Tyranny,
which forces us to kill our enemies, sometimes our friends for their will and
pleasure: our Lord has showed that we should do good unto our enemies, and
then we should do good unto our friends. After the day of Restoration, the
Horses, the Kine, and those necessary Creatures will be subject unto none but
unto those that are subject unto Jesus Christ: and men shall be known to be
Christians by the gifts of God; the Creatures will be subject unto them, as it
is said, The Creature shall be delivered into the glorious Liberty of the sons
of God: Men of England, subject your selves unto the Gospel and Government of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as it is briefly made manifest in the four
Evangelists; lest the Creature be delivered from use and comfort of this
Nation, know the only true God in your own bosom, know that the Spirit of the
Lord is in you accusing or excusing: Whether your actions be good or evil, know
Original righteousness; For this is eternal life, that ye know the only true
God in your own bosoms, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. My Lord showed me
that it was very dangerous to die in debt; we should agree with our adversaries
while we are in the way; if any man trespass against us we should forgive him,
and do him some good: my Lord showed me the Angels were very rational, and
looked upon us as we look one upon another, and judge our love unto our God; As
we like the Workmanship of his hands, they are offended because we like not the
form which he has made: we show God that we would have him make Horses without
tails, and some without ears; our own Toes all of a length, just strait and
square; some feet a little forked; our heads and knees bigger; our arms as big
at the hands as they are at the shoulders: the wood which God gives us to
build our houses we like it not of that color, but make it of some other,
still showing our dislike.

Lord have mercy upon us, The Whore of Babylon knows no more how to be born
again then Nicodemus.

Husbandmen Plow and Sow, whilst you have cattle, for the day of Restoration
is on New-years-Day next coming.

I have diverse other things to reveal concerning the World, the Sea, and this
Nation; I have made Paper, and brought it up to London; and have put the Bible
to Print in that Paper, and am about to get the most useful Book of Navigation
written out, or Printed, as I was commanded by my Lord and Savior; But I am
confined to this sheet; and so end.

All glory and worship be unto GOD, and unto Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior for evermore, Amen.

By me NICHOLAS SMITH.

THE END.

