PROPOSALS Humbly offered to the Consideration of The Honorable House of
Commons, For laying a POLL-TAX On all Horses, Mares, Geldings, etc. for one
Year; And a POUNDAGE-TAX On all Horses, Mares, Geldings, etc. that shall be
Bought or Sold in England.

ALSO An Annual Imposition or Duty ON ALL WEIGHTS and MEASVRES whatsoever; As
likewise On all Shopkeepers and Tradesmen.

PROPOSALS Humbly offerded to the Consideration of the Honorable HOUSE of
COMMONS for laying a Poll-Tax on all Horses, Mares, Geldings, etc. for one
Year; and a Poundage-Tax on all Horses, Mares, Geldings, etc. that shall be
bought or sold in England: Also an Annual Imposition or Duty on all Weights and
Measures whatsoever; as likewise on all Shopkeepers and Tradesmen.
I. THAT there may be a Tax or Duty, by way of Poll, laid on all Horses, Mares,
Geldings, etc. that are upwards of five Years old; and valued to be worth five
pounds.

II. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, who keep Horses, etc. either for
the Coach, Saddle, Wagon, Cart, Dray, Plow, or any other use whatsoever, shall
be obliged to cause the same to be given an account of, to the proper Persons
appointed for that purpose, upon the penalty of forfeiting (...) to His
Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

III. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, may, for each pare of
Coach-Horses etc. they have, pay as a Tax to His Majesty, the sum of eight
shillings, (provided such Nobleman, Gentleman, or other Person, does not keep
above eight Coach Horses, etc.) which said sum may be collected and paid at two
several payments, (or otherwise) viz.

IV. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, who keep Horses, etc. for the
Saddle, may, for each Horse, etc. he or they so keep, pay as a Tax to His
Majesty, the sum of four shillings, which said sum shall be collected and paid
as aforesaid, provided each Horse, etc. is valued to be worth five pounds.

V. That all Horses, etc. employed in Wagons, all Pack Horses, etc, all Stage
or Hackney Coach Horses, etc. Plow, Cart, Dray Horses, etc. and all Oxen
employed at Plow, Cart, etc. (where Horses are commonly made use of) shall pay
to His Majesty, for each Horse, etc. (or Oxen) so employed, or any other way
made use of, the sum of four shillings per Horse, etc. (or Oxen) to be paid as
aforesaid, provided the said Horses, etc. are valued to be worth five pounds
each.

VI. That no Nobleman, Gentleman or others, shall be obliged to pay for any
young Horse, etc. he or they bred out of their own stock, provided the same has
not been made use of, or kept in the Stable three Months, except the same be
above five Years old.

VII. That no Nobleman, Gentleman, or other Person whatsoever, shall be obliged
to pay for more than eight Horses, etc. how many soever they, or either of them
have; which said Horses, etc. shall be Assessed as aforesaid.

Object. The Noblemen and Gentlemen may allege, this Poll Tax will be paid
mostly by them and the Country People, by reason, most of the indifferent
People, (and some great Traders) as well as the more ordinary sort of Traders
of London and other Cities, have not such occasion for Horses, and therefore
consequently will be excluded the said Tax.

Answ. There are many Traders in London, as well as other Cities in England,
who keep Horses, etc. and will come into the said Tax; but if they were all
excluded this, there are other ways enough to Tax the Traders of London, etc.
(tbere being no Tax to be laid but what the Trading People must be a
considerable part of it) when the Country Gentlemen and Farmers may be excluded
wholly: And this will plainly appear by the following Part on Weights and
Measures, etc. (which will overballance the inequallity of the foregoing
Proposals) That being wholly on the Trading People, and proposed to be
continued Annually, which in proportion to the abilities of the Gentlemen, etc.
and the Trading People of England, will be heavier on the latter, than it will
be on the former.

VIII. It is further Proposed to this Honorable House. That there may be a
Poundage Tax laid on all Horses, etc, that shall be bough or sold in the
Kingdom of England, etc. from and after the (...)Day of (...) viz.

IX. That all and every Horse or Horses, etc. which shall be bought or sold in
any Market or Fair in England, etc. shall be registered by the Town Clerk, or
some other Person appointed for that purpose, with the Names and places of
abode of the buyer and seller: The buyer paying six pence per pound for each
Horse, etc. he shall so buy; and he that neglects so to do shall forfeit (...)
to His Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

X. That all, or any Person or Persons, who shall buy any Horse or Horses, etc.
of a private Person, or not in any Fair or Market, shall be obliged to pay the
Poundage, and cause the same to be Registered in seven Days after; and declare
(upon Oath, if required) the full price the said Horse or Horses, etc. cost;
and upon default to forfeit (...) to His Majesty, with encouragement to the
Informer.

XI. That any Horse, etc. which shall be transported out of England, and not
the Dominions thereunto belonging, (except for His Majesty's Service) shall pay
to His Majesty the sum of (...) and upon default hereof to forfeit (...) to His
Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

There can be no greater Objections made against this than the foregoing
Proposals, especially, since it is not every Man's occasion to buy a Horse,
etc. though he keeps some; and the Poundage not being above two and an half per
Cent. which is but little, may be easily paid; and besides, I believe any Man
who is about to buy a Horse, etc. that does not think it worth five Shillings
more to him than what he is to give for it, will hardly venture to buy it.

XII. It is further Proposed to This Honorable House, That there may be an
Imposition or Duty laid on all sorts of Weights whatsoever, wherewith any kind
of Thing (be it what it will) is bought onsold by: And also, That there be an
Imposition or Duty laid on all sorts and sizes of Measures whatsoever, either
liquid or otherwise, or in which Liquors are usually kept, or bought and sold
by.

XIII. That all Weights and Measures, as hereafter mentioned, or comprehended,
be obliged to have a Seal, without which they shall not be Lawful; and all
Persons whatsoever, shall be obliged to give an account of all and every the
several and particular Weights (from a Grain and upwards, as far as Weights are
made use of, either by Retail or Wholesale) wherewith they buy or sell by: And
also, an account of all and every the several and particular Measures, of what
Sorts, or by what Names the same may be known or distinguished by (whether
Wine, or Winchester Measures, etc. from an half quartern and upwards, as far as
the same are made use of, either by Retail or Wholesale) to proper Persons
appointed for that purpose, at which time they shall pay their Money, and have
all such Weights and Measures Sealed, which shall be Booked down in every
particular by the said Officer or Officers aforementioned, in order to have the
same Registered in the proper Office for that purpose.

XIV. That all Persons whatsoever, who shall neglect to give an account
particularly, of all Weights and Measures as abovementioned, etc. or shall
make use of any Weights or Measures that have not a distinct Seal (according as
the same shall be appointed) in compliance with the intention of these
Proposals, shall forfeit all and every such Weights and Measures he or they so
presume to make use of; and likewise (...)to His Majesty, with encouragement to
the Informer.

XV. That all Weights made use of by Goldsmiths, or any other Persons who make
use of the same sort of Weights, shall pay to His Majesty, for all and every
Weight under an Ounce, the sum of one penny each; and for all and every Weight
heavier than an Ounce, the sum of two pence.

XVI. That all other Weights not being the same with Goldsmiths Weights, with
which any Person or Persons does Buy or Sell by, shall pay to His Majesty the
sum of one penny, for all and every Weight not exceeding ten Pounds; and for
all Weights upwards of ten Pounds the sum of two pence.

XVII. That all Weights, as above mentioned, which remain in possession of the
Maker, shall be Sealed before they are Sold, (which may be done at the Office)
each Weight paying according to the Imposition or Duty abovementioned.

XVIII. That no Retail Trader whatsoever, shall be liable to pay more than
eight Shillings per Annum, how many Weights soever he or they have.

XIX. That no Retail Trader whatsoever, who makes use of any Weights to Buy or
Sell by, shall pay less than four Shillings per Annum.

XX. That all sorts of Measures, either Liquid or otherwise, shall pay
according to their proportion, the following Imposition or Duty to His Majesty,
in the same manner and form as is to be observed in the foregoing Imposition or
Duty on Weights.

XXI. That all sorts of Measures, either Liquid or otherwise; and likewise,
either Wine or Winchester Measures, etc. not exceeding the Gallon, shall pay to
His Majesty, for each Measure, the sum of one penny.

XXII. That all Measures, either Liquid or otherwise; and likewise, either Wine
or Winchester Measures, etc. with which any Thing whatsoever is Bought or Sold
by, (according as the same are made use of) whether they are of Earth, Wood, or
Metal, etc. and by what Name soever the same are called, as Peck, Bushel,
Runlet, Kilderkin, Firkin, Barrel, Hogshead, Butt, Pipe, etc. or what use
soever the same are put to, as Beer, Ale, Mum, Syder, Brandy, Strong Waters, or
any sort of Wine, or other Liquors whatsoever, shall pay to His Majesty (each
particular here mentioned, or to be understood) the sum of three pence.

XXIII. That all Casks not being sizeable, (and which are made use of in a
wholesale Trade) as Casks for Tobacco, Sugar, Currants, foreign Tallow, Soap,
Sope-Ashes, etc. or any other foreign or domestic Goods, which are sold by
wholesale and Cask'd up, shall be obliged to pay the sum of three pence per
Cask, for all Casks so made use of, upon the penalty of forfeiting (...) to His
Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

XXIV. That no Person or Persons whatsoever shall be exempted this Tax, except
such as receive Alms of the Parish, or those who cry any thing about the
Streets, who shall have a Certificate from the Church Wardens of the Parish
they live in, in order to have their Weights and Measures Sealed without paying
the Tax.

XXV. That all large Casks which pay the Tax, and by which the wholesale Trader
deals, shall be paid by the Person or Persons who have them in possession.

XXVI. That all Persons who make use of any Measures for length, as Yards,
Else, etc. (and by which they buy or sell) shall be obliged to make use of no
other Measures than such as has paid the Tax and been Sealed; and upon
default, to forfeit (...) to His Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

XXVII. That all Measures for length, as Yards, Else, etc. shall pay to His
Majesty (for each Measure mentioned, or to be understood) the sum of three
pence.

XXVIII. That no Retail Traders whatsoever, shall be liable to pay more than
eight Shillings per Annum how many Measures soever he or they have.

XXIX. That no Retail Trader whatsoever, who makes use of Measures to buy or
sell by, shall pay less than four Shillings per Annum.

XXX. That all Wholesale Traders, who make use of more Weights and Measures
than will amount to eight Shillings per Annum (according to the foregoing
Assessment) shall pay for the same proportionably to the number he or they
have, except such Weights and Measures amount to above sixteen Shillings.

XXXI. That no Traders whatsoever shall pay more than sixteen Shillings per
Annum, although they have ever so many Weights and Measures, except such Traders
shall have occasion for new Measures, Casks or Weights; and in such case, all
new Measures, Casks or Weights, shall pay the full Duty or Imposition,
according to these Proposals.

XXXII. That there may be a certain limitation of Time for all Persons to give
an account of their Weights and Measures; and that after such Time, all Weights
and Measures whatsoever, which are bought new, shall pay the full Duty (over
and above what any Person or Persons may have paid for the Annual Imposition)
according to the size of such Weights and Measures; and whoever neglects to
give an account in time, as aforesaid, (or makes use of any Weights or Measures
unsealed, after the expiration of the said time) shall forfeit (...)to His
Majesty, with Encouragement to the Informer.

XXXII. That all Tradesmen, who are Shopkeepers, or others, who Buy and Sell
either by wholesale or retail; or keep Warehouses, and have no occasion to make
use of either Weights or Measures, shall pay to His Majesty the Sum of four
Shillings per Annum, so long as the Imposition on Weights and Measures may be
thought fit to be continued.

XXXIII. That all Weights and Measures whatsoever (which are not here
mentioned) provided the same are in any manner made use of in Buying and
Selling (of what sort soever they be) shall be included in this Proposal; and
whoever endeavors to conceal or defraud His Majesty of all or any part of the
Imposition or Duty on Weights and Measures, or any other part of the foregoing
Proposals, shall forfeit (...) to His Majesty, with encouragement to the
Informer.

XXXIV. That all Housekeepers shall be obliged to give an account what their
Lodgers are (if they have any) in order that they may pay according to their
several Assessments; and he that neglects so to do, shall forfeit (...)to His
Majesty, with encouragement to the Informer.

REASONS Humbly offered for the Imposition or Duty, etc. to be accepted by this
Honorable House.
1st, THE Wholesale Trader cannot think himself much prejudiced by this Tax, by
reason of his great Dealings and the small Imposition or Duty proposed; which,
in proportion, is so inconsiderable, that it will not be worth any particular
Person's notice: For there is not one wholesale Trader in ten, that will pay
above eight Shillings per Annum (and no one to pay above sixteen) which,
according to their Abilities, is very reasonable.

2dly, The Retailers, who generally return less Money than the wholesale Men,
are more moderately Assessed, by reason there are hardly any who make use of
Measures exceeding the Gallon, or Weights exceeding the ten Pounder; whereby
their part will be so small, that no particular Person will feel it. Yet
Measures, as likewise Weights, being so generally made use of, will bring a
large Sum of Money into the Treasury. So that the generality of Retailers, who
make use of Weights or Measures, will not pay (by moderate Computation) above
four Shillings per Annum, according to the quantity of Weights and Measures
they have occasion to make use of.

3dly, The several Proposals aformention'd cannot raise any sort of Goods or
Commodity whatsoever in the least, by reason no particular Trade is Taxed; (but
that the same is laid on all sorts whatsoever) and the Imposition or Duty is so
small, that there can be no pretense for it.

4thly, The Imposition upon Shopkeepers, etc. who do not make use of Weights
and Measures, is likewise so small, that the Shopkeepers aforesaid, etc.
certainly cannot find fault with it, since they pay as little as any other
Tradesmen whatsoever; and are commonly as well able to pay as much.

5thly, The several particulars mentioned in these Proposals (if thought fit to
be accepted by this Honorable House) may all of them be Collected by the same
Officers all over England. For,

6thly, The Poll-Tax on Horses, etc. (as proposed) may be Collected by Officers
appointed in every particular Parish throughout the Kingdom.

7thly, The same Officers may readily Dispatch and Seal all Weights and
Measures, and take a particular and exact Account thereof, and for whom; which
said Account shall be sent up (or a Copy) to some proper Person or Persons
appointed for that purpose, to whom they shall send the Money by them received
likewise, which may be forthwith Registered at an Office, etc.

8thly, These Officers to be Housekeepers, or otherwise Residents in the Parish
where they gather and collect the several Taxes as above proposed; or the same
Officers may Collect for several Parishes, as is requisite or necessary.

9thly, The same Persons being Residents may attend all Fairs and Markets, who
may likewise Register and give an Account of all Horses, etc. Bought and Sold,
as the same shall occur.

10thly, It Is humbly supposed the foregoing Proposals will (if worthy
Acceptance) bring into His Majesty's Treasury the first Year, by Computation,
at least two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds; and two hundred thousand Pounds
per Annum so long as the same may be continued. There can be no great certainty
how much more Money this Tax will raise (but the number of Tradesmen who will
be obliged to pay to it, are so great, that it may be supposed, a far larger
Sum will be brought into His Majesty's Exchequer) by reason the Majority of the
People of England will pay something. But how many there are to pay, or how
much each Person will be Assessed, must, at present, remain uncertain, by
reason there have not been Precedents in this nature to give a true Information.

So that after Your Honors have, in Your great Wisdom, maturely considered the
foregoing Proposals in their several and particular Circumstances, I hope, Your
Honors will pass a favorable construction on the endeavors of Your Proposer,
(who entirely aims at the Service of His Majesty and His Kingdom, by offering
that, which Your Honors, in Your great Wisdom, I hope, will Judge serviceable
to the Nation at this juncture; and not burdensome to the Subjects thereunto
belonging) and according to the Merits of his Service, he humbly begs You will
grant him the encouragement he may deserve, etc.

John Smith.


