Something further laid open of the cruel Persecution of the People called
QUAKERS By the Magistrates and People of EVESHAM.
HAving suffered much by the Rude People, as Dirting, Stoneing, Stocking,
Spitting and Pissing upon, and having been often assaulted with great companies
of rude people in our meetings, and having suffered much Abuse and Violence,
not only in our meetings but also in the Prison, upon us who were prisoners,
who were at sometimes 20. in number, concerning which I shall mention little,
but direct the Reader to two printed Papers, one with this Title, (A
representation of the Government of Evesham, etc.) but especially to another,
titled (The cruelty of the Magistrates of Evesham) wherein is laid open the
manner of their proceedings against us, with their most unjust actings of those
that sat to do Justice there against us at the general Sessions held for that
place, where many of us were fined, and eleven prisoned, yet not any law could
be read unto us that we had broken: But to lay open some more of the most
inhumane dealings of him called Mayor, with the rest of the persecuting
Magistrates against us.

Friends, Having suffered much by the rude multitude, and enduring all
patiently, at last they grew ashamed and confounded, and then they grew more
quiet, and friends met peaceably twice or thrice a week, so that the ignorant
began to be convinced, and the gainsayers mouths stopped, and much people
received the truth in love, whereby the meetings were increased, and the
gainsayers mouths stopped, and the work of the Lord begun to prosper; thus we
countinued a certain spce day by day in peace, and then there arose up a new
Mayor, who knew not the Righteous seed, as there arose up a new King in Egypt,
Exodus 1 and he saw the people of God increase, and was vexed at it, as the
world was always vexed at the increase of the Righteous Seed; so that Mayor
(Edward Young) said he would break our meetings, or else his bones should lie
in the dirt, the which he did. Upon the 14. day of the 8. month, being the
first day of the week, friends met in a house; and as two friends of the town
were going to the meeting, the Mayor laid hands on them and put them in Prison.
And in the latter part of the day friends met in the street, where they were
peaceably without any disturbance, until the Mayor came with Officers, and
said, it was an unlawful Assembly; and said, if there were above eight persons
met together, it was an unlawful Assembly, and presently laid hands on
friends, and pulled, and thrust, and kicked many, and put many into prison and
into the Stocks and put me and two more into the Dungeon; and when he saw that
friends were not afraid, and that his cruelty could not move them, he said he
wanted another prison for the women, (for he had imprisoned men in four
several places:) that time when this was done, he commanded his Sergeant to
make a noise and proclaim and command, in the name of the Protector, that every
one should depart thence upon pain of imprisonment, when he wanted more prisons
to put us in: Thus he broke our meetings who harmed not any, nor resisted his
violence. Then he said if we would meet in houses or in the fields, he would
not molest us: Yet, on the next first day, he saw one of the Town going along
to the meeting that we had then appointed in a house, and him he put in prison,
and so I being that day put in the Dungeon, as once before I was put in for
praying, then he endeavored to keep all people from me and for several days
and nights we were denied having candles in this dark dungeon; at last he sent
us each man a pennyworth of bread, and a half penny worth of beer, the which
the Jailer said was the Towns allowance, but we still denied it, and sent him
word, That if we should not have food for our money, or from our friends, then
we should be without it: So at last when we could have bread from our friends,
and water when we could have it, then we did eat and drink and praise the Lord.

Thus he much endeavored to bring us to slavery to his corrupt will, which was
according to the words of Robert Atkins that sat Judge at the sessions, who
then said to me thus, You have been kept very high, but I shall take a course
ere I go hence, that you shall be kept shorter. And the mayor, Edward Young,
caused a trap-door to be made to the Dungeon, and locked down, and all our
bedding and bed-cloathes that friends had sent us, he caused to be taken away
from us, and will not let our friends have them again. Joshua Frensom, a friend
and prisoner, having much pain with his teeth did something earnestly desire
that whilst he was a prisoner, he might have the use of a pillow that was
taken away, which was his own, but it was denied. On the second day after we were
put into the dungeon, a friend brought us some straw to ly upon but the jailer
would not suffer it to be brought in to us, because they would not give him
money for to open the door. Once I sent to the Mayor to have liberty for some
man or friend to fetch out, our dung from us, and he denied it, and sent for a
Cunstable to put that friend in the stocks that came to ask it; and while I was
in the other prison, before I was put in the dungeon, sometimes our books and
writings were taken from us, and sometimes our stools that we had to sit or
write upon and our candles, besides much abuse which our friends received from
the jailer, who were prisoners at his house, which I shall forbear to mention,
only thus he said unto them, if they would not pay 4. d. a night for each man's
lodging, and 8. d. a meal for each man's meat, then they should go all to the
main goal, which they refusing to satisfy his will in, neither did they eat of
his diet, being all townsmen; but sometime he would not suffer their wives nor
any other friend to come to them to bring their diet, nor yet to come in to
them: then a man got leave of him that dwelt next house to the jailer, and so
went through his house and brought food to the prisoners, which when the jailer
saw, he threatened the man which had suffered them to go through his house, and
took the beer from them that brought it to the prisoners, intending by such
actions to force them to his will, which they would not be subject to,
therefore he brought them all to the main-goal, and then he said unto us, that
if he might have his will he would hang us all on the morrow, and he had said
before he might do what he would unto us, for we should have no benefit of the
Law, neither durst any Lawyer plead for us. Then were them eight kept in that
Goal, and we three in the Dungeon under them, where I and some others have been
kept in this Dungeon and Prison, with our own dung in the same room, from time
to time for this fourteen Weeks.

And as for the Prison or Hole where we are kept, it is not 12. foot square,
and one Goal-hole belonging to, four inches wide, where we take in our food and
straw to lie upon, and we are forced to burn candle every day when we have it,
by reason the Prison is so dark and so close, and so many in so little room,
and so little air, with the stinck of our own dung, all which might have
occasioned the death of some of us ere this time; and one they kept with me in
the dungeon until he was sick, and after turned him out in the night; and some
others have not been well by reason of the exceeding closeness of the prison,
whereby sometimes the stinck of the prison has been so strong in the streets,
that people could not endure to stand by it. Sometimes when the days were hot
the breath of some prisoners was almost stopped, and lay for several days
like men asleep; and when the days are at the coldest, we have not room nor
place either to make fire or to walk to keep our bodies vvarm; yet there is a
large prison over our heads, where they do sometime prison many of our friends,
but that large prison they will not let us be in, neither could we, nor friends
for us, prevail to have liberty to walk in that prison sometimes by day, and to
come down into the other prison by night.

Therefore let all people take notice, whose hearts is tender toward the Lord,
how we are not only deprived of outward liberty, without the breach of any law,
but are also kept in a most barbarous condition, worse than thieves and
murderers, as the jailer has said, that if we had been in for theft or
murder, he could have let us have more liberty then now he durst, because of
the Mayor.

One day two Country men were passing by the prison with their Teams, which
men came and enquired what we were in prison for, and the Jailer being by,
enticed them in to us, and then he locked the door again and went his way; so
the men were constrained by reason of their Teams, to send several messengers
with entreating words to the Jailer to come again, and then they were forced to
agree with him for to let them forth for money, the which they presently paid.
Another time one of the town came to see us when the Jailer was there and the
doors open, and the Jailer locked the door and kept him in that day from his
labor, and the night, and his wife nor her friends could not prevail with the
Mayor nor the Jailer, to let him out without money.

James Wall, who had been a soldier many years, and served an Apprentiship in
the Town, and a Freeman thereof, and have born several Offices, being a
Shopkeeper, having for seven years kept a standing in the Market place, until
since he was a prisoner for witnessing the Truth; yet the Mayor, Edward Young,
forbad his Wife to stand in the Market place, which for so many years he had
done, neither would he let her stand that time where he was wont to do, nor in
any part of the Market place; then she went to him about it, and once he said
she should have a standing for to open in the market, but after he began to
speak suttlely to her, saying, I hear that your Husband does abuse you: She
answered, my Husband did never abuse me; but as for that judgment which he now
holds, once I could not own it, but now seeing it is so much persecuted,
makes me own it, because the way of God was always persecuted; and when the
mayor heard that, and saw he could have no occasion against her Husband by her
words, then he said she should not have a standing place for five pounds. Also
two of James Walls Chapmen came to him, with whom he had dealed much, and their
accounts were large, and some money he owed them, who went to the mayor, and
proffered him what Bail he would desire for him to come forth one day to
perfect his Accounts, but they could not prevail with him, but the mayor said
to them, that if they would have a Warrant to seize on his Goods they should,
but the men said they had no reason so to do, for the mayor he seeks to ruinate
not only him, but all the other also. Upon that day we came before the late
mayor, George Kempe, I said, I own Magistrates that are for the punishing of
evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, he ansvvered, You will
find none such in England; (And I am sure I find none such in Evesham.)

Upon the 17. day of the 9. month Margret Newby, and Elizabeth Courten, came to
this town in obedience to the Lord, who had a meeting on the morrow, being the
first day, at Edward Pitwayes house, and after the meeting was ended, about the
fourth hour in the latter part of the day, they came to the prison to visit us
that were in it, and as they were returning the Mayor laid violent hands on
them himself, and sent for Officers, and caused them to be put in a pair of
stocks in a prison over us, which stocks are worse than ordinary, made for
hands and feet to be put in, and when the Constable had put them in those
stocks, the Mayor went up to the prison to see if they were put in bad enough
and the Constable had put them in one near to another, and the Mayor caused the
stocks to be opened, and removed them one as far from another, as might be one
at the one end of the stocks, and the other at the other, and the holes that
are for the hands their hands were to little, and he made them put in their
legs a yeard one from another, and the women desired a block to sit on it being
a great distance between the place where they were to sit, and the places in
which their legs were put; and the mayor bid the constable fetch a block and
thrust it between their legs, and said they should not have them between their
legs which they would have, and other uncivil words he used, and locked the
prison door, and went his way, and would not suffer any to go to them to carry
any clothes or any thing for them to sit on, in a most barbarous and cruel
manner for the space of fifteen hours; and after they had been in all that
time, he presently (after he had caused them to be taken out) sent them out of
the town a back way, without suffering them to go to any place to refresh
themselves, it being a freezing night. And the same first day at evening he
caused a friend that came to the prison hole, who came to the town the day
before, him he caused to be put in the common stocks, not shovving him any
reason why they did it; and after he had been in the stocks all that freezing
night in the street, then the Mayor sent him out of the town by the Jailer,
and when the Jailer had left him he returned to the town again along the road
way, it being the Market day, and came to the prison to us, and then went to
the Mayor to know what offense he had to charge him with, that he thus
punished him, but the Mayor having nothing to accuse him of, was wrath, and
sent him to the stocks again, where both his feet were put in.

Then they sent for Robert Vens, who did go along with that friend out of the
town, that had been in the stocks all night, and when Robert Vens came before
them called Justices, Samuel Gardener, and Robert Martin; the one of them said,
what shall we do with this fellow? the other answered, put him in the Goal and
hang him; but at last they sent him to stocks, and he knows no reason why they
did it, but for going with the other friend out of the town; and when he had
been in the stocks five hours, then they sent for him to see what the Jailer
had to charge him with for any words that he might speak when he went with the
other friend; so when they had punished him, they went to enquire what fault he
had done.

Some of the Inhabitants of the town intended to send two men to the Protector
(when this persecution begun in Evesham; and the corruption of the Magistrates
did so plainly appear) to let him know what corrupt men were in authority in
this town, and they writ something to that effect to send by them, the which
writing was subscribed about fifty hands to it; but I said unto them, that they
might put themselves to much trouble, and yet not speak with the Protector;
therefore if they would not otherwise be satisfied, they might put some four
hands to it and send it to print, and then I should endeavor to have it sent
to the Protector, that he might be left without excuse; so they sent it to
print with 20. hands to it, which was titled, A Representation of the
Government of Evesham from many of the Inhabitants thereof, directed unto the
Protector, O. C.

And at the Sessions many of them were fined, and some were both fined and
imprisoned ever since in the Protectors name, for declaring to the Protector
the corruption of those that are put in authority under the Protector, who act
contrary to the Protectors laws against those that have been faithful
soldiers both for the Parliament and the Protector, and there is not any
friend at any time, that can by any means since the Sessions, procure by any
means, or buy for money, a copy of our Indictments.

And let all people take notice, that all that is printed in the first, second,
and this third book, is all but a short declaration to what might be printed of
the persecutions of Priests Magigistrates and people of this Town of Evesham
against the Saints:

From the Dungeon in Evesham, by him that is known to the world by the name of
Humphrey Smith.

YOU that be Magistrates which do cast Christ into prison and will not visit him
when you have done, nor suffer his friends and brethren to visit him in prison,
and there you keep him in prison til he hunger and thirst, and you prison him
as a Vagabond, who has no place to lie his head, sick and in prison, and you
visit him not; but the Corner stone is set up, and the Rock of Ages manifest,
and him who bears the Government upon his shoulders, whose Kingdom is without
end, and Dominion which has no end, which is an everlasting Dominion, which
Dominion is over all Dominions; whose Scepter is Righteousness; whose Law Royal
stands over all, answers that of God in all, and respects no Man's Person, but
is Holy, Just and Righteous, Perfect and Good, whose Priesthood is Royal
everlasting, that never changes, who lights every man that comes into the
World, that men might believe and see the Way out of the World, Christ, the
Light, the Way, the Truth, who is the Covenant of Light, of Peace, and of Life:
Was not Christ crucified in Sodom and Gomorrah spiritually? and are not they
Sodomites that imprison him? and are not the Sodomites them that live in
fullness of bread, and Idleness, and the filthy conversation, which the
Righteous Soul grieves and vexes, which Christ is Shepherd of, and the
Bishop, who is a Witness in all Consciences, which witnesses against the Lusts
which war against the Soul: Was not all the Profession of Christ before he was
manifested in the flesh, and when he was manifest in the flesh, hypocrisy
among them that profess him in words, and did not believe in him who was the
Light, but cast him into Prison, and he was sick, and they visited him not; and
was hungry, and they fed him not; and he was naked, and they clothed him not;
such as neither knew his voice, nor the Prophets that showed the coming of him?
And is not all the profession of Christ now hypocrisy among them that profess
him in words, and do not believe in him who is the light, that lightneth every
man that comes into the world, but cast him into prisons, and holes, and
dungeons, and he is sick, and you visit him not; and hungry, and you feed him
not; and thirsty, and you give him no drink; and naked, and you cloth him
not, but into prison cast him as a Vagabond, who has no place to lay his head;
the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the son of man
has no place to lay his head; Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. Therefore awake ye Rulers, and fear the Lord God, and hear the voice of
the Son of God, that you may live; for now is Christ come to reign, the same as
ever was, whom into prison you do cast, and with your wills would not suffer him
to reign; but Christ will reign, who is not born by the will of man, who is King
and Ruler, and now raigns in his kingdom and dominion, which is without end,
and in his power, and in his fullness, who fills all things, and thousands of
his fullness have received, and of his power (as many as have received him) to
become the Sons of God.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1656,


