SLANDERS and LIES
Being cast upon the Children of Light, given forth to Print from one HENRY
WALKER, which R: IBITSON has Printed, That they Deny the Resurrection, and
Heaven, and Hell, which are Lies published to the Nation: which Lies R: WOOD
has also Printed. Therefore for the truths sake, and them that fear God, is
this Paper given forth, that the Lies return from whence they came, and them
that are given over to believe Lies may receive them. But the honest hearted
regard them not, knowing the time is coming, as the Scripture says, The wicked
shall fret themselves, etc.
WHEREAS Henry Walker gave in Lies to the Printer, that two QUAKERS which came
to White Hall, said, That there is no such place as Heaven and Hell: Thou
Walker have ministered forth thy Lies; for hell Thou shall find, which the
wicked must be turned into, and all Liars; and Heaven is Gods Throne, and the
Scriptures in the Old and New Testament is a Declaration from the Spirit; and
God is the Word, and Christ Jesus is the Light that lights every man that
comes into the world; and Thou who have made a scoff at this, Thy folly is
made manifest, and Thy self declared to be a false Witness, and brought Thy
self upon Record; for John said, that, Christ was the true light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world; at whose Doctrine Thou
stumbles; and Thou shall find a Resurrection to Condemnation for Thy body to
go in, when that the Just shall witness a raising to life: and thy reward
shall be according to Thy work, for many Lies have Thou uttered forth in Thy
papers against the Children of the Light, and published to the Nation: But all
that fear God does not Thee nor them regard. That in Thy Conscience shall us
remember in Thy day of Thy calamity, that we to Thy soul are friends, though
now to the world it is thy work to speak evil upon the Children of light, and
render them odious to the world. And R: Wood in Thy paper is many unsavory
speeches against the Children of light; who art seeking to justify lies,
showing thy self to be one of the world, which loves her own, whose custom is
to utter lies, whose Torment is beginning, and whose ill smell and favor
ascends, because the Sun is risen: And Thou declarest Walkers lies which he
has given forth against the Children of light, in Thy Book which is called The
Weekly Post, and have uttered forth Thy slanders and lies against the Children
of light. And those words Printed in thy Book, called, A Declaration of the
Children of Light, shall stand and witness against thylyes, and a Hell Thou
shall witness who said, They said there is no such place as Hell. R: Wood. And
secondly, Thou say they say, There is no such place as Heaven, which are
lies; for the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God; and
Heaven is Gods Throne. Again, thou say, they say, There is no Resurrection
of the Body; Resurrection to condemnation thou shall witness, which we
witness, who do witness a Resurrection to life, according to the Scriptures:
And R: Wood thou say the Judges sat at White Hall, which is another of thy
lies: The Scriptures the Old and New Testament the Children of light do own,
and the Scriptures says, God is the Word, which we witness according to
Scripture, which makes such lying fellows as Thee to rage: And R: Wood when
thou have uttered forth thy lies, thou say, Pure Rogues to roast. O Tyranny!
here upon Record to all the Nation thou art, what spirit thou art of, and whose
Servant thou art. And thou sets in thy Book, John Boulton, Simon Dring, William
Rayman, Richard Davis, whose Names thou art not worthy to mention, such as be
men fearing God, and their witness stands against the deceits and lies, The
light in thy Conscience shall witness it, We are justified by faith in Christ,
which faith works by love.

From them whom the world calls QVAKERS scornfully; but Moses who quaked and
trembled, said, To him Reproaches was great Riches.


