A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE Deputy Governor, AND THE
Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the Levant-Seas, AT St Bartholemew-Exchange,
May 1. 1689. By EDWARD SMYTH, A. M. Fellow of Trinity-Colledge near Dublin; And
Preacher to the Factory at SMYRNA.

May 28. 1689.
IMPRIMATUR,

Hen. Wharton, R.R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domest.



LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the corner of Pope's-Head-Ally,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1689.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE EARL of BERKELY, GOVERNOR, AND THE Company of
Turkey Merchants.
Right Honorable, etc.
THE following Discourse has no other pretense to so Honorable a Dedication,
but that your Command is the only reason it appears now in Print. Nor could any
thing justify the Publication of such a Trifle, but that I resolved to be
wanting in no instance of an entire Obedience; and that I would refuse no
opportunity of acknowledging to the World my Obligations, for the Honor of
being elected into the Service of so worthy a Society. to whose Industry and
Ingenuity, the English Nation in a great measure owes those extraordinary
Advancements of Wealth and Reputation abroad, this last Century has made. Whose
most eminent Virtues, exemplary Charity, and signal Services to your Country,
have raised you up to be the Ornament of your own, as the Envy of all
neighboring Nations. I could here offer a very just Apology for the
uncorrectness of this Paper, that it was conceived and brought forth in haste,
that the Concern I had for my afflicted Brethren of Ireland, had so far the
Ascendant of my thoughts, as not to give way to that serenity and calmness of
mind, which such a performance did require. But since I address my self to
Persons of your Candor, I am not to doubt of all favorable allowances. I hope
hereafter to glean something in your own Harvest, to which with less blushing I
may prefix your Names. And as it is now my Duty, so shall it ever be my Study to
promote your Prosperity and Happiness, for obtaining which Blessings, shall be
daily offered the Prayers of,

Right Honorable, and Gentlemen, Your ever obliged, and most obedient Servant,
EDWARD SMYTH.

A SERMON Preached before the Levant-Company.
ISAIAH XXVI. latter part of Ver. ix. -- For when thy Judgments are in the
Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.


SO wonderful are the Methods by which the Divine Wisdom has contrived our
Salvation; that the bare conceiving them is no less above our Capacity, than
that Infinite Reward surpasses all our Pretensions to Merit. There is not one
Attribute in the Divinity, which bears not a part in the miraculous Work of our
Redemption; the Unspeakable Wisdom invented it, and the Almighty Power
accomplished it; his Mercy has provided for our Infirmities, and his Justice
has insured our Salvation, that our hope is not in vain in the Lord.

And if ever Religion provided effectually for the salvation and happiness of
Mankind, this is peculiar to Christianity. For if we have the least spark of
Ingenuity or Good Nature in our Temper, the Evangelical Promises suited to the
most prevailing Passions of our Soul, the Cords of Love, the Wings of Mercy,
the Charms of Heaven, its Delights drawn to the Life, the Voice of the Charmer,
who surely Charms most wisely; the Pleasure of Religion, and the Sweets of
Virtue must make us Proselytes to Heaven, and force us to be Happy.

But then, should we despise even all these powerful Inducements to Happiness,
tho we are deaf to the Voice of the Charmer; the Long-suffering of God does not
yet fail us. There are his terrible Judgments set out with all the Aggravations
of Horror and Amazement, to reclaim us; to awaken us from that sleep, which is
surely unto Death, the Terrors of the Lord, the Flaming Sword, an Angry God
armed with Power, and Vengeance must strike us into a religious reverence. When
the Lion roareth who will not hear? Hos. 11.10. When the Almighty appears clad
with his Robes of Vengeance, as the Prophet speaks, and surrounded with the
Terror of his Judgments making Inquisition for Sin, how shall the amazed
sinner appear? with what confusion of face must he loath his polluted Soul! If
the still Voice could not, the Eloquence of God speaking in his Judgments must
deeply affect him with the profoundest Dread and Reverence. Even the stupid
Romans could then think of God, when Calamities were their severe
Remembrancers: For when thy Judgments (O Lord) are in the Land, the Inhabitants
of the World will learn Righteousness.

Where, by Righteousness, as is obvious in Scripture Phrase, we are to
understand Virtue and Religion in general: so that the sense of the words will
be this, That the Divine Judgments are most instructive of Duty and Religion;
that this is their Drift, and that we ought to learn this Lesson from them.
From which words I will take occasion to discourse to the following Particulars.

First, I will endeavor to Assign some Proper Marks, and Characters which may
enable us to discern the Divine Judgments; as when dispensed by a Special
Providence, and proceeding from the more immediate Hand of God. Secondly, I
will enquire into the more Notorious Ends, to which the Divine Wisdom has
directed his Judgments. Thirdly and Lastly, I will enquire, what is the Proper
Behavior of a Christian under the Judgments of God, and what Influence they
ought to have on our Lives.
First then, I will endeavor to Assign some Proper Marks and Characters, which
may enable us to discern the Divine Judgments; as when dispensed by a Special
Providence, and proceeding from the Hand of God.

To ascribe every Petty Chance, that happens, to a Special Providence, may
signify Lightness; to father on God the Mischiefs arising from our Sin and
Folly, may savor of Profaneness. By the Judgments of God therefore, I desire
you will understand such extraordinary Occurrences, as carry in them some
peculiar Marks of the Divine Anger; and are signal Instances of his Vindictive
Justice.

And here sometimes the Hand of God is made bare, raised up, and stretched out
in the Performance of most surprising Works: Thus the Earth swallowed up Corah
with his Accomplices; and a Fire from Heaven snatched away the profane hands,
which offered Incense; and many such signal Examples wholly unaccountable from
the Power or Efficacy of Natural Causes as to all their circumstances, do the
Holy Scriptures afford us.

But then again, that same Almighty Hand is wrapped up sometimes in a
complication with Inferior Causes when it is not lifted up so high, or so far
extended in miraculous Works. And here the special Vindictive Providence may
not be impressed on Events, in Characters so big and clear, as to be legible to
the most prejudiced eye. The Tracts thereof may be sometimes too fine and
subtle, to be descried by a dimn sight, with a transient glance, or upon a
gross view it may not affect the unreasonable sceptick, or such as are wholly
indisposed to receive it.

But shall not we adore his Almighty Power, and acknowledge his Judgments in
inferior Events, in a Plague or Famine unless a flaming Comet sets the World
on fire, and amaze us into a fit of Religion? must we wantonly prescribe to the
Divine Wisdom? deny him the Ministry of Second Causes, and refuse all
Nourishment, unless we are fed with palpable Miracles? For tho Special
Providence in the severer dispensation of Judgments is sometimes clouded by the
concurrence of Natural Agents, yet if we attend and consider them, we shall
easily discover some Marks of Vengeance imprinted on them. And surely it is the
practice of good men, to contemplate and study Providence; the Prophet ranketh
him only among the wise, who understands the Judgments of the Lord: it is a
Matter for pious meditation, warranted by the practice of good men, to implore
the manifestation of God's Power and Justice. If we therefore approach with
this preparation of mind, ready to attend the least intimations of his
displeasure, and to apply them to the amendment of our Lives, to learn
Righteousness from them, the following Marks and Characters may be of good use
to us, to discern and reverence the Judgments of God: And these Characters I
shall draw either from the Nature, or some Circumstance of such Events.

The first Character then of a Special Providence, and the visible Hand of God,
is the wonderful strangeness of Events; as when great Effects are accomplished,
either by no apparent means, or by means wholly disproportionate, and often
repugnant to the effect. Thus have we seen the mightiest Forces discomfited;
the firmest Structures demolished; Designs enforced, with all the advantages of
Strength and Cunning confounded and how unaccountable the way? no visible means
appeared, Nature seeming to have managed the War, and the Elements to have
fought against them: Panick Fears, or sudden Deaths, having seized the
principal Instruments. How ready is any part of the Creation to minister to the
Divine Vengeance? the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera, Judges
5.20. the Winds and Skys became Auxiliaries to Theodosius; the Lord thundered
upon the Philistines; and how should they stand against the Host of Heaven? the
Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the Philistines 185000
Men. Thus the mighty Power of Antiochus was to be broken without hands.

How often has Impotency, and the weak things of the Lord, triumphed over
Might? Thus a Stripling, furnished only with the Breast Plate of Faith and a
Pebble, shall fell down a monstrous Giant. tho armed with an Helmet of Brass, a
huge Target, Sword and Spear. How often have we seen the deepest Intrigue and
Policy, whose Foundation was laid in Hell, either blasted of it self, or bafled
by simplicity? the most perspicacious Counselors blinded and infatuated? the
subtle, treacherous, designing Politician not only supplanted in his wicked
enterprise, but dismally chastised by it, and falling into his own snare?
Surely then such Occurrences do more than insinuate the Divine Vengeance
concerned to countermine and confound such devices. It Is he certainly that
makes the Diviners mad, turns wise Men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolish, Isaiah 44.25. When Plots contrived in darkness are by unaccountable
accidents disclosed and brought to light, a Bird of the Air telling the Matter,
or the Stones crying out Treason, as the Prophet speaks: and shall not this
argue the Finger of God to be engaged? Behold that very design, which contrived
the destruction of David, increases his Honor; the Stratagems to supplant
Daniel, make him grow in the King's favor. Must not this then be the special
Operation of that God whose peculiar it is to do wondrous things, to be
terrible in his Judgments?

A second Character of a Special Providence, is the seasonableness and
suddenness of Events.

When pernicious Enterprises, which aim at nothing less than the subversion of
a Kingdom are grown to maturity, and are just ready for execution, how often,
beyond the Power of Humane Understanding, have we seen them either surprisingly
discovered, or seasonably prevented? And shall not this be a pregnant evidence,
that an ever-vigilant Eye, and the all-powerful Hand are engaged? Thus was
Pharaoh with his Host overwhelmed, when he had just overtaken the Children of
Israel. Thus when Sennacherib with an infinite force had invested Jerusalem,
when certain death seemed to threaten the holy City, God put a Hook into his
Nose, and turned him back into his own Land, 2 King. 9.28. When the profane
Caligula was just ready to discharge his bloody rage on the Jews, for their
refusing to worship the presumptuous Wretch; a domestic Sword presently gave
vent to his revengeful Breath. When Julian, by his Authority and Policy, had
projected the overthrow of our Religion, his Plot is bafled, and he falls
ingloriously by an unknown Hand. Certainly then we must here acknowledge the
secret efficacy of God, who pours down such unexpected Vengeance on the
counsels of the wicked. This is the method of his peculiar Providence, he could
as easily prevent the very beginning of wicked Designs; but he permits the
Contrivers to mount to the top of Confidence and Expectation; and then (...)
surprizingly, unexpectedly he issues forth a Judgment, and confounds the
Elaborate Undertaking. Be astonished therefore and tremble all ye workers of
Iniquity, and let the Lord be magnified in his Judgments.

Thirdly, Another Character of the Divine Judgments, and of a special
Providence in dispensing them, is from their kind and countenance, which often
bear a significant resemblance to those sins, for which they are inflicted.
Punishments (says a Father) are the forced Offspring of wilful Faults, and
therefore carry the Complexions and Features of their Parents: And thus the sin
becomes often legible in the Judgment, which is designed to punish it, which
provoked and wrested it from Heaven. How often have we seen ambitious
Confidence mourning in Disgrace; Avarice cursed with Decay of Estate; the
blasphemous Throat torn out; the bloody Oppressor weltring in his own Blood,
who but just now glutted in his Brothers; an Accident which almost continually
does happen; so signal is the Revenge of Murder: the Treacherous betrayed;
Places which prided themselves in Wealth and Greatness, Power and Magnificence,
now buried in Ruins, and more desolate than the Wilderness. Surely such
Occurrences do point out, and judicate the Finger of God, they speak plainly
that they are his doings: by such Actions he most evidently declares himself
the Judge and Governor of Mankind; Who directs the Instruments of Divine
Vengeance against Babylon, to take Vengeance upon her as she has done, Jer.
51.49.

Notwithstanding therefore any obscurity or intricacy that may sometimes appear
in the course of Providence; as whether such Events proceed from the more
immediate hand of God: if we consider wisely, with pious Attention, and a
devout Heart; if with Minds pure from vain Prejudices, and corrupt Affections;
the Marks, and Characters now assigned, will be of good Use and Direction to us.

We are too apt indeed to put off the Religious Reflections, and with the
Philistin loves to question whether this came by the Hand of God or not. But we
may answer our selves by a cheaper Experiment than they did: If the Characters
now assigned could not direct us; our own Sins will tell us plainly, we have
deserved the Divine Judgments: and surely it were more useful for a Christian
to make this Application, then wantonly to dispute about the Nature of them.

There are some who either through idleness of humor, or an affectation to be
reputed wise, have undertaken to arraign the Judgments of God; and to level
them ordinary Events, and Natural Effects. With such presumption some have
attempted to account for that General Deluge, which swept away all Mankind,
except Eight Persons, from Natural Causes. But surely these Men are more acted
with a fondness of their new Conceits, than by any zeal for Truth. For whoever
but seriously reflects on all the Circumstances of that Event, must confess it
beyond the power of Nature or Chance; and will condemn that Philosophy as vain,
which would advance such Extravagancies.

Having thus vindicated the Divine Judgments, and shown them to you by their
proper Marks and Characters. I proceed,

2dly, To enquire into the more notorious Ends and Purposes to which the Divine
Wisdom has directed them.

The first end then of the Divine Judgments is to proclaim God's Omnipotence,
and assert the just Power of God over the World.

And can we imagine a more pregnant Evidence of a resistless and uncontrollable
Power; for behold the Effects of his Indignation; the Pillars of Heaven
astonished, and the Earth trembling with an awful Reverence: Nature aghast, and
the Hinges of the World shaking. And now surely we are not of so Gygantick
stoutness, to stand void of Sense and Fear, when Nature herself is in such
Pangs and Convulsions. Are not these such Examples as carry Conviction with
them? As ravish a Religious Fear and Reverence from us. Can any thing be more
instructive of the deepest Humility, and most profound Adoration. When we shall
see Fate submit to the Command of God, and Necessity become as variable as
Chance: For lo he makes the Earth to reel to and fro, he pulls down and
builds up as it pleases him.

The proudest Monarchs, whom he sometimes styles Gods, how suddenly does he
allay them with Dust, least their Spirits become too much exalted. How easily
does he bafle their most Elaborate Contrivances. Did not every thing we wear
about us proclaim our weakness; the Divine Judgments could not fail to be a
sufficient Amulet against Pride. Are we able to defend our selves against the
least Calamity; when the weakest Creature comes armed with a Commission from
Heaven, the very Dust of the Earth, or but a Troop of inconsiderable Locusts
can overcome an Egypt; though her Wealth and Power were as boundless, as her
Sins were provoking.

Can any Man then reflect on the many Judgments of God, on those astonishing
Effects of his Indignation; and not presently tremble and stand amazed. With
what an awful Regard, with what profound Humility must this fill our Minds. Are
not these such effectual Arguments of Almighty Power, as must raise us in the
greatest Security; tho all the Dalliances of Vice had enchanted us, tho the
Lethargy of Sin had locked up our Reason and Consideration, yet such signal
Examples must affect us: the most hardened Hearts, and even seared Consciences
cannot escape some impression: For shall not we attend, when even Heaven and
Earth are summoned to hear.

Lord, how can we sufficiently Adore thy Power, when we meditate on thy
terrible Judgments: for behold any part of the Creation, shall at thy Command
become a most powerful Executioner of Vengeance. Let but the Sea open her proud
Waves, (and it is thy word that restrains them) and she may shut in the World,
as she once did the Host of Pharaoh. Surely then our Minds must be stupefied;
we are asleep even unto Death, if such instances cannot awaken us, For by his
Judgments he shows himself, and lifts himself up, Psalm. 94.1, 2. The Lord
is known by the Judgments he executes, Psalm. 9.16.

If the several parts of the Creation display the several Attributes of God; if
we may read his Power in the Firmament, and the Heavens declare it. In his
Judgments certainly it is writ in the fairest and largest Print; and here we
must read it, tho all other Arguments would pass without observation. If the
wiser Heathens by Thought and Study, by Speculation and Philosophy were able
from considering the Works of Nature to conclude an All-powerful Being: How
strongly do his wonderful Judgments enforce this Truth, and exact from us the
humblest Acknowledgments of Almighty Power.

A second end of the Divine Judgments is, to vindicate his Justice in the
Administration of the World: for were Men suffered with Impunity to proceed in
a course of Impiety; to enjoy the fruits of Rapine, Injustice, and other Vices,
which then might appear gainful; were they suffered to defy Heaven with their
crying sins; this might seem to arraign the Justice of God; it might give the
Atheists and Epicureans Objection some color, that in the Administration of
the World there was no regard had to the good and virtuous. But though this, if
true, might be abundantly answered; that the Methods of Wisdom, and Rules of
Justice, by which the Almighty acts, do infinitely surpass our Capacities;
either from the feebleness of our Reason, or finiteness of our Nature; and
because the Divine Administration has no complete determination here, but has
regard to a future Judgment. Yet to the everlasting terror of wickedness, most
signal Vengeance often overtakes the wretched sinner here; and National sins
seldom escape some signal Judgment, or General Calamity. The Examples from
Scripture, and such as I have already assigned; yea, the Occurrences of our own
Age will sufficiently confirm this.

3dly, Another end of the Divine Judgments is, to work in us an entire hatred
and detestation of sin.

It Is the greatest force and provication to the Deity, when he pours down his
wrath upon us, he does not willingly grieve us, or causlesly afflict us: It Is
our sins which makes us smart under that Hand, which otherwise would shower down
nothing but Blessings upon us. What ought our demeanor then to be, when
Judgments are upon us, and we groan under the pressure of Afflictions? Why to
reflect on our sins, to blush and be ashamed; to be humbled for our Iniquities,
which were the cause of that and all our sufferings; assuring our selves, that
whatever evil Instruments are in the Judgments and Afflictions which befall us,
our sins have set them all in motion.

And when the Avenger is at the Gate, O how lashing the folly, how confounding
must the guilt of sin appear? When Israel the Favorite of Heaven is led into
Captivity for her crying Idolatry, how pungent must her Resentments be? How
afflicting the remembrance of her Spiritual Fornications. Extremely blind and
stupid therefore must we be, or monstrously profane, if such Experiments of
Divine Power and Vengeance do not awe us, and frighten us from sin. It Is our
incurable folly that Afflictions are the only effectual Physic of our Souls;
that the bitter is the only Sovereign Potion.

How must the wretched sinner appear confounded; when he sees Almighty God,
whom but even now he openly affronted, whose Religion he ridiculed, whose
Honor he abused, coming on the Wings of Power, and making inquisition for sin;
when there is an Earthquake ready to swallow him up, or a Fire from Heaven to
consume him. O miserable Miscreant! Whither will thou fly from the All-seeing,
or shelter thy self from his presence? Can Darkness screen thee, or the Night
cover thee? Abominate then thy sins, loath thy polluted self; Cut off the
Instruments of thy Destruction, which have rendered thee so obnoxious.

4thly, Another end of the Divine Judgments is to beget in us a thorough
Contempt of the World and its fatal Dalliances: to enforce the Divine Precept
of setting our Hearts on things above.

For do not the Divine Judgments teach us; either how fugitive and uncertain,
or how unsatisfying and empty all sublunary Beings are. How suddenly have we
seen the adamantine works of Art and Contrivance subverted. Even the
Foundations of the World trembling, when the God of Nature was angry. Monuments
the vain Essays to Eternity, raised to perpetuate the Memory of some remarkable
Accident, or to carry the Name of some Great Person to late Posterity, how
often have we seen them buried in those very Ruins, which 'twas hoped they
should rescue from Oblivion. The best established Kingdoms have been overturned
in a moment. Those places which prided themselves in their imaginary Security;
and boasted of the multitude of their Inhabitants, and whose Merchants were fit
to be Companions to Princes; how has a Fire from Heaven, or any other Creature
able to do it, when commissioned from Heaven to destroy, swept them away? So
that scarce their Names remain to reproach their Pride.

Common Prudence does strongly press upon us this observation, when every day
informs us of the great emptiness and uncertainty of all worldly enjoyments.
And did not the wise Heathens of old, from this very Topic raise themselves to
a brave and generous contempt of the World; what else was the Moral of that
Chance, by which they believed all things here below to be governed: but that
all things are subject to the same fleeting and uncertain condition. And though
no Instrument of Vengeance were sent to destroy, no earthly thing is in itself
durable; but shall return to its original corruption. And do not the Divine
Judgments enforce this Duty from higher Considerations; when Destruction falls
in like a mighty torrent. The rich Man but begins to enjoy, and behold that
very Night his Soul is required from him. And this surely must correct our
Dotage, it must secure us from the Siren Enchantments of but momentary Evils.
For as sin is the lasting evil which has infected our Nature, so Judgment and
Vengeance will always hang over us to frighten us from the gilded Poison, and
wean us by frequent disappointments from any fondness we may have for earthly
things.

Thus have I laid before you the more notorious Ends of the Divine Judgments,
which are intended either to proclaim the Power, or vindicate the Justice of
God; to work in us a thorough hatred of sin, and a generous contempt of all
worldly things.

I proceed therefore in the third and last place, to enquire what is the proper
behavior of a Christian under the Judgments of God, and what influence they
ought to have on our Lives.

Almighty God takes no delight in hurling the World into Confusion, and turning
Cities into Ruins, making whole Countries a a desolation. Our provocations
must cry aloud when he executes the severity of his Judgments. It Is therefore
for the punishment of sin, and frightning us from it by such dreadful Examples,
by all the Rhetoric of the most amazing Instances, and all the Eloquence of
the acutest Pain.

To learn our Duty therefore in this particular, we are to reflect on all the
Ends of the Divine Judgments already assigned.

Are the Divine Judgments then evidently declarative of an Almighty Power? This
surely must imprint on us the profoundest Humility and most awful Reverence, it
must affect us with all sorts of Religious Fear: it must strike into our Hearts
the most sincere dread of his ever glorious Majesty; it must inflame us with
the greatest Acknowledgments, with the loudest Acclamations of the Infinite
Power of God, and his adorable Perfections; for shall not we fear, when the
Heavens do shake and tremble. And in this Duty we have the devout Psalmist's
Zeal so ardent, that it must excite ours, and we shall cry out with one mouth:
Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts, and I will declare thy
greatness. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.
We must celebrate the adorable Perfections displayed in such wonderful Events.
Do not the Divine Judgments glorify his Justice; and shall they not inspire us
to magnify this glorious Attribute, when his Judgments represent to us his
signal Triumphs over Sin; all the Strength and Beauty of the World being made
Prisoners to the Grave, and Captives to Destruction, which but just now bid him
so proud a defiance. We who just now finned with as much Security and
Confidence, as though we had blinded the Eyes, bugbear'd the Justice, or commands
the Power of God; cannot, however, but applaud his Justice: when of a sudden
like one highly provoked he draws forth the Sword of his destroying Angel,
commands the Wretch who looked so big into the Dust, and hurls him into
Destruction.

Are not the Divine Judgments sent from Heaven to raise in us an hatred and
aversion to sin; and to wean us from the World. And surely the least serious
reflection on them cannot fail of this effect. When the Instruments of
Vengeance are upon us, when Death in the ghastly appearance of a Judgment
stares us in the face; must we not then melt into such Complaints as these: O
that I had served God as faithfully, as I have done the World, he would not
have forsaken me, as that now is like to do. Had I laid up my Treasure in
Heaven, it would not have been in the power of any outward accident now to
deprive me of him. If these Flames of Vengeance are so insupportable, who shall
be able to dwell with everlasting Burnings. Is it not the height of madness, to
defy any longer, to provoke an angry God, infinitely more dreadful than this
can be. Farewell then all ye deceitful Vanities; though I placed my Riches next my
Heart, that could not clip their wings, or stop their flight. Tho I preserved
my Beauty with all the Extravagance of Art; I must lose it this instant. Now I
understand by dear Experience, thee and my self better (O bewitching World)
then to fix my Happiness any longer here. I will hereafter lay up my Treasure
in Heaven, I will be no longer cheated with imaginary good, but will make
provision for the true and everlasting happiness. Let these then be our
reflections, and we shall rise with greater Glory, our inward Beauty will
outshine whatever we could boast of outward splendour. We shall come out
purified from the Fire of Afflictions; with our Souls possessed of the only
valuable Riches of Grace and Virtue.

Our proper demeanor then, and the use we are to make of the Divine Judgments,
the most signal expressions of Almighty God's displeasure is, what the Prophet
in my Text draws from them, To learn Righteousness, to be instructed in the
Ways of Virtue, and in all the Duties of Religion.

And is not this the Moral and Natural Consequence of the Divine Judgments;
which represent Sin in its proper Colors, attended with horror and amazement,
dread and confusion of face. And when we see Vice thus sinking into Hell, how
much must we be enamoured with the Comeliness, the Divine Pleasure, the Heaven
of Virtue, which the wretched Sinner only admires to aggravate his misery. Can
any thing more effectually recommend Humility, than the exemplary downfall of
Pride; when a Firebrand from Heaven levels us with the Dust, and forces the
vain Bubble to an humble acknowledgment of his true Original, where the Worm is
our Sister, and a much happier Creature. When we see Luxury and Intemperance
chastised by some signal Calamity, by the Desolation of a Plague, by an
Earthquake, by a Fire from Heaven: How effectually must this press upon our
Consideration the contrary and proper Virtues of Sobriety and Temperance. All
that deceitful pleasure and advantage with which sin has so long imposed on us,
appears now in its Native Deformity, with its true Offspring Vengeance and
Judgment. With what zeal and ardency must we fly to the Breast Plate of Faith,
when all our imaginary Security shall betray us, when neither Palaces nor
Bulwarks can defend us; and the Earth finking under the load of our Iniquities
cannot afford us footing. Shall not the Hypocrite then unfold his Soul, when he
sees that all his pretensions to Religion make him only the more obnoxious to
Vengeance, and that his Rags and Nakedness are now most apparent. Is there any
thing then which makes us more effectually bow to the Precepts of Religion,
then the Terrors of the Lord, then his wonderful, his dreadful Judgments.

Whence do we proceed better Proficients then from the School of Calamities. A
storm will inspire Devotion even into that thoughtless Wretch, who in his
Security and Debauchery reviled every thing that was serious; who scorned to
damp his Mirth with the melancholy thoughts of Religion, and the sad
countenance of Sobriety. Who knew no such thing as the Pleasures of the Mind,
and would not value whether he had any rational Faculties, unless it were for
the contrivance of Oaths, and making new Discoveries in the ways of wickedness;
who was as great a Monster in Morality as ever there was in Nature. How
suppliant a Convert has a storm made him, how has an Earthquake reformed him.
When the Angel of Vengeance is at hand, ready to smite the Covetous and
Oppressor; how does this melt him into love and kindness, into charity and good
works; is he not ready to cloth the naked, whom he even now spoiled, and to
relieve that poor man, whose Face he had now been grinding.

Had most sins no other punishment then there necessary and natural
consequents; were there no other scourge for Luxury and Intemperance, but decay
of Estate, a Crased Body, and that they sow the Seeds of all Distempers, this
would be Amulet against them to a considering Man. But when a flaming Sword, a
Plague and Famine, and infinite other Instruments of a most terrible Vengeance
do certainly attend them. O stupefied Man! O monstrous Security! If this will
not awaken you and force you to Repentance. When your Cities lie in Ruins,
mourning in Dust and Ashes, because you neglected this Duty; when your Country
welters in Blood, and even the Stones cry out against you, to melt your more
hardened Heart. You cannot behold such Desolation without making this
reflection; It Is our sins surely which have made us thus liable to the Divine
Vengeance; had we any reason to expect his Protection, we might sit quiet tho
the World be overturned; this was the Hedge about Job, which till withdrawn,
bafled all the Attempts of Satan: But alas, our sins have put a Bar to this
Claim, we have forfeited God's Protection, and our reliance is now but
presumption. And can any thing more effectually press upon us Virtue and
Religion than such Considerations.

And truly few Men are so hardened, as not to be struck with an awful Reverence,
to be forced into some Fit of Religion; when they labor under some eminent
Judgment: For Vengeance carries with it such a convincing force, that few are
able to resist it: Even the Atheist cries to Heaven, when Death in the dreadful
shape of a Judgment (to him surely most terrible) do seize him. Thunder forces
Caligula to seek for shelter; even the hardened Pharaoh relents, when the
Almighty issues forth his Instruments of Vengeance; when the Strength of Egypt
is overpowred by a Locust; how does it extort from him the ungrateful
confession of his own weakness, and forces him to fly to the Intercession of
Moses. But then, alas, we are all Pharaohs too in our shameful Ingratitude; the
Religious temper seldom out-lives our Deliverance; those convictions and
reflections usually wear off, as the Judgment intermits. When the Scene is
shifted, and the succeeding Light has dispelled the Cloud, we then unbend the
Bow, let our severer thoughts disband, and return to our former Security. But
this surely, as it is the greatest Abuse of the Divine Mercy in our Deliverance,
so must it pull down an heavier Judgment upon us.

It Is our duty then, to treasure up the serious memory of all our past
Sufferings, and so to perpetuate the effects of them; that we may come out the
purer from the Furnace, and not like the New Moon return with the same Spots,
not to imbibe again those stains of sin, which have already rendered us so
obnoxious to Divine Vengeance. And was it not for this reason, that the
Christian Church in all Ages has thought fit to Consecrate certain Days of
Humiliation, as sure and perpetual Remembrancers of the Divine Judgments, and
her frequent Deliverances; least by a shameful Ingratitude she should trample
on and bury the Mercies of God in Oblivion. But methinks common Prudence should
direct us to this Practice, to beware of that Rod under which we have smarted,
and to forsake those sins which have so often exposed us to Death and
Destruction.

Many therefore are the Duties to which our Deliverance from past Calamities,
and the consideration of Judgments we have escaped, do oblige us.

First we must ever glorify Almighty God with the Songs and Triumphs of our
Deliverance, we must write our Deliverance not on Tables of Stone, but on the
fleshly Tables of our Heart. The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord. When he
sees his Glory so conspicuously advanced, and his holy Perfections so
illustriously shining through his Judgments; this signal conviction of
Infidelity, this confusion of Profaneness how does it confirm his Faith, and
cherish his Hope. The just shall rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth. How exceeding the Comfort? How triumphant is the Joy, when we receive so
clear Pledges of God's Love and Favor to us, expressed in his most tender Care
over us, in protecting us from most imminent Dangers, and contriving our
deliverance from such terrible Judgments; for were we not saved even as by
Fire, and as Firebrarnds plucked out of the burning. Let us then ever magnify
(O Lord) thy infinite Mercy's the only cause of our deliverance, for this was
our Sanctuary and Refuge, it was not our own Skill and Counsel, not our
Strength and Industry that saved us; but thou art our mighty Deliverer.

A Second Duty incumbent on us, is often to meditate on past Judgments. We must
not barely remember them, for this is no Virtue; but we must remember them with
those very passions of mind, those ardent thoughts, affections, and resentments
we had when we suffered under them, and they were so visible before us; what
indignation, and resolution we then expressed against sin; what submissions
were then wrought in us to his Almighty pleasure, and with what mortification
and self-denial we resigned our selves. And this is remembering in Scripture
phrase, by which we may secure to our selves all the advantages of past
afflictions, without the sting and misery which attends them; by setting them
in a clear light before us, and making them present to us by a lively
remembrance, so that they may be a constant bugbear to us against Vice. Let not
those ardors of Devotion expire, those struglings of the Spirit cease, which
burnt them so bright; if our Petitions kept equal pace with our Pain, let them
do so with the remembrance of it now.

Our Meditations on past Judgments ought also to beget in us a well grounded
hope, and strong confidence. The Lord has delivered me, therefore he will
deliver; I have often experimented his Mercy, therefore I will now fly to it.
If we have strengthened our Prayers in the day of our Calamity, by any
extraordinary Vow, or Sacred Promises (according to the pious Examples of Holy
Men) we are now carefully to perform them, and to release that strict
Obligation we have put our Souls under.

And there are many other Religious Duties of the same nature (for there are
scarce any which it does not confirm and increase) which the remembrance of
past Judgments strongly recommend to our practice. Nothing can more effectually
secure to us all the advantages and fruits of the Spirit. But not having time
now to enlarge on them, I must refer them to your own application.

Only let me beg your attention, whilst in a few words, I remind you of that
late signal Judgment, and deplorable Calamity; in which this Honorable
Audience was deeply wounded. The late Judgment which befell Smyrna, that
complicated Calamity of an Earthquake most terrible in all its circumstances,
succeeded by a Fire, (too pregnant an instance of the Divine Vengeance) cannot,
if barely related, but fill the most hardened Heart with pity and astonishment;
but on you surely, whose misfortune it was to be too much concerned in it, who
were so great Sufferers in the Desolation it wrought, it ought, it must make, a
more deep and lasting impression.

The Lord surely was in the Earthquake, and in the Whirlwind; the suddenness of
the Destruction even exceeding thought, and all the dismal circumstances
attending this Accident are too strong an evidence, that the destroying Angel
came from Heaven, and that the Almighty put on Vengeance to the overthrow of
that miserable City.

For behold the trembling Earth sinking to her Center, with the strokes of
God's Anger legible in her face; behold a great and opulent City, famous in
ancient and sacred Annals, and even then restored to her former Grandeur,
surpassing in Trade, and equal in many other advantages to any of her Sisters
in the East, reduced to ruin in a moment. The same instant saw her a most
flourishing City, and an heap of Rubbish. And that nothing of her Beauty or
Greatness might be legible in her Fall; a consuming Fire devours her very
Bowels, what escaped the Earthquake becomes a prey to the Fire. So heavy was
the Hand of Heaven that it pursues her to the very Grave, buries her very
Ruins, and razes her Foundation. O the consternation of her living, and
confusion of her perishing Inhabitants! O the sighs and tears, frights and
amazements! O the deaths! (and many were denied even this mercy) O the half
Deaths (Heads and Hearts miserably surviving the other Members) of Men, Women,
and Children lamenting, yet unable to help themselves and one another! The
Mother just lived to see her Daughter die, and the same Ruin involved the whole
Family. Such, had I courage, and were I sufficiently informed to proceed in the
description, you may imagine the lamentable Condition of Smyrna was. And was
this done upon the earth, and the Lord has not done it.

How swift (O Lord) is destruction, when thou do give it Commission. Even the
dull Earth shall become a swift Executioner of Divine Vengeance. One Instant
can, and did overturn the Toil, the Improvement of an Age. Such is the folly
and guilt of our sins, that against a City so advantaged, so cultivated, so
blessed, they can extort the heaviest Vengeance, even from that hand whence all
her Blessings derived. It was from their fatal influence that she is now forced
to succeed in the Fate and Ruin, as in the Wealth and Splendor of her
Neighbors; that she is now become like unto Sodom and Gomorrah.

Were that City able to speak out of its Ruins; how Eloquent would she be on
that Subject of her Sufferings; what heavy Complaints would she make against
those Sins which have been the certain and fatal Instruments of her
destruction. Let her Breaches then, let her Ruins and Desolation speak; behold
the genuine Offspring of Vice, the fruit of those things of which we ought to
be ashamed. And surely we cannot look on her Ruins but we must repent, we
cannot see her miseries without bewailing our own sins. And let us not here
flatter our selves, or run into that dangerous mistake; that the Infidelity of
the Jew and Mohammedan, that the Idolatry and Superstition of Popery are the
only provocations which brought down this heavy Judgment. Our sins, alas, are
but too much the ingredients, and its wounds and scars yet bleeding afresh, are
but too strong an intimation that we are still in our sins.

To conclude all then:

You have heard how Eloquent the Judgments of the Lord are to persuade
Repentance, and enforce all the Duties of Religion; how they recommend Virtue
from the strongest Topics of worldly Interest and Pleasure, as the surest
means to preserve both. How they represent to us most sensibly the destructive
nature of Sin, that all the Misery and Unhappiness which befalls Mankind, flow
certainly from this Fountain. This being then our case, common prudence, the
obvious consideration of our own advantage must direct us to that Duty which
Christianity commands. Sin and Folly will be found but two Names for the same
thing. Let us therefore apply our selves to the study of true Wisdom. Let us
make the true advances in Grace and Virtue. And now the Judgments of the Lord
are upon the Earth. Let us learn, let us practice Righteousness, for Godliness
we see is the true Gain, it has the Blessings of this World, and that which is
to come.

To which place of everlasting Happiness, Almighty God of his infinite Mercy,
bring us all. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. last line, after view a Full Stop. p. 11. l. 24. judicate r. indicate.
p. 12. l. 17. loves r. Lords. p. 16. l. 14. would r. should. p. 23. l. 23.
bugbear'd r. bribed. l. 22. commands r. commanded. p. 24. l. 13. Treasure r
Treasures. l. 15. him. r. them. p. 29. l. 17. do r. does.


