A MISSION OF CONSOLATION. Useful For all afflicted Persons.

By W. S*

LONDON, Printed by W. B. for John Williams, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Crown, in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

To the READER.
Reader,
LEt the Author of this small Volume, who has practiced some years in the most
exact (in prison) school of patience, invite thee unto a serious perusual
hereof, that you may thereby partake (in some measure) of the benefit of his
sufferings; he esteeming it a great glory in a Christian under persecution for
his conscience sake, to impart to others the good uses he makes in time of his
affliction; that they may by such example, apprehend the Cross to be the
lighter and so take it up with more alacrity and cheerfulness, and also
conceive the miseries assigned us here on earth the less insupportable.

This Mission of Consolation, this small first born child, (for so it is) will
after you have well viewed it) smile upon you, like a pleasant Infant full of
health; and tell you, that it is no Paradox to say there is virtue in a prison;
which indeed has a Sympathy only with virtue for until a Person so richly
endued enters the grate, it lies clouded and obscured; but then breaks forth
and shows its splendor. A prison is (in my observation) one of the narrow and
troublesome passages, which a Christian finds in the straigt way that leads to
heaven.

Let not the spurious issue of the now adulterated press discourage you in
reading for that is become an ambodexter in this age, Printing with one hand
Truth, and with another error: be satisfied, that this relishes not of any
upstart or unsound opinion, but will well become thy pocket, or thy chamber, if
thou art afflicted or persecuted for preserveing to thy self a good conscience.

It shows thee in the entrance, thy first estate as man, the Sons of Adam full
of impuritie and pollution, and born in a capacity of only bearing sorrow and
travail. But in the second part it does most admirably repair thy condition,
leading thee into a covenant with thy Redeemer. And in the third it instructs
thee how to fit and prepare thy self for so divine and heavenly society.

If thou find content in reading requite the Author with thy good wishes,
not further inquiring after him, but let the effect of thy prayers only find
him out,

W, S.
A MISSION OF CONSOLATION.
Of the covenant of sufferings as men the Sons of Adam.
TO the first covenant of sufferance you know we all give our voice, by a
natural instinct, before we have scarce enjoyed so much as light for it; and
our eyes may be said to set their mark to it, before we are able to set our
hands to this Article of eating in the sweat of our brows: for our eyes pay
their sweat, which is their tears, for what we taste, even before we be able to
receive bread for it; and as we grow into a state to set our hands to the
covenant of labor, we know there is scarce any thing we relish much, that does
not cost us sweat, and contention; nay we are of such a constitution, that we
can have no kind of delectation: the which some want and suffering must not
precede to affect us with the gust of it, so as we are sentenced to pay a great
fine of pain before hand for all those fleeting, and transitory pleasures,
which at best do but run over our senses, and so pass away and leave them again
in their drouth, and privation. And most commonly the advance of all our pain
and passion renders us nothing of what they negotiate. So as a man when he
looks upon himself in the best reflexes his temporary wishes can make him,
shall find this brand and stigmate of Adam upon on his forehead. Genesis 3. 19.
Thou shall eat in the sweat of thy brows.

And this is a mark which God stamped upon Adam of another kind of
signification than that he set upon Cain, for this directs to all things that
occur to man in this life to strike him, and wound his temporal estate in some
kind or other; in so much as all the Creatures do in their several manners
execute this sentence upon the Sons of Adam not alowing themselves to be
enjoyed by them without stinging them in some sort, either with the anxietie of
their appetite to them, preceding fruition, or the distaste of satiety
following it, or with vexation of a deprivement of them during the Order of
their affections to them. So as we may well say that every thing we find now
assaults our felicity in this life in some sort to kill it, and to revive to us
the memory of our covenant of sufferance we entered into as soon as we entered
into light. For which reason the wise man proclaims elegantly the tenor of
it saying Eccles. 40. 1. Great travel is created for all men, and a heavy yoke
upon the children of Adam, from the day of their coming forth of their mothers
womb until the day of their burying in the mother of all their cogitations, and
fears of the heart, imaginations of things to come, and the day of their
ending, from him that sits upon the glorious state unto him that is humbled
in earth and ashes. Neither need we look back upon the defaced images of all
conditions in the dead prints of History, we have such living figures of them
before our eyes, as must needs imprint upon our thoughts a lively character of
the deplorable estate of all mortals, whereby out of the ruins of houses
whereof you lament the demolishments, you may pick up some materials to build
in your minds this frame of the instable constructure of the greatest strength
of humane happiness; and thus your friends may in their fall some way support
your virtue, and your patience, when you consider how incident it is to the
vicissitudes of the world to expose unto us that changeable scene whereof
Solomon reports this to us. Eccles. 10 and 7. I have seen servants upon
horses, and Princes walking upon the ground as servants. And in such capital
letters as these you may now read the articles of the covenant of sufferance,
which man is engaged in, whereof Job makes a manifest, is signed even by all
the Princes of the earth; for we find this under their hands in all records of
them, in some part of their lives. Job 14 1. Man born of a woman and living a
short time is replenished with many miseries. In so much that after man by sin
had made misery for himself in this life, it seems a mercy of God to have
joined death with it, before which even the light of nature is sufficient to
show the Philosophers that none can be counted happy. And in order to this
proof, we mark that Cain he who first abused death by employing it to make sin,
was thought worthy of no less a punishment than the protraction of life, which
he had made so afflicting by his fearing to die, and thus he was made his own
torturer, by the ignorance of the evil of life, and of the good of death which
he had so much demerited the knowing of, for his brothers goodness was thought
worthy to be quickly relieved by death, and his malice was adjudged to the pain
of apprehending it, and to the supplice of a long life. With good cause then
may this be well reflected on, that the first virtuous and godly Abel, man was
quickly removed out of this hedge of thorns his father had set, and reconveyed
toward Paradise, and the first impious murderer was sentenced to live in the
pungencie, and asperity of these pricks and briars of the earth. But such is
Gods wisdom as he can extract medicines out of all the Brambles, and Thistles
our earth is overrun with, and minister them to our infirmity, for he applies
even those griefs, and sorrows which sin introduced to the expulsion of sin in
it self; so as this is an operation worthy of Gods invention by the labor, and
exercising of the body to enlarg the freedom of the soul, even by this
unfortifying of her prison in which she is kept, the closer, the stronger the
delectation of our senses grows upon us. Therefore the distancing of the
conveniencie of the flesh dilateth the commodities and freedoms of the spirits,
so as it is a divine artifice which God uses by hanging weights of sufferings
and pressures upon our senses, to wind up rather than to clog our spirits,
which are the motions, and resorts of the whole frame, and in probation of of
this experiment. David says. Psalm. 4. 1 In tribulation thou have enlarged me.

And it is most observeable that God ministered this receipt (drawn out of
thorns) to all those Sons of Adam whose minds he meant to purge and clarify;
for all the holy Patriarks took this detersive potion of bitterness and
affliction in this life; and it deserves our attention to note, how the nearer
the time drew to the manifestation of the Son of God (who was designed the man
of sorrow) the passions of gods children grew the bitterer and the sharper, for
the Patriarks were exercised by diverse mortifications, which were not capital,
they staid upon the distresses of their life: some of the Prophets as they
approached to this fullness of the time of passion tasted by anticipation, of
the cup of death, in which they were all but figures of Christ's cup-bearers, as
Esaias, Jeremy, Zachary, and others, and so those sufferings which in time were
the least distant from Christ (as those we find recorded in the Maccabees)
came also the nearest to the horror and acerbity of the passions of Christ, and
Christians for they went not straight to death, but turned about to take a
compass of tortures, to make death bitter to those they could not make it
terrible; as you may read in the execution of the mother, and her seven
children, the very dawning of the day of passion which was coming on gave them
this light of fortitude.

It seems this weight of sufferance and sorrow was always in so natural a
motion upon the children of God, that it moved the faster the nearer it came to
the center (the man of sorrow) who being the Son of God by nature, was the
center of all the Sons by grace, and adoption, and therefore all the bloody
sacrifices of the Law of nature, and ceremonial, tended and pointed to him as
their last term, and direction; in order whereunto S. Paulinus sticks not to
say that Christ from the beginning of all ages suffers, and triumphs in all
the Churches persecutions: in Abel, he is killed by a brother, in Noah, he is
derided by a Son, in Abraham he is a Pilgrim, in Isaac a Victim, and in Jacob a
Servant, in Joseph he is sold, in Moses left a Derelict, in the Prophets he is
stoned, starved, and vilefied. So as all the lines of holy passions, drawn from
the circumference of all ages tend, and resort to this center of the man of
sorrow, the Lamb of God, slain from the beginning of the world.

These evidences may prove unto us clearly enough the first bond or covenant of
sufferances we are entered into as men, (and even in that notion we seem to be
implicit christians) since he who suffered sufficiently for us all, makes all
virtuous afflictions referraable to him) it had been very easy for me to have
exhibited a more precise manifest of this our first designation to sufferings
under the notion of men, there are so many excellent draughts of it stamped by
the moralists, or naturalists of all ages; but I chose to deflect a little from
the letter of the Text, that I might make the inferences rather stongly
useful, than critically uniform; and therefore as I have already stepped
beyond the out court of the Gentiles, into part of the temple, I will not call
back to Philosophy to borrow any demonstrations of this principle, wherein the
proofs are so acumulate as all Sects of Philosophers which differ so much
concerning the point of the good man's life, concur in the confession of the
multiplicity of the ills thereof, but I shall not as I said walk aside into the
gardens and flowery beds of the Gentiles, because I conceive it more proper for
your state, to have some wholesome confection to take, than a nosegay of the
flowers of Philosophy to smell to only, in these unhealthful times; for the
larg contemplations of of the miseries of human nature is not a receipt direct,
and express enough for your present exigencies, for that is but as a good air
of meditation, that may be sufficient for such as are but in light ordinary
indispositions of fortune, but your distempers require some more forceable
application of comfort, by taking into your minds the strongest obligations to
patience and longanimity, I will therefore pass on to the other two assignments
of suffering which are upon you as Christians, and leave this our single
humanity sealed with Jobs signature. Job 14. 22. His flesh while he lives shall
have sorrow and his soul shall mourn upon himself.

Of the covenant of suffering as Christians, the Sons of Christ.
WHat we have said of our first obligation may well extenuate all, we are bound
to suffer by the second, for when we behold the infelicity of of our condition
as we are men, we may well wonder more that we are preferred to be Christians,
than that we are continued to be sufferers: for sure if God had consulted with
Adam after he saw his own nakedness, and the anexture of all the miseries
thereunto whither he would have bowed the heavens and have come down, to repair
this his ruinous condition, by his investing his miserable human nature, he
would have answered with the humble Centurion, Matthew. 8. 8. Lord I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof, but only say the word and I
shall be healed. Seeing he who made all by one word, could have redintegrated
Adam with a word, remaining in the simplicity of his divine nature, without the
Word being made flesh, and being as it were unmade himself (as the Apostle
warrants us to say) by taking that flesh upon him, which was become as it were
man's prison, so far was it from being worthy to be the receptacle of God.

When we consider then how God chose this way of commiserating our nature, not
to purg it by his power but by the very infirmity thereof, by taking the
passibleness of it upon him, we cannot deny the suffering part to be the most
beneficial property of it, since God made use of that only for the
restoration of it, wherefore the feeling that portion of human nature upon us,
which is the most ennobled by Gods election, and preference, cannot rightly be
accounted a prejudiced condition, whereupon we may conclude that the blessing
of being Christians may easily reconcile us to the Obligation of being
sufferers, for what can be the reason why Christ when by his pains he took away
the sting of sin, could not also take off the points of suffering in this life;
which are but thorns of that plant, but because his passions had infused such a
quality into our pains, as might produce this strange effect in our nature, to
make our root the less capable of bearing fruit by the excrescense, and growth
of these sprigs out of it, for temporal afflictions spring out of sin; as out
of the root thereof, and nothing dries up, and infecundateth so much the
radical fructifying vigor of this root, as the springing up of temporal
miseries, and distresses; so as the fruit of sin, which is death is killed the
soonest by the fertility of sufferings in this life.

Since Christ has then by the virtue of his Crown of thorns imparted this
faculty of the asperities of our life, of taking off the growth as his did the
guilt of sin, we need not wonder why he has left all these temporal
bitternesses upon our nature which he himself took expressly to taste in our
nature: so as we may be said to become the more Christians, the more we are
called to be patients. Which position we shall find the more clearly
demonstrated to us, the farther we advance into the principles of Christianity.

Saint Paul when he wrote to the Romans in those times, when in a parallel of our
cases the Christians were partly immured up in prisons, and partly expelled to
the adjoining fields thought (it seems) to sweeten their condition to them by
representing that mortification, and sufferance was their calling and
profession; for he asks them as of a notorious thing, whither they know not
this to be the constitution of christianity, saying Rom 6. 3. Are you ignorant
that all we who are baptized in Christ Jesus, in his death we are baptized?
Intimating that our first incorporation into the body of Christ, is in effect
an expiration of this world, and a translation by the virtue of the death of
Christ into such a sort of life as he has patterned to us by the inception,
progress, and consummation of his life. And the Apostle presses thus the proof
of this assertion Romans 6. 4. For we are buri^d together with him in baptism
into death: to evince this position that our mundanity is drowned, and buried
in our Christning, and that the life of Christ which was a continued part of
mortification is to be (as it were) our breath, and animation. And while we are
in this spiritual manner buried in the life of Christ, that is covered, and
enclosed with indignities and oppressions, we are acting that part we took upon
us in baptism, where we isted our selves into that militia which was erected by
him, who killed death by dying, and has left the same discipline to all his
soldiers to destroy death by dying to the world: mortifications therefore must
needs be the proper duties of that service a christian is upon, and his pay is
conditioned rather upon his suffering, than his acting as the Apostle
proceeds to testify. For if we become complanted to the similitude of his
death, we shall be also of his resurrection. So in a Christians case the wages
of death is life, for if he die here by a privatio^ of the carnal life of this
world, he performs the condition of life everlasting. For which reason S.
Paul who was the great commander of the Gentiles in this militancy (whereby this
kind of dying death is swallowed up in Victory) has left us his discipline in
1 Cor. 15. I die daily; and he gives us those orders. To be the followers of
him as he was of Christ whom he began not to follow until he was overthrown in
the command he had in this world, and was (as it were) resuscitated by the same
hand that had killed him. We may remember he was revived by what is destructive
to this life, by being almost famished, and illuminated by this worlds
darkness, and restored to corporal light, only to see how much he was to
suffer for that Name for which all the sufferings he had in his head were to be
employed, but in a manner far differing from this design; for they were
assigned to be enjoyed by himself not to be dispensed to others by his hand so
as this seems the gratification of his Christianity, the having of all that
treasure of crosses he had prepared for other Christians, appropriated to his
own use; whereof he grew so sensible, as in gratitude to this his preference,
he returned his. I do exceedingly abound in joy in all our tribulation.

But let us look upon his master and ours Christ Jesus in his own time of
tribulation, and we may represent him to our selves, in the first instant of
his conception accepting this Order from his father, which he gave to his
follower S. Paul, of Acts 9. 15. I will show him how great things he must
suffer for my Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel.
In which commission he labored three and thirty years, wherein, all we are
acquainted with of his life is either laborious or incommodious, or in
extremity dolorous, and painful. It seems the holy Ghost did not think any
thing worthy to stand upon record for Christ that was not eminently suffering,
and therefore passed over in silence, those parts of his life which we may
suppose to have been the least distressfull. If we look upon his way that is
drawn out to us from his cradle to his Cross, we shall find that he foresaw
in all ages, more than the persons themselves who are under them can do. He
truly bore all our labors, and our griefs. All the anxieties, and
contristations that now oppress you were in a sharper degree pressing upon his
heart and since he was content to aggravat all his sufferings by taking on him
the sense of your grievances, may not you very easily alleviate all your
heavinesses, by taking into your mind the resentment of sufferings, which were
designed for your succor in your temptations, by the reflection upon his
precedent? so that his example is not a simple injunction on you to suffer, but
a conferment of an ability to sustain it, and a means to improve, and
ameliorate your estate in your coinheritance with him: for the Apostle
inforceth this Doctrine with this Energy of A fathfull saying 2 Timothy 2. 12. For
if we be dead with him, we shall live also together, if we sustain we shall
also reign together.

This deserves well our conte^plation, that the fullness of the divinity did
inhabit in Christ, and the clear vision of God did always illuminate him,
notwithstanding this, it was miraculously disposed by God, that the affluence
of joy springing from the deity, should not overflow his body, and possess the
inferior portions of his soul, that there might be left room for pain and
anguish; the which was manifest in his passion, in so much as stupendous
miracles were requisite for an admittance of so much sorrow into his most
sacred mind: If God were pleased thus to multiply miracles, that affliction
might have access to his beloved Son, in whom he was so well pleased; shall we
with whom he has so much cause to be displeased wonder at any calamity, or
tribulation whereby he is pleased to correct us, especially when it is a mark
of our filiation, and fraternity with Christ? We who cannot be exempt from
sufferings without a miracle, as we are Sons of Adam, shall we be astonished at
any imposition, under this notion of brothers, nay even Members of Christ? in
which respect S. Bernard says excellently, that Delicate and tender Members
are not decent, and becoming a head stuck full of thorns. Therefore the
pressures, and pungencies of this life make the Symmetry, and proportion of the
body of Christianity, to the head Christ Jesus: who since he did not so much as
speak one idle word, all his praises, and Beautifications of the poor, and the
afflicted must needs verify the good of adversity. And Surely Christ did much
less do any idle deed, and if the exemplarie life of his labors, and
one-rations had not been directed to our conformity therein, there might seem
some supervacuousness and redundancy in his continual hardness, and asperitie
of life. Would God have afflicted his only Son so, if it were indifferent to
do, or not to do as he did? or that it did not concern those whom he had
fore-knovvn, and predestined to be conformable to the image of his Son in
this point that he might be the first born of many brethren? Our fraternity
therefore is derived to us by this similitude. Our sins might have been effaced
not only by a drop of Christ's blood, but even by a drop of his sweat;
wherefore this seems one of the chief reasons that did induce the atrocity
of his passion, and the austeritie of his life, the necessity of such a pattern
for our imitation, since our nature was grown so degenerous, and effeminate,
as no less than gods participation of all the sorts of grievances, and injuries
thereof, would serve to form in us a cheerful disposition to the sufferings,
and infelicities of this life God did not therefore intend to vex us, when he
placed our salvation in difficulties, and in our natures aversions, for to
sweeten the bitterness of this strong necessity, which was to work upon our
nature, to purg us from the love of this world he was so gracious, as to infuse
the company of Christ into this receipt, that the taste of his society might
make more pleasant to us the ill savor, and acerbity of the remedy. Well
therefore may we say. A greater than Elisha is here, who has amended these
waters by but tasting of them, and has left neither death nor bitterness in
them; for they are become rather waters springing up to life everlasting.

And we may observe that in conformity to Gods method with his Son Christ
continued the same style to his Mother; for she whom all Generations were to
call blessed was not allowed any of what this world calls Blessings; for she
who had born the Redeemer of the whole world, was not able to go to the highest
rate of the Temple, for his Redemption; her poor estate did not reach to pay so
much as a Lamb for the Son of God, and the Lamb who was to take away the sins
of the world, had not so much as a Lamb for his Ransom. The lowest price that
was set for any of the children of Israel was the rate her low condition was
taxed at, none was set at less than a pair of Pigeons, or a pair of Turtles,
and the Mother of God was in this inferior form of the Daughters of Men. This
may serve to sweeten the bitterest water of poverty when we ponder this, that
Christ would not allow his Mother to taste of any other spring; and though he
would not let her taste of the sowreness of the forbidden fruit: yet he fed her
more than any other with these bitter Leaves, which grew out of the same root,
that is, though he was pleased to exempt her from sin, yet he would not
dispense with her in sufferings, which we know are but the productions of sin;
and so she whom we may suppose to have been excepted out of the rule of
sinners, was exalted above any in the state of sufferers. And this seems to be
very consonant, that as she was Mother to the man of sorrow, and of no sin, so
she should be a bearer of all griefs without any guiltiness: but howsoever this
point is accorded by all parties that being the purest of all creatures, Luke
2. 29, 35. she was never the less the greatest of all Patients: when she came
to redeem her own Redeemer by the legal ransom, and was to enter into
possession of her Son, we may note that the joys that we represaged her by
Simeon in him were very dark, and mystical, but her own sorrows very clear and
manifest. For this mystery of her having a light to the revelation of the
Gentiles in her arms, and the glory of thy people Israel was hard to be
understood of one that was in the lowest rank of the people: but this part was
easy to be conceived of his being a mark of contradiction, and that a sword
should pierce through her own soul.

Nature it self evidenceth the miseries which mothers are liable to from
children, and thus she had here her sorrows and her sufferings writ to her in
the common Alphabet of nature, and her joys and consolations cyphered out only
to her in the figures and characters of grace, which are so hard to be
decyphered, though it may be she had the key of them: but howsoever her faith
was to be exercised by a tedious and very sudden trial in affliction. She
quickly found the sword in her soul, for we may easily conceive what a wound
her sudden flight into Egypt was, how many fears, distresses and anxieties,
pierced her tender heart in that laborious flight. And sure the sword of Herod,
that parted so many mothers and children, pierced her soul even while she
possessed her child: she may well be judged to have out-suffered any of them
in their own losses, for she had the grief of being the occasion of all them
upon her heart, so as the sword that was drawn directly against her soul though
the stroke did not light upon it, as it was aimed, yet it may be thought to
have wounded her in a sharper manner than it did any it fell bloudily upon, for
her exquisite charity must needs feel all their anguishes and passions who were
thus afflicted as personating her.

Thus we see how she began her possession of her Son with the sorrows of a
multitude of mothers inflicted on her, and if we look upon her being dispossessed
of her Son, there we shall see the sword piercing her soul in so horrid a
manner, as the pains which all the daughters of Jerusalem ever had in the
birth, or death of their children were but shadows of her torture: whereupon S.
Bernard says, Neither tongue can express, nor heart can conceive the dolours
wherewith the holy bowels of this Mother were excruciated.

Now blessed Virgin you pay with rigorous interest that pain which nature was
not allowed to exact of you in your delivery: the pangs which you felt not in
the birth of your Son, are infinitely replicated upon you at his death, when we
consider the Mother of Christ standing by the Cross, and seeing her Son under
those Nails, Thorns, and Scourges, and all the other Tortures.

With what hand can we hope to touch this doleful figure of the blessed
Virgin, to give it a lively resemblance? I will therefore leave it veiled with
this reason upon it, No figure is like to sorrow, the not being pourtraictable
being the nearest similitude can be made of this figure of disconsolation. That
which purporteth most to our purpose is, that by the not being able to
comprehend the immensity of the sufferings of the Mother of God, we may be the
less apt to apprehend any extremity in our own: when she who had at least no
actual sin to expiate, had so much sorrow to exercise her virtue. How shall we
(who have so much sin to satisfy for) wonder at any sufferings, whereof we
have so much need to sanctify us?

There is then no reason why we should fear to be mistaken, in taking crosses
for commodities, indignities for honors, poverty for treasures, since the
eternal wisdom, and divine understanding has counseled this acceptance of
them, not only by his advise but by his Mothers president, and his own
personal investure of them. He who is both the supreme goodness, and the
supreme power, chose by those low humbled means to redeem us, and by the same
we must perfect our salvation; the work must be finished by the same
instruments by which it was begun.

Christ told his Disciples, there were many mansions in his Fathers house, but
never gave them notice of any other way to any of them but this of the crosses,
and miseries of this world; and surely as he said of the mansions, so may we
say of the marches to them, if there had been another passage he would have
told it them. This narrow way and straightgate is all the direction we find
either by his life, his doctrine or his death. Mat. 11. 12. The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it away. Is the word, or motto
belonging to the Arms of the Gospel: and as Christ said, no body ascends into
heaven but he that descended out of heaven; therefore he vouchsafed to come
down to live out this way, which he imprinted upon his sacred humanity: So
that now this way lies so fairly marked out by the prints of his steps, in his
return to his eternal mansion, as no body that looks up to heaven can miss
the seeing of it, though it be not the milkie way of the Poets, but the bloody
way of the Prophets, and Apostles. It is traced out more fairly in the
firmament of a Christian, which is the Gospel, than the other in the material
sky. The life of Christ is such a sequence, and connection of bright, and
shineing sufferings, as shows our souls as intelligably the way to heaven, as
those stars do our eyes that sensible trace in the firmament. We may cast our
eye upon this Galaxie or constellation of humility, and depression in Christ's
life, we shall see it illustrious, and shinning in an humiliation under all
sorts of Creatures. He humbled himself to the Angels, he vouchsafed to receive
comfort of an Angel; as if his necessity, not humility, had required it. When
he was hungry he was pleased to take food, as alms from the Angels; when he
could have turned stones into bread. He humbled himself to man, and woman,
remaining obedient to his Mother, and Joseph. He subjected himself to impious
Princes, to Herod, Caesar, Caiphas, and Pilate, by understanding their burdens,
and their judgments he submitted himself to vile, and infamous servants, as to
Malchus, and to his torturers, deriders, and others. He yielded himself even to
inanimate creatures, suffering heat, and cold, to strike upon him, and by Iron,
Wood, Thorns, and Reeds he endured to be violated, and offended, nay he
subjected himself to his greatest enemy the Devil himself, when he suffered him
to carry him up to the pinnacle of the Temple; So there is no creature from the
sublimest to the meanest, from the best to the worst to whom Christ did not
humiliate himself.

And thus you see this arch of humiliation set as it were on another bow, in
the clouds of his humanity for a sign of this covenant of sufferances, wherein
I have suggested to you your engagement, and this bow of his covenant is so
extended, as it makes a perfect circle, it reaches from the sphere of
angelical, to that of inanimate substances, to both which we see Christ did
submit himself, and so his subjection touches the highest, and the lowest
point of his own creatures, which consideration of his ineffable humility must
needs assure us of the admirable effect it has produced of converting crosses
into the nourishment of his body left upon earth, and so to bring that which
separated his soul, and his body, now to be the means of reuniteing the body to
the head, for the cross is left in his Church, to conjoyn, and consociate the
Members into their suffering head, Christ Jesus, and we may well add, that this
divine sign of the cross set in the heaven of his person, so conspicuously
remains as a sensible mark of his promise to the Church of never being drowned
in any inundation of crosses failing on her.

Looking up therefore to the heavenly object of Christ's sufferings we may be
comforted by our similitude, and we may rejoice at our security, which this
covenant recapitulateth to us, as often as we contemplate it; in so much as
there is none of you who groan under any pressure or tremble under any
oppression, Heb. 12. 2. But Looking up upon the author and finisher of out
faith Christ Jesus, may not see him bearing the same cross with joy, despising
the confusion of it. Whither you sweat under your burdens, or whither you
bleed under the edg of these times, you shall find your persecution both civil
and sanguinary, patternd to you in the person even of God, and man, Christ
Jesus, who has not left so much as your fears, and terrors out of the
exemplar of his passions, his Mark 14. 33. He began to be heavy and to fear.
Was designed purposely as a cordial in your fits of fainting, and if there were
any point in your afflictions which were not exemplified to you in Christ's
passions, that circumstance ought to prove to you a sufficient consolation, in
that you had some suffering to offer to Christ of your own, besides the copy
and portraicture of his. But alas all that we can imagine in our own pains
wherein there is no imitation of his, is that which we may better blush at,
than boast of; for it is only the guilt of deserving more than we can endure
in this life, this is simply ours in our afflictions, wherein we find no
resemblance in the figure of Christ's sufferings, which part of our cases may
make us offer up to Christ a thankful alacrity in all temporal penalties
infflicted on us, for having taken off from us the burden we could not remove
by any sufferings, and having left us only such pressures as may aleviate the
weight of that intolerable gravation which is the guilt of sin: for our crosses
in this life by the virtue of the cross of Christ (whereof our heaviest are but
chips or shaveings) do not only keep our sins lower, but also weigh against
the temporal penalty of those which are in the scale.

It may admit a question whither it be a more precious Christian exercise to do
good, or to endure evils: that state is certainly the best in which both are
conjoined, when suffering many grievances, we act as much good as we are able.

Let them then who have nothing left to give to God by way of actions, rejoice
in the faculty of sorrows: When King David extols the dignity of man he
raises it upon this ground that God had made him a little lower Psalm. 8. Then
Angels, but in this respect we may say that God has advantaged him above them
by furnishing him with more instruments of attaining heaven than they have by
having coupled a body to this spirit in which he may suffer for Christ, when
many other capacities of expressing his gratitude are suspended; for man has
not only all the several powers of his mind but also the senses of his body
given him as Organs of working out salvation by carrying the Cross upon them,
with this corporeal furniture man is enriched above Angels; so as man may even
out of the greatest infirmities of his constitution extract matter of
glorification. This virtue has been imparted to the vility of flesh, and
blood, since God vouchsafed to be invested in it; Our flesh received this
privilege not only of being admitted into heaven, but of contributing to the
souls degrees of glory by the proportions of the bodies suffering; Rom 8. 13.
S. Paul says, It is no wonder that God having giving his own Son to humane
nature, should have given all these other prerogatives with him.

Out of this state of our mortality the Saints shall rise as high as they
should have done from the state of innocence, and immortality, which shows that
they are equally sanctified in the brevity, and shortness of their life now, to
what they should have attained in many ages, if they had remained immortal. The
similitude of sorrows, and crosses by the grace of Christ, countervaileth, and
compensateth the numerousness of the years of our service. Our redeemer has
left us this compendious way of approaching heaven by the necessities and
molestations of our flesh, the which he would not expunge in it that he might
present his Father the children of his most precious passions, as much purified
in a little time, as they should have been in the efflux of many ages. He who
raised above the highest heaven the heaviest of our earth upon this engine of
the Cross, has left it us, to wind up the easilyer our terrestrial qualities
upon the same Machine. This was the means which S. Paul made use of in all his
elevations up to the third heaven. Gal 2. 20. With Christ I am nailed to the
Cross: carried him up to that sublimity; and he kept himself so close nailed to
the Cross all his life, as when he was weak he was strongest and never esteemed
his raptures so much as his revilings, and ignominies. He professes to glory
willingly in nothing but in his humiliations.

2 Cor. 12. Gladly will I glory in my infirmities, in contumelies, in
necessities, in distresses for Christ, etc. because he found power was
perfected in infirmity, whereby we are convinced that those who are called to
Christianity are assigned to all sorts of crucifyings.

All the iniquity of a Christian consists either in doing what Christ did not,
or in refusing to do what he did, and none can excuse themselves by an in
capacity of imitating Christ, in that wherein he has been pleased to state
Christian profession; for every one may be poor, and patient, and mortified,
but every one is not qualified to attain to Riches, Honor, or Learning. This
is the wisdom, and love of God, to have those things made the best
contributions to our eternal felicity, which may not only be reached by every
one, but can even scarce be missed by any, which are the afflictions, and
adversities, of this life, wherefore those who it may be would not have had the
Zeal to affect a similitude to Christ in these hard touches of Gods hand, must
not be so ungrateful as to repugne this operation of God upon them, or be
ashamed and confused to see this figure of deformity in the worlds eye
impressed upon them, in poverty, infamy, destitutinos of friends, reproaches of
enemies and all other assimillations to Christ; but rather acknowledge a mercy
of God, who having called them to these trialls as Christians, whereunto they
have answered but ill in other times, that now he vouchsafes himself to place
them in the society of the passions of Christ, remembering what the great Doctor
in this worlds miseries, and the others felicities, remonstrates to us, 2 Cor.
1. 7. That in the same measure you are partakers of the passions you shall be
of the consolation of Christ.

Perfect Patience defined, imperfect consolated and directed
NOw I set up to your patience as a kind of brazen Serpent to cure all the
stings you are exposed unto; I must desire you to understand clearly the
integral constitution of this virtue: for I ascribe so much efficacy to it,
supposing the patience I handle to be an habit, or disposition inherent in our
wills, which receives humbly, and bears uncomplainingly all sorts of
temporal grievances and passions in order to a conformity to the will of God,
and our similitude to Jesus Christ, or as S. Augustine says, True patience
ordains us to endure all kinds of evils of pain, to avoid all manner of ills
of guilt. These definitions do not admit either a lame, or a pide patience to
enter into this high form of efficacy, that is, if it be peccant, either in
progress and continuation, or imperfect in the integrity, that is required in
it, of submitting to all sorts and degrees of sufferances, as coming all from
one providence. If we have any exception against any of this Jury of Gods
choosing to try us by, it is a sign our patience is but spotted, and
partycolour'd, or if it be intermitting, and by fits only, this betrayeth the
unsoundness of it. Wherefore we must endeavor to certify our nature in these
two deficiences, to which it is very liable: The first is of having refractory
intervals, in which we let in impatience, and murmur, to detract at least from
the intireness of this virtue, and suffer our senses to speak too freely
against that which offends them. The other is of our aptness to make motions
to God for some especial exceptions in our tribulations, resigning our selves
but partially to his design upon us, and likewise this deprecation is of the
present crosses that are upon us, believing we could place any other to sit
lighter upon us, if that were removed, with which we are actually charged, and
thus we are commonly tempted instead of suing for patience to God, to desire
his patience in our repugnancies, and that he would change his mind rather
than ours. This is a familiar irregularity in our natures, in the point of our
sins, as well as of our sufferings; there are but few that have not some bosom
sorrow, that they would compound for the being exempted from, and offer a
resignation to all the rest: but this is that hesitation, or stammering (as I
may say) in our patience, which is a great impediment to our conversation with
God.

I do not censure the first motions or the propensions of our nature to such
eases, and discharges for such a fault as should distract or scandalize any
body with their own imperfection in this kind; for as S. James says, Jam. 3.
2. In many things we offend all; if any offend not in word this is a perfect
mar. These inclinations to ease are (as we may say) slips of the tongue not of
the mind, but such trips and faltrings as are hardly fully to be redressed:
therefore this animadversion is intended only for advice to every one that
finds these knots, and stands in their patience to endeavor to work them out
faithfully, by prayer, and not to stop, or hang willingly upon them. But the
interruption or discontinuance of our patience and breaking off into fits of
intemperate complaints, is much more to be precautioned, and marked for
reformation; for according to Saint Augustines similitude, this is not only to
strike out of tune, but even to break the instrument; for he compares patience
to a Lute, and tribulation to the strings, which while they are well touched
make music; and so whilst patience praises God, and gives thanks in
tribulation, it yields a sweet melody to the ears of God; but when we fall
into querulousness and murmur, we break the Lute. When therefore we are so far
advanced toward victory as the having our senses disarmed by affliction, the
pleasures of which are our enemies sharpest instruments, we must watch that he
forge not new arms out of our pains, which God has given us as armor against
his shafts; and when he has scarce any art left to wound us by sensuality,
through the hardness of our conditions, then he tempts us by the weight of
our armor, to bring us to throw it off by impatience, and repining, which
indeed is to cast off the defensive armor that God gives the spirit against
the devil, and the flesh. When the Tempter has nothing left but pain whereby
to provoke us to offenses, one would think he were not to be feared, since all
impatience is but a new pain, which is proposed to us, let us therefore
consider that consequence, when we are solicited to unquietness and reluctation.

When we suffer by the violence and injustice of our enemies, the devil would
get nothing by this negotiation if we should bear it patiently, and virtuously;
for he would lose so much on the one side as he had got on the other; what he
had gained upon those he had made his Officers, and emissaries of iniquity and
injustice he would lose as much by the sufferers improvement and
sanctification, and so his malice would be unprofitable unto him, therefore
when he has prevailed with the one part to act his suggestions to the
innocent, then he turns to the other passive side, and labors to excite
their murmur, fury, or impatience, that his trade may render him profit on both
sides; a great prize by the malice he imports into the hearts of his Factors,
and may have some gain also exported to him out of the minds of the Patients.
We know when Satan had set the Sabeans and the Chaldeans a work against Job, he
left no art unessayed to infuse the fire of murmur and impatience into his
breast, and he took the subtilest way; for he got fully into that half of him
that lay in his bosom, and though he did not kindle any spark of rebellion in
his own holy breast, yet we may say his heart was a little overheated in the
ardours of that fiery furnace he lay so long in; for his breath savoureth a
little of some distemper which he found in it. By which we are not warranted to
let our tongues loose when they press and strain to break from us, to run after
some provocation to murmur and complaint, but rather warned to be exactly
vigilant in all such motions, since he whom God chose for his champion, as
having not his like upon the earth had such words shaken out of him in his
storm, as we may believe he resented more their having escaped him, than he did
all the violations he had suffered from his adversary, for he never wished any
thing recalled but his words. Chap. 40. verse. 4. 5.

This then may justly be a forceable motive to us, to set a watch over our
lips, when God has set such a guard over our heart, as affliction, especially
in a good cause. Let us not then, when there is no fault in the cause make one
in the calamity, by our impatience, since we ought rather to render double
praises both for out affliction and for our innocence. When we are punished for
crimes we ought to have patience, and when we suffer innocently we may well add
gladness to it; and we find a good cause produceing this effect in the
Macedonians, when they were in your cases whom the holy Ghost has left upon
record as a president for you. 2 Cor. 8. 2. In much experience of tribulation
they had abundance of joy, and their very deep poverty abounded unto the riches
of their simplicity: All this treasure of virtue issued out of the mine of
patience and longanimity which makes by the power of grace even the duration
of the pain an Antidote against impatience.

But by exhibiting unto you this high mystery of patience which is (as I may
say) a sacred confirmation of all virtue, I do not intend to discourage those
who are but yet initiated and Catechized in this mystery; for this ultimate
perfection of rejoyceing in tribulation is not a precept that claims our
performance, but a counsel that shows the excellency we may aspire to; which
the grace of Christ has set within in our reach to exercise that virtue, which
though it seem supernatural, is but suitable to the Members of such a head.
Those therefore who find not in their natures this finished disposition need
not perplex themselves with any scruple of faultiness, for if they are but in
this temper of sincerely and humbly demanding of God that grace which is
requisite for the discharge of their duties in these cases of temptations,
though they find for the present some aversion, and reintencie in their minds
against their miseries, they may safely conclude that God will minister, and
suppeditate grace sufficient for their support from falling into any direct
sedition, so long as they feel a sound and rectified desire to advance in the
state of perfect abnagation. Let them not disquiet themselves with their
distances from the top of the mountains so long as they are faithfully
climbing, in this case the indulgence of Christ is very applicable when he
says: Mark. 9. 40. verse. Those that are not against him are with him. So long
as we find not our will joined with our weakness against this self-denial we
shall not be charged with disloyalty.

There was a great cloud of infirmity in that Fathers faith, when he began with
Christ in Mark. 9. 22. If thou can any thing help us; yet as soon as he was
advanced to. I do believe Lord help my incredulity. His suit was granted, in
like manner when we begin with much imperfection we must not distract our
selves in apprehensions of our faintness, but proceed sincerely to. I desire, O
Lord, a perfect conformity to all thy Orders, help my inconformity. This prayer
continually pursued will certainly obtain the expulsion of that spirit which
casts us often into fire, and water, into several distempers in onr afflictions
let us remember Christ's lesson in this case. All things are possible to him
that believes.

If we aspire faithfully to this perfection we shall quickly find we have
dangerous enemies left; when we have once ingeniously undertaken our own
reduction, we must not expect to taste suddenly the good relish of
mortification. The first fruits of Canaan were held to be unclean, to figure to
us that there is always some impurity in our first thoughts, and designs of a
spiritual conformity; we must expect such a progression in this perfection of
Christianity, as Isaac made the digging of his wells in the Land of Promise.
The first water he called Contention, the second Enlargment, and at the last he
came to that he called Abundance, when all strife and difficulty was ceased. So
we shall in the beginning of our digging for this refreshing water of patience
find the inhabitants of our earth (our sensitive appetites) raise great
opposition, and in our pursuance, and progress we shall meet with less
contradiction, and more enlargment of our spirits, and at the last after a
faithful prosecution we come to that abundanee of water which Christ promises.

John 7 38. Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Which is not
only acquiescence, but joy and exultation in all pressures, and distresses.
This is the method of our advance in spiritual graces as the Psalmist designet
to us. They shall go from virtue to virtue.

Wherefore we must not be dismayed and relaxed when at first we encounter
difficulty, and contestation in our senses against patience, and conformity but
remember how gracious and indulgent God is to a little tender virtue, that has
but the quality of sincereness, as the holy spirit intimates by the Angel in
the Revelation saying, Apoc. 3. 8. Behold I have given before thee a door
opened which no man can shut, because thou have a little power, and have kept
my word, and have not denied my Name. So that here we see God, to a little
disposition opens a large passage toward plenitude, and consummation.

When therefore we find our hearts set to keep Gods word, and that in the
first incoation of our virtue we do but accept afflictions in his Name. He that
is the holy One, and the true One, will open that door of perfection which the
violence of the whole world shall not be able to shut any more against us.
Wherefore in all our straights, and coactions, either of our spirits, or of our
fortunes, let us remember how the holy Spirit calls to us; Dilate thy mouth and
I will fill it. As long as we do not contract and shrink our hearts in a
perverse chagrin; we need not fear the finding them yield, and give a little at
the first in the pressures of affliction, and though we never arrive at this
last station of perfect patience, of joying in tentations, there are many
mansions in heaven which answer the several promotions upon earth.

Not all Apostles, not all Prophets, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 14. The Angel promises their
reward, Apoc. 18. To them that fear thy Name, little and great. So long as we
acknowledge our own minority we may hope for our portion among the little ones.
This I say only by S. Paul's warrant of, Comfort the feeble hearted, support
the weak: for I persuade every one to this holy ambition of ascending as high
even as the steps of persecution can raise them; and there is no Ladder so good
as this of the Cross to scale by: and in our invitation to the nuptial Supper
of the Lamb, it is not humility, but rather pusilanimity, to aim to sit down
but in the lowest place; they who point no higher, design to stay too near the
door, and so may more easilier fall short of that than they who aspire to the
place of those who have left all for Christ, which is the throne of judging
Nations.

With good cause then I humbly advise every ones aspiring to the supremest
pitch of patience, and resignation. And I have warrant to discharge every one
from dejection, and confusedness in this case of imperfection when they do
loyally and ingenuously enterprise a proficiency in this virtue. And for this
reason the Apostle when he advises perfection, yet admits infirmity to an
expectance of Gods perfecting thereof, saying, Phil. 3. 15. Let us as many as
are perfect be thus minded, and if you be any otherwise minded this also God
will reveal to you. They who are not already stated in the accomplishment of
this virtue may hope for a further improvement by the compassion of God to
ingenious addresses.

Gods indulgence to the compleatness of our patience must therefore be taken
hold on, only as they stay to keep us from falling into dejection, and is not
to be used as a Rest whereon to lean the wriness and bent of our perverted
nature; for so we may insensibly induce an habit of crookedness, and petulancy
into our own dispositions.

Let us have therefore this direction of S. James always in our design at
least: Jam. 1. 3. Let patience have a perfect work, that you may be perfect and
entire, failing in nothing. By this we may rest assured of the perfection which
is contained in patience, since the Apostle asscribeth this integrity, and
indeficiency to it in all things. So as when we are possessed of this
compleatment of patience, then we are instated in a fortune which is so
obnoxious to the distresses of any want, that all privations administer to us
the end of all possessions, which is joy and satisfaction.

This has always been the state of the Saints by whieh having nothing they
were possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. For out of this ^reasury they who
lose parents, children, houses, and lands, for the Gospel have their assignment
for the hundred fold now in this time. And in confirmation of this truth we
find by experience that there is no condition so perfect in this world, that
has not often need of patience to make it tolerable: and they who have perfect
patience never want any other possession, to make their conditions acceptable.
All which duly pondered, I shall not need say more in recommendation of this
excellent virtue: but it is requisite to close up this point with the recalling
to your memory that our only addresses to this plenipotentiary consolation is
a constant research of it by prayer. In that order therefore I shall leave it
to you with this petition of S. Paul for the Thessalonians upon the same
occasion. Our Lord direct your hearts in the charity of God, and patience of
CHRIST.


