A Rout, A Rout: Or some part of the ARMIES QVARTERS BEATEN UP, By the DAY of
the LORD Stealing upon Them.

Wherein is briefly discovered the present cloudy and dark appearance of God
amongst them.

By JOSEPH SALMON, a present Member of the ARMY.

He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says.

Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest; it is polluted, etc.

The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to beat
down strong holds, etc.

London, Printed by T. N. 1649.

A Word to the Commanding Power in the ARMY.
By your leave, Gentlemen,
I Hope, in these days of Liberty, I may be free to speak a word to my
Fellow Soldiers: I shall not trouble you with much at the present, for I know
you have more trouble already upon your spirits, then you can well tell how to
be rid of. My speech is intended especially (as I said before) to my
Fellow Soldiers, those of the inferior rank and quality; I have very little
from the Lord to declare to You as yet: All that I have to say, is this; That
you go on as fast as you can with the Work you have begun, for the time draws
nigh that is allotted you: Make haste (I say;) yet not more haste then good
speed: Make a short work; but cut it short in righteousness; for the day is at
hand, wherein he that helps, and they that are helped shall fall together.
Gentlemen, you are the rod of God, yea, the rod of the Lords anger in his own
hand, the Almighty Arm acts you; and so it appears; for no manly glory can
encounter with you: in this day of the Lords wrath you strike through King,
Gentry, and Nobility, they all fall before you: You have a Commission from the
Lord to scourge England's Oppressors; do it in the name of God, do it (I say)
fully, hotly, sharply; and the same measure you mete, shall be met to you
again; for the Lord will ere long cast his rod into the fire of burning and
destruction: It will be a sweet destruction, wait for it.

Gentlemen, Under an abrupt form I subscribe my self Yours in life and death,
JOSEPH SALMON.

To the Fellowship (of SAINTS scattered) in the ARMY.
Dear Hearts,
I Know it will be a wonder to some of you, to behold this Frontispiece faced
with my Character; and truly, it is as much my wonder as yours: I little
thought that ever God would have called me hither.

Friends, I am yet amongst you, I own you, I can say Amen to your Proceedings,
although I cannot close with you in the managing of them. I have a fellowship
with you in the Lord: but I am distant from your dark and fleshly enterprises.

You are a scattered seed amongst tares, and it is your name that upholds the
fame of the whole: You are that little Leaven hid in the meal, whose
reputation seasons the whole lump; if it were not for you, this power of the
Sword would vanish and be annihilated. Behold, I show you a Mystery, it is yet
hidden from many, yea most of you; Thus says the Lord of Hosts, The day is
coming, and now is, when I will gather up my jewels in the Army (from under
this dark and carnal form of the Sword) into my self; where I will be unto
them Life, Liberty, Privilege and Satisfaction, the fullness of Arrears, and
plenty of Accommodation; when they shall no more contend with the world for
outward Interest, but beholding all in Divine fullness, shall in the enjoyment
of it sit down contented. And this I partly see fulfilled in my self and others.

But now it may be you will wonder why I yet remain amongst you, seeing I am
brought hither; I am sure many of your verdicts will pass upon me, I shall not
want the censure of most. But it is no matter, Cast all your cruelty and malice
upon me; the Lord in me is mighty to bear it; I will own it all, being willing
to become sin for you, though the Lord in me knows no sin; that you, together
with me, may be presented in the Lord an eternal righteousness.

I have but this at present to say: I am now with you, as Mary at the
Sepulcher, waiting to see the Lord: but he is risen. Your carnal affairs are
the Sepulcher where the Lord is buried to me; he is not here, he is certainly
risen, but where to see him in his next appearance, I wait: I must stand at the
sepulcher till the voice be uttered behind me, which I believe will be
shortly, both to me and many others. Till the day break, and the shadows flee
away, Farewell my Beloved, be thou as a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains
of Bether.

Sirs, I am yours, JOS. SAL.

A ROVT, A ROVT: OR, Some part of the Armie's Quarters beaten up, by the DAY of
the LORD stealing upon them.
THat Power (or Mystery) which acts all things, and by which whole man (in his
counsels, actions, and engagements) is led out and disposed according to divine
will and pleasure; I say, this Power (which is God) comes forth and offers it
self in a diversity of appearance, and still (by a divine progress in the
affairs of the earth) moves from one power to another, from one dispensation to
another, from one party to another; hereby accomplishing his eternally decreed
design in and upon the Creature. This is manifest in all dispensations, civil
and spiritual.

Time was, when God had faced the Jewish Ceremonies (those carnal
manifestations) with a great beauty and splendour of divine Majesty: the Lord
was there seen under that form to vail and hide his beauty and glory. In a time
appointed he departed from them, went out of them, he would dwell there no
longer; but he casts off that form or garment, and clothes himself with
another, swallowed up that glory in another, the lesser in the greater: and
then all the brightness and luster of divine appearance resided in, and dwelt
upon the flesh of the Son, as being a more true pattern, and exact resemblance
of God the divine Power. But the Lord was not here in his appearance where he
would be neither; and therefore having no resolution eternally here to
tabernacle or abide, in the fullness of Time he lays this form aside also.
Though he was the Son, the dear Son, the only begotten Son, a Son so like the
Father; yet he must not be spared; he must be crucified, the Lord will move
hence also: whence note, That this Divine power (or Mystery) admits of no
eternal habitation in any thing below it self.

Now as This power [God] has a daily motion out of one dispensation spiritual
into another; so also it is in Civil or outward dispensations.

This I have found in my own experience, (by tracing this Divine power, in its
going forth amongst the sons of Men) that it sometimes owns this, sometimes
that form; sometimes this, sometimes that party; daily moving from one to
another as it pleases: now the Lord lives in all these, though in some darkly,
in others more purely; and all these motions are as so many footsteps of God,
whereby he gradually ascends out of the creature, into a more complete image or
likeness of himself.

Time was, when God dwelt amongst us in the darkness of absolute and arbitrary
Monarchy: The face and beauty of Divine mystery lived in it, deny it who can,
that sees God in all things.

In this form of Monarchy God has veiled his beautiful presence with a thick
cloud of darkness: He has made darkness his secret place, and his pavilions
round about him, have been thick clouds of the Sky. Though the image and
brightness of God have dwelt in it, yet under such black darkness that man
could never discern it. Tyranny, persecution, opposition, will, nature and
creature, has been (as it were) that vail betwixt God and Man in this
dispensation; all this, and whatever you will call evil in Monarchy, the Lord
was pleased to hide himself under, while resident in this carnal form. I know
its difficult to see God in this darkness, the bright Sun under this black
cloud: the naked and pure Spirit, u^er this foul habit and filthy attire; but
he that cannot here discern God, is blind and sees not afar off.

God (having hitherto walked under this form) is now (and has in these last
days) come forth to rend this vail in pieces, to shake this form, to lay it
waste, and cloth himself with another.

How God has and does destroy Monarchy, and what it figures out to us.

The power and life of the King, and in him the very soul of Monarchy sunk into
the Parliament, and here it lost its name barely, but not its nature; its form,
but not its power, they making themselves as absolute and tyrannical as ever
the King in his reign, dignity and supremacy; yet the Lord ascended a little
nearer himself, by taking of this form (the Parliament) and hereby made way for
his after-design.

We see in a short time, he lays aside that glorious show and Idol, (the
Parliament) and clothes himself with the Army: And thus both King, Monarchy and
Parliament, fell into the hands, and upon the swords of the Army: and thus the
Army are to be the executioners of that beast (Monarchy) which they had
formerly wounded, and whose wound the Parliament had healed and salved over by
a corrupt and rotten Treaty: all which does figure out to me the stain of the
glory of all flesh: as Monarchy (or arbitrary regal power) falls by the sword;
so also shall that Kingly and Imperial power of all flesh be cut in sunder by
the stroke of Divine Justice; for by his fire and by his sword will the Lord
plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many: The Lord will
kindle a burning under that glory wherein he has formerly appeared; God
himself shall be the burning, the holy One shall be the flame, and all fleshly
regality in us, shall be the fuel which shall be burnt up and consumed. But we
shall hence proceed to our former Discourse, and shall next in order consider

How God lives in the ARMY.

Thus far we see God has moved from party to party, and sits down at present
in the Army: And here also God makes darkness his secret place, living under a
poor, low, carnal form, and few can behold his beautiful presence under the
power of the sword. The Lord here besmears himself with blood and vengeance,
deforms his own beauty, hides his aimable presence under a hideous and wrathful
form.

And now in as much as God has called me forth (from an impartial spirit) to
declare my Light; I shall (from some clear experience of the Armies present
condition) discover that dark and cloudy appearance of the supreme power (God)
amongst them, whereby may be discerned how far below the pure appearance of The
spirit, their present station renders them. And I am very confident, that which
I shall say, the Lord will testify and bare record the truth of the same upon
the hearts of many amongst them. Friends! Look about you; for the Lord is now
coming forth to Rip up your bowels, to search your heart, and try your reins;
yea, to let loose the imprisoned Light of himself in you; and if the Lord by
this does not shake many of you, then say, That I have prophesied Lies in the
name of the Lord. Then let him that has an ear to hear, hear, what the Lord
(that spirit says)

Thus says the Lord, yea the Lord says it:

That the present condition of the Army, or the present appearance of the
supreme power amongst them, renders them in darkness, and far below the pure
Light and life of God:

That it is so, I offer my appeal thus.

First, let them and all others (who are spiritually wise) consider, by and
from what principles God acts these men; I mean you Heroes of valor in the
Army, you Grandees of the present power in the Kingdom: In patience possess ye
your souls till I shall race your foundation, and discover your principles,
which God has hitherto and still does act you in: they are either public or
private, commonor (more properly) peculiar; your common and public principles,
are the outward liberty and freedom of the Nation, The establishment of
outward laws, liberties, and privileges; and some outward form of Government,
which may correspond with your sense of Justice: what no farther yet? This is a
poor earthly Tabernacle, which God at present has taken up in you; I wish I
might not have cause to say, It is a speckled pretense under which your private
interests refides: For I know this is the main spur that drives you on,
(self-preservation:) This is your Dalilah, your proper, private and peculiar
principle: Resolved you are to save your Lives, and preserve your
self-interest, though in this expedition you destroy all other powers and
interests whatsoever: Herein, (though you walk, as men, very carnally) yet.
Dear hearts I blame you not. I know God acts you in this cloud, he goes out
with you in this darkness, and Lets out his presence through this vail of
self-preservation amongst you, he has crowned you with same, success, and
victory, while you have lived and acted in this earthly body of outward
Liberty. But how far inferior and below this is, to a Life in the purity of
Divine light, (now God has disclosed himself) I am in some measure able to
discern.

You know not yet what it is to be dead to your own Interests, though you have
professed a great deal of self-denial, yet I profess many of you never yet
knew what true self donial was; and what it is truly to be dissolved and dye
out of your own carnal Interests: I know your bonour and dignity is great in
your hearts, your renowned enterprises call for merit: Your lives and safeties
are also dear to you; it is so, so it must be, God will have it so: he lives in
these low concernments, and yet your hearts cannot be imbittered or disengaged
from them: you hugg them, you prize them, they are an object of you embraces.
But I tell you, (Sirs) God is going about to unbody himself in you, whiles you
are embracing This body of self-safety and outward Liberty, he is dying and
departing from it, though you see it not. And This know, That God will ere long
leave you exceeding dark and dead in your enterprises: I was alive once as well
as you, and in my life I labored amongst you (in my sphere) as much as
another; but I am now dead with the Lord; I am at rest from my Labor; Ah happy
death! o blessed loss! how far better is it o Lord to be dissolved and
gathered up into thy rest, then to live the life of a worldly and carnal
labor? and I know also that the hour of Gods judgment is come upon many of
you: some of you have received your mortal wound already, I see you gasp and
struggle in your confused and dark enterprises. Let this silver Probe but sink
to the bottom of your wounded hearts, and something, without question, will
speedily be discovered.

Ah Friends, --

If you saw your Interests in the Lord, your Lives and Liberties in the Lord,
if you saw all yours in the Lord, you would think it a beggarly thing to
contend for any thing, or to plead Gods quarrel with any that shall demand
them of you. Doubtless, it is a poor, low, base, earthly spirit, that raises
contests, and seeks after the ruin and blood of creatures, for the enjoyment
of that which at best is but a bitter sweet, a well being subject to all manner
of casualties. Lo, This is the principle that God at present acts you by: It is
the Lord in you, inhabiting his secret place; and because I see it is the Lord,
I can embrace it, I can tender you in my bosome-affections, while you are
carried forth in this carnal dispensation. Nevertheless, I will in part
discover to you how far some are dead to their own Interest, and whither
shortly you must be brought.

Those that live in the more pure knowledge and life of God, see themselves
(their Lives, Liberties, and all outward enjoyments) not their own, but the
Lords, and theirs in the Lord, not a jot below him, or at the least distance
from him.

If we have the Lord, we have enough, because he is all to us, and we the same
fullness in him: Lo, this is life, liberty, and satisfaction. Now no outward
loss or misery can make us unhappy: we may be persecuted, yet not forsaken;
cast down, yet not destroyed; dying, and behold we live; in bondage, yet free;
because the Lord is all this, and more to us. To live, to us is Christ, and to
die is gain. If we have a portion of outward safety amongst others, we see it
is the Lord; if not, it is the Lord; and where the Lord is, there is Liberty:
God is to us light in darkness, glory in shame, beauty in deformity, liberty in
bondage, we possess nothing, yet enjoy all things; suffering is our crown,
death our life; yea, we live upon death daily, we cannot live without it.

Again, We are also contented with the dispose of providence in any thing that
may be called ours: If any party or power command us, our lives, liberties, or
interests, it is the pleasure of the Father in us to give up all to them: we
see a divine call in it, and can with alacrity yield obedience. Oh, it is a
sweet smelling sacrifice, acceptable with the Father, when we (the son) are
thus drawn forth to offer up our dearest Interests for the world. It may be you
cannot in this apprehend me: it is no matter, the Father wills it should be a
mystery.

Yet farther:

Our Interest of Life and Liberty is at your service: If you call for it, take
it; we are contented to be prodigal of it, to satisfy the blood-thirstie
spirit of any man in the Kingdom.

While we are in the enjoyment of these outward things, we use them as if we
used them not, being free to throw them off at the first demand: we are as free
to suffer, to be trampled upon, to hang and burn, as to enjoy that outward
liberty which you (so seriously and resolutely) press after. I tell you (Sirs)
Suffering is our Conquest: While we are ground to pieces under any power
whatsoever, all this while we trample upon them: debasing is our exalting; in
that which you call misery and calamity, we are more then conquerors: We dare
meet you (even you, whose courage has excelled, whose fierce countenance makes
the earth to tremble, you who are the present terror of the Nation) and appear
in a naked posture before you; yea, throw our selves, lives, liberties, and all
upon the edge of your cruelty; and we are sure, if you dare encounter with us
here, we shall overcome you. Ah Sirs! When you see this way of conquest, you
will throw your swords behind you in an holy despite and scorn; you shall lay
all your honor in the dust, and by that sweet spirit of meekness shall destroy
and subdue your Enemies.

But secondly:

I wish you might be carried forth into a serious view of the Manner of your
present Actings. As your Principles are poor and beggarly, so also the manner
of your Engagements is dark and fleshly. This cloudy and veiled appearance of
God amongst you, puts you upon preposterous designs, upon low and carnal
Enterprises: You have taken away Charles his life, because otherwise he would
(its likely) have taken yours. True, it is the good will of the Lord it should
be so, I have nothing to say against it; the Lord in this cloud leads you forth
to it; and in this you have played the parts of men acting under a fleshly
discovery of things. You are led forth in a way of vengeance upon your
adversaries; you sentence and shoot to death at your pleasure; it little moves
you to trample upon the blood of your enemies; this is your Victory, Glory, and
Triumph. All this is well; you must tarry here till God moves higher amongst
you.

I have only this to say to you:

Is it not a poor carnal thing for Saints, so high in profession as you have
been, to stand brangling with the World for a few carnal enjoyments? What, the
sons of everlasting peace, and engaged in a carnal combat? Well, it is the
Lord; I am satisfied. But oh, that sweet and meek spirit of Christ! who, when
he was reviled, reviled not again; was persecuted, but with patience under-went
it, and committed himself to him that judged righteously. You cannot, you dare
not commit your selves, your cause, your lives and liberties to the Lord, and
nakedly, without any carnal opposition, surrender your Interest to a divine
dispose: Nay rather, Shall not your swords soon be sheathed in the bowels of
those who obstruct (or impede) your furious march in the road of
self-preservation? Poor dear Hearts! It is the lowness, weakness, and darknese
of God by which you are lead forth and acted. The Lord (ere long) will come
forth in another appearance amongst you; he is coming out of darkness (his
secret place) into a light and open view; he will let out a more pure glory
upon you, when (in an holy shame) you will reflect upon your present
Employments.

I tell you (dearly Esteemed) it is a scorn to us, either to pick, or plead a
Quarrel with any party, for an outward or carnal Interest; The Lord has showed
us (and will shortly manifest to you) a more easy and sweet way of Victory; we
can overcome by being conquered, we can lose all, and yet be savers in the
conclusion.

Again, for I draw homewards.

The manner of your present actings, is in much fear, dread, darkness, and
confusion; it is your daily thoughts and care, how to complot your designs,
and lay out your Work so, as that you may save your selves, your honor and
reputation, but all is to little, you must shortly part with all; your name,
fame, success, and victory must all be forgotten, yea, you your selves shall
rejoice at your own Overtures.

You are very fearful and jealous of your defamation; you are afraid to think
of it: your spirits are involved in confusion and distraction, for fear lest
your design should betray you. These are your imprisoned thoughts, I am very
certain, but spiritual wisdom can discover them. The Lord knows, That you lie
under a sad weight of fear, terror and distraction: Fear, t he pit, and a
snare have taken hold on you, disorder and confusion abounds amongst you: You
grope for the wall like the blind: you aim at Liberty and Privilege, but you
grope blindly after it, as knowing not which way to accomplish it; and thus
many times you sit down weeping by the Rivers of Babylon; you are often so
overwhelmed in these troubled waters of Liberty and Privilege, that you are
constrained to sink under the waves of sorrow and darkness: I know the Lord
judges many of you, and throws you down by the sad and serious consideration of
your actings; He turns your hearts, ways and enterprises upside down before
you, and I know you are under daily convictions of spirit. Thus the dark
presence of God shuts you up in fear, and keeps you under bondage: The thick
cloud of horror and confusion vails that sweet presence and bright splendour of
Peace and Liberty from you; but in an appointed time the mystery of light will
break out in you, and upon you, when in the shinings of Divine Majesty, you
will clearly and purely behold things in a naked appearance, when you shall see
no canse of fear or trouble in any thing.

Those that live in Love to all, see no cause to fear any: for there is no fear
in love, perfect Love casts out fear: If you were in Charity with all men, you
would fear no man; for Charity thinks no evil, it knows none, it fears none:
All things are not yet reconciled to you, earth and heaven are not yet agreed;
but you labor under a body and bulk of cursed enmity, and hence is the spring
of all your fear and jealousy: If you could see all men, all Interests, all
power in the Lord, you would be offended at none, you would not fear any, but
would (with a sweet, patient, contented, and quiet spirit, lie down under any
thing coming from a Divine dispose. We see and behold our selves (as in the
Lord) without fear or jealousy, because we are really reconciled to all men,
all designs, all interests: And all they that know us are carried forth in a
spirit of Love toward us. The reason why we are hated, despised, and trampled
upon, is, because the world knows us not, they know not the Father in us.

In this state of ignorance we are the objects of scorn and contempt, and it is
our Freedom and Liberty to be so: The Lord in us, and we in the Lord, and with
him, travail together under the worlds infirmities, and because we see it the
Fathers will, it is our meat and drink to do it; we love to sweat drops of
blood under all men's offenses: Throw all the wrath, malice, envy and scorn of
man upon us, we fear it not, but in the Lord we are able to bear all, and
suffer under it. Lo, thus we fill up behind the measure of the sufferings of
Christ in our flesh, the dyings of the Lord are manifested in us daily: Here, O
here is a way to bring forth peace and unity: the Lord is coming, (he is coming)
to discover it: For by this death we ascend to a life, in all men's hearts and
affections; after this cross of hatred, we are crowned (as most choice and
precious) in all men's love and esteem, when the spirit shall descend from one
high, and be powered out upon them; they shall look upon us (whom in the Lord
they have pierced) and mourn over us with a spirit of love and tenderness: Then
shall we see of the travail of our souls, and be therewith satisfied.

Ah my dear Friends! my Soul travails again in birth with you, till the Lord be
thus formed and brought forth in you: I know many of you are almost spent under
your burden; you are so lost in a wilderness of Confusion, That you desire and
seek after a retired rest; you begin to loath your husks, and to have some
desire after your fathers table: I say no more, he that does come will come,
and will not tarry; behold, he comes with a recompense: you are afraid to lay
down your Swords, lest you should lose your Liberties; but the Lord will
recompense this sevenfold into your bosom, he is coming forth to make you
free to suffer a blessed Freedom, a glorious Liberty, a sufficient recompense
for the loss of all outward glories: Is it the loss of your Honor, Fame and
Dignity that you are afraid of? The Lord is coming to make you glad to part
with it, and with a holy rejoicing to throw it all behind you: Ah friends! The
Lord will honor you with meekness; you shall be the fame of the world, for
true valor and spiritual courage; yea (now and not before) shall the desire of
the Nations be toward you, their lamb-like spirits of meekness and innocence
will be an enforcing invitation to the Lion-hearted devourers of the world to
feed together with you in your green pastures, and to drink of your quiet and
still waters: when you are become children of this new birth, you shall be able
to play upon the hole of the Aspe, and to dwell with the Cockatrice in his den,
oppression and tyranny shall be destroyed before you; the sons of your
afflictors shall come bending to you: that sweet spirit of love and subjection,
that God shall bring forth in you, shall attract the hearts of the world
toward you, they shall throw down their crowns at your feet; and shall take hold
of that skirt of Righteousness which is upon you, and say, We perceive of a
truth, that the Lord is in you and amongst you. But in the mean time, you,
together with the world, are shut up in darkness, and not truly discerning one
another: you fear the world, and they are afraid of you; you are at a distance,
involved in a bloody contest, an earthly, lustful, and carnal Warfarr.

Where Live and Lie, and die together;
Yet but a while, it is not for ever.
Farewell.
POSTSCRIPT.
Friends,
BUt one word more, and I have done. I told you before, and now I say it again,
That your reputation is the same and glory of this present Army; you (I know)
are the main supporting Pillars of it. I will tell you what I see in this, more
plainly then I have hitherto declared. I see the Lord, our spiritual Samson,
has laid his hands of almighty power upon (You) these Pillars of this wooden
Fabric, he will disjoint you, and shake you all to pieces, and in you the
whole edifice of this swordly Power shall be annihilated: the Lord will die with
it, in it (or rather out of it, and from it) and in this death he will destroy
more then you have done all your lives time. The Lord will here take you
napping, as you are eating and drinking; marrying, and giving in marriage to
strange flesh; and the lake of divine burning shall consume you. Oh, it will be
a glorious day; wait for it.

I have here offered a few things to a public view; I know the wise ones
amongst you will slight it, and disregard it; the form, method and language
invites not the curious and nice spirit of any man: it has no beauty upon it,
though a great deal in it, which the Princes of this world cannot discern. It
is indeed the foolish language of the Spirit; if you do not like it, retort it
again, and I will carry it where I had it: you are like yet to have no better
from me. I was once wise as well as you; but I am now a fool, I care not who
knows it: I once also enjoyed my self, but I am now carried out of my wits, a
fool, a mad man, besides my self; if you think me any other, you are mistaken,
and it is for your sakes that I am so.

And now Friends, In him that was, is, and is to come, I take my farewell of
you: remember what I say, (is, was, and is to come.) The Lord was, when you
were lowest; he is, now you are highest; and he is to come, when you shall be
nothing. Even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

FINIS.

