SMART'S AURUM PURGANS.
THis exellent thing was by the Author proposed to his Royal Highness, for
(...) of the Navy, and the preservation of the health of (...) ^^je^^ie^
subjects, his Royal Highness was graci^usly pleased to refe^ (...) the
principal Officers and Commissioners ^f the Navy, December 2. 166^. they did
desire Sir John Lawson to Convene the Chirurgions bound to Sea under his
command to consider of it, etc. December 17. 1663. the Chirurgions referred it
to his Majesty's Physicians, and those after diligent inquiry and examination
made both of the Ingredients and Compositions, together with several
attestations of Chirurgions and others, who had successfully practiced this
preparation, they conceived it to be a proper and useful remedy, especially for
Seafaring Men, and did recommend the use of it to the Chirurgions, etc.

For the better accommodation of the people they be poysed off in small Balls or
Pills of thirty grains apiece, which is a sufficient dose for a person of a
tender Constitution, those of a middle constitution will require one and a
half, those of a strong constitution two Pills. So far for the generality of
persons and their distempers, but in Diseases over grown or long continuance,
as in bodies taken with the dead Palsy, or that have been prejudicially fluxed
with Mercurial Medicines, and in other like cases, or in distempers of gross
and strong bodies, it will be necessary to augment the dose according to the
constitution of the Patient, or Inveterance and powerfulness of the Disease, as
to two and a half or three Pills, yea four and to some persons I have given
five Pills, being lesser quantity would not serve. And thus the careful
Physician upon such occasions, first beginning low, may afterward raise his
dose until he find out how much the Patient must have, and so go on.

Take this Dose as you shall find convement, and having cut it very small, put
it in a spoon; then amongst half a pint of Ale or Beer rub it with the haft of
your knife in the spoon amongst the Ale or Beer until it dissolve; then put it
to the fire, and let it but just boil up, so remove it from the fire and let it
cool, so as that the Patient may drink it in the morning fasting; and
afterward as it begin to work, let the Patient drink plentifully of Ale or
Beer well warmed, its better then Posset drink. In four hours time it has
commonly done all its work, then give the Patient a glass of Sack, and so let
him alone until the end of six hours, for then is it time that the Patient must
eat something, a good Caudle, or some other comfortable broth, is better then
flesh meats at the first, but however of necessity he must eat something, and
not be kept any longer fasting, for the Spirits and Vitals having been engaged
in this Fight they must of necessity be recruited; as Marien in his Turb^
Philosophorum says, Honor our King in coming from Battle.

Some there be that cannot abide to drink any Physical Potion, which people may
cut it small and make it up in lesser Pills, and so swallow it down, and drink
some warm Ale after it; or mix it with honey and swallow it down, or take it in
the yolk of an Egg, or which way you find best to give your Patient content.

But as for Children and Infants for their Infirmities which requires Physic,
this Aurum Purgans when it is p^d in convenient Liquor as aforesaid, it is to
be administrated in small p^oportions, thus; Half a spoonful to a Child of half
a year old, a whole spoonful to a Child of a year old, two spoonfuls to a
Child of two years old, and so in order and regard to the age or strength of
the Child, or violence of the Disease, the proportion of the Physic is to be
increased, and the sick Child to be applied unto with warm drink, as is before
directed.

This plain, ready and easy course of Physic, has saved the life of very
many persons of both Sexes and of all ages, lately in and about London, and
made perfect Cures in all these under written Causes: whereof but one only is
cited for example, unto whom those who are doubtful may repair, and receive
satisfaction.

Dropsy. One Mrs. Durdant, daughter to Mr. George Wanx, Housekeeper of His
Majesty's Palace of White Hall, by means of this Medicine was cured of a very
dangerous Dropsy, Jaundice and Scurvy.

Worms. The Porter at Dorchester House about three years ago being at the point
of death, took one dose of this Medicine and voided a worm of twenty one foot
long, and has been well ever since.

Madness. One Barrius a Fisherman at Lambath; whose man servant called
William, was about six years past distracted, had this Medicine given him, and
thereby was restored to perfect sense, and has been well ever since.

Blindness Margaret Watson at the Cradle in Tuttle street, long blind of both
her Eyes, by taking this Medicine inwardly, and the Balsome of Mars outwardly
applied to the sore, in the year 1662. was restored to her good sight again in
them both, and has continued well ever since.

Stone. A Servant Maid of one Mr. John Gould Merchant in Crutched Friars, much
troubled with the Stone, had one dose of this Medicine, whereupon she voided
forty two Stones, 'twas in the year 1657. and she has continued well ever
since.

Flux of Urin. Sir George Mellwine, by reason of weakness in the Ureter could
not retain his water, with two doses of this Medicine taken in 1661. was
strengthened in that part, and perfectly cured.

Palsy. John Leonard of Lambath, being newly taken with the Palsy on the
right side, in five times taking of this Medicine was perfectly cured in the
year 1657. and has continued well ever since.

Gout. Hugh Shoory of Lambath, troubled with the Gout over his whole body, in
the year 1657. had this Medicine eleven times, and afterward fed him with
buttered Ale, he was perfectly cured, and has continued well ever since.

Looseness or flux. Alexander Shrimgear at Charing Cross troubled with a
dangerous gerous Looseness of six months continuance, had this Medicine four
times, and afterward I gave him Putirum Martis five or six times, one spoonful
in half a pint of warm Ale as hot as he could drink it, and he was perfectly
cured.

Twisting of the Guts. Thomas Nashe at the Coffee House in the New Ally near
the Old Exchange, when in his sickness about a year ago, much means for help
had been used to no purpose, was by one dose of this Medicine cured of the
twisting of his Guts, and has continued well ever since.

Small Pox. William Anderson in Bell Ally in Barbacan, was in the year 1660.
cured of the small Pox at the taking of one dose, and has been well ever since.

Swine Pox. Thomas Gallaway at Northampton House, about a year ago being sick
of the swine Pox and Floxes, his whole ^^ee seeming but one blister, was
perfectly cured at one d^ ^^g^ther the help of Balsomum Martis outwardly
applied.

French Pox. N. N. in Drewry Lane had about three hun^^^^ sores upon his body,
and in danger of losing his N^se and Pallat of his Mouth, by often taking this
Medicine wa^ pe^fectly cured without the loss of any thing, or any blemish to
be seen.

Mercurified body N. N. in Holbourn troubled with a foul Disease of fourteen
years standing, and having been often times fluxed, the Mercury had seized upon
his Head, Breast and Nerves; but seven doses of this Medicine brought out of
his body all the Mercury, and restored him to perfect health.

Dropsy in a child. Jonathan Brown a child of six months old in Theeving Lane,
very much swelled in Body and Legs with a Dropsy, when almost past hope of
Life, was by help of this Medicine restored to perfect health.

Itch in a man of 84. years. Mr. Barksby at Lambeth, aged eighty four years,
being troubled with the Itch over his whole body, with three doses of this
Medicine was perfectly cured.

Fevers. In all manner of Fevers commonly one dose, or at the most two doses
will make a perfect cure, but be sure to let no blood, and suffer not your
Patient to fast too long, but let him have some nourishment betimes.

Rickets. For the Rickets in little children it is an approved Remedy,
observing your dose as is above directed.

Gonoraea Running of the Reins or Gonorrhaea, it is a choice Remedy; commonly
three doses, or at the most four times, will make a perfect Cure; but in this
case also I commonly use to give the Sulphur Martis at night when they go to
bed, in a spoonful of Sack, and then wash it down with a glass of the same
liquor.

Mrs. Collier near the two Brewers in Peter street, taken with a continual
Sleeping was with five doses of this Medicine cured of her Lithargy.

Charles Woolls over against the Rose in Melbanck, troubled with spitting of
Blood, palpatation of the Heart, pains in the H^^d, sho^tness of Breath, and
cruel stitches in his Side, very s^^^ and weak, was by one dose of this
Medicine cleared from all those distempers, and within three or four days time
recovered so much strength as to go about his bussiness.

Plague. All Diseases or Sicknesses, or Messengers of death, especially that of
the Plague; for it bites like the fiery Serpents, Number. 21. suddenly inflaming
the whole body, and consumes its tinder, if speedy Remedy be not found:
Sometimes it comes like the cold Fit of an Ague, and shaking of the Bones;
sometimes again like unto a hot Fit, accompanied with pains in the head
heaviness of the eyes, faintness, shortness of breath, palpitation of the
heart, pricked as it were with needles over the whole body: some again are
taken with cruel vomiting of ugly stinking matter, blackness of the tongue,
hoarsness of the throat, costiveness of body, etc. Others again are taken with
extraordinary scowring of yellow stinking matter; others with a Narcotick
sleep, much ado to awake them, their face greenish, their eyes swelled and
heavy: others again are taken as it were with a madness, and cannot sleep at
all, their tongue black, their voice low, and all their bones so sore as if
they had been beaten, their urine thick and very red, sometimes black or green
(dangerous signs) the Pulses sometimes very strong sometimes very weak, trembling
and inequal, besides other outward signs that will appear upon the body.
Having now related something concerning the Symptoms, let us proceed toward the
Cure.

Know then in the first place. That this Visitation proceeds exente Dei, and
that no Physician or Medicine is of power to Cure, unless first the wrath of
God be removed: Take therefore Faith and true Repentance along with thee, and
go to thy brother, thine own flesh and blood, for he is so kind that he never
upbraideth any penetent, but his Arms be always open, ready to embrace. And
again on the other side, he is so deerly well beloved of his Father, that in
the twinkling of an Eye, he is able to turn his Wrath into Mercy.

When thou have thus provided for thy Souls health, then may thou also with
a good conscience beg a blessing for the restoration of the body, for then the
Disease is become Curable: but this distemper being of a spiritual Nature, of
so quick and so swift a Motion, therefore we must look for a quick penetrating
Medicine able to withstand its fury; but neither your common Plague Pills, nor
Electuaries, nor Purgations, nor Confections, nor Theriaca, nor Ovum Aureum,
nor any such like thing according to prescription of the common Theory, is able
to do it, for those touch not the Locum infectionis, but only the Intoriora
Corpora. The Diaphoreticks be also uncertain, for they only carry off the
accidens Narcoticum et Stupefactum, and are not certain in ictu, etc.

Take then in the name of God Aurnm Purgans, for he is the choicest remedy upon
this account, because he does partake of the quatuor entium, take then two
drams or four Pills, cut them small, and dissolve them in Beer or Ale, as is
before directed, only if you let it boil the fourth part of one hour, it will
be the quicker, and more penetrating, but then be sure that the Vessel wherein
you boil it, be large enough, because it is apt to swel up, and boil over, when
you have thus prepared it, if it be for a Child observe your former rule, only
a little stronger or more quantity by reason the vehemence of the distemper
require it; but if it be for a man or a woman, then give him first half your
quantity, and if that work within one hours space its well; but if not, and
that no sensible operation be, then give him half of that which yet remained,
and stay half an hour longer for its operation; and if that willl not yet do,
then give him the rest, for you must come up to his dose. Then first there will
come a cold sweat, then a provocation to vomit, then will it throw up abundance
of slime, then yellow and green gaul, by which means the Patient is eased of
the panting of the heart, and shortness of breath; afterward (...) will w^rk
downwards and last of all will come a (...) which being past, give the Patient
some comfortable (...) good Sack will do well; and so let him alone unt^l (...)
h^urs; in the mean time the Medicine will be (...) ^ing throughout the whole
body; purging and (...) if he should eat any thing (...) Medicine hindered of
its Operation* but howsoever d^ (...) ^ed and the Patient must not fast beyond
his s^^^^^th; but be sure ye suffer him not to sleep; for sleep does infect the
heart, where the Vital Spirits have their chief dwelling: but after twelve
hours is past* and that the Patient has eat something, then may he with Gods
blessing be permitted to rest a^^ when ^e comes to be awake again let him
swallow down one of the Antidotorial Pills, and keep another of them in his
mouth, playing with it up and down with his tongue; and as it dissolves swallow
down the moisture; it quenches the vehement thirst, keeps the Tongue and Throat
moist, and clear and spends the Poison as fire does straw: They be also a good
preservative for those that walk upon the streets, holding them in the mouth,
no bad scent shall offend them; and they are not so easily infected: In this
distemper I hold it safest to let no blood, and although the Patient by reason
of the vehemence of the Disease be faint and weak, yet by Gods blessing there
is no danger of his life, if he be well attended, within five days it will be
better. Thus have I in few lines expressed my judgment and experience as
touching this distemper: others that know a better Remedy, let them do the like
to the glory of God, and the preservation of the health of his Majesty's
Subjects.

N. B. Every Hous-keeper ought to be provided with those Medicines in his
House, and not then to have them to be sent for, when there is occasion to use
them, for it must be administrated within eight or twelve hours at furthest,
after they find themselves ill, for that Serpentick fire must be quenched,
before the tinder of the body be consumed, otherways it will be a difficult
work, were the Medicines never so good.

FINIS.

