Reformation and Union RECOMMENDED, as the Present DUTY and INTEREST OF THE
NATION: IN A SERMON PREACHED at the ASSIZES HELD AT HERTFORD, August the 1st,
School.

By RI. SKINGLE, Vicar of ROYDON in ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCVIII.

To the Worshipful JOHN BILLERS Esquire; High Sheriff Of the COUNTY of HERTFORD
Honored Sir,
THE Censures and Aspersions cast upon what you lately heard from me in the
Pulpit, have obliged me to present you with the same from the Press, which I
have here done without any omission or alteration. When you first engaged me in
that Honorable Service, of Preaching before the Judges, and many other Persons
in public Stations, I thought I had a fit opportunity given me, to recount the
great Blessings of late bestowed on the Nation, and to press Reformation and
Union, as the suitable return to God, and the seasonable and proper Method, for
the continuing our Enjoyments to us: And, I hope, what I then delivered, will,
upon serious perusal, find a kind reception by all that wish well to the
Nation, and desire to see Religion in the Life and Power of it. Indeed, I
cannot but think, we neglect both Duty and Interest, while these Things are not
seriously and in earnest undertaken; what is fit to be done, as also the way and
means to effect the same, must be left to Authority, but attempts of this
Nature I hope to see; and would willingly persuade my self, that we are not so
far left of God, but that such a blessed Work, so begun, and followed, will be
surely accompanied with a good event. I shall add no more, but the
acknowledgment of your favors to me, and my Prayer to God to bless you and
yours, especially with all Spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, and this is,
and shall be heartily done, by

Your Humble and Obliged Servant R. Skingle.

A SERMON PREACHED at the ASSIZES HELD AT HERTFORD August the First, School.
Psalm 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us.


WHEN the Grecians were set free by Flaminius the Roman General, it is said,
their Joy was too big for their Hearts; they scarce believed their own Ears,
when the Crier proclaimed their Liberty, but bad him say over that sweet Word
Liberty again, and looked upon one another with wonderment, Velut somnii vanam
speciem: Somewhat like hereunto was the case of the Jews, upon the deliverance
acknowledged in this Psalm, When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion,
we were like them that dream: So great was the Salvation brought unto them,
that they could hardly believe it; but when they saw 'twas a real thing, then
(say they) our M^^th^ were ^^ll'd with laughter, and our Tongue with singing;
yea, then they own their Deliverance to the Honor of God, and say, The Lord
has done great things for us.

Hence then we are to make this Observation, that God is pleased to work in a
very eminent manner for the welfare of his People; and when he does so, its
their duty to take notice of it. So great was this deliverance, that even their
very Enemies could not but acknowledge it; then they among the Heathen said,
The Lord has done great things for them. Yea, so wonderfully has God appeared
for his People, that their Enemies have seemingly come over to them; we read in
the Book of Esther, that God so disppointed their designs, that many of them
became Jews. And so mightily did God show himself for David, that even Saul
could think fit to speak him fair; yea, God so settled him in the Government,
and so prosper'd him, That a People whom he had not known, offered him service,
and strangers submitted themselves unto him, Ps. 18.44. Indeed,
prosperity-Proselites are not to be presently trusted, for fear the sting
should still be in then, and that safety and opportunity might encourage them
to thrust it out; but yet, however, such forced (though feigned) submissions,
show the greatness of a Deliverance, and how wonderfully God is pleased to own
his Servants. But we need not go further for the proof of this, then our own
late Experience will carry us: What a dismal condition was the Nation in, when
it was a dangerous thing to be truly Religious; nay, indeed, truly Moral, when
he that parted from iniquity, made himself a prey thereby? When all the desires
and attempts by just and due methods to make us happy, were frustrated, and the
struglings of honest Men were but like those of Slaves, which ended in a more
cruel Bondage; in short, though we had then to do with those, who went under the
Name of Protestants, yet were our Lives and Liberties in the Hands of violence
and oppression. And to help forward the glotious design of Popery and Slavery,
we were desired to believe, that all must be submitted to the discretion of the
Prince, and so even life it self (which is not in our own Power to dispose of)
must be tamely given up to the barbarous Will of another. And according to this
preparatory Work, our most Holy Religion, was soon after, ready to be
overwhelmed with Popish Superstition and Idolatry; our Nation swarmed with
Priests and Jesuits, and Irish Cutthroats; and why should we think they would
have slipped such a merritorious act, and lost such an excellent preservation
against the pains of Purgatory, as the murdering multitudes of us, if God had
not most miraculously put a stop to their fury? Surely if the Lord himself had
not been on our side when they rose up against us, they had swallowed us up;
the proud Waters had gone over our Soul: But blessed be the Lord, he has not
given us as a Prey unto their Teeth; our Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the
Snare of the Foulers; the Snare is broken, and we are delivered. Deliver, did I
say? Yea, not only so, but we have now a Prince set over us, who designs good
unto us, even the glorious Instrument of our mighty Deliverance; A Prince, who
is alone in qualifications, for such an Heroic undertaking: A Prince endued
with great Wisdom, and undoubted Courage, and whom all Men justly admire in the
Exercise of both; and unto whom all Europe stand ready to pay their respects
and duty: A Prince, by whose Hand, God has not only led us out of Egypt, and
given us a sight of Canaan, but whom God has enabled also to conduct us into
the Land of Rest. And who (maugre the greatest efforts to the contrary) is the
Instrument of an honorable Peace; a thing which our Enemies laughed at our
expectation of, and when actually concluded, yet did think incredible. These
are proofs sufficient, that God is pleased to appear in a very eminent manner,
for the welfare of his People. The other branch of the Doctrine. That it is
their Duty to take notice thereof, is also so plainly in the Text, and does so
naturally result from the former, that I need not enlarge in the confirmation
of it; he must be strangely lost to every thing that is manly, and not have one
rational thought about him, that will not argue from Mercy to Duty, from
Deliverance to Obedience: Yea surely, if God has delivered us out of the Hands
of our Enemies, it is highly reasonable that we should serve him without fear of
them, in holiness and righteousness all the Days of our lives.

And so much for the Doctrinal part of this Discourse, I shall now pass on to
that which is plainly Consequential of what has been said; And, First, Are
these our Mercies, and this our Duty; Then, according to our Duty, let us
ascribe our Mercies to him, from whom they came: Let us own God the Author, of
every wise Resolution taken for us, of every proper Method used for our God,
and of all the Advantages that have accru'd to us. It Is true, we are bound to
love, and honor also, the blessed Instrument of our Enjoyments; and to hate
that unworthy Carriage, to think of dealing with him, as the Traveller does
with the refreshing Fountain, who kneels down to it when he is thirsty, and in
Want, and turns his back upon it when his Turn is served. This, in our Case, is
a very base Temper, to be abhorred by all: But yet we must remember that no Man
has an Heart, or an Hand, Skill, Will, or Ability to do us good, but from God.
2. Has God done Great Things for us? Then let us take heed of Uneasiness under
his Grocious Dispensations toward us; an unworthy Temper, very incident to our
fickle and unconstant Natures. The Israelites were a very strange Example
herein; they repented them of their Complying with their Deliverance, and had a
Regret that they were brought out of Charnock, on the Aarie butes of God.
Egypt; they were angry that they were Freemen: Nay, such a Distraction had
seized them, that they spoke of taking Moses from the Place where God, by an
extraordinary Providence, had set him for their Benefit, and of returning to
their Egyptian Tyrants. Now this is a very stupid, ungrateful Demeanor, which
we are to avoid. And on the contrary, and in the 3d Place, If God has done
Great Things for us, let us be truly thankful to him. Blessed be God, if he
has not asswag'd the Malice, yet that he has abated the Pride, and confounded
the Devices of our Enemies. Indeed, God suffered them to have a Day, and we
beheld the Wicked in great Prosperity; but, blessed be God, Light has sprung
out of Darkness, and we have now, a very Comfortable Day shining upon us.
Indeed, Taxes have been, and are, great; but, truly, after all, an easy
Composition for the Security of the whole, even all that is dear unto us.
Blessed be God that our Liberties were not Finally Subverted, nor we Deprived
of our most Holy Religion. We know not what Dragooning is, any further than by
Report: We quietly profess God's Sacred Truth, and possess the Rights and
Inheritances of our Fathers. And, blessed be God, we have also a King, of whom
it may be said, he came to seek the Welfare of us all: A King, that sets up no
Interest, separate from that of his People's; and of whose Actions, not a
single Instance can be given, that looks not like his designing Good to the
Nation, the making of us truly happy, and the securing of it to our Posterity.
And, Oh! what Praise is also due unto God, as for the Giving of him to us, so
for the Merciful Preservation of him! How eminently has God appeared herein?
Indeed, he suffered the Sons of Belial to contrive his Destruction; but even
that barbarous Design it self, was not only most graciously defeated, but also
so overruled for our Good, that it (perhaps) proved the Means of saving the
Nation. How seasonably did it awaken us, and give us to consider anew, how
much our Interest lies, in the Preservation of the King? What a fresh and most
convincing Argument also had the King immediately, of the Nation's good
Affection to him? And how opportunely did it show the World, the Parliament and
People's due Zeal for his Person and Government? And put the Parliament upon
making such Laws for our Security, as, perhaps, would not else have been
thought of; and without which, it may be we might have been undone. Thus has
our gracious God, even turned our Enemies Swords into their own Bowels, and
their Artillery on their own Breasts: Let us then be thankful unto him. 4. If
God has done Great Things for us, Then let this induce us to a firm Reliance
on him; yet so, as not to neglect the Means for our Security. Jehoshaphat's
Eyes were toward God, and he excited his Subjects to Confidence in the
Almighty; yet he did not neglect the Security of Outward Means. To rely on God,
and to cast off Humane Help, is, to trust his Power, against his Command; and
to pretend to glorify his Strength, against his Sovereignty. God's usual Way
is, to exercise his Power in giving Life and Success to Second Causes, and
Prudent Endeavors: And in this Way it is, that we are to depend upon him. 5.
If God has done Great Things for us, Then let us remember the Churches abroad,
who are persecuted for Righteousness sake; the Thoughts whereof should strike
deep into our Hearts, and our Bowels ought to be toward them: And while they
write Lamentations to us, we should send up Lamentations to God for them. We
find it thus charged as a very great Fault, in Amos 6.7. They drink Wine in
Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointment, but they are not grieved
for the Afflictions of Joseph. Let us seriously think hereof, and know that we
are bound to do what we can for them; and that the least we can do, is, to cry
mightily unto God, that he would graciously vouchsafe unto them the like
Mercies and Deliverances to what we do enjoy. 6thly, and Lastly, If God has
done Great Things for us, Then what do we do for God, and for the Continuation
of what he has done for us? And here I crave Leave to suggest two Things,
which I humbly conceive are very proper herein: The First is, A Thorough
Reformation: And the Second, That some effectual Course be taken for the
Uniting of us. Indeed, these are Things that tend much to the helping forward
one another, Reformation-Union, and Union-Reformation; and both of them very
much our Duty, and as much the Nations Interest. I begin with the


First, A Thorough Reformation. Of this, in Church Matters, I shall only at
present say, Oh that God would purge all his Churches from their Dregs; and I
easily persuade my self, that every good Man will readily join with me herein:
When, O Lord, when shall it once be? Oh that it might be! But that which I
shall urge and press here, shall be the Reformation of Men's Lives and
Conversations: I mean, That some speedy Course be used, for the Suppressing
that Drunenness, and Uncleanness, Swearing, Perjury, Profanation of the Lord's
Day, and the like, which has overspread the Nation; and for encouraging of
Piety, and Holy Living. Something of this nature, I hear, is done in some
places, as also by some in this County, to their great Honor: And God's
Blessing upon their Hearts for it. Such are the Men that are likely to serve
their Country; and such are Persons that we are to have a Value for. But, alas!
What has yet been done, is by so few, that still the Practical Language of the
greater Number among us, is like that of Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that we
should obey him? Many live as if they questioned his Being, and more his
Authority: Such Provocations are common with us, as even dare God to his Face;
as if Men took Encouragement from the Influences of his Goodness, to mount to a
greater Degree of Sin; after a fair Sunshine of Mercy, to entertain more
unbridl'd Resolutions; and to pass forward with more Licentiousness, to bind
themselves stronger to their Iniquity, by that which should bind them faster to
their Duty. Now, When will all our Magistrates be pleased to take notice of
this; and to the utmost Extent of their Power and Influence, (as they are in
Duty bound,) put a Stop to it? I know they will assuredly say unto us that
Proverb, Physicians heal your selves, and first do your Parts herein. And I
most readily own, that to be Ensamples to our People, is very much our Duty;
and to let them know that Sin is the Ruin, as well as the Reproach, of any
Nation; and that for these Things, the Wrath of God comes, on the Children of
Disobedience: Nay, to bring off our Hearers, from all such Doctrines as but
tend to the upholding them in their Evil Ways; to deliver a wary and sober
Sense of the Efficacy and Benefit of the Sacraments; to warn them against
taking up with Church-Privileges, like those who cried, The Temple of the Lord,
and blessed themselves in their being Abraham's Children, though they minded
nothing less than the treading in the Steps of Abraham's Faith and Obedience;
of satisfying themselves with being within the Pale of the Church, and a bare
Performance of the outward Duties; of thinking their Attendance on the Lord's
Day, a License to live loosly all the Week after, and a quitting Scores with
God for what was past. In short, That he that will acquit himself like a
Christian, must give himself to the Lord, 1 Cor. 2.8, 5. That is, (as our
Church expresses it most excellently,) See the Communion-Office.
He must offer and present himself, his Soul and Body, to be a Reasonable, Holy
and Lively Sacrifice to God; The General Thanksgiving.
giving up himself to his Service, and walking before him in Holiness and
Righteousness all his Days. All this, with all the Encouragement we are able to
give to Pious and Godly Living, I acknowledge to be incumbent upon us. But then
there is also much lying before Magistrates, in this good Work; and this (with
Submission) I take to be their proper Business, who are to be a Terror to
Evil-Works, Romans 13.3. And were but one half of that Vigor exerted, for the
Suppression of Profaneness and Immorality, which was formerly expressed by
some others, for the punishing of Men in the Matters of their God, we should
soon see a blessed Alteration. Shall I then speak freely of two or three of the
forementioned Evils? (though not of them with Desire to exclude or abate your
Zeal against any of the rest, of the same kind.) There is Cursing, and Profane
Swearing; it is very sad that it should be so found among us, and
Parish-Officers not most strictly required to take notice of it: And whoever
observes how carelessly and impudently Oaths are taken, (especially if to serve
a Turn,) and what is frequently given in Evidence at such a time as this; and
what Oaths to discharge Offices are often swallowed, and how little, if at all,
regarded; will soon be convinced how needful it is to observe very strictly
when any come within the Verge of Perjury, and to punish it according to its
due Merit. And then, for the Profanation of the Lord's Day; it is plain that it
is not only the thing that be-dwarfs Men's Religion, by cramping the Advantages
to be gotten by the public Ministry, but is a great Cause why the Attendance
on it is so much neglected.

And now, Right Honorable, and much Honored; the King tells us once and
again, that he does most earnestly desire, and shall endeavor a general
Reformation in the Lives and Manners of all his Subjects; it is obvious then
where it must stick, if it be not effected. Be up then, be up and a doing in
this good Work, (I most humbly, but earnestly beseech you,) and the Lord be
with you.

And here will the Learned and Reverend Judges of the Nation, allow me one Word
to them in particular? Why, then, it is this; That they would be pleased to
remember, that there is much expected from them in this Matter, not only from
their High and Honorable Stations, (for they are always the same,) but from
those high Thoughts the Nation has of them, and the mighty Veneration that is
justly entertained for them. There is no Man but will own, that God exceedingly
blessed the Nation, in directing the King to such an excellent, and very
extraordinary Choice of Persons, when he filled those great Places. Now, as
Nehemiah argued, from his Place of great Trust, and from the Graces and Gifts
of the Spirit of God in him, saying, Shall such a Man as I flee? Thus we are
all ready to say, Such Judges as the Nation is now favored with, will go a
great way in this Work. Yea, let every one do his part herein, there is none so
mean, but may set an Helping Hand to this; if not otherwise, yet by Family or
Personal Reformation: Every one is a King, a Priest, and a Prophet in his own
Family; and the Neglect of Parents and Masters, (especially of such as have any
way the Addition of Outward Greatness,) in setting good Examples, and
commanding their Children and Household to keep the Way of the Lord, is the Rise
and Continuance of all Profaneness. What a brave Change is it then, in the
power of such, to make in the World? And as for Personal Reformation, every
one, in this Case, has a Corporation within himself, and has Authoriry to
arraign and execute every Rebel against God, and the Peace of his Soul. And if
he wants Help against his Traiterous Lusts, he may call in the Divine Aid; and
if he will but be directed by it, he will not fail to cut off the Heads of
those Uncircumcised, and to lay all those Sons of Anake flat. Stir up your
selves then, stir up your selves in this manner, against Sin. Yea, let those
that profess above the common Rate, see what is amiss: see their Coldness and
Formality in Religion, their Compliances with the sinful Humors of the Age;
their making themselves free to all Companies and Customs, their Looseness,
their Earthliness, the Decays and sad Declinings in Religion that are to be
found in them; truly reform these things, and be always upon their Guard for
the future, even till they see every Egyptian dead upon the Shore. This is that
which God expects from us; and this is the way to have him go on to do us good.

And so I pass to the other Thing which I proposed, when I began this use,
which is, That some offectual Course be taken for the uniting of us; and the
more to dispose unto this heavenly Work, I beg that these following particulars
be considered.

I. That Infallibility is not lodged with any Men; we all know but in part; and
to bring it home to what I am speaking to, let me use the Language of a
Reverend Person before the King; speaking of Dissenters, Dr. Wake in a Sermon
at Hampton Court, in 1689 p. 21.
We (says he) suppose them to be mistaken in the Things wherein they differ
from us, and perhaps they are so; but yet we must consider, that we our selves
also are but Men, and therefore may err; and they as verily think us in the
wrong, as we do them: and for ought I know, we must leave it to the Day of
Judgment to decide the Controversy, which of us is in the right. Amen, good
Lord, Amen. II. Consider the temper of the Gospel, requiring Meakness and
forbearing one another in Love; when the Disciples were so fierce, as to
suspend one who was working a Miracle in Christ's Name, only because he did not
follow them, our Lord immediately ordered a relaxation. And for our Apostle, we
find the same mind was in him that was also in Christ, Romans 14. which whole
Chapter, if it were well considered, would be of great use in this business;
and here let me give you the thoughts of a Right Reverend Divine of ours; There
is scarce (says he) a more unaccountable thing to be imagined, The Bishop of
Sarum, in his Preface to that excellent Book called, The Life of God, in the
Soul of Man.
then to see a company of Men professing that Religion, a great and main
Precept whereof is mutual Love, Forbearance, Gentleness of Spirit, and
compassion to all sorts of Persons, and agreeing in all the Essential parts of
that Doctrine, differing only in some less material and more disputable things,
yet maintaining those differences with a Zeal so disproportioned to the value
of them, prosecuting all that disagree from them with all possible violence;
and if they want means to use outward Force, with all bitterness of Spirit.
This (says he) must needs astonish every Impartial Beholder. But, III. If we
are indeed what we esteem our selves to be, the strong in the Faith; then let
it be remembered, that it is to such as we are that St. Paul addresseth
himself, Romans 15.1. requiring us not to please our selves; and in the seventh
Verse of the same Chapter, to receive one another, as Christ also receives us
to the Glory of God. And in the third of Phil. seems to intimate, that wherein
any differed from them, to leave them to God; and as far as they were agreed,
to walk by the same rule, and to mind the same things. ver. 15, 16. IV.
Consider the Mischiefs the want hereof brings; the public is deprived of the
Labors of many Learned and Godly Men; and upon this account also is it, that
instead of Loving one another, as our Lord has given us Commandment, the one
side cries out, Persecutors, and Men of cruel and bitter Spirits; the other
Schismatics, and as if Men of another Religion; and no sooner is either side
heated with this Coal, but like a burning Candle, whose Tallow is mixed with
Brine, spit up and down the Room. And what advantages has the common Enmity
got by these Feuds? And where are they so like to have an after-Game, as from
our Divisions? V. And Lastly, let the Things which are and have been the matter
in Difference be well considered, are they Things of absolute necessity to
Salvation? Dr. Wake in the formenticned Sermon.
Is Heaven at stake? Indeed, we must not destroy the Principles of
Christianity, out of Zeal to enlarge the Communion of Christians; but it is
always owned, that these are Things that do not at all concern the Foundations
either of Faith or Worship. Let Us all then, in what is proper for our places,
show a public Spirit, and contribute toward an Union, yea, he that can do no
more, yet by his Prayers for it. And, O Lord God, help, and give Men
Underderstanding to consider the necessity of it; I confess, prudence must
accompany our Zeal herein, otherwise, like ill ordered Physic, it may
exasperate the Disease, rather than remove it; but while we pretend Prudence,
let us take heed of Lukewarmness, and indifferency herein: There is too much
Neutrality amongst us, directly opposite to the temper of our Lord, whose Zeal
for Godliness and Purity of Worship, even eat him up. O that this were well
considered by us! And that we might also see Men's Zeal for Religion, overpoise
Ambition, Secular Designs, and Worldly Grandeur, then would Christianity soon
be reduced to this its Primitive temper. And then the envy of Ephraim shall
depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, nor Judah yex Ephraim; but they shall flee upon the Shoulders of the
Philistines toward the West, and spoil them of the East together; they shall
lay their Hand upon Edom and Moab, and the Children of Ammon shall obey them;
and the Lord shall utterly destroy the Tongue of the Egyptian-Sea; and then
Glory shall dwell in our Land, all Hearts, Heads, and Hands shall be at Work,
to promote the welfare of the Nation, utterly to root out Popery and
Profaneness, and to countenance real Piety and Good Living. Yea, the Kingdom
to the dear Son, O Lord, will then come, and all his Enemies be made his
Footstool; Come then, thus, O Blessed Jesus come quickly.
FINIS.

