A SERMON Preached Feb. 19. 1692. Upon the FUNERAL Of that late Excelllent
Servant of Our LORD JESUS, Mr. Richard Fincher, Who Finished his Course, Feb.
10. 1692.

By SAMUEL SLATER, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
1693.

To that Flock of CHRIST, of which Holy Mr. FINCHER was the Faithful Pastor.
DEAR FRIENDS,
GOD having made a sore Breach upon you by taking home his Servant to himself,
you made it your joint Request that I would Preach to you upon that sad and
solemn Occasion. The entire Love between him and me, together with the Kindness
I have for you, forbad my Denial. I did the thing, through Divine Assistance:
You then came upon me for the Publishing of what had been delivered, and
therein prevailed too. Here it is, the Lord accompany this Sermon with a
Blessing, that it may be profitable to you all, and many more. Having given you
so much Counsel already, I shall desire your following it, and will here add no
more, but beg for you the Divine Conduct, Grace and Influence.

And you, MADAM, whose Conjugal Relation to this Worthy Person has been
dissolved; I have rejoiced to see patiently bearing it, as one Taught of God;
and Oh that you may have fuller refreshings flowing into you from the Fountain
of all good, now that pleasant stream is cut off. And though your Communion
here was but short, may you have in Heaven an Eternal Communion with one
another, and both with God. You all I commend to him and the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified. In short, be you all upright with God, study Godliness in its
Power, live the Truths you Hear and Profess, adorn the Gospel by an Exemplary
Conversation, do not divide, but walk in Peace and Love; though the Shepherd be
smitten, let not the Sheep scatter, but the Lord give you another after his own
Heart. I am

Yours in our Dear Lord Jesus, Samuel Slater.
From my Study, March 10. 1692/3.
Lately Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
MR. Slater's Thanksgiving-Sermon, October. the 27th. 1692. Quarto. Mr. Slater's
Sermon at the Funeral of that Faithful Servant of Christ, Mr. John Reynolds,
Minister of the Gospel; who Dyed December 25. 1692. Quarto.

The true Interest of a Nation, or the Duty of Magistrates, Ministers and
People, in an Assize-Sermon at Bucks, July 5. 1692. By John Howard, M.A. Rector
of Marston-Trussel. Quarto.

Mr. Addy's excellent Book of Shorthand, by whom the Bible is done in the same
Shorthand. Octavo.

The Collections of Letters for the Improvement of Husbandry and Trade are
continued Weekly, at 1 d. each. By John Houghton, Fellow of the Royal Society.

PSALM. CXIX. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.


WHether we reckon this Psalm to David, the sweet Singer of Israel, or to some
other holy Man of God as the Penman thereof; it is past all question that the
Divine Spirit was the Inditer of it, and we have reason to judge it worthy of
so great an Author, because full of most rich and excellent matter. You may
observe in it the Description of a godly man, whose Picture is curiously drawn,
and to the Life, in his Graces, and holy duties, and sore afflictions, and
manifold Experiences, and sweet Consolations. But passing by the Consideration
of the whole, I shall confine my Discourse, and for the present engage your
Meditations to these words which I have been directed to, as a Subject very
proper upon this sad and solemn Occasion. In which we plainly see the Friendly
happy agreement between a most wise and holy God, and an humbled afflicted
Saint, under and about those dark Providence and smarting Dispensations, which
are ordered out unto him; when there is not only a Rod but a Scorpion in the
hand of the former, and multiplied yea deep wounds on the back of the latter.
The holy Prophet does here speak as a man lying under the Judgments of God, and
exercised with Afflictions, a Child dear to his Father, and over him, yet under
his frown; but in this very case far from quarrelling the Rod, and contending
with his Father about it, he humbly submits, and sweetly quiets himself, freely
making this ingenuous and thankful Acknowledgment: I know O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me. The terms
in the Text are so obvious and very easy, not needing that much time should be
spent in their Explication. Therefore all that I shall say to that purpose,
will be no more than this.

The word Judgment is variously used in the sacred Scripture, and particularly
in this Psalm; frequently we are to understand by it the Law of God, his
Statutes and Commandments; these are the Judgments of his mouth, which in and
concerning all things are right, there is nothing perverse in them, but as
Silver tried in a Furnace of Earth seven times, free from all dross. Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good. Now if any Person be
inclined thus to understand the word in this place, he shall have my leave so
to do, I will not contend with him about it. Yet in my apprehension, it seems
much more suitable to the Mind and Scope of the Prophet in this Place, to
understand by Judgments those troubles and calamities which the Lord is pleased
to order out to the Children of Men, while they tabernacle in Flesh, and are
passing thorough this vale of tears. Those Providence of God, which have an
angry aspect and frowning Countenance, whether they be penal and acts of
revenge, and so inflicted upon wicked men his Enemies, or only castigatory and
corrective, and so laid upon good Men and Women his Children, are Judgments.
Thus 1 Pet. 4.17. The time is come that judgment must begin at the House of
God; and if it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? If there be such sufferings for Gods Subjects and
Favorites, how will he handle Rebels? So again observe that place in the 1 Corinthians. 11.32. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged; but when
we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World. And such Dispensations may very fitly be called Judgments on a
twofold Account.

First, Because they are rectoral and judicial acts, they are acts of
Government, put forth by God as holding the Reins in his hand, as sitting in
the Throne judging right and rendering unto men according to their Works. Even
when they are ordered out to the Saints themselves, not only for probation, or
the Exercise of their Graces, but likewise for their sins; there is not only a
design of Love in the Bowels of them, and merciful Purposes carrying on, but
there are Characters and Marks of displeasure engraven upon them; for though
God is so gracious that he will not cast off his Children for sin, yet he is so
holy that he will not bear with sin in his Children, but they shall feel he is
offended; if they transgress, they shall suffer; if they will break the Hedge,
some of the Thorns shall stick in their sides, Psalm. 89.30, etc. If his
Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments: if they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes. This he threatened,
notwithstanding he promises in the very next words, that his loving kindness
he will not utterly take from him, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail: He will
not break his Covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips.

Secondly, They may well be called Judgments, upon the Account of Gods ordering
them out in infinite Wisdom. In wrath he remembers Mercy, and does all as
becomes him to do it. He knows what is best to be done, and how much his
Children bear, and what the Providence will issue in, and how the Physic will
work. Isa. 30.18. The Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are all they that wait
for him. His Judgments are with judgment: This good man readily subscribed to
it; O Lord, thy judgments are right, such as they should be, there is not any
such thing in them that can be mended, and therefore nothing that should be
quarreled.

And he does not stop here, though it is good for one in trouble to come to
this, but he goes on, thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: These
Dispensations do speak thee both a righteous Judge, and a cordial Friend; in
what thou have done, thou have been true to thy gracious Word, and to my chief
Interest; though Flesh grumbles, and says there is severity in this stroke,
yet my Faith speaks better of my God, and tells me there is his Love in it. He
has done nothing but what he might do to me, and what He has done does really
make for me. Though my Spirit be not right, nor my Duties right, nor my
Carriage right, yet his Judgments are right.

And He does not speak this at random, as one that had a mind to be talking,
though it be he did not know what; nor does he speak it with any hesitancy or
misgiving of Mind lest it should afterward be found otherwise, but with the
greatest assurance, confidence and alacrity imaginable, that he might work a
belief in others who should hear of it. I know, says he, I know very well what
I say: I know the thoughts that I have of my God and his dealings with me, they
are not vain and mistaken thoughts, but highly rational and well grounded: But
you may ask, How did he come to know this? I answer, two ways.

First, By the Word of Truth: Which speaks plainly, Deuteronomy. 32. He is the rock,
his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is He.

Secondly, He knew it by other Saints Experiences and his own. Both my
Predecessors and my Contemporaries have been able to make an honorable Report
of God, and so am I, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but
now have I kept thy Word. And again in the 71 Verse. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I may learn thy Statutes. These words do afford us
several Truths worthy of our consideration and repeated Thoughts. I will only
name them.

First, Many of those Afflictions which come upon the Saints, are the Judgments
of God upon them. I do not say all are so, but many. Probably the stroke of God
upon you of this Congregation, is a Judgment. I do not take upon me positively
to determine it, but it will be no prejudice to you to look upon it under that
Notion, and carry accordingly, humbling your selves under the hand of God, and
learning Righteousness. Is there not a Cause? Find it out if you can, and beg
that God would lead you into the knowledge of it, Job 10.2. I will say unto
God, Do not condemn me, show me wherefore thou contendest with me.

Secondly, The dearest of Gods Saints are within the reach of his Judgments,
and may be exercised by them. As he will to their comfort gloriously manifest
the love, so when occasion requires he will use the Authority of a Father. If
his Children will be sinfully deaf to Doctrine, he will open their Ears to
Discipline, and by it. Those that will not be pliant to the Word, shall feel
the Rod. He has such a Love to them, and Care of them, that he will be sure to
whip them (though he does not willingly) rather than lose them.

Thirdly, The administrations of God to his People, in his judging and
afflicting them, are ever managed with unspotted Righteousness and
Faithfulness. Reproach shall never cleave to his Majesty. He will neither give
his Glory to another, nor in the least stain and blemish it himself. He can do
nothing but what is right, and he will do nothing to his People but what is
good. It is impossible for him to do any thing which shall violate the Law of
Equity, and no less impossible is it for him to do any thing which is
inconsistent with his own everlasting Covenant, or their Interest and good.

Fourthly, God does and will satisfy his People about this: They shall be able
to say, I know it; they shall both see and feel it. Justice and Faithfulness
shall be so plainly impressed upon his Dispensations, and in such legible
Characters that they shall run and read them. In order hereunto God has been
pleased to do much in his Word, and he will do more by his holy and almighty
Spirit, who dwells with them, and will be in them, and make all effectual
upon them. But none of these things shall be the Subjects of the following
Discourse, any further than as they will fall in under the handling of that
Doctrine which I intended for, and which with the Blessing of God will prove to
your advantage, and that is this:

Doct. Under the most afflictive Providence, the Children of God ought to
press on to, and be expressive of a full satisfaction of Soul concerning the
Righteousness and Faithfulness of God in them.

We ought to be satisfied, and have reason so to be, of that I shall speak in
the doctrinal part: We ought to express that satisfaction, of this in the
Application. The Text we have before us does afford a very sufficient and solid
Foundation for us to build such a Conclusion upon. We find this holy man had
been met with by God in the way of his Judgments, and exercised with
Afflictions, but we do also find that the Lord and his Servant were Friends
notwithstanding that, and perfectly agreed; this clearly appears by the
honorable Testimony he gives concerning God, and his smart dealing with him.
He did not only put his mouth in the dust, as one that had not a word to say
against God, but he opened it with wisdom, as one that had enough to say for
God, and to his praise: I know that thy judgments are right; in the Original it
is (as the Margin of our Bibles tells you) Righteousness, Righteousness it
self; they can be no more charged with being wrong or unjust, than light can
with being dark, or sweetness it self with being bitter: And though thou have
afflicted me, and do still, I own it was and is in Faithfulfulness. So that
here was no such thing as a quarrel, no such thing as an Objection, no finding
of any fault, but justifying of God, and an humble acquiescence in his Will and
the Product thereof. Now here I would have this in the first place in a special
manner taken notice of: That it is Gods Purpose and fixed Resolution, that
which his Heart is very much set upon, to have all things cleared up and set to
right between him and his People whom he dearly loves, and has set apart for
himself, and for an intimate and everlasting communion with Him in the other
and better World. It is his unalterable Will, that there shall be a mutual
satisfaction; He will have a full satisfaction concerning them, and they again
shall have a full satisfaction concerning him.

First, God will have a full satisfaction concerning his People. I say, God is
immoveably resolved upon that, He will have satisfaction: But, alas! a poor
Soul will say, I cannot give it him. Job 9.2, 3. How should man be just with
God, if he should contend with him? he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Not
one mercy of a thousand, they have been so ill improved, not one sin of a
thousand, they are so foul, heinous and crying. But be not discouraged at that,
for since the Best of men are not able to make satisfaction, He himself has
been graciously pleased to make Provision, and to find out a way for the doing
of it, and has to that end and purpose laid help upon one that is mighty, that
so his righteous and holy Law may not quarrel, but be answered in all its
demands; and that none of his glorious Attributes may have cause to complain,
but whatever Objections may be raised and brought in against them upon account
of the Corruption and vitiousness of their Natures, or the sinfulness and
Irregularities of their Hearts and Carriages, may receive a full answer, and so
all Obstructions and rubs which lay in the way of their Happiness may be
removed. And so he has found a full, and will take an eternal satisfaction in
that which his only begotten and most dearly beloved Son, and our most gracious
and blessed Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, did freely undertake, and fully
perform in a way of active and passive Obedience; from that Sacrifice of
himself which our High Priest did once for all offer up, God has smelt a sweet
savor of rest, so that in Him he is now and for ever well-pleased with them.
He can now close with them, and with delight embrace them with his Arms, and
lay them in the Bosom of his Love. Mark the Language of his Grace, which is
poured out of his Lips, and how sweetly he calls to them: Isa. 1.18. Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be
as Wool. And now the Devil is cast down, who is the great Accuser of the
Brethren, that would make it his business to accuse them day and night before
God in his Temple, God will not give an Ear to him. He had as good sit still,
only his Hatred and Malice against you is so great that he cannot. Well,
Christians, look to it that you do not listen to Satan's Temptations, and you
may be sure, your Father will not listen to his Accusations. He is satisfied
concerning you by his Son, and in him you are accepted. You are not satisfied
with your selves, not with the Frame of your Hearts, but would have them more
spiritual, holy and heavenly; nor with your Duties, but would have them more
according to Gospel rule: You would serve God better, and be more with him, yet
in, thorough and by the Lord Jesus Christ, God is satisfied concerning you, and
with you, so that he reckons you his Jewels, his Portion and Inheritance; and
in this you have reason to rejoice: And then further

Secondly, It is the Will of God concerning his People, that they should
likewise have a full satisfaction concerning him, and all his Dispensations, as
they have had: Psalm. 22.2, 3. O my God, I cry in the Daytime and thou hear
not, and in the Night-season, and am not silent, but thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the Praises of Israel: And so Asaph acknowledged in the 77th. Psalm,
That God's way was in the Sanctuary, a most holy way, though at that time it
was a mysterious and abstruse way: His way was in the sea, and his path in the
great waters, and his footsteps were not known: And God takes this well at
their Hands, he has his Book of Remembrance for such, Malachy 3.16. and it is
that he does expect from all his People, and will bring them to.

That he expects it from them, is clear from his expostulating with them, as in
Ezekiel. 18.25. Hear, O House of Israel, is not my way equal? are not your ways
unequal? and so in Isa. 40.27, 28. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O
Israel? my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment passed over from my God:
Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary, there is
no searching of his understanding: And thus he dealt with the tachy Prophet
Jonah, who was so much off the Hooks upon the sparing of Nineveh, and the
Withering of the Gourd, in the shadow whereof he had so exceedingly rejoiced;
the Lord was pleased to speak to him more than once, Jonah 4.4. Do thou well
to be angry? And again, Ver. 9. Do thou well to be angry for the Gourd? Have
I been so merciful to Nineveh, and to thy self too, Jonah, and will thou be
froward with me? Do thou well to be Angry? Have I done amiss? Have I given
thee any Cause? God would have all his People pleased with what he does, and in
Order to that, satisfied; and they have reason to be so, because it is he that
does it: Were there no more, that should in our Esteem be enough alone. David
counted it so in Psalm. 39.9, 10. though he was almost consumed with the blow of
God's Hand, yet he was dumb and opened not his mouth, because He did it.

And as God would have this in his People, and does expect it from them, so he
is able to effect it and bring it to pass: He that has found out a way to
satisfy himself concerning his Peoples bad Actions, so that there shall be no
abiding breach between him and them upon that score, what is it that he cannot
do? He that has done that in which lay the greatest difficulty, cannot be
posed and non-plus'd by the less, viz. the satisfying of his People concerning
his Dispensations of Providence and carriages toward them; as in blasting
their Estates, and making them melt as snow before the Sun; in breaking to
pieces their Relations, and making them to sit solitary and alone; in taking
away their Comforts, and rendering their Lives bitter, and a burden to them; in
putting out that Light in which they had rejoiced for a season, smiting their
faithful Shepherd who had fed them with sound Knowledge and Understanding.
These things and all others, God has made Provision for, and will satisfy his
People about; though he condescends therein to them, not being responsible to
his Creatures, Dan. 4.35. He does according to his Will, both in the Army of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or
say unto him, What do thou? Yet thus he lays by Majesty (as it were) and
stoops to dust and ashes: thus he will deal with them, after he has dipped his
Pen in Gall, and written bitter things against them, at which they are
troubled, yea startled.

The next thing I shall do, is to show you, how necessary this is for us,
though it be altogether Mercy, Grace throughout in God: For there are apt to be
in good men under dark and afflictive dispensations very undue and unbecoming
Thoughts and Motions, a filthy scum arising. Possibly you have found in your
selves something of that nature under the late Providence, which at present you
may think proper and right, what you are very well able to justify; just as it
was with Jonah in his extravagant Heat, his Passion had so blinded his Eyes,
and conquered his Reason, that he told God to his Face, ( Jonah 4.9.) I do well
to be angry, even unto death: But when these very Persons are returned to
themselves, their furious heat is abated, and they afterward become more
composed and sedate, and enjoy a due calmness of spirit, and thereupon come to
reflect on themselves, they will see cause to blush before God, to condemn
themselves, and to be ashamed of their words and actions. I will give you an
Instance or two.

First, In such Cases they are very forward to enter the Lists, and Dispute
with God: When his ways are out of their sight, his Providence so many Riddles
and Mysteries that they cannot Interpret; when the Hand of God comes near to a
Man, and touches him to the quick, bleeding him in a Master-Vein, and taking
away from him that which was the desire of his Soul, and the Delight of his
Eyes. There are irregular and unchild-like Workings in him, though at another
time you would not have thought there had been any such thing in the Man, but
let God have used him at his Pleasure, let God have tumbled and tossed him up
and down as he would, he would still have fallen upon a square, and when this
and that and the other was gone, he would have possessed his Soul in Patience;
but alas we find it with him as with Water that has for some time been in a
Glass, while it stands still it looks pure and clear, but if one stir and shake
it, then that filth rises which lay before at the bottom undiscerned, and now
it is all over disturbed and roil'd: So here, the Christian has had some
Disappointment or Loss, something or other by which his Spirit is wounded, and
that puts him quite out of Humor, and now he thinks himself able to deal with
God, and, as I said, would argue the Case with him. Thus it was with the
Weeping Prophet, Jerem. 13.10. Indeed he laid down this as an Eternal Truth,
that would not admit of any question; Righteous art thou, O Lord: Yet he
thought there were some things that he might Animadvert upon, and be bold to
discourse with God about: Let me talk with thee of thy Judgments; Yes, do so,
Jeremy, but when thou do, set a Watch before the door of thy Lips, and have a
Care thou do not transgress. Well, he turns Questionist; Wherefore does the
way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? And Afflicted Job went beyond him, and rose too high, Job. 23.3,
4, 5. O that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his seat;
I would order my Cause before him, and fill my Mouth with Arguments: I would
know the Words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto
me: But know it is far more becoming of Man, and profitable for him to deal
with God in a way of humble Submission and fervent Supplication than in a way
of Dispute, for in this way God will certainly be too hard for Man, and teach
him better Manners, as he did Job, whom he brought upon his Knees, and made
throw down his Weapons, and cry Peccavi, Job. 40.4. Behold I am Vile; both
really so, and in mine own Eyes, What shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand
upon my mouth, and so for the future Seal up my Lips, as one that do not know
what to say, and have already offended in saying I did not know what. Let all
the Earth keep silence before him, but vain Man would be Wise. And so

Secondly, There is apt to be even in good Men themselves something of a
Tumultuous and Discontented Spirit, rising up against God because of his
Providence, forming in their Minds very unworthy and unbeseeming Thoughts of
him: Exceeding dishonorable Thoughts, which do wretchedly reflect upon God and
Religion; this we see too too plainly in Holy Asaph, Psalm. 73. He first looked
abroad round about him, and there saw the Ungodly of the World free from those
Troubles with which many better than themselves were exercised, and filled with
all manner of Delights, Prospering and Flourishing, increased in Riches, and
having more than Heart could Wish; then he turned home, and considered how
Matters stood there, and he found himself roughly handled, Being plagued all
the day long, and chastened every morning; and upon this he was almost ready to
run with the Herd, to throw up all, and cast Dirt in the Face of Godliness, by
laying down this Vile Assertion, Ver. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence: Only God was graciously pleased
seasonably to step in with his preventing Kindness, and to Recover him again,
and bring him to his right Mind, by making him to see and consider the tendency
of such a speech, Ver. 15. If I say I will speak thus, behold I should offend
against the generation of thy Children. By this you see what need good Men have
of a Corrector.

Now in the next place my Business will be to show, That before God has done
with his People, He will so Answer all their Objections, so clear up Matters to
them, so open and explain the abstruse Riddles of his Providence, that they
shall be well settled in their Minds, and both able and ready to profess
themselves very well satisfied about that which God has done; for the Proof
whereof there is no need of carrying you any further than the Text, where the
Psalmist does with all his Heart justify God; I know O Lord that thy Judgments
are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: And when these two
things are once set before the Christian in a just light, namely the Justice or
Righteousness of the Dispensation, and the Faithfulness of God in it, the sweet
Satisfaction of his Soul must necessarily result from it: And there is enough
plainly laid down in the Sacred Scripture to satisfy as to both these, any one
that is acquainted with it, and would be satisfied, and has not a mind to
quarrel: As I shall, through the Divine Assistance and Blessing make to appear,
beginning first with the Righteousness of God's Judgments, or smarting
Dispensations, which, if I be not greatly mistaken, will be evident to him that
will give himself time and leave to Consider these few things.

First, The Absolute Sovereignty and Power of God: This does carry a great deal
of Strength along with it, and is alone sufficient to silence Disputes, and to
make a Man put his Mouth in the Dust, let the thing which God has done be what
it will. It must be granted that all Men are accountable, both those that are
under the Law, and those that made it. The Actions of Men are to be weighed in
a just Balance, and judged of by Reason and according to Law: To affirm any
Man to be altogether above a Law, is to make him more than a Man: But who shall
say, What do thou, to him who has unquestionable right to do whatsoever he
pleases both in Heaven and in Earth? All Persons and Things are in his Hand,
and as much at his dispose as Clay is in the Hand of a Potter, of which he can
make a Vessel of Honor or of Dishonor. As God at his own time called the
World out of Nothing, and established the Earth upon the Floods, so He can at
his own time (as He has of late up and down) cause tremendous and depopulating
Earthquakes, and at last burn it up and all the Works therein. As when He
pleased He did raise Man out of Dust, so when He pleases He can say Unto Dust
thou shall return. At his own Pleasure he sends Laborers to work in the
Vineyard, some at the sixth Hour of the Day, some at the ninth, and some at the
eleventh: So, at his own Pleasure he says to this Man, and to that, and to the
other, I have no more Work for you to do: When He sees good, He Calls such an
one to his Service, he has a Job for him, and when he sees fit, he says, Now
you shall take your rest, thou have been faithful in thy little, now enter into
the joy of thy Lord: All things are and shall be as God will have them; and
Romans 9.20. Who art thou, O Man, that reply against God? or Answerest again,
and Disputest with him? It was in this that the strength of that Argument lay,
which Elihu brought for the quieting of Job's disturbed Spirit, and the putting
a desirable end to that over hot Controversy which had been between him and
his three Friends, when he Interposed, endeavoring to bring things to a good
and amicable Issue, he laid all the weight upon this bottom. Job was at a
perfect loss, his Heart did not reproach him, but all along he had the
Testimony of his Conscience that He was not wicked, but had sincerely and
industriously endeavored to walk in his Integrity, and thereupon he wondered
that such severe Strokes should be Orde'rd out to him: On the other side his
three Friends were Nonplus'd too, and could not tell how to look upon Job as a
godly Man, but an Hypocrite, Unmasked since he was so exercised, humbled and
emptied; Elihu then comes to untie the Knot which had been too hard for them,
and resolved all into the Sovereignty of God, Job 33.12, 13. I will answer
thee, that God is greater than Man, why do thou strive against him? for he
gives no account of any of his Matters: He is too great for that, infinitely
too high to be brought to the Creatures Bar: And when Elihu had prosecuted the
Argument, and with much holy Wisdom managed the part of a Moderator, God
himself seconded him, and went on after the same manner that his Servant had
done, instructed by his Spirit, Job 40.2. Shall he that contendeth with the
Almighty instruct him? he that reproved God, let him answer it: And Ver. 8, 9,
Will thou disanull my Judgment? will thou condemn me that thou may be
righteous? have thou an Arm like God? or can thou thunder with a Voice like
him? and you may see that when this Holy Man Job had heard and been better
informed than before concerning this great Truth, he made haste and delayed not
to resolve upon an humble silence: I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
Ear; i. e. I have formerly had some Notices given me of God, I have had
Teachings from my Parents and Instructors, but now mine Eyes have seen thee; I
have had from thee farther and much clearer Discoveries of thy Self, and Power
and Glory, than ever I had from Man, and now instead of Contending with thee, I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6. and before that in
the 40 Chap. 4, 5. Ver. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee; I will lay
my hand upon my mouth: Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice,
but I will proceed no further; Or, as it is in the Original, I will not add,
not a Word more, not a Syllable more: There has been too much already absurdly
spoken by me against thy Wise and Holy Providence, who have such a Sovereign
Authority, and unlimited universal Right to do whatsoever thou will, for that
the good Man did acknowledge and subscribe to, Job 42.2. I know that thou can
do every thing; nothing that is evil, every thing that is good; every thing
that is not a contradiction in it self nor to him, nothing that is unworthy of
him; every thing that does become him: He can do every thing for us, and every
thing with us that he pleases. God will not do all that he can, but He can do
all that he will: He has Power to do it, yea and he has Authority too, and
therefore every thing that he does must needs be right, because he has a right
to do what he pleases. There is none that can give Law to God, only He is a
Law to himself.

Secondly, Consider God in all those lighter or heavier Afflictions, with which
he does exercise the Children of Men, yea his own Children; he must of
necessity be justified and acknowledged right, because he does not in any of
them exceed the demerit of their sins: He cannot but do right in all things,
that does wrong in nothing. We do indeed meet with this Pathetical Expression
in Job 23.2. Even to day is my Complaint bitter; It is bitter to me; for tho it
gives me Ease, yet it is not what I like; I do not love to be always
Complaining, and I find it is bitter to you, you do not relish it, you do not
love to have your delicate tender Ears thus grated, yet, says he, My stroke is
heavier than my groaning: If these Groans pierce your Ears, there are Sorrows
that wound my Heart; if my Groans be great, my Burden is much greater; if my
Complaint be very bitter, I am sure the blow which God has given me is very
smart: You think my Patience is very small, but you are not sensible of my
Pain, you do not feel that which I feel: But mark this, though Job did say, his
Stroke was greater than his Groans, yet he does not say that it was greater
than his Sins; No, No, the Sins of an Hour deserve all the Afflictions of a
Life, and more too: There is more evil in the least sin than there is in the
greatest Affliction: There is good in Affliction, but none at all in Sin. See
what Zophar said to Job, Job 11.6. Know that God exacts of thee less than thy
Iniquities deserve; God has taken away thy Servants, and thy Cattle, and thy
Children, and suffered Satan to smite thee with Boyls from the Crown of the
Head to the Sole of the Foot, and hither thou art come from great Honor and
Estate to a Dunghill, but as good a Man as thou art and think thy self to be,
thine Iniquities deserve worse than all this. Iniquity for certain deserves
Affliction, but in this Life God never Orders out to any so many and so great
Afflictions as their Iniquities do deserve. The least Mercy is more than all
our Earnings amount to, and the greatest Affliction less than our least Sin
deserves. David complained in Psalm. 38. That God's Arrows stuck fast in him,
and his Hand pressed him sore: But his sins made deeper Wounds in his
Conscience than those Arrows did in his Flesh, and accordingly he cried out in
the 4th. Verse, that his Iniquities were gone over his Head, and as an heavy
burden they were too heavy for him: The Hand of God did sorely press him, but
his Iniquities did press him a great deal worse. The Condition into which
sinning and God provoking Jerusalem had been brought, and in which it lay for
the space of seventy Years, was exceeding deplorable: You must needs account it
so if you ever took Notice how it is set out by the Prophet Jeremiah in his
Lamentations: Yet Holy Ezra humbly and ingenuously acknowledged to the Glory of
God, Ezra 9.13. That he had punished them less than their Iniquities. My
Friends, it is a very proper Course for you, and for others under Affliction,
first to take a serious View of your Sins, looking upon them through the Glass
of Christ's Blood, for so you will see them to be out of measure finful, and
after that turn your Eyes upon your Afflictions, and behold their Face in the
Glass of your sins, and then you will see them to be very moderate, and that
the Divine Contendings with you are in measure. Whosoever he be that does
really see into the Demerit of sin, cannot but presently discover much of the
Mercy which is in the Affliction; and it must be granted that those Afflictions
can be no other than right which are Merciful Afflictions.

Thirdly, Consider God in his depriving his People of their Comforts, and
taking away from them their pleasant things, and how grievous soever this
Dispensation is to them, God cannot but therein be right, because He takes from
them nothing but that which was his own. Job was stripped to his very Skin, and
that too was not left whole; he then looked to what would be at last, that as
he came Naked into the World, so he should go Naked out, but still he did not
quarrel: How came that about? See Job 1.21. The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. God has taken away your Estates,
how came you to have them? were they not of his bestowing? Remember then the
same Hand that has now cast you down, did before lift you up. God has now
Written you Childless, but consider that he made you Parents; it was His Wool
and his Flax, his Gold and his Silver, and your Children were more his than
your own: God has now taken away your Husband, and your Father, and your
Pastor, but He gave him first, and when He gave him you knew He did not give
him to you for ever. You knew when you came together, and while you lived
together, it would be only for a season, and you must part again. When God gave
him to you, it was with the Reservation of his own Interest, which must always
be kept entire. God did not part with, nor in the least diminish his own Right
when he put him into your Hands: He gave him to you, but it was for a time. The
truth is he did only lend him to you, in his Pity and Love he sent him to you,
that he might be an Helper to your Faith and Joy, and promote your Progress in
that way of Truth and Holiness which leads to Heaven and Glory. You knew that
it was God's Intention, his fixed and unalterable Resolution to send for him
home as soon as he had finished that which was given him to do: And what Reason
can be assigned why He or any other Faithful Minister or Godly Christian should
stay here after his Work is done? It would be an irksom and tedious thing for
an holy Soul to live in the World and be Idle, to live and have nothing to do:
Shall I not do with my own as I please? said the Master to that Labourer who
quarreled with him about his Pay: And may not the great God much more say so?
What, shall I ask your leave? Is it fit that I should advise with you what I
shall do with, and how I shall dispose of that which is mine own? Ministers are
Stars, with which I have beautisied the Firmament of the Church, which is a
lower Heaven; these I have made and appointed to give Light unto the World, and
I will set them in what Orb I please, and when they have shined there, and
scattered their benign Influences as long as I see good, I will place them in
another; and when they have done all that which it is my Pleasure should be
done by them, I will take them up to an higher Sphere, even that of Heaven,
where they shall see my Face in Righteousness, Contemplate my Glory, and be
Satisfied with my Love and Likeness. But once more

Fourthly, Let us View those Judgments or Afflictions which God Orders out to
his People in all the Circumstances of them, and we shall find they are right
throughout. Here I might be very large, but will Contract.

His Judgments are right as to the Principle from which God acts in the
Ordering them out, and as to the End at which he aims, and as to the Means of
which he makes Use, and as to the Measure of their Sufferings, how much they
shall bear, and as to the Time how long they shall continue. God is so exact in
these and all other things that can possibly be named, that there is not the
smallest Failure: That which they said of our dear Lord Jesus while he was here
on Earth, we may most truly affirm of God, He has done all things well. Were
the World to begin again, all his Providence should be as they have been,
because nothing in them can be mended. I will give some light touches and short
hints upon those things which I have named, and so pass on.

There are Judgments and dark Providence which God Orders out to Churches and
particular Saints, but the Principle from which in them God acts, is a
Principle of Love, and that is not only right but sweet: He Loves them while he
afflicts them, and he afflicts them because he Loves them, Revel. 3.19. As many
as I love I rebuke and chasten. Possibly his Love is not plainly impressed upon
the Rod, so that thou can run and read it, at present it is concealed, but it
will break out and show it seif in due time. Ephraim was as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the Yoke, impatient and unruly, and as such he was Chastised,
the Whip smarted, and the Goad pricked him, yet he was God's dear Son and
pleasant Child, and his Father resolved to have Mercy upon him. God has taken
this and that from you, Moderate your Grief, for He will not take his loving
kindness from you. The Rod may smart and put you to Pain, but it is the Hand of
Divine Love which lays it on.

As God is right in the Principle from which he acts, so He is in the End at
which he aims, for that is exceeding gracious, Heb. 12.10. He chastens us not
for his own pleasure but for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
holiness: He aims not at the Weakening of our Bodies and Estates, but the
Mending of our Souls; not that we might be made the poorer by it, but the
better: And as this is his End, so it shall be attained, Romans 8.28. We know
that all things shall work together for good to them that love God: They have
done it hitherto, and so they shall for the future: It is clear from constant
Experience: We know it: Good is in the Heart and Purpose of God, and all things
shall be subservient to it, all shall make their Contributions. This late
Providence, the Death of your Worthy Pastor was for good, for certain it was
good for him; to him to live was Christ, and therefore to him to dye must needs
be gain, unless Paul were mistaken, Philip. 1.21. That you will easily grant,
viz. He is no loser by leaving of the World, and of You, because he is gone to
Heaven, He is where He would be, where He knows more, and enjoys more, and is
better than he could here, had he lived Methuselah's Age; and this shall work
for good to you also: But you do not see how that should be. It is very likely
you are dim-sighted, and see but a little way; and let this be enough for you,
(as indeed it is at present) that though you do not see, God does, who is Wiser
than you. And then

God is right as to the Means which he uses: Those that he makes Choice of and
employs, are the best that could be in the Case: Or, if they be not so in
themselves, he both can and will make them so; if they be too Weak, he will
Empower them; and if they have no Virtue of their own, he will Infuse some into
them, as in the Sound of Rams-Horns, before which the Walls of Jericho fell; or
if they be contrary, he will reconcile them. One would think Clay and Spittle
are enough to put out seeing Eyes, but when he pleases he can temper them into
so Sovereign a Remedy as shall give Sight to one that was born Blind.

Further, God is right as to the Degree and Height of the Suffering: When angry
with his Children, He stirs not up all his Wrath; No, No, He Contends with them
in measure: He never makes too great a Rod, nor gives his Patient too large a
Dose, but weighs out every thing, so that there shall not be one Drop of Gall
too much in the Cup: He is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above what you are able: Full out as much, but no more. If need be you are in
heaviness, no more than need, no longer than need. And so

God is right as to the Time; when Trouble shall come, and when it shall go,
when it shall begin, and when cease. He does every thing in Season. In the
Fullness of Time He sent his Son into the World, and so He sends Affliction.
Death comes to reap his Corn when it is White to the Harvest, and He puts every
one of his Children to Bed at their Hour. When his Faithful Servants have
Finished their Work, then he takes them to their Rest, and lays them at perfect
Ease in the Bosom of Abraham, or rather his own. They shall not outlive it,
nor shall they dye before it is done. I hope I have said enough to satisfy you
about the Perfect Righteousness of God in his Judgments, and that may well
silence you.

There is another thing in the Text which this Holy Man says He did know, and
that is, the Faithfulness of God in afflicting him. And if the other does
silence, this may well quiet and delight the Afflicted Saint: And truly we have
all of us reason to be satisfied about this, that though God often is an
Afflicting God, yet He always is a Faithful God, and it is in his Faithfulness
that he does Order out Afflictions to them. Now this will appear if you
Consider these two things, God is Faithful to his Covenant, and to his Peoples
Interest.

First, In afflictive Providence God is Faithful to his own Covenant: Instead
of running Cross to it, he acts in a Wise Pursuance of it. He never runs Cross
to it, for while the Saints are here, the Covenant does not put any of them out
of the reach of Afflictions, Galat. 4.1. The Heir as long as he is a Child
differs nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all; but may have as
course Fare and as hard Usage; so may one of those that are Heirs of God and
Glory. Indeed we are assured, there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus: And that Security is matter of great Joy; but though by laying hold
upon Christ and the Covenant they are free from Condemnation, yet they may
expect Probations whenever God please, and Correction when they deserve and
need it. As we before intimated, God has reserved unto himself a Liberty and
Power of Visiting his Children's Iniquities with the Rod, and their
Transgressions with Stripes.

But not running Cross to the Covenant is not all, it is too little, for in
afflictive Providence upon good Men, God acts in pursuance of his Covenant,
for by that he stands Obliged to be not only a Sun to them for refreshing, and
a Shield for defense; not only to give them Grace in the way, and Glory in the
Country, but also to withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly: Now
Reason and Experience tell us that Physic is good, wholesome and necessary,
sometimes as well as Food; and Purges, though strong, and make Heart-sick, are
good as well as Cordials, and bitter things are good as well as sweet, Psalm.
119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted: Many an holy and gracious
Person cannot say, It is good for me that I am afflicted. Poor Creature, his
Spirit is so disordered by the bitterness of the Affliction, that he cannot at
present taste the sweetness of that good it does him, but sooner or later every
such an one shall say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. While God
is Plowing upon their Backs, and making long his Furrows, they conclude it is
very strange Work, but when they once come to reap the Harvest, they shall most
freely, and with thankfulness acknowledge to his Glory, that it was very good
Work.

Secondly, In afflictive Providence God is most true and faithful to his
Peoples Interest: Though they be and often are Sufferers, yet it is to be
Charged upon themselves, and not upon God, if they be losers: It is his
gracious Will that they should not lose but gain by their Sufferings, and that
their Gains should not only compensate and equal their Losses, but likewise
much exceed them: From the Thorns that prick and wound them, and let out some
of their Blood, they shall gather the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, Heb.
12.11. When the Lord leads his People into a Waste and howling Wilderness, he
makes for them a right way, though there was none before; possibly it is steep,
ruggid and troublesome, however it is right; and walking in it undefiled, they
shall be brought to a pleasaut Place, a good Land, a City of Habitations. When
God is stripping you of this and that, and the other Delight, He is thereby
fitting you for a more Noble Enjoyment, a more Valuable Good, yea, for those
Blessings which run parallel with the Line of Eternity. This is all the Fruit
to take away your sin, and to prepare you for a more intimate Communion with
him here, and a plenary endless Fruition of him in the other World, 1 Cor.
3.22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World,
or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours: O the
Riches of a Believer! all his, Ministers, Ordinances, Providence, those that
look pleasantly upon you, and those too that have a terrible Aspect, all are
yours, your Friends, your Servants, all employed for the promoting of your
Holiness, and thereby your Happiness; the good Man in the 73d. Psalm, was
pained, grieved, and pricked in his reins, but upon his going into the
Sanctuary, and Consulting with the Divine Oracles, his Pains abated and went
off, so that He quickly sound all well; 23, 24. Nevertheless I am continnally
with thee; and though evil be with me, I will not fear it so long as I am with
thee; thou hold me by my right hand, whereby I am safe from sinking into
utter ruin; thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and so whatever I may lose
by the way, I shall not be quite lost my self; and afterward receive me unto
glory, and if thou receive me, its no matter who rejects me, and however things
go with me at the present, I am sure they will be perfectly well at last; For
the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. No, not to be mentioned the same day,
because these are but light Afflictions, and short, but for a moment, and yet
they work for real Saints a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Thus you have seen that all God's Judgments are right, wherefore he deserves to
be justified, and that he is Faithful in Afflicting his Children, therefore it
becomes them to be satisfied: He will Correct them, that he may not Lose them;
He will Judge them, that he may not Condemn them with the World. We have
finished the Doctrinal part, and shall now proceed to the Use, which will be by
way of Exhortation, dividing it self into two Branches.

USE.
Exhortation first: I do Counsel and beseech you all to rest satisfied with and
subscribe to the Righteousness of God in his Judgments that are upon you, and
his Faithfulness in those Afflictions which which he has been pleased to
exercise you: Let him be justified when he Chides and Frowns, let him be
Cleared when he Judges. Do this now with reference to that smarting Stroke
which was lately given you, and proved the sad Occasion of the present
Discourse, and do the same too with reference to any other Rebuke and Blast of
Providence which is upon you: And it is according to the Will of God and the
Practice of his People, for you to make your satisfaction known. Let it appear,
and that by such things as these:

First, By Ceasing and putting an end to all Disputes: Stop the Mouth of
Contradiction, and let your Souls keep Silence unto God, let there be no rising
of Heart against God, no Objecting against any thing that He has done, no
finding of Fault. Know, O Man, who and whatsoever thou art, however
distinguished from thy Neighbors, and dignified above them, the great God is
above thy Match, and by no means to be Contended with; He gives no Account of
his Matters, and therefore not to be summoned to the Creatures-Bar: He himself
is the Supreme Judge, by whom all are to be Sentenced as to their Eternal
State, and from whom there lies no Appeal, and therefore be not you so bold as
to sit Judges upon him or any of his Providence. Remember David's Carriage
when almost Consumed by the Blow of God's Hand, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it. And look upon the Man bearing the
Yoke in his Youth, and Consider how he is described in the 3 Lament. 28, 29. He
sits alone and keeps silence, and puts his Mouth in the dust if so be there may
be hope, and gives his Cheek to him that smites him. Certainly, An humble
Submission and patient Silence do best become the greatest and most Holy
Persons under the most severe Chastenings. Think with your selves what Color
of Reason you can possibly have for Objecting against that which is every way
right. Why should you go about to find a Fault where there is none, especially
when every one of you have above a thousand.

Secondly, Quarrel your selves for former Quarrelings of God, and unreasonable
dislikes of his Dispensations; thus it was with Holy Job, though for a time he
would maintain his own ways before God, and thought he had enough to say, Job
23.3, 4. O that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his
Seat, I would order my Cause before him, and fill my Mouth with Arguments; but
he was of another mind when he was brought forth into a clearer light, then he
took God's part against himself, and that in the same words which God had used
with a very little Variation, Job 42.3. Who is he that hides Counsel without
Knowledge, therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful
for me, which I knew not, which was an humble acknowledgment both of his
Ignorance, and of his Folly in meddling with what was above him. The like we
find in Asaph, he being in anguish of Spirit, burdened with a continued Series
of Affliction, and heated with Temptations, spoke unadvisedly with his Lips, he
threw dirt in the Face of Religion and Godliness, by saying, He had cleansed
his Heart in vain, and washed his Hands in Innocence: But when that Violent
Paroxism was over, and being at leisure from his Passion, he came to make a due
reflection upon what he had said, he fell upon himself with a just and holy
Indignation, and of his own accord cried out, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee: He did not only eat up his own words,
which he found exceeding bitter to him, but by spitting in his own Face he gave
Glory to God.

Thirdly, Submit and yield to God for the future, and do it cheerfully, lie at
his Foot, put your selves and your all into his Hand, and leave it to him to
take his own way with you, and to use his own Method. Some of the Jewish
Writers say that David did utter these Words in the Text, when he was forced to
leave his Palace, and to flee before the Face of his unnatural and rebellious
Son Absalom, in danger of losing both his Kingdom and Life. And if so, then
being so sweetly and fully satisfied about the Righteousness and Faithfulness
of God in his dealings with him, you may see how readily he resigns himself to
the disposal of God, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. The King said unto Zadok, carry back the
Ark of God into the City, if I shall find Favor in the Eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation: But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems
good unto him. If my God have no Pleasure in me, I will take Pleasure in
nothing; if he will lay me aside, I will be content; if he will cut me off, I
will lay my Head upon the Block: God shall Order, and I will accept; His Will
shall be the Ruling Will, and mine the Complying Will. Let him as he pleases
Carve out my Condition, and I will take it as it comes: If I must no longer
wear a Crown, then I will take up a Cross. And the Church was much in the same
frame when fallen and sitting in darkness, Micah 7.9. I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, take all patiently, and accept the Punishment of mine
Iniquity, for I have sinned against him, therefore though the Rod smart I will
Kiss it.

Lastly, Be sure to justify God; always give the Cause on his side, and speak
honorably of him and all that he does. God is always just, and in every thing;
just in his Acts of Mercy and richest Grace, Romans 3.26. He is just when he is
the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: Just in all the Afflictions of
this Life, and so he is in the Miseries of the Damned in the next, Romans 2.5.
The very day of Wrath (though dark and gloomy) will carry along with it
sufficient light to reveal and manifest the righteous Judgment of God;
therefore in the forenamed instance of Job we observed that after Elihu had
performed his part, and God had seconded him, that good Man submitted, and
spoke God's own Language, thereby showing his being Convinced that what he had
said before was according to the dictates of his own foolish and corrupt Heart,
now he would speak as God speaks, whom he knew to be Wisdom it self, and Truth
it self, and Goodness it self. It is not enough for us not to speak against
God, we must be speaking for him, though he needs it not. None shall ever have
Cause to repent of Commending God, because we can never rise too high in his
Commendations, we can never speak too much of him, nor too well. Our Tongues
are never so much our Glory as when employed in showing forth his Glory. He
does deserve more than our dearest Love, and our highest Praises. The day will
come in which the Vail shall be taken off from the Face of Providence, and when
we come to see things as indeed they are, we shall be perfectly reconciled to
them, sinding them to have been at Peace with us; and what we are now too apt
to quarrel, we shall then admire. But I pass on to the

Second Exhortation, And I desire you to account it your Duty not only to be
satisfied about God's dealings with you, that all his Judgments are right, and
that there is his Truth and Faithfulness in those Afflictions with which he
exercises you, but also to see carefully to it, that your Spirits and
Carriages, your Hearts and Affections be right too: That was a severe Rebuke
which God gave to Eliphaz, and spoke his just resentment and high displeasure,
Job 42.7. The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, my Wrath is kindled against
thee and thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has. Know and Consider this, it will be to you when under
dark Dispensations, both an Honor and Comfort, that your Thoughts of God are
right, the Frame and Temper of your Hearts right, and your Deportment and
Behavior right. When all is as it should be, abating for Humane Infirmities,
which you cannot avoid, and which God will graciously bear with, remembering
your Frame, and considering you are but Dust: To this Purpose I shall give you
the following Counsels, desiring you to put them in Practice.

First, Be sensible of that which God has done to you: He loves to be taken
Notice of, and would not have his People careless or stupid, but hear the Rod,
and who has appointed it: And his Anger comes up into his Face, when Men do
not Observe his Works, nor regard the Operation of his Hands. Withal it is a
sad Omen, and certain Presage of some impending and approaching Judgment, when
Godly Ministers and Christians are taken away, but there is a senselesness upon
the Spirits of those which are left behind, Isaiah 57.1. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful Men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come: They
neither mind who is gone, nor what is to come. Here is an excellent Person
gone, a Man of whom the World was not worthy, and there are doubtless many to
be found among us that do not lay such a Providence to Heart. He is dead; but
what of that; no body shall live always: He is gone; even farewell He, we could
spare more of them. They did never Value the Life and Labors of such a Man,
nor are they Concerned at his Death. But I do advise every one of you, and
others also, to beware of such a Spirit as this. We find in the Scriptures that
ordinarily when the Saints dyed, there was great Lamentation because thereof.
When good old Jacob dyed, the very Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten
days, Genesis 50.3. When Moses dyed, the Children of Israel wept for him in the
Plains of Moab thirty days, Deuteronomy. 34.8. When Stephen had been Stoned to Death,
Devout Men carried him to his Burial, and made great Lamentation, Acts 8.2. But
though Joshua had been an excellent Man, true to his trust, and resolved for
God, and his Service and Honor, though he had gone before them as their Prince
and Leader, and given them the Possession of the Land of Canaan, yet when he
dyed, we do not read of one Tear that was shed over him, nor of one Groan nor
Sigh that was poured out upon him: And if you do but Consult the History, you
will see that not long after the Wrath of God brake in upon that People.

We are not Ignorant that there are those among us, that are glad at Heart when
such Men as He are taken away. He was a Dissenter, say they, and a Schismatic,
(which is more than they can prove) and such as he they look upon as the
troublers of Israel, and disturbers of the Peace, the Burdens and Pests of the
places in which they live. These are the Men that stand in their light, and
would stop them in their full career of Profaneness, and they hate them because
they cannot away with that Reformation which these men preach up, and would
fain promote and perfect; and upon this account these wretches, when such men
dye, will ring a Peal instead of a Knell, and when they are buried, could sind
in their Hearts to leap and dance upon their Graves. Well, since it is so, God
will take these men away, and give unto those Enemies their desire; they shall
be troubled with them no longer: He knows of another place, and better, where
these his Servants will be welcome: There are myriads of Angels and Saints in
Heaven that will rejoice in their Company; but what will follow hereupon? These
men's departure from hence is no other than a making of way for some tremendous
Judgment to come in their room. The Inhabitants of Sodom were as much vexed
with Righteous Lot for his preciseness, as he was with them for their
profaneness and detestable abominations, and they had a great mind to be rid of
him. Well, says God, you shall see two Angels come from Heaven to send him out
of Sodom. He lingered a while, but at length he goes, and now they hoped a good
Wind would blow after him, and they should have fair Weather too, and they had
it, but it did not last long; the Sun rose gloriously upon them, but it soon
sat in a dark Cloud, in a Bed of Sorrow, Genesis 19.24, 25. When Lot entered into
Zoar, the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord
out of Heaven: And he overthrew those Cities, and all the plain, and all the
Inhabitants of those Cities, and that which grew upon the ground. I will add
but one Instance more, which single and alone will be sufficient evidence: Our
Lord and Savior came to his own, but his own received him not, seeing in him
no jorm nor comeliness for which he should be desired. They looked on him as
the only Person that stood between them and their prosperity, and would, if
tolerated, bring a storm upon them, if they should suffer him to live and go
on, the Romans would come and destroy their City, whereupon they would have
Barabbas a Thief released, and Jesus crucified; well, what followed, their fear
did not indeed enter at that door, but it came in at another, when the Messiah
was cut off, the Romans came, their Temple was burnt, their City turned into a
ruinous heap, and the Inhabitants were destroyed with a most dreadful
destruction.

Know, my Friends, the Saints and Servants of God are the Pillars of the Earth,
the Bail to the World, that shall continue no longer than till God has
finished his Number, called his Elect, and prepared his called Ones for Glory,
The World is no more than a Stage upon which he acts his great and gracious
design concerning those whom he has chosen from among the rest of Mankind, and
set apart for himself, and when that is thoroughly accomplished, the stage shall
be taken down. A Criminal Woman for some Villainy committed by her is condemned
to dye, but being found with Child, she is reprieved till she has brought
forth, and then sent to the Gallows, and Executed. So this World which lies in
Wickedness is condemned to the Fire, once it was drowned by a Deluge, but not
washed from its filth; therefore its end is to be burned, only it is continued
till all the Children of God be brought forth: Hereupon my Counsel is, that all
who have a Kindness for England, or a love for themselves, would take notice of
such dispensations, and lay them to their Hearts.

And in particular, as to this Providence which has been ordered out to you
who are the Members of this Congregation, I do heartily commend to you a
serious reflection upon it, together with a deep and afflicting sense of the
hand of God therein. God has been pleased to take away from you your Excellent
Pastor, that Good Shepherd who led you into green Pastures, and by the Waters
of stillness, and who (as it is said of David in the 78 Psalm 72.) fed you
according to the integrity of his heart, and guided you by the skilfulness of
his hands. I need not perfume his Name, which is a precious Ointment, nor spend
any of the little time (which is left) in commending to you him who was so well
known, and so exceeding dear, therefore I will only say this in short: He was a
very gracious and holy Man, I doubt not to say, an Israelite indeed, greatly
set for the Interest and Honor of God, and much in Communion with him. He had
received a plentiful Unction from the Holy One, and was rich in Spirituals; and
indeed in all my Converses with him, I found him to be of a sweet, affable and
loving Temper, by means whereof his Grace was the more taking, being like a
Diamond set in Gold. He had good Natural parts, which were cultivated and
improved by acquired Learning. He had found mercy to be faithful, having been
so all along to his great Lord and Master, his Cause and Interest, standing his
ground like a Rock unshaken in the days of soarest and most violent Temptation;
nor would he touch (tho he saw others swallow down) those things which his
Conscience told him would prove defiling to himself, or snares and
stumbling blocks unto others; yet was he a Man of peace, he would study it,
advise it, and pray for it, and follow it with all men, so far as ever he could
go without forsaking of Truth and Holiness, that he was bound to be dear over;
while he was true to his Principles, and held on his way, he was no Incendiary.
He was a very modest Person, clothed with Humility, as his upper Garment in
which he walked up and down, I never saw him without it. You know full well,
and are ready to testify, that he was an industrious painful Labourerer in
God's Vineyard; and as he labored, so he longed for the Life, Salvation and
Spiritual Progress of his Hearers, traveling in birth to see Christ formed in
them. He was a Workman that needed not to be ashamed, his Pulpit was a witness
to his pains with you, and his Chamber to his Prayers for you, in the former he
wrestled with you, and in the latter with God on you behalf: And as he preached
so he walked, commending his Doctrine by his practice; was he an Angel to and
in the Church? he was a Saint in the street, being in his Conversation a
singular Ornament to the Gospel, and an Excellent Pattern to them that knew
him: But he is gone, here you shall see his Face no more, and hear his Voice no
more. Having finished that Work which his great Lord and Master had given him
to do, he was by that grim Messenger Death sent for, and carried to his last
and everlasting Home, the Presence Chamber of God, the habitation of his
Holiness and Glory, where he has received that Crown of Righteousness which
was laid up for him. It is well with him, very well, Eternally well, so well
that he would not have it better, for he has fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for
evermore at the right hand of God; he is at rest in the Bosom of his Lord,
being satisfied with his likeness, and taking his fill of Love: Only his Body
lies sleeping in its Bed of dust, but rests in hope of a comfortable awaking,
and blessed Resurrection, when it shall stand up from the dead, shake off its
dust, arise and shine, being made like unto Christ's most glorious Body, no
longer a clog and impediment to the Soul, but an Help-meet, fit to accompany it
in all its great and blessed Employments and Operations. The loss is yours, and
indeed it is a great one, it becomes you to be intimately sensible of it, and
to bewail it. Weep not for him, but for your selves, and for your Children.

Secondly, Learn from hence one singular piece of Wisdom and good Husbandry, in
Improving your faithful Ministers, and others, the precious Saints of God,
while you have them among you. Blessed be God, tho many are called up to a
better State, yet there are many left behind, but they are only sojourners here
for a short season, the time will come when they must be gone too, the Number
of their days is with God, who has appointed and fixed those bounds which
they cannot pass. As for the Fathers where are they, and do the Prophets live
for ever? No, no, Experience tells you that they do not; and they themselves
are ready to tell you that they would not: And indeed it is a thousand pities
that they should, as matters do now stand. It is pity they should always carry
about them a Body of death, which is worse than Death it self, that they should
be always groaning under Corruptions, and conflicting with Temptations. What!
always upon hot and hard service, and never have the Victory and Triumph? It
is pity they should always live in a dirty stinking World, in an ungrateful
and malicious World. It shall not be, no, it shall not be; God has graciously
provided a better Place for them, and better Company, and incomparably better
Things than ever they could have met with here. Well, do you think of this
feriously, frequently, and manage your selves accordingly. Your late Pastor was
snatched away from you on a fudden, as if Heaven had been longing for him, and
in a kind of Haste to have him there; and it may be quickly so with reference
to others as well as to him, none has a Lease of his Life.

And be not offended, if I propound one Question to you, which is this: Does it
not this day wound some of your spirits to think, your Minister is gone, and
you have not Improved him as you might and ought to have done? If a Friend lend
you an excellent Book for a Week or Month, will you let it lie by on a Shelf,
or throw it into a Corner, and not read it. God lends you Faithful Ministers,
gracious Friends and Relations, that you may get good by them, and be the
better for them; if you will not make use of them, their very remembrance will
be a terrible sting in your Consciences. Let me commend to you the Wisdom and
Practice of Elisha, he had an inkling of his Masters leaving him, and that more
than once, 2 Kings 2. The Sons of the Prophets that were at Bethel said unto
him, Know thou that the Lord will take away thy Master from thy head to day?
And so again said the Sons of the Prophets that were at Jericho. Well, his
Master carried as if he had a Mind to shake him off; three times he would have
had him staid behind, Tarry here, I pray thee, for the Lord has sent me to
Bethel, v. 2. and so again v. 4. and yet again v. 6. but all would not prevail,
still Elisha answered, As the Lord lives, and as thy Soul lives, I will not
leave thee: But he kept with him, and his Eye fixed upon him, and by that means
obtained a double portion of his Spirit. We need not a Spirit of Prophecy to
let us understand that we shall be taken from one another. The Scripture
assures us, that it is appointed for all Men once to to dye, and there is never
a pore in our Body but what may serve as a door, little indeed, but wide enough
to let Life out, and Death in; therefore while you have those with you by whom
you may get good for your Souls, make all the advantage of them that you can.
Do thus with your Fellow Christians, your Godly Neighbors and Acquaintance,
those with whom you walk in an holy Communion, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. You are all of a Calling, dealing with and for Heaven, now when
Tradesmen meet together, what do they discourse of but their Calling, Merchants
of their Ships, Shop keepers of the price of their Commodities? Oh that you
would do the same as to your excellent and holy Calling! Oh that Discourses
that tend to edification may be more frequent and familiar at your Tables and
all your meetings! this would not hinder and obstruct your worldly Affairs, but
sanctify and sweeten them: Our great and gracious Lord has set us a Pattern.
After his Resurrection he continued with his Apostles forty days, of which he
spent none in idleness and froth, but all in speaking of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. and so likewise do the same with your faithful
Ministers, attend their Ministry, hearken to their Doctrine, follow their holy
Counsels, walk in their light, and do not grieve their Hearts by your slights,
neglects and divisions, but obey them that have the Rule over you, knowing they
watch for your Souls, and show your Respect and Kindness to them now if ever
you would do it, yet a little while and you shall not have the Privilege of
doing it. In Heaven they will not need your Countenance and your Prayers, and
they will be above your Purses. Do what you can now, knowing it is the best and
most fruitful Soil you can find to sow upon. Puul turned over to God that debt
which he owed to Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1.16. The Lord give mercy unto the house
of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my Chain: And
Ver. 18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that
day: And without peradventure God did most readily accept the Bill, and will be
sure to pay it with a very great increase.

Thirdly, Instead of murmuring that God has taken him from you, be you
thankful, and with your Hearts bless his Name that ever he brought him to you:
For certain God had some Work for him to do in the City, and therefore he
fetched him hither: 'Till then he lived at a distance, and this place was quite
out of his Road: And Oh! what a singular Mercy was it, that God should raise a
Storm in the Country, and thereby drive him to this place, that so he might
find thee out, and deliver a Message from the great God to thee, and from the
Prince and Fountain of Life speak a Word of Life to thy Soul, who to that very
day wast a poor, ignorant, lost, filthy, vile Creature, altogether dead in
trespasses and sins! Prithee, go thy way admiring rich and free Grace, and show
the tender Bowels of a Christian in pitying and bewailing those poor
Creatures, thy ignorant and graceless Neighbors, who came to the same
Congregation with thee, sat in the same feat with thee, and had the same Means
with thee, but got no good at all, remaining in the same Condition in which
they were before, Vassals of Sin and Satan, in the gall of bitterness and bond
of iniquity: Thou have been savingly enlightened, when others are still
unacquainted with God and the things of God; thou have turned thy back upon thy
wicked Associates and Courses of Debauchery, but others are the Companions of
Fools still, and march on to Hell as if they were in Post-haste, Swearing and
Cursing, being Drunk and Unclean still. Do thou, I say, Bless God for it, and
be exceeding thankful, that his Servant lived 'till he had wrought savingly
upon thy Soul, and must not himself go to Heaven before he had brought thee to
God.

Fourthly, Remember the precious Truths which be Preached to you, and often
call to mind those holy Counsels that He gave you: This is a great Duty bound
upon you by Scripture-precept, Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have the Rule
over you, who have Preached to you the word of God, whose Faith follow,
considering the end of their Conversation: Where the Apostle did not speak only
of those that were present, but also of them that were gone. Now, pray, do so;
Remember him, and the gracious Speeches you have heard from him, and the
wholesome Advice you have received from him, and the blessed Truths that have
been delivered by him, and hold them fast; and if any shall now come, and bring
with him another Gospel than that ye have received, entertain him not, listen
not to him, let him be accursed, Galat. 1. There are many fall Prophets gone
forth into the World, and into this Nation and City, yea, there are many
Antichrists, whereby we know this is the last time, and it is like there will
be some plucking and tugging at your Faith. When an Orthodox, Gracious and
Peaceable Minister is dead, then is the Devil busy, thinking it a fit
Opportunity for him and his Servants to sow his Seed and put off his Wares;
that is a time for Men of dividing Principles to infuse and spread their
wretched Notions, and disturb the Peace of Churches. If you love your selves,
and as you will Answer it another day, do you avoid them, and take heed you do
not drink in any unsound Opinions, any rotten and exploded Errors, an Old
Falsehood under the Notion of a New Light, and to this end bear upon your
thoughts the Text last mentioned, which in my Judgment furnishes us with a
Reason why so many are Fly-blown in their Heads, and led into Error in these
seducing times, viz. They do not remember them that have the Rule over them,
they do not Observe their Faith, nor the End of their Conversation: For many
though Convinced of the Truth of those Doctrines which they Preached, and
Eyewitnesses of their Conversations, that they were Holy, Exemplary, and
according to the Rule of the Gospel, yet they will most absurdly question what
such Pastors did deliver, and believe a Stranger and follow him: Whereas, whom
should you Credit? whom have you Reason and Encouragement to follow but him who
made it his Business to get to Heaven himself, and to show you the right way,
that He might meet you there, and have you for his Crown and Joy? You have
found him faithful to God and to You, why then should you not continue steadfast
in, and immovable from those holy Truths which he has delivered to you, rather
than give an Ear to them whom you know not from whence they came, nor what
Spirit they are of?

Fifthly, Stand in the gap, doing what in you lies that this Breach, this great
Breach which has been made upon you, may be made up again, and that with all
convenient speed: You that have a sincere Love to the Interest of Christ and
the Everlasting Gospel, and a real Kindness to the Church of which you are
Members, lay out your selves to such a purpose, and that to the utmost. You
that have the Spirit of Grace and Supplication poured out upon you, and
dwelling in you, that have Acquaintance with God, and an Interest at the Throne
of Grace, now do you improve that Interest, try what you can do, and beg of
God, beg earnestly that he would be graciously pleased to set up a burning and
shineing Light in this Candlestick, and to provide for you such a Workman as is
both-skilfull and faithful, that needs not to be ashamed, and that will
build proper Materials, not Wood, and Hay, and Stubble, but Gold and Silver,
and precious Stones, upon that good Foundation, which this holy Man of God, now
with God, has laid among you.

And let special Care be taken that there be no unbrotherly and unbecoming
Divisions among you, but avoid them, delight not in Breaches, lest the Devil
enter in by them, but keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and be
of one mind, of one accord, that so the precious Gospel may not suffer by your
means, for if it does, verily you shall pay for it. Advise together, and manage
all your Meetings and Consultations calmly, with Wisdom and Meekness, and
Brotherly Love: And if you shall see Occasion of doing so, Advise also with
others, who will be cheerfully willing to afford you all the Assistance that
they can. But above all, be sure to Advise with God, and Wrestle mightily with
him, who is the best Counselor, and holds all the Stars in his right hand. Go,
go to Heaven for a Pastor, and beg of the Lord who knovveth the Abilities and
the Hearts of all Men, that He would Choose for you, and send One that will be
indeed a Blessing. Let me tell you this, when a godly able Minister dies, the
People who have lost him, have very little Reason to expect that God will send
them another, 'till they have been earnest and importunate in seeking One, that
is, 'till they have Prayed him in, and Sighed him in, and Wept him in. And I
beseech you, look to it that you be not misguided by any bad Counselor, and
that no fordid sinister End, no petty private particular Interest do betray you
into the Hands of an unfit Person, one that is Corrupt in Judgment, tainted
with Erroneous Principles, who will endeavor to Poison you; or one that is of
a Factious Spirit, who will foment and keep up, and help to increase those
differences, the laying and composing of which does deserve and call for the
utmost Endeavors of those that fear God and bear good Will to Sion. That which
was the Prayer of Moses for Israel, is and shall be mine for you, Numbers
22.16, 17. Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over
this Congregation, that may go out before you, and that may go in before you,
that may lead you out, and that may bring you in, that this Congregation of the
Lord may not be as Sheep without a Shepherd. The good Lord give you a Man after
his own Heart!

You will think it now high time for me to shut up this Discourse, and I think
so too You, I suppose, will not; sure I am, you have no reason to judge me
uncharitable, if I look upon this Congregation as being no better than mine own
and others. Surely there are some here, in whom to this day Satan has his
Seat, while in others of you Christ has Erected his Throne. Surely this is not
a Floor in which there is nothing but Wheat. For mine own part, I do desire to
be a Pastor to such a Church, as all the Members of it are Saints; for as I
greatly love pure Ordinances, so an Holy Communion, but I would not desire to
be a Preacher to such a Congregation in which there are none but Saints,
because, though Edifying Work be very good, and great, and excellent, and
accordingly to be attended to, yet Converting Work is the main and principal
Work of the Gospel Ministry: Thus our Lord Jesus spoke to Paul, Acts 26.17, 18.
I send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God: Therefore, before we part, I
would leave something among you, and with those of you who are as yet in an
unregenerate state, that through the Blessing of God accompanying it, it may do
them good.

You that have sat under the Ministry of this Holy Man, and have not had your
Hearts pierced with it, nor your Consciences awakened, but have all this while
been in a profound, yea dead Sleep: Or, it may be, you have been awakened, and
sometimes scared and frighted, (as I doubt not but you will own him to have
been a spiritual and lively Preacher) and for a while you have been greatly
concerned, and started up, but the Pang went over, and you even laid your Head
down again upon the Pillow of Carnal Security, and at this day are as fast
asleep in your Sins as He is in his Grave. I know you not, but if you know your
selves I will say this to you; Fall down upon your Knees, and humble your
selves greatly before God, and admire his Patience and Goodness, giving to him
the Glory of it. O what a Mercy is it, that your Minister is gone, who was fit
for Heaven, and that you are yet here who have been all your days
industriously fitting your selves for Hell! Do you Bless God with your Souls,
and all that is within you, that you are yet alive in that very place where you
have squandred away so many precious Seasons, golden Opportunities, withstood
so many loud and earnest Calls, where you have despised and slighted so many
free Offers of Grace, and been altogether barren and unfruitful under such
Beams of Gospel Light, and Dews of Heavenly Doctrine. And when you are at home,
retire into your Chamber or some private place, and beg of God, yea most
heartily beg, that the Death of this holy Man may go near to you, and that it
may make that deep impression upon you, and prosper to the doing of that good
Work in your Souls which was not done by all the Sermons which you heard from
him. Oh that he might prove another Samson, triumphing over the Enemies of God
and Souls, killing more Sins among you and in you by his Death, than he did by
his Preaching all his Life.

Know it will be a most blessed Day, I mean the last and great Day, that of the
Resurrection, and it will be at that Day a most Comfortable Meeting that He and
you will have, if then he shall find those Gracious whom he left Wicked and
Profane; if he shall find them in Christ, and alive unto God, whom he left dead
in Trespasses and Sins; if at the Resurrection He shall find them to have been
renewed in the spirits of their minds, whom, when he went out of the World, he
left Carnal, and sold under sin.

But if at that Day he shall find you the very same that at his Death he left
you, in a Christless and Graceless State, know and tremble at the Thoughts of
it, that Prophet, that Man of God will stand forth as a Witness against you.
Truly, it would prove some piece of Happiness to lost and ruined Sinners in
Hell, some alleviation of their Sorrow, and abatement of their Torment there,
if they could but quite forget there had ever been a Prophet among them, upon
that account they would lie at more ease than they are like now to do: Every
reflection you make, every time that you shall think what a Minister you had,
what Preaching you sat under, what Means you enjoyed, it will be as a Sword in
your Bones, and as Oil to your Flames.

Let me but add this one thing more, and with that I will put a Period to this
Discourse. If you will not be reclaimed and reformed, but go on in the
frowardness of your Hearts, and in crooked ways with the Workers of Iniquity,
He that Prayed for your Conversion and Salvation, and Preached to you the great
things of the Law, and the precious things of the Gospel; in a word, He that
Mourned for you, and Wept over you, because you had sinned and had not
repented, must at the last day, and will look cheerfully, and be perfectly
pleased when he shall with Christ the Judge Vote your Damnation. Be persuaded
to read over, and seriously think upon that place, 2 Corinthians. 2.14, etc. Now
thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ; for we are
unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that
perish; to the one we are the savor of death unto death, to the other the
savor of life unto life: For Ministers to be unto their Hearers the savor of
Life unto Life, is very sweet, and highly desirable, but it is exceeding
dreadful for them to be unto any of them the savor of Death unto Death,
however they must be both; and the Apostle says, in this we triumph: But how,
O holy Paul, can thou find in thy Heart to do this? Where are the Soundings
of thy Bowels? What! triumph at the sight of poor Creatures going down to Hell!
Any one will conclude that Parent has no Natural Affection, does not love his
Child, who goes leaping and dancing while he follows it to the Grave or to the
Gallows: But if you do observe that which follows in the 17th. Verse, you
will be easily reconciled to the Apostle; For we are not as many, which corrupt
or deal deceitfully with the Word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God speak we in Christ. When Paul and other godly Ministers
triumph over their lost and damned Hearers, they do it not so much because they
see them miserable, as because they have the Testimony of their own
Consciences; these poor Creatures are lost, but not through any Fault of mine,
they go to Hell, but God knows I did not send them thither; I Preached to
them, and, God is my Witness, I did it in Sincerity.

FINIS.

