To the meek and open hearted Lambs, and Flock of Heaven, in meekness of Love,
with Greetings of Peace from the Seat of Infinite Mercy; tendered unto, and
sent to be read among them all, who live in the humble State.
THere was a time of blackness and darkness which covered all flesh, and the
guilt of sin was upon all consciences; and hardness of heart possessed every
vessel, and the minds of all was a stray from God, and their souls in the bonds
of iniquity, in the day when none was able to deliver his brother, O who can
utter the distress and the languishing state, which the sheep then scattered
were in, O the secret groans of the outcasts of Israel which God has now
gathered, why should it be forgotten, who could pluck their feet then out of
the snare, or deliver their soul from death; had not the Lord in mercy looked
down from Heaven, surely many had sunk in the pit of misery, and never come to
see the light of the morning, for the which the bowels of the humble yearned in
secret, and the sights were deep in the sollitary place.

And then did the Lord in the bowels of his mercy let open his ear, and for
his own names sake had regard unto the complaint of the poor and needy, and he
caused light to break out of darkness, and truth to spring from its secret
hidden place, and life to grow up in the midst of death, and to break through
the powers of darkness, and the Lord in his power gave utterance to his
servants and messengers, and then were the words of his truth as food to the
hungry, and with much gladness of heart was the sound of the way of life by
many received; then did love begin to arise in the heart, and a tenderness in
the bowels, and a willingness in the mind, and then was a joy like the joy of
harvest among the people, and many began to invite one another, saying come and
we will return to the Lord, and we will resolve to walk in his paths for ever,
then was the voice of thanksgiving among the People, and the ways of the Lord
became more delightsome then Gold, and the footsteps of righteousness more
pleasant than all the Treasure in the world. O it even melts the heart to
remember the days that are past, and to consider the infinite goodness of him
that is the God of the poor and needy, then were many made willing to run and
to leave their filthy garments behind them, even before they well knew how to
do it, O how loathsome was sin in that day, and how wearisome was the land of
darkness, and how desirable even beyond expression, was the unsatisfied
thirsting soul after the presence of God: could the treasure of the earth then
have given peace? or could Silver have satisfied the hungry heart? or could the
choysest love of the most nearest relations have quenched the thirst of the
perched ground? Surely none but the Lord was then desired, yea other lovers
became as loathsome, and other delights became burdensome to the weary
Travelers and all vanities began to vanish as a vapor of smoke, and the wind
of Heaven was daily a scattering the chafe, and the barren Womb mourned for the
quickening life of God, who had put it into the hearts of his long afflicted
scattered ones, to follow him in the ways of truth and equity, and then did
the Lord visit such again and again in his loving kindness, by his servants,
whose living words of truth through them, did yet more open the understandings,
and hearts, and satisfy the judgments of the humble people, in the knowledge
of the way to rest and peace, in leaving the evil and choosing the good, and to
walk and come to live therein for ever.

And then came the time of trial and exercise, when the cross must be taken up
to the worlds ways, and also foolish vanities left behind, and the needless
words no longer used, nor that religion continued any longer, in which made
nothing perfect: then did the people gaze and wonder, and the relations and the
acquaintance stood like as from David afar off, and then was every ones
greatest enemy with the light found in his own house, then did the Tribes of
the earth mourn, then did the Draggon stretch forth his power, then did the
doubtings, and fears, and thoughts, and unbelief come roleing in like floods, O
the straights that many then were in, even seeming greater than any before, and
none but the Lord could deliver, so that then the cries were doubled, and the
secret groans came on a fresh again, and the greater the cries of such were,
the more they prevailed with him that was to help, but with his rod he forced
them to submit unto his will, by departing out of that which had caused him to
frown upon them, and by leaving that which had polluted their dwelling, and as
they began to obey him therein, so he began to let forth the smiles of his
favor toward them, and when they offended again he chastized them sore, and
scourged them for their negligence, and corrected them because they forgot
their obedience to his will, and as thereby they drew near unto him, he eased
the stroke of his Justice, and let them taste of his mercy, and sometimes
invited them with love as a father draws the child: and thus he left not
working with them, and in them by his own secret wisdom and power, until he
had brought them to be after the desire of his heart, that he might delight in
them for ever, and that they might never more be scattered upon the ba^ren
hills, nor yet the dark mountains.

And as obedience in truth and Innocence was willingly yielded to the Lord;
peace began to take hold; and satisfaction got some entrance, and a little
secret hope there was which became as an Ancker to the soul, against the stormy
time, and also in the midst thereof; and as Iniquity was departed from so there
came into the humble heart some satisfaction from God; and some stability in
his way of righteousness, and then refreshings of life attended the heart in
the morning, and the water which revieweth the Thirsty began to open it self in
the midst of a barren Land; and then nothing was more desired then the living
upon that food with which the God of heaven does nourish only his Children;
which he freely gave and brought down even near to the Tents of Israel, and he
caused them to know his statutes and his judgments, and he put his perfect Law
in the midst of them, and his mercy Seat within the Veil, that they might ask
Counsel at the living Oracle, and he gave them his spirit, which all the
circumcised of heart do rightly know to be the chiefest good, and to this end
did he bestow that most precious gift upon them, and gave that spirit of life
into them, even to guide, counsel, and direct, inform, instruct, reprove,
defend, and succor them and nourish their souls for evermore, and so he set
before them the way in which they should walk with him, wherein he would be
their father and the Rock of their strength, and made known unto them the
secret mysteries of his heavenly bessed will, which had been long concealed;
and does yet so remain form the disobedient, and covered from the Children of
men.

And when even the God of Abraham Isack and Jacob had done all this, and much
more for you. O ye now well beloved friends: then did he begin to try your
patience, and to exercise you yet further to prove you, and to make known unto
you even more that which had long been in the heart, and then he suffered a
calm to come over you and much quietness there was with many and then did the
enemy begin to asay again to bring into carelessness, and present a spirit of
slumber, with dullness, and negligence attending, and then the seed was again
burdened therewith, and the upright hearted durst not give way thereunto,
before whose eyes the pure heavenly fear still remains, surely it were almost
endless to relate the sundry trials and states which has been known among the
flock of Jacob. Who could have believed that the strong should have been so
tempted as they were, and the mighty so asaulted diverse ways as they have been,
and yet that the weakest who continued in the grace, which teaches to deny
ungodliness should stand and remain, and how wonderfully has the Lord
preserved his whole flock unto this day, even so that with true gladness of
heart in living praises it might truly be said, that no weapon formed against
Gods Israel has to this day yet ever prospered, though no man has appeared
either in felld or Court on their behalf, nor visable hand appeared for the
defense of the flock of Heaven, O where is that Lamb of the fould who now
stands in the Covenant of redemption that cannot breath forth the praises of
God, in the heart breaking power of his Love and the sensible feeling of his
tender unspeakable mercies; Behold O friends the goodness of God is
unutterable, ye I have not words to express it, and such that feel it may taste
of it, and drink of the fullness thereof, beyond the narrowness of my broaken
speech, and let such draw near unto me, and let these that which bends and
cloaseth up in the bowels, that we may meet at the entrance of Wisdoms gate,
and live one with another and one in another, so as the world did never know;
neither in their nature shall ever understand for my heart is filled with love,
and my dwelling is enlarged with the boundless borders of peace and my life
streams forth in meekness; Behold there is none can stop it, where the seed
springs up as a Lilly, and where the dawning of the day is witnessed, where
undefiled love which cannot think evil has its resting place, and where the
true simplicity of meekness remains.

Even there my lines are read, my words are heard my mind is known my language
understood my love received, and even my life takes entrance; What shall I say
I am with, near or in the midst of all the Innocent Lambs by the virtue of
that power and invisible spirit which fills all in all? and in silence with
you could I long rest, where the world should neither know nor yet perceive me,
and the same bread which I receive in the invisible power, and break unto, or
disperce among the Lambs of God; who can feed upon no other, Even so the same
is it by which my soul at present does live, Yea behold I live who once was
dead: And my life is hid among the rest with Christ in him, from whence the
Heavenly food, and the souls saving, and hearts satisfying power does come.

And this is to stir up your minds, and to put you in remembrance of the Lords
dealing with you, and his large Loving kindness toward you and his effectual
work of love in you, that you may never forget him, nor be unmindful of his
fatherly pity toward us all, when we were all in our low estate, and that you
may feel the revivings of his virtue and the Inlivnings of his power, and the
quicknings of his Spirit, That yea may grow therein and wax fruitful to God:
and come to be seated, and established in the land of life, Blessed from
Heaven, with much more fruitful increase then the Land of Goshan; That the
fruit of Lebannon may be known and the Rose of Sharon, and your selves as the
Ceaders that are full of S^ap and your life as the Vine that never wants
nourishment, whose fruit abounds to the glading of the Vine Dressor, That the
Lord my rejoice over his heritage, and delight himself in the midst of Zion,
and be glorified in his people, and admired of all them that believe.

THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where, in the Love long suffering,
forbearance meekness; gentleness; out of the strife, or self seeking: For
surely woe will come upon that Spirit wherever the Lord finds it, and even the
Lord knows the desires of my heart in true simplicity has been, That his
righteous Judgments might pass betimes upon every appearance thereof in my
self, Neither do I believe that God will ever prosper it in any; nor any with
it; Therefore my Exhortation in the Everlasting Love of the God of Heaven is.
That you all every where live in true brotherly love, and remember Joseph's
advice to his breathren, that they fall not out by the way: The Heavenly God of
power, and life and virtue keep you out of all this, in the life of Wisdom and
meekness; where Strife shall never inhabit, nor death enter within the walls of
Zion, in which their dwelling is, who keep themselves undefiled, and remains
in the fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the power of the word of
his saving grace, praying to the Lord for you, That ever more you may continue
in the Love of Christ. From the feelling and refreshings whereof in the heart,
this is written unto you by him that in the truth can serve the least of you,

Being your Friend Humphery Smith.

ANd Friends this is a time of quietness and stillness, or a time for you so to
be, and there has been a large time of gathering; and for convincing, and now
the Lord is proving and trying them that are gathered. And after this time
blessed and thrice happy shall they be that are found faithful in it, and
worthy to be Crowned with Heavenly honor, and to be further employed in Gods
service, and to remain as Pillars among the flock of Heaven, and as Lights to
invite others home to the dwelling of God. And now should all friends be kept
in wisdom; and take heed what words they use among men, or concerning any men,
though they do contrive against us; had the Lord left us where they are, and
set them where he has placed us: then might we have been this day as ignorant
of the way of peace toward Enemies, and of the path of Innocence and
Righteousness as they now are, but the Lord has showed us mercy; And I say the
God of heaven forgive them and defend us; And all that dwells in this may come
at last to see a time of greater gathering then ever yet was; Oh my Pen cannot
write it. And if all were quiet in their own measures, and little at all were
moved in that measure, either to write, Print or speak at this time, waiting
singly upon God; Oh he would plead for us, and he alone would help us, and keep
us as in his Arms, until the indignation were over past, And this I write that
you might know of my continual confidence in the Lord, if he had, or did not at
this time raise up, or make use of any of us to help him, or to be workers
together with him. But a remnant he has whose hearts he Inlargeth with prayer,
and some of them with strong inward desires and groans and some with uttrance
to declare the good will of God unto others in your assemblys, and some
steadfastly to believe in God that he will never leave us, and all this ascends
up before the Lord even as one sacrifice, and he that has heard and had mercy
on us when we were not his people, and turned not back our complaints in that
day; O how shall he now forget us, now we are his people, and are purchased
unto him with a Randsome more precious then all the Gold in the World; who is
it among all the flock of God; but have already had much experience of his
Love, good will and mercy; and wherefore then should any of the sons or
daughters of Zion, suppose that God will ever forsake or leave them in
distress; I even say doubtless and certainly it will not be so, but the Lord
will stand by us; and the God of the whole earth will go before us, and the
wonderful, dreadful, powerful presence of the most high will be with us, over
us, amongst us, and in us, for ever more, and we shall certainly be preserved
by his power.

And by this my tenders of love in those Lines, all the dear and humble hearted
friends of Christ may hear from me, and understand that something of the virtue
of the Vine, is, and remains in me, and if the will of God should be so, that
my body suffer in this close unsavory Prison many months or several years
longer, yet shall the Lord be my God for ever and my rest unto the end of
troubles, and in silence and secret shall, and does, my heart and soul, pour
forth intercession to the Throne of power, in the behalf of his own truth and
people, and for every feeble plant which God has planted.

And when I have put you in mind that you ought not to forsake the assembling
of your selves together, I leave you to God at present.

H. S.
Winchester Prison the 30th of the first Month 1662.
ANd you should all take heed of that which would lead you up an easier way
then by the light that condemns sin, and verrifies and troubles you; for by it
does God speak, and in it calls for repentance; and in it strive with you, and
many more so strongly, that they cannot rest night nor day, being not yet
reconcile to it, but this consider that this will not always strive with you,
therefore while the light is, and is not put out, if you will hear his voice,
by whom God speaks peace, that peace you might enjoy for ever, then take heed
of that by which a hardness comes upon the heart, and a Veil so thick with
unbelief that the true mourning is done away there cannot be then a secret
crying unto the Lord; for help and deliverance in the true brokeness of heart,
which opens it to God; with bowels of Love and tears, whereby Gods mercy is
felt, but a hardness upon the heart, and a wrong thing ask for peace in the
unbelief, from that, which darkneth, trke heed of this thing, and this know
assuredly that when trouble comes in the inward parts, and the rumor of War is
hard between the two Nations, Jacob and Esau both in the Womb, and the light
condemning in the heart, which has been Fleshly, and the Witness of God
awakning the Conscience that then if there be not a brokeness thereby, and a
mollifying of the heart and a humbling of the lofty part, then will hardness
take place, and Rebellion prevail with thee against the light. Therefore in its
season let these things have entrance in you, and come to that which can
receive it in love faithfulness, and plainess as it is written.

Dear Lambs of my Fathers fould, keep close together in the unity of the holy
Spirit, in this day which is coming upon you, for you will be driven as sheep
to the slaughter, but I say, in that which was, before the wrath of the enemy
was, fear not, for the horse and the rider shall be overthrown, by which the
rider shall be disinabled to go on in his purpose: for I looked and beheld,
that the fore feet of his horse was chained, and a fence was in his way, and by
reason of the eagerness of his horse, he was overthrown, by which means he was
maimed of his arm; and you were left upon your green Pastures, though some of
your wool was scattered and wasted, which is the worst thing that shall befall
you: if you keep close to God, he will certainly keep you in this day and hour
which is coming, yea and is even at hand, watch and pray, that ye enter not
into temptation, yea, what I say unto one, I say unto all, watch, and fear not
man, but God, so will you be kept clean over all to his everlasting praise for
ever and ever so says my soul Amen.

Who am your suffering Brother, known by the name of Charles Baley.
Seen and given forth in Dover prison the 15th. day of the 1 month, 1661.
The End.

