SYMPTOMS OF GROWTH and DECAY TO GODLINESS: IN LX. SIGNS OF A Living and
Dying Christian.

With the Causes of Decay, and Remedies for Recovery.

By Francis Smith.

Job 17. 9. But the Righteous will hold his way, and he whose hands are pure,
shall increase his strength.

Revel. 2. 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first Love.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for F. S. at the Elephant and Castle, near
Temple Bar, 1660.

IMPRIMATUR,

William Jeffery, Benjamin Morley, Thomas Munck, Joseph Wright.


TO Every Judicious and Considerate READER.
Christian Reader,
THere was never more need from the beginning of the Creation to this day, for
persons professing Godliness, to enter into their Closets, and to retire into
their most secret Chambers, there to Commune with themselves, and most
seriously and narrowly to search their hearts, and try their ways, whether
they be such as can abide the strictest and severest scrutiny, according to the
balance of the Sanctuary, and the Touch-stine of the Scriptures, and (it may
be) a Fiery Trial, which is coming upon all the World, to try them that dwell
upon the Earth. Let th^se things be seriously considered in such a day as this
is, wherein such a multitude of Professors of all sorts do abound, who have
enjoyed so long a time of peace and prosperity, which are apt in themselves,
through our carnal hearts, to lull us fast asleep in the bed of sloth and
carnal Security, and to be get a spiritual Lethargy in the Soul.

To awaken us and to provoke one another to this great duty, let us call to
mind our former days, when we were first illuminated, how great a zeal did
then possess us, what care, what diligence, that we might be found approved of,
in the sight of God, who judges the hearts, and tries the reins? It is the
sad complaint of discerning Christians this day, (and is there not a cause!)
that there is a lamentable Decay and decrease of Godliness, in the power and
life thereof among professors. This is a Lamentation, and it shall be for a
Lamentation.

It does therefore exceedingly concern all Christians of what rank soever,
seriously to search and examine their own hearts, and to cry, what have we
done! what is the matter! surely the dispensation that is upon us at this day,
is to try and to purge, and to make white, that they which are upright might be
made manifest, when the Hypocrite and formal professor, that cannot abide the
trial, shall stumble and fall, and the shame of their nakedness shall appear.
Our lot is certainly fallen in the last days, upon whom the ends of the World
are come, and our Lord himself has expressly foretold, that in the last days
among Professors iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold;
and that then the wise Virgins, as well as the foolish, will all slumber and
sleep, Mat. 24. 13. and 25. 1, 2, 3.

So likewise the Apostle Paul foretelling the evil of the last times, sets
down a black Catalogue of sins that will be found (not among the profane only,
as in all ages) but in such persons, having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. beginning.

Formality and Security abounding among Professors, is the sin and sign of the
last days. And herein we may discern gray and hoary hairs, more than here and
there upon the head of this old World. We are fallen into the lees and dregs of
time, and the World the older it grows, the worse, declining now into its
dotage.

Blessed is that Servant, that in such a day as this is, keeps his Garment
unspotted, and his conscience undefiled, that has his Lamp burning, and his
light shining, and his Loins girded, and is always expecting and prepared for
his Lords coming. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.

The design of this ensuing Treatise, (which we recommend unto thy serious
perusal) is to set forth the sad estats of a Dying and Decaying Christian,
showing the Symptoms, Causes and Cures of the Decay of Godliness; Together
with the Benefit and Means of the Growth and Increase of Godliness. As thou
may see in the Title and Frontispiece of this Book.

A Subject certainly never more suitable and seasonable than at this day, when
as Godliness it self in the power and life of it, is at so low an ebb, and
grows every day more than other, into a sensible Decay and Consumption. And
therefore this Piece needs not our Commendation, but a greater than we are,
has Avouched this, whose Wisdom and Authority we must adore; A Word fitly
spoken, or spoken in season, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

For the Author, by that acquaintance we have with him, we judge him to be an
experienced Christian, and one who has made it his business to discern the
Signs of the Times, and we doubt not but the savoury Christian, upon the
through reading of his Book, will judge the same with us.

Reader, we shall detain thee no longer in the Porch, enter the House it self:
Come and see whether it perform not more than we speak.

Now the blessing of God go along with it, and with thee in the reading of it,
and he that gives seed to the sower, and blesses the increase thereof, grant
unto us all, that we may remember our first ways, and do our first works; and
more abundantly; that our last days may be our best days, and our last works
may be more than our first; that we may be Trees of Righteousness, of the Lords
own planting, that we may bring forth most and best fruit in our old age, when
all other Trees cease to yield their increase. In a word, that we may not be
found wanting, nor too light, when our Lord shall come again to Judge every man
according to his Works: Shall be the daily Prayer of,

Thy Servants for Christ's sake, Henry Jessey, Henry Den, John Gosnold.


To all that are called to be Saints, especially my dear Relations in Yorkshire
West Riding; Together with my Brethren and Companions in the Faith, in and
about the City of London, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
My dear Fellow Travelers,
HOwever it is with you now, as to your spiritual state, I am bold to affirm,
that the days of your first Espousal, as in themselves, so in your own
estimation, were very happy and joyful days, and you so afflicted for your own
former Mis-doings, and so affected with what gracious change, God through his
rich Grace then made, that with all your might you did willingly render up your
selves to Christ Jesus for your Savior, and with all free affection and humble
submission chose him, or rather closed with Gods own Appointment, that this his
Son should become your King to Rule you, your Priest to make Atonement for
you, and also your Prophet to Teach you; in a word your All in All: Thus at the
sight and sense of what Sin and Satan had been, and what now Christ Jesus would
be by way of change, your hearts were wonderfully taken up with admiring this
choice, that were not only of Gods preparing to Redeem you from the highest
Wrath, but to Redeem you to the highest Glory; I fear your hearts now this
change is not so new, is unable to express what once, (though in the time you
had less Knowledge) you could have reported of this matter, the sense of Wrath
then at Gods unfolding your condition, being so apparent, and the necessity of
a Savior without which you must perish, being so urgent, put you upon that
thoughtfulness of heart, what to do that you might not Perish, but be Saved,
and filled your hearts and hands so full of better Business, that Husband,
Wife, Children, House, Land, Trade, and whatsoever else till then had been dear
to you, now became strange in your esteem; thus did you run well, and of Christ
Jesus were known well, your fruit being sweet to his taste, and love in each
answered love, with such delight, that you could say with David, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee? and whom in Earth in comparison of thee? Was not then the
light of his countenance life to you, and his withdrawings your death? none but
Christ could satisfy you, to be talking with him, and walking with him, and
whether he is in the Garden, or Wilderness, or any Solitary place, you must be
with him; nay, rather could you not bleed with him, than feast without him?
thus in nothing more happy than with your Beloved, wondering greatly at this
great Grace, that in such a condition should find you, and to such a condition
bring you: look back, call to remembrance days past, was it not thus with you,
and a thousand times more?

But how is it now you have seen some of the depth of Christ's love, and born
the heat of the day in some measure? Do you love him yet more and more? Is
Prayer, Hearing, Reading, Weeping, Watching, Fasting, Doing, Suffering, welcome
still? Does the pulse of your Soul run this way stronger and stronger? The path
of the just is as a shining light, that shines more and more to the perfect
day. Are ye able to speak in truth this to be your condition? Or do you grow
weary and faint in your mind, thinking now Christ's way too strait, his work too
great? If it be come to this, then it is a piece of the saddest news that ever
came to thy Soul; Yet God knows it is no new thing, but an evil too too common
among Professors who like Israel of old, thought Manna while new most welcome,
yet in its continuance, though Gods own Institution, (which was a reason
sufficient why it still should be welcome) they loath and term it light Bread;
thus were their goodness like a morning cloud or early dew that passes away:
In like manner New Testament Churches, that had fair and flourishing
beginnings, yet in time comes to hang down their heads, and grow feeble and
faint in their minds; How were the Corinth Church that had been their Apostles
glory and crown, become his sorrow and grief; what bitter messages does God
send to most of the Churches in Asia, complaining that they had fallen from
their first love, threatening them with no less than to Unchurch and spew them
out of his mouth; such wild Grapes in time, did this once flourishing Church
bring forth; and the very complaint of Jeremiah, concerning Israel in them
verified, Chap 2. 21. Yet had I planted thee a noble Vine wholly, a right Seed;
how then art thou turned into a degenerate Plant, of a strange Vine to me?

My dear Brethren, these are not the tyth of the sad instances that might be
alleged of such as once were fair and flourishing, yet in continuance of time
to a sad degree left their standing, and so incurred Gods sore displeasure and
severity upon them; all which premised, proves it so far from being any of our
happiness to begin well, though at the rate here mentioned in our Espousal
days, that truly it will but prove an addition to our unhappiness, if we shall
not end well; for better is the end of a thing than the beginning: All which
notes a Christians true good, to consist as in a fair beginning, so both to
hold on well, and above all to end well. What Christian is he, that will not
tremble then to consider both old and new Testament Churches, what fair
beginnings they made, and yet what dismal ends they came to, as Jude complains,
Trees without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots.

The good Lord help you my Brethren, and my self, to lay this thing to heart,
that with fear and trembling, we may work through our Salvation, and from first
to last avoid that damning sin of carnal security, that God knows does too too
much rock many Professors in our days into a deadly sleep, who being once
green and flourishing, still retain a strong opinion of hereafter Glory, though
grown as dry and barren as the Fig Tree, that Christ Jesus would not suffer to
stand.

Thus considering with my self, and musing in my mind what a fearful thing it
would be for me and you, that have had such like beginnings, and have made as
great promise of a good conclusion, to fall into the hands of the living God,
who will strip us as naked of his Glory (if here we are found wanting) as ever
we were born, unless the falling of former Churches prove so our admonition, as
he that stands takes heed lest he fall; for which cause, I have both for your
benefit and mine own, gathered together Thirty Symptoms of Growing, and Thirty
more of Decaying to Godliness; in the first you may (for present) only read the
Signs of Growth; in the second, you may read both the Signs of Decay to
Godliness, with the Causes and Remedies; which with Gods blessing (I humbly
pray and hope) may tend to your strengthening, if Growing; or to your speedy
reducement, if Declining: Read therefore what now by the help of the Lord is
brought to your eye, with much seriousness, and while you look upon the Book,
be still reflecting both upon the heart and life, with this kind of searching
language; Is my case thus, or is it thus? However your own opinions may be of
Growth or Decay, they are your Highest Concernment; Entertain therefore with
all love my poor yet affectionate Dedication, remembering the Marriage of the
Lamb draws nigh, and his Bride must make her self ready: Be sure then you be
not found without your Wedding Garment; but imagine your selves the very next
door to Being compassed with the majesty of that day; let the thoughts of it
keep you company, in Buying, Selling, Eating, Drinking; yea in the whole course
of your Pilgrimage, and follow God with incessant Prayers to fill your Souls
brim full of the living Worth of hereafter Glory, and the unsupportable weight
of its contrary; That to this great end these my poor Labors, and such as
these, in the glory of their perfection, may prepare you upon the most
acceptable terms for future Glory; is the true desire of

Your unworthy Brother in the dear Concernments of the Gospel. Francis Smith.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1.COntaining in it a Sign of Dying to Christ; with three causes of its
coming, which being avoided, may serve as remedies against its ruin; with
profitable Objections answered. 1 Chap. 2.Containing three Causes of weariness
to spiritual Worship, and the principal Reasons thereof. 19 Chap. 3.Briefly
showing the cause of weariness to hear any truth often. 23 Chap. 4.Briefly
showing, how want of Charity in hearers, causes them dislike what is preached.
27 Chap. 5.Containing five Causes of deceitfully thinking we know enough; with
four marks to know when we are under that deceit. 31 Chap. 6.Containing in it
Christians aptness, through weakness, to neglect coming to Christ's Table; with
a short description of offenses, that seemingly may hinder; and three Causes of
this Decay. 38 Chap. 7.Showing the great decay to Christianity, when mindless
to prayer; with a pl^^^ discovery of the Necessity, Excellency, Let and Helps
to prayer, in sixteen particulars. 46 Chap 8.Showing the great Decay to
Christianity, when mindless to Reading and meditation in the holy Scriptures;
with six calamities very observable, which Scripture Ignorance brings. 54 Chap.
9.Showing that an itching ear in Christians after Novelties, bespeak them
decaying to godliness: with four Remedies against it. 65 Chap. 10.Proving us
dying to Christ, when others sinnings are not our sorrowings; with two Remedies
against this Decay. 69 Chap. 11.Showing that unsavory talking among Christians
when they meet, proves them earthly-minded: with three Causes of this Decay. 74
Chap. 12.Proving unpreparedness to hear the word of God, a Sign of Dying to
Christ; with three sorts of hindrances, which must be laid aside; and what must
be our work, before Hearing, in Hearing, and after Hearing. 81 Chap. 13.Proving
the state of such to be sad, who assemble together more for fear of man's eye
than Gods: with four Discriptions how such may be known, (or know themselves)
with two Causes of this decay. 89 Chap. 14.Showing our state dying, when we are
more troubled at the decays in our House, than in Christ's House; with four
marks to know when we are so dying. 89 Chap. 15.Showing that want of weeping in
some, when others of Christ's Children with grief are stooping, declares such to
him a dying: showing also in four respects how we are to pity; with four
Remedies against this decay. 94 Cap. 16. Showing that when the name of Christ,
and credit to his Gospel; is not so dear to us as personal sufferings, w^ are
then surely on the dying hand: and that in estate, body and life, we ought to
submit if called to suffering: with four Causes of Decay here. 99 Chap.
17.Showing, that sinning through impatience, under Offenses, is a certain mark
of deep decay; with Objections, and Answers, proving the degrees of anger; and
three Causes why Christians are impatient unto sin. 104 Chap. 18.Proving those
Christians to be almost dead, that make it more their business, to get the Form
than the Power of Religion; with its Causes and Remedies. 111 Chap.
19.Containing in it a description of a decaying Christian, by his light trouble
at Miscarriages, though known to Gods eye, while kept from man's eye; with two
special Causes of this Decay. 115 Chap. 20.Showing the heart very bad, when
under faults it cannot bear plain dealing; with three Causes of this badness.
120 Chap. 21.Proving the condition of the rich as well as the poor, to be a
condition of trouble; and that whether it be common or more than ordinary, to
be answerable in prayer; with a description of the different kinds of trouble;
with profitable Objections answered 125 Chap. 22.Containing in it an Assertion
of the Causes of Affliction, and that without great provocation God is not wont
to afflict his people; and though provoked, very unwilling to extremity: With
four Objections that seem to complain against this Doctrine, Answered. 132
Chap. 23.Proving those Christians under great Decay, that pray more in
Affliction to have it removed, than sanctified; with three Causes of this
Decay. 143 Chap. 24.Containing in it six Seasons, in which Christians ought to
humble themselves by fasting; proving those under great decay, that in times of
calamity can find no necessity for fasting. 152 Chap. 25.Containing in it the
evil of Ignorance, in not knowing wherefore Gods Rod is come, nor what good it
has done: with three Directions how to know when persons are under this Decay;
and three Remedies against it. 159 Chap. 26.Showing where sin takes its
beginning, and how by degrees if hearkened to, it works ruin; with six special
marks, how persons (though pardoned) may know when God will suffer them to fall
into sin anew. 164 Chap. 27.Showing Satan's way, by which he gets in our day
most advantage upon Churches; and a plain discovery of the first rise of the
Quakers; showing also the great Law of Edification, to be preferred in all
Doctrine; with Cautions to such as live out of all Church way. 177 Chap.
28.Showing the necessity of humble waiting, and confident depending upon the
holy Spirit, to help in the great work of mortification; the necessity whereof
is showed in seven particulars; with six directions how to get and keep this
holy Spirit. 189 Chap. 29.Treating of Spiritual Ignorance of our everlasting
condition; and five Scriptures tending to reducement from carnal security; and
three special Causes of such a damning Decay. 205 Chap. 30.Showing the
miserable estate of such, as after longer acquaintance with Christ, are less in
love to him; with six Causes of this Decay. 218


SIGNS OF A Living and Growing CHRISTIAN.
SIGN I. When thy chief Delight is with the Saints, epecially them that excel
in virtue.

SIGN II. When the smites of the Righteous, are not a burden to thee, thou
can hear of thy faults with affected attention.

SIGN III. When Jesus Christ in the midst of temptation, is more to thee than
all the World.

SIGN IV. When thou matterest not how dear it cost thee, so thou make
Corruption weary.

SIGN V. When increase of time in the use of Gods Ordinances, works increase of
affection to them.

SIGN VI. When length of time in Christ's House, works in thy heart increase of
hatred to all sin.

SIGN VII. When thou carriest about with thee a constant jealousy over thy
heart, proving its affectedness, to God and goodness.

SIGN VIII. When every known new mercy begets new thankfulness, and that with
delight.

SIGN IX. When known calamity in Gods House, begets deep sorrow in thy heart.

SIGN X. When Gods afflicting thee for thy sin, makes thee love God the better.

SIGN XI. When the same care and travail thou labourest once in to get Christ,
thou as much if not more labors in to keep Christ.

SIGN XII. When by thy laboring in Gods Vineyard, thou art little grieved
(though outwardly much injured) while Gods name is honored.

SIGN XIII. When under deep distress or languishing, the word of God is
precious to thee.

SIGN XIV. When any condition, though in its self mean, as it comes from God,
is welcome to thee.

SIGN XV. When the peace of Christ's House, begets chief joy in thy heart.

SIGN XVI. When thy avoiding all sin, is as truly occasioned through fear of
dishonouring God, and incurring his present displeasure, as wrath to come.

SIGN XVII. When the least apprehension of Gods withdrawing from thee, makes
thee seek him more earnestly.

SIGN XVIII. When every company is burdensome to thee, that is not designing
thy Fathers glory.

SIGN XIX. When the sins of professors comes so near thy heart, that it makes
thee walk sadly.

SIGN XX. When the light of thy understanding grows more strong, to thy making
Judgment of Spiritual things.

SIGN XXI. When thou have dear affection for the meanest of Christ's followers,
because they are gracious.

SIGN XXII. When the path of the humble is sweet to thee, thou had rather be
there than in the tents of the ungodly.

SIGN XXIII. When thy pity is such to perishing people, that thou can not
but weep at the thoughts of their ruin.

SIGN XXIV. When prosperity does not lift thee up, nor adversity cast thee down.

SIGN XXV. When thy resolution to follow God fully throw all difficulties is
stable, and temptations to the contrary tends but to thy strengthening.

SIGN XXVI. When the visits of the holy Spirit, of which once thou had few,
now to thee are many.

SIGN XXVII. When thou art so acquainted with thy spiritual standing, that thou
art easily made sensible of the least step to decay.

SIGN XXVIII. When the force of the Resurrection, and Judgment to come, lies so
close at thy heart, that it makes thee answer every call of Christ, to do or
suffer cheerfully.

SIGN XXIX. When the hopeful assurance of a city to come, makes thee
delightfully a stranger to thy own.

SIGN XXX. When increase of time in Christ's acquaintance, works increase of
affection to Christ's company.

SIGNS OF A Dying Christian.
CHAP. I. Containing in it a Sign of Dying to Christ; with three causes of its
coming, which being avoided, may serve as remedies against its ruin; with
profitable Objections answered.
SIGN I. When you are so indifferent to assemble, that you can come, or cannot
come.
IT is not only possible, but too too common, for Christians after they have
been sometime conversant in the worship and service of Gods House, to come to
this declining frame of Spirit, having seen into some of the depth of that,
that at their first convertion, being mighty new, was mighty welcome; but
proving more natural to them becomes in some kind burdensome; then Satan, that
long waited for it, gets advantage upon them, to dispute the case with them,
Whether there is such necessity of that labor and travail about their
Religion, as they take; and by this means Jeroboam like, 1 King. 12. 27, 28.
When he would draw the hearts of Israel aside, tells them; it is too much to go
up to Jerusalem to worship, and so makes two Calves of Gold, and puts the one
in Dan and the other in Bethel, saying, These be thy Gods O Israel.

Now such pretenses of ease as these, takes presently with deceitful hearts,
especially when there is a show of attaining the same end they looked for, with
less cost and charge; by this means the heart lets go those powerful
convictions wrought by the holy Spirit at his first taking possession, which
leads the mind out to make Religions getting and holding, a labor, work, or
business; now lets go its first unwearied diligence, and so takes in this
Spirit of indifferency to assemble; which plainly discovers, that now but half
the heart attends that spiritual service, in which the body is present; and
indeed thus much ground by a Christian lost, gives such a wound to his heavenly
trade; that the savor and relish he had at his first beginning to run well, is
now much departed, and so his appetite being withdrawn, makes his stomach loath
or nautiate that food, that once was savory and nourishing.

Now what likelier way can be imagined, to hurt and spoil a Christians
Communion with his God, and so by little and little, remove him from his
spiritual trade; then to possess his heart with such kind of indifferency as
this, even a willing negligence to assemble; and so estranging himself to
Christ Jesus Fould where he is wont to feed his flock at noonday, being a
stranger there, to the daily opportunities of spiritual gains, must needs loose
in his spiritual trade, and consequently be affected with new lovers, and lust
after their unprofitable dainties; Does not experiance speak mournfully in
this, and confess the field to be more than half lost, when that early zeal
to Christian assemblings grows low; and though once remained greatly burdened
at material hindrances, yet now is content with slight excuses, seeing no such
necessity, as is by zealous persons pretended, and once by them believed, so
often to assemble; and as by sad experience some can witness, when others have
been delightfully taken up with Gods public worship: they idling up and down,
have found satan not a little busy; nor his design a little taking, to prepare
their speedy ruin; For as by often rubbing hand in hand, warmth is gotten; or
by often using working-tools rust is prevented; even so a frequent assembling
among Gods children, inclines and disposes the heart to good, and consequently
impairs and lessens the old man's hold; being under that continual means, that
renews and inclines the mind into a spiritual likeness, to Christ its head; and
so is wrought up to a spiritual compliance with every new motion to good
performances; saying with David, When thou said, seek my face, my heart said,
thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. no sooner says God; seek my face, but
without delay, David's heart says, thy face Lord will I seek; I was glad when
they said, Come let us go into the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122. 1. it was joy
to David to see Persons so mindful of their true good, as to be forward to
assemble.

All this premised, bespeaks this indifferency to assemble, of a very bad
tendency, plainly giving beholders to understand, that good things, were not
esteemed so much as good by such Persons; as they was so esteemed as new, we
have sad instances, of this kind of spiritual decay, in Israel of old, Number. 11.
4, 5, 6. The mixed multitude that was among them, fell a lusting, and said, who
shall give us flesh to eat; we remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt
freely; the cucumbers, and the melons; and the leeks, and the onyons, but now
our souls is dried away, there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our
eyes. so Chap. 2. 5. And the people spoke against God, and against Moses;
saying, wherefore have ye brought us out of Egypt to dye in this Wilderness;
for there is no bread, neither any water; and our souls loath this light bread.

Here Gods own institution, that once was welcome to them, and being now, they
was mighty eager after it, in so much that they could dispense with breaking a
law, to gather it, as Exodus 16. at large proves; where we read of its first
institution: this Manna that the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 78. 25. calls Angels food:
they now loath, and call light bread; this Manna though Gods own appointment,
that fed them to the full, and was to continue with them till they come to eat
the old corn, in the Land of promise, Josh. 5. 12. yet this they loath under
its constant enjoyment, and wish for Egypts food again.

How zealous were persons in this age, ten or twelve years ago, when truth
begun more clearly to break forth, no cost or early pains mattered; happy were
they that could come soonest; then were assemblies crowded; good men encouraged
to labor, Gods name delightfully worshipped; in so much, that without wrong one
might say, since such days the Kingdom of Heaven have suffered violence, and
the violent take it by force: is Gods hand shortened, that such workings of
heart are not now as was then? is not now assemblies thin, performances small,
seldom and late? is it because God is a Wilderness to his people? is it not
because they surfeit under fullness? Does not many run too and fro, that
knowledge is increased, and sons and daughters prophecy? How then may this
serve to rebuke that sloathful Spirit in any, that are careless to assemble,
and calls on them to be restless with God, till they are again restored to such
a Spirit of zeal, as they had in the days of their first Espousal;
lukewarmness here, being that inlet sin, to spiritual spoiling; disappointing
God of gracious opportunities to enrich them, and through this neglectance,
offers daring occasion to the Devil to tempt them; Does not the holy Apostle,
Romans 10. 14, 15. plainly imply an impossibility of believing in him, of whom
they have not heard: And how shall they hear, says he, without a Preacher, as
it is written? how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? does not this saying, in so many
words declare the reason of perishing, to be want of knowledge? Hos. 4. 6. And
the cause of ignorance, the want of preaching: How does this then commend Gods
high approbation of assembling, it being the proper season for preaching. Then
they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord heard it;
and a book of remembrance was written, before him for them that feared the
Lord, and thought upon his name: In an evil time when many grew weary, and
said, it is a vain thing to serve the Lord, and what profit is it that we have
kept his ordinances, and walked mournfully before him; then such as met often,
were high in Gods account.

Alas, alas, is not preaching, though accompanied with never so much inward and
outward pains-taking, then matter of scorn to standers by, who live vainly;
also a joy to the Devil our grand adversary, when few attend it, and of those,
most part flat, low, indisposed, and weary, having little spiritual life or
vigor in them; on whom common custom to assemble, has eaten out the spiritual
relish, that should be in them: but I shall close this with Gods counsel, Heb.
10. 24, 25. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and good works.
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is:
but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as we see the day approaching.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Does not this dismal conclusion,
ver. 26. proffer it self, as the most probable end of such as cease to
assemble, and makes way for their fearful and inevitable ruin? shall any dare
then to content themselves with light excuses, to hinder their assembling, and
not rather provoke and exhort one another to so good a work?

I shall conclude this first Sign, of dying to Christ, with offering briefly
three Remedies, how it may be removed, where begun; or prevented, where like to
come.

First, consider and lay to heart; That to assemble is a very weighty duty, and
requires all your heart; Isa. 35. 3. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear,
and your souls shall live; see Prove. 8. 34, 35. Blessed is the man that hears
me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors: for who so
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Plainly noting,
that diligent harkening, which cannot be without assembling, is the way to
life; therefore not to be slightly looked at, Acts 3. 23. Every soul that will
not hear this Prophet, shall be cut off from amongst the People; Persons may
think it a light thing to forbear hearing, and an offense only to the
assembly; but God will count it a despising him, and the means he has
ordained; The Chrildren of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back
in the day of Battle: they kept not Gods Covenant, but refused to walk in his
Law: therefore the Lord heard this; and a fire was kindled in his wrath against
Jacob; For their hearts was not right with God: Let us take heed therefore,
that we refuse not him that spoke from Heaven; but as we must consider, that it
is a weighty duty to assemble, so it requires that we come with all our hearts;
this God calls for, and where it is wanting, performances will not be
acceptable: This people draw nigh me with their mouths, and honor me with
their lips; but their heart is far from me, Isa. 29. 13. it is Gods complaint
by Jeremiah, Juda has not turned to me with her whole heart, but fainedly;
with a heart and a heart, a heart as much a contrary way, as that way; they
were indifferent, as willing not to turn as to turn; this makes offerings to be
abhord, the contrary by Christians must be made at; Blessed are they that seek
him with their whole heart, Psalm. 119. 25. Less then the whole heart begets
jarring, prevents harmony, hinders the spiritual building.

A second Remedy, is to consider, that it is not possible to prevent this
spirit of indifferency, but by continuing as industruous to keep what ye have
gained, as you were to get it, the prayers, the tears, the searchings of
heart, the attentive hearing, and frequent assemblings, that you in order to
your first Espousal did diligently follow, you must still hold on in; that you
may keep and increase the same, for the promises run in no other channel, Prove.
2. 4. If thou seek for wisdom as for silver, and search for it as for hid
treasure: Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Hos. 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the
Lord, his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come to us as
the rain; the latter and former rain unto the earth. God will be to such as
follow on to know him in his way, as the former and latter rain is to the
earth, which without it is dry and barren, but being refreshed therewith,
proves green and fruitful.

Now alas persons when once they are gotten in Christ's Fould, think their work
well nigh done, but God knows it is but then begun, their Labor before was but
to come into the vineyard, and there I am sure they must not be idle; they are
put there to work, to be lights to others, and show forth Christ's virtues; and
there God will prune them, dress them water them, but it is that they may be
fruitful, else they must be plucked up as cumberrers of the ground; do not
therefore think your work is now near done, for you are but now begun, you are
now entered into the war; listed under your Captain Christ Jesus, and must till
death, continue fighting, striving, and overcoming, that at last you may
overcome: therefore if you read, prayed, fasted, watched, weeped, assembled
much before, now do it much more, 2 Cor. 5. We labor, (or made a business of
it) to be accepted of God; and says the holy Apostle Peter, writing to them
which had obtained like precious faith, through the righteousness of God, and
Jesus Christ our Savor; and had escaped the corruption that is in the world
through lust, exhorts them, to give all diligence to add to their faith virtue,
and to virtue knowledge, and to knewledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and
to brotherly kindness love; for if these things be in you and abound, they make
you neither barren nor unfruitful: But if they lack these things, they are
blind, and cannot set a far off, but have forgotten they was purged from their
old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 2. One would think, that persons that had gone thus far,
as to obtain like precious faith with Gods elect, and were purged from their
old sins, having escaped (or were escaping) the corruption that is in the world
through lust, might have well nigh done their work, yet the holy Ghost here
shows them, that now their work is but begun; and says, they must give All
diligence; so saint Paul to the Philipians. Chap. 2. 12, My brethren, as you
have always obeyed, both in my presence, and absence; work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling; from all this we may learn, that its no
being idle in Christ's Vineyard, if it cost us much diligence to get in, it must
cost us much more to keep in: so I shall conclude this second Remedy, with the
holy Ghosts counsel to the Church of the Hebrews Chap. 6. 11, 12. And we desire
that every one of you ( mark it well) do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope to the end, that you be not sloathful, but followers of them,
who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

Thirdly, a third Remedy may be this, that you would humbly and constantly
endeavor to profit something in every assembly, make it your care to be still
doing or geting good, then you are about your days work, content not your
selves to come together from day to day, and wait under the ministry, going a
way without gain; but come to the assembly with sensibility of many things you
yet want; this will quicken your zeal, ripen your expectation, and prepare way
for God that delights to be rich in giving, to give you richly.

You will profit little, though you want never so much, if you are little
sensible of your wants; and God will give you little because you will be but
capable to improve little, for where the sense of want is low, there the pulse
Godward will beat faintly; and nothing more does occasion this indifferency to
assemble, then seeing it amount to little in the profit and advantage to
persons that are frequent in attending, it makes them count, better stay at
home, than be never the better for their meeting together, Mal. 3. 14. You have
said it is a vain thing to serve the Lord; and what profit is it that we have
keept his ordinances, and walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts: They went
not surely the right way to expect profit, nor had their eye upon right profit;
but something they did propose to themselves in coming that they got not; and
so cries out, it is in vain to serve him; it is even thus among professors now,
if they see meetings come to little, though the fault be only in themselves, it
ends to make them think lightly of assembling; Who is there among you, says
God; Mal. 1. 10. that would shut the doors for naught, or kindle a fire on my
Altar for naught; he that ploweth ploweth in hope, and he that sows sows in
hope; that is, persons that do work, expect and count upon fruit therefrom;
they will not do it for nothing, and indeed it is but reasonable, he that
plants a vineyard should drink of the wine thereof; great layings out,
preparing the heart for expectations of great returns; and when persons do lay
out, and count upon answerable returns, as they righteously may, God being
pleased they should, and this coming to pass tends much to their encouragement.

Object. But some may say, I have gone (long to the assemblies, and gone on
purpose sensible of many wants, and have counted upon to profit, (as here you
direct me) yet for all this I am ready to grow weary, for I see it come to
little, I am still shalow in my understanding and weak in my memory.

Ans. I shall answer this objection two ways: first, by praying you to enquire,
whether that little you do know, and have learned, you do put into practice;
What can engage God more to teach you to know more, than walking up to what you
do know? Oh thou that art named the house of Jacob; is the spirit of the Lord
straightened, are these his doings? Does not my words do good to them, that walks
uprightly, Mica. 2. 7. see to it, whether you live not much short of what you
do know, and if you find you do, as some such defect must needs be the cause,
why you profit so little, then you will see great reason, God should not trust
you with five Talents, seeing you improve not two.

But secondly, seeing you do profit little, Be troubled much, let it be your
burden; while persons in assembling gain but little, and are but little
troubled, they are not like to have their condition much mended: To come often
and profit little, is very sad; but to be unsensible of ones wants is much
sadder: Whereas on the contrary, to be in want, and so sensible of ones want,
that they go burdened up and down, is the best way to get remedy; when Joseph
was in affliction, some that were concerned to bear part of his burden, were
so unsensible, that God complains against them, Amos 6. 6. They were not
grieved at the affliction of Joseph; they were so far from easing him, or
freeing themselves from provoking of God to bring them into such like trouble,
that they were not so much as grieved; had no burden upon them, were therefore
fit matter to be indeed deservedly brought themselves into the like condition;
a most remarkable and profitable example, if heeded by Christians; we have to
this very purpose, in Daniel that holy man, Chap. 9. verse. 2. when he
understands by reading, that there were a number of years for Jerusalems
captivity, how was he burdened that he might know it, is evident, if you read
but what he did, verse. 3. I set my face to seek the Lord God by prayer and
supplication; with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes; behold here a gracious
pattern for Christians, that want to know great things from God, Daniel sets
his face unto the Lord, with such qualifications attending this performance, as
though Daniel would be content with no denial; so Chap. 10. 2, 3. A thing was
revealed to Daniel, but the time appointed was long; In those days, I Daniel
was mourning three full weeks. I eat no pleasant bread, neither came flesh, nor
wine in my mouth, till three whole weeks were fulfilled: That such manner of
burden and trouble as this, at the sense of ones ignorance, is not only the
way to get profit, but indeed a most acceptable way with God, and so liked as
to speed presently.

Let us see then what is written in Dan. 9. 23. At the Beginning of thy
supplication, (mark that) the Commandment came forth, and I am come to show
thee; therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision. Had not Daniels
supplications, fasting, sackcloth, and ashes, proved a prevailing cause with
God, to send an Angel, to make him understand; Wherefore serves this thus
written? At the beginning of thy supplication; so Chap. 10. 12. An Angel said
in a vision, Fear not Daniel, for from the first day, that thou did set thy
heart to understand, and chasten thy soul before thy God; thy words were heard,
and I am come forth because of thy words. Does not all this call upon
Christians to do three things.

First, to get a mighty sense of their ignorance, which is the grand cause they
do not profit.

Secondly, to be greatly burdened that it is so with them.

Thirdly, to set their faces toward the Lord God by prayer and supplication,
without ceasing, both to be and to abide otherwise: Is not the Prophet Daniels
Writing for our learning, and to encourage us to take the same course? God
sorely dislikes the contrary, Isa. 32. 9. Rise up ye women, that are at ease,
(not troubled or burdened) hear my voice, ye careless Daughters, and be
troubled: Thus much may serve to inform a willing mind, how to get from under
the power of this Dying Sign, of indifferency to Assemble, and so pass to the
second, third, and fourth Signs of Dying to Christ; in which I shall be
somewhat brief, they having some kind of dependence upon this first Sign.

CHAP. II. Containing three Causes of weariness to spiritual Worship, and the
principal Reasons thereof.
SIGN II. When in your purest Worship, you are quickly weary.
It is possible to come to this pass, at but a seeming occasion, and persons
create some kind of pretense why they are weary; if it happen that at some time
they are not so particularly and personally concerned, in that part of Gods
Worship, where they are present; It so falling out, that the matter God is
entreated about, they are not so at want in, or what is preached, they to some
considerable degree are informed in already: This may fall out in numerous
Congregations, where different conditions ministers different occasions, as to
the manner of carrying on their Worship; and though at such a time for a
growing Christian, there is no room to be weary, he being as well delighted
occasionally to hear, or pray over again what he knows, as he is to hear what
he knows not: in the one he takes occasion to praise for what was; in the
other, to praise for what is; yet declining persons will in such a case as
this, when they are not so nearly concerned, take advantage not only to be
weary, but from hence plead their justification so to be; but this Sign speaks
to persons under a further consideration, such as in their purest Worship are
quickly weary, in their most intimate, private, personal, closet performances,
retired from company, and set to the most intimate Worship of God, in fasting,
praying, self-examining, and the like; yea, from a sense of mighty Need drawn
to this, and yet quickly weary, must needs argue them deep in this decay; and
that in such there is a very strong combat, who shall now gain the field, they
being a weary in their purest Worship: It is evident hence, that the enemy has
got more than ordinary advantage, and strikes now at the very root of their
Religion, aiming at once as it were, to make a speedy end; and puts such
Christians, instead of Worshipping faintly, to cease Worshipping at all; its high
time therefore at the first sight of such declining, which in our days is not
the portion of a few; for surely, surely, many there are in Churches, that in
their purest Worship are quickly weary; I say again, its high time, that those
that find the case thus with them, do even like the Ninevites at the preaching
of Jonah; They believed God, proclaimed a fast from the greatest to the least,
Jonah 3. 5. Even so let such go to their knees, humble themselves, and cry
mightily that they perish not.

Now the Causes of this decay, seems to be these three.

First, Self-conceitedness that they know enough.

Secondly, Luke-warmness in their Religion.

Thirdly, Unaptness to personal Duties: Which may serve as helps to remove it,
where begun; or prevent it, where like to come.

First, Self-conceitednesse, that they know enough; Now this comes to pass,
either;

First, Through ignorance of what they ought to know: or,

Secondly, Through Carlesness to put in practice what they do know.

Let the Law of God, as the Law of a Nation, be never so plain in it self l^^d
down, yet without studious industry to understand what is Gods own injunction,
we may remain ignorant of the same, and that ignorance prove a sin to us, it
being the effect of sloathfulness, contrary to, Prove. 2. beginning; If thou
seek for wisdom as for silver, and search, (mark that) for it as for hid
treasure; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God, Psalm. 1. 2.

Secondly, Through carelessness to put in practice what they do know; persons
are very apt to complain of their ignorance of plain duties, yea, as though
they were holden and hindered, when as all experience speaks, the only way to
know more is to put in practice what we do know already; Thou ought
therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I
should have received mine own, with advantage, Mat. 25. 27.

A Second Cause may be luke-warmness in Religion; that is, so indifferent, that
they care not whether they go forward or backward; I know thy works, that thou
art, neither cold nor hot; I would thou were cold or hot; so then because thou
art lukewarm, I will spew thee out of my mouth, Revel. 3. 15, 16.

Thirdly, a third Cause of this decay, is unaptness to personal duties; every
professor in order to his growing, has personal duties constantly to carry
about with him, aptness wherein fits him for public employment; but the
contrary, makes him unhandy or unskilful in the word of righteousness; as
children by virtuous education; or the unexpert soldier, by frequent
discipline, are both made ready for man-liker actions; even so, aptness in
personal duties, as family and closet prayer, family and closet reading, a
careful exercise, and execution of those choice and nearly concerned duties,
(with these mentioned) of frequent fastings, watchings, humblings, patience,
meekness, temperance, zeal, fear, love; giving all diligence, for if these
things be in you and abound, they make you that you shall be neither barren nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that lacks these
things is blind, and cannot see a far off: so briefly I pass to the third Sign.

CHAP. III. Briefly showing the cause of wearyness to hear any Truth often.
SIGN III. When you care not to hear one matter often, though a suitable truth.
By Often here, I would not be understood so, as that those that preach, should
day after day when they assemble without intermission, preach the very same
thing word for word to their hearers; for indeed this may give just occasion of
burden to the hearer, therefore such preaching upone truth in respect of the
season must surely be so observed, as to leave room for the making known other
truths, as necessarily to be believed; therefore, let the considerate Reader in
this case, construe my words, as he upon another case judges he ought to
construe the holy Apostles words, Often, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as you eat
this bvead; Often here, does not in the least intend, that not at all persons
be in this service, neither does it surely intend, that they do it every time
they meet together, but so do it as it have its season of being administered,
and such season as may not extinguish, or leave no room for the administration
of other Ordinances; so that by Often, I would be understood, so frequent a
preaching, the same truth already known and believed, as stands with the
wisdom and judgment of persons, that by God are entrusted to Preach: with this
always premised, that as they see a possibility of any truth losing its proper
force in the memory and heart, through want of repetition. And when suitable
truths upon this very score is over and over preached, and meets with such
Spirits as care not to hear it, that are mindless, careless, and displeased;
this bespeaks such to be of the dying hand; for indeed, such carriages
withstands Gods ordinary method; which he frequently uses in Scripture to his
own people in covenant with him; for two great ends, the one is, that they may
remember it; the other is, that they may do it.

Is not one great end of many institutions imposed on Israel of old, and they
found according to commandment in the same services yearly, least they should
forget what God would have them remember: and when they are pleased to choose
them a King, it is Gods express charge, when he sits upon the Throne of his
Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of the Law, and read therein all the
days of his life; that he may learn to keep all Gods word. The safety of this
to the same people, that have already believed is plainly expressed, and
faultiness in them that care not to hear it, plainly employed; and one of the
great ends I have now noted, is also a sign in, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. Moreover
brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which also
you have received, and wherein you stand; by which also you are saved, if you
keep in memory what I preached unto you; unless you have believed in vain. Then
he goes on and shows the particulars he had preached to them, Principles
even so plain in the Letter of them, that one would think they could not be
forgotten; which strongly implies, that through want of preaching the same
things to them again, they might either loose the bare knowledge of the
Principles there laid down, or at least the spiritual force and nature of them;
how then does this very Scripture reprove such as care not to hear a suitable
truth often? charging them with faultiness in forgetting: that of all truth at
best, they know but in part; and that by hearing one and the same truth again
and again, a man may see some excellency further than yet he ever saw:
experience will witness this to the considerate, Psalm. 3. beginning. 2 Pet. 2.
12, 13, 14. Now this defect seems to arise from some wrong Judgment, or
apprehentions, that such persons have of themselves; They are notionally
conceited of some large reach they have in the knowledge of those very things
they care not to hear; and this defect in them is occasioned through want of
humble dependence upon God, and sensible feeling the Spirit of that word; All
my springs are in thee, Psalm. 87. last. Let any that find the case thus with
them, be entreated to be restless in themselves, (not quiet or content) but
pray earnestly to God, that he would both heal them from this foul distemper,
and also forgive them for this great evil, of entertaining, or giving way to
burden at hearing again, that that grace has taught them to know already. I
shall end this Sign with what the wise man says, Prove. 3. 5, 6. Trust in the
Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thy own understanding; but in all
thy ways acknowledge him; and he shall direct thy path; or keep thy feet from
running thus astray.

CHAP. IV. Briefly showing, how want of Charity in hearers, causes them
dislike what is preached.
SIGN IV. When few Sermons will please you, either you like not matter, or
manner, or man.
When Persons come to this decay, that they not only are weary to hear one
matter often, but few Sermons pleases them; they are then ready to throw off
all, and it is usually known by this very character in the Sign, viz. They will
either find some fault with the matter; or else dislike the manner, or else the
man; and wherever this is found in person or persons, without just occasion
given them, such certainly cannot stand long in their profession, without
penitent reformation.

Let but hearers, when they come to Sermons, leave charity behind them; how
easily may they disturb themselves and others in one of these cases; As for
matter, will they not reply, it is such as I know already as well as the
Minister can tell me; otherwise, it is but poor weak ordinary matter: and as to
the manner, will they not reply, either he speaks too high or too loud, that
they like not; or in their account not high enough, too low, that they like
not; otherwise in their account, too fast or too slow, and all this they like
not.

Now as to the man, this being first premised, he is one that has ordinary
approbation and seal from heaven to his Ministry, in the working through grace
sinners to conversion; why as to such a man, they dislike him, and manifest
their dislike; yet being asked can give no reason; nay it is probable to say
truly, they cannot tell why they dislike him, but yet they do, they are not
free to hear such a man. Is not this a silly weakeness got among some
professors, the good Lord undeceive and humble such: surely it is possible for
some to show deslike in some, or all these cases, and as little cause for ^t,
as Corah and his company, had to dislike as they did, Moses and Aaron, Numb.
16. 3. They gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and
said to them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation is holy,
every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye up your
selves above the congregation of the Lord. How causeless this carriage was from
Corab, Dathan, and Abiram, with two hundred and fifty Princes, the Lord from
Heaven in a way not common discovers, they that die, die not the common death
of all men, as that Chapter fully shows; so heinous was their sin in Gods
account, to murmur against his servants without a cause: And is it then a new
thing, that such be in Churches now in this decaying Sign, of disl^king matter,
manner, or man? was not this very Spirit got into the Corinth Church, and bold
even to show it self against that holy man St. Paul, that had begotten them to
the faith, 2 Epist. 10 For his Letters, say they, are weighty and powerful, but
his bodily presence weak, and his speech contemptible. Here they was not
sparing to vent themselves; the small cause they had, yea the unreasonableness
of that their dislike, let the considerate judge, whose conscience is not
asleep. Again, in 1 Cor. 4. such a like Spirit discovers it self, after so
ungratious a rate, as that Wise-mans reply will evidence, in verse. 3. But with
me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, or man's judgment;
they account the Apostles fools, themselves wise, the Apostles weak, themselves
strong; by all this, without adding what Scripaures more might be added, it is
very evident, if we will take the holy Spirits testimony, that such persons
under this very Sign were in the Apostles days; and does not also the
testimony of a good conscience say, there are such even now?

Object. But how comes this to pass.

Answ. This defect seems to arise from this, even selfe-conceitedness, tall
thoughts in some of their own great abilities, comparing themselves with
themselves, and so think what they ought not of themselves.

But as a help against this disease, I would remind what the Apostle writes to
such like people; or at least to prevent such a distemper, Romans 10. 3. For I
say through the grace given unto me, to every man which is among you, not to
think of himself more highly than he ought to think. But to think Soberly, as
God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. Clearly implying, that God
has not dealt to every man the same measure, or knowledge, or reach in Gospel
truths. And least they be hasty to pass Judgment upon others, he would have
them think soberly of themselves; And when they are ready to manifest dislike,
rather to account it their weakness than strength, and so to be silent.

CHAP. V. Containing five Causes of deceit fully thinking we know enough; with
four marks to know when we are under that deceit.
SIGN V. When you think you know enough.
The greatness of this defect, and the danger of it may be seen, if something
be premised and considered. When you think you know enough; that is, you are
grown so tall in the knowledge of God, and the Ordinances of his House, the way
to his Kingdom; the strength of your adversaries, the Flesh, World, and Devil,
and the plague of your own heart; for all this must be premised, as being in
such persons as think they know enough; if their thoughts be not gross deceit,
and then what need of Hearing or Assembling, or crying after knowledge, or
lifting up the voice for understanding? Is not this gross deceit grown somewhat
common, but of dangerous tendency, to knock both heart and hand from off the
means God has ordained to increase and sanctify Knowledge? Is not such a
conceit the road way to Atheism? Were it not gotten among some sleepy
Christians in the Apostles time? Does not that saying, 1 Cor. 8. 2, 3. directly
aim at such? If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet
as he ought to know. But if any man love God, the same is known of him: As much
as if the Apostle should say, you think you know much, truly if you know so
much as that you love God, you are known of him; and if you know this, you know
what you can know in this life; but if you know not this, you know nothing yet
as ye ought to know, whatever you think of your selves: and therefore look to
it, that you love God, and dwell not about this or that tall conceit of your
knowledge, but if you or any man love him, the same is known of him: And this I
shall humbly add, if any man love God, the same has learned to think soberly
or meanly of himself.

But the danger of this appears further, if we consider, that some for being
under this Dying Sign, were about to be spewed out of Gods mouth, Revel. 3. 17.
Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
Nothing; (yet art so ignorant) or know not that thou art wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked. How does the Holy Spirit illustrate to us
the miserable estate of this People, under this Dying Sign? Wretched, one would
think that enough, yet he adds Miserable, and that is not enough to set it out,
but they are Poor, Blind, and naked; in a word, they are quite the contrary to
what they think of themselves, and what is in growing Christians.

Now I shall with Gods help, show some Causes of this Deceit; you may think you
know enough:

First, when you measure what you know, by your own eyes or light; you do think
so, not measuring what you know by the Rule of Knowledge, the Word of God, 1
Cor. 10. 12. For we dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our
selves with some that commend themselves; but they measuring themselves with
themselves, by comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise. Prove. 30.
12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet not washed from
their filthiness.

By these texts you may see, what miserable judgment men will make of things,
when they walk by the light of their own eyes, contrary to Gods express charge,
Deuteronomy. 12. 8. You shall not do after all things ye hear this day, every man what
is right in his own eyes.

Secondly, Another Cause may be this, when you measure what you know, by what
once you did know; not considering that further knowledge, forces further
light, and calls for proportionable practice: When I was a child I spoke as a
child, I understood as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish
things.

Thirdly, When you measure what you know, by seeing others that profess they
know, do as they do, Tit. 1. 16. They profess they know God, but in works they
deny him. Other men's actions must no further be a rule for us, notwithstanding
their knowledge, then as their actions accord with Gods Word, the rule of
knowledge.

Fourthly, When you measure what you know, by what you are disposed to
practice, or do; men pick and choose what Commands they will observe, and how
to observe them, in our days: Some Commands suit more with the nature and
disposition of persons than other Commands do; they that cannot endure
Drunkenness, can give way to passion; they that cannot endure uncleanness, can
give way to Covetousness; but as the victory is glorious when gotten over, what
was most difficult; so measuring what we know, not by what we are disposed to
do; but what God commands us to do, is the truest way or rule to measure by;
for the carnal man will make the Law of Nations his guide; the moral man the
ten Commandments his guide; the Antichristian man the false Spirit his guide;
and all measure themselves by their guide: but the undeceived Christian man,
makes Gods Word his guide, and measures what he knows, by his walking like
that; To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

Fifthly, When you measure not what you know, by what God in his Word calls you
personally to do; when those especial Commands that lies upon you, as Husband
to Wife, Wife to Husband, Father to Child, Child to Father, Master to Servant,
Servant to Master, are left undone, or so lamely done, that they are full of
cracks and flaws; the Religion of such is vain, and contrary comparisons to
this, as vain and deceitful. This was the evil of the Scribes and Pharisees,
they minded Annise and Cummin, but neglected judgment, mercy, and faith, the
weightier matters of the Law: all doings are shows without substance, while the
weightier matters are left undone, James 1. 26. If any man seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deceives his own heart; this man's
Religion is in vain: Consider this in the fear of God.

Object. But how may we know we are deceived with this deceit.

Answ. First, When you have a low value of that means, that under God first
brought you to know: Is not Sermons a low thing with you? this and that
Preacher, that once was high in your account, now weak and mean in your esteem?
Now you are full, now you are rich, and have reigned as Kings without us: I
would to God you did reign, that we also might reign with you, 1 Cor. 4. 8.

Secondly, When you are mighty prodigal of what you know, thinking no matter
well managed, that you have not most voice in, Prove. 15. 2. The tongue of the
wise uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of fools pours forth foolishness.
So prove. 29. 11. The fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in
while afterward.

Thirdly, When you please your self with the thoughts, that few or none in
knowledge outstrip you, having a secret scorn to compare your selves with any;
that is, when you think none is able to say more to a text of Scripture, than
you have done; or knows the holy Spirits mind more than your selves, Jer. 8. 8.
We are wise, (We by way of singularity,) and the Law of the Lord is with us: At
the same time God says, What wisdom is in them?

Fouthly, When in all matters material, you are not careful to take counsel of
God, before you bring them to action, Prove. 15. 28. The heart of the wise
studieth to answer, but the mouth of fools pours forth foolishness. And Chap.
3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

CHAP. VI. Containing in it Christians aptness, through weakness, to neglect
coming to Christ's Table; with a short description of offenses, that seemingly
may hinder; and three Causes of this Decay.
SIGN VI. When a small offense will keep you from Christ's Table.
By Christ's Table here, I would be understood Christ Jesus his own institution
the night he was betrayed; which he set on foot to his Penitent, Believing,
Baptized Disciples, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. For I have received of the Lord, that
which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which
he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and
said; Take, eat, this is my body broken for you; this do in remembrance of me;
And after the same manner he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This C^^
is the New Testament in my blood; This do, as often as you drink it in
remembrance of me. These Scriptures prove it to be Christ Jesus his own
institution, and therefore a duty for his people to be found in often.

But it being somewhat besides the business in hand, to treat in particular of
all the uses and ends of this blessed institution, my work here is to be
instrumental, if the Lord will, to deter believers upon some offenses that they
have taken, from the neglect of this duty that is weighty, and not to be
omitted or abused, as they will answer Christ Jesus, who is ready to take an
account; it being that Ordinance that does in a most lively manner express the
certainty of his suffering, in his body being broken, and his blood poured out,
that he might finish the work of man's redemption, and remain at the Fathers
right Hand, Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; against all the
opposition of that corrupt Spirit, that seeks in our days to disparage and
extinguish this blessed Ordinance, thereby to root out of men's understandings
the certainty of Christ Jesus being a personal fleshly substance; and so
converting into a Spirit, contrary to this saying of his, after his
resurrection; Behold my ^ands, and my feet, that it is my self, handle me and
see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bone as you see me have, Luke 24. 39. Acts
1. 9, 10, 11. The necessity of believing this is evidenced by the sad
consequence of the contrary, for denying Christ Jesus to be a fleshly
substance, and converting him into a Spirit, any Spirit, or every Spirit, and
so in truth deny the Christ of God; And then blind, injudicious men, may form
to themselves, and world, what they will fancy to call their Christ: This
premised, I shall now speak of offenses what they are, and what offenses are
not to hinder.

There are three sorts of Offenses.

First, Offenses given and taken. Secondly, Offenses given and not taken.
Thirdly, Offenses taken and not given.
First, Offenses given and taken, are such, as when Nations, or Persons when
not provoked by invasion to defend, yet by invadeing others will offend; now
they that defend defending; here Offenses are given and taken.

Secondly, Offenses given and not taken, when we bless them that curse us; do
good to them that do hurt to us; pray for them that despightfully use us.

Thridly, Of^^nces taken and not given, are when at a seeming and no real
cause, persons are moved and disquieted. Christ Jesus coming in the days of
his humiliation not as he will come after the days of his exaltation, or at
his second coming, proved a seeming cause, was no real cause for the Jews to
stumble at him; his visage was marred more than any man's, when they looked for
him to come, and presently restore Israel. Now such Offenses taken and not
given, is the intent of this sixth Sign, under the term Small; so that when
persons give way to their passions, and are so moved at something which seems
to be a just Offense to them, from brethren or any other, without or before
they had duly weighed, not suspending all kind of dislike, till in the balance
they have tried whether it be really an Offense, or but seemingly so; is a sign
of great weakness, proving that such are under some spiritual decay, marked
out, though upon another account, by Christ Jesus, Mat. 13. 20, 21. But he that
received the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears the word, and
anon with joy receives it: but when tribulation, and persecution arises;
because of the word, by and by be is offended. Now persecution and tribulation
is no real cause of Offenses, but rather an encouragement to hold fast the
word, being one common mark such are in the truth; the Apostle Paul makes it an
argument of this kind, 1 These. 3. 5. For this cause when I could no longer
forbear, I sent to know your faith, least by some means the tempter have
tempted you, and our labor be in vain. We would have no man moved by these
afflictions, for your selves know, we are appointed thereto; and instead of
being offended we are commanded to glory in tribulation: this may teach us to
bemoan such, and beg them be warned not to keep themselves from Christ's Table,
because of this or that seeming, or real miscarriage in others, if in order to
their reducement from it, we have done our duty.

For any therefore to estrange themselves from Christ's Table, it being no less
than a refusing the food he has prepared; because things go not just as they
would have them, does greatly argue the stop to be in themseves though not by
such heeded; they being great wanderers abroad into the ways of others;
perhaps more busying themselves than they ought, and yet as great strangers at
home to self-examination, and due personal preparation, which where ever it is,
is that indeed that so warrantably calls persons to come to Christ Jesus Feast,
of Bread and Wine, purchased with his blood; that negligence therein will prove
no less than their great sin: What is it therefore that should keep us from
that service, wherein by faith we are to feed, as it were upon the flesh of the
Son of God? Whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed. Truly
nothing but self-unworthiness or unpreparedness: Surely, surely, the spiritual
growing Christian, whose hungrings and thirstings are after hourly communion
with Jesus Christ, can better forgo his natural food a thousand times, than
yield to a stop from this performance: Let us therefore examine our selves,
that we are meet subjects, discerning the Lords Body, and so let us eat that
Bread, and drink that Cup.

Now the Causes of this decay, or yiedling upon small Offenses, to absent from
Christ's Table; may be these three.

First, Too great Ignorance who are the Subjects Christ calls to this Service.
Secondly, Too too great aptness to be easily provoked. Thirdly, Want of Love to
Jesus Christ, the Author of this Service.
First, Too great Ignorance; who are the Subjects Christ calls to this Service;
which consists in a misconstruing his general invitation to all penitent,
believing, baptized Disciples, who have had an orderly admittance thus far, and
by way of Precept, are enjoined both, to come to this Service, and continue in
it; The same day were added to the Church three thousand souls, and they
continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, fellowship, breaking of Bread and
prayer: it is peculiarly unto such appointed and sanctified, that they may keep
in remembrance their Lord and Savior; So often as ye eat this Bread and drink
this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come. But I would not be
mistaken here, as that I mean, the outward badge of these only, makes right
Subjects for Christ's Call; yet this outward must be, but woe to it when it is
alone: The Kings daughter is to be all glorious within, as well as her garment
of pure gold: The hungerer and thirster after his supply, that sensibly sees
all his springs to be in him; and as the Heart pants after the brooks of
water, has his foul crying, Oh when shall I come and appear before him?
negligence to be thus fitted, causes ignorance of Christ's Call.

But Secondly, Too too great aptness to be easily provoked: Some Christians are
so weak, that they will be still forming discontent to themselves, ill
interpreting others actions, and straining at every Gnat, which generally comes
through weakness in judgment, and unaptness to be busying themselves with their
high Calling, and the worth of Gods gracious privileges afforded them; by
which means the inward man is too much raked or made raw, and so apt to smart
at every little touch; as special care therefore must be had in Churches, that
none give just offense; so that none upon too light account take offense; for
it does but argue such Children or Babes in Christianity, and greatly robs
themselves of that spiritual refreshing strength, that otherwise might be their
present portion, and fills their heart with disquieting thoughts to the
hindering their spiritual appetite from taking in that rich refreshment, Christ
Jesus Table is furnished with for every prepared guest.

But Thirdly, Want of love to Jesus Christ, the Author of this Service: All
those motives that provokes the heart to love Jesus Christ, should be active
now; viz. The greatness of his love to purchase this Service for us, with no
less price than his precious blood; the smalness of our desert to procure this;
together with the high privileges it signifies us heirs unto: Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed on as, that we should be called, (or
accounted) the Sons of God, who was before without Christ, etc. But now made
nigh through the blood of Christ. How should this provoke our fervent love to
him, to be crying out with the Spouse in the Canticles; My beloved is fair and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. Certainly my friends, were our hearts
truly spiritual, we could not choose but see singular desert in Jesus Christ;
calling for the greatest of our love, in a holy affection to the in joying of
him, and making us prefer our communion with him, in this service, before all
things that in this world may challenge our dearest respect: It must needs
therefore follow, that want of love, makes way for small offenses to keep us
from Christ's Table; I shall leave this to consideration, and pass to the
Seventh Sign of a dying Christian.

CHAP. VII. Showing the great decay to Christianity, when mindless to Prayer;
with a plain discovery of the Necessity, Excellency, Lets, and Helps to Prayer,
in sixteen particulars.
SIGN VII. When you have no great mind to Prayer.
When a Christian is mindless of this bosom, blessed, intimate service of
Prayer, which is a drawing nigh to, and talking with the great Lord God
Almighty; here is then ground enough to conclude his state, and his decay very
great. Now in Prayer there is considerable.

First, The Necessity of Prayer. Secondly, The Excellency of Prayer. Thirdly,
Lets to Prayer. Fourthly, Helps to Prayer.
First, The necessity of Prayer, appears from the command of God, 1 These. 5. 7.
Pray without ceasing; Col. 4. 21. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same
with thanksgiving, 1 Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto God.

Secondly, It appears from example, 1 Samuel 12. 23. God forbid that I should sin
in ceasing to pray for you, Psalm. 55. 27. Evening and morning, and at noon,
will I pray, Dan. 6. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he
went into his house, and kneeled upon his knees, three times a day, and prayed,
and gave thanks before his God, as he did at other times.

Thirdly, The Necessity appears from the importunity that goes along with
prayer, Luke 22. 44. And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, Luke 6.
12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went into a mountain to pray,
and continued all night in prayer to God, Acts 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept
in Prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church to God for him,
Luke 11. 8, 9. I say to you, though he will not rise and give him, because he
is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many
as he needs.

Secondly, The Excellency of Prayer, appears in this.

First, It ingageth Gods strength. Secondly, It holds with holy reverence Gods
hands. Thirdly, In no condition we can be barred from it.
For the first, Exodus 17. 11. And it came to pass, when Moses held up his
hands, Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hands, the Amalekites
prevailed, Josh. 10. 12, 13, 14. Then spoke Joshua (or prayed to the Lord,) in
the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites, before the Children of Israel;
and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou
Moon upon the Valley of Jaalon; and the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed
until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies; and there was no
day like that before it, or after it, that the Lord hearkened to the prayer of a
man, for the Lord fought for Israel.

Secondly, Prayers Excellency appears in this, it holds with holy reverence
Gods hands, Exodus 32. 9, 10, 11, 12. And the Lord said to Moses, I have seen
this people, and behold it is a stiff-necked people; Now therefore let me alone
that I may destroy them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. And Moses
besought the Lord, saying, Lord why does thy wrath wax hot, turn I pray thee
and repent of this evil against them, Numb. 14. 11, 22. And the Lord said to
Moses, how long will this people provoke me, and how long will it be ere they
believe me? now therefore let me alone that I may destroy them.

Thirdly, Prayers Excellency appears, in that in no condition we can be barred
from it, Daniel, in the Lions Den, Chap. 6. Jonah in the Whales Belly, Chap. 1.
2. Then Jonah prayed to the Lord his God, out of the Fishes Belly, and said, I
cried by reason of my affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me: out of the
belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice: so Paul, and Silas in prison
prayed, and sang praises to God, and the prisoners heard them.

Now we come to Lets to prayer, i. e. what hinders Prayer from prevailing with
God.

First, presumption in an unreverent adventuring before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 14.
and 20. 33. etc. For as yet the people had not prepared their heart unto the
God of their Fathers, therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because
I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel, Amos 4. 12.

A second Let or hinderence to Prayer is, wandering thoughts, Jer. 4. 14. O
Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved, how long
shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Therefore take no thought saying,
what shall we eat, or what shall we drink; or wherewith shall we be clothed?
but seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 32, 33.

The third Let to Prayer is, bosom sin, or pleasant delight in some secret
lust, Psalm. 66. 8. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear me.
Josh. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. The Lord says to Joshua, get thee up, wherefore lie
thou thus upon thy face; Israel has sinned, they have also transgressed my
covenant, which I have commanded them; for they have taken of the accursed
thing, and have also stolen and dissembled; and they have put it also among
their own stuff, therefore they could not stand before their Enemies, but
turned their backs. This good man Joshua in Chap. 10. 12. at another time is so
prevalent at Prayer, that the Sun and Moon stands still; yet now in his seventh
Chapter, because there is some bosom sin in the Camp, he cannot prevail till
this is removed.

A fourth Let is, want of reconciliation to brethren, Mat. 23. 23, 24.
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the Altar, and
first go and be reconciled to thy brother. Mat. 6. 12. For give us our debts as
we forgive our debtors; but if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive ye your trespasses.

A fifth Let, is despairing doubts of being answered, Jam. 1. 5, 6. If any man
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God that gives to all liberally, and
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him; but let him ask in says, nothing
doubting, for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the
wind, and tossed; let not that man think he shall receive any thing at the hand
of the Lord: whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, believe that you shall receive
it, and ye shall receive it, Mark. 11. 24.

We shall now speak of Helps to prayer; or says some, I would but I cannot
pray, I want words, all that I can do is to sigh; for a Help to this.

First, labor to get a feeling of the necessity and excellency of Prayer, so
as that thy heart goes under a grievous burden, because thou can not pray,
Jer. 5. 3. O Lord are not thine eyes upon the truth, thou have stricken them
but they are not grieved. Here the Prophet complains, that though Israel are
stricken, smitten, and afflicted, yet they have not grieved; clearly implying,
that a grieved, burdened state at the sense of want, is a fair step in the way
to obtain supply, Psalm. 38. 4, 6. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as
a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me; I am troubled, I am bowed down
greatly; cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.
22.

Secondly, study much how to get deep sense of your great wants of Gods daily
help; All my springs are in thee; without me you can do nothing: For in him we
live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. 27. 28.

Thirdly, Consider God has provided no way for you to acquaint him with your
wants, but prayer, and if you cannot pray, how will you make your complaints to
God, Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by Prayer and supplication with thanksgiving,
let your requests be made known unto God, 2 Chronicles. 26. Vzzia sought God in the
days of Ezra, and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper: call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me, Psalm. 50. 15. Hos. 5. 15.

Fourthly, consider that all your outward mercies becomes blessings through
Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5, 6. For every creature of God is good, if it be reeceived
with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and Prayer: Give us
this day our daily bread; When Jesus had made the multitude sit down upon the
ground, he looked up to Heaven, and gave thanks; or said grace, as the old
translations read it.

Fifthly, Consider what a miserable condition will yours be, if cast into the
Lions Den, Whales Belly, or stocks, if you cannot pray: They poured out their
supplications when thy chastening was upon them.

Sixthly, Entreat Jesus Christ to teach you to pray, Luke 11. 1. And it came to
pass, as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his
Disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciples: as the Lord commands us to do, so he must help us to Pray. Zech. 36.
37.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the great Decay to Christianity, when mindless to Reading
and Meditation in the holy Scriptures; with six Calamities very observable,
which Scripture Ignorance brings.
SIGN VIII. When Reading and Meditation in the holy Scriptures, is not
delightful but burdensome unto you.
When Israel was pleased to choose them a King, God is pleased to set him his
work, lest they lose their end, and God lose his honor.

And it shall come to pass, when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom,
that he shall write him a Copy of Gods Law in a book, and it shall be with him,
and he shall read therain all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear
the Lord his God, that his heart he not lifted up above his brethren. In like
manner when Joshua enters upon the Government, he has this charge from God,
that the Book of the Law should not depart out of his mouth, but he must
meditate therein day and night; that he might observe to do according to all
that's written, then should he make his way prosperous, and have good success.
And when King David declares who is the blessed man, He is one that delights in
the Law of the Lord, making it his meditation day and night. This premised,
discovers most precious worth attainable through Scripture reading, with
meditation; and if need were might call for a multitude more witnesses, both
from Scripture and Experience: But it being not so much my proper work to
assert Scripture Excellency; as to show and prove that Christian to be dying to
Christ, that is not delightfully taken up with Meditation, and Reading in his
Word. I shall therefore proceed in a plain method.

Thus where delight to Reading and Meditation grows low, there negligence to
Reading and meditation must needs grow high, there decay grows great, and such
must decline in their spiritual estate, this negligence bringing with it much
ignorance, and so covers the eyes and hearts of such as with a vail, so as that
they cannot so see as the spiritual growing man sees, Gods Precepts how they
command him, Gods promises how they uphold him, Gods threatenings how awfully
they persuade him, the Scripture being his Treasury or Storehouse, from whence
he is made able through the spirits help, to withstand the fiery darts of the
wicked one, saying after Christ Jesus his Captain, thus and thus it is written.
It is evident to the meanest capacity, that does but consider, how great
incapacity all such must needs be in, to understand and resist the manifold
temptations and wiles of the evil one, except they be well acquainted with Gods
holy Word, that has in it Armor for the whole man, with directions how to put
it on; and it becomes thus excellent, for that all Scripture is given by the
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Ignorance
therefore here, must make sore desolation, and bring as I humbly conceive upon
persons, these six Calamities.

First, It makes you in a wilderness when sickness and affliction comes,
because you will not know how and why they come. Sickness, and Affliction are
of two sorts, inward and outward; Inward are such as seize upon the mind, as a
judgment caused upon the person where they come, Isa. 6. 9, 10. And he said, go
and tell this people, hear ye indeed but understand not; see ye indeed, but
perceive not; make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. So Romans 1. 21, 28.
Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened: And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Now such fore judgments as these, are come
upon and procured by many, who turn the grace of God into wantonness,
professing to be most spiritual, live as the almost most carnal, little minding
(because greatly ignorant) of those spiritual causes they may run into, to the
bringing upon themselves such spiritual judgments or sicknesses and afflictions
as these. And indeed how comes it to pass, that such afflictions are not
feared, before they come to the provoking such to walk so as may prevent their
coming, but ignorance of the Scripture? they not conversing often with them, to
the well informing themselves, what judgments may come on their minds, and what
are the Causes God assigns of their coming, so as to be in trembling and dread
continually, to the keeping themselves out of that channel, where such bitter
waters runs.

Again, there are outward sicknesses and afflictions, and they are such as
these, Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59, 60. If thou will not observe to do all the words of
this Law, that are written in this Book; that thou may fear this glorious and
fearful Name, the Lord thy God; Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful,
and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance; sore
sicknesses and of long continuance: Moreover, he will bring upon thee all the
diseases of Egypt, which thou was afraid of, and they shall cleave unto thee.
Levit. 26. 15, 16. If ye shall despise my Statutes, or if your soul shall abhor
my judgments, that you will not do them, but that you break my Covenant; I also
will do this to you, I will even appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and the
burning Ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart; and ye
shall sow your seed in vain, for your Enemies shall eat it. But I shall speak
fully to the Causes of Affliction in the Twenty second Sign, and therefore
proceed no further here, but come to the second Calamity, that Scripture
Ignorance brings.

Secondly, That your uneven walking with God, may bring upon your selves death
before its time. This Particular is proved thus; Long life promised to the
obedient, Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be
long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. Also Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47.
Set your hearts to all the words which I testify among you this day; and
command them your Children, for it is not in vain, because that through this
thing, (mark that) ye shall prolong your days in the Land, whither ye go over
into Jordan to possess it. This is also proved by the contrary which comes upon
the disobedient, Deuteronomy. 11. 16, 17. Take heed to your selves, that your heart be
not deceived, and ye turn aside and serve other Gods, and then the Lords wrath
be kindled against you, and ye perish quickly from off the good Land, which the
Lord gives you. Eccles. 8. 13. But it shall not be well with the wicked,
neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears
not before God. So Chap. 7. 17. Be not over much wicked, neither be thou
foolish, why should thou die before thy time?

Thirdly, By means of Scripture Ignorance, you cannot know to ask in faith the
things you want for soul or body; that is, you will not know where to be
absolute or positive in your asking, and whereto be submissive and conditional
in your asking: Now the Scripture gives directions as to the putting up
Petitions to God, and men may easily err by not observing them, Genesis 32. 26.
And he said, (to wit the Angel) Let me go for the day breaeth; and he answered,
(to wit Jacob) I will not Let thee go, except thou bless me. So Exodus 32. 12.
Wherefore should the Egyptians say, for mischief did he bring them out to slay
them in the Mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth; Turn
from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people. So Acts 12.
5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing unto
God for him. By these Scriptures we may observe, that to be conditional or
indifferent in our asking, when God may be dishonored by denying, is not good;
therefore in this case, may a man coming in Gods way, be bold to ask pardon of
his sins, peace to his conscience, power over his corruptions without
condition: in such case, Gracious and humble resolutions to have no denial,
greatly likes God, and suits with his will, Isa. 62. 6, 7. I have set Watchmen
upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night;
you that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence till he establish and make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth. But observe, in all cases Petitions putting
up, must not thus be framed, Acts 21. 14. And when he would not be persuaded,
we ceased saying, the will of the Lord be done. So Romans 1. 9, 10 For God is my
witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without
ceasing I make mention always of you in my prayers; making request, if by any
means I might now at length have a prosperous journey, by the will of God,
(mark that) to come to you. So Jam. 4, 15. For that ye ought to say, if the
Lord will, we shall live and do this or that: I shall leave this to
consideration, and proceed to the fourth Calamity.

Fourthly, Negligence to Reading and Meditation, will make you ignorant wherein
you may prevent the presence and comforts of Gods holy Spirit; that is, that
God may either take away his spirit from striving with you, or you away from
his spirit, My spirit shall not always strive, Genesis 6. 3. 1 Samuel 16. 14. But
the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord
troubled him. Psalm. 51. 7. Take not thy holy spirit from me. Neh. 9. 30. Yet
many years did thou for bear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit
in thy Prophets, yet would they not give ear; Therefore gave thou them into
the hands of the people of the Land: But they rebelled and vexed his holy
spirit; therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. By
these Scriptures we may see, that the holy Spirits company may be put away from
us through ungracious walking.

Fifthly, Negligence in Scripture will make you ignorant, that there is a
Legion of evil Angels waiting hourly to take advantage against you; no sooner
in the Text but now mentioned, had the good Spirit left Saul, but a^ evil
Spirit comes upon him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 19 20, 21. And the Lord said who shall
in(...) Ahab? presently there came out a Spirit and said, I will entice him,
and be a lying Spirit in the month of all his Prophets. Job. 1. 6. There was a
day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan
came also among them; and so soon as Joshua is standing before the Angel of
God, Satan is got at his right hand to resist him: now ignorance that there is
a Legion, or very many evil Spirits waiting all advantages and opportunities to
do us hurt, occasions many to be secure when and where they have no cause, and
so their feet come to be ensnared in bypaths to their shame, and sorrow; let us
therefore be so studious in Scripture, as to say in truth with the holy
Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 10. 11. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also, lest
Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his devices:
Clearly noting, how careful this good man was to keep the tempter at greatest
distance; while persons are not sensible that they are continually attended
with wicked Spirits, that seeks to ensnare them, by drawing them aside from
God, they shall be the oftener captivated, and so in their spiritual estate in
great danger to be spoiled; When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he
walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none; then he returns to
his house, [or heart] from whence he came out, and finding it empty, swept,
that is, destiture of the good Spirits company, then goes he and takes with
him seven more wicked Spirits than himself, and enters in and dwells there, Mat.
12. 43, 44. Hence it is clear that evil Spirits both wait advantages, and take
them where they find suitable subjects to be gaining upon. But I pass this, and
come to the last Calamity which negligence brings.

Sixthly, It makes you ignorant that you may hinder Gods holy Spirit from
working any effectual good upon you. This may possibly seem strange to some,
that the good purposes of Gods good Spirit upon any, may be by them hindered;
but if it be considered well it need not be strange, for if the workings of the
holy Spirit were unresistable, then few if any could be ungodly; it strove much
with the old World, and yet they was not worthy to be saved from the Deluge;
and striving need not be where there can be no resisting. Again the holy Spirit
was much grieved with Isreal's stubbornness, testifying against them many years,
Neh. 9. yet would they not give ear; how could it be said the Spirit grieved at
their withstanding, if they could not withstand? Turn ye at my reproof, and I
will pour out my Spirit upon you; and make known my words unto you, but ye have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: In all their
affliction, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them, but
they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; therefore (mark that) he was turned to
be their enemy. Now if the workings and strivings of the holy Spirit, were
unresistable, certainly Israel with whom it so strove, being so bemoaned of God
for their rebellion, neither could nor should have so withstood him. How shall
I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? how shall I make
thee as Adma or Zeboim? my heart is hot within me, my repentings are kindled
together: Would it not be blasphemy to say, that Gods thus bemoaning was not
real? It is altogether certain, that the very heart of God is set out in these
expressions.

CHAP. IX. Showing that an itching ear in Christians after Novelties, bespeak^
them decaying to godliness: with four Remedies against it.
SIGN IX. When you are mighty inquisitive after Novelties, or new things,
rather than wholesome Doctrine.
This Sign is too too common amongst Professors, and commonly arises from some
dislike that they take, because things go not just as they would have them,
after the light of their own eyes; such may know themselves, or at least be
known by their instability or running from one thing to another; as Solomon
says, given to change, no longer contented than while they are prosecuting
some notion or other, that has in it the face of new, and if with their notion
they prove to be accepted, then perhaps quieted for a while, till some other
new conceit take them; but if not accepted, then they swell so big, that the
bounds of the Church is too strait to hold them. And sure from hence has risen
the multitude of dividings in opinion, that now are on foot in our Land, men
growing confidently conceited that they are in the right, and no reason shall
sway them; but if their offer be rejected, then presently they make a schism,
and so striving to get a party, crying out of great injustice, as though truth
were only in them, and withstood because their Notion is withstood. All this
while the great end of Church-being, and Ordinances appointing (to wit
edification) not so much as thought of, but forgetting that blessed rule of
Christ Jesus best followers (who became all things to all men that they might
gain the more) drive on furiously, and come what will come in the issue, all
must presently be as they see, or else they will be gone; whereas God knows if
they were narrowly looked into, they would be found of the simple that are apt
to believe every word, while the prudent looks well to his goings, not hasty to
receive, nor hasty to forgo what he has already received.

By this I would not be understood to palliate men, who count others giddy
headed for leaving an old Romish form, when by God they are otherwise
persuaded, light breaking in, and truth being made manifest; but I rather
indeed would by this give such to understand, that the drift of what is here
pointed at, has respect to such as in a right constituted Church cannot be
contented; Not in the least encouraging any others to be contented with false
settlement, ignorantly concluding, that if they change, it will be to something
new and not true. Men may change but it must be for the better, yet how apt are
persons to be affected with changes, that they will change though it be for the
worst; At such a sort of people my drift is, it being an evil that the
Scripture is not wanting to tell us of, Exodus 32. in the beginning, While Moses
is but absent for a while from Israel, they cry to Aaron to make them new Gods,
saying, these be thy Gods O Israel; in like manner as you may read, in Numb.
11. 6. compared with 21. 5. Gods own appointment that once was welcome to them,
now they loath it, while it remans the same from Gods own continued
institution, yet they are a weary of it, calling it light bread: An unsettled
people taken with new things because new, and a weary of this though true
bread. The Author to the Hebrews, chap. 13. 8, 9 seems to rebuke such a Spirit
as this, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; Be not carried
away with diverse and strange Doctrines: clearly noting, that they were ready
to hearken after something or other that would have tended to their subverting;
That we henceforth be no more Children tossed too and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, (note that) by the slight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but growing up into him in all
things which is the head even Christ. All which premised bespeaks professors
care to be how they may stand unmovable, abiding, and abounding in the way of
the Lord, and not to be soon moved in their minds from their standing, because
of some new spirit that seems to proffer it self.

As a help therefore against this disease, I would humbly offer three or four
directions, and so conclude this Sign.

1 That you would pray often for Gods leading, before ye take upon you his
Religion.

Secondly, As well hear, as duly consider what can be said, against what you
are about to receive, as what can be said for it.

Thirdly, That you be able to warrant every principle of your practice, at
least by two or more texts of Scripture.

Fourthly, That you labor as far as you are knowers, by striving to be doers;
negligence here provokes God to suffer a Spirit of error and deep sleep to fall
upon many.

CHAP. X. Proving us dying to Christ, when others sinings are not our
sorrowings; with two Remedies against this Decay.
SIGN X. When you can hear of foul miscarriages in others, with little or no
heart remorse.
That is, When the knowledge of others sinning, proves not thy sorrowing; where
the name and honor of God lies near a heart, a deep wound must needs come at
the tidings of miscarriage, and by this most certainly may a growing or
declining Christian be read, and read himself if heeded; for answerable to the
spiritual sense or feeling of things, will their behavior be. A man that is
wounded in his body, is more or less astonished at it, and amazed by it, as he
more or less retains his senses; want whereof lessens not the wound, it rather
shows the danger of such to be the greater: Three or four things considered
must needs declare, and prove such Christians not only dying but near dead, as
can hear of others sining, and by no means they themselves touched with
sorrowing.

First, the great dishonor that sin brings to God; the sin of no people
dishonours God so much as the sin of professors, You have I known of all the
Families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities,
Amos 3. 2.

Secondly, The great reproach it brings upon the Gospel; A man that never
professed any thing better than making it his trade to sin, though his estate be
miserable, yet he professes not better; but for such as take upon them the name
or profession of Jesus Christ, and not depart from, or again turn to iniquity,
provokes the enemies of God to blaspheme, 1 Samuel 1. 12.

Thirdly, The lamentable misery that such bring upon themselves; There is more
hope of one that never made any profession; the sin of this is next door to
impossibility of redemption from final hardening, It had been better they had
never known the way of truth, then after depart from the holy commandment, 2
Pet. 21. 4. The evil World by seeing such sin, are not only tempted to remain
in their sinful state, but to glory in it, for they may think they do but sin,
and serve, and please themselves; and if professors so do, why may not they?
Thus the Devil secretly laughs at them, and openly gets advantage by them;
Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, for men
abhorred the offering of the Lord. Elies Sons that was in the Priesthood, is
singled out with marks of Gods displeasure, as sinners of a deep dye, insomuch
that want of suitable indignation against them for their evil in their Father
Eli, who in other things was a good man, brings upon him that, that makes the
ears of all Israel that heard of it to tingle, 1 Samuel 2. 3, 4. What a plague
was brought upon those that did evil before the Lord in Moses time? twenty four
thousand slain til Phineas in his zeal to the Lord stood up and made an
atonement, Numb. 25. It is without all question, that the Nations round about,
were as to the act more wicked and abominable, as to the same and such like
wickedness; yet we do not read of such severity in God toward them, as to
those his own people that had seen his miracles, and his wonders; were it not
that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and say our hand is high, and the Lord has not done
this, I would scatter my people among the Nations, but for tempting the wicked
to do more wickedly: Gods severity should be set out against his own people in
bitter characters; this must needs render such very much dying to Christ, that
can hear of soul miscariages in other professors, and not themselves taken with
horror and astonishment; My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart,
because thou have heard, Oh my soul in Jerusalem, the sound of the Trumpet, the
Alarm of War; Set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and weep for
the abominations that are done in the midst thereof; Zekiel. 9. 4. I will
gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assemblies, who are of thee, to
whom the reprobate is a burden, Zeph. 3. 18. Does not the Scrptures with one
consent, discribe the growing, and declining Christian by this very mark? one
is sorrowful, the other mourns not; it is reported there is fornication amongst
you, 1 Cor. 5. and you are puffed up and have not rather mourned: clearly
noting, that this was none of their virtues, but indeed an evident token of
spiritual loss in them, the contrary being so honorable in Gods account, viz. a
sorrowful spirit at others misdoings; plainly proving, that if a wanting, a
certain character of great decay: I shall come now to offer briefly some Causes
of this spiritual decay, and some Remedies to remove or prevent it, and so
conclude this Sign.

First, want of zeal, that burning shining Grace, which when accompanied with
judgment, cannot bear to see or hear of Miscarriages in others, without
personal horror; As soon as Moses came nigh the Camp, and saw the Calf, and
dancing that was there, his anger waxed hot, and he took the Calf which they
had made, and burnt it with fire, ground it to powder, Exodus 32. So Phineas in
his zeal to the Lord, when he saw the evils that were committed in the Camp,
arose and slew both the man and the woman, and so the plague was staid.

But secondly, want of becoming love to others eternal welfare, is a Cause of
our not sorrowing at their sinnings; that good man Jeremiah, chap. 13. 17. If
they will not hear, (but persist in their evil way) his soul shall weep in
secret places for their pride. See this also in Jesus Christ, that had such
love to perishing Jerusalem, That when he was come near and be held the City,
he wept over it, Luke 19. 41.

As Remedies against this decay; First, consider what a wide breach it makes in
our spiritual state, and whither in a little time, it will bring us; Repent, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will sight against them with the sword
of my mouth, Revel. 2. 16.

Secondly, In order to removing this, do as men do that have a desperate mortal
disease growing upon them, if not speedily remedied; how will they go and run,
pray and pay, leave no stone unturned, no means unattempted? Even in like sort,
must spiritual diseases be looked at, and labored with: See thou a man
diligent, he shall stand before Kings and not mean men, Prove. 22. last. Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Psalm 51. 2.

CHAP. XI. Showing that unsavory talking among Christians when they meet,
proves them earthly minded: with three Causes of this Decay.
SIGN XI. When in your comings together, your talk is not savoury and heavenly.
Upon various occasions Christians meet together; sometimes with those that are
wringing their hands for sorrow; sometimes with those clapping (as it were)
their hands for joy; sometimes at the Assembly, sometimes at one another
dwellings: Now all comings together, ministers occasion of Talking, and will
greatly evidence where most is each others Treasure, it being natural for
persons when they meet, by their voice to express what is the workings of their
mind; And as the heart is more or less heavenward, so certainly will their
talk bend more or less that way: Earthly minded men when they meet, will be
carrying on their trade, counting it matter of duty, to promote what lies
nearest their hearts; so those that decay to spirituals, having begun to affect
themselves with new Lovers, and so losing the sense they once had to the best
things, may be discerned now to have changed for the worst, by their unsavory
and earthly talking; and how advantageous all meetings are to the promoting
(whatsoever it designed) none is able to express, but such as experimentally
make a view of it, well considering, That evil communications corrupt good
manners, or lessens a man's hold to the best things; and when that precious time
in Christians meetings together is so spent, that its rather spilt like water
upon the ground* such leaving no savor of grace behind them, must needs argue,
that they are falling, if not fallen from their first Love, besides the
dishonor done to God: great has been the wrong such have done both themselves
and their adherents, in public or private assembling.

What more unpreparing the heart, and indisposing the affection to the
spiritual worshipping of God, then either before hand being in a carnal slepy
posture, or else in such unseasonable, if not worse? talking (some of their
Farms, others of their Merchandise,) nay perhaps backbiting and whisperingly
opening the infirmities of others, to the sowing prejudice in the hearts of
those, that through ignorance and weakness incline to hear them; whereas on the
contrary, such whose minds are always carrying about with them the
contemplating of Gods end, in giving opportunity after opportunity, puts
themselves with trembling care into such employment (of still getting or doing
good) as may obtain from their gracious God, the approbation of redeeming time:
see that good Nehemiahs practice for this, he no sooner meets Hanani, (but
what?) I asked concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the
captivity, and concerning Jerusalem; he is inquiring presently, how it fared
with the people of God, and Jerusalem the City of David, and place of his
Fathers Sepulcher, and full near his heart their welfare lay, as appears by his
hearty affection and affliction at the evil tidings, Chap. 1. 4. And it came to
pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept and mourned certain
days, and fasted and prayed before the Lord God of heaven. I shall add another
text, and then proceed to the Causes of this decay, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another; (but their talking was so savoury
and so heavenly) that the Lord hearkened and heard it, (yea) and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name.

Now the Causos of this Decay, which being avoided, may also serve as Remedies
against it; and they are three.

First, Long custom to Christian Meetings. Secondly, Uunskilfulness in Gospel
Selfdenial. Thirdly, Negligence to a plain duty.
First, Long custom to Christian Meetings; though this be not in it self a
Cause, yet it may be easily so converted; for without a godly jealousy over
the heart in often meeting with Christians, the very custom of it, will by
little and little, steal away that spiritual vigor that ought to run in the
veins of every one, where ever they are, to the making their being as much as
possible, to Gods honor and their souls edifying; for custom begets such an
aptness to any service, that except the heart be still examined, persons will
be in meetings together, very destitute both of suitable preparation, and
answerable expectation, and all through long custom; for as in sinning, it
will take away in time the conscience of sin; so in the best performances it
will rob a man of that forehand care, that should attend him, unless he be much
upon his watch.

Secondly, A second Cause is, Unskilfulness in one great point of Christianity;
viz. Gospel self-denial, which stands in a conforming the whole man to be
always pleasing and serving the Lord; such knowing themselves not to be their
own but bought with a price, and therefore whether eating, drinking, talking,
walking, to be doing all to the glory of God, whose they are: Now unskilfulness
herein, will be still carrying on all affairs with much mixture; partly in
designing the Lord, partly designing self; having not so learned to live upon
another bottom, as the Gospel grace of self-denial teaches, Mat. 16. 24, 25.
Mark 6. 34, 35. by which means many are at a great stand how to spend this and
that opportunity, and so instead of asking their fellow Christian how he grows
or stands affected to the best things, what temptations are upon him? when, at
what times he finds himself most weak and unable to resist? And whether often
in closet prayer, watchings, fastings? and what assurance he has from some
solid marks, whether he grows yea or nay? and what value he puts on fellowship
with God, and enjoying the light of his countenance? what all this is, and what
its worth, when it shines, when its clouded? but if instead of such Communings
as these, time be vainly spent in hearing and telling some new thing,
complaining rather of hard times, than hard hearts, this and the other outward
loss, instead of true losing; if the case be thus it must needs proclaim you
dying Christians; for that in your comings together, your talk is not savoury
and heavenly.

Thirdly, A third Cause may be this, Negligence to a plain duty, Heb. 10. 24,
25. And let us consider one another, to provoke to love, and to good works; not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; that is certainly, to be
upon doing the work of the day) and so much the more, as you see the day
appreaching. Clearly impying, that we should be so far from neglect to
spiritual and profitable talking when we meet, that it should be our care so to
consider one another, wherein they begin to grow faint, weary, flow, remiss,
and wanti^g, as to be provoking or seeking occasion to p^rswade and put forward
such to that, that they ought not to be backward in: This was the trade of Gods
Children as you may read, Acts 15 36. And some days after, Paul said to
Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our Brethren, in every City where we have
preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. Acts 18. 27. Who when he
was come helped them much, which had believed through grace. This certainly is
as true in Paul and Barnabas; as in Apollo: let then I pray you, what has been
said in this Sign, serve for caution thus far, that you will all be careful
when you feast, when you fast, when you sit by your fire, walk by the way, lie
down, rise up, for the avoiding precious times mispending, to be talking of the
Lord and his Laws: consider what you read, and pass to the next.

CHAP. XII. Proving Vnpreparedness to hear the Word of God, a Sign of Dying to
Christ; with three sorts of Hindrances, which must be laid aside; and what must
be our work; before Hearing, in Hearing, and after Hearing.
SIGN. XII. When you are so little prepared for the solemn Assemblies, that
they come before you think of them, or long for them.
When Persons suffers themselves, to be so taken up with common or worldly
business, as that they leave no room for solemn Prayer, and Preparation, to
meet in Gods Ordinances at days appointed; its an evident token, of little
reverence besetting the heart, and as little consideration who they are to
meet: Now to come before the Lord in his Assembly, where he is wont to be, and
has promised to be, there doubtless remains a work upon us, to be done by us,
by way of Preparation, and that because of Gods presence being there, as in the
Temple, the Type of Gods Assembly or Gospel Church, Kings 1. 3, 9. I will put
my Name there, and my heart, and my eyes, shall be there perpetually; his
power, presence, and goodness shall be there, and he ever was and is wont to
meet his People there. Tell me O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest
and make thy flocks to rest at even; if thou know not, go thy way and feed
thy Kids by the shepherds tents, Cant. 1. Now that great preparation as to
this and that by way of duty ought to be, will appear by what may follow; want
to prepare therefore must needs be a character of spiritual decay; and the
rather if we consider, how strict the Lord was as to them that drew nigh him
when he gave out the Law, Exodus 19, 10. And the Lord said unto Moses, go and
sanctify the people to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes; and
let the Priests also which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest
the Lord break forth upon them. Nadab and Abihu, for not sanctifying the Lord
when they drew nigh him, there went out a fire from the Lord, and devoured
them, and they died before the Lord, Levit. 10. 2. Most remarkable is that
passage in good Joseph, Genesis 41. 14. Before he will come into the Kings
presence, he shaves himself, and changes his raiment; lays aside his prison
garments: How much rather should those prepare and lay aside, that come into
the presence of the King of Kings: Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble
at his word, Isa. 66. 5. Persons may hear from day to day, and remain much like
the same, rather worse than better; which must needs argue some defect in
themselves by unduly approaching near so solemn a Service: I shall therefore in
humility offer some Directions, what we may do in order to our profit, before
hearing, in hearing, and after hearing.

First, Before Hearing, pray God bless his Word unto you, and lead you in his
way, Psa. 25. 4, 5. Show me thy way O Lord, teach me thy path, lead me in thy
truth; Teach me for thou art the God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the
day, Exodus 33. 15. If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. This
is as true in one case as another.

Secondly, Go to the Assembly with reverent considerations, that you are to
meet God, Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because
I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. King Rehoboam did
evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12. 14.
compared with Chap. 19. 3. There are good things found in thee, in that thou
preparest thy heart to seek God.

Thirdly, Before you go to hear, you must lay aside all superfluity, 1 Pet. 2.
1. Wherefore laying aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,
receive with meekness the ingrafted Word.

There are three sorts of Superfluities to be laid aside, which else will
hinder you from profitting.

First, All those doubtful carping cares for the things of this life, you are
incident to, Mat. 13. 22. Mark 4. 19.

Secondly, You must lay aside all those vexatious frets of this life you are
incident to, Judges 16. 16. compared with 1 Samuel 1. 6, 7.

Thirdly, You must lay aside all those pleasant pleasing pleasures of this life
you are incident to, Psalm. 45. 10; 11. All or any of these being carried with
us, and heeded by us, will so load us, that there will be no room for the Word
to profit.

Fourthly, When you come to hear, come with hungring and thirsting, Mat. 5. 6.
Psalm. 42. 1, 2.

The second Direction as to Hearing is, what you must do in the time of Hearing.

First, You must hear with reverence as Gods Embassage, Psalm. 2. 11. compared
with 89. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to
be had in reverence by all that are about him.

Secondly, You must hear as Gods Word, Isa 66, 2. 1 These. 2. 11.

Thirdly, You must hear with attention and godly fear, Isa. 55. 2. Nehem. 8. 3.
Luke 29. 48. And all the people were very attentive to hear him.

Fourthly, In Hearing, you must mix what you hear with faith, Heb. 4. 1, 2. But
the word preached did not profit, it being not mixed with faith in them that
heard it, 2 Chronicles. 20. 26.

Fifthly, You must receive what you hear in the love of God, 2 These. 2. 10.
Psalm. 119, 97.

Sixthly, and lastly, You must hear with resolution to obey, Deuteronomy 5. 27. Josh.
1. 16.

Now what must you do after Hearing?

First, You must remember what ye have heard, 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Secondly, That
you may remember, you must meditate upon it, Josh. 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2. Thirdly,
of all the Sermons you hear, pick out something most profitable, and confer
about it, Mark 4. 10. Fourthly, You must put into practice what you hear,
Eccles. 9. 10. Jam. 2. 25. Luke 11. 2.

I shall now hint three Reasons of this great Care thus to Assemble and hear
Gods word, and then proceed to the Thirteenth Sign.

First, Because it is the great Ordinance of Conversion. Secondly, The means of
a Christians growth, and Sanctification. Thirdly, Negligence in it, a great
aggravation of Condemnaton.

CHAP. XIII. Proving the state of such to be sad, who assemble together more
for fear of man's eye than Gods: with four Discriptions, how such may be known,
(or know themselves) with two Causes of this decay.
SIGN. XIII. When you come to the Assembly, more for fear of brethrens eye,
than Christ's eye.
That is, you are so indifferent as to coming, that would none miss you nor
question you for it, you could well dispense with absence, and that without any
material hinderance; it is much to be feared that this decay prevails strongly
with many professors, who have neither hungring, or thirstingat least, at that
early rate they once had, and still doubtless ought to have, were they not
losing their relish to Ordinances, and the fellowship that they have had with
God through them; for now they begin to cease looking at things with an eye of
faith, and have all or most of their recourse to things after an eye of carnal
sense; and so no fear holds them to the outward order of Gods House; but what
is taught by the precept of men; and were they not liable to censures both from
the assembly and others, (who have taken notice of their being professors)
could as to the eye and censure of Jesus Christ quit all; wherefore the Lord
said, Isa. 39. 4, 13. For as much as this people draw near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me;
[note that] it is far to many degrees alienated, and their fear toward me is
taught by the precept of men; it is from hence very evident, that they though
they did come together, yet it was not from aright principle, their person, and
their heart was asunder, and God is pleased to note them out as people fearing
him only with an outside fear; therefore he will proceed to do a mavelous
work upon them; the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31. meets with such a people, as are
still a quarelling with the Prophets words, and talking against him in the
doors of their houses; yet would say, Come I pray and hear, what is the word
that comes forth from the Lord, coming as his people come, sit before him as
his people do, hear his word, and with their mouth show much love; but their
heart runs after covetousness. So in the time of the Prophet, Mal. 4. 3. there
you have a description of a decaying, and growing professor; one is so weary,
that they are ready to throw all profession off, crying, It is in vain to serve
the Lord, and what profit is it that we keep his Ordinances? at the same time
those truly spiritual, that feared Gods eye more than man's, they spoke the
oftener one to another, fearing him and thinking upon his name.

I shall give two or three descriptions, how such may know themselves, or be
known; and so pass to the next Sign.

First, Such when by more or less weighty occasions, they are hindered from the
assembly, you will not find them troubled; whereas a truly growing Christian,
though hindered even by God, yet he is thirsting, hungering, and thinks it
long, saying with David, O when shall I come and appear before thee, Psalm. 42.
1, 2.

Secondly, Such may be known, and know themselves by this, they are of all
others most apt to be discontented, it is seldom but one thing, or other
troubles them, and goes not as they would have it; whereas the more spiritual,
dwells so much in charity with every one, that they are ready to construe every
thing to the best; so neither much troubling, nor much troubled.

Thirdly, If any Schism or faction rise, you (...) these more apt than any
other to close with it, and so zealous for a while as passes, but it holds not
long.

Fourthly, you shall find such very forward at propagating some lesser matters
of Gods Law, while the more weighty they themselves live strangers to; a chief
cause of all this is.

First, large zeal, but shallow judgment.

Secondly, a too much prying into the ways of others, and too little into
their own.

CHAP. XIV. Showing our state dying, when we are more troubled at the decays
in our House, than in Christ's House; with four marks to know when we are so
dying.
SIGN XIV. When the decay in Christ's House, less troubles you than the decay
in your own House.
This decay wherever found, notes a man very far gone on the dying hand; If
trade decays, then nothing but complaining, if loss by fire or sickness, or
death, then all is out of order, it breaks their rest, they cannot sleep by
night, disturbs their worships, they cannot pray, read, or meditate by day; It
is evident with such, the affairs of their own house lies nearer their heart,
than the affairs of Christ's House, far from a truly growing Chrian, who is all
out of order when it goes not well with the Church of God.

Now by decay here in the Sign, I would be understood of persons in Christ
Jesus profession, who dye in their zeal, love, and fear, etc. that begin to
walk faintly after Christ Jesus, flat to prayer, to reading, to hearing, cold
and careless to spiritual visitings one another, seldom and little in
spiritual talk, when they meet together, not now as once, make it their trade
and business to be making the name of Christ great wherever they come; but
either say nothing, or that that comes to nothing, having no spirit or savor
in it; yet once was early at the Ordinances, quickly troubled if things went
amiss, much joyed when all werein a holy Harmony; but now being discovered to
have lost most of their spiritual relish to those good things they once
flourished in, and this not working trouble of heart on fellow brethren, and
beholders, must needs argue great decay.

That such decay in Christ's House, even among those in his spiritual
profession, has been, and too too much is very evident both from Scripture and
experience.

First, from Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. beginning. And I Brethren could not speak to
you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, even babes in Christ, whereas there is
among you envy, division, and strife, are ye not carnal and walk as men.

First, this same people as the first Chapter makes appear, had such grace from
God given by Christ Jesus, that they were enricht in all utterance, and in all
knowledge; so that they came behind other Chruches in no gift, waiting for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Again this holy Apostle, in Ephesians. 2. 12. Complains greatly of their decay;
many had sinned, and had not repented of the fornication, and uncleanness they
had committed. From whence it is very obseveable, that their decay was such,
that their Senses or Feeling were well nigh departed from them, they were
guilty of high crimes, among which were debates, envyings, wrath, strife,
backbiting, whispering, swelling tumults; yet not humbled among themselves for
all this: In like manner the Galathian Church, Chap. 4. That once if it had
been possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes and given them to the
Apostle St. Paul, now counts him their enemy for telling them the truth; so
Revel. 3. 17. Thou say I am rich, and increast with goods, and have need of
nothing; but know not that thou art poor and miserable, and blind and naked.

It would be tedious to tell what experience cound speak of the same thing in
our days; are there not many that at their first entrance into Christ's
Vineyard, never thought that they loved Enough, Heard, Prayed, Labored enough,
that had mighty Parts, Gifts, and Graces, and did mightily improve them to the
best services; yet now is grown huskish, dry and barren, and rare to hear any
spiritual expressions from them; Now count meetings burdensome, duties
tedious, sit as dull under the use of Christ's Ordinances, as though their
stomach did loath now, what was once as the morning dew to them; who can
withhold being grieved and afflicted at this, unless his eyes be out, and his
spiritual feeling gone? It therefore may concern all those that read this, to
make inquiry with themselves what impression such tidings as these of decays
in Christ's House, make upon theit hearts; for answerable to ones esteem of
things, and making any thing their treasure, will their sorrow and trouble be
to see it wasting, whether husband, wife, children, houses or lands, or the
prosperity and well-faring of Gods House lie nearer the heart, may easily be
discerned by the effects that will follow; O Lord what shall I say, when Israel
turns their backs upon their enemies! for the Canaanites and the inhabitants of
the Land shall hear often it, and environ us round, and what will thou do for thy
great name? Josh. 7. 8, 9. Joshua in the fight or flight might have been taken
or slain, yet that is not highest in his thought, nor lies nearest to his
heart; his great fear is what to do for the Great Name, fearing the Canaanite
should have occasion to speak lightly of it: I would not by what has been
said, be thought to prohibit persons being troubled at outward decay, that
would be a way to hold them from such diligence as ought to be, to romove or
prevent it; but we may know whether we are less troubled at decay in Christ's
House, than in our own, by these marks following.

First, by observing which way the drift of our praying to God bends most.

Secondly, In which channel our complaints to men runs most.

Thirdly, whether the thoughts of it are so prevalent, that they molest us in
the highest of our spiritual performances.

Fourthly, whether in compassion, our choice answers the lesser call, and
rejects the greater; that is, we will rather put our helping hand, to the
removing the decays of our house, than of Christ's House. Read and consider,
and then pass to the next Sgin.

CHAP. XV. Showing that want of weeping in some, when others of Christ's
Children with grief are stooping, declares such to him a dying: showing also in
four respects how we are to pity; with four Remedies against this Decay.
SIGN XV. WHen you can see Christ's Children stoop with trouble, and you not, or
little Sympathize with them.
Although affliction comes not forth out of the dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground; yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly
upward, Job 5. 6, 7. And though in general, it be a portion common to all, yet
in especial, and most of all to Gods dearest people, the worst of men commonly
being in the least of troubles here. They are not in trouble as other men,
neither are they plagued like other men, Psalm. 73. Now this portion from the
Lord, for blessed ends to his people, though deserved by them, and as needful
as their food to them, yet it being that that bows their soul down greatly,
ought to be attended with suitable compassion, from their fellow brethren, as a
help provided of God, that they may bear it the better.

When trouble or afflictions of any kind from the Lord, are great upon some, it
is an evident token of decay in such, as have not a fellow-feeling toward
them. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and lie upon beds of Ivory,
stretching themselves upon their coutches, drink their wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with chief oyitments, but are not grieved for the afflictions
of Joseph, in Amos 6. from the 1. to the 7. Some we may see there lived a
careless life, feeding to the full, had even what heart could wish, felt not
the trouble in person, that at the same time was their brethrens portion; yet
are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, but lived at the height of Joy,
under their own fullness, and were not compassionately affected with others
penury: This has been found among the people of God, but ill taken from them,
Numb. 20. We shall find that Israel was in great distress, and begs their
brother Edom (who knew all travail that had befallen them) to let them pass by
his high way; but he showed them no pity, was fallen from that sympathizing
Spirit that ought to be in him. God will not forget to take notice of this, and
reckon for it; which proves that pity in his people one to another, is Gods
expectation from them, Amos 1. 11. Thus says the Lord, for three
transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because he pursued his brother with the sword, and cast off all pity.

But some may Object and say, shall we pity those, (though Gods own people)
that have brought by their sinning, what misery is come upon them?

Answ. Yes, God expects this from his peoples enemies, how much rather from
their friends, Isa. 47. 5, 6. Sit thou silent and get thee into darkness, O
Daughter of the Caldeans, for thou shall no more be called the Lady of
Kingdoms; I was wroth with my people, and gave them into thy hands, but thou
did show them no pity, upon the ancient have thou very heavily laid thy
yoke; For this cause they must get them into darkness, clearly noting, that
though God for his peoples evils do afflict and trouble them, yet it is not at
all either to warrant his people, or his peoples enemies, to add to the burden
he lays upon them; but on the contrary calls for pity, yet not pity with
their sins, but such pity as may reduce them from their sins.

First, in taking notice that they are in misery, Remember O Lord what is
become upon us, consider and bebold our reproach. The Church counts it of
tendency to her healing, by having her affliction taken notice of.

Secondly, you must pity them in helping them to understand the cause why it
is come; Lam. 3. 36. Wherefore does the living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sin.

Thirdly, Pity in provoking them to search and try their ways, and turn to
the Lord their God.

Fourthly, Pity in helping them down; that is, laying the displeasure of God
before them to humble them; and when duly humbled, to comfort them; least such
should be swallowed up with over much sorrow; We may conclude this evil to be
very commonamong professors, and it may call upon them to a self-examining,
whether, and wherein they are under this spiritual decay; for the removing, or
preventing of which, I shall offer three or four things briefly, and so
conclude this Sign.

First, to consider the precepts of this duty, and from whom they come, Romans
12. 10, 14. Be kindly affectionate one to another, with brotherly love, in
honor prefering one another; Weep with them that weep; put on as the elect of
God, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering;
who is afflicted, and I burn not?

Secondly, Consider the danger of being wanting here.

First, it makes us most unlike God; in all their afflictions he was afflicted.

Secondly, It opens a door to let in upon us equal misery, Amos 6. 7. Therefore
shall they go into captivity, with the first that go captive; and the banquit
of them that stretch themselves, shall be removed.

Thirdly, It leads the way to heart-hardning Zech. 7. 10. Oppress not the
widow, fatherless, stranger, nor poor; but they refused to hearken, and made
their heart as an Adamant stone.

A Third help against this decay, is to be considering or laying to heart the
condition of such, thinking it might now be, and yet may be our own; you that
are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, Considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted; bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill
the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. beginning.

A Fourth help against this decay is, humbly and constantly to beg of God, a
heart according to the new Covenant, Psalm. 86. 11. compared with Ezekiel. 36. 26.
and so, Teach me thy way O Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to
fear thy name: I will give you a heart of flesh; or a tender heart, 2 Chronicles.
34. 27.

CHAP. XVI. Showing that when the name of Christ, and credit to his Gospel; is
not so dear to us as personal sufferings, we are then surely on the dying hand:
and that in estate, body and life, we ought to submit if called to suffering:
with four Causes of Decay here.
SIGN XVI. When you will rather betray the Name of Christ Jesus, and the
credit of his Gospel by your silence; then appear for it, to your own suffering
and disparagement.
Three things may be observable as to the opening of this Sign.

First, what is meant by the Name of Jesus.

Name refers to his person, and properties, as his power, wisdom, judgment,
mercy, justice, goodness; dishonor done to all or any of these, is done to
him, because this is the matter or substance he is made known by, and
understood to be; it is clear that Name in Scripture, when referred to the
person of God and Christ, notes all this, Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the
Name of the Lord thy God in vain, Chap. 33. 19. Chap. 34. 6, 7. Josh. 7. 10.
John 17. and Acts 9.

Secondly, how far if called, ought we to suffer for this Name.

Suffering is a word reduceable to three heads; all centring in man.

First, in estate, there he must suffer, by having his goods spoiled, his
bodily substance wasted, Heb. 10. 35.

Secondly, in body, by persecutions, and reproaches, bonds, and imprsonments,
Heb. 10. 32, 33. chap. 11. 36.

Thirdly, In life, Luke 14. 26. Acts 21. 15. Revel. 12. 12. Now in what cases
may we be proved guilty of this dying Sign, as falling under any or all these
three heads.

First, If because of our estate we comply with, or countenance any evil, or
refuse to confess any good, John 12. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Nevertheless among the
chief Rulers also, many believed on him, but did not confess him, lest they
should be put out of the Synagogue.

Secondly, If because of our bodies, to free them from sufferings, we will
comply with, or countenance any evil, or refuse to confess any good, Mat. 13.
21. But when tribulation or persecution rises, because of the word, by and by
they are offended.

Thirdly, If because of our lives to free them, we will comply with any evil,
or refuse to confess any good, contrary to Dan. 3. 17, 18. chap. 16. 16. Under
all or any of these considerations, when professors can hear the great Name
dishonored, and by their silence suffer it to be betrayed, it is very evident
they are dying to the things of God. No man or woman in a Christian profession,
but one time or another, are liable to temptations of this kind; that is, to
have the Name and credit of Christ and his Gospel, come in competition with
their sufferings and disparagements. And answerable to their weakness, or
strength, so ordinarily is their behavior to suffer, or to sin; there may be
considered three or four Causes of this, which being heeded and avoided, may
prove as Remedies against this decay.

First, A slavish fear of men, and things pertaining to this life; Fear ye not
the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their revilings; upon this score,
either fearing men, or fearing losing the things pertaining to this life, as
John ^2. many believed but did not confess him, for fear of losing their place
in the Synagogue. It is much to be feared that with regard to this, many hear
and bear to hear, see and bear to see, know and bear to know, that dishonor
contracted to the name of Christ, and his Gospel, that otherwise they would
not, and certainly ought not; Have no fellowship with unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them; that is, come not in company with them, yet
if you must, then rebuke them; for any among their great friends, kindred, or
any other, by whom perhaps they have great gain, to bear with swearing,
blaspheming, deriding at religion, or other vain communications, plainly argues
a great slavish fear to have possessed them.

Secondly, another Cause of this, may be an impotent love; that is, your love
to God proves weak or lame; There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts
out fear; because fear has torment.

Thirdly, Unskilfulness in the Doctrine of self-denial, may prove a great Cause
of this decay; Whosoever does not take up his Cross and follow me, cannot be my
Disciple; behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things
that shall befall me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, bonds and afflictions abide me, but none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear to my self, so I may finish my course with joy.

Fourthly, A doubtful mind of Gods All Sufficiency, and certainty, to make up
what damage may come through our care to his name and credit, both in this
life, and that to come; Gods All sufficiency is never so seen, as in the time
of greatest scarcity, or under the highest straits; Then stand still and see
the salvation of the Lord; and as Gods sufficiency is never so seen as then, in
like manner he is never so obliged as then; When persons are suffering (through
his grace) for his namesake: They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute
you, and bring you before Rulers for my names-sake; but I will give you a
mouth, and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay,
Luke 21. 12. 13.

CHAP. XVII. Showing, that sinning through impatience, under Offenses; is a
certain mark of deep decay; with Objections, and Answers, proving the degrees
of anger; and three Causes why Christians are impatient unto sin.
SIGN XVII. When at a small offense, you are so impatient that you commit
great sin.
It is not possible to live without offenses giving, or taking, real or
seeming; and such is man's frailty in common, that even under small
provocations, they are apt to yield to too deep an impression. But for better
understanding, it may be necessary to make some Observation upon this Sign.

First, As to the meaning of small Offenses.

Secondly, As to the kind of impatience here intended.

First, By small Offenses is meant, either small with respect to the little
occasion that is given, perhaps but seemingly; or if real, yet so slender, as
it would be wisdom to wink at it, and but folly to be moved by it.

Secondly, Small as coming from the smallest occasions, viz. earthly; an error
of life, as to the things of heaven, though small, being that that is greater
by many degrees, than some error that may arise from the things of this life,
which by God are called the smallest matters. A Christian may be easily read
more or less, strong, or spiritual, as he is more or less affected with the
offenses that this life minister to him; Whereas there is envyings, debate, and
strife among you, are ye not carnal and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 2.

Now the kind of impatience here intended is, for offenses to be so moved or
enraged as to run beyond the bounds of Gods alowance, Be angry but sin not; let
not the Sun go down upon your wrath; Intimating a great aptness in persons,
when provoked to be so enraged as to continue and boil in wrath, seeking for
revenge, contrary to Gods counsel, Be in malice as Children.

Object. But it may be Objected, whether an allowance of anger, or impatience
under provocation may not be.

Answ. There is anger in good part, and in bad part; so to take offense or be
angry, or impatient, as to thirst after personal revenge, or requital; surely
is not good: He that is so angry with his brother, shall be in danger of
Judgment; for in their anger they slew a man, and in their wrath they dug
down a Wall; cursed be their anger for it was fierce, Genesis 49. 6, 7. Here
Impatience is taken in ill part, and by Christians to be abhorred and avoided,
it being not of that kind, Exodus 32. 19. And Moses anger waxed hot; full of
zealous and sore displeasure; not simply against their person, but against
their sin. Thus God is said to be angry with his people when by their sins they
provoke him, Numb. 11. 10.

But Impatience and anger in ill part, is such as runs out to the breaking the
hedge of Government, running into cursing, swearing, tumults, fighting or
brawling.

Object. 2. But it may be again Objected, that the Sign it self seems to give
an allowance of great anger, or impatience, under great Offenses; for it says,
When at a small offense you are so impatient, that you commit great sin.

Answ. Doubtless under great Offenses, greater displeasure may be manifested;
but let the growing heaven-born Christian, set up his standard here, that at no
offense small or great, he may dare at any hand to break down the wall; in a
word, Be angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. By this means we make our quarrel
Gods, whose vengeance is, and he will righteously repay; otherwise, that is,
when impatience carries us into the path of sinning, we make the quarrel our
own, and take Gods work from him, and so incur his displeasure upon us: The
good Lord give in wisdom and strength to Christians here, under all
provocations, whether great or small, in Church or Family, from friend or enemy,
that they let patience have its perfect work; rather to the suffering any
wrong, than committing the least sin; how like our Head the Lord Jesus would
this declare us to be? Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth;
yet when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not,
(took it most meekly) and committed himself to him that judges righteously.

Object. 3. But it may be objected again, whether by this Superiors, as
Governors, Parents, or Masters, may or not be angry with their Inferiors?

Answ. Yes, and correct them to, but it must be as their drinking was in
Esthers time, according to the Law of Gods allowance; Read for our rule in this
case, (and let us live and die by it) Nehem. 5. 6, 7, 9. And I was very angry
when I heard their cry, and these words; then I rebuked the Nobles and Rulers
saying, It is not good that you do, ought ye not to walk in the fear of our
God, because of the reproach of the Heathen our enemies. O let Christians make
this their rule under all provocations, to keep within the fear of God, because
of the reproach of the Adversary; yea, let your provocation be what it will, or
from whom it will, friend or enemy, child or servant, them that have most cause
or least cause, still remember and keep to this, it is better ten thousand
times ten thousand, patiently to suffer, than impatiently to sin and suffer
too; by the one, others do us wrong; by the other we do our selves wrong: St.
Paul meets with some Christians in the Corinth Church under this Dying Sign, 1
Cor. 7. 6. Brother goes to Law with Brother, and that before the unjust too:
He prescribes the Remedy, that they rather take wrong (though from Brethren)
and suffer themselves to be defrauded. The Proverb is worth our heeding in this
kind, (it will not countervail our cost) better patiently take the wrong, than
with sinning seek our right.

I shall now come to two or three Causes of this Decay, which being observed
and avoided, may also serve as Remedies against this decay or dying Sign.

First, the first Cause is, want of Government over our own spirits. Secondly,
Too high esteem of worldly Enjoyments. Thirdly, Cumbring our selves with any
business.
For the first, viz. Want of government over our own spirit; that is, not being
Lords over our own passions, having them at our Christian beck, when to be
angry, and to what degree; Ignorance of our bounds here, makes us Beast-like; I
were envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked; saying, I
have washed my heart in vain, and cleansed my hands in innocence, Psalm. 73. So
foolish and ignorant was I, even as a Beast before thee. He that has no Rule
over his own Spirit, is like a City without walls and broken down. Want of
government over our own spirit, makes us as naked or desolate, as an
unfortified City, whose walls are broken down, Prove. 25. 28.

Secondly, Too high esteem of worldly Enjoyments; He that will hardly be moved
at a bigger thing, will not easily be moved for a pin; All offenses are a kind
of loss, being something that crosses the grain of our spirit; now answerable
to the estimation we have more or less of our loss, will our offense taking be;
It is putting too high a value of earthly Enjoyments, as Husband, Wife,
Children, House or Land, Gold or Silver, that makes us so impatient at their
loss or leaving; Set your affection, says St. Paul, on things above, not on
things below; The time is short, it remains that they that have Wives, be as
though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not, 1 Cor. 7. 29. The Apostle would have
them to carry about with them their outward Enjoyments, as a Traveller carries
his old Coat about with him, every day thinking to throw it of; and if he loose
it, or be robbed of it, does not much trouble himself, for he sets little value
upon it: Would Christian Travelers seek to soar high in their affections, how
little would this little little worldly pelf, seem to us in our getting or
losing.

Thirdly, A third Cause of our Impatience, and a third Remedy against it is, to
avoid much cumbring our selves with any business; that is, a filling our hands
too full, over-charging our selves, taking more upon us than we are able to
manage with submission to better things, and so hinder meditation and
contemplation about those lasting things of heaven; which occasions a freezing
of the spirits, and so we sin and fall at every little trouble that comes in
our way; whereas a joyful spirit, that is enlarged and at liberty, Bears all
things, believes all things, endures all things, is not easily provked, as 2
Cor. 13. at large shows: All this while a spirit cumbred is in bondage, and
quickly fretted, like a scald head soon broken; Take heed lest at any time your
heart be overcharged, Luke 21. 34. I would have you be without carefulness, 1
Cor. 7. 32. Martha, Martha, thou art troubled, and cumbrest thy self about many
things; but Mary has made choice, or busied her self about that good part that
shall never be taken from her, Luke 10. last. Consider what you read, and the
good Lord give you understanding, Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. Proving those Christians to be almost dead, that make it more
their business, to get the Form than the Power of Religion; with its Causes and
Remedies.
SIGN XVIII. When you are more careful to get the words of Christ's People,
than the spirit of Christ's People; the Form than the Power.
That is, the name and outside of Reformation, rather than the spirit and
power of Reformation; when the strength and bent of all thy care, lies in
trimming thy self to appear before men righteous or religious. Persons may go
very far in this with great self-security, resting barely upon outside
performances, getting fine words, and painted expressions, making a great show
of their worship, Pharasaical like, and at the same time live under the
dominion of some base lust, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. To what purpose is the
multitude of your Sacrifices to me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt
Offerings of Rams, and fat of fed Beasts; I delight not in the blood of
Bullocks, or Lambs, or Hee-goats: When you come to appear before me, who has
required this at your hands, to tread my Courts? Your new Moons and appointed
Feasts, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them, for your hands are
full of blood. They were then under the guilt of sin, or dominion, or both, and
yet at the same time full of outward Services, and mighty busy in their
Worship, Hear ye this ye men of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship
the Lord; Do not trust in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; for the Temple of the Lord is this, If ye thoroughly amend
your ways and doings; if you thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his
neighbor, and oppress not the poor, fatherless, or widow; in This I Delight,
Jer. 7. It is clear here also, these rested merely in outward, and lived under
the dominion of very base lusts, at the very time they seemed so zealous for
the Lord.

And it is very much to be feared many now adays run in the same channel,
Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. Come I pray you and hear what is the word that comes forth
from the Lord; and they come before thee as my people come, and sit before thee
as my people do; and with their mouth show much love; (but mark that at the
same time) their heart runs after Covetousness. These were Hypocrites in Zion,
that shelter themselves in the outside of Religion, Covering Gods Altar with
tears, Mal. 2. 8, 13. Yet he regards them not, seeing such to be but nominal
Christians, and therefore abhors them exceedingly: The Scripture seems to
intimate this as a very common overspreading weed, not rare to be found, but
rather rare to be avoided in professors. Let us therefore all look to our
selves, prove our own work so shall we have rejoicing in our selves alone, Mat.
23. 14, 15. for a pretense make long prayers, Romans 2. 18, 19, 20. Behold thou
art called a Jew, restest in the Law, make thy boast of God, being confident
that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light to them in darkness; at
the same time under the dominion of Sin.

But what may be the Causes of this, that persons should take such pains in
Religion, and at the same time be but mere painted Sepulchers?

Answ. First, gross ignorance.

Secondly, Carnal security.

First, Gross ignorance, that God did never institute Laws for Laws sake, but
for his Name sake, and sinners saving; never placing happiness in them, but in
him that is the Author of them. O then what ignorance and madness is it, for
people to content themselves with flesh-circumcision? God will punish such with
the uncircumcised, Jer. 9. last. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I
will punish the circumcised with, or as truly as, the uncircumcised; for the
one has it not in the flesh, and the other not in the heart.

Secondly, Carnal security; That is, dream they shall be accepted because great
Prayers, great Preachers, great goers to Church, (though this be good in it
self) yet this is filthy and bad, when either it is alone or rested in; When
they shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5. 3.

CHAP. XIX. Containing in it a description of a decaying Christian, by his
light trouble at Miscarriages, though known to Gods eye, while kept from man's
eye; with two special Causes of this Decay.
SIGN XIX. When you are not much troubled at your own Miscarriages, while they
are kept from public view.
By Miscarriages here, I would be understood, the failings and fallings of Gods
Children, not wilfully nor altogether willingly, but through infirmity, being
overtaken, or as it were ensnared before they are aware, yet truly privy to
what they have done, and not ignorant they have gone out of the way:
Nevertheless if their going thus far in sight and sense of uneven walking, be
found without much trouble, it is most evident then their case is very sad; Now
who is he that lives and sins not? 1 King. 8. 46. And who is he that can hide
what he does from an All-seeing eye, Psalm. 139. 7. And what is it that puts
distinction between a good man's sinning, and a bad man's sinning? but that the
one sins with all his will, the other, with scarce any of his will; to the one
what he does is matter of delight; to the other what he does is his sickness;
though it is true he does it, yet his heart is grieved for it: now the more or
less a good man is troubled upon this score, the more or less is his decay;
where the awful fight of Gods eye is much reverenced, there all Miscarriages
are soon discerned and much avoided; but the lesser any man is beset with this
grace, lessens his fear to the greater, and heightens his fear to the lesser:
that is, Gods eye is not so much run from as man's eye: one of the highest
temptations to sin being secrecy; and one of the greatest seasons to try
whether a man has good will to do amiss or no; it having in it no kind of let
to touch his sensitive part, with care or fear to eschew it, because that
visible shame that sin brings, in all probability cannot come; then Satan is at
work mightily, having the highest opportunity, unless the Conscience be found
very tender, to strike the heart into a trembling sense of that piercing eye of
the Almighty; saying with Job, Does not he see my ways and count all my steps?
chap. 31. 42. What else can hinder closing with temptation to a high degree?
now such misdoing as this, of secret sinning, found in any, and they not much
troubled because it is not made known; let the sin they have committed be never
so small in account, yet a sin, does prove such very desolate of the grace of
God.

Amnon one of David's Sons, being evil disposed toward Tamar his Sister, is not
thoughtful at all of Gods secret eye, but careful how to avoid man's eye; as
this saying proves, Have all men out from me, 2 Samuel 13. 9. none but Tamar must
stay with him; toward home he is wickedly designed, running into Gods eye
without all fear, so he may run from man's eye: It was not thus with good Joseph
Jacobs son, when he had as much if not more secrecy, and the temptation
without very strong, to have drawn him into high miscarriages; at such a time
in a resisting way, gives this reply, How can I do this great wickedness and
sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. In like manner Annanias and Saphira, that sold
their possessions, under pretense of giving the price as a Free Will Offering
to the Lords use; but when required to speak the truth, whether or no they kept
any thing back, in fear to man's eye rather than Gods eye, sins at a high rate,
Lying, as the Scripture gives it, to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. But as
it is the practice of decaying Christians, to be most careful to keep their
miscarriages from man's eye: in like manner their sorrow at the sight of sin, is
distinguishable to be different from the sorrow of the growing Christian;
though his miscarriage may be only known to God, saying with David, Against
thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this wickedness in thy sight, that thou
might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge: On the
contrary as Jeremiah complains, I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright, no man repented him of his evil, saying what have I done; every one
turns to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the battle. But I shall
proceed to the Causes of this Decay.

Now the Causes of this, which being avoided, may serve also as Remedies
against this Dying Sign, and they may be these two.

First, want of fear to God,

Secondly, want of love to God.

First, want of fear to God; he whose heart is possessed with the fear of God,
as knowing his greatness, and his goodness, his mighty power and arm, to save
or destroy, though such a one wants no power, or secrecy to offend this God,
by committing actual evil a-against this God, yet dare not, cannot, will not do
it; But were it not for the fear of God, could, and would do, what they cannot,
nor dare not; this held good Joseph, Genesis 29. 7. How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God, Nehem. 9. 15. But so did not I, because of the
fear of God; these persons wanted neither power, nor secrecy, to have complied
with the temptations before them; yet they are held by this precious grace, the
fear of God.

Secondly, want of love to God, is a Cause of this decay; did we so love him as
we ought, we would not so wound him by our sinning as we do, Had they known him
(indeed it may be said) had they loved him, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory, 2 Cor. 2. 10. If any man love me he will keep my sayings, and my
father will love him, and we will make our abode with him, John. 14. 23.

CHAP. XX. Showing the heart very bad, when under faults it cannot bear plain
dealing; with three Causes of this badness.
SIGN XX. When you love least those Brethren, that deal most faithfully with
you, in the opening your soars, and tendering your Remedies.
It is a strong evidence of a bad Spirit, when persons come to this pass,
either they must be unsensible of their bad state, or else willing to continne
in it through a hardened heart; but may be easily discerned in a Church, either
by their itching at most plain soul-searching Doctrine; or their estrangedness
to the most zealous spiritual Brethren; and if there be a lukewarm Christian
in the Church, a thousand to one but he is most of their society; they may also
be known by this, they are greatest strangers to the difficultest duties; it is
hard to bring them to early duties, and as hard to hold them at late services;
in a word, you may have their company, but it must be at services most easy,
when some outward credit may accrue to them by their profession; then none
shall seem more apt and active than themselves, and God that best knows this,
greatly abhors this; and will chastise such Chruches as are not careful to
remove, and will also in due time, make such persons by one means or other, so
manifest, that he that runs may read them; but as there are such that will not
like them that deal faithfully with them; even so, there are some that out of
personal respect to such, and for fear to lose their favor; will not tell them
so nakedly of their sores; but in love to their persons speak faintly of their
sins, and so hate their souls. In show these are a man's greatest friends, but
in truth his greatest enemies, witness the false Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 6. Shall
I go against Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? and they said go up,
for the Lord has delivered it to thy hand. And when a Prophet of the Lord one
Micaiah is called for, verse. 13. They would fain have seduced him to speak good
words, as they called it, that is, pleasant promises, though they were lies;
Thus we may see the property of false Prophets, that for an angel will cry up a
person as if he were almost an Angel, it was even so in Jeremiahs time, chap.
8. They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people slightly, crying,
peace, peace, when there was no peace. When God would not, nor righteously
could not, speak peace but war, because of their misdoings; yet these false
Prophets make promises of peace to them; though in their sins, that as God by
the Prophet Ezekiel complains, Chap. 13. Sow pillows under arm-holes, for
pieces of bread, and handfuls of barley. Sparing what he would have destroyed,
and destroying what he would have spared: it is a very great Judgment upon a
Church or people, to have such amongst them, as will speak peace to any out of
the way of peace; it is as bad a judgment upon those persons, that love not
those that speak war to them, when their impenitency speaks the same; yet of
such the Apostle St. Paul complains, Gal. 4. 15, 16. Am I therefore become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth? Doubtless these Galathians speaks in their
hearts as much, as others speak of the Prophet Amos, Chap. 10. who say, The
land is not able to bear his words; once this same Church, could have pulled
out their eyes (if it had been possible) to have done this same Apostle good;
Now counts him their enemy for telling them the truth; But I shall briefly
speak of two or three Causes of this Decay, which being avoided, may serve as
so many Remedies against this dying Sign.

First, A first Cause is, shaking hands again with our old sins, falling in
love with what once we loathed: very burdensome to Israel was Moses, when once
they began to grow affected with the Fish, the Cucumbers, and the Mellons, that
they had in Egypt; not only then good, plain dealing Moses comes out of
request, but even Gods Manna, though Angels food, Numb. 11. 5, 6. We remember
the Fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the Cucumbers and the Mellons, and
the Leeks, and the Onyons, and Garlic, but now our soul is dried away, and
there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes, and this we loath
as light bread, chap. 21.

But Secondly, a second Cause may be this, a losing the relish we once had to
heavenly things, Jer. 2. 23. Iremember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the
love of thine espousals: when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a
Land that was not sown; then thou wast holiness to the Lord, and the first
fruits of his increase; but now be astonished Oh heavens at this, and be
horribly afraid, yea very desolate, says the Lord; for my people have
forsaken the Fountain of living waters, and hewn out to themselves broken
Cisterns, that can hold no water. But I have a few things against thee, because
thou have left thy first love; Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
or else I will come and remove thy Candlestick except thou repent, Revel. 2. 11.

Thirdly. A third Cause may be this, a too too much complying with the
friendship of this World: which in its latitude is enmity with God, Gal. 5. 7.
Ye did run well, who did hinder you, (or as the margin reads, drive you back)
that you should not obey the truth: (or hold on your way) This persuasion comes
not of him that calls you: If any come to me and hate not his Father, and his
Mother, Wife, Children, Brothers, Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26. Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced
this present World: Read and consider.

CHAP. XXI. Proving the condition of the rich as well as the poor, to be a
condition of trouble; and that whether it be common or more than ordinary, to
be answerable in prayer; with a description of the different kinds of trouble;
with profitable Objections answered.
SIGN XXI. When under more than ordnary trouble, afflictions, or straits, you
are not more than ordnary in Prayer.
For the opening of this Sign.

First, what is meant by troubles; it is something that in it self is not, nor
cannot be pleasant; But something that opposes and withstandeth the desire and
delight of the mind; and therefore in Scripture called a burden; Cast thy
burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee; were trouble a matter of
pleasure, and profit in it self, there would not be that proper need of prayer,
and calling for help from one that is stronger; So that as the word is
universal in an ordinary case, it takes in those cares, fears, and sorrows in
common, that we are daily incident to, Job. 5. 6, 7. Man is born to trouble, as
the sparks fly upward; That is, it is as natural for man to meet with trouble,
as it is for the sparks to fly upward; because there is not that ordnary common
condition, but it has its proper temptation; as I shall instance in this
following; for says the poor man, were I a rich man, how glad, how thankful,
how contented should I be? But Solomon says of the rich, Eccles. 2. Who can
come after the King? I got me this, and this, yet all vanity and vexation of
Spirit; and there is no profit under the Sun.

Object. Why no profit?

For these reasons; first, he is very apt to be high minded, and that will dog
him, and trouble him; and as it is very hard for the poor to keep the wolf from
his door, that is hunger and rags, even so the rich he is in danger of, and
involved with trouble, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this World,
that they be not high minded; when a high mind in a stately Coach, and a meek
Christ on a poor Asses colt meet together, Herod's Palace, and Christ's Manger;
It is well now if the high mind do not rather die than stoop, Ezod. 5. 2.
compared with Dan. 3. 15. Who is the Lord that I should obey him? what God is
able to deliver you out of my hand? Here in their greatness, they challange
God, James 5. Do not rich men oppress you, and bring you before Rulers? Is it
not their common practice to use their power to oppress you, and as Solomon
says, Prove. 18. 23. While the poor uses entreaty, the rich answers roughly;
Now God is pleased to establish a statute in Israel to prevent the evil of high
mindedness, which the rich was incident to, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.

But Secondly, The rich has the trouble of care, as well as the poor,
differing only in this, it runs in another Channel; For the abundance of the
rich, will not suffer him to sleep; he is so beset with fears of the robber,
and cares how to secure, as holds his eyes, is as a disease upon him, Eccles.
5. 12. It is clear from experience also, for some rich are so beset with
troubles, that they wish as hope of deliverance, they had been poor; Thus much
for the rich. Now the poor has his troubles also, though of a contrary kind,
for as the rich are apt to be too high, so the poor too low; Job 5. 15. But he
saves the poor from the mighty, that is, from being crushed by him, Psalm. 113.
7. He raises the poor out of the dust; they are so low, that God stands for
them to uphold them, and keep them, lest they sinck.

Secondly, as the rich, his abundance will not suffer him to sleep; Prove. 10.
15. So the destruction of the poor is his poverty; that is, it leads him to do
that, that will destroy, Prove. 30. 7. Lest I be poor and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain; Hunger, Cold, Fears, Cares, Poverty, and Oppression,
that is their portion.

Now all these are common troubles, that are incident to every man, but more
than ordnaty are such as are not so common, that do not come every day, but are
of such a kind as this, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble; This
day of trouble notes something of singularity, as elsewhere the hour of
temptation, notes something not ordinary and common, for every man is subject
to be tempted daily, but this is called hour of trial, because it is some
temptation of a strange kind, not ordinary and common, as is evidenced by these
Scriptures following, Nehem. 49. Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God,
Isa. 37. 11, 12, 13. Luke 6. 12. Acts 12. 5. All these Texts plainly show, that
the practice of holy men, in more than ordinary troubles, was to be more than
ordinary in prayer.

But it may be Objected, what is meant by ordinary prayer; whether once or
twice a day, men ought in ordinary cases to pray.

In Answer to which I shall first premise, that men ought to pray daily, in, or
under ordinary or common troubles, from these Texts of Scripture, Mat. 6. 7,
11. Give us this day our daily bread; this day, either intends some particular
day, in a man's life time, or else every day; that day that we have need of
daily bread, or Gods strength and help, is the day here intended; but every
body will grant, that every day we have need of daily bread; therefore
doubtless, the intent of Jesus Christ here is, that we should pray every day,
Luke 18. 1, 5. Men ought always to pray and not to faint, but cry day and
night, Luke 21. 36. Psalm. 86. 3. comp. with 88. 9. Hear me O Lord for I cry to
thee daily; By this I hope all good men will conclude, that its their duty to
pray every day.

Objection, 2. How often every day in ordinary cases, ought we to pray?

Answ Where it has not pleased God by way of precept, to direct to times by
way of number, example doubtless may teach us something; Psalm. 55. 17. Morning,
noon, and evening will I pray and cry to God, and he will hear me; as if David
should say, my often importuning will be a means of prevailing, Daniel 6. 10.
Kneeled down upon his knees, three times a day, and prayed, and praised God as
he did before time: clearly proving, it was Daniels practice to be in that
heavenly service, three times a day; these Scriptures compared with, 1 These. 5.
17. (pray without ceasing) teaching surely, either that Christians ought in
ordinary troubles, to be found in prayer three times a day, or at least to be
all the day in a praying frame.

Objection 3. But some may say, what if we do not pray at all some days, shall
we fare the worse?

Answ. First, if you pray not at all, you go out of Gods peoples road; as both
precept and example seems to point out; Give us day by day our daily bread:
seeming to note as well a continuance in the duty of asking, as in the need of
receiving; also: These. 5. pray cotninually: Nehemiah, David, Daniel, and Jes^s
Christ, by their daily practice seems to construe this precept, to intend daily
prayer.

Secondly, not to pray at all, seems to put us out of Gods gracious protection,
and so we prove self-betrayers, Zek. 36. 37. I will yet for all this, be
inquired of, by the house of Israel, Luke 22. 40. Pray that you enter not into
temptation; if you seek him he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, he
will forsake you, Chr. 15. 2.

Thirdly, Not to pray at all, seems to put us out of the way of promise of
being helped in troubles; Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear
thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. Seek and you shall find, knock and
it shall be opened to you.

Fourthly, Neglect to prayer, tempts God to suffer us to be led into
temptation; Pour out your hearts before him at all times; God is a refuge for
us; but it is to such as wait upon him, by pouring out their wants before him,
Lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil, Mat. 6.

What has been said, may teach two things; First, the lamentable condition of
such as neither can nor will pray, that are as unaccustomed to it, as the
Heifer to the yoke; living absolute Athiests in the World; saying in their
heart, if not in their actions too, there is no God: Pour out thy wrath upon
the heathen, and families that call not upon thy name.

Secondly, This teaches to strengthen the hearts and hands of such as fear
God, to this service of prayer, it being part of their defense or Armor, Ephesians.
6. Praying always with all prayer, and suppliaction, in the spirit, watching
thereunto with all perseverance, etc. When thou saidest seek my face, my heart
said, thy face Lord will I seek: thou will hide me in thy Pavillion, Psalm. 27.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Read and consider, so pass to the next Sign.

CHAP. XXII. Containing in it an Assertion of the Causes of Affliction; and
that without great provocation God is not wont to afflict his people; and
though provoked, very unwilling to extremity: With four Objections that seem to
complain against this Doctrine, Answered.
SIGN. XXII. When you are mighty careless to Inquire after the spiritual cause
of Affliction, and mighty careful to Inquire after the natural cure.
The more or less spiritual any man is, may be easily discovered under this
Trial; Affliction being of that piercing kind, that other trials are not,
because of the great influence it has upon the sensitive part of man, where
ever it comes, while sense remains, it makes the person restless, either to
find out cause, or cure, or both. We may therefore first inquire after the word
Affliction, what that means; to afflict, is to lay some burden upon a
person, that is not ordinary, Genesis 15. 13. There they shall afflict you four
hundred years: this is opened in, Exodus 1. Israel is made to serve with rigor,
Lam. 1. 4. 5. The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn
feasts: all her gates are desolate, her Priests sigh, her virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of
my people, which are in Egypt, by reason of his task-master, Acts 3. 34. By
these Texts it appears, that affliction means any grief or trouble, that
comes upon soul or body, name or estate, for the punishment of sin, or the
trial of faith; so that sickness, and diseases, as feavor, and ague,
consumption, inflammation, and the like, are all comprised under this word
affliction; it will therefore be necessary to open the word Spiritual cause, it
being in the Sign oposed to natural cure: by spiritual cause, is to be
understood, some provoking God in the subject afflicted, to the procuring this
affliction, nothing some cause or other, why the Spirit suffers it to come upon
us.

Now every body will be ready to grant, that these things before promised, may
be truly called affliction, but not grant that there can be such a spiritual
cause in themselves, and so make the Sign of no force.

Now to clear up this doubt, let us make this inquiry, whether any affliction,
or death it self, come upon any man, but for some cause or other from the man,
(active or imputive) that is, he either so acted in his particular person, or
some body else in his general relation, and on him it is righteously come: For
the resolution of this question, let us inquire what causes in Scripture the
righteous God assigns afflictions or death unto, Genesis 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Who
told thee thou were naked, have thou eaten of the Tree I commanded thee not to
eat: the things in this Chapter considerable are these, verse. 14. the Serpent
must go upon his belly, eat dust, and be cursed above every beast of the field,
verse. 16. to the woman he says, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conception; in sorrow thou shall bring forth children: and to Adam he says,
Cursed is the Ground for thy sake, Thorns and Thisles it shall bring forth to
thee; dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; you see in these verses,
misery both upon the woman and the man, is brought, and the reason by God
assigned, verse. 17. Because thou have done this, in harkening to thy wife,
cursed is the ground for thy sake: so also Josh. 7. 7. Israel, Gods prevailing
people, that by day had a pillar of a cloud, and by night a pillar of fire
ministering unto them; now cannot stand before their enemies; Joshua that at
another time commands the Sun, and Moon, and they obey him; now by prayer
cannot prevail, for Israel Gods people, against the cursed Nation; But what is
the matter? verse. 11, 12. Israel has sinned and cannot stand, neither will I
be with them any more, except they put the accursed thing from among them, Lam.
3. 1, 13. I am the man that have seen affliction, verse. 39. Wherefore does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? 1 Cor. 11. 3. For
this Cause many are sick, and weak, and many sleep, 1 These. 2. 11. For this
Cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they all might be damned that
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: and let all the
House of Israel know, that without a Cause, I have not done all that I have
done, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 14. 23. Much more might be said, as to afflictions,
that attend both the body and mind, together with the Causes; and this left to
consideration, whether if Hell, condemnation, the highest of affliction, be the
fruit or reward of sin and unbelief; much rather sickness, and diseases with
death it self, which are the least afflictions, must come from Creature Causes:
now if any man can assign any other Cause than God does here assign, let him do
it; if not by all this comparing of it with the eighth Sign of dying to Christ,
in which I have been more large upon affliction, inward and outward, with their
Causes; I shall therefore proceed to some Objections, that seem to complain
against this Doctrine.

Object. 1. The first Objection is grounded upon, 2 Samuel 12. 14. The Child that
is born to thee shall surely die: David is threatened with death in the child
that has not offended, contrary to this Doctrine.

Answ. This act of God to take away David's Child, if considered, will be found
mercy mixed with justice, David by the Law was to die for the matter of Vriah;
now God in respect he bare to David for what good he had done, and further were
like to do, being a man so after Gods own heart, goes out of the ordinary way,
spares the person of David, and imputes it upon the relation of David, viz. his
Child; so in David's seed he punished David's person; this is Gods usual way in
Scripture, and sets his Majesty out, to be full of mercy in the midst of
Justice, he will take away the first born in Egypt, that had not sinned, and
therein plagued Pharaoh and their Fathers that had sinned; That this is mercy,
consider if David the sinner be cut off for his sin; there was then no room
left to manifest repentance either in David or the Egyptians, yet death must
come that God may be just; and though nothing but Justice must take place, yet
in that he will be as merciful as possible to stand with Justice; Therefore
there is truly a Cause, for God to impute death to David's Child, for David's sin.

Object. 2. The second Objection is grounded upon Job 2. 3. which seems also to
complain against this Doctrine in these words; Thou have moved me against Job
without a Cause, he is a perfect and upright man, one that fears God, and
hates evil.

Answ. God goes in this out of his ordinary way, as in the case of St. Paul's
conversion, Acts 9. It will not be safe to imagine, that others are unconverted
because God meets not others so, sometime God does things to show his Power,
and Majesty, and greatness over all, and his using instruments in an
extraordinary case, as his raising Lazarus from the grave, and from death the
widows Son, and others, is no warrant for us to allude to cases ordinary.

Secondly, here was a cause if not in Job, and indeed necessity that this
should come upon him, if we consider, Chap. 1. 9. There is none like Job, says
God; does he serve thee for naught? says Satan, put but forth thy hand and he
will curse thee to thy face. Now that Job did not serve God just because God
had dealt so well with him, but would do it if God dealt other ways with him,
shall now appear, and the accuser of the brethren be put to the worst, who
complains against Job, as envying his prosperity.

Thirdly, in the strictest sense this carriage of God to Job, can hardly be
termed affliction, but rather some gracious condition by God made with Job to
this purpose; Job thou art an upright man, thou fear me, and hate evil,
and Satan is still complaining on thee, because he envies thy prosperity, and
tells me thou would prove another man, then I take thee to be, if I should try
thee by adversity, and take from thee thy prosperity; Now lets stop the mouth
of this great adversary, and lend me thy Oxen, and thy Asses, thy servants and
thy Cammels, thy Children and all thy substance, and thy body for my service, I
will pay thee with great advantage, as appears by this following; So the Lord
blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning, for he had fourteen
thousand sheep, and six thousand Cammels, and a thousand yoke of Oxen, and a
thousand she Asses, and had also seven sons and three daughters; so that the
Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, Job 42. 10, 11, 12.

Object. 3. The third Objection is grounded upon Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart: Good men here are taken away by
death, and no cause showed; they have the testimony of good men, and yet taken
away: It will be granted, they might have lived much longer for age, the text
implies it, and the Objection is the stronger by it; for it would be no matter
of complaint, had they lived till very age had took them away, for then we know
all must die.

Answ. The time these good men lived in, was a very evil time, and God takes
them away:

First, in judgment to the People. Secondly, in mercy to themselves.
First, in judgment, Isa. 5. 6, 7, 10. 11, 12. He has called upon them by the
Righteous, and warned them, but it would do them no good; now he will take away
the Righteous from them, to see if they will lay it to heart.

Secondly, in mercy to themselves, they are taken away.

First, Because by long living with such, they must needs be a weary even of
their lives, and their souls vexed from day to day, Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me that
I dwell in the Tenis of Kedar. So Jer. 4. 14. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained
at my very heart, my heart makes a noise within me, because thou have heard in
Jerusalem the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of war.

Secondly, in mercy to them, because the continuance of this temptation upon
them, may at last so weary them out, as they may give up all as Solomon did, 1
Kings 11. 4. When he was old, his Wives turned away his heart after other gods.
So Mat. 24. 21, 22. Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world, nor ever shall be; except those days shall be shortened
there could no flesh be saved; but for the elects sake, it shall be shortened:
Even as our Proverb is, A continual dropping will wear a hole in the stone: so
a continual oppression may turn the wise man out of all; see for this, Jer. 20.
14, etc. He curses the day of his birth, and the man that brought tidings to
his Father; wishes his Mother had been always great with him, saying,
Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, and that my
days should be consumed with shame? Clearly noting, that any zealous heart, is
sorely touched, when all he can do will not keep God from dishonor; O blot me
(says Moses) out of thy book. By this it may appear, that Gods afflicting men,
is for some cause or other in them.

Object. 4. Fourthly, another Scripture that seems to complain by way of
Objection is, John 9. 1, 2, 3. in these words; Who did sin this man or his
Father, that he is born blind?

For answer to which Christ says, Neither this man nor his Father, but that
the power of God might appear; yet it is clear, the Disciples understood this
affliction in common must come for sin; and Jesus Christ in his reply notes the
case more than common, saying, He was born for this purpose, that the work of
God should be manifested in him; It was mercy he was born, and he was born that
a wonder of heaven might be showed upon him; therefore we must distinguish
between a case that is extraordinary, and one that is common.

Again, from the unwillingness that is in God to afflict; as a confirming
Answer to all the Objections, it appears, that high provocations in us, procure
Afflictions to us; for till Justice calls so loud, that God cannot be just
except he does afflict, though in compassion he mixeth all with abundance of
mercy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his
Prophets, rising up betimes and sending them, because he had compassion on his
people, and on his dwelling place: That is, he was very pitiful, loath to
grieve or afflict them, till there was no remedy, Justice called so long and
loud for vengeance upon them, as Psalm. 106. 54. They did not destroy the
Nations, but were mingled among them, and learned their works, and served their
Idols; therefore was Gods wrath kindled, in so much that he abhorred his
Inheritance: Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their
cry, and did pity them. Hosea 6. 4. compared with Chap. 11. 7, 8. How shall I
give the up? what shall I do to thee? What less does all this signify than
thus much? that though God be so provoked, that nothing but Judgment must come,
yet like a tender Father to an unruly Child, mourns over him, while he corrects
him. We shall leave what has been said to consideration, and pass to the
Twenty third Sign of dying to Christ.

CHAP. XXIII. Proving those Christians under great Decay, that pray more in
Affliction to have it removed, than sanctified; with three Causes of this Decay.
SIGN XXIII. When you pray more for Afflictions being removed, than sanctified.
That is, not only mindless of Afflictions Cause, but indeed mindless of
Afflictions end; it is easy and ordinary for persons under Affliction to be
brought to their knees to prayer; not only good men, but bad men in affliction
will be ready to cry for help, In their affliction they will seek me early,
Hos. 5. 15. That is one of their first works, then they will mind to be doing,
till then God is forgotten, they having lost much their spiritual feeling, but
now being touched in their outward senses, they will cry for relief. Then
wicked Pharaoh, that in Exodus 5. 2. could say, Who is the Lord that I should
obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go; in Chap. 8. 8. When his Land was full of Frogs, cries to Moses to
pray to this God for him, he had but little before disdained: See that known
text for this, Jonah 1. 5. Then every man, (that is, when they was in
affliction) cries to his God; the tempest being great, and they all like to
perish, not only cries to their God, but with a high hand says to Jonah, What
meanest thou O sleeper? arise and call upon thy God, that we perish not. So 2
Chr. 33. 12. Manasseh when he was in affliction, sought the Lord his God: By
all which compared, it is very usual both with good and bad men in affliction,
to be early at prayer to God.

Now Affliction you know, we have in the last Sign proved, is Gods Furnance to
try the Nature of every Metal by; so that you may truly pass judgment upon
your selves, whether or no you are of the dying hand; not by your praying, here
you may deceive your selves, though you pray mightily, for it is easy to do so
in Affliction; but if you pray more for Afflictions being removed, than
sanctified; that is, put up strong cries to be eased of the trouble, but scarce
possessed with faint wishes to answer Gods design in the trouble; never
inquiring, What have I done? or saying, I must be more humble, more thankful,
more pitiful, more fearful, more careful all my days. What shall I do, says
the zealous man, to get good by this Affliction? his voice cries louder for
spiritual advantage, than his pain for natural freedom. Let us think of this
and deal plainly with our own hearts, and see what way the pulse beats most;
for as the staff you set up, will fall one way or other; so persons being more
or less spiritual, will easily discover it in Affliction. Israel of old might
be read in this, and you know how God dealt with them, of six hundred thousand,
there was but two, namely, Joshua and Galeb, that entered the good Land of
promise; they early begun to show how carnal they was, Exodus 12. 13, 14. When
they enjoyed their great deliverance from Egypts bondage, Chap. 15. then sang
they Gods praise; but being put into some strait, they murmur presently, and
wish to God they had died in the Land of Egypt, as Psalm. 106. shows at large,
where we may read of Gods dealings with them at large, and their dealings with
God: while they had what they wanted, they were pleased and liked the Lord
should be their God; but when (though for their own good) they were straightened,
and did miss their wonted fullness, then they lusted exceedingly in the
wilderness, and tempted God in the desert, verse. 14. We do not read it was upon
their hearts to make any spiritual use or advantage of Gods different dealings
with them; when they had not what they would have, instead of learning to cease
to murmur, they strengthened themselves in murmurring against the Lord, who was
graciously careful for them, and suffered not any more straits to befall them,
than what was in order to their truest good; although they were, as many now
are, full of complaints, yet their greatest want was slackness to those strong
cries that ought to be found in Christians, for a sanctified use of whatsoever
does befall them, taking care to the one thing needful, without which all Order,
is Disorder, all Mercies, Miseries, all Blessings, but Cursings; What shall it
profit a man, whatsoever he has of fullness or scarcity, health or sickness,
desire, or want of desire, if Gods end in all, and our happiness in all* be not
gotten? to wit, that eternal Salvation that freeth from everlasting Damnation,
that being the great work that all other works ought and must give way unto:
But I shall proceed to the Causes, why persons pray more to have Afflictions
removed, than sanctified.

First, Ignorance of the Cause of Affliction. Secondly, Ignorance of the
Necessity of Affliction. Thirdly, Ignorance of the End of Affliction
First, Ignorance of the Cause of Affliction; No chastening for the present is
joyous, but grievous, bitter and sharp, having with it an unpleasant taste to
whomsoever it comes; therefore in it self certainly not welcome to any,
although they bring it upon themselves; who is it that runs not from pain
naturally, and will part with what is outwardly dear to them, rather than
expose themselves to that torturing that attends some kind of Affliction? Now
if as plainly and as certainly it appear. there is unwillingness as well in God
to Afflict, as there is in the creature to choose Affliction, then it will
naturally follow, that there is a Cause, Ignorance of which is a main reason,
why we pray more to have it removed, then sanctified.

For the proof of this, that there is as great unwillingness in God, from whom
Affliction comes, to give it, as we to receive it: mind a little some texts of
Scripture, 1 Pet. 3. 8. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good? in the words going before you have it thus written, But the
face of the Lord is against them that do evil: That is, his favorable
countenance is set against such, and their portion is bitterness, Levit. 26.
17. But if ye be followers of that which is good, who will harm you? Here seems
to be a holy challenge, to whatsoever may harm us; as if the Spirit should have
said, What indeed can harm you, if God be for you? and God will not be against
you if you are followers of that which is good, For he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet the
prisoners of the earth, Lam. 3. 33, 34. Wherefore then may it be said, Does the
living man complain? the holy Spirit gives the answer; For the punishment of
his sin. The joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning; the
Crown is fallen from off our head, Woe unto us for we have sinned, Lam. 15. 16.
A multitude of Scriptures might be urged further to prove both unwillingness in
God to afflict, and that the very Cause of all our Woe both temporal and
eternal, is our misdoing; O that my people had hearkened to my voice, and
walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my
hand against their adversaries, Psalm. 81. 13, 14. Now in reason were the Cause
of Affliction, considered to be only from our selves, procured by our misdoing,
and sent with tendency to our mending, we should surely pray more to have it
sanctified than removed.

Secondly, Ignorance of the Necessity of Affliction, is a Cause of this Decay;
the very unwillingness of God to bring it, and the creature to endure it, fully
proves, that there is Necessity for it; there cannot be more undelightfulness
in the creature to undergo languishing, than there is in God to put him under
languishing, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? How shall I make thee as Idma? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart
is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11. 8. When he
was come near, and beheld the City, he wept over it: Luke 19. 41. Now Gods
unwillingness, proves the creature cannot live at any spiritual rate without
it; and indeed Experience proves the same, Before I was afflicted I went
astray, but now I have kept thy word, Psalm. 119. 67. David wandered from the
Fould, and were like to continue till Affliction spoke to him, he forgot
himself and what he was a doing, The wicked, says the Psalmist, are not in
trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men; therefore pride
compasses them about as a Chain, violence covers them as a garment; and what
use do they make of it? they say, how does God know, and is there knowledge in
the most High. This clearly notes, that a condition freest from trouble or
affliction, generally is attended with carnallest behavior Godward, When I
had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and assembled by troops
into Harlots houses, Jer. 5. 7. By all this it appears, that it is from
ignorance of Afflictions necessity, if we pray more to have it removed than
sanctified.

Thirdly, Ignorance of the End of Affliction, is a Cause of this Decay; now the
Cause being Sin, and the Necessity being to humble; the End is to save: Now all
Gods dealings are mercy, whatsoever he does to the creature, is like himself,
and in it self is mercy, if he give us all we desire and would have, it is
Mercy; if he keep us without it, it is Mercy; Health from him is Mercy, so is
Sickness; Plenty from him is Mercy, so is Poverty; Health, Life, Strength, and
such like Favors temporal, every body will acknowledge to be Mercy; but their
contrary few or none will account Mercy, yet this is Mercy also; for this
Checquer work the World is made of, some at the same time are wringing their
hands for sorrow, while others are clapping their hands for joy; some with
strait^, through Sickness and Poverty are Weeping, others through Health and
Plenty, rejoicing: Now the great difficulty is, how to bring the heart to look
upon the state of Weeping as truly Mercy, as the state of Rejoicing: For which
end consider, why we do account Health, Plenty, and such like Enjoyments Mercy,
but because they have in them an esteeming and desirable good, a seasonable and
suitable good; it is the same with the contrary, they are as seasonable and as
suitable, could our frail hearts so receive them, for they are as truly from the
Lord as the other, and as truly have the same end in them. There are two great
Ends in all God does; one is his Honor; the other is our Salvation; now if God
give us what we would have, his End is the same; and if he give us the
contrary, his End is the same; and Christians certainly misconstruing his End
to be Mercy, is the Cause they misconstrue his Actions to be Mercy: That both
are Mercy, read Exodus 13 17. There God led them through the wilderness, an
unbeaten way, where they wanted both bread and water, and yet both End and
Action Mercy, to bring them to Canaan, and deliver them from harm by the
Philistines: Remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty
years, through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein was fiery Serpents,
and Scorpions, and Drought and no Water; that he might humble thee, and prove
thee to the good at thy latter end. It is too evident, that Israel construed
this hard dealing from God, but it was great Mercy, as the text fully proves.
Ignorance therefore of the End of Affliction, is a Cause why we pray more to
have it Removed than Sanctified.

CHAP. XXIV. Containing in it six Seasons, in which Christians ought to humble
themselves by fasting; proving those under great decay, that in times of
calamity can find no necessity for fasting.
SIGN XIV. WHen under Gods Calamity, you can neither find necessity, nor
excellency, to humble your selves by fasting.
As prayer rightly put up to God, is a way and means by which he many times is
prevailed with, both to remove judgments and sanctify them; even so fasting is
Gods way, in which he has often been found, and it is the more prevailing with
him, in so much as it has in it a gracious tendency to abase and humble the
soul, and make it more fit to receive the kind impression of his precepts, in
opening of his promises, together with the reverencing him because of his
threatenings, it being a season not only of laying the soul low in its own eyes,
at the sensible sight of his own vileness, but a mavelous exalting the
gracious and long-forbearance of God, forcing the heart to cry out, what manner
of love is this that we should be called the Children of God? who was before
wallowers in the works of darkness, that leads to the Chambers of death, but
now by his grace, though once far off, made nigh, of an Alien made a home
dweller; All these things are brought to remembrance, very fresh in fasting
Seasons, that being a time of calling to mind things past; and though calamity
be as truly Gods mercy, as the contrary, having in it the same design of
Salvation good, yet it is more properly sent in order to reducing from those
straings it finds such persons in, as it comes upon, and because of the smart,
and unpleasant taste it brings with it, calls them with a louder voice to make
inquiry, why am I thus? which prosperity in all probability could never have so
done, being not so much of that piercing kind, to the external senses, as
adversity or calamity is; and this the Prophet, Isa. ^6. 16. seems to make his
great observation in these, words, Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they
poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them: For I will be unto
Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion unto the House of Judah: I even I, will
tear and go away, and return to my place till they acknowledge their offenses,
and seek my face; in their affliction, they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 14, 15.
Plainly implying, that it is not only the design of God to send calamity upon
persons for this end, but that also they are most aptly provoked to it at this
Season; see that remarkable text, for this, 2 Chronicles. 33. 10, 11, 12. And the
Lord spoke to Manasseh, and his people, but they would not harken; wherefore
that he might speak by his rod, as well as his word, the Lord brought upon him
the Captain of the Host, the King of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the
Thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon; and when he was
in affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly. While
the rod was but shaken as it were, Manasseh remained refractory, but when he
was bound in chains he humbled himself greatly; must it not then from hence
needs follow, that calamity calls for fasting, and humbling where ever it
comes, being designed to that reducing end: and may not the decay of some grow
to that pass, even so ripe for reaping, that except they should from a deep
sense of their state, be mightily brought down to humble their souls with
fasting, as the last remedy left or prepared by God, for such conditions to
betake themselves unto; and that if they here should fail, then to be given up
to the mouth of ruin. Here this ye old men, give ear all ye inhabitants of the
Land, has this been in your days or even in the days of your Fathers; tell
ye your Children of it, and let your Children tell their Children, and their
Children another generation: that which the Palmer worm has left, has the
locust eaten, and that which the locust has left, has the canker worm eaten;
and that which the canker worm has left, has the caterpiller eaten; sanctify
ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants
of the Land, into the House of the Lord their God; and cry, ah las, ah las, for
the day of the Lord is at hand; and as destruction from the Almighty shall it
come. How evident is it that this was this peoples last remedy, and except they
now find mercy, nothing but destruction will be their portion?

But some may Object and say, how shall we know when danger is such, that
without humbling our selves, with fasting, we are like to meet with ruin.

Answ. There are six seasons that of necessity calls for Fasting.

First, when long patience is abused. Secondly, when just judgments are
threatened. Thirdly, when Just Judgments are executed. Fourthly, when iniquity
in Churches gets a head. Fifthly, when Churches grows secure. Sixthly, when
some great thing is by them to be obtained.
First, when long patience is abused; patience or forbearance in God, is long
exercised to both Churches and people, before with judgment he sweeps them
away, the rod is shaken again and again, while they are under visible decay,
and though God wait long upon such as grows lukewarm in all their active
graces, yet will he at last speak home to them; it was thus with Israel after
they had rested from their troubles, they did evil again, and again, for which
God did gently whip them; then they turned for a while, and cried, but
presently after, went to their old course, Yet many years did he forbear them,
and testified against them, by his Spirit in his Prophets, yet would they not
hear, therefore gave he them up into the hand of the people of the Land, Nehem
9 30. So in Jeremiahs time, they provoked Gods patience long, So that the Lord
could no longer bear because of the evil of their doings; clearly noting, that
they had long abused his long forbearance, therefore was their land made
desolate.

Secondly, just judgments threatened; when judgments by God are threatened upon
Churches in order to their preventing, this is the way they are to take, as the
Text but now named in Joel fully proves; see also, Rev. 2, 3. chapters, where
you have several Churches, found in a decaying state, and called upon to speedy
repentance, else they must be unchurched.

Thirdly, when just judgments are executed, is a season for fasting that they
may be again removed; Then Hanany said, the remnant which are left of the
captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach, the wall
of Jerusalem is broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire: and it came
to pass when I heard these words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain
days, and Fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, Nehem. 1. 4. This way
good Nehemiah took, and it was prosperous with the Lord.

Fourthly, when iniquity gets head, that is, when sin and sinners in Churches,
grows so numerous and heady, that they are like to out-voyce the better party,
it is high time then to be, night and day with the Lord in fasting and prayer,
that iniquities head may be broken, by the sword of his mouth; there was a few
names, and it was but a few in Sardis Church, that had not defiled their
garments, the greatest part were ready to die, and the Lord threatens to
unchurch them except they repent, Revel. 3. And now you call the proud happy,
yea, they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even
delivered: then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, Mat. 3.
15, 16.

Fifthly, when Churches grow secure; that is, as safely sheltered in their
account from judgment, though a dying to every duty, as if they were in a
growing, flourishing state, contenting themselves to be told it is not well
with them, but sit still from using either means of information or recovery, as
though they were minded to suffer their distemper to grow mortal; Thou say I
am rich, and increased with goods, and has need of nothing, and know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked. As many as I love
I rebuke and chasten: Be zealous therefore and repent, Revel. 3. 17, 19.

Sixthly, when some great thing is by them to be obtained, Dan. 9. 3. And I set
my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with Fasting,
and Sackcloth and Ashes, Mat. 17. 21. This kind goes not out but by prayer and
fasting, Acts 14. 23. And when they had Ordained them Elders in every Church,
and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they
believed.

CHAP. XXV. Containing in it the evil of Ignorance, in not knowing wherefore
Gods Rod is come, nor what good it has done: with three Directions how to know
when persons are under this Decay; and three Remedies against it.
SIGN XXV. When Gods Rod works so little upon you, that you can neither tell
wherefore it is come, nor what good it has done.
People under this Sign are very miserable, for they are not only miserable in
general, but miserable under the means of reducement; The Sun, of such is
setting, and the Lamp agoing out. It is a misery to be in need of the
Physician, but to remain in misery (after their best appication as to healing)
must needs be miserable, for then there remains no visible hope of remedy; when
correction by the Rod will not do, (that is, will not reclaim,) then is giving
up the next work.

It may be necessary to open the meaning of Gods Rod, it signifies his stripes,
or chastisements; and says the decaying Christian, it is true, these and these
miseries lie upon me, and have for some time, but I know not the cause, nor
what is a miss, or how to have it removed, nor wherein to be bettered; the
Scripture gives us many sad instances of such a people as these, Jer. 2. 30. In
vain have I smitten your Children, they have received no correction; though I
do correct them, yet they do not receive it; that is, they remain the same
under it, as Jer. 5. 3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved,
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; for the
people turns not to him that smites them; strangers have devoured their
strength, yet they know it not; though gray hairs are here and there upon
them: Such as these have lost their spiritual hold, and feels not the force of
Gospel-arguments, and now the Devil may take their Religion from them, if he
brings but something by way of exchang, that serves and suits their external
senses. It is easy for such to sell their Master for thirty pieces of Silver,
just like Israel of old, Exodus 32. When they saw that Moses delayed his coming,
(though he is gone up to the Mount with God) yet they make themselves new Gods:
mere shows, and forsake the true God; this is a most miserable state, but how
shall we know we are under this dying Sign, and get help against it.

First, When no affliction or Rod that comes upon you, does so much trouble
you, as to provoke to a diligent search what is the cause of what is come, Jer.
8. 6, 7. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him
of his evil, saying, what have I done? The Stork, Turtle, and Swallow, observe
their time, but my people know not the Judgments of the Lord; They know not
wherefore my Rod is come, but if I afflict them, they get it off as soon as
they can, not considering, that if it do not mend them, I shall bring seven
times worse Judgments upon them; As it is with some, and our experience can
speak to the truth of it: Let God visit their family with sickness, they will
send to the physician, and if he goes further and bring death, they will bury
their dead, as fashionably as they can, but hardly inquire, saying, what have I
done? or what ought I to learn?

Secondly, When if you are wrought upon to inquire after the Cause, you center
in generals; that is, some sin or other, not descending to particulars; for
this and this evil, it is thus and thus with me.

Thirdly, When though you may confess in general, and descend into particulars.
Yet if there be not right sorrow for, and turning from, you are still under
this dying Sign.

Now as Remedies against this dying Sign.

First, Keep your Judgments under continual information, from those Texts of
Scripture, that declares what the Rod is sent for, Deuteronomy. 17. may well be alluded
to, the King must have the Law by him continually, that he may read therein,
and why? that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren; and that he might
learn to fear the Lord his God continually. So that you see he was daily to be
informing his Judgment in the Law, as the proper way to fear the Lord his God,
and to avoid sinning against him: once informing the Judgment will not do, so
as to carry force to the keeping from doing evil, except there be a daily
tutoring the mind in the same things again and again; as often rubbing the
hands causes heat, and often whetting the instrument keeps from rust, and
makes sharp; even so, often informing the understanding and Judgment with some
such Texts as these, bears such a stroke upon the heart, as to deliver it from
going in that path, attended with such woes from Heaven, Levit. 26. 14, 15, 16,
17. If you will not hearken to me and do all my commandments, I will appoint
over you terror; yea, and set my face against you, and plague you for your
sins. Job. 36. 18. Because there is wrath, beware, lest he take thee away with
his stroke, then a great ransom cannot deliver thee. The Prophet Isaiah in
Chap. 5. from the 8. to the 23. verse, pronounces woe upon woe six times over,
clothing transgressors with woes, as a man is clothed with his garment.

Secondly, content not your selves on this side a heart so tender, as to be
under continual feeling fear of God and his Judgments. Christians should be
restless and not cease by prayer to cry night and day, that God would make them
large sharers in the promises of the new Covenant, Exck. 33. I will take away
thy stony heart, and give thee a heart of flesh; thy hard heart, and give the a
soft heart; Man's heart is like metal, and metal you know that is hard and
unweldy, that will not receive an impression, is put to the fire to soften, to
make it receive the stroke, in 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. you have a lively instance of a
soft heart; because thy heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before
me; my flesh trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid of thy Judgments, Psalm.
119. 120.

Thirdly, When at any time a Rod from God comes upon you; pass Judgment still
that there is some cause, and cease not praying and searching till you find it
out: This will certainly preserve you from being under the possession of this
dying Sign, Josh. 7. Israel comes to loss, what does he then do? Cry, alas O
Lord God, wherefore have thou at all brought these people over, to deliver us
into the hands of the Amorites to destroy us.

CHAP. XXVI. Showing where sin takes its beginning, and how by degrees if
hearkened to, it works ruin; with six special Marks, how persons (though
pardoned) may know when God will suffer them to fall into sin anew.
SIGN XXVI. When the thoughts of thy dearest Lust, or any other sin, is
pleasing to thee.
Though^ is the first door of the mind inwardly, as the eye and ear are of the
body outwardly; here sin takes first place, and if here it be not first slain,
it will increase to conception, and from thence to action: the eye and ear
carry things to the thought, and the thought carries things to the conception,
and conception to affection, and affection to consent, and consent to action;
and thus you may behold how great a fire a little spark kindles: Now every good
man has had a dearest lust, and every wicked man has a dearest lust, that he
most hugs, loves, and serves; though evil men do obey fance to any sin that
suits with their liking, yet there is some particular sin to which they have
most single regard; and the best of Gods people are under more particular
inclination, to some one particular sin than other, and in danger to fall and
be overcome thereby, 1 King. 8. 38. there the Scripture notes this, under the
name of heart-plague; also Psalm. 18. 23. Ah mine iniquity; Now this comes to
the thoughts for entertainment, and there is greatest possibility of finding
entertainment; for which cause Gods word so much inveighs against thoughts,
when they are about evil exercises, Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the thought
of his heart was evil, and only evil, Jer. 4. 14. How long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? Prove. 24. 9. The thoughts of foolishness is sin.
Thought is the least motion of the mind, and whether it be wicked or good, is
not hid from God, nor from Gods Vicegerent, even Conscience; No thought can be
withheld from thee, Job 42. 2. No secret design, though in the very heart of
man, can be so carried on as that God cannot be privy to it, Amos 4. 13. That
declares to man what is his thought: Now thought, though the least motion of
the mind, yet being employed with continual good objects, as the Resurrection,
and Judgment to come, thinking still what shall be the estate of the saved and
damned; has blessed force both upon the heart and conversation, to regulate
things there; and by all possible means labors to work such up to Gods
likeness, that they may have boldness in judgment; even so, (and let conscience
how speak) letting the thoughts have to do, (so as to like of) those vain shady
delights, that the hearts of men are apt to set up to themselves; as
Uncleanness, Covetousness, etc. has as great force on the conversation, to
carry it Hell-ward. It highly concerns Christians therefore, to be upon the
examination of their state, as to thriving or decaying, and to see to the
Thought what branch it bears; the beginnings of sin inwardly being there, and
be certain to pass this judgment upon your selves, that if to your thoughts,
your former dearest lust in any branch of it, or any other sin be pleasant to
you; that is, tall, lovely, comely, or desirable, and not rather hateful,
frightful, burdensome, black and hellish; you are a dying or decaying to
heaven, and heavenly things; and very seasonable to such may the counsel of
Peter be, Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God the thought of thy heart
may be forgiven thee. I shall from hence take occasion to give you six Marks,
by which you may know when God will suffer your Return back to your old dearest
lust, or some other sin; and they may by Gods blessing and your ca^e, slay
iniquity in its first motion.

First, The first Mark may be this, when after God has pardoned the sins you
once lived in, you are not so abased in your own eyes, so as to walk humbler
with God all your days: Now this is Gods great end in forgiving all sin, Ezekiel.
16. 62, 63. I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I
am the Lord, that thou may remember, (mark that) and be confounded, and never
open thy mouth more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee. So
Ezekiel. 36. 29, 30, 31. I also will save you from all your uncleanness, both
guilt and filth, then shall you remember your own evil ways, and shall loath
your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations.
So that you see, God expects to receive fruit from the pardoned.

But Secondly, When because of your graces, you are in any measure lifted up,
to admire grace more than giver: By grace here, I mean the Graces of Gifts, as
ability to pray, or preach, etc. distinct from the Graces of Humility, Meekness
and Charity, for a man may be rich in the one, and yet poor in the other; Now
Gods usual measure of bestowing the Graces of Gifts, at such times, and to such
persons as have been very rebellious, yet are returned to the Shepherd of
their souls: Now again you must distinguish between Graces and Gifts, with what
allowance the Scripture gives, otherwise ye will confound hoth by mixing them
together; for though Graces be Gifts, and Gifts be Graces, yet are they not
such as prove, that of necessity where the Gifts or Graces of Preaching, or
Praying, or Knowledge, or Tongues are, there will be the Graces of Humility and
Thankfulness; though it will prove there should be such Graces; the reason I
conceive lies here, and it may be worthy our noting, (thus) The Graces of
Gifts in the sense we distinguish, are more properly given of God for the
benefit of others; as he gave his Spirit to Saul, for the benefit of Israel:
Now other Graces are most properly given for the profit of our selves, because
with the one we may perish, without the other we cannot be saved: Now both this
dying Sign, and the distinction may be of use, if considered among Churches,
for experience tells us, while the humble in heart have stood with their low
and mean parts, in the mean time those tall in Gifts have fallen, like Dagon
before the Ark, and it is good none here be secure, for though Gifts be Graces,
and that from God the giver, yet may a person fall in love with the Gift, and
himself for the Gift, as to be lifted up to the forgetting God the Giver, 2 Chronicles. 26. 15, 16. compared with Chap. 32. 25.

Thirdly, A third sign of Gods suffering persons to fall into sin, may be this;
When signal favors from God given you are not minded, but forgotten: There is
none that lives but are more or less tried by God in this very kind, some time
or other of their life, for they are not only sharers in Gods common favors,
that he daily bestows upon all, as Rain, fruitful seasons, food, raiment,
health, strength, and the like; but also signal and special favors, as
Redemption from the Grave, when at the very brinck to visible view, even
favors of such like kind as Israel had, when the firstborn in Egypt dyed, not
a Dog barks against Israel; when Plague or Sword sweeps away by hundreds, on
our right hand, and on our left, and we remain untouched; this certainly is
never to be forgotten: so the red Sea deliverance, the pillar of Cloud by day,
and of Fire by night, together with the dividing of the Waters of Jordan, are
Parables doubtless in Gospel days, and we under as gracious Obligations to
remember with thankfulness Gods loving kindness: David that good man, makes
observation in this case of old Israel, and has left their stain for
Generations to come, to read and take warning by, Psalm. 106. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
God rebuked the red Sea, and it was dried up, and redeemed them from the hand
of their enemies; yet they soon forgot his works, and waited not for his
counsel; so 2 Chronicles. 32. 24. Hezekiah was sick to death, and he prayed to God,
and he gave him a sign; but Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit
done him; (mark that) his return was not as signal as his favor, therefore God
suffers wrath to come upon him; by all which it is clear, that more than
ordi^ary favors, calls for more than ordinary returns; and where its a wanting,
God is provoked to suffer such to fall: I pray God make this hint as
acceptable, as it is seasonable, to those that shall meet with it.

Fourthly, A fourth Mark how persons may know when God will suffer them to fall
into Sin; When under great straits, you are not much with God for wisdom and
counsel; Neglect here must needs be dangerous, for it is a kind of tempting
God, a daring as it were the holy One of Israel: When under great straits that
for good ends he brings upon them, they are careless to request his help for
their escaping, and answerable gaining. No man that trades in the way to
heaven, but at times is exercised with great straits of one kind or another,
the very entrance into it promises nothing less, Mark 8. 34. Whosoever will
come after me, let him take up his Cross daily and follow me: So that Jesus
Christ would have persons count upon meeting with hard things, that will be his
Disciples; For man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, Job 5. 7. Now
that none may sinck under them, Jesus Christ has made provision, which if they
neglect they are like to perish, Mat. 26 4. The Shepherd shall be smitten, and
the Sheep all scattered; now the best preservative against such a danger, is,
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, Luke 21. 26. Men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after what shall come to pass; for the
Powers of heaven shall be shaken: Therefore watch ye and pray always, that ye
may be accounted worthy to escape. By these Texts, together with Phil. 4. 6. Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, let your
requests be made known unto God. Clearly noting, that persons under straits,
are not in Gods security out of the way of prayer; well therefore may this
prove an acceptable caution to every Christian, when he undergoeth his share in
the Cross of Jesus, to make his complaint and earnest cries to him by prayer,
with supplication; No doubt but such will find Christ seasonably helping him:
but if you find a secure drowsiness attend the heart, then conclude your misery
is not yet at the height: The Disciples are found asleep three times together,
and cannot watch with their Lord one hour, before their misery will be greater
by his being taken from them: but I shall end this Mark, leaving for our
gracious pattern the example of Jesus Christ, Who being in an Agony and swet,
as it were great drops of blood, he at that time, prayed the more earnestly,
Luke 22. 44.

Fifthly, When you readily close with occasions to sin; this tempts the Devil
to tempt you, and tempts God to leave you; Sampson in Judges 14. seeks to take
a Wife among the Uncircumcised, that he might seek an occasion against them:
Even so, does not the Devil make his attempts, whereby he may give an occasion
to Gods People to sin; The ready closing wherewith, tempts him further to
tempt them; and indeed tempts God to leave them: Now occasions to sin comes
many ways, and from different objects, that may have but little beginning, and
yet tall conclusions; sometimes the ear hears that which sets the heart on
fire; sometimes the eye sees, that which brings woe to the mind; witness David,
who at the top of his roof, as he was walking, sees Bathsheba washing her
self, and her beauty passing through the casement of his eyes; this small
occasion took possession, and made him a prisoner to his great overthrow: so
Joshua 7. 21. Achan saw among the spoils, a goodly Babylonish Garment, and a
Wedge of Gold; his eye looked, and his heart lusted till he was ruined. Now
every man that knows any thing of sins way, knows, that it seeks and takes
occasion from very small beginnings; Behold how great a fire a little spark
kindles; it begins by little, taking its degrees, and is carried through the
eyes to the thoughts, then to conception, then to affection, then to consent,
then to action: Now the provision the holy Scripture makes in this kind, is
positively engaged by way of Precept, To astain from all appear ances of evil,
1 These. 5. 22. Clearly noting, that in order to persons certain security from
the commission of all evil, they must abstain from its Appearance: Very
observable is Gods care to Israel of old, no sooner were they out of Egypt, but
he seeks to take all occasions of sin out of their way, Exodus 13. 17. And it
came to pass, that when Pharaoh had let the People go, that God led them not
through the Land of the Philistines, although it was near, (note that) lest
peradventure the people see War, and return to Egypt again. So Exodus 23. 13,
33. Also Deuteronomy. 7. 25. Prove. 22. 24, 25. They must cut down their graven Images,
and burn them with fire, and desire none of the silver that's on them, lest they
be a snare unto them. So the Wiseman, counsels to make no friendship with an
angry man, and with a furious man; no not to go, lest we learn his ways, and
get a snare to our souls.

Sixthly, When you are not pitiful to the tempted, but in your prosperity
forget their calamity; God is pleased many times to suffer Satan to be let
loose upon some Christians, and to try them sorely, yea, to engage them deep in
actual War, whilst other Christians as it were, are lookers on; to let the one
see how weak he is in the hands of this spiritual Adversary, if left to
himself; and to try the other, what frame of heart he carries toward his
brother in distress, and this if wisely improved turns to the great advantage
of both: The personal sufferer, if he endure, becomes heir to the promise,
annexed to the condition of the tempted, Jam. 1. 12. And the looker on, if he
by beholding is so enflamed with zealous love and pity to his suffering
brother, that he greatly suffers also: The one is offended, the other burns, 2
Cor. 11. 29. When all the strength a poor tempted soul has, is engaged in hot
fight with the Devil, flesh, and world, then pity from lookers on, proves like
a fresh recruit to a shattered Army, it so suits with Gods will, and with the
tempteds want; whereas on the contrary, want of pity in lookers on, as it
strengthens the hands of the Adversary, and tempts the courage of the troubled
to grow flat: Now this sixth Mark is framed to that end, if the Lord will, that
lookers on may not only know what frame of heart they are to be of in such a
season; but to provoke them to make haste to it; in Amos 6. 4. there was
neglect to this duty, and it meets with a sad salute; Woe to them that are at
ease in Zion, that lie upon beds of Ivory, that drink Wine in Bowls, but are
not grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph: No iniquity) mark that) so provokes
God as to be preferred in punishment before this; They must go into captivity,
with the first that go Captive, Amos 1. 11. Numb. 20. from the 14. to the 22.
God will not bear such a pittiless heart in his very Enemies. Isa. 47. 6. I was
wrath with my People, and gave them into thy hands; and upon the ancient very
heavily have thou laid thy yoke; Therefore in one day shall come upon thee loss
of Children, and Widdow-hood. Remember therefore those that are in Bonds, as
bound with them, and them that suffer Adversity, as being also of the same
Body, Heb. 13. Read and consider, and the good Lord give you understanding;
Amen.

CHAP. XXVII. Showing Satan's way, by which he Gets in our day most advantage
upon Churches; and a plain discovery of the first rise of the Quakers; showing
also the great Law of Edification, to be preferred in all Doctrine; with
Cautions to such as live out of all Church way.
SIGN XXVII. When you are mighty curious about the lesser matters of Gods Law,
and mighty careless about the weightier.
When Satan the grand Engine of beginning and perfecting a Christians ruin,
cannot at once knock his heart and hands from off the Ordinances of Gods House,
thereby to make him destitute of the very means to good: He usually works this
way, where he finds meet subjects to be working upon, viz. make some more
curious by far than God would have them; and so wholly taken up with the lesser
matters of Gods Law, that he may have the fairer opportunity to make them as
careless in the weightier; by this manner of dress he deceives far more, than
by his common known dress of visible profaneness; this being so far from the
road of the rude ranting way, that it shows, yea, and pretends to exceed even
Christians in their right Saint-like way, carrying with it profession of, and
contention for commands of God. Which spirit meeting with ignorant and
inconsiderate people, makes a noise as though it would drive the World before
it, while the fairer, surer Christian, that carries on his matters temperately,
giving due respect to every command, yet seems in their eye to burn so dim,
that they are ready to bid him stand further off, they are holier than he.

This deceit is a wonderful mysterious one, and without all doubt works
mightily, not only among the Churches, but in, and among the people called
Quakers, whose spirit is yet kept under by the wise God, till a riper season,
from showing it self in that Atheists dress, that certainly it did rise from,
and certainly will end in. They being of all people Pharasaical like, out of
all cry, contenders for that that comparatively is but the shell of
Christianity, and are so far from contending for, that they set themselves even
against the kernel or substance of Religion; and the Church of God, can truly
witness this, for from among themselves are some gone out, with as fair
pretenses as can be, of living more to God in the Spirit and power of holiness,
and yet quickly showing themselves in the mystery of carrying on most
abominable Atheistical principles, of denying both the Resurrection of the
body from the grave of the earth, and Judgment day to come; And so bend their
bow at the overthrowing the very foundation of godliness, in the mystery of
Egyptian darkness, and yet under the highest pretenses of Angel light. It is
clearly evident, that the first rise of that spirit laid its beginning upon
these very materials, of being curious in the lesser, and careless in the
weightier, making nothing secretly to act gross abomination (as some can
witness) yet to public view, where they might have the fairer advantage to
deceive the simple, did make great show of tender respect to some lesser
matters of Gods Law; and indeed out-talk every body, while God knows they did
not thus plead out of true love to Gods Law that they had, but because no bait
would so fit their hook, and carry on the business they designed like this.

Now Satan himself full well knows, that it is in vain for him to expect the
accomplishing any great design among the separated Churches, any other way, for
filthiness of flesh is so manifest, that every body among them that knows but
any thing, knows they are redeemed from that, but filthiness of the spirit
which works secretly, and yet ends carnally, and mortally, is his grand working
way; which doubtless the Apostle well knew, when he gave this exhortation to
the Corinth Church, with this description, which I pray observe, Chap. 7. 1.
where he beseeches them not only, to cleansethemselves from all filthiness of
the flesh; but by way of distinction, filthiness of Spirit also; and that in
order to their perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Read also, Isa. 30. 21.
And by this mysterious means he takes in some place, and among some people by
companies, that most of them in their true Church standing were the carnallest,
mean, and ignorantest Christians, having in them as little experience as could
be of the power of Godliness; so little, that if they had any less, would have
had too little to be born by the Church; yet intangling themselves with this
spirit of deceit, (or filthiness of spirit) have grown mighty confident, bold,
and lifted up, too wise for their teachers, despising those far before them in
grace, yet far behind them in their account; and very justly may and does the
Lord let such fall into spiritual deceit, notwithstanding they plead for some
of his own law, they being most careless, where he would have them most
careful; so renders their care in the lesser, while careless in the g^eater, of
no account with him at all, he taking no pleasure in such, but greatly
disdaining them, Mat. 23. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for you pay
tyth of mint, Annise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the
Law. They are under Gods woe, though they do what they ought to do, yet in
leaving undone something weightier, that ought to be done also. Multitudes as
the Scripture witnesses have been, and God knows in our days are, deceived in
this matter; who content themselves, some in being mighty just between man, and
man, which in it self is good, yet loose in other matters; others great
Churchmen, yet abominable proud, covetous, or both, much like those, Isa. 58.
2. That seek God daily, and delight to know his ways, (mark that) as a Nation
that did righteousness, and delight in approaching to God; yea, they fast and
and afflict their Souls. How excellent are all these things mentioned, and
worthy our noting? that though found in this practice, yet sent to, by God to
be told of their sins; all which noted together proves, that faithfulness in
some truths, while unfaithful in other truths, more, or as material; renders
the services of such to be of no account: all which I have briefly noted for
caution to two sorts of people in special.

First, Such as live out of most way of Gospel separation, and yet keeping
themselves under the observation of some truths, that conscience and the light
of nature dictates to them, though under apparent neglect, and in disobedience
to many known Gospel truths; that they know or easily may know, following the
Counsel of God, to cry after knowledge, and lift up their voice for
understanding; searching as they search for their silver; digging as they dig
for their hid treasure: That is, taking as great pains for the knowledge of the
true treasure, as they take to possess themselves with worldly treasure; for
the getting whereof they rise up early, go to bed late, and eat the bread of
painfulness; but all this while content themselves with lazy desires, and
saint wishes after the true treasure, and will not close with any thing, that
proves costly in getting or keeping, James 2. 19. Thou believe there is one
God, thou do well, the Devils also believe and tremble; but will thou know O
vain man, that faith without work (...) dead, being alone; therefore faith must
be of a Gospel kind, and proved to be so by Gospel works: Though a man should
beg pardon of his sin, of lying, cheating, covetousness, or uncleanness, or
such like works of the flesh all his days, and yet continue in any, or all of
these; yea, though he could cry for it, till his heart strings break, he must
miss of it, asking out of the way of the promise, in which pardon is decreed by
the God of Heaven to be given; so that every repentance supposed to be right,
may be wrong, and that faith not of a Gospel kind, (...) of a Gospel show; If a
man would have ^^^vation with his sins, or Christ and his (...), he goes out of
the channel of the penitent, who are wont to meet God in sorrow f^^ sin, and
turning from sin, Prove. 18. 13. H^ (...) covers his sins, shall not prosper,
but w^^^^^ confesses and Forsakes them, shall have ^e^cy.

Now deceitful hearts, through the D^^^^ wiles, misconstrue promises of Glory,
(...) part for the whole, having confident dependence upon the promises of
life; and can (...) many Scriptures wherein are gracious promises made by God
to sinners; but never consider what Kinds of sinners the^ be, to whom the
promises are made, neither take any due care to perform the condition the
promis^ is made upon; so please themselves in the hope of Heaven, not
diligently weighing the foundation their hope is built upon. It is like to
prove with such, as with a hungry man, he dreameth, and behold he eats, but
he awaketh and his soul is empty, Isa 29. 8. Many will say to Christ in the
great day, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our
streets, therefore Lord, Lord, open to us; depart from me ye workers of
iniquity; whose hope must perish in being not of that purifying kind, that
renews the soul Godward, but still allows the flesh a commanding power,
forgetting that great mark, which proves the hope of Gods Elect to be of the
right kind, John 1. 3. 1. And every one that has This Hope in him, purifyeth
himhimself even as he is pure.

Secondly, Let this serve for caution to such in Churches, as are, or are like
to be curious in the lesser, whiles careless in the greater. Great has been
the trouble of such Churches as can witness this decay to have been amongst
them; it still took the most inconsiderate, that lived too much below
comparison in Gods Law, where or when to be more or less in condescension in
order to the best maintaining edification; which is the great end of all
institution: they forgetting, or not knowing this, have gone so unseasonable
about setting up the lesser, that they have debased the weightier; making the
remedy prove far worse than the disease; carrying on this work with such manner
of management, that an indifferent stander by could not but imagine, that sure
the whole will of God, lay in the one, two, or three lesser things, that they
so pleaded for; especially, seeing it carried on with that heat of Spirit, and
resolution of taking place, that the bonds of love, and Church Communion could
not hold them.

Whence has the divisions among the baptized Churches, both in affection and
practice risen, if not from this very root? Cannot hundreds witness, yea and
mourn for what they know in this matter? has not the great law of love, and
the great design of all Ordinances, to wit, Edification, been sacrificed for
the will of some novelties? I know what I speak to be truth, and that I have
many witnesses. The honor of God, the credit of his Religion, when it has
come in competition, has been less preferred than some new apprehension, if
not some old error newly espoused; does not this preach persons wonderfully
carnal, and wise in their own conceits? How far have such gone from Christ's
good example? I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them
now; Let us mind a little, their best season of receiving was Christ's best
season of declaring: Does not Christ, by this teach every Disciple of his, to
digest well themselves?

First, What they have to offer before they offer it; and the best season too;
may not, nay have not some by seeking before due season, to set up some one
lesser law, thrown down several greater laws; nay has not some unseasonably
bringing in the truth, together with the ill management thereof; brought into
the Church by head and shoulders, envying, strife, and devision, and cast out
humbleness of mind, long-suffering, gentleness, and bowels? does not the holy
Apostle set a copy for all, how to walk in this respect? 1 Cor. 3. 1. And I
Brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal; even
babes in Christ: I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye
have not been able to bear it, neither yet are ye able. Does not he here
consider their inward constitution, and prepare his dish to their stomach? and
is not this Heavens roadway to bring in the greater? by an orderly first
bringing in the lesser; witness this holy Apostles carriage, 1 Cor. 12. 17, 18,
19 Did I make a gain of you, by any of them I sent to you; I desired Titus, and
with him I sent a brother; did Titus make a gain of you? We speak before God in
Christ, we do all things dearly beloved for your edifying: he had respect to
the great design, Edification; and when requiring their performance of a lesser
duty, to wit, giving their temporals to them from whom they received
spirituals, even as the Lord has ordained; that they that preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel: yet as I said but now, if the calling for the
performance of this duty, will not stand with their edification in the main, he
will rather preach the Gospel of God freely, 2 Cor. 11. 9. But when I was
present with you, ( And Wanted) I was chargeable to no man, and in all things I
have kept my self from being burdensome to you; and so I will keep my self:
you see, though he wants necessaries, he will take nothing of them, but rather
over-burthen other Churches that are better spirited to bear it, then among
this people labor in vain; may not all mourn for Gospel loss, through the want
of such walking one toward another in our days? How prosperous in
probability, may not I say in certainty, had the truth been over it is, through
our Nation, had it not been for those divisions that now are among the
Churches? whose beginnings came in this way; I do secretly rejoice, to think
what a blessed issue would have been reaped of general harmony amongst Gods
Children, while all persons, in all places, and among all people spoke the same
things. Does not the adversary hinder the building greatly, while he can truly
say, do you not see how they are divided among themselves, and lay low one
another? does not also the conscious seeker stumble greatly at this, and say,
what shall I do? where to settle I cannot tell? Does not the carnal Christian
because of this please himself, that he is got into the world of liberty from
all Church way? O that the Lord would be entreated to awaken the upright! yet
to make it their prayer, and care night and day, how they may in places, times,
things, especially in the main, both to speak and do the same thing; this will
be blessed with better success to God, and Gospel, in one year, then the best
endeavors of another kind, for time past has been in some years.

I have done, and the good Lord begin to set this my humble caution to Churches
home, that they all may take the good Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 14. 26. How is it
then brethren, when you come together, every one has a Psalm, has a Doctrine,
has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation; Let all things be
done to Edifying.

CHAP. XXVIII. Showing the necessity of humble waiting, and confident depending
upon the holy Spirit, to help in the great work of mortification; the necessity
whereof is showed in seven particulars, with six directions how to get and keep
this holy Spirit.
SIGN XXVIII. When the holy Spirits help to the great work of mortification,
seems not of absolute need to you.
That is, its working, help, and way is not taken heed to: necessity of the
holy Spirits help in this matter of great concernment, cannot be known, so as
to be to this great end worthily improved, without knowledge to a good degree,
how in this great work the holy Spirits help is concerned, and whether so
concerned, that without its help, mortification of sin in its right order,
cannot be brought about; Now where the holy Spirit is sought unto, and humbly
waited upon for help, he does show himself helpful in these particulars.

First, in fortifying the mind of a Christian with spiritual materials, meet to
wage war with the spiritual adversaries, flesh, world, and Devil, all which are
strongly engaged against a poor convert, Gal. 5. 7. The flesh lusts against
the Spirit; desiring and striving to do what is directly contrary to the
Spirit, like a perfect opposite, aiming and striving to set up all impurity,
contrary to, or against the Spirits purity. Now the mind being the most noble
part in man, that the flesh is most engaged against; so that Peter in his 1
Epist. 2. 4, 12. cautions to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the
soul, or mind; therefore says the holy Apostle St. Paul, Romans 7. 23. I see a
Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, to lead me captive to
the Law of sin, in my members; And says Jesus Christ, Mat. 22. 37. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. All which
together, proving the mind to be the most noble part, at which the holy Spirit
to possess with good, and the adversary to possess with bad, has a chief and
only aim, knowing right well, that conquest there carries away the whole man;
and therefore the actions of good men, and wicked men, are more or less reputed
good or bad, as they are more or less managed with the Mind; Nehem. 4. 6, 17.
The builders that wrought upon the wall, with one hand, held a weapon, and with
the other hand wrought in the work; for the people had a Mind to work: which
notes how mightily a willing mind does contribute to a succesful work; and that
this is greatly esteemed of by God, read Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee; thou will keep them, such are the
proper subjects of Gods great care, whose minds on God is stayed, and they
shall have peace, peace, that is, peace in its best performances, and in all
its degrees, peace at home, abroad, in storms, in calmes, within, without,
equivolent with that blessing annexed to commandment keepers, Deuteronomy. 28.
beginning. But on the contrary, Prove. 21. 29. The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination to the Lord; how much more, when he brings it with a wicked Mind;
So that at the best the wickeds sacrifices are abominable, but how, much more,
when they come with a mind set on wickedness? Phil. 3. 18, 19. For many walk of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, they are enemies of
the Cross of Christ, who mind earthly things: now all this premised, be speaks
the necessity of the holy Spirits help to fortify the mind with spiritual
materials, meet to wage war with the spiritual adversary; for the fruit of the
Spirit is in all goodness, righteousness, and truth, proving what is acceptable
to God; and is therefore put in opposition to the works of the flesh, Ephesians. 5.
9, 10. Gal. 5. 22. But the fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, meekness,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith; now a mind destitute of this holy
Spirits fruit, is no way able to withstand the motions of the flesh; but is
carried captive with every lustful bait at the tempters will; for they that are
after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; and as it is the care of the
evil one, to have the mind of sinners in his possession; even so the first work
the holy Spirit does upon the converted, is to put Gods law into their mind, by
demolishing those dark works, in those that turn to God, both in debasing what
was, and in exalting what was not, Ephesians. 4. 17. This I say therefore, and
testify in the Lord, that you walk not as other Gentiles, walk in the vanities
of their mind, verse. 22. But that you put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man with his deeds; and then is a necessity of putting on
the new man with his deeds; for if the house, or heart be empty, swept, and
garnished from all bad, and yet not possessed with like good, the evil one enters
again, and makes the case worse than before; All which notes the necessity of
having dependence upon the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. To fortify the mind
with spiritual materials: and thus I have done with the first mark, and come to
the second.

Secondly, It is the Spirits work, to discover to the Christian man, wherein
his danger most lies; that is, by what bait, and to what evils the tempter is
most like to draw him; Ignorance here causes people go into the tempters way,
and without defilement more or less they can hardly return, and surely Solomon
alludes to this in one of his petitions to God for Israel, 1 Kings 8. 38. What
prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel,
which shall know every man the Plague of his own Heart: clearly implying, that
among Israel there might be, that did not know their own Hearts Plague, or
wherein their danger most lay; now the holy Spirit was given to instruct them,
and so witnesses, Nehem. 9. 20. Thou gave thy good Spirit to instruct them;
the manner how is set out in, Exodus 13. 17. And it came to pass when pharaoh
had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the
Philistines; although that was near, for God said, lest they repent when they
see war, and return to Egypt again. It is very questionable, if not out of
doubt; that this danger was not in their eye at all, but God led them (says
Moses,) by his Spirit says Nehemiah; clearly noting, that persons harkening,
find the holy Spirit not wanting to lead them in the best way, and set before
them the greatest danger; one text more and so I have done with this, Isa. 29.
24. They also that erred in Spirit, shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn Doctrine. They that through ignorance went astray shall
come to understanding, or know their best way; and they that did repine shall
learn Doctrine, or be better taught.

Thirdly, The Spirits work is to discover both the strength of the tempter, and
temptation, showing to the Christian man these two things.

First, that the tempter can but entice, not enforce. Secondly, that the
strength of his temptations lies in present things.
First, he can and does prepare suitable baits and snares, but all he does do,
and can do, amounts but to thus much; Therefore greater is he that is in you,
than he that is against you; which consideration tends greatly to a believers
support, while he is able to say, I know it must be my fault if I sin against
my God, for the tempter cannot force me, neither did he ever force any, he can
and does proffer his ware, putting the best face upon it, as you may see, Genesis
3. 4, 5. And the Serpent says to the Woman, ye shall not surely die; for God
does know in the day you eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and shall be
as Gods, knowing good, and evil; here he makes his bait pleasant, and to
promise greater privilege than yet they had; with which the woman is taken;
And when the Woman saw that the fruit was good, and that it was pleasant to the
eye, she took thereof and did eat; contrary to the Law: so Josh 7. 20, 21.
When Achan saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish Garment, and a wedge of
Gold, he coveted them; which notes, that the Devils power to take, centers in
preparing fair outsides, which carries some after destruction, as the Ox goes
to the slaughter, not knowing that it is for his life; and indeed as his trade
lies in shows, so the people he tradeth among, (without which he could not
trade at all to any advantage) are silly people; and though silly people, yet
he tradeth altogether in the dark, and therefore is called the Ruler of
darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12: And his Kingdom a Kingdom of darkness, Col. 1. 3. and
dare not come to the light for fear his deeds should be made manifest.

Secondly, as he thus trades, and these are the people he tradeth with; so the
strength of his temptations centers in present things; It is all he can make
snares and temptations of, as is evident by these Texts, Romans 8. 18. The
sufferings of this Present world are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us: so Gal. 1. 4. who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from this Present evil World. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has forsaken
me, having embraced the Present World; Now all these Scriptures speak the
tempters strength to lie in present things, which made the holy Apostle have
light account of his suffering, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory; he compares it with the state to come, gives it the next count to a
cipher, calling it momentary; and the utmost we can make, or any sinner that
lives at greatest height of worldly pleasure, must confess all present things
will amount to but these three.

First, Such as goes but shin deep.

Secondly, Such as may properly be called minute joy, that that is ours this
minute, but either it taken from us, or we from it next minute, it lasts not.

Thirdly, At the longest worldly pleasure serves us but till we come to the
grave, and there it leaves us.

Having now done with the third Discovery of the holy Spirits help, I shall
briefly add two or three more, and pass to the Twenty ninth Sign of a dying
Christian.

Fourthly, The holy Spirit discovers what unprofitableness is found in sin
after committed, working strong convictions upon the heart of the sinner, and
forces him to confess that his eager pursuit after his sin, now he has had
his hearts desire granted, contracts but woe and sorrow, though sweet in the
mouth while eating, yet bitter in the belly when eaten, Mark 8. 36, 37. What
shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his soul? Or what shall
a man give in Exchange for his soul? When such Texts as this is brought home to
the conscience, it does so awaken where not willingly withstood, that sins hold
must needs fall.

Fifthly, The Spirit furnishes the Christian with spiritual Arguments, bearing
such force upon his heart, as makes him able to break out with such replies as
these.

First, All the Devil has to make an argument of, is but present things, and
they suit not with my person, for my person is made up of soul and body, and
all he offers, does but respect and serve that body, that shortly must be
worms-meat; and therefore it will not profit me to lose my soul for present
things.

Secondly, As all he has to make an Argument of, suits not with my person; in
like manner, it suits not with my condition, for if I have all that heart can
wish, it carries me but to the grave, and there leaves me, and woe be to me if
such works follow me; for alas I must be raised again, and he that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption.

Sixthly, The holy Spirit helps in lending the immediate supplies of new
strength proportionable to our straits, and will not suffer those that wait on
him, to be tempted above what they are able to bear, but will with the
temptation make way to escape, that they may be able, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

Seventhly, The holy Spirit helps by striving with the heart, to draw it after
holy performances, following the soul up and down with sweet visits, and secret
whispers, prompting and inclining it Godward, preparing a season for the heart
to draw nigh God, and then preparing the heart for that season: The Spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we ought; but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8. 26. May not all this teach us, to put a high value upon the
holy Spirits Help, to the great work of Mortification, by all means striving to
please and not grieve this holy Spirit, by which we are sealed to the day of
Redemption.

Having now spoken of the holy Spirits help, may not some from hence inquire,
what may be done to the obtaining, not only its visits now and then, as a
wafaring man that tarrieth for a night; but its constant company to abide with
the soul?

Answ. There may be three Directions laid down briefly, for its obtaining; with
three Directions for its keeping.

First, for its obtaining; Get a deep sense of its want and worth. Secondly,
Get longings of heart after its supply. Thirdly, Make humble supplications to
the Father for it.
First, Get a deep sense of its want and worth; its Jesus Christ's own argument,
that the world cannot receive this Spirit, because it sees him not, neither
knows him, John 14. 17. Now by personal examination of that souls barrenness,
where the holy Spirit either comes but seldom, or stays not long, may some
considerable sense of its want be discerned, and consequently of its worth; all
those black, sinful works acted by the sons of men, are the effects of the holy
Spirits absence; and indeed to what degree, a good man is a stranger here, to
that degree he is weak an unable, either to make right judgment of the best
things, or to withstand the temptations and vexatious assaults of the evil one;
and although a man be thus destitute where the holy Spirit is wanting, yet can
there be no expectation of his company, till a deep sense both of its want and
worth affect the heart, to the rendering the soul capable of setting a valuable
estimation of its company.

Secondly, for its obtaining, Get longings of heart after its supply;
breathings and pantings from a sense of its want, bastens its coming; a foul
that goes sadly up and down all the day long, sick as it were of love, for its
frequent visits, to revive comfort and strength; and to discover its own wants,
and the tempters wiles; making the soul taller by head and shoulders, than
those temptations that frequently attend it, saying with David, As the Heart
pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee O God: My soul
thirsts for the living God, when shall I come and appear before thee? Or be
filled with supplies from thee, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.

Thirdly, for its obtaining, Make humble supplications to the Father for it;
not only sick of love, with the Spouse; but also panting and thirsting with
David, yet rests not here, but is again and again upon its knees, with humble
hearty supplications to God, even the Father; like the thirsty traveller, that
going from Fountain to Fountain, from means to means, till he get what his soul
travelleth after: when Jesus Christ were about to leave the Disciples, this was
one of the last Legasies he gave them; And I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, John 14. 16.
If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children; how much more
shall your heavenly Father, give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11.
13.

In the second place, we may offer three Directions, in order to the sure
keeping the holy Spirits company, or holding constant fellowship, and dear
inward intimate familiarity with so happy a companion.

First, A constant withstanding the beginnings of all evil. Secondly, A ready
compliance with new motions to all good. Thirdly, A retaining in the heart, a
high value of its company.
First, A constant withstanding the beginnings of all evil; is that which will
wonderfully engage the Spirits company; when you crush sin in its least and
first motion: Now the dearest of Gods Children are liable to temptation, and it
is not their sin to be tempted to sin, Jesus Christ was tempted to sin; their
sin lies in closing with the temptation; but if instead of closing with it,
you do in the Spirits strength constantly oppose it: mistake me not here, I
pray you, a constant opposing sin, does not intend less than these three things.

First, A firm withstanding the very first least motion, even a glance as it
were, at the eye ear or thought to sin; Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1
These. 5. 22.

Secondly, As the first least motion, so in all cases and conditions, whether
the temptation set upon you when ye are full, or hungry, sick or well, strong
or weak, rich or poor, in affliction or out of affliction, it will be coming
with new assaults in all conditions, waiting to kill you by a Goliath or
Bathshebah, temptations more piercing, or more pleasing; [Constant] intends a
withstanding here.

Thirdly, Constant intends continual; Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life,
James 1. 12. Revel. 2. 10.

Secondly, A second Help to retain the holy Spirit, may be this; A ready
compliance with new motions to all good; it is as proper for the holy Spirit to
be prompting the heart to good if hearkened to, as for the fire to give heat,
waiting upon the soul in every season, whether of rejoycings or weepings,
whether of doing Gods will or suffering for his name; still to be putting such
as wait upon it into some such action as tends to their enlargement
heavenward; but it must be quietly and silently heeded, that when it says,
Seek my face; the answer may be, Thy face will I seek. Great care and fe^r
therefore must be had, that we neither grieve it, by not hearing what it says,
or not doing what it bids; nor yet quench or lightly esteem those gracious
services it prompts us to.

Thirdly, A third Help may be this; A retaining in the heart a high value of
its company; this is the way to keep, and to be richly encreast with the
company of the holy Spirit; it cannot dwell where it is not valued at the
highest rate; and that because ignorance of its worth and work, incapacitates
the soul, to high expectations, being ignorant both of the ability and delight,
that essencially abides in the holy Spirit, to be greatning in the heart things
to come, and lessening in the heart things present. Christ Jesus could not in
one place, do many mighty works, because of their unbelief; the low and mean
esteem of him, lessened their expectation from him: Now the Spirit searches
all things, yea, the deep things of God; We are therefore called upon to be
filled with the Spirit; and if we live in it, to walk after it, being
strengthened with its might in the inward man, to a full understanding the deep
things of God: Labor therefore, praying over this, to retain in your hearts an
high value of its company.

CHAP. XXIX. Treating of Spiritual Ignorance of our everlasting condition; and
five Scriptures tending to reducement from carnal security; and three special
Causes of such a damning Decay.
SIGN. XXIX. When your are so Ignorant of your Spiritual standing, that you
know not whether you grow or decay.
This is not only a Sign of great Decay, but a prediction of a speedy fall, or
total throwing off those holy badges by which a Christian is known from other
men, such being of a Laodicean spirit, neither hot nor cold, yet say they are
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; Being in a besotted,
careless state, not minding when they do well or ill; when Professors come to
this pass, they grow useless and fit for nothing but to be laid aside; for were
such hot, that is, zealous, active, and lively, they were fit for
encouragement; and were they cold, that is, quite dead, they were to be plucked
up by the roots, and cast into the fire: now this sort of Peoples ignorance is
a very high crime, it being premised, that their ignorance of their standing,
growing or declining in heavenly things, does not come upon them for want of
Gospel means, allowed on Gods part in order to their being fruitful; but that
under sufficient allowance in order to their growth, they prove empty, dry, and
huskish; yea and such, that were otherwise in the days of their first
Espousal: but length of time in Gospel standing, for want of due care to
observe Gospel ends, they have by little and little entertained Spiritual
slumber, and so lose their stomach to, and relish of the true use and powerful
end; Means from God to them has been so long continued, and so by long custom
in his service, come as his people come, sit before him as his people do, and
hear his word day by day, but do it not, or live not like it, having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, viz. the spiritual end designed by
God in giving the form, being not listed up to, provokes God to complain
against such of old, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib,
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider; though I have nourished
and brought them up, yet they understand not that I taught Ephraim to go,
taking him by the arms; but he knew not that I had healed him, though
strangers devoured his strength yet he knew it not, and though gray hairs were
here and there upon him, yet he knew not: Hos. 7. 9. Nay some were grown to
that pass in spiritual slumbers, that even under judgments they knew not how it
was with them, Isa. 42. 25. He has poured upon Jacob the fury of his anger,
and strength of battle; and it has set them on fire round about, yet he knew
it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. By all this we may see,
that some were so ignorant of their spiritual standing under plentiful means,
that they knew not whether they grew or decayed, though it is apparent, the
decay was great; they knew not how it went with them: At such a loss may
Professors be in their heaven-born state, that while they are objects of pity
and sorrow of heart to growing Christians, that behold their decay; yet all
makes not for their awakening, but still they think it well with them, and that
they have need of nothing, though blind and naked.

Now the Causes why persons under Gospel means, grow to this senseless pass in
their spiritual estate; may be these three.

First, Carnal security in an evil time. Secondly, Contentment with outside
Christianity. Thirdly, Not being conversant about things to come.
First, Carnal security of hereafter Glory; which consists in a kind of
confidence of Glory to come, without certain care of being in that way through
which Glory is promised; It is such a state as promises safety to it self, and
yet lives a careless life; when the children of Dan went to seek them an
inheritance, they come to Laish, and found the people that were therein, how
they dwelt careless after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; this
proves such an advantage to them, that they take their City, burn it with fire,
and upon the ruins thereof, build themselves an Inheritance, Judge. 7. 8.
Clearly noting, how dangerous a state some manner of security is; When they
shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5. 3. It
seems in that good man's time, there was some that had high thoughts of
hereafter Glory, yet should meet with disappointment, and their expectations
come to nothing, though they might cry, as in Jeremiahs time, Peace, peace, yet
peace there was none; like the old world in Noah's time; Sodom and Gomorrah in
Lots time; They eat, they drank, they builded, they planted until the day that
Noah entered into the Ark; and Lot left Sodom, being under such kind of
security, as no awakening word would warn them, till at last Destruction ruins
them. We have the like instance from Jesus Christ, speaking of the last days,
I say to you, many shall come from the East, and West, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, but the Children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness. May we not tremble to read this
text, with self-reflection, that from the East and West, such as in all
probability never had the Tyth of that means we have had, neither heard nor
seen what we have heard and seen; yet to their measure had walked so like what
they had heard, and what they had seen, that they shall be counted worthy by
the Lord to sit with Abraham and Isaac, in the Kingdom, and the Children of
the Kingdom cast out; namely, such as had his Name and Ordinances among them,
making visible show of his Religion, and promised themselves lack of nothing,
because they would cry Lord, Lord, and were great nominal Christians, pleasing
themselves in giving Christ good words, and thinks none shall be saved so soon
as they, they being beset with such salvation privileges, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Many
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and
cast out Devils? Then will I say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I
never knew you: Let none therefore trust in lying words, which cannot profit,
saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; the Temple of the Lord
are these, that ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; then will I
cause you to dwell safely, Jer. 7. beginning.

But alas how few lay to heart, the great good Salvation, and deliverance from
the great hurt Damnation, eying with all trembling the road way in which God
will both give the one, and withold the other; surely, surely, this carnal
security, the souls damning sin, would never so possess persons, rocking them
asleep, did they but with all diligence consider, that security of all kinds
about hereafter Glory, without these marks of hearty designing, and actual
endeavoring the new creatures life, in the measure called for, as attainable
and to be attained in the Scripture of truth, nothing being more evident, then
that such make it their whole business, to be conversant about those
soul-searching texts, that speak out salvation by Christ Jesus, upon no less
terms, than hearty designing, with actual endeavoring to live like Christ
Jesus, in Scripture conformity to his will; I shall beg of God there may be by
them that read this, these five following Scriptures duly weighed, which with
the help of his grace, may serve as a deliverance, or tend to the rouzing up of
the soul from this damning sin of carnal security.

The first is, Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin, but the spirit is life, or alive, because of, or unto righteousness. 2
Cor. 5. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things
are past away, behold all things are become new. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. 1 John 2. 6.
He that says he abides in him, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked.
Chap. 3. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even
as he is pure. Does not these great Scriptures with one mouth, tell you the
high road way to hereafter Glory, and prohibit any man from daring to promise
himself the same upon any other terms, or in any or her way; wherefore my
brethren, seeing that ye, or if you look for such things, be diligent that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14.

Secondly, A second Cause of persons being so senseless, is, Contentment with
outside Christianity; that is, frequent in the performance of those Services
that relate to the Worship of God, but the thing designed by God to be reached
after and obtained, is not pursuied. It is evident both from Scripture and
Experience, that persons have been and are frequent in hearing Sermons, in
Prayer, in Reading, in Fasting, and such like performances, yet they remain
very carnal and unmortified: Now Gods gracious End in giving such spiritual
privileges to persons, being by him designed to beget them to his spiritual
likeness, and his End not brought about, must needs argue such, not, or little
further than outside performances, contenting themselves with their Services
so done, that leaves three parts of four yet to do; for what pleasure can God
take in those, that after long standing under the opportunities of getting both
inward and outward excellency, in that that makes Christianity honorable,
while they still remain as fruitless as the Fig Tree, having a great show at
distance, and nothing but leaves at hand: Does not Jesus Christ in so many
words except against such, as not rightly qualified for his Kingdom, Mat. 5.
20. But I say to you, except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: Their righteousness will not do, and yet they are known to be a People
much in prayer, Fasting and giving Alms, which are in themselves good things,
and yet they not accepted of God, but for all this his Woes goes out against
them? May it not be feared, that hundreds in our days, content themselves with
scarce going thus far in outward acts, yet retain a strong opinion that all
shall be well with them hereafter; as though such confidence of being saved, as
they that act it are content with, would content God; but let not such deceive
themselves: and they may find that confidence about hereafter safety, not being
acted by penitent subjects, whose hearts can witness a through change, will
return to themselves back again, charged with presumption, notwithstanding all
their outward performances: And it is most sure, as has been premised in the
last Sign, that the holy Spirit bears not witness with such spirits, that they
are Gods Children, and that because while they remain thus content with
outside Christianity, Reformation reaches not the heart; and then is a
wanting that awful reverence of God and of Christ within, that commands
without, the tongue so to talk, the eyes so to look, the hands so to act, the
feet so to walk in the likeness of God, as to be truly deemed his workmanship;
Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men, forasmuch
as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ. But we shall leave
this to consideration, and pass to the third and last Head.

Thirdly, Persons are so senseless of their spiritual estate, by not being
conversant about things to come: Now things to come are reduceable in special
to these four heads; Death, Judgment, Salvation, Damnation: all which are
matters (not of show) but of certainty, and may be called the four last things,
which every man ought to make his four first things, that he furnishes his
heart withal, because indeed they are Religions great cause, and bounds;
Heavens great Argument to call us to duty, our great Argument to submit to
Heavens call. And as these has more or less force upon the heart, they may be
more or less read in the life; the worst of men whose consciences are not
seared, will be found under some awakenings, by but reflecting here, now, and
then, so forceable are they, where in the lowest sense but believed; Now that
persons, not being conversant about these mighty matters, prepares way to
spiritual senselesness, is very evident; and therefore when God complains of
his peoples unequal walking, he either assigns it to their negligence here, as
the cause they so walk, or seeks to possess them with remembrance here, as a
most quickening remedy; Deuteronomy. 8. 5. Thou shall also consider in thine heart,
that as a man chastneth his Son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee; and the
reason of this is given by God himself, as an argument most strong, verse. 26. I
fed thee with Manna in the Wilderness, which thy Fathers knew not, that I might
humble thee, and prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end; (mark that) at
thy latter end, Chap. 32. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation; you
see here Israel, set not a value on making God his safety, but waxed wanton,
and forgot who had formed him; now the most reduceable means we find urged is,
verse. 29. thus, O that they were wise, that they understand this, and would
consider their latter end: God bemoaneth them with desire they would look
before them, intimating that would they but look upon hereafter, they would
live after another rate here; pertinent to this is, that Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13.
And thou mourn at last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed; and thou say,
how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and obeyed not the
voice of my teachers, nor incline my ear to them, that instructed me; because
there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with the stroke, and then a great
ransom cannot deliver thee. Job 36, 18. Does not all these Scriptures show the
miserable state of such, as are not conversant about things to come; and how
impossible it is to be reformed while they remain strangers to these great
considerations: now on the contrary what more contributes to a spiritual
growth, than hourly Communion about these mighty matters? no considerations
being of a more mortifying force than Grave considerations; 2 Cor. 5. 10. For
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether
good or bad: knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade men. This
holy Apostle no sooner treats of Judgment, as his Doctrine, but to awaken and
persuade from its terror, is his Application: also Jesus Christ to deter men
from evil, and to compose them to good, gives such awakning Items as these, If
thy right hand offend, part with it, rather than be cast into Hell fire; where
the worm never dies, and the fire is never quenched: Three times together does
he in that 9. Chapter of Mark, labor to rivet upon the hearers what misery is
to come, and by the worm and fires being, notes certainty; and by the worms
gnawing, and fires burning, notes its misery; and by the worms not dying, and
the fires not being quenced, notes its eternity. Who would not at this, cry out
with David; Oh God my flesh trembles because of thee, for I am afraid of thy
Judgments: Christ Jesus three fold repetition seems plainly to show us what
great aptness there is in every body to lose the Spiritual force of such mighty
matters; they being the proper object only of a lively faith, that looks at
things to come, with such estimation as procures an inward trembling before
God, to take one step aside from God.

But alas, alas, how many be there that stop the mouth of conscience all they
can from speaking of this State to come, and will not endure to hear of the
Grave, or Judgment, Salvation, or Damnation, though such as will not endure the
bitter of these things here, cannot enjoy the best of them hereafter; It is
living now in a holy awe of them here, that will make us live above the fear of
them hereafter: content not your selves then for a thousand Worlds, at any
distance from daily communion with the things to come; talk with them face to
face, as a man talks with his friend, and go aside often from all other
business, into your closet, or garden, field, or wilderness, nay, into any
solitary place on purpose to talk with the Grave, how shortly you must put off
your clothes (or outward garments) and never more put them on, saying with Job,
My foundation is in the dust; if I wait, the graves my house, I have made my
bed in the darkness; and said to corruption thou art my Father, and to the worm
thou art my Mother, and my Sister, Job 17. 13. 14.

CHAP. XXX. Showing the miserable estate, of such as after longer acquaintance
with Christ, are less in love to him; with six Causes of this Decay.
SIGN XXX. WHen increase of time in Christ's acquaintance, works decrease of
Affection to Christ's Company.
Is this the case of any, or rather is it not the case of many, that began
well, and promised fair for holding on well, as though all the world with its
allurements should not hinder them from ending well, that in their early or
first love were so pleasantly affected with Christ's acquaintance, that their
meat and their drink was to be with him at his feet hearing his word; and if he
walked in the Garden they must be there, if in the Mount of Olives they must be
there, if in a solitary place they must be with him, in no condition disliked
with his company, content with him in fullness, and in scarcity, content with
him in favors and in frowns, still happy while leaning on Jesus breast, some
leaving father and mother to come to him, others leaving house and land to come
to him, their trade of Tentmaking, fishing, nay having found such a pearl, sell
all to buy this field, and what shall we have, or how be filled with enjoyment
of thee? We have forsaken all to follow thee, Mat. 19. 27. But what things were
gain to me, those I counted loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, etc. Phil. 3. 7, 8,
9. Now I go away to him that sent me, and because I tell ye these things sorrow
has filled your hearts: They were so dearly affected with Christ's company,
they could not bear to hear of his personal withdrawing, though he tells them
it is best for them, they should be for a little time without him, yet at this,
sorrow fills their heart, John 16. By this giving any to understand, that they
could joyfully cry with David, whom have I in Heaven but thee? And whom have I
on earth in comparison of thee?

Tell me Christians, you that can experience the new birth, and know full well
how it was with you in the days of your espousal, were you not then ravished
with Christ's love? even sick of love, filled with content to be about him,
wondering every day at this grace, counting no pains much, no cost enough, to
serve such a lover, under the shadow of whose wings you took sweet delight; but
how is it now? you did run well, did any hinder you, that ye should not still
obey the truth? or with the righteous hold on your way; and having clean hands
grow stronger and stronger. Job 17. 9.

Is any of these forementioned decays come upon you, what mind have you to
assembling, are ye indifferent or no? tell the truth, search your hearts, and
speak your hearts: Do you love to hear Sermons now or no? Is it, or is it not
like the morning dew to you? are you weary or no in your purest worship? Is
your delight still to be with God in closet services? Have you good will and
great longings, to be often at Christ's Table, through faith eating with him and
drinking with him, of his body which is meat indeed, and of his blood which is
drink indeed? What mind have you to prayer? Do ye with delight pour forth your
souls before him at all times, as your refuge? What is your delight to reading
the holy Scriptures? Are they your meditation day and night? Can ye say, I had
fainted for thy Salvation had I not hoped in thy word? Search into your state,
and let your condition be what it will, pass right judgment upon it, whether ye
die more or less, or grow more or less; to have true knowledge of your state, is
the way to better it, if decayed this may remedy it, if growing this may
increase it; Oh then stand not still in a conceit, it is well or ill with you,
but be at certainty, how it is with you, examine your selves, prove your
selves, know you not that Christ Jesus is in ye except ye be reprobates, 1 Cor.
13. 5.

Come dear friends and let us walk on to Emmaus, and talk together by the way,
of all things that have happened of late, namely since we did believe; have ye
a hankering after new things, would you now be gadding up and down, after
diverse and strange Doctrins? how is your heart affected with, or Afflicted to
hear of others Mis-doings? Does horror take hold of you; because any leave
Christ's law? Does your souls weep in secret places for others pride? Are you
astonished to hear that such a one is turned again to his farm, another to his
merchandise? One gone back to Egypt again, another willing to stay in the
Wilderness, and many most unwilling if it prove costly, either to pass over
Jordan, or by Jerico, though it be Gods great road way to Canaan: Remember how
it was once with you, enquire how it is with you now; when ye meet one another,
is your talk heavenly or earthly? what do ye Savor most? what design seek ye
most to carry on? in all company who are ye for, the world that is, or the
world to come? Do ye ask one another when you meet, what trade goes forward
with you most? Are ye telling meekly and frequently each other, what God has
done for your souls? What yearnings of heart is in you after these solemn
assemblies? Do you count it worthy your time to be often there? Do you go and
pray, and pray before you go, that you may dutifully meet God, and he
profitably meet you? does Christ's eye constrain you to come thither or the
Churches eye? when you are hindered what is your fear? How is your care? Can you
be well content to be lightly absent, if the Church will be content with your
absence? Does the Decay in Christ's House, or in your house trouble you most?
Can you quietly bear Decay in Christ's Spiritual House, while you keep from
Decay in your temporal House? Can you see afflictions pierce the sides of some
bitterly, and you not weep with them? Was it thus with you once, were not
others sorrows your tears? Did you not delight to mourn with the mourner, and
rejoice with the singer? Are you now less able than formerly to withstand
temptations? Will a small offense make you so impatient as to commit great sin?
Is Satan almost at every little turn too hard for you? Are you bafled quickly
now with every little blow? Are you so dry and barren of the Spirits waterings,
that now every touch takes you? How is it with you when troubles are upon you?
Are you more or less than you were wont to be in prayer? Whether is your care
now most to know afflictions cause or cure? What way tends the strivings of
your heart most, when Gods stroke is upon you? Would you part with the Rod upon
any terms, or undergo it longer, to have it sanctified the surer? does
affliction mend you or make you worse? How are you when the Rod is gone? Can
you truly say with David, Before I was afflicted I went astray, and as truly
say, But now I have learned to keep thy word; What are your thoughts of Egypt,
the Land you were redeemed from? Would you go thither again? Is your old sin,
or sins in any measure pleasant to you again? Are you taken with the thoughts
of your basest Lovers, whose paths led you to the gates of Hell? Does the great
work of Mortification go forward or backward? Does sin get head or lose head in
you? Are you not indeed wholly ignorant as to your spiritual estate, whether
you grow or decay.

But last of all, and most of all; Does increase of time in Christ's
acquaintance, work decrease of affection to Christ's company? Ah Lord God, is it
come to this, have you suffered so many things in vain! What? Love Christ Jesus
less! whom you can never love enough, and once thought so? Does long
acquaintance with such a Friend, procure desires of his absence? God forbid:
Would you not walk with him now, and talk with him now? yea take sweet counsel
together, as you were wont to do? Do you savor the things of the earth so
much, and the things of Heaven so little, that now your Lords company is
burdensome? Can you not go with him, run with him, Fast with him, Pray with
him, weep with him, yea and bleed with him? Has he not done all this for you?
He was made sin for us, that knew no sin; wounded for our transgressions;
pierced for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and
with his stripes we are healed, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Isa. 53. 5. But I shall proceed
briefly to six Causes of this great Decay.

First, Forgetfulness of that perishing condition Christ found us in at first
acquaintante: And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own
blood; I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live; then washed I thee
with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood, and anointed thee with oil,
Eccles. 16. 6, 9. compared with Chap. 36. 11. Then shall ye remember your own
evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in
your own sight, for your iniquities and abominations. Here by comparing our
estate with Isreal's estate, we may read our danger with Isreal's danger, who
being apt to forget the condition God found them in, and redeemed them from,
are charged to remember their own evil ways: This Remembrance was that, that
wrought such high admiration in St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13. And I thank Christ
Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, that he counted me faithful, putting me
into the Ministry, who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious. Clearly noting, that Paul's remembrance of Christ's goodness to him in
misery, increased his esteem of Christ's mercy.

Secondly, A second Cause may be this; Actual withdrawing from that wonted
familiarity we use to have with Christ; once if it were well with us, he must
know it, and be praised for it; if it were evil with us, he must be told of it;
and at the least absence, you could cry with the Spouse, Tell me O thou whom my
soul loves, where thou feedest and causest thy flock to rest at noon; for why
should I be as one that turns aside, from the flocks of thy companions, Cant.
1. 17. Thus in a holy friendly intimacy claims his company; if now such
discover strangeness to him in being strangers to his Fould; in a word, at
every Christians service, now seldom, though once often; thus neglecting the
means of increase, must needs cause decrease.

Thirdly, The third Cause may be this; Deep declinings to heart acquaintance;
The watch now over the heart is not so strict as once; it was so tender in
times past, that every comer in and goer out, must be under strict examination,
who they were for, whether or no they went Christ Jesus earand; but now the
door of the heart is set open too too often, at hours too unseasonable, for
reasons too slender, to the entertaining many a strange face that never was
wont to come there, since the King of Glory had taken his possession; for this
Jeremiah complains against Jerusalem, How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? They kept not their heart with all diligence, knowing that out of
it are the issues of life; But trusting it too much were deceived and turned
aside thereby.

Fourthly, A fourth Cause may be this; Decaying in love to Christ's Children;
once your chief delight was with the Saints, and especially those that excelled
in virtue; now daily decaying in your love to them* and acquaintance with them:
This Christ Jesus makes an unerring reason, He that loves his Brother abides
in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him, 1 John 2. 10. If
any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar; for he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can be love God whom he has not
seen? Chap. 4. 20. Plainly asserting, the impossibility of loving the greater,
if we love not the lesser; so that to what degree there is decay in one, there
is the same in the other.

Fifthly, The fifth Cause may be this; Increase of affection to perishing
things; At your first acquaintance with Christ, the world and its offers was
contemned by you, now it is esteemed; you had once a holy carelessness for the
things of this life, now an unholy carefulness for them; then you sat at Jesus
feet, hearing his word, but now cumbered with much serving; Love not the world,
nor the things of the world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him: Meaning whosoever loves the world at such a rate as to be more
thoughtful after its vanities than Heavens excellencies; For the love of Money
is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from
the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 10.

Lastly, A sixth Cause may be this; The withdrawings of the holy Spirit, that
was once pleased, and did then visit you often; but now is grieved, and visits
you seldom; that once helped you much against temptations, laying for dead the
deeds of the body, now lets you alone to be beaten and baffled with every evil
motion, and this as the effect of the Spirits withdrawing, whose work where
ever it is, being to greaten the esteem of Jesus Christ, and foil temptations
of every kind, if not discouraged, grieved and hindered, for fear of which are
those high Christian Precepts given, not to vex it, quench it, or grieve it;
and that because, as our natural body without life is void of action, so
without the holy Spirit is a Christian man dry and barren, at best but like the
Fig Tree, something only in show, yet cursed by Jesus Christ for want of fruit:
When the Apostle Jude comes to speak of some, that in the last days should
turn Mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts, mark how they are
charactrized out; These be they who separate themselves, sensual, Having not
the Spirit; Jude reckons them among the Sodomites for filthiness, calls them
Raging Waves, Wandering Stars, Murmurers, Complainers, worse than natural
Bruit-beasts, and the sum of all, As being destitute of the Spirit. In the
midst of all David's languishings for fear of so high a loss, is not this one of
his most bitter cries? Cast me not away from thy presence; and Take not thy
holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. 11.

I have now done, having cast my poor Mite into Gods public Treasury, as one
Lift if God will, to encourage the growing Christian, and reduce the decaying
Christian; if any be bettered by it, I have my end, let God have the Honor; To
whom, through Jesus Christ, by the help of the Holy Spirit, be all due Praises
ascribed, in Heart, with Tongue and Conversation, for ever and ever; Amen.

ERRATA.
EPistle Dedicatory, Page 6. Line 25. read your heart, p. 9. l 1. r. Isa. 55,
p. 25. l. 23. for a Sign r. assigned, p. 34. l. 4. f. ye, r. we, p. 72. l. 15.
f. Reprobate, r. Reproach p. 48. r. Aj^lon, p. 51. r. Mat. 5, p. 53. r. Zech.
p. 58 middle, r thou wast, p. 61. l. 3. 71. l 8. f. was, is, r. were, are, p. 82
l 5. f. even, r noon, p 92. l. 1^. f. now is, r. now are, p ^1. l. 14. r.
observe, and f E^hes. 2. 12. r. 2 Cor. 12. 21. p. 93. l. 6. r. of it, p. 94. l
5. r. Sign, p. 1,6. l. 27. f. shin, r. skin.


