An APPEAL To the Consciences of the chief Magistrates of this COMMONWEALTH,
touching the Sabbath Day: As held forth in a Book Entitled, Articles of
Religion approved and passed by both Houses of Parliament, after advice had
with the Assembly of Divines, etc. Printed in the year 1648.

As also In another Book Entitled, The Grounds and Principles of Religion,
contained in a Short Catechism, etc. And published by the same Order.

By William Saller, and John Spittlehouse, In the behalf of themselves and
several others, who think themselves obliged to observe the seventh Day of the
week, for the Lords Holy Sabbath, as in the fourth Commandment of the Royal-Law
of Jehovah, Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Psalm. 119. 46. I will speak thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.

Mat. 15.6, 9. Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect, by your
tradition: but in vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

Printed for the Author, 1657.

An APPEAL to the Consciences of the chief Magistrates of this Commonwealth,
touching the Sabbath Day, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
IN as much as the 35 Article of the present Government, does grant liberty to
confute Error and Heresy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound D ctrine: We
have therefore (as obliged in Duty, and Conscience, Lev. 19.17. Luke 22.23.)
taken upon us to present unto you (as the most properest Judges in this matter)
wherein the Persons mentioned in the Title Page, have erred in their judgment,
touching the Lords holy Sabbath. And to the end you may the better discern the
said error, and be thereby induced to reform the same: We shall in the first
place lay before you, what they have asserted touching the Law, in which the
said Sabbath is included. In Page 19. of that Book of Articles (as in the Title
Page) they have ingenuously and christianly confessed,

1. That God gave to Adam a Law, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him,
and all his Posterity, to Personal, Entire, Exact, and Perpetual Obedience;
promising life upon the fulfilling, and threatening death upon the breach of it;
and endowed him with Power and Ability to keep it, Genesis 1.26, 27. with Genesis
2.17. Romans 2.14, 15. Romans 5.12, 19. Gal. 3.10, 11. Eccles. 7.29. Job 28.28.

2. That this Law, after his fall, continued to be a Perfect Rule of
Righteousness, and such as was delivered by God in Mount Sinai in ten
Commandments, and written in two Tables, Jam. 1.25. and 28, 10, 11, 12. Romans
3.8, 9. Deuteronomy. 5 32. and 104. Exodus 34.1. The four first Commandments,
containing our duty toward God, and the other six our duty to Man, Mat. 22.37,
38, 39, 40.

3. That the Law (commonly called Moral) does for;ever, bind all, as well
justified Persons, as other, to the obedience thereof, Romans 13 8, 9, 10 Ephesians.
6.2. 1 John 2.3, 4, 7, 8. and that not only in regard of the Matter contained
in it, but also in respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it,
Jam. 2.8 Romans 3.31. neither does Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but
much strengthen the Obligation, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19. Jam. 2.8. Romans 3 31.

4. That although true Believers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works,
to be thereby justified or condemned, Romans 6.14. Gal. 2.16. and 3.13. and 4.4,
5. Act. 13 32. Romans 8.1. yet it is of great use to them, as well as to others,
in that as a Rule of Life, it informs them of the will of God and their Duty,
it directs and binds them to walk accordingly, Romans 7 12, 22, 25. Psa. 119.4,
5, 6. 1 Cor. 7.19. Gal. 5.14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. discovering also the
sinful pollutions of their Nature, Hearts, and Lives, Romans 7.7. and 3.20. so as
examining themselves thereby, they may come to a further conviction of, and
humiliation for, and hatred against sin, Jam. 1.23, 24. Rom 7.9, 14, 24.
together with a clear sight of the need they have of Christ, and the perfection
of his obedience, Gal. 3.24. Romans 7.24, 25. and 8.3, 4. It is likewise of use
to regenerate, and to restrain their corruptions, in that it forbids sin, Jam.
2.11. Psalm. 119.101, 104, 128. and the threatening of it to serve to show what,
even their sins deserve, and what afflictions in this life they may expect for
them, although freed from the curse thereof, threatened in the Law, Ezra 9.13,
14 Psalm. 89 31, 32, 33, 34. The promises of it in like manner show them Gods
approbation of obedience, and what blessing they may expect upon the
performance thereof, Levit. 26.1, 10, 14. with 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 6.2, 3. Psalm.
37.11. with Mat. 5.5. Psalm. 19.11. although not due unto them by the Law, as a
Covenant of Works, Gal. 2.16. Luk 17.10. so as a man's doing good, and
refraining from evil, because the Law incourageth to the one, and deterreth
from the other, is no evidence of his being under the Law, and not under Grace,
Romans 6.12, 14. 1 Pet. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. with Psalm. 44.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Heb. 12.22, 29.

5. That the forementioned Uses of the Law, are not contrary to the grants of
the Gospel, but do sweetly comply with it, Gal. 3.21. the spirit of Christ
subduing and inabling the will of man to do that freely and cheerfully, which
the will of God requires to be done, Ezekiel. 36.27. Heb. 8.10. with Jer. 31.33.

In all which expressions, we acknowledge our selves to be of the same
judgment with them. Again, as touching the observation of the seventh Day
Sabbath, in Cap. 21. of the forenamed Book, page 35. they use these following
words.

As it is the Law of Nature, that in general a due proportion of time be set
apart for the worship of God; so in his Word, by a positive, Moral and
perpetual commandment, binding all men in all ages, he has particularly
appointed one Day in Seven, for a Sabbath to be kept holy unto him, Exodus 20 8,
10, 11. Isa. 56.2, 4, 6, 7. which from the beginning of the World, unto the
Resurrection of Christ, was the last day of the week. Again, in page 16. of the
Catechism mentioned in the Title Page, they also acknowledge, That the fourth
Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such a set time, as he has
appointed in his Word; expressly one whole day in seven, to be a holy Sabbath to
himself; and that from the beginning of the world, to the Resurrection of
Christ, God appointed the seventh Day of the week, to be the weekly Sabbath.

And in this particular also, we judge they have dealt far more heartily then
most of these will do, who pretend to a higher dispensation.

Having thus showed you their judgments in reference to the Moral Law, and the
Sabbath therein contained, we shall in the next place recite the Scriptures
they urge to prove a change of the said Sabbath day unto the first Day of the
week, viz. 1 Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10. But before we shall speak
thereunto, we first conceive it meet to show you the gross absurdities that
will follow, if the said Texts make such a change of the Sabbath, as pretended:
For,

1. If the Law written in man's heart by Nature, were such a Law, by which Adam
and all his Posterity were bound, Personally, Entirely, and Exactly unto a
perpetual obedience thereunto, as they have confessed: And if the Day that God
instituted for a Sabbath, Genesis 2.2, 3. was the same Day that God intended Man
should observe, in that Law of Nature he had written in his heart, Romans 2.14,
15. as certainly none will deny the Day of the commemoration of the Creation to
be, in that there could be no greater engagement in Nature, to keep a
Sabbath Day: Then it will follow, That if the said Texts do make a change of
that Sabbath Day (as they pretend they do) then they plainly make a change of
that Personal, Entire, Exact, and Perpetual obedience, required by God in the
Law of Nature.

2. If the Law written in man's heart by Nature, continued after the fall of
Adam, to be a perfect Rule of Righteousness to all his Posterity, both toward
God and their neighbors, as they have granted: Then it will follow, That this
perfect Rule of Righteousness became in part imperfect at the Resurrection of
Christ: for otherwise, what needed the Sabbath day, which was part of that
perfect Rule of Righteousness, and had so continued from the Creation until
that time, admit of a change by the Resurrection of Christ, as they pretend it
did?

3. If the said Law, so written in Man's heart by Nature, was the same which was
afterward renewed in Mount Sinai in ten Commandments, and written in two
Tables, do for ever bind all, as well justified persons as others, to the
obedience thereof, in regard of the Matter contained therein, as also in
respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it: Then if the three
Texts urged by them, do make a change of the Sabbath day, then they clearly
change the Matter in the Law, where it is said, The seventh Day is the Sabbath,
etc. as also of the Authority of the one Lawgiver, Jam 4.12. who gave that Law;
as also plainly contradict what the said Persons have affirmed, Namely, That
Christ in the Gospel does not any way dissolve, but much strengthen the
Obligation of justified Persons and others, to their obedience to the Matter
required in the said Law, and that from Mat. 5.17, 18, 19. Jam. 2.8. and Romans
3.31.

But lest that which has been said, should not give you full satisfaction as
to the Matter in difference: we shall in the next place reply to these three
Texts apart, and so show the invalidness thereof, to what they urge them to
prove.

First, 1 Cor. 16.2. does not in the least presuppose a Congregation gathered
together to have the Word preached, or Sacraments administered; for the Text
says the clear contrary, i. e. Let every one lay aside by himself, as God has
prospered him: which does clearly evidence, That the Apostle spoke not of
giving forth their liberality by way of Collection, but of laying up by a man's
self Singularly, as a man does when he is at home: which moiety so laid up
apart by themselves, was afterward to be given to those Messengers, whom they
should afterward approve of by their Letters; which Persons the Apostle
promised to send unto them, to receive it from them: so that the Collection was
to be afterward by the Apostles Messengers; but on what day they so collected
it, is altogether uncertain: Wherefore we conceive this Text does not tend in
the least to change the Sabbathday, instituted by God, to the First Day of the
week.

2. The Apostle Paul's preaching at Troas, Act. 20.7. was extraordinary, and no
president (he being to depart the next day) for otherwise Ministers of the
Gospel are thereby obliged to preach every First day of the week until
midnight; and then break bread afterward. Secondly, it is questionable, whether
the breaking of bread there mentioned, is to he understood of the Lord's Supper,
seeing the interpreters refer that Text to Act. 2.46. where it is said, That
the Church brake bread Daily, from house to house; and consequently upon other
Days, as on the First Day of the week. Thirdly, If the administration of the
Lords Supper, be an unerring mark of the Sabbath Day, then the Day called
Thursday is the Sabbath Day, if Christ's example be as binding as they would
have Paul's to be in this place, the first institution thereof being of a
Thursday night. It is clear also, that Philip baptized the eunuch upon a
traveling day, Act. 8.36, 37, 38. etc. and that preaching is also no certain
mark of a Sabbath Day, appears, in that the Apostle Paul exhorted Timothy to
preach in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. which does admit of Day or
Night, and of other Days, as on the Sabbath Day.

It behooved them therefore to have proved, first, That the Apostle Paul
preached then at Troas, in obedience to the fourth Commandment: Secondly, That
the seventh day Sabbath from the Creation, was then changed to the First Day of
the week; and when, and where, and by whom, and upon what account it was so
changed: Thirdly, they should have showed us as plain a Commandment for the
keeping of the first day of the week, upon the account of the Resurrection of
Christ, as there was for the keeping of the seventh Day of the week, upon the
account of the Fininishing of the Creation; and that by the same Authority by
which the former Sabbath was enjoined, as in Genesis 2.2, 3. and Exodus 20.8, 9,
10, 11. there being but one Law-given, as has been showed: Fourthly, They
should have showed some President, where one or more of the Apostles of Christ
did preach two first Days immediately and successively one following the other,
and in obedience to the fourth Commandment (or otherwise) For a single action,
if they could prove it, is no Practice.

All, or any of which, we are assured is impossible for them to prove from the
Holy Scriptures; And therefore in the three Texts so urged by them, they
plainly beg the Question, i. e. that the First Day of the week is the Sabbath;
which is denied them by us, and which we have just grounds to do, in that the
Apostle Paul, who (albeit the greatest opposer of ceremonies of all the
Apostles) did constantly preach upon the seventh Day of the week; and that
after the Resurrection of Christ, as appears from Act. 13.14, 42, 44. and 16
13. and 17.2. and 18.4. as also, in that we read not in the least, that any of
the other Apostles did ever neglect the observation of the seventh Day of the
week, as enjoined in the fourth Commandment, and therefore we dare not but
judge, they walked in obedience thereunto; as also, in that the Lord Jesus
affirms that he that breaks the least of them Commandments, etc. shall be
called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; as also in that the Apostle James
affirms that he that fails in his obedience to any one point of the
Royal-Law, has thereby made himself guilty of the breach of the whole Law: so
that we are bold to conclude they were no Sabbath Breakers. From all which,
with several other Reasons we might have urged, we deny that Act. 20.7. proves
any thing, as to what they have urged it.

3. The First Day of the week is not so much as mentioned in Rev. 1.10.
Secondly, the Lord's Day there named, may be ascribed unto all that time,
wherein John was conversant in that Revelation, which probably was of a longer
continuance, then one Natural or Artificial Day: Thirdly, If it must needs be
applied to such a Day, then why not more properly to the seventh-Day Sabbath,
as in the fourth Commandment, then to the First Day of the week? Seeing Jehovah
himself there styles the seventh Day to be his Sabbath, Exodus 20.10. But the
seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. vid. also, Isa. 58 13.
yea, the Lord Jesus himself speaking of the seventh-Day Sabbath (before named)
professes himself to be the Lord thereof, Mark 2.27, 28. Luke 6.5. Therefore
the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath Day. Fourthly, Why may not the Day
commonly called Christmass-day, or Good Friday, or Ascension-day, be as
properly styled the Lord's Day, as the Day called Easter Day? Fifthly, Neither
this Text, or the two former, have any tendency to the Resurrection of Christ,
more then that he arose from the Grave on the First Day of the week; and
consequently, of no more force to prove a change of the Sabbath, instituted by
God, then the Day of Christs-birth, or Passion, or Ascension, has to change it
to the Days they happened to fall on, for any thing that the Scripture does
attribute to the day of Christ's Resurrection, more then to any of the other.
Sixthly, The Rhemists upon this Text of Rev. 1.10. do ingenuously acknowledge,
That the Church made a change of the Sabbath, from the Seventh-day unto the
First Day in the week; and that without all Scripture, or commandment of
Christ, that they read of. Yea (say they) which is more, not only otherwise
then he ordained in the first Creation, but plainly otherwise then was
prescribed by God himself in the Commandment: yea, and otherwise then he
ordained in the first Creaetion, when he sanctified precisely the Sabbath Day,
and not the Day following. To which may be added the Testimony of Doct.
Prideaux, in his work upon the Sabbath, where he querieth saying, Where is the
least mention of Surrogating the First Day of the week, in Room of the Sabbath?
or where among the Evangelists, is there any distinct institution of the
Lord's Day, or where will you necessarily prove it? Mr. Bond also speaking of
the change of the Sabbath, concludes, that it was an Ecclesiastical
constitution, and not an Apostolical precept: to which may be added the
Testimonies of several other Writers to the same purpose. Doct. Willet also, in
his Comment. upon Exodus, speaking of the changing of the Sabbath, urges
Vrsinus to prove, That the Church did it, ut se a Judaica synagoga discerneret,
That they might be discerned from the Jewish Synagogues: which we conceive to
be a very weak Argument, to change a Moral and perpetual Commandment of God,
binding all men in all ages: As the forementioned persons have granted it to be.

All which being seriously weighed and considered by you, we appeal unto your
Consciences, whether it be not the duty of all Christians to obey the positive
command of the one Lawgiver, rather then the determinations of Parliaments and
Synods, without any warrant from the Word of God. Seeing the Lord Jesus himself
has declared it to be a vain worship, where the Commandments of men are made
Doctrinal, Mat. 15.9. as also in that the Apostles of Christ did publicly
oppose the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, upon the like account, Act. 4.18, 19,
20. And seeing you have engaged to establish the Christian Religion, contained
in the Scriptures, Article 35 of the present Government; and seeing Jehovah
himself, has so plainly determined which of the seven Days in the week, he
will have us to observe for his Sabbath; and that by three notable Characters,
i. e. the Sabbath Day, the Seventh-day; and that Seventh-day where on he
himself rested, Exodus 20.10, 11. which reason cannot be given for any other Day
in the week, the seventh Day and the Sabbath Day, both pointing at the very
same day and time; so that take away one, and take away both; and grant one,
and grant both, they being like the Name, Jesus and Christ, which both belong
to one Person. And seeing the Lord Jesus and his Apostles, have as much
ratified and established the fourth Commandment, in every jot and title
thereof, as of any other of the nine, Matthew 5.17, 18, 19. Romans 3.31. James
2.10, 11. We cannot but stand in admiration, that you should take upon you
(being poor Mortals, and such as Jehovah can destroy in a moment) to
countenance, and much more to establish such a Day for the Lords holy Sabbath,
as has no warrant from the Scriptures (as has been showed) and to restrain
the people of this Commonwealth from working on that Day, wherein Jehovah
himself has commanded, or at least, freely permitted them to labor in, Exodus
20.9. and to grant free liberty to work on that Day, in which he has
positively commanded them to cease from their labor, Exodus 20.10.

And therefore it does doubtless very nearly concern you to consider your
present condition in this matter, seeing it will no more avail you at the Day
of Account, to say you have observed a Sabbath in stead of the Sabbath, then it
will be for the Heathen to say they have worshipped a god, instead of the true
God; Or no more then it will excuse Jeroboam, to say, That he kept the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even the month that he devised of his own
heart, etc. 1 Kings 12.33.

Secondly, In hat it is as much a changing of the Truth of God into a lie, as
in any other action of the Man of sin, 2 These. 2.4, etc. it being a grand
Character of the man of sin to change Times and Laws, Dan. 7.25.

All which we hope the Engagement you have taken, will be a means to incline
you to hearken to what has bin said: And hoping you have been better learned,
then to reject good advice, though tendered by contemptible Persons; We do
hereby, in Gods stead, exhort you to reduce the Lords holy Sabbath to its
proper Day: which you may do without the least prejudice to the people, if you
will but remove the Markets and Fairs, which fall on that Day, to some other
day in the week: which until you have done, you do not only live your selves
in a manifest disobedience to the fourth Commandment, but are also a grand
Cause of the peoples living in the same sin, and that by reason of the strict
injunction you lay for the observation of the First Day of the week; many not
being able to leave their callings two Days in a week; and therefore, albeit
convinced of the truth of the seventh Day to be the Lords Sabbath, yet are by
reason thereof, necessitated to break the Lords Sabbath, and to observe that of
Man's erecting. O remember the brand fixed on Jeroboam, namely, That he sinned,
and caused Israel to sin.

We are also persuaded, That if the Clergy of this Nation* would set themselves
conscionably to preach from Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11. they might in a very short
time convince the judgment of their Congregations; so as that they would
willingly shake off the traditional Sabbath, and yield a filial obedience to
the true Sabbath, in case the aforenamed impediments were removed, and free
liberty granted to all that have a desire to observe the seventh day of the
week for their Sabbath, to work on their callings on the First Day of the week,
which God himself has permitted them to do, as has been showed.

Which if done, it would be a means to remove a great stumbling block to the
Jews, who make it an Argument (that Christ is not the Messiah) because
Christians, who profess themselves to be his followers, are Sabbath Breakers;
concluding from thence* that Christ himself was a Sabbath-breaker and
consequently a sinner; and if so then there can be no benefit by his blood.

Again, as the change of the Sabbath to the First Day of the week, was chiefly
done to raise a wall of partition betwixt the Gentiles and the Jews (as has
been showed) so we hope the pulling down of that wall will be a preparative to
the accomplishing of those glorious Prophesies, which hold forth the unity
which shall be betwixt Jew and Gentile: as our Savior himself has foretold,
Joh. 10 16. as also the Apostle Paul, Romans 11.25, 26, etc. and Rev. chap. 7.
which surely ought to be the earnest desire of all the people of God, and
especially of such as are in a waiting posture to see the fulfilling thereof;
and most of all, by such as profess themselves to be the Rulers and Pastors to
such a people, as you and the Clergy of this Nation account your selves to be.

But if after all the praying for the conversion of the Jews, and having now
power in your hands to further it, you are yet resolved not only to continue
this stumbling block before them, but also to harden your hearts, and blind
the eyes of your understanding, because this wholesome advice is not tendered
unto you, by the great Potentates and learned Rabbis of the Nation: Yet we
hope by what we have here spoken, we have delivered our own souls from what
will follow thereon, having faithfully discharged our duty herein, both toward
God and our Neighbor.

FINIS.
Errata, for grants, read graces, Page 5. li. 11.


