TO PROFESSORS OF RELIGION Of all Sorts, and likewise to PROFANE, In and About
this CITY of CHESTER.
THis is in my Heart to you, in Defense of that Glorious Truth, which the Lord
has brought to Light in this our Day, and which shall never more be
extinguished, though many Wicked and Ungodly Men have opened their Mouths
against us, to destroy us, for bearing Witness to the same; and which hitherto
we have believed, born, and still do bear Witness to, That he that believes in
the Son of God, has ( Life, and) the Witness in himself, which Life is the
Light of Men, which lights every Man that comes into the World, that
whosoever believes in it, follows it, and obeyes it, shall not abide in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; yea, it shall take Root, grow,
bring forth Fruit, and prosper, to the Honor of him, who forth of his Rich
Love to Mankind has so manifested it.

Now by Reason of some in and about this City, which have made a large
Profession of this Truth, and have by their erring from it opened many Mouths,
who are saying, We see the same Things among you, which you have counted Evil
amongst us, and denied and judged us for, and which you once denied your
selves; and yet talk of Perfection, and plead for the Light: In Answer to
which, I, with those People scornfully called Quakers, do say,

We have not only denied you, because of your bad Fruits, but as being out from
that (not believing in the true Light which lights every one that comes into
the World) which would make you bring forth good Fruits; For make the Tree
good, and the Fruit will be good, says Christ, the Light: And we do judge our
selves ( first) and espy the Beam in our own Eye; for being turned to the
Light, which makes manifest the least thing that appears in us contrary
thereto, is as a Beam, which (whilst standing) cloudeth and overspreadeth the
pure Presence of God; wherefore we are not at Rest Day or Night, till the Beam
be plucked out: And so do we espy and reprove the Faults of others, who either
plead for Sin as long as they live, or excuse their own Iniquity by others
Failings, and yet think themselves safe.

And this I would have none to be ignorant of, that although we believe
Perfection to be attainable in this World; yet we are very sensible, that it is
not always the Work of a Day, Month or Year; but that there must be much
waiting, many a Sigh, Groan and Tear; a great spiritual Combat with the Dragon
and his Angels within; a diligent and expert Exercising of the whole Armor of
Light, ere such a State be witnessed: But this is our Comfort, that we are
truly turned to the true Light, which gives the Victory in the End; and so are
not faithless, but believing; as also that the Lamb's War is truly begun in us,
who fights our Battails for us, while we stand still, and behold his Salvation:
But we never did assert our selves such, because there was such a Principle in
us, by no means; but that all who are led by it, are so far perfect and
infallible, and no Jot farther: So that in Plainness, what bad Fruit has
appeared in any gone from us, and once of us, or yet may appear in or amongst
some of us, I would have all to know, that such Fruit is not from the Light,
but from the Enemy of the Light and of the Soul too; and all who give Way to
the Temptations must bear their own Burden: And this I must say, not only for
my self, but in the Behalf of other Brethren and Friends (in whose Defense I
have been made willing to write these Lines, to stop all perverse Tongues
whatever, and those of all Sorts, who wait over us with an Eye to spy Evil)
That there is never an one among us, who are truly and sincerely come to the
Light of Christ Jesus, but do love Judgment; yea, wait for his Judgments to be
brought forth to Victory, even as the Watchman waits for the Morning; and so
far are any such from pleading for any one Sin in Thought, Word or Deed, that
it is their Meat and Drink to do the Will of the Father; and like Gall and
Wormwood to that of God in them, when it is not answered; neither can they be
(in the least) content to shroud themselves under a Profession of Truth, so as
the more freely to act Deceit thereby, but both desire and witness a Growth in
Truth and Righteousness, as knowing, that not to go forward, is to go backward:
And as for any that have (or still do) come among us, and seem to walk with us,
that are otherwise minded and conditioned, then I have declared, by the Light
they are judged, and by the Truth denied, and by the Fan winnowed, and in
themselves condemned: wherefore stumble not at the Light and Truth, because of
Offenses; for it causes not the Offense, but by Degrees gathers all that
believe in it and follow it into its own Nature, and makes Fearfulness in due
Time to surprise the Hypocrite: So God is glorified, and his Truth vindicated
thereby: Thus the Foundation of God stands sure, notwithstanding all perverse
Tongues and deceitful Spirits against the Truth, and us for the Truth's sake.

And further, to undeceive the simple-hearted, who through Lies, Slanders, and
Forgeries, have been made to believe, that we deny the Bodily Appearance of
Christ, his Transactions at Jerusalem, the shedding of his Blood to be
beneficial to us; it is the Light within only ( says the false Accuser) we
expect to be saved by; and likewise, that we deny the Scriptures of Truth.

To these do I (on the Behalf of Truth) testify, that the Appearance of the
second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the quickening Spirit, in that holy Body
prepared of the Father for him, was for the Salvation of the World, who had
fallen in the first, that whatever he then did both living and dying had a
great Influence for God upon all that believed, and has still for all that now
believe in him, as he manifests himself to us by his Light in the Conscience,
for we do affirm, that to come to that is the readyest, nay, the only right
Way to come to true Faith in Christ, as he then appeared, and to receive any
Benefit by him: And it is not another then that Blessed Light, Power, Wisdom
and Eternal Righteousness, who then appeared, by whom we have received any true
spiritual Benefit; how then can our asscribing particular Salvation in this Age
to him, who thus now appears to our Souls, render him no Savior in that, or
invalidate his then Appearance, whose Doctrine pierced, whose Life preached,
whose Miracles astonished, whose Blood atton'd, and whose Death and
Resurrection confirmed his then Manifestation to be no less then God (who is
Light) manifested in the Flesh?

For the Scriptures.
We own them as they own themselves, A Declaration of those Things most truly
believed, given forth in all Ages by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; that
they are profitable for Reading, for Exhortation, for Reproof in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfectly furnished; they are the Form of sound
Words; and we believe they ought to be read, believed, honored and fulfilled,
as that by which God has, does and may yet reach by his Spirit to the Hearts
and Consciences of People: And the earnest Desire of our Souls to Almighty God
is, that we may witness the fulfilling of them, that God's will may be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven: And so to the Righteous Lord God of Heaven and Earth
do we make our Appeal in these Matters (against all the Unrighteous Dealing
both of Professor and Profane) who is the Searcher of the Hearts of all Men.

By one scornfully called Quaker, an Inhabitant of this City, whose Love is to
all, and desires the Good of all, my Peace and Satisfaction being with and from
the Lord. Richard Smith.


