The heads and substance OF A DISCOVRSE; First private, and afterward public;
held in Axbridge, in the County of Somerset, about the 6th of March, 1650.

Between John Smith of Badgworth, and Charles Carlisle of Bitsham, etc. on the
one part; and Thomas Collier of Westbury on the other.

Things they are of weight and highest concernment.

Published by the said Tho. Collier of Westbury.

John 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

1 Cor. 2. 8. And this is that wisdom, and that knowledge, which none of the
Princes of the world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spred-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's. 1651.

To the Right Honorable the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the High Court
of Parliament. And to the Right Honorable the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
IT possibly may by some be accounted too much boldness for me, who am indeed
the least of all Saints, to present this ensuing Discourse unto your Honors
its not the apprehension that I have of any worth that is in my self; let me be
abased, so Truth be exalted; but the reasons drawing me unto it, are, first
those unchristian like, and indeed inhumane like reproaches and falsehoods I
received from them, both before, at, and since the Discourse.

Secondly, that ability which God has given (I trust I may say without
flattery or folly to many of your Honors) to judge of things that differ.

3. That power likewise which resides in you of restraining and punishing those
who are declared enemies to the Lord Jesus, the peace of his people, and the
Nation.

well; If you thus be a sanctuary to the Saints, and maintainers of the
interest of the Son of Righteousness, in the world, which is righteousness and
holiness; the takers off of yokes and burdens from the people, that so they
may, as the Lord speaks of his people in another case, fear you for your
goodness in the latter and, then shall thy light break forth as the morning,
and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall gather thee up, Esaias 58. 8.

So prays he, who is your Honors to serve in the Lord Jesus, Tho. Collier.

The heads and substance of the Discourse, are as follows.
The particulars they swore to, are these following.
1. HE denied Jesus Christ to be the eternal Son of God. 2. He denied a local
heaven. 3. He denied the equality of the Son with the Father. 4. He denied that
Jesus Christ by his death upon the Cross did satisfy divine Justice. 5. He
denied the Trinity. 6. He affirmed that the Saints are the Sons of God in the
same manner as Christ himself. 7. He affirmed that the divine essence was
communicated to the Saints. 8. He affirmed that the bodies of the Saints should
be turned into Spirits. 9. he affirmed that the Moral Law was abrogated.
To four of these particulars they swore false, and after acknowledged it;
taking up the argument as it was at first truly stated, thus,

1. He denied Jesus Christ to be the Son of God by an eternal generation. 2. He
denied the equality of the Son with the Father as they hold it forth. 3. He
denied a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead. 4. He affirmed that the Moral Law,
as a ministration in the hands of Moses, was abrogated and done away to
believers.
But to the first in order.
1. He denied Jesus Christ to be the Son of God by an eternal generation.

That which they undertook to maintain in this particular was, the eternal
generation of the Son by the Father in the Godhead, which was and is by me
denied; the Scripture they had at first to prove it, was that in the
Common Prayer book, in Athanasius Creed: That he was very God of very God,
begotten before all worlds; I denied that to be Scripture; they affirmed it to
be in the Scripture; I told them I knew no such Scripture, and desired them to
look it; they searched the Scripture, turned their Concordance, but could not
find it; I then told them where they might find it; but in the second meeting
they produced these Scriptures, John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son; and John 1. 14. 1 John 4. 9. He sent his only
begotten, that we might live, etc. and hence endeavored to maintain this
argument, that if Christ was the only begotten, then he was eternally begotten,
etc. that I denied; for he is not said to be begotten* but as in the womb of
the Virgin, by the power of the most high. Luke 1. and upon this accouut he is
said to be the only begotten Son of the Father, because there was never any son
so begotten; they still pressed this argument* that this begetting must of
necessity be a begetting before all time: I answered them out of Psalm 2. 7.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, which is a begetting in time:
they then fell to that in Prove. 8. 25. Before the mountains were settled, before
the hills was I brought forth; hence endeavoring to maintain an eternal
begetting, which was denied: bringing forth and begetting being not the same;
although after the flesh begetting precedes bringing forth; yet in the Divine
mystery there is a bringing forth without begetting; in conclusion I charged
Person Smith with blasphemy and nonsense; blasphemy in holding forth a
generation in the Godhead, which is proper only to the creature; and nonsense
in holding forth a generation in the Godhead, the Father begetting the Son, and
yet the Son to be coeternal, and that it was him that indeed denied the
eternity of the Son.

I shall further declare my understanding in this mystery.

Christ as the Son relating to the Divine being, was and is that wisdom which
was before the mountains and hills, viz. that wisdom, power, light, love, etc.
which lay hid in silence in the Father, and was the Father before the Creation,
yet lay hid, viz. not made manifest to any creature; but in the Creation put
forth and made manifest, as likewise in the preservation, but especially in the
restoration and drawing up of souls into spiritual union and fellowship so
manifest in the man Christ Jesus, John 1. 1, 2, 3. with verse 14. Here is a
bringing forth of that excellency which was in the Father from eternity, into
visible manifestation to the Creation; but last and specially to those made
partakers of that birth from above, John 3. 3. so that that wisdom brought
forth is not something begotten by the Father, but the bringing forth of that
word of wisdom and power which was before all beginning with God, in God, and
is God: so that to conclude this particular, I neither did nor do deny the
eternity of the Son, but the generation as relating to the Divine being. To the
second.

2. He denied a local heaven.
In this I denied heaven to be a particular limited place, I acknowledged that
heaven must have some place; for that which has no place, has no being; but
that as far as I know its not a limited place; that is, some place of glory
above the firmament, as is imagined; but that heaven relates rather to a
condition of glory, then a place of glory; and its not the place but the
condition which makes either heaven or hell. He viz. Parson Smith, proceeds to
proof; produces that of Paul being in the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. I asked him
if he thought that Paul was taken up above the Starry firmament; he answered
yea, for he knew no other heaven: I answered, I knew another heaven, which
Christ speaks of, which is within, and doubtless this is the heaven the Apostle
was in: The highest manifestations and enjoyment of the Lord, so high, that he
knew not himself, whether in the body, or out of the body; that this is the
truth, appears in that he is not speaking of being transported personally into
such a high place as is imagined, for he is speaking of visions and revelations
so high, heavenly and excellent, that he knew not whether he were in or out of
the body. He produced Steven, Acts 7. 55, 56. who said, Behold I see the
heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God: I asked if
he thought Steven was so quick sighted as to see so many hundred thousand miles
as they say it is: (and its very probable Steven was in a house too) and that I
understood it to be the invisible glory of Father and Son manifest unto Steven;
he answered, that it is said, he saw Christ at the right hand of the Father: I
answered, its true; but what understand you by right hand? that is an
expression rather to declare the glory of Christ, then the place; and that
which I understood by right hand, was and is the enojoyment of the Fathers
love, of the Fathers glory; at his right hand are pleasures for evermore; the
apprehensions of wrath and anger is the left hand, etc. so that heaven which
Steven saw open, was the glorious opening and unfoldings of the Father and Son,
whom to behold in love is life; and then was a time for Steven to see the
heavenly glory of the Father and Son in a special manner when under such a
trial for the profession of them.

One Parson Fearn stands up, and pressed Parson Smith to say something in
confirmation of the point in hand for the satisfaction of the people, which put
him the more to a stand; then the said Parson Fearn produced that Scripture,
Col. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God.

I answered, that this Scripture held forth no local, but a spiritual heaven;
for the heaven here is that into which saints are already risen into; if risen
with him, then above with him, beholding the glory of the Son with the Father,
seeking things which are suitable to such a condition, until the Son shall
appear in his brightness; then shall they appear with him in glory, verse 4.
for they shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 3.

They ask where heaven is, if not a particular place? I answer, as in relation
to God its every where, he being in all places, yet never out of the perfection
of glory, therefore never out of heaven; as in relation to the Creature, its
every where, where the heavenly light and love is manifest, and the soul taken
into union with it: He asked if I would bring heaven and hell together? whether
heaven was in hell? I answered, yea, it is in hell; you grant that God is in
hell, then certainly heaven is there; for God is never out of the heavenly
glory; farther, two persons may be in one place, the one in heaven the other in
hell; the one in the enjoyment of love and grace, the other in the apprehension
of wrath and anger; experience declares the truth of this; and thus may it be
in another world to eternity, seeing its not the place, but the condition which
makes the difference: Again, heaven and hell, light and darkness, joy and
sorrow, may be in one heart, yet the light still distinguished from the
darkness, hell and heaven distinguished, and at a distance each from other.

Unto the third.
3. He denied the equality of the Son with the Father; this was abused in the
terms, and after consented unto, that he denied the equality of the Son in the
way they hold it forth; which is as the second person in the Divine being:
there I denied any equality; for there is no quality in God; quality and
equality is only proper to the creature, not the Creator: Therefore if we
consider Christ as God, so he is the Father; at this he cried out Blasphemy,
making wonders, till I produced the Scripture, Esaias 9. 6. where he is said to
be the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. The Scripture
produced to prove an equality, was Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God; to which I answered, that the
equality there intended, was not an equality in the Divine being; but the
excellent quality of the humane nature by virtue of its union with the Divine:
and so he thought it no robbery to be equal, because God had made him so, for
its evident in the Scripture that its the same He that was in the form of God
and equal with him which died upon the Cross; and I suppose none dare affirm
that it was the Godhead which dyed upon the Cross; therefore I say he was made
equal; at which they wondered again: I proved it thus, Act. 2. 36. God has
made that same Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ: And all power is
given to the Son; And God has given him a name above every name, etc.

The fourth Particular.
4. He denied that Jesus Christ by his death upon the Cross did satisfy divine
Justice.

In this they likewise abused me; for that which I asserted was, That Christ by
his death upon the Cross did not satisfy divine Justice in the way they hold
it forth: viz. That God was offended, and Christ the second Person steps in,
and undertakes to make satisfaction to divine Justice; This was that which I
denied, affirming that the Redemption and Salvation of man flows singly and
purely from the Fathers Love, and that Christ came forth from the Father, did
the work of the Father, was upheld and carried through by the Father; for says
Christ, John 5. 19. The Son of himself can do nothing; And God so loved the
world that he gave his Son, Joh. 3. 16. So that Christ is the manifestation of
the Fathers love; To clear this truth unto them, I gave them this comparison,
Suppose one of you lend a man 100. li. and vow satisfaction again; afterward
this man turns bankrupt, and so utterly disables himself for payment of the
money. You to make good your word, and free your debtor, enable your son, give
him the money, that so he might pay it you again satisfy your word, and free
the debtor; then you send a messenger to inform him that the debt is paid, and
his peace is made: So God having said, In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall die; Man eats and dies, God, to satisfy the word of his Truth, and to
restore fallen man, gives forth his Son, that so the Son might give himself a
ransom for the world, and so the Father in the Son satisfies his Word, which
is his divine Justice, and makes peace with the world, and by the Spirit of
his Son sheds abroad his love and peace in the hearts of his secret hidden
ones, that so they might come to be possessed with, and to live in the
enjoyment of that redemption, that peace and love which was purposed by the
Father, and made manifest in the Son for them.

This Truth being rightly understood, is that which keeps the fountain of grace
clearly open, That fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, Zac. 13. And this
mystery of mercy being rightly received, draws up souls to the Father in the
Son, and makes not the Son the object of faith without the Father, nor the
Father without the Son, but the Father in the Son; He that believes on me,
believes not only on me, but on him that sent me, Joh. 12. 44.

The fifth particular.
5. He denied the Trinity.

Here likewise they abused me; for that which I denied, was, a Trinity of
persons in the Godhead, which they affirm.

That which I laid down was this, That I denied not the Trinity, that is,
Father, Son and Spirit, as the Scriptures hold it forth, but a Trinity of
persons I deny; for I deny any person to be in the Godhead; for God is a
Spirit, Joh. 4. 24. not a person: They then proceeded to prove the person of
the Father first, Heb. 1. 3. where Christ is said to be the express image of
his Fathers person, I denied that there was any such word; they pressed earnest
to the Scripture. I desired them to look in their Original, to see what it was
there; they said it was person there. I told them it was not, but it was
substance; they asked me what the Greek word was. I answered (...), which
signifies substance; they affirmed that it was person, not substance: I asked
them all, being six of them, whether it was person? they all affirmed that it
was: so I answered that it was a shame for them thus to speak untruth, and to
delude the people; I told them (...) is person; they fell out into reproachful
terms, denying it all of them except one, who confessed it was person; thus being
gravelled in the first, they proceeded no farther.

Its true, the Scripture speaks of Father, Word and Spirit; this I own; Father,
as the fountain; Word, as streams of wisdom, power, and love coming forth to
the sons of men, taking flesh into union; so the Son, operating and working the
good pleasure of his will; so the Spirit: God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, and God was manifest in flesh, but God was not flesh, and
there is no person in the Godhead, that being a word proper to man only; and
that word is never in all the Scripture, that I know, attributed to God, but
they are principles and terms received by tradition from Rome, and thither let
them return again.

The sixth particular.
6. He affirmed that the Saints are the Sons of God in the same manner as
Christ himself.

This I owned and affirmed, That Christ was a Son by virtue of union; so were
the Saints; For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; because he
who sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all of one, Heb. 2. They
affirmed that the union of Christ with God was hypostaticall, and the union of
Saints was mystical; I asked the people if they understood hypostatical union;
he said it was personal (though not truth, but substantial) I asked him what
he meant by mystical union; he could not answer it, but desired me to answer
it: I told him nay, I should not explain his terms; so he left it: Mystical
signifies a Mystery; Great is the mystery of godliness; so that Parson Smith
makes the union, and so the sonship of saints a greater Mystery then that of
Christ: for Christ's union he could explain, but the saints was a mystery, and
so left: but its indeed both a mystery, a spiritual union, and a spiritual
relation. It was objected by one, That it pleased the Father that in him should
all fullness dwell, and from his fullness we receive. I answered, true, it is so,
and I shall need no other Scripture to answer you, then that you have produced;
for I am not maintaining the fullness, but the manner; its true, Christ is
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows; but they are anointed
with the same oil; Christ has the fullness of the Godhead in him; but the
saints receive of the same fullness, the same for nature and manner, though not
for measure, yet are sons in the same manner as Christ.

It may be objected, that Christ was the natural son, saints are sons by
adoption and grace.

Answ. True; yet they are sons by nature too, made partakers of the divine
Nature, and shall in conclusion be made complete in the same perfection with
Christ; they are heirs, coheirs, joynt-heirs with Christ; if they suffer with
him, they shall reign with him, Romans 8. They are made partakers of the same
relation, the same spirit, the same love, heirs to the same Kingdom; And when
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we likewise appear with him in
glory: we shall be as he is, because we shall see him as he is, and shall see
our selves with him; this is the mark we are running to, and the prize we are
running for, if we so run as to obtain.

The seventh particular.
7. He affirmed that the divine essence was communicated to the Saints.

This I likewise owned; which they denied; proved 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby he has
given us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be
partakers of the divine Nature: the divine Nature is the divine Essence; they
are made partakers of it by great and precious promises, promised and
performed, wherever the Lord communicates his spirit, which is of himself, and
is himself, Romans 8 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ* he is none of
his: and if so be the Spirit of Christ dwell in you, etc. They still opposed,
that the divine Essence was not communicated to the saints: I desired them to
declare to the people what the spirit of Christ here mentioned is, whether it
be God or not? They answered, it is God, yet not communicated to the saints. I
answered, it is in them, it dwells in them, they are made partakers of it; Where
the Lord the Spirit is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. and Joh. 14. 16, 17. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, and he shall
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he
dwells in you; hence take notice that the true cause why the wise men of the
world do not receive this truth, is, because they see him not, neither know
him: ignorance is the cause of error; upon this account it was that Christ was
crucified; upon this account it is that his Spirit is blasphemed; this oneness
in the Spirit of the Son is a mystery, hid not only from the world, but in a
measure from the Saints too: But verse 20 at that day, viz. the day of Christ's
appearing in the revealing of this truth to his people, then they shall know
that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: at that day they shall
know the spiritual union and indwelling presence of Father, Son and Saints
together. But one Parson Eaton, and Doctor they call him, Parson of the Town,
newly come there, a traveller, and one I suppose lately come from Rome; I judge
it so both by his bitterness and enraged spirit, set on fire of hell; and
likewise his principle, which he declared; he speaks to this purpose; if this
be a truth, then the Saints are God; for to whomsoever the Spirit of Christ is
communicated, they are no longer man but God, they must of necessity be God. I
answered, there is no truth in what you affirm. I shall make it appear to you
thus: Christ you will grant was made partaker of the Divine nature; the essence
was communicated to him, and yet he retained his humane nature; his manhood was
not turned into or confounded with the Godhead: he answered that the manhood of
Christ was God; that God was made man, and man was God; I denied it, desiring
him to prove it; he answered, I might as well desire him to prove that there
was a God, as to prove the manhood of Christ to be God: in conclusion he
produced John 1. The word which was God was made flesh and dwelt amongst us:
And Acts 20. it is said, that God purchased his Church with his own blood, etc.
I answered, the Word was made flesh, that is, compared with 1 Timothy 3. 16.
manifest in flesh: great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifest in flesh;
else you destroy the humanity of the Son; and his blood is said to be the blood
of God. 1. Because it was the blood of him who was taken into special spiritual
union with the Father: Believe me, says Christ, the Father is in me, Joh. 4.
2. Because it was that blood the Father had appointed for the manifestation of
his love, and the expiation of sin, yet not of the essence of God. This
principle that God is man, and man God, is Jesuitical, and came from Rome.

8. Particular.
8. He affirmed that the bodies of the Saints should be turned into Spirits.

To which I answered: this I own as the Scripture holds it forth, viz. Into
spiritual bodies; its the word of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Its sown a natural
body, its raised a spiritual body: they answered, that Spirits have no bodies;
therefore if raised Spirits, then no bodies; for body relates unto flesh: I
answered, sin is not flesh and blood, yet called a body: that the body of sin
might be destroyed, etc. they said it was called so Metaphorically, and so are
the Saints in the Resurrection called bodies in regard of its likeness or
manifestation to the creatures apprehension; for there are Celestial bodies,
and Terrestial bodies, earthly, heavenly, spiritual, fleshly. The Apostle
says, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; they
answered, that the Apostle intended by flesh and blood, corrupt nature and sin
that must be done away: I answered, the Apostle is not treating about the
Resurrection of corruption, or corrupt nature, but of the body, flesh and
blood, which cannot inherit the kingdom; for the kingdom of heaven is
spiritual, and only spirit shall inherit it: Thou fool, that which thou sowest
is not quickened, except it die, that is, die to its old nature and form; and he
gives it a body as pleases him to every seed his own body; not the body or
likeness of the first man, which is of the earth earthly, but of the second,
which is the Lord from heaven; this being the mysterious work the Lord has to
effect in and upon his people, to bring them out of the nature of the one, into
the nature and glory of the other.

The ninth Particular.
9. He affirmed that the Moral Law was abolished.

The truth was, and it was assented to, that the Moral Law was abolished to
believers, as held forth in the hand of Moses; but unbelievers are still under
the Law; for whatsoever the Law says, it says to them which are under the
Law, Romans 3. 19. but believers are not under the Law, Romans 6. 14. therefore the
Law says nothing to them: they answered, that was, they are not under the
condemnation of the Law; nay, but the Apostle says, they are not under it,
therefore the Law, (viz.) as in the hands of Moses, says nothing to them; for
there is a great mystery in the right understanding of the difference between
the dispensation of Law and Gospel, Moses and Christ; The Law came by Moses,
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. He ( viz.) Parson Smith, asked if I
denied the Law, and whether there was no Law to believers? I told him No; I
knew a Law under which believers were; he professed he knew no other Law then
the Law of Moses: I told him if he would confess his ignorance, I would tell
him of another Law: he said, he knew it not; I answered there is a Law of
Grace, both within and without: That within, is the Law written in the heart;
promised in Jer. 31. and made good in the Gospel, Heb. 8. That Law of the
spirit of life, spoken of by Paul, Romans 8. which made him free from the Law of
sin and death; this Law is the light and guide of Saints; whosoever has not
this Law within him, is none of his, Romans 8. 9. 2. There is a Law without
likewise, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the Law of Love, a light and
guide likewise in our weakness and childhood, unto the heavenly Canaan. He
answered, this was all one with what he held. I answered nay; for he held still
to the Law of Moses; he asked if believers should act contrary to the Law of
Moses? I answered nay; not in the substance of it; yet it behooves them to know
the difference between Moses and Christ, Law and grace; I produced Romans 7. the
woman is bound to the law of her husband so long as he lives; but when her
husband is dead* she is free from that Law, ver. 4. wherefore my brethren ye
also are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another; that as a woman is dead to the law of her husband, so are
believers dead to the Law; and as a woman is at liberty to marry with another,
and then is subject to the Law of that husband; even so believers, being
married to Christ, live to him, are subject to him, that so they might bring
forth fruit unto God. At this Scripture he was at a stand; I pressed him to
answer the Scripture; he refused, saying, I brought Scriptures which were not
to the purpose, nor have any tendency to the thing in hand; and would not
answer it; thus thinking to shift out when he could not answer: But I desired
him then that he would give the meaning of that Scripture to the people, that
so they might be satisfied in the truth of it, if I did misapply it; he
endeavoring to wind out, refused; but being earnestly pressed to it, he
answered, that notwithstanding believers were made partakers of Christ, yet the
Law was holy and just and good. I told him it was a truth, but nothing to the
truth intended in that Scripture, and desired him earnestly to speak to that
Scripture; he then answered, that believers were freed from the rigor of the
Law: I answered again, that in substance he granted what I affirmed; for if
believers be not under the rigor, then they are not under the command; for its
the command which occasions the rigor: the transgression of the Law occasions
the rigor. I farther produced 2 Cor. 3. where it is said, the Law is done away
and abolished, ver. 11. and 13. and its the Moral Law that's there intended, as
appears verse 7. It was that which was written and engraven in stone: He
answered, that it was true that the ministry of the Law was done away, but not
the Law; it is the ministration of it that is there intended: I asked him then,
why he did preach the Law and plead for it, if the ministration of it was done
away? the truth is, that as the ministration of it, as it is death, so the
ministry of it is to work up souls into its righteousness for deliverance from
death; so in the Gospel, though a Gospel of grace and peace; yet those who
reject it shall be damned; therefore is the ministry accompanied with it for
the working up of souls into its grace and peace. If it be objected, that the
Law was never given that men might seek or obtain life in it, but Christ was
life then as well as now. I answer, its truth, the Law was in it self a
ministration of death, and not of life; yet under that dispensation, the
wisdom and way of God was such to his people, as that they first looking into
that Law, seeing how far short of life they came in their not performing of it,
might look above unto that righteousness which was presented in it, much like
unto the fiery and brazen serpent; the one bites, the other cures; and this was
the constant way and course of the Lords communicating himself unto his people;
but now the manner of the dispensation is changed, and all things are made new:
the way of God to his people is first, to bring them into view of his goodness,
and to possess them with his love, and then from the same principle and power
of love gives forth a Law within, a Law without, which is a Law of love, in
which there is no condemnation to them who walk not after the Law of Moses, but
the Law of Christ; not the Moral Law in the hand of Moses, but the Law of grace
in the hand of Christ, who serve not after the Law of a carnal command, but
after the power of an endless life; not in the oldness of the letter, but in
the newness of the spirit. But to return, he asked me what was the difference
then between the Law in the hand of Moses, and the the Law in the hand of
Christ? I answered, as much as between life and death; in the one the
ministration of death, in the other the ministration of life: if the
ministration of death was glorious, how much more shall the ministration of the
Spirit exceed in glory?

Thus my noble friends, have I given some brief hints of the substance of the
Discourse, passing by those many vain and antic behaviors, which would be a
shame to repeat in persons pretending for truth and honesty; and this I leave
with you as my apprehensions in the things declared. Let those who have the
spirit of light and truth judge; for the spiritual man judges all things,
though he himself be judged of no man.

FINIS.

