The Lamb and his day proclaimed.
THe Kingdom of God is at hand, which come^ not with observation* salvation is
near unto all that will receive it, redemption is coming in a time unexpected,
and deliverance in a way not known, as a thief in the dark is the heir ^ome,
whose light out of darkness is shining, and that which shines out of darkness
is it alone that gives the knowledge of God, whom to know is life eternal; and
^he brightness of the day of God is springing forth of darkness, as the morning
sun after the darkness of the night, and glorious is this day of the revelation
of God, to all them that have waited for his coming, who in the life of his
power, through the obedience in his love, come to rejoice in his dominion over
all the powers of darkness for ever, and sound forth the dreadful day of his
power unto all the inhabitants of the earth, from the which, Christ the Savior
comes to take p^ace, and to bring the sword of Gods judgments into the bowels
of all the earthly minded, and in him that judges the secrets of all men's
hearts, does his followers rejoice, and proclaim him unto you all that makes an
end of sin, who of the father of love and mercy is tendered unto all that will
receive him, that in him who condemns the evil deeds, and sin in the flesh,
salvation might be attained unto who now comes unto his own, of whom many
receive him not, for he is come to judge the world whom God so loved, that he
gave his son the light of the world, that whosoever believe in him (by whom the
secrets of all hearts are, and shall be judged) may be saved from wrath to
come, and find a sure hiding place, when the wicked shall be cut off the earth.

And now who will receive the Lamb, in whose mouth there is no guile, (...)
among the sons of men will receive him that has been slain from the foundation
of the world, who will receive him that is the gift of God which is perfect,
who will receive him that is a man of sorrows, whose beauty is hid from the
prudent of the earth, who will receive him that the Priests cry out against,
and the rulers say away with him from the earth, who will come unto the waters
of life and return unto the fountain of living mercies, that in his belly the
springs of life may be felt: who can endure to follow him to the end of the
world, whose kingdom is not of this world, and who receives not honor of
men, who can hear, receive, and keep the hard sayings, and drink his blood that
cleanses from all sin, who is willing to receive him that is the resurrection,
and the life, whose presence troubled and terrified his own Disciples, so that
their hearts burned within them, who will lay down their Crowns at the foot of
him that is the light, and mourn over him that is slain-whom they have pierced,
and through patience, long suffering, and obedience, follow the one Shepherd
in the regeneration even unto them is the word of consolation sent.

Therefore be ye awakned, o all ye rulers and people, let not your hearts be
hardened against Gods witness in you, neither stop your ears, nor close your
eyes, for of a truth the Lord is at hand, and is come to try you, with his
loving kindness and with his judgments. His flock despised of men, has he sent
in the meekness of his love, to preach the innocent life of his son among you,
in meekness, patience, sufferings, tribulations, who being reviled, revileth
not again, but in patience enduring long imprisonments, yea want and sickness
there, and abuses, cruel mockings, stonings in the street daily, and revilings
by ungodly persons, whose cruelty is increased, and their sins multiplied,
increasing to the day of judgment, and righteous revelation of Gods wrath upon
all unrighteousness of men, who hold his truth in that which is not his
righteousness, which is now brought near unto all that fear, before him in
uprightness of heart, that truth in the inward parts they might come to know,
and in it worship the God of the spirits of all flesh.

H. S.


