TO New-Englands pretended Christians, WHO Contrary to CHRIST, have destroyed
the Lives of Men.
Having seen something of yours, called by you an Appendix, whereby you would
justify your selves in Whipping, Imprisoning, Banishing, Killing, and making
spoil of whole Families; I being weak of body, and in bed, the strength of the
Lord arose in me, from the which was given forth that which follows:
THE Lord God will answer you with that, which you shall never be able to
resist, and from the which you shall never be able to fly; neither shall your
coverings defend you, but God will visit in secret, and the Almighty will rain
snares upon you: and all your strong holds in one day (and that suddenly, in a
moment) will the Lord God scatter, and confound, with all your strong reasons,
and your weapons which you have gathered together against the invisible God and
his servants, like your Fathers in the days of old ( Isa. 41. 21.) these with
all your weapons of war against the Lamb, and the suffering seed, shall be
broken in the midst of you, and death will overtake you, and Gods righteous
judgments will enter within your dwellings, and a day of blackness from the
throne of God will come upon you, and his anger with bitterness will be powered
forth upon you, as a mighty storm which comes on a sudden, and as a whirlwind
which none can stop, and as the mighty unmerciful raging waves of the Sea,
which none is able to resist; even so shall the day of your calamity come,
which is hastening, as the lightning, whose breaking forth, all your fleshly
wisdom shall never be able to hinder.

Behold! I have heard a voice of terror from the Lord against your unrighteous
proceedings, and the day of Gods vengeance is in his heart, and who shall stand
to plead with him? Behold! ye thorns, the Lord our God is a consuming fire, and
before him you cannot stand, for your sins have reached up to Heaven, and your
iniquities is come before the most high, and your grievous blood-thirsty
actions is spread over Nations, and Gods witness in thousands (who are not of
us) but rather yet against us, does rise up in their hearts against you; and
when you are awakened, you will be filled with anguish, and a cup of
astonishment from the righteous God of truth, will be powered forth unto you;
and as sure as you have thirsted after, and drunk deep of the blood of Gods
chosen, (though despised of men) so certain shall you have blood to drink; and
trembling, horror, and amazement, will most absolutely come in that day, which
approaches as a theif in the night; and then shall your bowels be ripped open,
and your inside-coverings broken, and then shall your hearts be rent with
perplexity, and amazement shall come over you as the cloud of the night, and
the hand of the Almighty will find out your secreet lurking places, and then
shall ye know that the Lord our God does, and will plead the cause of his
people, and avenge himself on his and their enemies; and then shall ye know
that ye have risen up against the Lamb, who is sometimes silent from pleading
his own cause, who though dumb as to answer the mighty one of the earth, yet
faithful in suffering, according to the will of him who rules over all: and
then shall ye know, that though no answer at all were written unto your dark
pretended coverings, yet shall you then feel an answer near unto you, and the
sound of Gods terrible voice shall be heard in the midst of you; and from the
dreadful noise of his war, shall you never be able to cover your selves withal
your writings, printings, nor declarations, though never so strong from the
prudency of the earth, for God has cast all that behind his back; and in the
day at hand shall you most absolutely come to know it so to be.

For behold, my heart is indeed rent, and God has opened in it the secret
council of his will, and his purpose concerning you, whose decree shall never
be changed, which is sealed against the evil doer; And where is there a people
or evil doer, who have done worse than you? Have you not made your selves a
reproach amongst men, and as a byword amongst the people? O horrible, and
wicked cruelty, and merciless tyranny which is found in the midst of you? Is
this the fruit of your profession? and has the spirit of truth led you to do
these things? Do not even the Nations stand and look at you? and do not the
upright in heart mourn in secret because of your sins? Ah, who could have
believed that you would have done such things! and do you think now to stop the
mouths of people by publishing your strong reasons? Nay, this is plain in my
heart, that all whatsoever you print, publish, or declare, shall never give
satisfaction to the meek just principle of God, which remains in the spirits of
many thousand thousands in the Nations round about you: and if your called an
Appendix, with the rest of your writings, were never answered by us, and if we
therein should lay our mouths in the dust for ever; yet this we know, that the
holy one of Israel, the righteous God of truth will plead our cause, and
execute Judgment in his fury, and avenge the blood of his Saints, and help
the man of low degree against him who is too strong for him; and to the Lord
God of righteousness we commit our cause, and the innocence of our dear
brethren, and in Gods blessed will I rest, and am satisfied in respect of his
love unto his Jewels, though but as fools to the world, and in respect of his
answering of you according to the fruit of your own ways.

And behold! ye children of men, I cannot but proceed to declare unto you the
day which is near at hand, and warn you all to strip your selves from all your
coverings, and sit down ye people in dust and ashes, and confess your
Iniquities in secret unto the Lord, before it be too late, for great is the woe
which is coming upon you; and that which I have heard concerning you, is none
other than a voice of terror; O the trouble, distress and calamity, that
sounds in mine heart concerning you! and from the Lord God will it be powered
forth, and exceeding deep shall you drink thereof; and this shall you know to
be true, when the whirlwind comes from far, and the shadows of the night draw
near, when no hiding place will be found for the hypocrite, neither a refuge
for the evil doer.

And then, as ye have not spared the despised of the world; so will the Lord
cast upon you and not spare. O the bitterness, and unutterable torments which
will then come! but who amongst you will believe these things, and who can
entertain the Council of the Lord? and are not your hearts yet hardened against
reproof? and are you not to be reproved for your envy against Gods people? nay
moreover, are you not sometimes already reproved by him, who sees in secret,
and who searches the intents of the heart, and makes manifest unto man the
wicked enterprises thereof, and overturneth the councils of the wicked, but
remembers the cause of the needy, and pleads the Innocence of the upright,
in whose sight the death of the Saints is precious, and who pleads their
cause in the day of trouble, and will most certainly confound his adversaries,
and scatter his enemies as smoke is scattered with a mighty whirlwind, and in
that day where then will your place be found?

And a seed there is which God will deliver from your hands, and preserve from
the blood-thirsty men, which shall grow up in the midst of you as a Lilly among
thorns, and Gods blessing shall be upon them, with whom my life is: and as the
latter gleaning in the time of harvest, so shall the gathering of Gods heritage
be. And what you have done, will be for the advantage of the suffering seed,
and for the Glory of God, and much for your disadvantage and eternal shame, and
endless misery, if you repent not. And this you men of sin should know, that in
as much as you have taken away the life of Gods creatures; and moreover,
unjustly, by an unrighteous law destroyed the life of his servants; therein may
all men see that you are contrary to Christ, and led by a spirit opposite to
him, who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

And what is here written, need not hinder the movings of God in any of my
Brethren his servants, in giving forth a more large Answer, according to the
particulars written in your called Appendix, or to any other of your writings,
the which you may also expect; only this was in my heart, in which I have
discharged my Conscience; and so herein give forth my mite amongst the rest of
my Brethren, by way of declaration, and that from God.

And by this it is my souls desire your hearts may be humbled, and truly rent,
and broken for your own iniquities, and that with speed, or otherwise Gods
dreadful hand you cannot escape.

And this is in faithfulness to God, and love to your souls, from a Friend
thereof, called HUMPHRY SMITH.
Written from the movings of Gods Spirit, the 14th of the first month, so
called, near the beginning of the Year 1660.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle in
Martins Le grand, 1660.


