The Cause Of the long Afflicted, And Sore OPPRESSED, Sent forth (in brief)
from WINCHESTER PRISON, Being a Copy of the Mittymus, whereby Humphrey Smith
was again Committed (into the place of his former long suffering, in the same
straight unsavory Prison,) with his Answer (which was then sent back) thereunto.

As likewise a short Relation from the rest of them called QVAKERS there.

Printed for the said sufferers.

The Mittymus.
Southton. To the Keeper of his Majestys Goal at Winton, or to his sufficient
Deputy, Greeting.
YOu shall herewithall receive the body of Humphrey Smith, who was taken at
unlawful Meetings at Alton, being a Ringleader, and one of the chief of the
Quakers, who traveleth the Country to seduce the people, and disturb his
Majesty's peace, contrary to the Law in that behalf made and provided. These
are therefore, in his Majesty's Name, to will and require you forthwith, that
you receive the body of him the said Humphrey Smith, into your Custody, and him
to detain in your said Goal, until he shall be delivered from thence by due
order of Law. Whereof fail you not at your perril,

Given under our hands and Seals at Alton the 14th. day of October, in the
thirteenth year of his Majestys Reign. Anno 1661. John Norton. Humphrey
Bennit.


The Answer.
THe Jews (who denied him that said I am the Light) laid hands on Paul, Cryiug
out help men of Israel, this is the man that teaches every where against the
Law, Acts 21.28. And the Jewish Christans (who denied the Light) laid hands on
Humphrey Smith, and in the Mittymus say he was at an unlawful Meeting; And so
these called Christians say our Meetings are unlawful, or against the Law. And
just so it was said of Paul that his teaching was against the Law. Again Iobn
Norton and Humphrey Bennit say that Humphrey Smith was a Ringleader; Likewise
Turtullous said that Paul was a Ringleader, Acts 24. Again Humphrey Smith is
accused for one of the chief of the Quakers, and for traveling the Country to
seduce the people. And in the same manner Paul was accused for a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, Acts 24.5. (and if so, then
Paul was a greater Traveller then Humphrey Smith) and as Humphrey Smith is here
accused for seducing the people. So Paul was accused for setting forth of
strange Gods, and for preaching new Doctrine Acts 17.18. And again Haman
accused the Lords people, that they kept not the Kings Laws. And these men
accuse us that we disturb the peace, contrary to the Kings Laws. And the Rulers
accused Paul for teaching things that were not Lawful. And these accuse
Humphrey Smith that he did that which was contrary to the Law, which they say
is made and provided, which is as much as if they had said, We have a Law, just
like their Fathers who (Crucified Christ and) said We have a Law and by our Law
he ought to dye; And so these who have envy (which is murder) in their hearts
say, we have a Law made and provided, and by the sorce thereof Humphrey Smith
(who is a member of Christ) must be Imprisoned (his body, [mark] not his Soul,
then his Soul may be at liberty,) And them Magistrates cast Paul into Prison.
And so these did by Humphrey Smith. And they charged the Jailer to keep Paul
safely, Acts 16.21. And these Charge or require the Jailer in no less then his
Majesty's name and at his own Perrel to receive and detain the body of
Humphrey Smith in his said Goal, until he shall be delivered by due Order of
Law.

But now they have above a year together, contrary to Law, deprived me, of the
benefit of all their Law and Liberty.
And in this their acting and writing, they themselves have compared Humphrey
Smith with Paul (and others of Gods people) And themselves with Paul's
Persecutors, and with other such Rulers, who accused and imprison Gods people
formerly, who pretended a Law then, as these do now: And so here is still much
Law spoken of; But little Mercy, and less Justice or equity either amongst them
or these: And thus we are daily brought before Magistrates, and cast into
Prison, where the Members of Christ have been sick, and some have dyed, to whom
these called Christian Magistrates never visited: And thus in pretense of a Law
does Christ's members suffer by these now, as he himself did by those then, who
said We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye.

And hereby all people may plainly perceive (who are not wilfully blind that
here is not one thing Charged against Humphrey Smith, but what has been
Charged against Gods servants in the d^ys of old, and all persons may easily
see that Humphrey Smith is not any otherwise accused then the members of Christ
has already been; and all the Rulers themselves may hereby know, that in all
this, there is not one word, or particular thing by which Humphrey Smith does
now suffer, but what the Lords dear people have already suffered, by and under,
and that by the Magistrates, or the Rulers of the people, by whom likewise now
Humphrey Smith do suffer, and so he is hereby, and therein the more declared to
be one of Gods servants, and they by whom he thus suffers, are manifed the
more, to be of the same Generation, who still accuse and imprison, and by cruel
hands cause Gods servants to suffer; but Christ ha^h promised (whose word shall
stand for ever) that these things should turn to us for a testimony Luke
21.17. And this may and does this day testify to the World (and for us against
the world) that we are of God, and that Humphrey Smith is his servant, and that
he does this day suffer by the Rulers, under the same accusation, and no other,
and for the same truth, and so in the same cause, as Gods people of old did and
not for any thing else nor any other thing pretented against him, nor in the
least laid to his charge.

And if this will in no wise convince these Rulers of their evil herein nor
other people, of the innocence of my present sufferings. Then let them all take
heed least the God of this World has wholly blin^ed them, and hardened their
hearts therein, and chained them up in obscurity and bound them under the
powers of darkness, and so far Seduced them already, that they are become past
Sense, Sight, or Feeling, and then no more but a most fearful looking for the
Righteous Judgments, and indignation of the Almighty, which will one day
devour, and none shall deliver.

And then shall they all know both Rulers and people that I am Gods servant,
this day in Bonds for the Testimony of Jesus (against the cruelty of men (in
close Prison at Winchester being known to the wicked world by the name.

Humphrey Smith.
This was in short time sent back to them that committed me.



A Copy of a Paper sent to the late intended (but Adjourned) Sessions.
WE are men that do fear the Lord, and do also truly desire peace with and
amongst all men, amongst whom we have like wise be haved our selves in peace
and quietness, laboring with our hands in the things that are honest, whereby
to provide for our selves and families, continuing also in carefulness therein,
that though we suffer in body and estate, that neither we nor them, might be
chargeable to any, neither have we wilfully provoked the Officers, and Rulers
against us, but in humility in that we dare not but obey the Lord that made us,
in waiting upon him, for the which only and for no other cause, on our parts,
we have already suffered be ore this imprisonment so much cruelty and inhuman
usage, that several sheets of Paper might be filled therewith, though it would
not be easy to be believed, that Englishmen should so unmercifully be abused,
by Soldiers, and other men, of their own Nation, as has been daily inflicted
upon us in the Town of Portsmouth, the place of o^t abode and habitations,
where for the space of one year and half, few first days therein but we were by
the rudest Soldiers (that they could choose for the purpose, and such like
Officers, either haled out of our Meetings, before the Law was made as against
it) or beat forth with much violence, or thrust or beat with Muskets along the
streets, or punched, or knocked with the great ends of Muskets, and so with
violence drove forth at the Gates, from our own Habitations, and then were
hindered from coming in again to our employments, or most if not all these
things, were daily inflicted upon us with many more crueller beatings, and
brusings of our bodies then is herein written, and our goods have been spoiled,
and some carried away, and our windows battered down, even after we were beat
and turned out as aforesaid, and such first days as we escaped these things we
were shut up together in our own house, and Armed men set on every side to keep
us in both men and women, in a most evil and unseemly manner, and food denied
to be brought into us, and sometimes our food that was sent us taken away by
the Soldiers, and other times we were some of us kept in several nasty holes,
which are so bad, that most people do seem it a hard thing for the worst Fellon
or Offender, to be kept a few days, where we were constrained to by several
weeks, having also both friends, and our own wives, and Relations, yea and food
it self and other needful things then kept also from us, and in Fellons holes
the waves of the Sea have so beat in on one of us in Winter season, that he
have stood in water up to the Ancles, for the which things the Lord God has
and will visit them that were the Actors thereof.

And when we had for the space of one year and half, in much patience suffered
many such things as aforesaid; PLACE="marg" s Capt. egg Capt. (...)ol^^n, and
Capt. Cor(...)elious may (...)e Exam(...)es.
then did the Rulers of the Nation add affliction to our long grieved souls, by
making a Law that not above five might depart from their habitations, and
assemble together under pretense of Worship; the which though our Meetings were
not in pretense, but really intended, and absolutely for the Worship of God,
yea notwithstanding, though we were not this time (for the which we yet suffer)
the number of five that departed from our habitations, and so not transgressors
of that Law, as we made it appear unto the Mayor and Rulers that committed us.
Neither could they themselves affirm and prove that we had therein
transgressed that law; yet notwithstanding they imposed the uttermost penalty
upon us, which in the said law is mentioned against them that transgress it,
and so kept us full three months in Prison in that town, and three weeks
moreover then the three months. And then in our Mittimus they did not so much
as deal justly with us, but writ therein, that we were lately taken at a
meeting as though it had been very lately indeed, and thereby have sought to
conceal the long Imprisonment we had then suffered for the same meeting
therein signified, and concerning which we have also suffered nine weeks more
in this Prison of Winchester this 13th. of the 11th. month 62.

And these our hard and unreasonable sufferings. and grievous abuses, does even
cause a cry for mercy, and may claim compassion in equity, as well as Justice
from you, who in Justice ought to show mercy, in releiving the oppressed: who
having suffered all these things only upon the account of some difference in
Opinion, in matters of Religion, or matter in us of Conscience to God, wherein
also the Kings late Declaration offers us relief, the benefit thereof we
shall gladly receive; but if otherwise, then we say the will of the Lord be
done, whom we dare not but follow though it should be to the loss of all.

John Austin, Jonas Goff, Will. Bucklan. Tho. Cozens. Nic. Cumplin, Will.
Iennings.

Solomon Nun also a Prisoner eleven weeks for not paying four shillings for
being absent 4 first days from their Church at Fareham which in conscience he
could not pay, and so he is kept from his Masters business, being a young
Apprentice lad. John Bishop also a Prisoner nine weeks, being taken out of his
own house, from the which he was not departed, neither were there then found
with him any more men but two. Humphery Smith a Prisoner one year and three
months, and never called at Size or Sessions, nor suffered to come to any of
the Rulers in the County to lay before them the true state of his Case.



And now seeing the hardness of the hearts of the Rulers is such, that though a
copy of this foregoing paper was sent unto them, at the time of their late
appointed Sessions, and they not release the the said sufferers (though they
released several Baptists and others that have not suffered nigh so much) nor
commiserate their long and sore suffering cause, being some of them but poor
men, and seeing the said Paper, was turned again, and so the cause of the long
oppressed turned aside.

Therefore is this published (with the other) that both Rulers and people may
hear and see the long and many afflictions of the harmeless.

And now as touching four coats that in cold Winter weather were stripped off
us, four since we came to this Prison, and openly carried forth (by one whose
name we forbear to write) and the money for them drunk presently in strong
beer; concerning the which, although we mentioned not a word amongst the rest
of our sufferings, in the foregoing Paper. And yet seeing it is so, that just
thereupon we were curbed and checked, and friends kept out from us, and bitter
words used at them that were let in, (though the Jailer had profit by them) and
that even by the Jaylers wife, (she having slighted Gods love, and so now has
little pity for us) and this being also done at the same time, when the Kings
Declaration was come forth, which is so largely tending to our Liberty. And
that the said Goalers wife, and himself (if they own that action) may know that
it was out of forbearanee of love, and not of slavish fear of any, that we
mentioned not these our Coats in the said Paper.

Therefore are these few lines pertaining to the matter, now added to the rest
of the sufferings of us I.A.T.C.I.G.N.C. this 14. day of the 11. month 62.

And the cause, or the reasons wherefore the Copy of the Mittimus with the
answer of me, H.S. is herein made public, are these.

First because John Norton and Humphery Bennit, have not only thus committed
me upon no other account, but for being such a man as Gods servants were in the
days of old, and for doing no other thing, but what was (though sometimes
unjustly) charged against them, and also before this late Law was made
(intentionally) against meeting. Secondly, because they have kept me close
Prisoner one year three Months and upward, and that only upon this account.
Thirdly, because I have been all this time deprived even of that benefit of the
Law in this Land which Thieves and murderers have, being not all this time
called at Size or Sessions. Fourthly, because the said John Norton refused to
let me have my liberty for a little season when a friend came to seek it of
him, after I had lain here almost a year. Fifthly, Because nothing of evil is
proved or brought in against me, nor any Law known by which they thus keep me
in long Bondage, though wrongfully in the Mitty mus they have pretended a Law.
Sixthly, Because I am more hardly dealt with (in my imprisonment) then the
Highway men that break out of Prison or any other offender here, by their
order, for the keeping of friends from coming in to visit him that is one of
the members of Christ in Prison. Seventhly, Because that by no means all this
time I can be permitted once to pass forth to any house in the Town, and
several reasons more wherein I am unreasonable dealt with, all which having so
long, and with much silence and patience undergone. Eighthly, Because all this
and much more of their hard dealing, and my sufferings is so little regarded by
the said John Norton, and Humphrey Bennit and other Rulers, who some of them
said I might rot here.


Therefore I say thus much is at present published, and that other tender
hearted people, and the meekest among the Rulers, may both read and consider
the cause of the oppressed, and also the long sufferings of H. S.

The time comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God
service, John 16.2.

If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you, John
15.18.

But in the great day when it shall be said, Come ye blessed, and go ye cursed,
the things then laid to their charge will be these, I was hungry, thirsty, a
stranger, naked, sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not answer, when saw we
thee so, reply, In as much as ye did it not unto one of the least of these, ye
did it not to me, according to Matt. 25.41.42, 43, 44, 45, 46.

THE END.

