A JUST ACCOUNT Of the Horrid Contrivance OF John Cupper, and Judith Brown his
Servant, In poisoning his Wife.

Who were Tried at the Assizes held at Shrewsbury, the 21 st. day of July,
1684. Cupper to be Hanged in Chains, and Judith Brown to be Burnt.

Together with their Dying Confessions.

Published by me William Smith, Rector of Bitterley, their Minister, to prevent
false Reports.

Juvenal. Sat. 6. Hippomanes carmenque Loquar, coctumque venenum,
uxorique datum?
LONDON, Printed for Edward Robinson, Bookseller in Ludlow, MDCLXXXIV.

A Just Account of the horrid Contrivance of John Cupper, and Judith Brown his
Servant, in poisoning his Wife.
JOHN CVPPER was born at Snitton, in the Parish of Bitterley, and a short time
educated at the School of Bitterley; not making any proficiency in Learning,
his Father Thomas Cupper, removed him from thence to Ludlow, to a
Writing-School: Where after he had spent some time, his Father put him out to
several Services; but not behaving himself well in some of them, he returned to
his Fathers house; and afterward Married Hannah the Daughter of John Wheeler,
Rector of Wafers Hopton, about three Miles distant from Bitterley, against the
consent of her Father and all her Relations. Not long after they were Married,
though her Fortune was beyond his Merit: Continual Jars and Quarrels happened
betwixt them, in so much, that their Neighbors were in daily fear, lest some
mischief should attend their ungodly way of living.

At last, he with his Servant Judith Brown, a notorious Strumpet, contrived the
Death of this miserable and unfortunate Woman. They both long debated, how they
should accomplish their wicked design, and after several consults, they
concluded the securest way to effect it, was by Poison.

This they attempted for the space of a Month together: and what they thus
basely and wickedly designed, at last they brought to pass.

Her Death being sudden, her Neighbors came and told me that they were afraid,
that John Cupper had made away with his Wife: I told them, that if they did
suspect it, (as indeed there was just cause, by the words they had given out)
that they ought to go to the next Justice of Peace, for his Warrant to
apprehend both Cupper and his Servant Brown; and after Apprehension, to send
for the Coroner; who summoned a Jury at Bitterly upon Ascension day last, and
caused the Body of the Murdered Person to be taken up again, being Buried the
Lord's day before. After the Body was viewed, and Cupper and his Servant
brought to touch the Corpse, the Coroner causes them to be separated, and
examined them asunder very strictly; and I must needs say, with much Prudence
and Caution.

But they had so combined together, that for some hours they stiffly denied the
Guilt charged against them, and their Tales were but little differing one from
the other.

At last his Servant being removed, whilst Cupper was under a second or third
examination, A Farmer of the Parish, with the Maids Sister, goes to her, and
told her if she would confess truly, she might be in some hopes of being saved;
if not, they were both like to suffer together; the Witnesses that were
examined, having Sworn so materially against them.

Judith Brown listening to this, confessed presently that her Master and she
had poisoned her Mistress, the Farmer and some others acquainted the Coroner
privately with it; upon that he was removed, and she brought under Examination
again, and confessed the Fact before the Jury and several other Bystanders,
and set her hand to the Confession. She being again removed, Cupper was called
in, and when he perceived that his Servant had declared it, he likewise
confessed it, and set his Hand to his Confession. Upon this they were both the
same Night sent toward Shrewsbury Gaol, and the next day were secured there.

During the time of their Imprisonment, I went with two of his Neighbors to
visit him, where we found him seemingly not much concerned; and after some
little time of Discourse with him, and lamenting the miserable state and
condition, that he had brought himself into, I desired the Jailer and my
Neighbors to withdraw; and discourst him an hour at least by my self. He then
utterly denied what he had set his Hand unto before, and pleaded, with Tears in
his Eyes, his own Innocence; and did not doubt, but at his Trial he should
clear himself, and that he was there in Chains by the malice of his next
Neighbors. I told him that whatever he did propose to himself, he would
certainly die for this offense, and that poisoning of his Wife was so horrid
and dismal a Crime, that he could have no hopes of Pardon; and therefore
persuaded him what I could to betake himself to his Prayers and tears day and
night, to secure, if possible the Salvation of his Soul. When I had said what I
could to him, I desired the Jailer that his Servant might have the Liberty to
come to me; he granted it presently, and when she came, she pleaded her own
innocence likewise, and though she had put her Hand to her Confession before,
yet vowed she was not Guilty: But I assured her, as a little before I had her
Master, that they would both die for that black and fearful Crime; and desired
and entreated them both, that they would prepare for their Latter End; that
their times were but short in this World; and that in a wretched and shameful
manner they would be cut off: And then I took my leave of them, commending them
to the mercy of Almighty God, with my earnest Prayers and Supplications for
them.

After I had left them both in tears, they having the convenience it seems,
through the favor of the Under-Jaylor, (as some of the People in the Town
informed me) of coming frequently together, He persuaded his Servant to take
the whole upon her, and that if he was acquitted, he would get a Pardon for her.

His Servant (as I was acquainted by some of my Parishioners that heard the
Trial) when she was brought to the Bar before the Honorable Sir Thomas Street,
one of His Majesty's Judges of Assize for the Oxford Circuit, being ask't
whether she was Guilty or not, she then pleaded her own Guilt, and her Masters
Innocence; her Master continued obstinately denying the Fact; and that he was
not in the least Guilty; but the Jury going out upon him, brought him in
equally guilty of that Crime, which his Servant had took upon her self, and
after that, the day following, Sentence past upon them both: Cupper to be
Hanged in Chains in the Old Field near Ludlow; and Judith Brown to be burnt for
poisoning her Mistress.

When she saw her self under the Sentence of Condemnation, she pleaded her
Belly; and was respited till her Delivery, and when she was delivered of a Man
Child, which she Fathered upon one Not, her Execution was deferred for a Month
or longer. But Cupper was brought to be Executed in the Old Field near Ludlow,
the twenty fourth day of July. I met him on the way at Roger Burton's House in
Onybury, where the Officers staid about two hours with him. And after Prayers
with this poor condemned Malefactor, I then privately put him upon that which
before he had denied in Prison, viz. The Poisoning of his Wife, he then
confessed it presently, and withal told me, That Judith Brown and he had
attempted it several times after his Wife had lain in her Month, and finding
that through the strength of her Body, she had workt off small Potions infused
sometimes in Milk, and sometimes in Beer, at last they were resolved to give
her a greater quantity of White Arsenick in Milk. After she had eaten the Milk,
a violent Vomiting and Purging seized her, and being very thirsty, called for
Water to drink; they thinking her then in a fair way to have their ends, bring
her water with more Arsenick infused in it; and after the drinking of it, being
violently torn in her Stomach, a Neighbor coming in accidentally to see her,
Cupper's Wife told her they had given her her last, and she not long after died.

After he had thus confessed his Guilt toward his Wife, I ask't him about the
death of his two Children; it being reported that he had murdered them; this
he denied, and told me he had never any thoughts of ill toward them; and that
the Accident of scalding Pitch falling upon one of them, hastened its end which
had troubled him very much; and that the other dyed of a Natural Death, which
his Neighbors could not but be well satisfied about.

Then I enquired of him whether he had been Guilty of stealing Sheep upon the
Clee-hill, or not, having been long suspected: He answered, That he was
Innocent; and wished he had been as Guiltless toward his Wife, that then he had
never come to so shameful an end, as he was presently like to do in the view of
all his Neighbors and Acquaintance. I desired him to tell me truly whether he
know of any about the Hill, that were Sheepstealers, and advised him to have a
care that he did not die with a Lie in his mouth, or any thing that then might
burden his Conscience. He told me he would have a care of that; and said he
knew of none; only there was a common Report in the Neighborhood, that there
was a Person in the Township of Snitton given that way, but he knew nothing of
it.

What relates to the Scotchman that was murdered some years since on the Clee,
of which he was suspected, I know nothing of, I my self being but lately settled
in the Parish; and no man in his Wits can think that I could charge him with
that I never heard of till since the Execution of the Criminal, nor did he
mention the least title of it to me.

All he further confessed to me, was, that he had had Carnal knowledge of his
Servant Judith twice the Month before his Wife was brought to Bed, and though
she was with Child, yet she was not so by him, but by another that was
conversant with her before.

And now in Contemplation of approaching Death and Judgment, with tears at the
Gibbet he bewails this wicked Act of poisoning his Wife, and all other sins
that he was guilty of, and with a heart swelled with the dreadful thoughts of
his sad Condition, repeats that excellent Prayer for Condemned Malefactors,
written by Dr. Patrick in his Devout Christian.

When he had ended that Prayer, after a Psalm, I joined with him in another,
and then rising up, the Chains were presently fastened to his Body, then in
another short Prayer he desired that God would ease his disturbed mind, his
wounded and dejected Soul, heartily praying that God would ease his broken
heart, hoping in his Goodness, that now crying and bewailing his sins, God
would hear him; and then going up the Ladder about the middle, he turned to the
People, acknowledged his faults, for which he suffered, and begged of them to
pray for him, that his Soul might be saved, and begged Young and Old to take
warning by him, and was Turned off.

The one and twentieth of August, Judith Brown was Burnt at Shrewsbury, where
she confessed (as appears by Captain Reignolds Paper sent me) she consented with
her Master to poison her Mistress, and her Master was the cause of bringing her
to that unhappy end; desiring that all would take Example by her just and
shameful death, and was so consumed to Ashes in a dreadful Bed of Flames.

Thus both underwent the due punishment of their heinous Crimes contrived and
executed upon a poor and an unhappy Wretch, a Wife to the one, and a Mistress
to the other.

Let me desire every one to examine himself to the bottom, touching all crying
sins, particularly touching Cruelty. God himself is rigorous in the scrutiny he
makes in any bloody Crimes: As if he would upon occasion take the Coroners
Inquest into his own hand, he himself makes inquisition for Blood.

These two Wretches that were justly Executed, had time enough after the Fact
to have fled from the rigor of the Law, having the opportunity of four or five
days to make their Escape; but surpised with the Villanousness of the Action,
and their Consciences being harrast with the sense of Guilt, they could not
flee, but Justice necessarily took hold upon them.

It has past into a Proverb long since, That Murder will out, and the History
of all Ages affords us wonderful Discoveries of it. Wherefore we ought to take
warning, and not to suffer any revengeful Inclinations to harbor in our minds,
no Cruelty to Neighbors, no bloody Practices against Parents or Relations: If
we give way to these things, our hearts becoming hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, no wonder if the blackest Crimes do follow, and one
wickedness slily draw on another. These despicable Wretches neglected
instruction, hated to be reformed, lived in all manner of Licentiousness,
Profaned the Sabbath, slighted Ordinances. The Master often engaged in
Quarrels, both at home and abroad, would not be persuaded, but still persisted
in wickedness, and we have seen the End, a sad and a shameful End; a way of
Dying abhorred by Good men, and the Wicked may tremble at it, and learn to
amend their Lives, to become better Christians than they have been formerly;
which God of His Infinite Mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

