A free Flowing of the Father's Love to the Heirs of the Kingdom, with all that
are seeking the Peace and Righteousness of it.
YE little Flock of the Heavenly Power, who are raised unto newness of Life by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ the Righteous, in whom ye have obtained Grace
and Mercy with God the Father, and have the full assurance of Life eternal
sealed unto you by his holy Spirit, whereby ye feel al things added for your
consolation and rejoicing; so that outward Persecution or Tribulation cannot
separate you from the Love of God which ye possess in Christ Jesus the Lord,
but in his Love you are so rooted and grounded, and steadfastly stayed and
fixed, as that the Powers of darkness cannot move or shake you to pluck you up;
ye are the glorious Offspring of Almighty God, and the shadow of his Power is
over your branches for your preservation, in which lie ye down in stilness and
quietness, for the Lord God works mightily for you.

Dear Brethren, the deep sense of that Endless Love which God the Father has
bestowed upon us through Christ Jesus, does mightily abound in my heart toward
you, and in all brotherly kindness I therein visit you, as being a partaker of
the Afflictions and Sufferings which any of you endure this day; for I do
assuredly believe that God is with you, and that his Love does freely abound in
you over the Afflictions that do betide you, and in this Faith I am comforted,
knowing that the Arm of the Lord is underneath you to support and succor you;
the sense of which constrains me to visit you with these lines, that ye may be
strengthened unto all long-suffering and patience with joyfulness, holding
forth the holy Testimony of Life in full assurance of Faith unto the end; for
you are an unknown People in the hidden life of the immortal Seed, and
therefore it is that you endure grief by aliens and strangers, who are not of
the same household of Faith with you; and do not marvel why these things come to
pass, it being no more than what he endured before you, who is the Captain of
your Salvation; for had they known him, they would not have crucified him; and
you being born of his Life, you are as far out of the sight and knowledge of
every stranger, as he was, who by wicked hands was crucified: and this is not a
new thing which happens unto you, but is the same that he endured, who is
leading you in his own footsteps, that ye may obtain the Inheritance with him:
and this day is not come upon you unawares, that you should be amazed at the
approach of it, or affrighted at the terror in it; for the Lord God has been
preparing you for it, and furnishing you with strength to stand with boldness
in it, so that ye are as armed men well prepared for the battle, being filled
with might, by his Spirit in your inner man, and your backs are as ready for
the Smiter as the Smiter is to smite you, and you shrink not their blows though
they be many and furious, but stand with the Helmet of Salvation over your
heads, and feel your safety in the Arm of your Keeper; for assuredly the mighty
Lord God, who is the God of your Salvation, does arise in his Power, and
according to your Afflictions so does he proportion his Strength for your
Preservation; and though the wicked be permitted to do something of what is in
their hearts, yet God will restrain them for accomplishing their fury to the
full, and they shall never be able to bring it to pass though they have decreed
it; for when so much of their wrath is gone forth as shall turn to the praise
of God, then will he restrain the remainder, by pleading the Cause of his
Chosen, and appearing in his Power for the Deliverance of Sion, and all his
enemies shall stand amazed and confounded within themselves, for the day of
trembling shall come upon all flesh, and then shall your Glory shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father, and many shall take hold on your skirts,
with a desire to be called by your Name; and from that day shall Israel possess
their own Land in peace, and quietly sit under their own Vine and Fig Tree, and
none shall make them afraid; then will the Lord comfort you for the years
wherein you have been afflicted, and for the days wherein you have seeu
adversity: Therefore ye little Flock of the heavenly power, be not afraid nor
terrified because of your Adversaries, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom; and though you endure many Tribulations, yet through the
same you draw nearer the Inheritance; and you that endure Tribulations in
patience, you have a good part in the Joy of the Kingdom; and herein is your
Comfort in the midst of Tribulation, feeling a possession which the world
cannot give, nor take away, in which stand ye steadfast without wavering, and
never look back again to fading things, but still press forward in the Drawings
and Overcomings of the Heavenly Love, that the Eternal Life may wrap you up in
it self, and mould you into the nature of its own being: for dear Lambs, I know
the manifold temptations that may assault you in such a day of trial; and I
also know the manifold Mercies of the Lord God to overcome them; and as ye
cleave to the Lord, and resign up all into his Will, the appearance of his
Power will scatter Temptations and drive them away; but if you begin to listen
to the Enemy, and to enter into thoughts and reasonings about the things of
this life, then a Vail will come over you, and weakness will seize upon you,
and your days and nights will be wearisom to you: therefore, my dear Friends,
keep your Consciences clear in the sight of God, that as the streams of his
living water has purged out that which once did defile you, even so to keep
your selves unspotted of the world; for you are to give up all in the freeness
of your minds, and the Lord loves a cheerful giver; and where all is given up
in cheerfulness, his Love does answer the Givers sevenfold into their bosoms:
for you give him nothing but his own, and why should any murmur when he
requires it, or keep back any part when he calls for the whole? O give all up
freely and cheerfully, and his gifts will be enlarged unto you more abundantly,
and you will feel his strength to carry you in pure delightings to do his Will,
and to follow him whithersoever he goes. I know that many of you are in the
true sense of it, and have your Rejoicing in it; and though you endure a great
fight of Afflictions, and go through Trials and hard Tribulations, yet you
cannot say much of them to glory in them, or any way seek to be esteemed or set
up by them, but you secretly rejoice in God, whose Presence you feel to be your
strength, and so return him the Glory in his own strength, by which you are
preserved to do his Will: and I know there are many that cannot express much in
words, that are freely given up to serve the Lord, whose Offerings in their
breathings are acceptable with him; and I also know, that many are truly
seeking the Peace and Righteousness of the Kingdom, that yet are sore beset
with diverse temptations, and are not grown into that strength as to be able to
resist them, but secretly cry unto the Lord that he would help them, and by his
Power to sever all from them that lets or hinders from following of him.

O ye dear Brethren, who stand in the strength of the Eternal Power, be ye
tender over the weak and crying Babe, and help it forward with an Arm of Love;
for there can be no more expected than there is strength to perform, but as
there is a willingness begotten, and a true seeking after the Peace and
Righteousness of the Kingdom, the willing mind is accepted according to what it
has, and God will increase strength to the willingness, and in due time make
it able to perform: therefore let the strong bear with it as a Babe that is
willing to the utmost of its strength; and if through its weakness it should at
any time fall, be ready to help it up again; leave it not behind you because it
is weak, but take it on with you though it walk slowly; for it is an Heir of
the Kingdom, though many things yet lie in its way and it want strength to
remove them and get over them; O condescend to it in bowels of tenderness; and
if it slip, hold it up and heal it; and do not beat it, but take it by the hand
and lead it, until it have received strength to walk with you that are strong;
and so in the Eternal Unity and Fellowship of the Kingdom you will be all knit
together as one man; and truly serve one another in every office of Love, which
is good and well-pleasing in the sight of God.

So all dear Friends every where, whether bond or free, feel your Unity in the
Spirit and Bond of Peace, and then you that yet have your outward liberty will
help to bear the burdens of your Brethren that are in Afflictions; for all that
are in the Life they are in a sensible feeling of the Sufferings of the Body,
and it is unto them as their own in the Unity of the Spirit; for the Spirit
gives the sense of the Afflictions and Sufferings of Brethren, and also of
their Joy and Consolation; and here the true Love abounds one toward
another, which the Waters cannot quench, nor the Floods drown: therefore as the
Lord God has chosen you to be a People to himself, so do you walk worthy of
his kindness, and honor his Name and Truth in the blessed Unity of the
Immortal Seed; for many eyes are upon you, and many that watch for evil and not
for good, whose tongues are as ready to accuse as their eyes are to watch; and
there are also many that have a true love and favor in their hearts toward
you, and a secret cry in them to be with you; and when the Cloud dissolveth
which at present lies over them, they will run: therefore walk circumspectly in
the Light, and preach to all in the Life, that you may be a sweet savor unto
Life in all, even as I know many of you are, in whom the Virtues of Life do
sweetly abound, which is a sure Testimony for God in the hearts of all people;
and so all feel the Springs of Life to your Refreshment and Comfort; for the
Lord has great regard unto you, and his Promise does assure a great
Deliverance for you; for thus he has spoken, Jacob shall not always be in
trouble, nor Sion in heaviness; for I will glorify my Name in Sion, and Jacob
shall rejoice: Therefore be of good comfort ye dear Children, and think not the
time long, but let Patience have its perfect work, and in the living Faith and
Hope stand ye steadfast, and anchor into the depths of God's Eternal Love, so
will you be stayed upon him, and strengthened by him, and no weariness will
come upon you, but a fresh delighting in the Seed which over all must reign,
and as Heirs of the Kingdom inherit your portion to the glory of the Father,
where I dearly embrace you, and in pure Love and perfect Peace salute you all.

Your dear Brother in bonds, W. S.
The beginning of the 7th month, 1664. This is to go amongst Friends, and to be
read in their Meetings.

