A Sober and Serious REPRESENTATION to such as are or may be in POWER, tending
to the Happy Settlement of these Distracted NATIONS.
PErsons in Power must remember that they are subject to like passions and
imperfections with others, and that they are under very strong temptations, to
Pride and Selfishness, and Wilfulness, against which they have need to keep a
constant and severe watch; the rather because God has by our late strange and
frequent mutations shown unto us the instability of all earthly Power, in case
they displease God, and discontent the people. This being premised, I take the
boldness in all humility to suggest:

First, That the great Wisdom and Interest of Governors lies not in a violent
restraining of Peoples hands, but in a sweet prevailing upon their hearts.

Secondly, That a Free State (of all Governments) can worst be settled without
engaging the affections of the generality of the people; and therefore the
Rulers of it ought to make it their great design (as Christ did in his Church)
to make them a willing People in the day of their Power.

Thirdly, That it is not to be expected that the affections of people should be
regained and recovered from those discontents, animosities and prejudices
(wherewith they are filled) in a moment; but it is a work of time, and to be
done leasurely, and a work which may be spoiled by Precipitation: As he that
shall scrue up a string in an Instrument to the highest at first, shall break
it in pieces, while another that brings it up by degrees, may safely raise it
to an higher pitch. Magistrates being Parents, must bear with their childrens
weaknesses, and pardon their frowardness, and not immediately reject all that
do not at the first word comply with all their desires: Nor must they
Jehu-like, drive on furiously; but rather with Jacob, consider the tenderness
of the children and flocks, and lead them with gentle and easy marches, lest
if they be over-driven, they dye.

Fourthly, That the affections of people are not to be gained by some fair
Expressions, and verbal Declarations, (in which the generality of men have
learned to put very little confidence) but by visible Demonstrations and
effectual Actions.

Fifthly. That it is impossible to settle the Nation as a Free State, but upon
the Basis of the sober party, the others b^ing so inconsiderable in their
numbers and interest, (which therefore must be imposed upon the rest by an high
hand, to their great regret, and with their great charge) so odious to the body
of the Nation,) which therefore would perpetuate divisions and animosities in
the Nation, and so occasion everlasting Broils and Wars, and Hazards) so
inconsistent with themselves, with their own principles, their own promises,
and many times their own former actions, and so much resolved to subject all
Civil Affairs and Interests to their own private conceptions in Religion.

Sixthly, That it is vain and unreasonable to imagine that a State may bottom
it self upon both Parties, there being such a manifest impossibility of serving
two Masters, especially such who are, and are like to be at so wide and
irreconcilable a distance in their principles, spirits, designs and
endeavors, that the one will be continually provoking, subverting, and
counter* working the other, and thereby tear out the bowels of their common
Mother, and weaken the Nation, and make way for any Foreign Adversary; (most
persons being more willing to be inslaved by Foreigners, than by the basest of
their own people) And that they will no more cement, t^an the Ark and D^gon
could stand together, or than the Iron and Clay in Daniels Image could
concorporate, (the inequality of which mixture was one occasion of its fall)
And that State which seeks by such a Syncretism to gain both, will indeed
disoblige both Parties, and render their Government ungrateful to all.

Seventhly, That together with Scripture and Reason* the experience of these
times makes it evident, that no settlement is like to be had in the State,
unless there be some order and establishment in the Church; the distempers in
the one, so easily and universally passing into the other.

Eighthly, That our present Rulers cannot more promote their own interest, than
by discovering their own intentions in some signal and real way on the behalf
of the Ministry, Learning and Universities, and discountenancing that turbulent
Generation of Quakers, Fifth Monarchy men, and Rigid Anabaptists, (by whom
having been disturbed and deceived twice, it will be none of the wisest actions
to put them into a capacity of deceiving them the third time) that the whole
Nation may see that their Rulers do make a difference between such modest and
humble, and quiet souls, as through tenderness of conscience and humane
frailty, are overtaken with some errors of lesser importance, and such as
overthrow the Faith, and subvert the foundations of Religion, and make no bones
of trampling upon our Laws. Liberties, Civil Authorities, and Principles of
righteousness, when they stand in the way of their particular opinions.

Ninthly, That they would be tender in the pressing of Oaths, which have been
so frequently urged, and so fearfully violated, that many are afraid even of
lawful Oaths* and in particular, that the Oath of Abjuration may not be
pressed, which

1. Is unnecessary and insufficient; For, Suppose it not to be sufficient, that
is already done, to make it Treason for any man to move for the bringing in of
the Old Line; and suppose that the Magistrate shall think fit to impose an
engagement upon Members of Parliament; Is not this enough without an Oath of
Abjuration* For if men make conscience, a bare engagement will be sufficient;
and if they make no conscience, ten thousand abjurations will have no hold of
them: And if the one being owned before a man's entrance into the House, does
not tie him when he is entered, neither will the other: Let men be as cautious
as they can, when all is done as it is their duty that they ought; so it is
necessary, they must trust the Providence of God with future things.

2. It is (at the least seemingly) unlawful, as it is an appearance of the
highest evil; viz, visible breach of all Covenants, etc. (And we know even
lawful things are to be avoided, when they have but an appearance of evil) as
it is a real and great scandal, not only to such as are engaged to the Old
Royal Family, but to thousands of others, (and they Persons Sober and
Judicious) And besides, it is a confining of Gods Providence; for who can say
that the Affairs of the World, and of the Nation, may not be reduced to such a
posture, that it may be not only lawful, but also necessary to take in a Branch
of that Family upon terms, and that that may be the only visible means to
prevent the total ruin of these three Nations? Suppose one of that Line
hereafter shall be, and by sufficient and satisfying evidences appear to all
People to be a Person truly Gracious, (as who can tie the hands of Gods Grace?)
and heartily ready to forgive all His Enemies, and (besides that principal
Security His supposed Godliness gives) to give whatever further Security can be
desired or had unto the Godly Party of the Nation; as also to those that have
purchased His Lands, that they shall enjoy them: Suppose withal, That in Case
of a Refusal, all Neighboring Princes and States resolve to Contribute their
Utmost and United Strength toward His Restitution, (which no Wise man will say
is impossible) Suppose also that our Ships, the Walls of our Nation, are
vanquished and broken, which (unless we will with the Vain Spaniards, fancy
them to be an Invincible Navy) must needs be allowed for a possibility: And
suppose the hearts of the whole Nation, and the best men most freely and fully
toward Him: And Lastly, That the then present (but now future) Magistrates by
their Ungodly and Unrighteous, and Selfish Carriages, should render themselves
Odious to the whole Nation* (which no man that considers the confessed
Corruption and Degeneration of some, at least of the Magistrates of these last
Times, can deny to be possible) I say in this Case, I suppose there would be no
Pious and Publick-spirited Person but would judge it his Duty to use all lawful
Endeavors, if not for the Restoration of the whole Line, yet at least for the
Restitution of such a Person, for which there could be no way, but by the
violation of that Oath which he had rashly and sinfully engaged himself in;
thereby defrauding himself of that Liberty which God and Nature had given him,
and preventing himself in that Duty, which the saving of his Country from total
and certain ruin may indispensably require of him.

3. It is against Rules of Prudence, and looks too like a secret design of some
Extravagants in Religion, however others may be engaged in it, thereby to
provoke and irritate, and disoblige the Sober Party in the Nation, (the most of
whom may be gained by degrees, by the just and pious, and laudable actions of
their Magistrates) and craftily to oblige the State to lean again upon that
broken Reed which has so often pierced into their hands: And it seems to be like
the opening of the wound again, when there is some tendency toward a closure;
or like the remanding of Israel into the Wilderness, when they were coming
toward some settlement in the Land designed for them: And therefore it is
humbly desired, that in so nice a juncture of Affairs, and so ticklish a time
as this is, there may be a forbearance of corroding Medicaments, and people may
be won by Lenitives.

To which might be added, That the effect of this and such like Oaths and
Engagements, will in all probability be, that multitudes of Sober, Peaceable
and Tractable Persons who fear an Oath, will refuse to swear even that which
possibly they may be willing to do; and the Power of the Nation will in a great
measure fall into the hands of such Persons, as are either men of no
conscience, who can without any scruple both take and break any Oath, (when
occasion serves) or such as are men of unsound Principles in matters of
Religion, and so Animosities will be begotten, continued and increased, and the
Public Peace ^ndangered.


