A Manifestation of Prayer in Formality, and Prayer in the Spirit of God.
IT has been a Common Observation through Ages and Generations, to perform
something as a duty unto God by way of Prayer; and this Common Observation has
descended from one Generation to another (ever since the Apostasy entered) in a
customary and formal way, still observing the practice in words, and continuing
the same as a duty unto God in the same manner and form, not at all regarding
or considering the present want, or necessity of the present Age or Generation,
nor the present states and conditions of particular people, but praying in the
same words, and in the same form, from time to time, and from Generation to
Generation; and so it flows, as a natural stream in a common and customary
practice from one Generation to another: and hence it is that people continue
asking, but do not receive, because they ask amiss, not feeling the Spirit that
makes intercession: and so the Pharisees made long prayers, but received the
greater damnation, because they prayed not in the Spirit, but in the customary
formality, which by the Spirit was condemned. And it is very sad, that people
should all their lifetime be complaining and asking, and never come to receive
satisfaction; and this in the common way of Prayer in this present Generation,
who have many prayers in formed words, and with their mouths do often repeat
them, and in the formality make a practice of them, and so at set-times, and in
set-prayers spend away their days, but feel not the Lord nor his goodness. And
this Common way of Prayer now used in the Common Worship, never brings people
to obtain, but keeps them always asking; where, in answer to the Commandments,
they pray on this wise, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law; and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we beseech thee. Now if
they would incline their hearts to the Spirit of God in themselves, and obey
it, then the Spirit would incline their hearts to keep God's Law, and the
Spirit would write his Law in their hearts, and put it into their inward parts,
and it would keep them that they should not depart from it, and there they
would feel God's mercies, and so come to receive an answer of their prayers:
For when the heart of man does not incline to the Spirit of God, it is in
rebellion against him, and God does not show mercy to the rebellious; and so
people pass over their time in words, but want the Life which should do them
good, and when they come to finish their days, their hearts are as far off
from Gods Law, as the first day when they began to pray that he would incline
their hearts to keep it; and they have no assurance that God will show them
mercy, though they have been praying in words all their lifetime: And likewise
in answer to the Lettany, where they pray after this manner; Good Lord deliver
us; and, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord; and this is the same in their
latter days as in the beginning; and it is manifest, that they are not
delivered from those things as in words they pray to be delivered from, nor are
not heard in those things which they beseech the Lord to hear them in, and so
they spend their days in observing a customary formality, and never come to
any assurance that they are delivered, or that their requests are heard, and
answered. And again, in that which they call the Creed, they confess they
believe in God; now they that believe in God, their hearts are inclined to keep
his Law, and he shows them Mercy, and hears them, and delivers them, for they
that believe in God they do his will; and if any man do his will, him he
hears. And then again, they confess that they are miserable sinners, and do
those things they ought not to do; and if so, then not Believers; for they that
believe in Christ are not miserable sinners, neither do those things they ought
not to do, but by believing in Christ they are saved, and he takes away their
sin that makes them miserable, and sets them free from their misery, and they
do those things that are well-pleasing in his sight; for they that truly
believe in Christ, they do not only confess their sins, but also forsake them,
and so find mercy with the Lord; and they are not always complaining, that
they do those things they ought not to do, but know his Will and do it, and are
blessed in their deed. And again, in that which they call the Lord's Prayer,
they generally say, Our Father: Now the Children of God are not miserable
sinners, nor do not those things they ought not to do; for whosoever is born of
God, does not commit sin; and whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither
known him; and there are not any that believe in God, or can call God Father in
truth but those that are born of him; for those that are born of flesh and of
blood, and of the will of man, they do not believe in God, neither can truly
call God Father: for that is the nature in which sin is committed, which makes
people miserable; and that is the nature in which they do those things they
ought not to do; and that is the nature in which there is no saving health; and
there is not any prayer accepted of God, which in that nature is performed: for
none in the flesh can please God; and whatsoever is offered unto him in that
nature he does not regard it, for it is the nature from which all wickedness
proceeds, and the prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto God: and
though there may be many which may deny the Common way of Prayer, as it is used
in the Common Worship, and set up some other way of Prayer, as more excellent;
yet whilst the flesh and blood, and will of man conceives it, and performs it,
there is no difference in the ground, between that which they deny, and that
which they set up and practice; neither does God regard it any more than that
which they deny: and though such Prayers may not appear so formal, as those
that are commonly used in the Common Worship, yet they are conceived in the
very same womb, and do not at all differ in the ground: for as the wisdom of
the flesh has composed so many set-prayers in words, and has prescribed a way
to observe and practice the same, and that none is either to add or diminish as
to what is so composed; even so, the same wisdom may deny that prescribed way,
as being formal, and may invent something instead of it, in a higher mystery of
iniquity; and though they may not speak in such formal composed words, yet in
the same wisdom, their words are formal, not at all differing in the ground or
conception, but only in the expression and observation, and in their practice
it is as formal as that which they deny; for they have a constant observation
by way of Prayer, in what they practice, which in it self is as formal as the
set-prayers commonly used in the Common Worship; for they can set their own
time both to begin and to make an end; and when they will they can utter words,
and when they will they can be silent; and they have their own conceptions at
command, and can either perform or not perform in their own time; and this is
the unclean part which offers unto God, which he does not accept, neither is
any Prayer regarded or accepted of God but the Prayer which is offered to him
by his own birth. So that these few things being seriously considered, it is
manifest, that the way of Prayer, as it is now commonly used, observed, and
practiced in the Common Worship, is not true Prayer, but a bare formality, and
not only so, but also contradictory, and so is not performed with a right
understanding; and it is as manifest that all other ways of praying, which are
conceived and performed in the wisdom of the flesh, is not true Prayer, neither
does God regard it more than the other, because it is performed in the same
nature, and differs in nothing but in the manner; and however they may differ
in the practice, yet they meet in the ground, and are offered up in the unclean
part, and so are not performed with an understanding, as Prayer in the Spirit
of God is.

Now the Spirit of Life, which is manifest from God in every man's conscience,
does so enlighten him, as to make him sensible that he is a sinner, and in
himself is miserable, and eternally liable to the Wrath of God, without the
Lord appear for him, and work his deliverance; and as man takes heed to that
Spirit which does so enlighten him, and makes manifest his condition to him,
then the Spirit begins to quicken and stir up something in him that desires
after God, and breathes after God, and the sighs and groans begin to arise in a
true sense of misery, and the breathings go forth in the earnest of the Spirit
unto God, and the cry arises for help and deliverance; and though that which is
quickened by the Spirit, to breath in the Spirit, be but as a babe in youngness,
and that it does not know what to pray for as it ought, but stands sighing, and
groaning, and mourning, in the sense of burdens, weights and loads that lie
upon it, yet the Spirit in that state helps its infirmities, and makes
request for it according to the will of God, for the Spirit knows what the
Babe wants, and with what it is burdened, and so makes intercession unto God
for it; and in the Spirit the Babe has access to God; and though it be but
young, yet it cries Abba, Father, and so it breathes in the Spirit, and cries
in the Spirit, and prays to the Father in the Spirit: and the sighs and groans
do rise from a true sense of its own weakness, and the want of Gods Mercies;
for it understands in the Spirit what it wants, and is sensible what burdens
lie upon it, and in the Spirit it draws nigh to God, and submits its self to
the Throne of his Grace, and there finds Grace to help it in its need, for the
Spirit brings relief from the bosom of the Father, and supplies the Babe in
all its wants, and every breathing is ministered unto by the Spirit; and here
the Babe prays aright, and asks according to the will of God, and he hears
its complainings, and in his compassion he answers its petitions, and so it
comes to receive from his own hand, and he gives unto it daily bread, and
nourishes it with his own virtue, after which it breaths, and stands by it to
help it in the hour of temptation, and so the Babe begotten by the Spirit,
prays in the Spirit, and receive; from the Spirit, and is strengthened with
the virtue of the Spirit; and this is true Prayer, though never a word be
spoken through utterance: for the Babe breathes in the Spirit and cries in the
Spirit, and prays in the Spirit; and as it so breathes, and cries and prays
in secret; even so the Father which sees in secret, does reward it openly, and
by his Power removes the burdens from it, and with his own Hand lifts up its
head, and in his own time he delivers it out of all troubles; and from its
quickening and first breathing it goes on from strength to strength, and from
virtue to virtue, even as by the Spirit of the Lord; and having received
strength in the Spirit, then by the Spirit it has utterance given, and can
utter words by the help of the Spirit, and so prays in the Spirit, and prays
with an understanding; and that which it expresses in words by the help of the
Spirit, and by the strength of the Spirit, that is a comfort to every Babe that
is breathing in the same Spirit; and so the Babes begotten by the Spirit, pray
in the unity of the Spirit, and their Prayers return into their bosom, and are
answered with a seal of the same Spirit; for they ask in the Name of Christ,
and in his Name they receive their satisfaction; and so here is a time of
sighing, and groaning, and mourning, and complaining; and a time of breathing,
and crying, and praying; and a time of receiving and rejoicing, wherein the
Babes of Life do come to inherit that which they have breathed after, and so
come to the living praises unto God, who has answered their Prayers in the
riches of his Grace and Mercy.

So all must come to the Spirit of God, by the Spirit to be ordered, and cease
from their own words and from their own time, and learn to be silent until the
Spirit give them utterance; for the Lord is weary of all Formality and
Hypocrisy, and he has no pleasure in any such performances; for his
Controversy is against the Son of Perdition, but he will exalt the Son of his
Love; and blessed are they that are born of his Life, for whatsoever they ask
in his Name, their Petitions are answered, and their Requests granted, and the
Prayers of such are only accepted, and not the prayers of those that think to
be heard for their much babbling, who have many words, but not in the Life.

W. S.


