Some ACCOUNT of the Great Sea Fight, Wherein Their MAJESTY'S NAVY-ROYAL, In
Conjunction with the Dutch Squadron, ENGAGED THE French Fleet Off of CAPE
BARFLEVR, On the Nineteenth of May, 1692.

AND Put them to Flight, Burning and Sinking many of their Ships, so that the
Sea appeared full of Wrecks of Ships for Two Leagues together.

WITH AN Account of the Sinking the French Admiral, and his two Seconds:
Running many of their Ships a-ground, which are destroyed by our Fleet.

AND Some other Particulars relating to this glorious Success and Victory over
the Common Enemy.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back. 1692.

Some ACCOUNT of the Great Sea Fight, Wherein Their MAJESTY'S NAVY-ROYAL, In
Conjunction with the Dutch Squadron, Engaged the French Fleet, etc.
THE French thinking to do great Matters at Sea this Summer, got their Fleet
out somewhat sooner than than they were wont, appearing more numerous and
daring than they did the last Summer; so that on the 9th. of May, their whole
Fleet, consisting of about 100 Sail, was, about Noon, seen off of Dartmouth, at
a great Distance, viz. three Leagues from the Start, and continued turning to
the Eastward, the Wind at East and by North; and the next Day, they were again
seen from the same Place, when, by their sailing, they seemed as if they
intended to stand to their own Coast: And our Fleet being now well manned, and
in a very good Readiness, on the 14th. of May, in the Afternoon, Admiral Russel
weighed Anchor out of Rye Bay, and about eleven the next Morning joined Sir
Ralph Delaval, and Rear-Admiral Carter at St. Helens, and soon after diverse
Dutch Men of War came to join him, so that the whole Fleet consisted of about
Ninety Sail of Ships for the Line of Battle, the Officers and Seamen being very
hearty and full of Courage, and every thing gave a happy Presage of the
Glorious Success that soon after ensued, as appears by the Loyal Address,
humbly presented to Her Majesty by the Chief Commanders of her Fleet; which for
the Satisfaction of the Reader, it may not be amiss to Incert, as an
Introduction to so glorious an Enterprise, viz.

The Queen being informed of a scandalous and malicious Report that was spread
abroad, as if some of the Officers of their Majesty's Fleet were disaffected,
or not hearty in their Service, and that her Majesty had thereupon ordered the
Discharge of many of them from their Employments; Her Majesty was pleased to
command the Earl of Nottingham to write to Admiral Russel, and let him know,
that her Her Majesty was satisfied that this Report was raised by the Enemies
of the Government, and that she reposed so entire a Confidence in their
Fidelity, that she had resolved not to displace any one of them; which being by
the Admiral communicated to them, they made and sent up the following Address.

WE Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects and Servants, Flag-Officers
and Captains in Your Majesty's Fleet; out of the deep and grateful Sense we
have of Your Majesty's good and just Opinion of our Loyalty and Fidelity
Imparted to us by the Right Honorable Admiral Russel, in a Letter to him from
my Lord Nottingham, do, in the behalf of our selves, and all other Officers and
Seamen, presume to address our selves to your Majesty at this Juncture, to
undeceive the World in those false and malicious Reports that have been lately
spread in prejudice of Your Majesty's Service, by People of an unreasonable
Disaffection to Your Majesty's Government, and an obstinate Aversion to the
Quiet and Good of our Country, that there are some amongst us that are not
truly zealous for, and entirely devoted to your Majesty's Service; we do
therefore most humbly beg Your Majesty's Leave to add to our repeated Oaths,
this Assurance of our Fidelity, that we with all imaginable Alacrity and
Resolution, venture our Lives in the Defense of Your Majesty's undoubted
Rights, and the Liberty and Religion of our Country, against all Foreign and
Popish Invaders whatsoever; and that God Almighty may preserve Your Majesty's
most sacred Person, direct your Councils, and prosper Your Arms by Sea and Land
against Your Majesty's Enemies, Let all the People say Amen, with Your
Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

Dated on Board the Britannia, at St. Helens. May, 15. 1691.

This was signed by Sir John Ashby, Admiral of the Blew, Sir Ralph Delaval,
Vice Admiral of the Red, Mr. Rook, Vice Admiral of the Blew, Sir Clously
Shouel, Rear Admiral of the Red, Mr. Carter, Rear Admiral of the Blew; upon
receiving which, her Majesty was pleased to say, That she had always this
Opinion of the Commanders, but was glad this was come to satisfy others.

The English and Dutch Fleets having now taken the Seas, on the 18th. of May,
the Admirals Scouts, whilst he bore South West and by South, seven Leagues from
Cape Barfleur, made the Signal for seeing the Enemy, the Wind Westwardly: The
French bore down upon our Fleet, and about eleven engaged it, but at some
distance; we continued fighting till half an hour past five in the Evening, at
which time, the Enemy towed away with all their Boats, and we after them. It
was calm all day, about six there was a fresh Engagement to the Westward of the
Admiral, supposed to be the Blew, and it continued calm all Night, but the
Particulars at present, are only, that the French were beaten, and the Admiral
was steering away for Conquet Road, having a fresh Gale Easterly (but very
foggy) that being the place he supposed they designed for; and that if it
pleased God to send Fair Weather, he doubted not but to destroy the whole
French Fleet. In the Night, three or four Ships were seen to blow up, but not
known what they were.

As to some other Particulars, it appears by another Advice, That about the
gray or opening of the Morning, our Fleet made the French Fleet in a Line of
Battle, about two Leagues to the Windward; and they then having the
Weather-gage, bore down very boldly and closely upon our Fleet; at Eleven the
Engagement began, and continued very hot and furious till almost four in the
Afternoon, at what time the French Fleet bore away. The Wind at West by South,
and West South West, veering about to North by East, and North North East, Sir
Clously Shouel, and Sir John Ashby, having the Weathergage, fell bravely on,
maintaining the Engagement till almost ten at Night; the French all that while
bearing away, and the English pursuing them, some Ships were seen in the
Nighttime in flames, about nine of the Clock; but not knowing what they were,
nor likewise the damage sustained on either side, when this Advice came away.

But since this, the Mary Galley came from Admiral Russel, to Spithead; who
left him at Eight in the morning, about fifteen Leagues South and by West from
the Isle of Wight, declaring he saw both the French Admirals Seconds sunk, and
many Ships on fire, and that for the space of two Leagues together the Sea was
full of Wrecks of Ships, but knew not of the loss of any of their Majesty's
Ships or Commanders; and that when this Galley came away, the French were
running, and the English in pursuit of them; and about Ten of the Clock he
heard them Engaged again, and the Guns firing till One, at what time the Wind
sprung up at South and by West.

Upon this News, and ever to be wished for Success, as well by Land as Sea, of
which Heaven has given us already so great an Earnest of future Improvement
against the Common Enemy, not only the Joy of all good Subjects abounded, but
the Bells, in all places where it came, were rung out; the Tower-Guns, and
those in other places, were discharged, and the Streets, at Night, filled with
Bonfires and Illuminations, to the great contentment and rejoicing of the
Nation.

Since the former Advices, a Letter came from Portsmouth, bearing date the
21st. of May, giving an Account that Their Majesty's Ship the Montague, Captain
Foulk Commander, came in thither from the Fleet, his Ship being disabled in the
Fight, he leaving the Fleet the day before, about Nine of the Clock in the
morning, pursuing the Enemy; and says, that Mr. Carter, Reer-Admiral of the
Blue, was killed in the Action. And the same Letter further relates, That
Captain Killingsworth, Commander of the Fox Fire-ship, had made his way to
Portsmouth in his Boat; and gave an Account, That he had burnt his Fireship on
board the French Reer-Admiral, but was put off with a great deal of difficulty;
and that he saw a French Man-of-War, of about Seventy Guns, blow up, and
another Three-deck'd Ship on fire.

On the Twenty first, about Nine of the Clock in the morning, our Fleet set
sail again; as likewise did the French: Admiral Russel took his course toward
Barfleur, having got sight of diverse Ships under the shore: Admiral Allemond,
of the Dutch, and the Admiral of the Blue, sailed to the Westward. The first of
these endeavored to get up with sixteen of the Enemies Ships which he
discovered, supposing them to be coming from France to join the French Fleet.
Sir John Ashby pursued the rest of the French Fleet, who in much Confusion
labored to get into the Rafe of Ornay. Admiral Allemond lost sight of the
aforementioned sixteen Ships in the night, they having, as he supposed, got in
among the Rocks; and because he found it not safe nor convenient to follow them
there, he sailed Eastward again, to rejoyn Admiral Russel.

On the Twenty second, in the Morning, Vice Admiral Delaval burnt, near to the
shore, under Cape de Wike, a great Ship, called the Royal Sun, of France, being
the Ship of Count de Tourville, the French Admiral, carrying a Hundred and Four
Guns; as likewise the Admiral commanded by his Second, Monsieur Beaujeu, a Ship
carrying a Hundred and two Guns; and the Fort of Eighty Guns; with two Frigates,
and Three of lesser rank: And Admiral Russel was in close pursuit of Nine more.
The Prisoners who were taken from the burnt Ships, declared, That during the
time of the Battle, 4 or 5 of their biggest Ships were destroyed. Reer-Admiral
Carter, and Colonel Hastings, after much Bravery and Resolution, were both
killed in the Fight: And at this time an Account came from Portsmouth, that
four French Ships, of three Decks, lay on the back of the Isle of Wight,
extremely disabled; and that two English Men of War, who were refitted, with
two Dutch Frigates, and a Fire-ship, were going against them, to take or
destroy them.

FINIS.

