THE BEHAVIOR OF John Hutchins, IN NEWGATE, Together with his Dying Words As
he was going to be EXECVTED in FLEET STREET, On Wednesday the 17th. of
December, 1684. FOR Murdering of John Sparks a Waterman, near Serjeants-Inn
London, on Wednesday the 3d, of December,
AT the late Sessions of Jail-deliver, Held in the Old-Bayly, the 10th 11th
12th and 13th. Days of December. Amongst 18 others that recieved sentence of
Death: One of the Persons of whom we now give a more particular Account is John
Hutchins, who was Indicted for the Murder of John Sparks, a Waterman in
Fleet Street, on the 3d. of December. It appeared on his Trial that Sparks with
two of his Companions coming from a place where they had been about Business,
met with the said Hutchins, who was in Company with two Women, one of whom
Sparks in way of jest stroaked on the Belly, at which Hutchins was so far
Enraged, that he run the Deceased party through the Thigh, of which Wound he
instantly Died: Upon which the same being proved against him, he was found
Guilty.

After his Condemnation the said John Hutchins, On Monday the 15th. of this
Instant December, 1684. Confessed freely of himself, he had been a great Sinner
in many Respects, But that he was not Guilty of the Murder for which he stands
Condemned. The Ordinary replied, that he did not believe his Denial of the
Crime to be True, because it was proved upon him by several Witnesses, who
being upon their Oath, Credit is to be given to them; in as much as Perjury is
so Heinous and Soul hardening a Sin, that Repentance for it is very Difficult,
and therefore it Hazards the Eternal Happiness of the Soul. Hutchins replied,
that tho he could not be Credited in his purging of himself as to the Murder,
yet he had many ways greatly provoked Gods Anger against him. Upon this free
inclination to a Confession in the General, the Ordinary assured him that he
added a deeper Malignity to all his other Sins, if he stood out in the denial
of the Murder, and yet was conscious in the least of it. Yet he still denied
it, tho he was urged to deal Ingenuously and sincerely, as a Dying Man, whose
Repentance would be much hindered and questioned as to the Truth of it, if he
proceeded to Extenuate, much more to deny the Fact. So when the Ordinary for
that present could not prevail to bring him to an Acknowledgement in that
Respect, he proceeded to enquire into his Education, Trade, and manner of his
former Conversation. He said that he was Born in a place called Abbot-Sally,
six Miles from Taunton in Sommerset-shire, Descended of Parents who lived in
Reputation, and of a plentiful Estate; that he was the Eldest Son, but being
Extravagant in his Conversation, he much Diminished that Estate which was left
him; that he was so Profuse, that having wasted most or all of it, he was
forced to betake himself to the condition of a Soldier; That he Listed himself
under Sir George Booth, when he appeared in Public Service, for the Asserting
of his Loyalty to the King; That afterward he betook himself to some other
Employment, but soon quitted it; And then falling into bad Acquaintance, he
grew negligent of his Duty to God, and by degrees very Intemperate: That he
also was addicted to Lying and Swearing; that he seldom Prayed to be kept free
from the Temptations of Satan, and the Lusts of his own Heart; that he had
often Profaned the Sabbath Day, and by his Excess had deeply run himself into
Debt, upon this he was cast a Prisoner into the Marshalsea, where he continued
for a long time, and was relieved by the Charity of several Worthy Persons, yet
misspent that which was given to him; that he had a great fit of Sickness, out
of which if he Recovered, he Vowed to God that he would Reform his Loose
Conversation: Yet contrary to his Resolution, he continued very Vain and
Regardless of answering the Goodness of God, in restoring him to his Health.
This he said lay as an heavy Burden on his Conscience, by calling to mind that
Counsel and Charge of our Blessed Savior to the impotent Man, who had lain at
the Pool of Bethesda 38 Years Jo. 5.14. Behold thou art made Whole, Sin no
more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

He also said, that he Believed that for sinning against the clear and strong
Convictions of his Conscience, God left him to run into further Wickedness; and
that the Sentence of Death justly overtook him, because within a few Days
before he was Apprehended for the Murder, he lay under this horrid Imprecation
on himself, that the Vengeance of God might light upon him, if he did not
forbear to go into the Company of a Person with whom he was at Variance. Yet he
did Associate after with that very Person

On Tuesday, the 16th of this Instant Mr. Ordinary, took the said Hutchins
apart from the rest of the Condemned Prisoners and after Counsel and Prayer
almost Two hours with him; He then Inquired into the frame of Hutchins's Heart,
how he stood prepared for his Execution on the morrow, being Wednesday and what
hope he had of a future Happy State. He answered only in Generalities and loose
uncertain hopes. The Ordinary told him, that It was no wonder he was doubtful
of his Salvation, whereas he did not perform the conditional requisite
preparations for it: For God in sacred Scripture affirms, that he who
endeavors to hide extenuate or deny any Sin shall not prosper, but rather draw
the severity of Divine Justice on himself. The Ordinary entreated him to be
open and free in the confession of all his Sins, but especially of the Murder
he is Condemned for; he still after many urgent arguments, to move him to do it
stood out in the denial of it; the Ordinary laid before him the clear Evidence
of his Guiltyness as it was Traversed at his public Trial yet he denied the
Crime. The Ordinary Prayed for him in Particular that the Lord the Omniscient
Searcher of every Heart would Incline him, no longer to Dally with God, nor to
presume to deceive such, who deal with him about his Eternal State. After time
spent with him to no purpose, as to Confessing his Crime, and yet desiring
credit to be given to his denial of it, the Ordinary acquainted of him two very
sad and dangerous Instances, in one Gowre and one Kirk who several times with
an Horrid Imprecation, denied the Murder of their Wives. Nay Gowre after an
hour and an half absolutely denied the Murder of his Wife tho much persuasion
and Prayers were used to move him to an Ingenuous Confession, yet still he
denied it, till the Ordinary went out of the Cart and then being on the brink
of Eternity, he durst not venture into the other World with a flat Falsity in
his mouth. So, calling for the Ordinary back again, Gower at last Confessed
that he Killed his Wife with his own hand. This Horrid Instance of a
dissembling and hardened Heart at the very approach of death, the Ordinary
spread before Hutchins, to Convince him of the Diabolical artifices of Sinners
to palliate the Crimes with a Soul ruinating denial of them. yet Hutchins
persisted as before in denying, that he was Guilty of the Murder of the
Waterman.

Upon this, God by a very sensonable providence moved the Heart of the Reverend
D. Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's, to take very great pains in persuading
Hutchins to Confess the whole truth Concerning his Crime. The Ordinary is
obliged to the Dean for his great pathetical Assistance, yet could he not
prevail with Hutchins to Confess the Crime. So he left him, and in a pious
Compassion of his Stubbornness, desired the Ordinary, to put it home to him at
the public Execution, Which; was this present Wendesday the 17th of December,
upon a Gibbet set up on purpose for him at the end of Ram Allley just against
the Sign of the Three Kings in Fleetstreet: Whether, about the Hour of 10 in
the Morning he was brought in a Cart from Newgate.

Upon sight of the place of Execution; the Criminal continued his obstinate
denial of the Fact, nor was he observed to change Countenance. The Ordinary
Prayed with him twice, and he likewise very Affectionately for himself. In the
first of Mr. Ordinarys Prayers, he humbly entreated the Almighty, that he would
so incline the Heart of the poor Condemned Prisoner, that before he went out of
the World he might confess and own his Crime: Notwithstanding which, he still
denied the same, laying his Salvation upon it that he was not Guilty, and
begged of the Ordinary that he would Publish the same to the whole World: Tho
he confessed he had often provoked God, and that he justly deserved this severe
Judgment,. No more could be got out of him, but an obstinate denial of the
Fact, which he stood in till he was turned off the Ladder, about the hour of
Eleven, and hung till it was full Twelve.

Dated the 17 th. day of December, 1684. Samuel Smith, Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by G. Croom, over against Baynard's Castle in Thames Street.
1684.


