AN ANSWER To a Late PAMPHLET, Called a Sober Dialogue, Between a Scotch
Presbyterian a London Churchman, and a Real Quaker, scandalously reflecting on
the Church of England, As if her Doctrine and Common Prayer did justify the
Antichristian Doctrine, of the Real Quaker, viz. That the Light Within, whither
in Heathen, or Christian is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else;
wherein the plain Deism and Antichristian Principles of the Real Quaker and
his Party, and the pretended Church man, are plainly detected.

By a Friend to the Author of the Dialogue, called, a Sober Dialogue, between a
Country Friend, a London Friend, and one of G. K.'s Friends.

London, Printed for Sam. Clark in George-yard in Lombard Street. School/9.

A SOBER DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Country Friend, a London Friend, and one of G. K's.
Friends, Concerning The great Difference of Faith and Doctrine betwixt many of
the Quakers, especially their Principal Teachers and him.
Land. Friend HOW do thee do my Friend? How do Friends in your Parts? Are
you still quiet among your selves, and all of one mind?


Country Friend, No, we are far from being quiet among our selves.


Land. Fr. What is the matter with you?


Co. Fr. The matter, why the very Foundation of Truth is struck at by G. K. his
Books fill us with strange apprehensions; he tells us, and that from plain
Scripture, that the Light within will not save us without something else.


Land. Fr. Well, and what say Friends to it?


Co. Fr. Say, why, they know not what to say, and most of our sober and
thinking Friends are at a stand, doubting they have been mislead; some
diligently searching the Scriptures find that we are mistaken, for that in Men
that reproves for Sin, is only the Law written in the Heart, there accusing or
excusing; and withal we find that Christ Jesus says, that he came not to
condemn the World but to save it; saying, that it was Moses or the Law that did
condemn.


Land. Fr. What, are all our Ministers so Blind as not to know the Doctrine of
the Law from Christ's Doctrine? why, the Law can make nothing perfect as
pertaining to the Conscience, but the bringing in of a better hope; sure this
hope must be in Christ Jesus, and not in that which condemns for Sin; for my
Friend, what simply condemns us does not forgive us, but as G. K. says, there
must be one to forgive our Trespasses, as well as a Judge to Condemn us; so
that it is plain that the Light Within cannot save without something else.


Co. Fr. Blind, I fear they are blind indeed, and have led too many of us into
the Ditch. On my word, it is a horrible mistake to say, that what does Reprove
can Save us; they may as well say, that John the Baptist was Christ. -- But
prithee what says W. P. to this?


Lon. Fr. Why, he says Truth is the same as ever it was; and says, Friends keep
to your Ancient Testimonies, and Truth will be over the heads of all its
Opposers.


Co. Fr. And what says G. W.?


Lon. Fr. Why G. W. is pevish, and does nothing as I hear but revile G. K. and
has sent him his Curse.


Co. Fr. His Curse man! and what will that do?


Lon. Fr. Do, why it only sets us further adrift from the Doctrine of Christ,
which says, Bless and Curse nor.


Co. Fr. Has G. K. ever Cursed any of them?


Lon. Fr. No, not that ever I heard.


Co. Fr. Prithee what do thou think of these things?


Lon. Fr. I think they do not rightly understand what Truth is; Truth (as W. P.
says) never changes, but we are always changing; for how unlike are we to what
we were when first a People? I wonder W. P. should say mind your Ancient
Testimonies, when he well knows that the Ancienter the Testimonies, the greater
were the Imaginations and Errors, witness his Sandy Foundation Shaken: I fear
our Friends are too like the blind Pharisees, which preferred their Lamp-light
before the Light of the Sun; I confess the Light of the Sun is a true
unchangeable Light, but all Lights must give way when he appears.


In the midst of this Discourse steps in one of G. K.'s Friends, and begins
thus. FRIENDS, Light Within being sufficient to Save without any thing else:
Pray let us not borrow other Peoples Eyes and Legs, but see and walk our
selves; let us go to the very first of the Creation of God, which answers so
exactly to the Second, that it may be called the Looking-glass of the Second
Creation, or New Creation. Pray was not the universal Light the First days Work
in the Old Creation? So in the New, Was not the Sun, Moon and Stars the Fourth
days Work? by which all things revived to such a proportion of Life as to
produce Seed in themselves; which could never have been brought to perf^ction
by the First Light, without the Light of the Sun. So, as to the New Creation,
There is no Perfection under the Law, until Christ came who was to be Revealed
the Fourth day, i. e. the Fourth Thousand Year of the World; and is that true
Son of God by whom we must bring forth Fruit, whose Seed is in it self as it
holds in the Natural, the Nature of him abiding in us; for without him we can
do nothing.


Lon. Fr. Prithee Friend what is the benefit then of the Light in every Man, or
the First days Work, as thou call'st it?


G. K.'s Fr. You may as well ask me what benefit it is for the Master Builder
to lay the Foundation first of his Building before he finisheth it; or if he
should go on no further, whether Men would not say this Man has laid a good
Foundation, [the Law or Light in every Man being a good Foundation of
Morality,] but why goes he not on to finish it? Either he understands not, or
is not able, this is what Men usually say.

But my Friends, The great Builder and Creator did finish the first Work as a
Draught of the Second; and be you assured that the New Testament Creation as
far exceeds that Old, as the Fourth days Work did exceed the First.


Lon. Fr. What, then I perceive thou think that Friends Dispensation is only
the First days Work.


G. K.'s Fr. Why, verily, as to Friends I cannot give a satisfactory judgment
concerning them, for I find no where in all the holy Scripture such a People
set down there for the People of God, but several hints to the contrary. I must
needs say they have ill marks, but I hope it may be attributed to the Ignorance
of most of them. We know that in the last times some will have strange
Pretensions and Heresies; even denying the Lord that bought them with his most
precious Blood; and denying the Resurrection of that holy Body, with its
Ascension into Heaven, and that that very Body is now in Heaven, as a Wall of
Salvation between us and the Justice of Almighty God, which otherwise would
take Vengeance on our daily and hourly offenses: For my part, I do admire that
any People professing Godliness can pretend to be in the Faith, and not
faithfully believe such things.


Lon. Fr. Do thou believe that Flesh and Blood can inherit the Kingdom of God?


G. K.'s Fr. Yea, The Flesh and Blood of our Lord and Savior, which was never
born to see Corruption, neither was of any corruptible Seed.


Co. Fr. Why did Christ say to the Jews, John 6.63. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing.


G. K.'s Fr. Why Friend do thou think that Christ spoke to the Jews of his
own Flesh and Blood, which he said he would give for the life of the World; and
if that Flesh and Blood did not profit us, what did that gift avail us?

When Christ said to Nicodemus unless a Man be born again, etc. Nicodemus
understood that he must be born again of his natural Father and Mother as new
Flesh; but Christ plainly told him that that which was born of the Flesh was
Flesh, and that that was born of the Spirit was Spirit; and farther said, that
the Wind blows where it lists, and that he only heard the sound thereof,
but knew not whence it came or whether it went, and so said our Lord is every
one that is born of the Spirit: I hope you confess that such a spiritual Birth
far exceeds that Flesh and Blood which we take from our Parents, and is
polluted with Original Sin: Our Lord might well say that such Flesh and Blood
profited nothing, although we make so much ado about it, unless the Spirit blow
upon it, and change it from Corruption to Incorruption.


Lon. Fr. But what did Christ mean by saying, Nicodemus understood not when he
spoke of natural things?


G. K.'s Fr. Why, is not the blowing of the Wind natural? and yet who can tell
from whence it comes, or whether it goes? How should then natural Men judge of
the coming and going of the Spirit? They can possibly tell when it is present
and when it is absent; but from whence it comes or whether it goes they know
not.


Co. Fr. Prithee tell me, What do thou think of the Light in every Man's
Conscience?


G. K.'s Fr. The Light in every Man is, that Blessing which doubtless was given
to Japhets Offspring, the Islands of the Gentiles, they not having the benefit
of the written Law, leaving the Country where Shem's Stock was, which had the
Law in a far more glorious manner than the Gentiles had, as being the Elder Son
of Noah, had the first great Blessing of the knowledge of the Law; but the
Mercies of God was such, that he left himself not without a Witness in the
Gentiles that did accuse or excuse them; which showed the Law written in the
Heart, and that they did by Nature the things contained in the Law. So that you
may see that the Law Outward, and the Law Inward are the same thing as to just
and equal doing; as for Instance, that passage of Cornelius; who was said to be
a just Man, and one that feared and worshipped God, and in good Works did exceed
many that were called Christians; however, all this Man's Righteousness could
not save him. But at such a time when greater Light was revealed, an Angel must
be sent to him to tell him that he must send for one Simon Peter, which was to
tell him words by which he might be Saved. So here you see plainly that this
Man was not to be Saved by the Light Within, without something else, that is,
Christ without, and the Faith in Christ, which comes (ordinarily) by outward
Preaching; and the Aposte says, that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God Preached. Pray what did Peter Preach to Cornelius? Was it not
mostly of Christ's Miracles, of his Death and Resurrection, to which all the
Prophets did witness, that through his Name was remission of Sin only to be had?
And at the very Instant, while the words were speaking did not the Holy Ghost
fall on them which heard the Word, to the Astonishm^nt of the Jews that came
with Peter? Now, I hope, you see what must be added to that Light before true
Salvation can be known or enjoyed.


Lon. Fr. Since we have gone thus far, what think thou of Water Baptism and
the Supper?


G. K.'s Fr. If you please you may see what Peter says to those very Persons
that had just received the Holy Ghost; Can any man forbid water, that those
should not be baptized: and he commanded them to be Baptized in the Name of the
Lord, that was, in the Name of Jesus. Now, how your Friends can hide themselves
here I know not: Blessed be God for the New Testament, and for the Sound
Doctrine contained there; and our Lord said, that those that heard those
Sayings of his, and did them, were wise indeed, and built on that Rock which
the Gates of Hell should not prevail against: The Lord help us to flee from
vain imaginations, which indeed is a sandy and shaken Foundation.


Co. Fr. Well now, if thee pleases, concerning the Supper, what have thou to
say for that?


G. K.'s Fr. I have this to say for the Lord's Supper: We own that it is said,
that he that does Believe and is Baptized shall be Saved, his Sins being
forgiven and remitted. Pray, is not the Forgiver of our Sins worth our
remembrance; since Christ has paid so great a Debt for us as his own Blood: Was
such Ingratitude ever heard of since the World began, that a People should
forget so great and so good a Lord, as not to remember him in his own
Ordination, however simple it may appear, it is precious to the little ones of
the Kingdom.


Co. Fr. Why do thou think we do not remember the Lord Jesus, because we do
not receive the Bread and the Wine?


G. K.'s Fr. I do think that those that break one of the least of Christ's
Commandments, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Pray, if to
break one of the least will be such a lessening of our Happiness, what must the
breaking of the greatest be, is it seemly for Children to be wiser in their own
Eye, than their Fathers, or Subjects, than their King, or Malefactors than
their Judges? yet so it has been sometimes, but for a People to be wiser than
their God is monstrous; had the Lord commanded some great thing, as the Heathen
Gods did, that we should Sacrifice our Children to him, than we might have
shrunk from it; but such things are far from him, only having commanded us to
remember him, in that which is easily had, and that which is our common Food
too, in the eating of that Bread to remember the Lord, how his Body was broken
for us, and in drinking of that Cup to remember us, how he shed his precious
Blood for us; and likewise to know that he is that living and spiritual Bread,
which if a Man feeds on, he shall have everlasting Life. His Flesh being Meat
indeed, and his Blood Drink indeed.


Co. Fr. Well, but if we receive him in Spirit, will not that do?


G. K. Fr. You cannot receive him, but as he is, both Body and Spirit, that
which God has put together is not to be divided; therefore you must receive
him, either as the Man Christ Jesus, or not at all; that is with a lively Faith
to believe and to remember how that Body Suffered for us on the Cross, and is
now in Heaven, and left us this Commandment, thus, To remember him until he
come in Power and great Glory. Now whether it is better to obey God or Man,
judge ye? Our Lord said, Do this in remembrance of me* Some Men say it is but a
Shadow, and they are come to the Substance: Well, I will ask thee this
Question; art thou in thy mortal Body able to stand before the Son of God,
should he appear to thee, would thou not be Terrified and Astonished, the
best of Men ever were so, and believe, me, that the sight of an Angel would do
it to the best of you, who is much less in Glory then the Christ of God; and
since we are such weak Creatures that we cannot be hold his Glory as he is in
that glorified Body, then ought we not to be mighty thankful that he is pleased
to condescend thus far to our Weakness, that since we cannot behold him as he
is, that he has been pleased to leave us such a Looking-glass wherein we may
discern the Lord's Crucified Body, and in that to remember what he has done for
us, enough surely to engage us to remember him according to his own
Prescription.

I am persuaded had G. F. given any Commandments they had been obeyed: As for
Instance; how has he set up many Orders, which he never had from the Holy
Scriptures; and do not some Men make the Commandments of our Lord and Savior
of none effect, through their own Traditions, Teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men.

Our Lord says, Judge not, least thou be judged, but your Friends say, they
have Power to Pronounce Plagues and Judgments on others, and that when they are
dead too, if they pleased not them, say they are gone to the Pit.

Our Lord said, Bless and Curse not, but your Friends do send their Curses, as
G. W. does his to G. K.

Christ bid his Disciples not to Judge those that cast out Devils in his Name,
although they followed not them, but said, they that were not against them,
were for them.

But your Friends say, all that follow not them are out of the Truth.

Christ says, When you have done all, or the utmost you ought to do, say, that
you are but unprofitable Servants; but some of your Friends say plainly they
will not say so, for they are profitable Servants.

Christ says, Look unto me all the ends of the Earth and be you saved.

But your Friends say, look to the Light within only, and be you saved, and
where in all the Writings do they direct People to the Lord Jesus without them,
as the Object of their Faith for Justification and Redemption? Do they not
always say, Friends mind that of God in your own Hearts, not saying one word of
the necessity of Faith in the Crucified Jesus, or of his Resurrection or
Ascension into Heaven: I have often heard them say, that Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, making no difference between the Flesh of Christ,
which was not born of corruptible Seed, and their own corruptible Flesh, which
must see Corruption. Christ said in his last Prayer, Father I will that they
that thou have given me may be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory: And if the Glory of Christ be no where to be seen but in every Man; Pray
what Glory is seen there of Christ? may they not all say, Lord have mercy upon
us miserable Sinners, that rather darkens his Glory than exalts it.


G. K.'s Fr. Pray what makes some of your Friends, when they hear of Christ's
being at the right Hand of God in Heaven, to say, what would you have us
believe in two Christ's? We own to other Christ than what is within us, or any
other Heaven than what is within us, or any other Resurrection but what is
within us. Is not all this very fine Doctrine? Pray then if this be true,
whether must all our Spirits go when we dye? What, must all go into the Quakers
for Rest and Peace? For if they will own neither God or Christ, or Heaven or
Hell, but what is in them, what shall I say? This is like the rest of their
Contradictions, both against Scripture and right Reason.

Pray where had your Women their Commision, for their assuming Church
Government, other then from G. F. The Apostle forbids it in several places, but
some of them to my knowledge have said, that they are farther Englightened than
they were in the Apostles Days; if they could make that out, it were something
for them, but I say as the Apostle Paul said, that if he or an Angel from
Heaven did Preach any other Gospel than what was Preached by Christ and his
Apostles, let him be accursed. My Friends, it is a dangerous thing to bring in
new Doctrine, I do believe the Scripture was given for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, that the Man of God may be made perfect, and all they that Preach
according to that Rule; Peace on them, and all the Israel of God, and all they
that Preach not according to that Rule, it is because their is no Light in them.


London, Printed for the Author, And are to be Sold by B. Aylmer at the three
Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhil, 1699.


