A GAGG for the QUAKERS, WITH AN ANSWER TO Mr. DENN'S Quaker no Papist.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. and are sold near the North-Door of S. Paul's Church.
MDCLIX.

TO THE. READER.
Reader,
LIttle did any man think when the dispute between the Quakers and Mr. S. began
at Cambridge, that it would suddenly come to this question (between Papists and
Protestants) Whether there be any such thing in the world as a Protestant
Clergy, and consequently whether any true Church, or faith, or sacraments be to
be had out of the Church of Rome.

I dare say that those who heard the public dispute at Cambridge, did as
little foresee this, as the Reverend author of Schism dispatched did think that
the controversy between him and S. VV. (with those other Romanists who have
writ against him, about infallibility and schism) would end in this debate,
Whether we may give as much credit in matter of fact to 24 of the ancient
Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church, as to 12 country Yeomen on a Jury. The
Protestant affirming this, the Papist denying it. But so it is; and so it
appears by these two following discourses. Which if you have patience to read,
you will find that Mr. Den. (pretending to defend the Quaker) says not one
word in defense of any Sect, but only the downright open Papist; and that he
uses the very same arguments, and the same words against Protestants in
general; as the Papists do in their daily-printed books.

But if your leisure will not permit you to read the whole be pleased (for a
taste) to peruse the 58. 59. and 60th. of the letter to Mr Den. and the 14th.
and 16th. pages of the Queries.

Farewell and beware of wolves in sheeps-clothing.
A Memorable Advertisement from Dorsetshire.
IN September last 1659 there was a strange discovery made of diverse Witches in
and near the Town of Sherburne in Dorsetshire, there being near 200. of them at
one meeting, most of them Quakers and Anabaptists. Three Men and two Women
formerly Quakers, committed to Dorchester Goal where they now are prisoners,
have confessed upon their examination and since their commitment to sundry
persons of quality who have visited them,

1. That when the Devil first appeared to, and tempted them to become Witches;
He first of all persuaded them; to renounce their Baptism and no wonder,
because in it they renounced the Devil and all his works, with all the sinful
lusts of the flesh: which they did Actually renounce before they made a
contract with him.

2. That the Devil did often visibly appear to them in sundry forms (and
persuaded them as he Matthew. 4. 8, 9, 10. Luc. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. tempted our
Savior) to fall down and worship him, which they did.

3. That he instigated them to torment, bewitch and destroy as his and their
greatest enemy Mr. Lyford late Minister of Sherburne, a learned, pio us
Orthodox, painful Divine, being tormented with a painful and sharp disease
of which he dyed; and Mr. Bamfield his successor a very godly laborious
Minister, whom they have forced by their Witchcrafts to desert the Town.

4. The two Women confess to all, that the Devil has often times had Actual
copulation with them in sundry shapes; but most commonly in the shape of Mr.
Lyford and Mr. Bamfield, the Ministers of Sherburne, whom he and they most
hated and endeavored to destroy.

5. The Devil since their imprisonment has frequently appeared to them all,
and actually possessed them, bruising, tearing like the unclean Spirit Mar. 9.
18. to the 28. Luc. 9. 39. 42. etc. tossing them frequently up and down the
prison in a strange manner, tormenting them with strange fits of convulsions,
quakings, shakings in all their joints, and swellings in their whole bodies,
that their skins are ready to break, which makes them cry out and roar with
great horror, as diverse eyewitnesses of quality attest. And if incredulous Mr.
Den, or any other Quakers doubt the truth of it, if they please to visit them
at Dorchester, they will be enforced to confess it, and give glory unto God for
his discovery of the evillness of the way and sect of Quakers.

To Mr. HEN. DEN.
Sir;
. 1. THis day I met with a decree of the Pope, condemning the late Apology for
the Jesuits (which was printed in answer to Montalto's mystery of Jesuitisme)
and threatening all who dare read or keep it; but withal I met with a new
Apology for the same persons with your name prefixed. Wherein wondering to find
several aspersions cast upon sundry of the Jesuits adversaries (among the rest
upon Mr. Tho. Smith) I resolved to spend an hour or two in vindicating them and
the Church of England; which (in favor to the flourishing Romish Mistress and
idolatry) you think fit to call their fading Mistress and idol.

2. And here if I should imitate you, I should superscribe this, To my
frivolous and learned friend, H. D. Mr. of Arts and senior Soph. Captain and
Apothecary, farmer and Minister, the reverend Apologist for the Society of
Jesus. But counting it no virtue to imitate you in this kind, I shall only take
notice of such passages as may appear to some weak people to be pertinent.

3. In the first page, you tell us that the Tinker mendeth souls; though you
can not but know if you have read over that book which you pretend to answer
(which I much doubt) that this Tinker p. 297. l. 21. of his book entitled Law
and Gospel, advises his convert in these words come to Christ even as filthy
as ever thou can: that is (if I understand English)when you have sworn a vain
oath and would go to prayer for pardon of that sin, first stab your Father,
then poison your Mother, lie with your sister: and then go confidently to
Church, but not before. If Mr. D. have read this or those other strange
passages of this T's. sermon mentioned in the Quaker disarmed, or (if he will not
believe that relation) if he will credit his own eyes, and see what the same
Tinker says against Christ's oration ( Mat. 25. 35. 42.) and against the
necessity of good works p. 65. 66. 99. 100. 101. 151. 304. 311. methinks he
should not say this Tinker mends souls; unless he mean that he mendeth them
just as he mends kettles, that is, stopping one hole and making many.

4. In the next place H. D. blames Mr. S. for proving that none may preach
unless they be sent, when (quoth he) the T. is of the same mind. I answer that
the T. did deny it, till Mr. S. had proved it; or at least he bid him prove it.
And Mr. S. wa persuaded (and still is) that Mr. E. to whom that letter was writ
did not believe the necessity of any omission.

5. Whereas you would fain invalidate Mr. Smiths ordination, you may suppose
him ordained by Bp. Hall; and then when you have answered Mason de ministerio
Anglicano, Dr. Fern against Champney, and the vindications of our Reformation
and Orders which are writ by Bp. Bramhall and Dr. Heylin, it is very probable
you shall receive Mr. S. his determination of your questions. Till then he who
thinks you have not vouchsafed to read that small book which you pretend to
answer and profess magisterially to censure, can not believe that you will find
leisure to read his determinations of such questions. And he has not so much
spare time as you, to write and print books only for his own reading.

6. Mean while I must tell you, that one reason why I think you have not read
over the Quaker disarmed, is because you put a case and three queries in your
4th. page, which are answered in the letter to Mr. E. 35. Yet for your more
abundant satisfaction I Will answer them more particularly; by asserting. 1. That
in your case the preaching of those shipwrackt men to pagans is no sin. 2ly.
That in such extraordinary cases it is lawful for such a Congregation to choose
their Teachers. 3ly. That such a Congregation may find fitting men, full of
faith, to preach unto unbelievers; especially if the shipwrackt men have
recourse, as soon as they can, to the Church, to ordein them: as Frumentius and
Aedesius did who are mentioned in the letter to Mr. E. afore-cited.

7. But H. D. must give me leave to tell him, that that man has an ill mind
who being in a ship well orderd, usurpeth the Masters or Pilots place, and
takes to himself what portion of the freight he pleases; merely because a
vessel shipwrackt is sometimes thought a lawful prey by the people on the
shore: And I wonder that these words should come from one that pretends to be a
Minister of the Gospel, unless he would imply that he has an eager mind to
shipwreck an entire vessel under fail.

8. Whereas in your 5th. page you fall foul upon Mr. S. for disputing with
Quakers; you must know, that those your friends did not only challenge him and
all the Clergy in England in print ( G. Fox's mystery in folio p. 19. preface)
but set up their bills of defiance upon the commencement and School doors. Nay
the Majors Wife and diverse other Quakers were importunate with Mr. S. to
dispute (who half an hour before the on set resolved to decline it) and the
Mayor himself told Mr. S. that he was glad he would undertake them, for he had
often said that they were so insolent because no man meddled with them. And the
case standing thus (as Mr. James Alders and many others can witness) I would
gladly see your determination; and what you have to say against S. Paul, who
says it is the duty of a Minister not only to exhort but to confute gainsayers
Tit. 1. 9.

9. For the argument of three he is see p. 2. Mr. S. did not say, that this was
the only way of proof, but that it was one; He did not say, that all three
he is be three persons, but that all he is which be in Heaven are such. You may
see they were then speaking of the three that bear record in Heaven; and I hope
Mr. H. D. will stable none of his troop- horses in Heaven though they come into
Paul's.

10. In your 2d.. you would clear G. W. from being a Papist because you say he
would take no oath Ans. Others think that he will take an oath when it is for
his advantage, as you may see in the queries; and if that be true, (as Mr. S.
has reason to believe it) I know no reason why he should refuse the oath
unless he be a Papist. Nor would Mr. S. I believe have mentioned that oath to
him, if he had not been assured that G. W. and H. D. are both alike bitter
enemies to the old moderate way of trial, appointed by the Church of England;
and if you be so, I am yet to learn what other way, beside this oath, he could
have propounded.

11. To your 3d.. where you ask who can make sense of the story of the twelve
Ambassadors; I answer any man but Mr. D. who is unwilling. To the rest of
this. besides what you have been told before [p. 2. l. 24.] I reply, that
though the Father Son and H. Ghost are one essence, and each of these three is
every where; yet that they may manifest the distinction of persons, one having
condescended to an incarnation whose human nature there appeared, the other two
did at his baptism manifest themselves by sensible symbols. Which three
sensible manifestations Almighty God was pleased then to make unto men's senses
in three distinct places (though each of the three persons be in all places)
that we who are in diverse places might have some apprehension of the distinct
personalities.

12. In your 4th.. you tell Mr. Smith of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius (as the
Romanists are wont.) As if all those who protest against the Church of Rome for
pretending to infallibilty, were thereupon necessarily obliged to place the
same infalibility in every Protestant Doctor. And whereas you ought (if you
would say any thing pertinently) to prove what the Protestants of the Church of
England answered, you tell us what the Papists in other Nations object; whether
truly or not I shall not now stand to examine.

13. But I am glad to meet with a man that has read ALL the books of Papists
in those times, and ALL their Histories. I hope you would not cite them all as
fitted with matter for your purpose, unless you had read them all: I entreat
you to cite not all of them (though the more the merrier) but only one, if you
can, in all your vast historical readings (I say one Protestant of those many
thousands that have defended the Church of England) who has made such an
Enthusiastical answer as that of G. W.

14. In your 5th.. you fondly imagine T. S. stark mute diverse times; As first,
upon your saying that the first Protestant Bishops had no ordination, but what
they mutually gave themselves and one another. Ans. If you mean by mutually (as
common sense requires) that the Ordained did ordain the Ordainer Bishop, I
beseech you to prove it: for it is as false, as it is evidently known that the
four Bishops-Ordeiners were Bishops before the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
reign; of which time only you make this question and scruple.

15. Secondly, you fancy T. S. mute again upon your asking who gave them
commission to make Math. Parker Archbishop of Canterbury. Ans. The Bishops in
King Edward VI's. time did give them power and so commission (for all Bishops
have commission when fit occasion and due circumstances occur) to make Mat.
Parker Bishop: and I doubt not but Mr. Smith (as mute as you conceive him, and
impertinent in Manuscripts) is both able and ready to show you in his own
private library (besides what he has in the public) some ancient records,
wherein you will find it evident that Mat. Parker was a true Bishop; if you think
there can any evidence arise from the testimony of a peevish adversary, who
lived in Matthew Parkers days.

16. Presently you add that T. S. dared not profess openly that they received
their commission from Popish Bishops of K. Henry VIII's time. Ans. true;
because he dares not speak a falsity: for they received it in the time of Edw.
VI. Though what you suppose had been no impossible thing, since good
Protestants in the days of Edw. VI. had received valid baptism (as all men do
acknowledge) in Henry the eights reign.

17. In answer to the rest of this. be pleased to know that the ancient Church
believed (contrary to your Popish novelty) that all Bishops had spiritual
jurisdiction, as being successors to the Apostles. And it is only the interest
of the Pope to deny it: who is wont to make titular Bishops without
jurisdiction, to serve himself in his pretended Councils.

18. I hope I need not tell Mr. D. (who tells others. 15. how they speak at
Cambridge) that a Master and a Family, an overseer and a charge are relata,
rise and fall together: but I must tell him that Bishop Barlow and Miles
Coverdale had the warrant of all their Ecclesiastical Superiors (who then were
over them) to make Bishops in the diocese of London and that Bonner was not
their superior.

19. To what you speak at large of Q. Elizabeth's being a Lay-person and not
being able to give any power, etc. I answer; What power that Queen had, and
ought to have in Ecclesiastical matters you may see in the Articles of the
Church of England: which no Papist nor Anabaptist (H. D. or W. J. W. J. or H.
D.) was ever able to disprove, or durst say one word against it.

20. Reading forward I am at a stand, and must plainly confess I know not what
you mean by what follows, viz. your comparing the common people, and Masters
of Families with the Queen that then was. I know not what your asserting that
these have as much power as the Queen can drive at, but casting off all
authority; like your brethren at Munster.

21. To your 6th.. I answer that if there be any Churches beyond our seas, who
count it their glory to want a succession of Bishops, yea to cry shame upon it;
and to reject it as a superstitious relic of Popery, and mark of Antichrist,
we are no more engaged to defend such people, then the Quaker is engaged to
defend the Papist, or the Papist a Quaker; nor so much, as appears by this
Apology which I am now answering.

22. This I know that not only the Reformed Churches in their Confession of
Ausburg, and again in their Apology for that Confession (cap. de. ordine
ecclesiastico, and cap. de potestate eccles.) and in their other colloquies at
Worms and Ratisbon, and diverse of their books beside; but likewise Mr. Calvin
(who subscribed the Augustane confession) in his book de necessitate
reformandae ecclesiae to Cardinal Sadolet his old friend, and in his epistles
to Archbishop Cranmer and Bishop Ridley, and in his Institutions l. 4. c. 4..
4. And with him Mr. Beza too in his book de diversis gradibus Ministr. c. 21..
23. I say I know (and am as sure as a man that believes his eyes can be) that
these and Zanchy, Diodati, Cappellus, Pet. Moulin; Daille, and others the most
learned Frenchmen now living believe episcopacy and the government by Bishops
to be lawful at least. And I am sure that Mr. T. S. if H. D. be so well
acquainted with him as he pretends (but I am told he confessed he did not know
him so much as by sight, the same hour that he owned this printed book to him)
will at his request give him a larger list of reformed foreign Divines on this
subject, and proofs that other protestant churches beside the English have a
successsion of Bishops which I saw in his chamber. But there is so much already
printed of the L. Viscount Falklands Bp. Carleton and others against your
ungrounded assertion, that I shall deferr sending you a larger catalogue until
you (or your friend Knot the Jesuit, who also has writ against Episcopacy)
shall have answered Dr. Hamonds dissertations against Blondel, otherwise than
by your sword and sequestration.

23. Your 7th.. containing nothing to the purpose but a bare assertion that [T.
S.. 16. and] great numbers even of Episcopal men, PRESBYTERIANS Independents,
and ALL professors besides Papists, do refuse to take the oath of abjuration,
is in my opinion answered sufficiently, till it be proved, by a bare negation;
Though some of them have much more cause to refuse it than you; who have taken
away the former trial of Popery, viz. Recusancy; common by the Law to Papists,
Anabaptists and other Sectaries: which names I hope you will not be angry at,
while you take them to your self p. 16. l. 14. 16.

24. In your 8th.. you argue against the oath thus; No man can safely swear
that he believes no purgatory, unless he be as sure that there is no purgatory
as that there is a God. Ans. This looks like the saying of Fa. Knot against
Chillingworth, who thinks that what ever he believes in religion he believes
with the same certainty wherewith he receives the highest articles of the
Christian faith. When passion and prejudice is laid aside, I hope you will find
time to consider whether if you were now disputing in the Divinity Schools you
might not safely affirm that to be true which is your opinion in any matter of
Religion, and not expect that any Caviller who stands by (and is no way
concerned in the Act) should thence infer and cry out that you are as sure of
it as that there is a God who made the world. If this Caviller should go
further, single this assertion (perhaps being only argumentum ad hominem) out
of your whole dispute and print a book against it, would not he be (as you say
Mr. S. is) not a little ridiculous? And would not you your self take as little
notice of him as Mr. Smith does of you? I should enlarge upon this your
acception of the word believe, but that Mr. Chillingworth has said enough of
it in his answer to your Brother Knot, and T. S. in his defense of
Chillingworth.

25. In the last lines of this 12th. page you have these words, what do I know
whether purgatory be revealed in Scripture or no? You seem here plainly to
profess that you do not know whether Papists or Protestants be in the right, so
far as to Gods revelation in Scripture; which Protestants have always made
their rule. By which we may judge what a Protestant you are, And that
Anabaptists either deny the H. Scripture to be their rule, or affirm that they
know no error in purgatory.

26. To the 9th.. whereof I can scarce make common sense, I might tell you that
no Parliament is in any sense that which is signified by the word person. But I
rather answer that no Parliament can free any person from any oath of belief
which he has taken: For example, if one Parliament propound an oath to me to
declare whether I think the Articles of the Council of Trent be Orthodox and
Catholic, and I swear no; from this oath ten thousand Parliaments can never
absolve me. If I swear in truth I need no Absolution: but if I therein forswear
my self, the Parliament can not free me from perjury, nor remit the guilt of
it. The matter of this oath was Concerning belief, and I never yet heard or
read, that any Parliament in England did assume power of setting men at liberty
from beleiving what they believe in matter of Religion. I grant that an Act of
Parliament may be repealed by a Parliament and so the Law of exacting this oath
may be abrogated, but that an oath taken Concerning matter of belief or not
belief can be voided by any Power on earth, is the doctrine not of any English
Parliament, but only of the Conclave at Rome: therefore (good Mr. Den) creep
not under the wing of an English Parliament, but confess your Argument to be a
naked weapon of a Romish Jesuit.

27. To your 10th.. I answer briefly, that it is not to be imagined any English
Parliament has or will forbid the subject of any Prince to acknowledge that
civil subjection which is due to his Sovereign, so long as he remains in his
dominions.

28. In your 11th and 12th Sections you make the oath of abjuration to be both
a prelaticall and Presbyterian design ( prelaticall men must be sure to pay for
all) but whereas you tell me diverse times of Prelatical malice, and that the
Papists Universally disown that Tenet which is objected to them as theirs; viz.
That faith is not to be kept with Heretics. I shall not insist upon the
Lateran council (which decreed anno. 1216. can. 30. that the Pope has power to
absolve subjects from their obedience) which is one of those Synods to which
Bellarmin says all that are Catholics must submit: but I reply, that what you
say here is nothing to the purpose, for Mr. S. never said otherwise, for (in
the 16th. page of his preface to Daille's Apology for the Reformed Churches) he
professes so much kindness to the Romanist in this particular, that I have
heard him censured by some of them as talking there like an inamorato. But
methinks both they and you instead of censuring him and bringing new arguments,
should answer that which he printed therein above six years since; especially
when he there does very earnestly beseech them to answer it, professing that he
had been many years troubled with it. The argument is this, That which one or
two (or some few) Roman Doctors say is lawful, may (in the judgment of
Papists) be done without danger of mortal sin [the Major is Mr. Knots charity
maintained c. 4.. 25. as also Valentia, Vasquez, Lessius, Enriques, Sa, Cellot
de Hierarchia l. 8. c. 16. p. 714.] But not only one, but many Roman Doctors
say, it is lawful to murder or depose a supreme Magistrate that is guilty of
heresy or suspected of it. Cavete principes conclusionem. The minor is
sufficiently proved by Dr. Jer. Tailors sermon on the powder treason p. 50. and
51. and in a small tract entitled Romish positions for rebellion collected by
Bp. Morton: and Mr. Yaxley's reasons why he could not be a Romanist (as he much
desired) and a good subject to his Sovereign at one time.

29. Reading 'tother day Sleidans relation of your friends affairs at Munster I
met with this passage, that there was a law made at the council of Constance
that promise should not be kept with Heretics, or those that be suspected for
Heretics, though they came to the Synod upon the public faith of the Emperor
for the hearing of their cause. Sleidan, l. 3. ad an. 1521, mihi p. 59. edit.
Francf. 80.

30. You who pretend to skill in all Popish histories cannot but know, that
John Hus had the Emperor Sigismunds safe conduct in as large terms as might
be expressed, grate suscipere, favorabiliter tractare -- omnique prorsus
impedimento remoto transire, stare, morari, and redire libere permittatis,
sibique [Husso] and suis, dum opus fuerit de securo and salvo velitis and
debeatis providere conductu, ad honorem and Reverentiam nostrae Regiae
Majestatis. And notwithstanding this he was burnt; which questionless the Emp.
would not have suffered, but either in obedience to the command of the council,
or upon that Councels persuading him that he was not to keep promise with a man
whom they had declared an heretic: a man who ad incendium quasi ad epulas
properavit, lingua potens and mundioris vitae opinione clarus, as Aeneas
Sylvius (afterward Pope Pius the 2d.) Hist. Bohem. c. 35. 36. a man whose rare
endowments Poghius the Florentine historian and Orator (an eyewitness of his
trial at the Council of Constance) admired; saying nihil unquam protulit
indignum bono viro; ut si id in fine sentiebat quod verbis profitebatur nulla
in eum (...)edum mortis causa inveniri justa posset. O virum dignum memoria
hominum sempiterna! epist. Poghii ad Lenard. Aretin. in fascic. rerum expet.
and fug. p. 153. which passages I cite, lest you should object Campians
retractus ex fuga, or any such frivolous pretense.

31. In sum, since you impertinently affirm that the Papists universaly
disown that Tenet, that faith is not to be kept with Heretics; methinks it is
fit you should prove that they universally disown the Council of Constance,
(which is one of Bellarmines 17.) unless you are so far Jesuited as that you
reject that council, because it ejected two Popes.

32. Mr. S. never yet said that Papists ought not to be permited to improve
their estates, nor that there are not some Papists who abhor breaking their
promise (and therefore while Mr. D. talks to the contrary he fights with his
shadow) but you shall do well to prove that no Papists can take advantage from
the decree of the Council of Constance to break their promises made to
Protestants. And I cannot but take notice, how much the Papists are beholden to
Mr. Den, for telling the World very plainly that they may find every jot as
much honest proceeding and credit in Papists as in Protestants. p. 15. l.
penult.

33. A few lines after having told us that the Presbyterians are easily enough
infected with such leaven (prelaticall malice) he falls into these words, Nor
do they, while they fall thus upon others, take any notice of, or endeavor to
answer, those things which are standing objections against themselves; to wit
in relation to their rebellion, disobedience and apostasy from the government
of the church of Rome; which in good earnest I think they will never be able to
answer, upon their own principles. Ans. Observe how this man (though he called
himself Anabaptist and Sectary but two or three lines before these words) now
soon forgets what person he had assumed, pulls off his Vizard, and appears a
bare faced Romanist. Observe how he who professes to teach men to be
disobedient and rebellious to all Bishops, passionately and hastily takes part
with him, who has usurped upon all Bishops in the Christian world: and rather
then loose his design, calls all who now profess not to obey the Church of
Rome Rebels, Disobedient, and Apostates from Her Government (sure he can not
in good earnest suppose them to be disobedient, unless in good earnest he
believe they owe her obedience.) Then judge what a foul slander this is in Mr.
D. to blame protestants for their not endeavoring to answer those things which
have been answered an hundred times by Bishops unanswerably: Judge what a crime
it is for one who calls himself a Protestant to object against this and all
other reformed Churches, the most bitter calumnies that the most extreme rigid
peevish Papists have devised.

34. You go on thus; supposing their ordination for which they so much contend
to be of necessity and of Divine right, and that they had it from the Church of
Rome, as most certainly they had. Ans. Here you seem to contradict what you
said in the 6th.. (p. 9. l. 33.) in these words, nor could he in truth affirm
it. But if you mean by these words last cited out of the 12th.. (as they seem
to import) that you esteem our ordination to be of divine right because it came
in succession from the Church of Rome, it is a wide mistake. In sum, methinks
you declare here openly in this paragraph that all who are baptized and
ordained by any of the Church of Rome (as it is certain a great part of this
nation was, even in the time of Gregorius M.) do therefore now and shall for
all future ages owe obedience to the Pope of Rome; or else they are all Rebels
and Apostates. Whereas we are not more ordained by those who were ordained by
others from the Church of Rome, then Mr. Den himself was baptized by the hand
of one of those who was baptized from others that were heretofore Romish
Priests; so that our Ordination is surely as divine as his baptism. As for his
being rebaptized, both the Church of Rome (for whom he pleads) and we and all
the Christian World account him, for that, a Rebel and Apostate from the
Universal Church.

35. But because he says in good earnest he believes it can never be answered
upon our principles, he shall receive his answer in these three lines
following, challenging both the Jesuits and Anabaptists Mr. H. D. and N. N. to
answer it if they can:

The Answer is this.
36. The popes of the Church of Rome dare not deny themselves to have received
Ordination from the Church of Jerusalem; notwithstanding this they profess
that they owe no subjection to the Bishop of Jerusalem: Therefore it was (not
prelaticall, but) Anabaptistical I malice to tell all Bishops that have been
ordained from Rome they are Apostates and Rebels from the Church of Rome in
good earnest if they (avouching ordination from the Clergy to be of necessity
and Divine right) do not obey the Pope.

37. That which follows in your books about Mr. G. and Mr. P. who disputed
against the Romanists (a fact which I believe Mr. Hen. Den never was never
will be guilty of) all that know those Ministers know to be superfluous and
frivolous. However I to whom you (in defense of the Quakers very pertinently do
object this) think fit to tell you, that whereas the Romanist took a longer
time only to put forth an edition of that, which if he had dealt truly was all
before done to his hand; whereas he has also so changed, transposed, added,
diminish't and made of it what he list, that I believe it will be as soon owned
for your (I mean not J. S. but H. D's.) conference as Mr. Pearsons or Mr.
Gunnings; I must now tell you further (what you have been often enough told) that
that relation cannot expect to be regarded by Mr. P. or any sober person which
is disclamed and disowned by three of the four who were disputants, viz. by
both the Protestants and half the Papists.

38. But chiefly I must entreat you to consider whether the inserting of above
200. lines at a time as part of the conference which never was part of it
(besides all professed additions) 2ly. Whether the leaving out whole sheets of
the Protestants, which the Papists thought too hard to answer; and 3ly. the
scarce suffering any one argument and answer of both to come together (but
casting usually parts of the same paper of Mr. G. many score leaves asunder one
from the other) be not a scandal that any Christian would desire might be
covered with silence. And I would gladly know from any ingenuous person,
whether this might not be answer enough to a book put out at the charge of the
Romanists own purse and conscience; a discourse by being mangled rendered so
unintelligible, that scarce any man ever read it over or will.

39. One of your friends sent 3 copies of this conference between Mr. G. Mr. P.
and the Jesuits to Mr. T. S. in Cambridge, who being very desirous to hear
what was in it (and having not leisure to read it all himself) gave two of them
away, upon condition that those learned persons on whom he bestowed them should
read it: but they both threw it aside before they had read a few leaves of it.
Reverend Mr. Will. Moor, the deceased Library keeper, was persuaded by Mr. T.
S. to read one leaf; but professed before many witnesses he would not read
another if you would give him the whole impression: because 'twas so
unintellegible for the causes above mentioned.

40. As for your own book (which you commend) against the same Mr. G. of the
same alloy. If a tract as full of falsehood as any pamphlet is wont to be
fraught with, may be believed against so many thousand witnesses as heard you
both dispute two days; and at length the dispute, interrupted by the
Anabaptists themselves against all laws of dispute, as you your self then and
there acknowledged; If Mr. Gunnings giving the world satisfaction at the same
place concerning the whole matter and the Universal Churches tradition
concerning that question, in a third discourse afterward, at the request of the
Moderator (For the Moderator hearing both Mr. D. and Mr. G. appeal to the
Churches tradition, said, that the Auditory was unsatisfied in that particular,
and therefore desired that one of them would take the pains to clear it, Mr.
Den refusing Mr. G. did it) to which Mr. Den then durst not reply a word.
If I say all this cannot rescue Mr. G. from the expectation of a reply to a
pamphlet in print, because forsooth it is in print, we may expect his answer
hereafter when he shall see fit; with a relation of a former and of a later
Jesuits dealing and Mr. Dens collated.

41. But in the mean while to give you and your friends employment (which I
perceive you want) and satisfaction if possible; After you have answered the
letter in Quaker Disarmed (taking in the enclosed printed paper entitled a Gag
for lay-preachers which you may have near the Little North-door of S. Paul's,) I
shall entreat you to know (because you complain of your books lying unanswered,
and therein a scandal and prejudice to the Protestant cause) that there is a
multitude of considerable books writ by Protestants in folio and other volumes
against the Church of Rome which have been 20. or 30. years unanswered; and are
like to lie forty more.

42. I shall name some: first (for your reading) a new gag for an old goose by
Bishop Mountague, Bp. Franc. White, and Bp. Laud, and Bp. Chapel against
Fisher, Spalato's 3. tomes, Bp. Hall, Birckbeck, Crackenthorp, Bp. Mountague
against Bullinger, Dr. Tho. Jackson, Chillingworth, (tho your friends the
Jesuits have attempted to answer his pamphlet, as they call it, diverse times,
and Mr. Knot was 19. or 20. years about one.) Then in a smaller volume so many
that a bare catalogue of them would make a big book, as Dr. Cosins, Dr. Jer.
Tailor, Dr. Fern, Dr. Featly, Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond of infallibility, and his
dispatcher dispacht. These all new, beside old ones. Not to mention the heaps
of excellent pieces of Forrainers Dailleus, Moulin, Blondell, Calixtus,
Bochartus, Placeus, etc. each of them as famous and considerable as your
Jesuits.

43. And yet you and they be the men that clamor against the Protestants as if
they could say nothing for themselves, when it is as clear as the sun at noon,
that neither you in this apology nor they in their other writings have a word
to alledg against us, but what has been unanswerably refelled by the
forementioned Authors and others 100. times. And yet you are so wise as to
complain of our silence, and the Jesuits (for whom you here plead) put forth
books consisting only of questions to the same men, instead of giving them so
much as one answer to their many demonstrations made against you: and though
some of them as Mr. G. Dr. H. etc. never declined any meeting with the ablest
of you and the Jesuits, but attend the business as diligently as if they had
nothing else to do, and have been often declined by you and them, and can bring
witnesses to depose where several Romish Priests have appointed days and
hours and (at the very hour appointed) sent a flam to prevent the meeting.

44. But to come closer to you Mr. Den. For your part, besides this
scandalous false printed relation of your own here mentioned, one may (to use
your own words) guess at the conscience and honesty of Mr. Hen. Den by his
saying not one word in his book of a public conference held by him and the
same person, upon the same question, at Castor in Northamptonshire. But I
suppose you will publish that when you print your public dispute with Mr. Weller
of Immanuel College before the Committee at the Bear in Cambridge.

45. Besides all this, a reasonable man would think that Mr. Gunning having
taken such pains, when you disputed with him at S. Clements Church, to keep
the Auditors from hissing Mr. Hen. Den quite off from the desk and dispute
(as diverse who were there tell me they will witness) deserves to be excused if
he takes no pains to consider your pamphleting afterward.

46. The mentioning whereof minds me of your blaming Mr. T. S. for Arabic,
etc. In answer to which I am told, that though he ownes the dispute as a true
matter of fact, and so far his; yet 'twas penned by one of the auditors who
took it in shorthand: and then it was no absurdity to say Mr. Smith was doing
that which all the University knows he was appointed by the Vice Chancellor
to do, in reference to printing a Catalogue of all the Manuscripts in
Cambridge, which is now ready for the Press. But suppose all this to be false,
yet it will be hard if Mr. T. S. who was deputed by Mr. Wheelock when he left
Cambridge without hope of returning (under hand and seal) Arabic professor
and has taught that language to diverse, have not more skill in that tongue
then you have in the Aethiopick who cannot read it, and yet cited that and all
other translations of the N. T. in the public conference that you boast of at
St. Clements Church without Temple Bar: saying you would stick to the
AETHIOPIC. And your respondent asking you whether you brought your argument
from the Aethiopic copy or the Latin version? You replied with some smartness
from both, from both, Sir. Which passage (together with your saying that
Children cry because they are unwilling to be baptized though they neither will
nor nill, with diverse others (which you are so faithful a relater as to pass
over in silence) having made those thousands of people which heard you very
merry, might have remained buried in silence, if looking into your two Books I
had not met with your Aethiopic as well as Arabic.

47. But now leaving your languages I return to your Apology, where. 13. you
say you can not see any great reason of fear or danger from the papists,
questionless your bare warrant shall secure all English men from Powder-plots
hereafter.

48. Your 14th. you thus begin in their defense, I am to say something
concerning those common Brutes which are raised against Popish Priests and
Jesuits, as if they did secretly insinuate themselves into the Congregations
of different professions in Religion. To which I answer that Mr. Pryn, Mr.
Baxter and the rest whom you call Bedlams p. 6. and 19. may cry you mercy for
the report of secret insinuations, for me thinks it is open enough now; or let
the World judge by this book of yours.

49. But let us hear what he reports these bedlams and bookmakers to say (by
the way did H. D. never furnish the tobacco-shop with wast paper They tell
(quoth H. D.) of an idle fellow one Ramsey, etc. I wish Mr. Hen. Den were such
an Idle fellow, that he be likely to have the tithe of his Scholarship, though
he live as long again. What this Mr. Ramsey is and was, I desire Mr. Den may
learn from a book printed by some of very good repute in Newcastle, and the
depositions sent up by the Mayor of that Town with Mr. Ramsey to London; some
years before Mr. Prynne could hear any thing of his conference at Cambridge: so
that he was not imprisoned upon a bare suspicion as Mr. D. says. How he got
out of the Gatehouse, and what he did in Cambridge, I had rather he should hear
from Mr. Ratcliff and Mr. Griffith of Christ's College, diverse of St. John's and
other Colleges (whom he taught Hebrew) than from me; who am confident I know
his Religion and design from other Reasons, besides his frequenting Milton near
Cambridge. But sure H. D's concluding that because Ramsey came not to further
trial, therefore he was no disguised Papist, is no better an argument, than if
he should prove, that there have been no Jesuits in England of late years,
because (though diverse have been apprehended) none have been brought to Trial.

50. Concerning the Franciscan at Bristol, the oath of G. Cowlishaw Ironmonger
in Bristol is upon record, and printed in Mr. Pryns Quaker unmaskt, edit. 2. p.
3. who (p. 34, etc.) answers to what H. D. here objects to clear the
Franciscan. Besides him at Bristol, I could tell Mr. Den a strange story of
his Father Whitebread saying Mass about London; and of another disputing for
the Quakers, and presently proved a masked Papist at Wolverhampton: but I had
rather he should have these things from others who have more leisure. When he
shall have considered these and other like relations (which will shortly be
printed at large) I will desire him to tell the world, whether they be
groundless and unproved calumnies.

51. To the next words, wherein he says, No man's innocence will be able to
protect him against suspicion; I answer, That it is not fit any man should
judge, how hardly Mr. Den shall be dealt with by any suspicions, further then
may appear by those propositions of his, which are recollected in the close of
this address.

52. In the very next line H. D. says, that he for his part does very
confidently assure himself, that if an oath were tendered to ALL the Papists in
this Nation, they would willingly swear, that neither they themselves, nor any
that they know, did ever use any such practice, or ever thought it lawful to
dissemble their Religion. Wherein H. D. expresses questionless a greater
confidence in behalf of the Jesuits, then either Clark or Watson would of
Robert Parsons the Jesuit; or the secular Priests at this day will for the
body of that Society, as appears by their books which for these sixty years
they have writ one against another. So that H. D. is a closer friend to the
Jesuits then many Romish Priests be.

53. This 15th.. begins thus, we all know it is a fallacious way of arguing to
proceed, a posse ad esse, as they speak at Cambridge (Do not they speak so at
Doway and St. Omers too?) and yet no better is the Argument of the Papist's
Adversaries in this case. Here he blames some persons under the name of Popish
Adversaries, sure he means to exempt himself from the number. And before he is
gone to the middle of this page he falls again to undertaking for the
Principles of Popery, and passes his word that their principles contain nothing
which allows dissimulation in Religion.

54. But in the last page he will needs have Mr. S. to be a Papist for
asserting that we receive the Canon of Scripture upon the Authority of the
Church of all Ages, and the pure spouse of Christ, I would fain be told by Mr.
Den what reason he can give to his brethren Anabaptists and the Quakers, why
the song of Solomon should be Canon and other useful books which bare his name
Apocrypha, why the Revelation of St. John should be put into the Canon 300.
years after Christ and some gospells (bearing the Apostles names) left out, but
the authority of the Jewish Church for the Old, and of the Christian for the
New Testament? But I would have him remember that to talk of the pure spouse of
Christ, and the Church of all ages, and exclude the 12. Apostles and the first
Century out of it, is a discourse not becoming Mr. Dens profession.

55. Sure H. D. never saw Dr. Cousin of the Canon of Scripture, nor Hooker's
Ecclesiastical policy, nor heard of St. Augustines non Crederem Scripturis nisi
me moveret Ecclestae authoritas. If Mr. S. be a Papist for this, he has these
and a multitude of such good Protestant-company Popish with him.

56. You ask what other Church was there in all ages, but the Roman? I answer,
unless you and I agree now upon the terms of the question we must end where we
should have begun; therefore first I must desire you to tell me what you mean
by the Roman Church? Which I shall scarce know, till you answer the 20.
questions that Mr. T. S. puts in the close of his preface to Daille's apology.
But that you may not pass without one answer, I pray tell me what other Church
was there in all ages but the Greek Church, and those that agree with her in
all or most part of what she holds, particularly in believing no infallibility
or Sovereign jurisdiction (over all) in the Bishop of Rome, for which among
other good doctrines the present Roman Church refuses her Communion?

57. And here you mend all at last; for you no sooner hear talk of a pure
spouse of Christ the Church of all ages, but you apprehend it can be understood
of none but the Roman Church; and say plainly, that to talk of a pure spouse of
Christ and the Catholic church in the creed, the church of all ages (for those
are the words in the letter that you cite) is doubtless in effect, to justify
the church of Rome to be a pure church.

58. Thus having examined Mr. Hen. Dens new book and Religion, I shall only
recollect a few positions published by him and his friend George Whitehead the
Quaker (whom he would prove to be no Papist, and therefore that no Papist is a
Quaker) and then leave Mr. D. to turn over his Aethiopick Testament, all the
books of Papists, and ALL their histories; and leave the Reader to judge how
good Protestants this fit couple be; H. D. and G. W. George Whitehead besides
those particulars which are mentioned in the Queries hereto annexed (especially
p. 14. and 16.) maintains these seven following Romish doctrines: 1. That
justification is by inherent righteousness: and so says no Protestant but so
says Bellarmin l. 2. de justificat. c. 3. 2ly. That a man may perfectly keep
the law without sin: so says (not Protestants but) Bell: l. 4. de justif. c.
11. 12. 13. 14. 3ly. G. W. denies the imputed righteousness of Christ for
justification: so Bell: l. 2. de justif. c. 7. 4ly. G. W. affirms that
Scripture is not the supreme rule for trial of spirits: so Bell: l. 3. de verbo
Dei c. 4. 5ly. G. W. has writ an whole book against Mr. Clapham to prove that
the written word is but a dead letter, and carnal. So says Costerus in
enchyridio. p. 44. 6ly. G. W. pretends to immediate Revelations and pretended
miracles (see Clapham and the century of queries) so do the Papists:
unchurching them who pretend not to them as trial of a Church. 7ly. G. W. and
the Papist both alike place much of their holiness in their beggarly apparel,
in going openly with sackcloath and barefooted, which I find taxed by the
ancient Fathers of the Church. Thus far G. W.

59. Now, for Mr. Hen. Den; I hope the Reader has ere this observed, that
though this book of his before us be entitled for the Quakers, and (as I am
told) was offered to them at the Bull and Mouth in Aldersgate Street for their
press, yet it is indeed all in behalf of the Papists; and conteins not one word
(from the first to the last) to the advantage of any sect under heaven but only
the Romish: That the very same arguments, and the very same expressions are
used now against the Church of England by the Anabaptist and by the Papist, so
that he who answers one of them answers both. I might take notice also of such
words in this Quaker no Papist, as cause the Author thereof whoever he be (H.
D. or J. W. or W. J. for I take them to be all one man) to smell of a foreign
Country: as when he speaks of the Justice of peace in his District, p. 10.
and calls the same man Batchelour of Divinity and Master of Arts, putting this
after that, and the like: but to let this pass I shall only mention a few of
Mr. Hen. Dens positions delivered by him in this tract (for I have not
leisure to look into Mr. Robothams Den of thieves) and then leave our Disputant
and Scholar to read his Aethiopic books. Some of his Doctrines printed in this
book entitled Quaker no Papist, are these,

60. 1. That Mr. H. D. does not know whether Purgatory be revealed in Scripture
or not. p. 12. l. penult. 2. That it is clear who ever takes the oath of
abjuration does forswear the privileges of Parliament. p. 14. medio. 3. That
in good earnest he thinks those who had their ordination from the Church of
Rome and do not obey the Pope, are Rebels, disobedient and Apostates, if they
defend the necessity of ordination by Bishops p. 16. medio. 4. That he finds as
much honest proceedings and credit in Papists as in Protestants p. 15. l.
penult. and can see no great reason of fear or danger from papists p. 18. l. 3.
5. That he does very confidently assures himself (sure no man else can assure
him) that if an oath were tendered to all the papists in this Nation; they would
all willingly swear that neither they themselves nor any that they know, did
ever use any such practice as is reported of Ramsey by Mr. Pryn (and some in
Cambridge) and of a Franciscan by Mr. Baxter; and swear that neither they nor
any they know did ever make profession for what ends soever, to be of any
Religion save only their own, p. 19. fine. 6. That no Protestant Minister
either in England or beyond the seas has any better ordination or commission
to preach then G. Whitehead the Quaker. p. 8, 9, 10. Lastly (for I will not
trouble the reader with recollecting all) that the present Roman Church and no
other is the pure spouse of Christ, or else there has been none in all Ages.

From these seven Capital assertions of Popery let any indifferent man judge
whether Mr. H. D. (notwithstanding his vehement pretendings to the contrary)
may not be justly thought to favor the doctrine of the presentRoman Church,
alittle more then a man of his profession (which is Anabaptisme, next door to
Quakery) should do.

And so till you answer these threescore Paragraphs I bid you heartily
Farewell. QUESTIONS
ERRATA.
IN the letter to Mr. D. p. 2. l. 1. r. mission. 31. r. Bellarmines 18 Councels.

In the Queries, p. 2. l. 11. for let the reader judge, r. No conclusion can be
false when the premises are true, l. 24. often fordids, p. 12. l. 28. r. Sr
Walter l. 29. Countess of Sidney, p. 13. l. 35. dele viz. lust wrath, etc. p.
16. l. 1. (...). l. 2. (...). p. 16. l. 16. for at the end of r. in the preface
to these queries.


