Some Brief CONSIDERATIONS AND PROPOSALS, Relating to the DEPENDENCIES OF THE
ENGLISH NATION WITH Spain, etc.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1658/9.

Some brief Considerations and Proposals, relating to the Dependencies of the
English Nation with Spain, etc.
WHat the sufferings of this Nation were, in the breach with Spain, in the
year 1655. most men are sensible of, more particularly the Merchants that
traded thither, which had great estates seized on, and ever since have the
Pirates of Dunkirk, Ostend, Sansebastians passage, Calicia, and others in the
Straights, had their ends in taking (even at their pleasure) our ships trading
for any part of Europe, and elsewhere, to the lessening the stock of the
Na^ion, weakening its strength, and ruining of many a family, that lived in
great plenty and reputation, supporting many others, it being clearly to be
demonstrated, that since the first falling out with that Nation, this has
lost, when least, 700. sail of ships small and great, most of which might have
been preserved, if the managers of the Navy appertaining to this State, had
been pleased to have employed so many of its men of War for checking of those
Pirates, as would have been well maintained by the purchase they might have
taken from the enemy, and the revenue that must have come into this Common
wealth for Custom and Excise of our lost goods, ('it is true, great Fleets were
sent abroad to as great charge of the Nation, but they lay together in such
stations, where few or none of the enemies private men of War did frequent,
whereas had they been reparted in the Bay of Biscay, Coast of Galicia, and
within the Streights, (as well as before Cales,) as was desired by several
Memorandums and Applications of Merchants, most of our ships had been
protected, and the enemies men of War either destroyed or disheartened from
coming abroad, but they seeing no effectual course was in particular taken to
suppress them, encouraged by great booties obtained from us, knowing from
their Agents here how things went, have increased in strength and number, and
unless some trading, or suffer the Commerce to be destroyed, to the enriching
the Adversaries.

Private men, we know, must not meddle with mysteries of State, where so
judicious persons sit at the Helm of Government: yet as well-wishers to the
whole, being made too sensible as to the thing in hand; we suppose it our duty
modestly to present our thoughts concerning the affairs with Spain, as verst
with the dispositions of that Nation.

Known it is that a vast treasure has been spent in carrying on the War with
that people, which notwithstanding has not wrought the intended effects, for
their policy has been such, (though in many things to their prejudice) as to
judge it their greatest safety to lie still, and not to set forth their Armada
to engage with our Fleets, keeping themselves in part from those great expenses
which we have continually been at, affording the Dutch the conveniences to
serve them in times of necessity, as in bringing their treasure from the Canary
Islands, etc. which with themselves as our back-friends, use all means to
wear out the purse of the Nation, and occasion discontents for want of trade,
thereby either to spoil us by a War, or reduce us to such terms of peace as
would be as bad, and in the mean time the Spaniards take such opportunities of
getting home their West India Fleets, when our ships cannot well remain on
their Coasts, or are wearied with waiting there for want of necessaries, as it
has formerly f^ll out.

And whereas the Merchants and Navigation of England, have after the War
undergone such great losses, many of the Spaniards on the contrary, have
enjoyed greater advantages then in time of peace, occasioned by our continual
and irrigular trading thither, employing the Native Spaniards and others as
Factors, which put our commodities at what rates they please, and their own
goods, as Wines, VVools, Fruit, etc. even as they list, insomuch that a Pipe of
Canary Wine now, costs more then double the value of what formerly it did, and
our Goods that yielded a considerable advance therein times of peace, by the
Accounts those Spaniards and our Correspondents now give, the Product will
scarce answer the principal Cost here in England; the like Negotiation is found
in Malaga and other parts of Spain, to which must be added, that in this
disadvantageous trade, we employ for the most part Holland-ships and Seamen,
enemies at heart of this Nation, to the Augmentation of their Shipping, Seamen
and Wealth, the consequence whereof may in the end produce no good to England,
and what is as bad as the rest, those Spanish Commodities, by our untimely and
immoderate pressing for them, are not to be obtained by our English
Manufactory, as in former times, but store of Plate is sent to purchase them,
so that as silver was brought in abundance from Spain hither, obtained for our
English Goods, now its carried thither for the buying of what is not at all in
effect beneficial to this Nation.

Then is to be noted that this Commonwealth had in most part of Spain
considerable Factories, which did great subsinesse for themselves and friends,
yea, the greater part of the Spaniards affairs did run by our hands: but now
not an Englishman dares appear (except some that this Nation is little
beholding to for the service they do the enemy, and if any are discovered, they
are immediately laid hold of, and imprisoned as Spies, etc. And any Goods
appertaining to English, and but slenderly proved to be such, are absolutely
Confiscate; on the contrary, here in London, native Spaniards that never came
in times of Peace, are as free as our selves, and bring in store of VVines and
other Goods by the hands of Jews and some others, which take them up in their
own names, and the proceed of a great part of their effects, is and has been
remitted to Flanders, for several years past; so that if such Negotiations be
not prevented, what will follow; but whereas we were the managers of the
Commerce with Spain formerly, Jews and Spaniards with their Confederates will
have all in their possession, and take many other conveniences out of our
hands, which how well in time it will stand with this Nations interest and
safety, may easily be discerned.

And yet all these particulars premised, and though the damages sustained by
war have been so considerable, we are not well fitted to treat of a Peace,
especially if the Spaniard see first an inclination here to strike up with
them, for then Articles cannot be made so honorable and profitable for us, as
they might before this War began, and therefore an orderly Prosecution of the
same a while longer, may bring matters into such a posture, as to answer our
conveniences, and the worlds expectations, as to the Engagement with that
Nation.

Whe^efore are humbly offered as Expedients.

First, that there may be an absolute Prohibition for the bringing in any
Canary, Malaga, or Sherry Sacks, or Fruit, from either place, for the space of
about two years, in which time the Owners of those Commodities which are
chiefly spent in England, that now are grown very rich, by our ill managing the
trade, will be reduced to much hardship, if not to a discontent with their
Governors and the Kings duties, which are now considerable, will be brought
very low; and in this time, while we desist from the trade, will all our
English Manufactory that is in Spain already, and going thither, be spent at
good rates, which will put the better estimation upon the same for future, and
other Nations will with many, and other better effects, (then those we have now
from Spain,) take them off our hands, to supply the Markets when there is want,
this being one of the best remedies, as the Case stands, to provide an
advantageous trade for time to come, which otherwise cannot be driven, but at
loss to us, and too great benefit of the Spaniards, either in Peace or War,
and the rather because all Englishmen in the Spanish trade, are, and have been
at liberty to adventure what they list, without the Restriction of a Company,
as the Custom is for other parts of the World, as Turkey, East India, etc.

Secondly, the grand expectations of the King of Spain, and his Subjects, are
the Arrival of his Plate Fleet, now supposed, after their Conjunction, at the
Havana, from Cartagena and new Spain, to be upon their way for Europe: in
which comes the treasure of two or three years drawing together; and as it
concerns him much to have the same, so it will this Nation to deprive him of
it, and possess it our selves; which if it should so fall out in this Juncture
of time, would discompose that Kings affairs in most part of his Dominions, and
how much it may further ours, may be judged, this State by Intelligence, which
questionless it has, knows best what strength they consist of* and
answerably what power to order against them, and in what stations to a^t^nd
them, in that doubtless their bent will be either for Cales, Gibraltar, or the
Groyne in Galicia; as for the Canaries, their last suffering there will make
them shy of returning to that place; if three or four small nimble sailing
Frigates lay in different latitudes about the Western Islands, one or more
probably may get sight of the Spaniard, and observe their motions, and as there
is occasion give notice to our Fleets, as they shall be appointed, and the
Nation being able to spare so many ships for this hopeful affair, the charge
extraordinary cannot be very great, to put them forth a little sooner then they
might, upon other emploiments, lying already fitted, and this design taking
effect might clear the Commonwealths obligations, and furnish it to carry on
the war to purpose, against those that otherwise will employ the same against
us and our friends.

In the Bay of Biscay, among others are the chief Ports of Sansebastians
passage and Bilbao: the Inlets of Commodities which furnish that Country, and
the North-parts of Castilia: especially with Fish, whereof those parts spend
great quantities, and will be supplied by the French and Dutch, with whatsoever
they have occasion, except prevented by this State in keeping men of War upon
that Coast, but eight ot ten Frigates will hinder their trade, and deprive the
places aforesaid, from other conveniences of the inhabitants, which will make
them clamorous; More particularly, when they cannot sell their Countrey-goods,
as Wooles, Iron, Steel, etc. nor receive Corn and other Provisions from
sorreign parts, whereof for the most part they are in great want, and our
Frigates will also check the attempts of the many Spanish men of War, sailing
out of Pasage and Sansebastian, that have hitherto done the Nation so much
mischief, and will still, if not looked after.

In the Provinces of Galicia and Asturia, seated between Biscay and Portugal,
the King of Spain has a very great Revenue out of Salt, that is brought into
those parts from South- Spain, by Hollanders and others, which they may be
totally deprived of, as of many other concernments, by keeping about ten men of
War about those parts, where are convenient harbors to water and shelter in
upon occasion: and the taking the said Salt will not be only the Kings loss,
but the whole Country must be driven to great extremities, and not be able to
follow their Fishing trade, which is the greatest maintenance the common people
have, and this Squadron will lie opportunely to secure our Merchants ships,
trading for Portugal and other places, from Biscayners, Ostenders, and other
Pirates, that sail out of the ports of Galicia.

Malaga, Alicante, and Valensia, within the Streights of Gibraltar, are places
abounding with Wine, Oil, and Fruit, the greater part whereof is brought for
England, and that trade failing, the people there will generally be driven to
straits, the rather if we have Ships of War upon their Ports, to examine all
strangers, and deprive them from carrying in Provisions, without which they
cannot well subsist, and Commodities lying on the Inhabitants hands, (as they
must, if strangers bring them not hither,) will be for the most part lost, and
a Squadron kept about those Coasts, will secure most of our trade in the
Levant, against all enemies.

Sevilla, Cales, and Saint Lucar, which are the chief places of trade in Spain,
do set forth all ships for the Indies, and thither for the most part return
that Kings Fleets, and particular vessels, with silver and other Commodities,
out of the said India; but about twelve Sail of our ships continually kept
there, may impede the carrying in of any Provisions for the supply of the
Country, or the Kings Fleets, which ordinarily are brought from Holland,
France; and also intercept their ships going to, and coming from the Indies,
and other places, hindering the excursions of private men of War, that sail
thence to annoy our Merchants ships; and upon any occasion of service to this
Nation, may soon be drawn the Squadrons from the Coast of Galicia, Biscaya, and
the Streights, to join with these: which together will make a sufficient
strength, to encounter any power Spain can set forth, or may expect from abroad.

Such Courses as these being taken in good earnest, and none but diligent,
affectionate, and able Commanders, employed in our Fleets, will not only
preserve our Commerce, but be a great repute to the Nation, in a manner keeping
the Coasts of all Spain continually alarmed: depriving that King of the greater
part of his incomes, and render his people incapable to pay taxes, which are
heavy upon them; and consequently, his Armies and Garrisons will be neglected
in Pay and Provisions, some of his remotest territories will revolt or be taken
from him, and a general calamity overwhelm his dominions then, (and scarce
otherwise) will that Nation be made truly sensible, what it is to have peace or
war with England, and being brought low, he will as eagerly seek for a peace
from us, (and with more reason) then he did lately from the Hollander; once his
subjects granting in a manner their own conditions, at least for better then we
had, by the last Articles of Peace. This being certain, that the King of Spain,
seeing this Nation formidable, and valuing it self of its strength, will yield
to our reasonable desires.

But if now, or at other time a Peace should be treated of among other things,
that may more immediately concern the State; these heads may be insisted upon
for the bettering of our Nation in general, and encouragement of Merchants and
Factors that shall continue trading with Spain.

First, that Restoration be made to the several Merchants of this Nation, of
the state and shipping which the King of Spain and his Ministers did seize on
in the year 1655. which will amount to a very considerable sum, and be made
out by testimony, and this he is absolutely bound to do, and our Governors
engaged to see performed, beside many other Reasons that may be shown more
particularly, by the twenty third Article of the Treaty between the two
Nations, made 1630. which in express words says. Item, if it shall happen
hereafter, which God forbid that any displeasure do arise betwixt the said
Renowned Kings, the King of great Britain, and the King of Spain, whereby
danger may grow of the interruption of Intercourse and Commerce, then the
Subjects of either King are thereof so to be admonished, as that they may have
six months from the time of the munition, to transport their Merchandise
without any arrest, disturbance or hurt in the mean season to be given unto
them, either in their Persons or Merchandises.

By this Provision made, its clear that the King of Spain did unjustly lay hold
of, and keep our estates, and imprison our persons; therefore as it has been
the honorable practice of the Supreme Powers of this Commonwealth, to see its
subjects righted from Foreigners in most Treaties of late; we hope the like
course will be taken when a Peace shall be agitated, and not only reparation
for the goods imbarged at the beginning of the War, but of many other injuries
and losses done to the Merchants of this Nation before, contrary to the
Articles of Peace, while we were in amity with Spain, which then were
complained of, and will still be made out by proofs of the persons damnified,
when they shall have an opportunity afforded them to do the same.

Secondly, that all the Subjects of this Commonwealth may enjoy the free
exercise of their Religion, without being molested by the Inquisition, or any
other Church Officers: and in the most signal places, where the greatest
Factories reside, that there may be tolerated Ministers to preach in our
Consuls, or some other person of authority his house; and no Spaniards to give
scandal at times of meeting, it being but high Reason we should prize our own
Religion, as much, if not more, then they do theirs, which have liberty to
exercise the same in any Ambassador, or other houses here, without
contradiction. Also we ought to have allowed select places for the burying our
dead, at such times as we think fit, in that formerly we were necessitated to
do it by stealth in the night, with much hazard of our persons, and many have
been most barbarously taken out of their graves, and exposed to be devoured by
beasts, etc.

Thirdly, when any person of this Nation dies in that Country, though
intestate, that the Court of the Cruzada, may not at all meddle with the
deceased's estate, but that the whole may come to his Correspondents and
Friends in England, without interruption, for it has been the practice of that
Court to seize on whatsoever remains of men, that die without making Wills,
and have put those to whom the estate belongs to great Charges, in proving
their Propriety, and afterward by one pretense or other, keep them from their
right, remaining with all.

Fourthly, that all question of Contrabando be taken off, touching our English
Manufactory, and that full credit be given to such dispatches and Certificates,
as our ships shall carry from the Custom-houses of England, otherwise there
will not want Informers, that may bring the clearest thing in doubt, and once a
Suit it commenc't in such cases, commonly the greater part, if not the whole
Principal is spent, ere the matter be decided, to the undoing of many a man,
and hindrance of the Commerce in general.

Fifthly, that the extraordinary Charges of Vizits, from the Contrabando and
Inquisition be taken off, and though a ship come full of any Commodity into
Port, and cannot dispose thereof, the Owner may have free liberty to seek his
Market elsewhere, without paying duties for more then he lands, and taking any
from the shore again, that will not spend the custom thereof, to be returned,
and the ship to depart at pleasure.

Sixthly, that the English Merchants may sell in any part of Spain, Corn,
Fish, or any other Commodity, at the rates they shall think good, and the
ordinary Justice there, not to put a set price, as in some places they formerly
have done to our damage, and disturbance of traffic.

Seventhly, that whatsoever goods we once dispatch, and pay the duties thereof,
shall never be questioned by any of the Kings Ministers, either of such as we
import there from England, or lade from Spain to other places, neither that we
be bound to bring Certificates of the landing our commodities in Ports, at
amity with the Crown of Spain, as has been the practice, to the loss of many
men's estates, upon false Informations, loss of Certificates, or the Judges not
admitting them for good, though authentic, when they came, taking advantages
of our securities given in that behalf, and molesting both them and us.

Eighthly, that no Merchant be liable to produce his Books of Accounts to any
of the Kings Ministers, as hitherto they compelled them to do, or for avoiding
thereof drew from us great bribes.

Ninthly, that nothing of Imposition be extracted from any of this Nation for
Custom, of what they carry to, or bring from Spain, more then what was paid,
when the last Articles were made, nor that we be enjoined to pay taxes, or lend
money to the King or his Officers, upon what occasion soever, nor be put out of
such houses wherein we live, for the accommodating any of the Kings Ministers,
as in times past many were compelled to do.

Tenthly, that our Trade may be general in all the King of Spain his Dominions,
or if a Restriction should be in the parts of America, it will be requisite
that Provision should be made for any vessels of ours, that by tempestuous
weather, or other extraordinary Accidents, may be forced from our own
Plantations thither, so as they may be friendly used while there, and have
leave to depart when they list on their employments.

Eleventhly, that Consuls and Vice-Consuls to assert the Nations Privileges,
and see the performance of Articles, and keeping our Factories in better order,
(as to the more beneficial managing the Trade) be seated in the most important
places of Spain, sufficiently empowered to that purpose.

Many other Particulars may be by the Merchants afforded to the State as
necessary, when a Treaty shall be on foot, as they shall be called upon to do
it.

FINIS.

