A Solemn PROTESTATION OF THE Imprisoned and secluded Members OF THE COMMONS
HOUSE, Against the horrid Force and Violence of the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army, on Wednesday and Thursday last, being the sixth and seventh days of
December. 1648.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament,
(above one hundred in number) forcibly seized upon, violently kept out of, and
driven from the House, by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under Thomas
Lord Fairfax, coming thither to discharge our Duties on Wednesday and Thursday
last, being the sixth and seventh of this instant December; do hereby, in our
own Names, and in the Names of the respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs
for which we serve, and, of all the Commons of England, Solemnly Protest and
Declare to the whole Kingdom; That this Execrable Force and open Violence upon
our Persons, and the whole House of COMMONS, by the Officers and Army under
their Command in Marching up against their Command, and placing strong armed
Guards of Horse and Foot upon them, without and against their Order, is the
highest and most detestable force and breach of Privilege and Freedom ever
offered to any PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND; and that all Acts, Ordinances, Votes and
Proceedings of the said House made since the sixth of December aforesaid, or
hereafter to be made, during our restraint and forcible seclusion from the
House, and the continuance of the Armies Force upon it, are no way obligatory,
but void and null to all intents and purposes: And that all Contrivers of,
Actors in, and Assistants to this unparalled Force and Treasonable Armed
Violence, are open Enemies to, and professed Subverters of the Privileges,
Rights, and Freedom of Parliament, and disturbers of the Peace and Settlement
of the Kingdom; and ought to be proceeded against as such: and that all
Members of Parliament and Commoners of England, by their Solemn Covenant and
Duty, under pain of deepest Perjury, and eternal Infamy, are obliged
unanimously to oppose and endeavor to their utmost power, to bring them to
exemplary and condign Punishment for this transcendent Offense, tending to the
dissolution of the present, and subversion of all future Parliaments, and of
the Fundamental Government and Laws of this Realm.

All which we held it our Duties to Declare and Publish to the World, for fear
our stupid silence should give any tacit consent or approbation to this most
detestable crime, and make us guilty of betraying the Privileges, Freedom and
Honor of this Parliament, to our perpetual reproach, and the prejudice of all
succeeding Parliaments. Dated at Westminster. December 11. 1648.


