The Revenous Beast Discovered, AND THE Devourer Pursued.
In a Short Account truly stated of the unjust Proceedings and Cruel dealings
by Dove Williamson Priest of Elton in the County of Nottingham, against William
Claytor of the same Town.
William Claytor being a Farmer, painfully laboring to provide for his Family,
and to pay such Rent as was due unto the Owner of the Farm, the Lord gave an
increase to the labor of his hands, and blessed it, and his corn and cattle
increased, of which increase the said Priest demanded a Tenth part, which he
calls his Tithes, but unto his demand the said William could not consent,
knowing that it was the fruit of his own labor which God had increased unto
him, and that the Priest had neither been at any charge nor taken any pains
about it; And being also convinced by the light of Christ in his own conscience
that both the Law and the Priesthood was changed under which Tithes were paid
and received, and that the Substance being come, all shadows are to cease, and
that the Gospel is free, and to be preached freely, the said William could not
for conscience sake satisfy the Priest, to give him that part which he calls
his Tithes. So the Priest sent for a Sub-poena out of the Exchequer to cause
the said William to appear in that place in his own person, to answer what the
Priest should object against him; and the said William appeared to have
answered in the Truth, but his appearance would not be taken without an Attorney
to appear for him, though he was commanded to appear in his own person upon
pain of a great sum of money, and he having performed on his part what was
required, and being there as he was commanded to answer for himself, he had not
freedom to employ another to do that which he was commanded to do himself, and
was free to do it, and for that end went near upon an hundred miles; But deceit
not receiving Truth, the said William was sent to the Fleet, (a prison in
London) and was kept a prisoner for the space of two years, during which time
the Priest made spoil of his goods, and took and carried away his corn from off
his ground by a cart load together from one land before it was set on the cock,
so greedy was the beast of his prey, and the devourer to make spoil, neither
regarding God nor man. Let the Scripture be searched and this man tried in the
spirit of Truth, and it will be plainly seen unto whom he is like, not like a
Minister of Christ (who labored with his own hands to make the Gospel without
charge) but like a greedy dumb dog that can never have enough, seeking to
devour and destroy and murder the innocent; and after all this is done, and
that the said William had been a Prisoner two years, the Priest procured a
Habeas Corpus, and removed the body of the said William to the Common Pleas
Bar, and there declared against him for 38 l. 10 s. debt, when he had made
spoil of his goods at his own pleasure, and the said William answered that he
did not ow him any thing. So he was returned into the prison again, and did
from that time continue a prisoner about a year and a quarter longer, and then
the Priest proceeded against him at the Common Law, and brought down a Trial
which was tried at the Assizes held at Nottingham in the year 16^9. and thither
the Priest brought a man whose name is Richard Horse-poole, and he swore that
the Priest was damnified for want of his Tithes to the value of 7 l. So the
Jury who was to try the matter they gave unto the Priest 20 l. and there could
be no witness heard of the said Williams part, though there were some ready to
have given crew evidence, who knew well the spoil of goods the Priest had made
in taking and carrying them away. Then the Priest proceeded upon this unjust
verdict, and was now minded for his prey, and two Bailiffs came on the Priests
behalf, whose names are George Miller and Robert Miller, who are like minded
with the Priest to devour at once, and these two men upon the 14. day of the
ninth month, 1659. seized upon the goods and chattels of the said William, and
took and drove a way eighteen head of Cattle which the said William valued
truly to be worth threescore pounds. So the Bailiffs procured one William
Bartrum and Bryan Goodwin, William Oliver and Thomas Rick, who were ready to be
like minded with them, and these men valued the goods so taken by the Bailiffs
to be worth but six and twenty pounds, at which rate they passed, and the
Bailiffs proceeded to make sale of them, and sold them at Alehouses, and never
came at any Market with them. And after they had thus finished the mischief of
their hearts as far as they were suffered, they brought 7 of the cattle back
again when they had wronged them seven or eight days, which the said William
valued to be worth eighteen pounds; So that they kept eleven Cattle which were
worth two and forty pounds. Let all who have the sense of Gods fear in their
hearts consider this soberly, and weigh it coolly, and it will appear to be the
Devils work from the beginning, for a man to be sued for denying an unjust
demand, and then cast into prison because he could not answer deceit, and then
kept a Prisoner three years and a quarter, and during that time the Priest
spoiling his goods, and then declares against him for eight and thirty pounds
ten shillings debt, and when it came to be proved could not prove any debt, but
a man falsely swears to seven pound damage for Tithes, and the Jury made that
up twenty pounds for the Priest, and the Bailiffs made it up too and forty
pounds, and thus is the innocent made a prey unto the teeth of the ungodly; And
both Priest, Judge, Jury, swearer, liar, Bailiffs and praisers all devouring by
consent, and all like minded in exercising cruelty, and all must perish
together without speedy repentance, for a wicked and an ungodly generation you
are, whom the Lord is spewing out, who delight your selves in committing such
filthy and horrible things as these are; what will ye do in the end which is
hasting upon you all, when the Lord will enquire after all your doings, and
that you must come before Him to give an account, what then will ye do, and
where will you hide your selves to escape the wrath of Him who Judges in Truth
and righteousness? there will not be a hiding place found for you, neither
amongst the Rocks nor under the mountains, but the terrible day of the Lord
will come upon you, and the fierce wrath of the Lord will overtake you, and his
indignation will take hold upon you, and a just recompense of reward will he
give unto you according to your deeds, and this is to you all from first to
last who have acted thus cruelly without showing mercy; You may here read what
is brought force by you, O ye Priests of Eng. here is your fruit, and by it are
you known to be a Troop of Robbers, false prophets and Deceivers; We do not
delight to lay open your filthiness, but that you may see your selves and be
ashamed, and for the sake of the simple who are following of you and deceived
by you, that they may come out from amongst you, and escape the judgment that
is coming upon you. And thou Priest Williamson, there needs no proof be brought
against thee, for thou have uncovered thy self to thy shame for ever, and have
made thy self manifest what thou art, and the fruits brought forth by thee do
witness against thee that thou art not of Christ's sending, He sends forth his
as Lambs among Wolves, but thou art come forth a Wolf among Lambs, Therefore
repent of the evil of thy doings, and restore that which thou have wrongfully
caused to be taken away by violence, for the cry of the oppressed and the
Family of the Innocent will rise up in judgment against thee, and the Judge of
all the earth will do right unto thee, and repay thee according to what thou
have done, and judgment without mercy will the Lord give unto thee, and heavy
will his strokes fall upon thee because thou have showed no mercy.

O ye Rulers of England who have now power in your hands to remove these
oppressions, and take off these burdens which lie so heavily upon the innocent,
the cry is exceeding great, put it not from you, nor do not neglect it any
longer, but set your hearts to do the work of the Lord, and take off the yoke
from the necks of his People, and then will the Lord be with you, and his Arm
will he make bare for you, and all your enemies shall fall before you, and none
shall prosper that rise up against you; But if you be double minded, and
neglect the work of the Lord, and seek to exalt your selves and fear the faces
of men, the Lord will withdraw from you, and your enemies will prevail over
you, and you will be rooted out as others have been before you, for cursed are
all that do the work of the Lord negligently; Therefore with boldness show your
selves in the face of all your enemies, and arise in the Power of the Lord God,
that your hands may be strengthened to take off all these burdens which make
the innocent to groan under them, and let not any thing stand that is contrary
to the Truth of God, but strike it all down, that all whose faces are
Sion-wards may walk on their way rejoicing, being freed from all oppression,
and by your Government defended from all injury and cruelty either to their
Persons or Estates, That so the exercise of their tender Consciences may not be
bowed down, nor any come into sufferings for it; But all may stand in their
Freedom toward the Lord, and that none may exercise Lordship over them; And so
all being peaceably affected toward the Nation, all may stand in their Freedom
toward the Lord, and that no Law may stand to compel or force the tender
Conscience of any; This is that which is your great work which in the integrity
of your heart you are to perform unto the Lord without delaying, and then will
the Lord be on your side and justify you, and what then need you fear who
rises up against you to condemn you; so let not your hearts be feeble, nor your
hands slack, but be you faithful unto God, and in his strength go on and
prosper, and the Lord will be with you, and he will stand by you against all
that shall oppose you, and give you the heads of all your enemies to Reign over.

This is published for no other end but to manifest Truth and lay open deceit,
that the Rulers of the Nation may see the Government, and what it is, and the
Laws, and how they are executed. And that all people may see what a Ministry
there is, and what their way is, and how they are upheld and maintained, and in
what cruelty they do compel it, that all these abominations may be rooted out
from the earth, that such a Government may be changed and such Laws disannulled,
and such execution of them repealed, and such a Ministry removed, that all such
ways may be altered, and such a maintenance raced out, never more to be
remembered, that so all cruelty, Tyranny and oppression may cease, and Truth and
equity set up and exalted, that he alone may Reign over all who will not give
his glory to another.

WILLIAM SMITH.


