A Few Words unto a PARTICULAR PEOPLE.
THe People unto whom this following matter relates, are such as holds an
Inward Principle, but in practice do not answer the true Light; and many of
them formerly met together at Nottingham Castle, and were generally known by
the name of the Castle Company; and I have lately had to do with some of them
in a private way of writing, and the Papers that I received were subscribed by
Rice Joanes, Anthony Hutchinson, Fortune Buroughs, Isaac Baker, Elizabeth
Parsons, and John Lauson; and in my last I did enjoin them to publish what had
passed between us, by causing it to be printed (with what more they had to say)
but since I have not heard any thing of it; and though these people are found
opposite to the principle and practice of the People called Quakers; yet they
have never manifest wherein they err or fall short of Truth in the general; and
some of these people that once had a sense of Truth, as in the Light it was
manifest, but they did not abide in the fear and Counsel of God, and so lost
the right way in the beginning, and then turned against the Testimony of the
Power, and fled the Cross, and many were simply betrayed by giving up their
belief to the Doctrine then propounded; but the Lord has gathered some from
amongst them, who in the Truth are a good savor to the honor of it.

Now these people have taken up a belief that they may keep their inward unto
God, and yield their bodies to comply with outward things, and in that belief
they take liberty in common Customs and Fashions, as if such things were of no
concernment in matters of Faith and Conscience, and that does clearly evidence
that their inward Principle is not of God; for where the Spirit of God is the
inward Principle, it disposes the body by its own Power, and thereby the
Conversation comes to be holy, and without blame, and body, soul and spirit
glorifieth God, as being his; (mark) the body, soul and spirit are all to be
disposed in a right order to Gods glory, and if the body comply with outward
things, and the mind otherwise reserved, it is a mental reservation; or if the
mind comply with the body in such things as are manifestly contrary to the true
inward principle, then the true principle is transgressed, and it is altogether
against the outward sufferings of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, who
suffere^ for the Testimony of Truth and a good Conscience, and their bodies
suffered for being faithful to their inward principle, and they did not seek a
way to escape sufferings, by reserving their inward principle, and yielding
their bodies to comply with outward things, but they testified to the truth of
their inward principle, and against such things as were contrary to it, and so
they exercised a Conscience void of offense toward God and man; and if the
inward principle of these people was that Spirit which testified in the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, then they could not live in such things as
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles reproved; and as they live in such
things, it is manifest that they dispose themselves in their liberty for their
own pleasure and security; and the spirit which they are under persuades them
to be reserved in their inwards, and then gives a seeming satisfaction and
peace in what is done, and the generallity of these people are much to be
pitied, who have given up themselves to believe such an error with confidence;
for neither their foundation nor building are of God, but they have laid a
foundation in the earthly wisdom, and builds upon it with their own reasoning,
and so are not in Paradise, where man was placed in his innocence, but
possesses Cain's City in the Land of Nod.

Now in the beginning the wise Creator made all things good, and he formed man
of the Dust of the Ground, and into his nostrils he breathed the breath of
life, and man became a living Soul, and the form was his Body, which as a
vessel was prepared to contain the excellency of that pure living breath, and
as man stood in communion with the Light, Power and Wisdom of his Creator, his
outward Form, Vessel or Body was equally qualified with the Virtues and Graces
of the same Nature, and so he was the Image of God by creation, and his outward
Body was ordered by his inward Principle; but when he transgressed his inward
Principle, his outward Body lost the qualifications of the Virtues and Graces
that were in it, and there he died, and then the outward Body became tainted
with qualifications of darkness, and in the Loyn of the fallen Posterity
darkness rules the Body, and so the Body is ordered by another spirit then
what ordered in the beginning, and in that spirit is the fleshly liberty of the
Body, and that is a degeneration from the Spirit by which the Body was ordered
before transgression.

And you that are concerned in this matter may do well to consider your own
bodies; for however it was in times past, as to outward bodies, yet you cannot
deny your own; and do you not understand generation, and by what generation is
maintained? and seeing you have outward bodies, it concerns you to mind what
spirit governs them, and what you yield your bodies to comply withal; for it is
certain, that the body which complies with common customs, fashions and
vanities, is not governed by the true Spirit; and that your bodies do so comply
is evident by your practice; and will you deny the body to be the workmanship
of God? and if it be his workmanship, then is it not concerned to serve and
honor him? and does it not serve and honor him, when by his Spirit it is
governed? and does it not the contrary when it complies with such things as are
contrary to his Spirit? and so the body is concerned in matters of Faith and
Conscience, as by the true Spirit it is ordered and governed, because in that
state it stands in unity with the Light, Power, Life and Wisdom which is the
Heavenly Treasure, and so the Apostle testified of the Treasure in the earthen
vessel; and what was the earthen vessel in which they had the Treasure? and did
they hide the Treasure in the earthen vessel, that it should not be known? or
did they not preach it that others might believe in it, and have benefit by it?
and did they not thank God who manifested the savor of his knowledge by them in
every place? and so they did not walk in craftiness, or handle the Word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth commended themselves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God, for they were not ashamed of the Gospel,
because they preached not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and so they
were in the universal Spirit, and communicated their Treasure according to the
Wisdom they received it in, and in that their Light did shine before men, and
their good works were seen, and God was glorified; and is your works wrought in
the Light, to shine and be seen to God's Glory? or are they not wrought in
darkness, by which God is dishonored? and if you say your works are wrought in
charity, as being most agreeable to the Nature of God, and that the compliance
of your bodies to customs and fashions is only suitable to what is observed
amongst people of the Nation; I answer, that if your works were wrought in that
charity which is agreeable to the nature of God, then you could not yield your
bodies to comply with such things as are contrary to God, and though your
customs and fashions may be suitable to the People of the Nation, yet they are
no way suitable to the Truth, or to the People that live in it; and so your
charity, customs and fashions are only to please your selves, which displeases
God; and if you will search your inwards with the Light, you may find Darkness
and Death reigning; and the true Seed oppressed and mourning; and if you were
in true charity you would regard the groans of the oppressed, and the
afflictions of the afflicted, and not exalt your selves in your fleshly liberty
to increase the burden; but Phoraoh is hard-hearted, and has neither love nor
pity, and in hardness he rules, and will not obey the Lord, and that which you
serve and worship is an Idol which darkness has formed in you, and being
affected with it, you rejoice in your outward liberty, as if it were allowed
from a true inward ground, and you will not have the Ark of God set up, lest
your Idol should fall before it, and so your hearts are after your Idol, and
not after the Lord, and you will not admit of reproof to come near you, but in
a strong confidence of the inwards, resists that dispensation, as not belonging
to you, when indeed both your liberty and confidence are reproveable, as the
offspring of a corrupted stock, and with that you keep the good Seed in
bondage, and brings forth fruit of another nature; and what then is the
inwards which you answer but the spirit of darkness, from which you have your
liberty in common customs, fashions and vanities? for the true Light redeems
out of such things, as it is obeyed and followed; and whilst you live in such
things you walk in Darkness, and not in the Light, and in Darkness you crucify
the Lord of Life, and put him to open shame; for your outward conversation does
not answer Christ, as an inward principle, but you bring forth open deeds, that
puts Christ to open shame; and that is the false birth in its false liberty,
and this is truth unto your conditions though some of you may still say as you
have done, that things come too lightly, but it is in the airy spirit in your
selves that is light, and would be eased of the weighty power; for that spirit
does not like the Power should deal with it, because the power deals truly
and plainly, and cannot dissemble and flatter, and what have you done since you
turned against the testimony of the power? have you gathered the Scattered, or
have you not been scattering, and so have neither done good to your selves nor
others? for the love which you pretend to all does not really extend to any,
but such as can esteem you, and prefer you, and in your liberty have
familiarity with you; for if any faithfully reprove you in your liberty, then
your spirit soon lusts to envy; and though you please your selves with your
pretended general love, as if it were so near the Nature of God, yet your love
is not of him, nor from him, nor to him, but is of, and from, and to your
selves; and so your love is to Esau, and not to Jacob, and that love is
contrary to the nature of God, and both your love and envy are from one ground;
for you have a secret way to strengthen your hands against the Son and Heir,
and if you can stop or hinder, or draw any from the Truth, you put forth your
strength to do it; but how do you stop or hinder or draw any from vanity? you
can let that alone, and have pleasure amongst such a people; and is that the
love and tenderness which ye have to God and his Truth? or is it not plainly
manifest to be the contrary? it is plainly seen in the Light, though in
darkness you may not see it; and notwithstanding your secret working against
the Truth, you cannot hinder Truth from prospering, you may possibly stop or
hinder some for joining to it, and also may draw some unstable minds from the
profession of it; but Truth springs and prospers, and spreads, and is
honorable, and many tender desires that joins unto it, comes to be satisfied in
it; and if you had eyes to see, you might behold the mighty work of God by his
Power, and your work profits nothing? but the natural man perceives not the
things of God, and whilst you look with that eye, the things of God are not
perceived by you; and not perceiving the things of God, you prefer your natural
work as the highest attainment; and indeed it is high, and as a high thing must
fall, and then you will know that it is not the highest attainment of Truth,
but high conceitedness in your fleshly liberty and confidence, and that will be
the end of your Idol.

Now if the grain that is sown do not die it abides alone; but if it put off
its first body through death it quickens again, and so takes root downwards,
and then rises and springs upwards, by which the nature of the Seed is again
manifest in its own body, and so according to the will of the Creator, there is
a harmony in the Creation to further production, and in that course are all
things revived to manifest the nature of their seed.

And you that look so lightly at what has or may be mentioned concerning you,
as not worth the mentioning, as in one of your Papers is expressed; and so
would not be counted such as joins, and has fellowship with the world; and
what would you be counted in your customs, fashions and vanities? would you be
counted such as are redeemed out of the world? if you would be counted such,
then you would be counted better then you are, and that is deceit; but time
will make all things ^anifest: and if you would be counted Christians and
Saints, then you must walk in the Light that sanctifies, and not walk in
darkness that defiles, and where you say in one of your Papers, That you do
not find in the Scriptures that any were called the Church of Christ, but such
as received his doctrine, then you are to prove by plain Scripture, that your
faith, doctrine and practice are the same with such as received Christ
Doctrine, and were his Church.

First, That your Faith, concerning the nature and manifestation of Christ, is
the same.

Secondly, That the Doctrine which by you is held forth and maintained, is the
same.

Thirdly, That your practice in Burrying, Marrying, Swearing, You to a single
person, observing Days and Times, paying Tithes, honoring Persons,
distinction by Titles, naming Days and Months, Feasting, and needless things
about Apparel, are the same.

Now if you cannot prove by plain Scripture that in these things you are the
same with such as received Christ's doctrine, then it must needs follow, that
ye live after the flesh, and not in the Spirit; so if you can make these things
good by plain Scripture, then you may be further tried; and if you cannot, then
it will plainly appear that you differ from such as received Christ's Doctrine,
and were his Church, and you cannot in honesty deny your error; and as for the
Papers, your publication is still expected, as being your proper place to do
it; and when things are publicly brought forth by your own hands, then your
matter may either be fully answered, or confessed; and in the mean time
consider patiently, whether these things be not worth the mentioning, and your
diligent observing; for if such of you as have any simplicity will be mindful,
you may come to know a more excellent Treasure then ye have treasured up, and a
more comely Garment then ye have put on; for your treasure is cankered, and
your garment moth-eaten; and so you dwell with the consumer, and not with the
preserver.

Friends, If you will own the Scriptures, you cannot deny but the Light with
which Christ lights every man that comes into the world is true; and as you
are come into the world, so a measure of that Light which is true is in you,
and if you obey another thing, you obey that which is false, and so are guided
by a false Principle, and that is your error wherein you resist the Truth; for
if you were guided with the true Light, then all your words and works would be
according to the Truth, and there you would feel the Cross to your outward
liberty, and Judgment to take hold upon the Transgressor, and so come to be
redeemed up to God by the work of his Power, for your own wisdom and reasoning
strengthens the Body of sin and death, but the power makes free in the
glorious liberty, and there is the cross to all fleshly motions, and by that
the Son comes to be known, and life in him; and they that have the Son have
life, and they that have not the Son have not life; and such are dead in
trespasses and sins; and this is unto you that are simple-minded, for in true
tenderness you are pitied as a people ensnared, for in a snare you are taken
and held, and the King and Queen of Babylon triumph over you.

Oh, that such of you as have been carried away with a strong voice, might now
hearken to his voice, who calls behind you, that the Light may become your
Leader and Teacher, for subtilty has deceived you, and by deceiving has power
to rule over you; and if you will not hear when the Lord calls, then when you
call he will not answer.

Friends, it is the bread that comes done from Heaven, that satisfies the
hungry, and that bread you want, and satisfies your selves with Earthly vapors,
and so you lie smothered, and sees not the Son of God, and that is certainly
your conditions in Captivity, and by the Rivers of that Land the true birth
sits weeping, and cannot sing the Lords Songs.

Nottingham, the 3d Month, 1669. Your Friend in that Love which seeks your
Eternal good. William Smith

THE END.

