A TESTIMONY FOR THE TRUTH, And against DECEIT and DECEIVERS, WITH A Reproof
unto those who are not Faithful to the Truth which they are convinced of.

By Stephen Smith.

Isaiah 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they
shall see, and be ashamed for their Envy at the People.

Verse 12. Lord, thou will ordain Peace for us; for thou have wrought all our
works in us.

Printed in the Year, 1668.

A Testimony for the TRUTH, and against Deceit and Deceivers, with a Reproof
unto those who are not faithful to the Truth which they are Convinced of.
FOr as much as it has pleased the Lord in his great love and tender mercy to
visit many who have been long covered with Darkness, and drawn by the Subtilty
of the Serpent, working in a Mystery within, and without in his Instruments,
from enjoying that Love and great Riches which is declared of in the Scriptures
of Truth, which should be revealed in the latter days, in his Everlasting and
Unchangable Covenant; which Promise of the Lord many who had true breathing
after him, and could not be satisfied with feeding with Swine upon Husks, but
truly breathed after Living Refreshment, and after that Bread which nourishes
that Birth which is Eternal, and have delighted in the righteous Judgments of
the Lord, over the Enemy and Oppressor of Man's Soul, through which Judgments
the Love of God has greatly been manifest, having thereby brought to the
knowledge of his Everlasting and Unchangable Truth, to the exceeding great
refreshment and satisfaction of the Souls of many thousands, who have earnestly
desired the same before the World and all its glory; and having received the
same in the Love of it, and known Freedom by it, in the Enjoyment of the same
do meet together, as the manner and practice was of those who lived in the Fear
and Dread of the Lord in the Primitive times; so now in the pure Fear and
Obedience to the just and equal requirings of their Creator (whose Ways are
Equal, Right and Just) meets together to wait on him, to the end they may be
refreshed and fed with the same Bread of Life, that so the Plant which the Lord
has planted may grow, that so they may be changed from glory to glory, till at
length they may come to bear the Image of the Heavenly, whereas formerly they
have born the Image of the Earthly; and those who so meet in the Spirit of
Truth, can truly say they never waited on the Lord in vain, but do witness
true refreshment from the God of Love, whether a word be spoken in their
Meetings or no; so that they can truly sing in their Spirits of Mercy and of
Judgments, forasmuch as the Lord has mixed Mercy with Judgments, and has not
executed Judgment without Mercy, in which has greatly appeared his wonderful
Love to lost Mankind, of which great and unspeakable Love, there are this day
(to the Glory and Praise of his great Name, even from his own Works) thousands
of Living Witnesses, and hundreds have laid down their Lives in Nasty Holes,
and Stinking Prisons, and many have been Banished, and many have suffered cruel
Mockings, and many thousands the Spoiling of their Goods, whose Righteous
Testimony through the Eternal Spirit of Love and Truth they have gladly born in
this Day of Gods Power, to the exceeding Comfort and Refreshment of all that
are faithful Followers of the Lamb, but is, and shall be to the astonishment
of all who persist in their Disobedience against the Spirit of Truth, and
continue in their Rebellion against it, and this righteous Testimony, through
all who are true Worshippers in the Spirit and Truth, who are led and guided in
all their ways by the Spirit of truth, being Sons and Daughters of the Living
God, so greatly beloved by him; so that those that touch them in a wrongful
manner do touch the Apple of his Eye, who created all things for his Glory; and
though his Mercy is great in not executing Judgment speedily, but gives space
and time of Repentance, yet if they mind it not, but let the Day of Gods Love
pass over their heads, that Terrible Voice they shall hear; My Spirit shall
strive no more, let Flesh know that its but Grass, and when the Spirit of the
Lord blows upon it, it shall fade as a Flower, and that in a moment, when his
Anger is kindled, which may be when the Worker of Iniquity is in the height of
his vain glory, and greatest boasting: so as that righteous Testimony (through
all who are in the true Innocent Seed, unto which all the Blessings and the
Promises of the Lord are) does stand as a true Witness of the Lords great Love
in this day wherein he is making known his great Power against all Workers of
Iniquity, and unrighteous Actions, and deceitful Workers, who can feign and
flatter with all sorts of debauched Persons, and all dissembling Hypocrites,
Persons of unstable minds, joining with the cunning, twisting, twining Serpent,
in all its appearances, in their earthly, sensual, and devilish wisdom, being
in the Adulterous whorish spirit, degenerated from the Spirit of Truth, holding
a Profession of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons,
receiving honor, and giving honor, according to the Customs and vain
Traditions of the World, by which means they have no knowledge of that Honor
which is from Above: yet notwithstanding these great Abominations which they
commit in the sight of the Lord, and all them which lives in their faithful
Testimony against them, yet they lean upon the Lord, and thinks there shall
come no evil upon them; but except such do speedily repent, and turn from their
Abominations, and bow to the righteous Testimony of God in them, which shows
them the deceitfulness of their hears, to the end they may above, and before
all, desire a clean heart, and a right Spirit, that so they may be single
hearted toward their Creator, and all men; which except that be known, the Lord
will send a day upon them, wherein shall be weeping, and howling, and bitter
Lamentation; and their Torment shall be so great, that in the Morning they
shall wish it were Night, and at Night they shall wish for Morning, and many
shall desire Death rather then Life: So I greatly desire that all People would
mind, in coolness, how it stands between them and their Creator, and deal
impartially with themselves, for, of a certain, God will not be mocked, but
such as they sow, such they must reap: So all mind the Fear of the Lord, which
is to depart from Evil, that so the Curse of the Lord may be done away, and his
Blessing known and received.

And those that comes amongst the Possessors of Truth, who have heard the sound
of it, and so a belief is raised in their hearts, that God is found by them
that diligently seek him in the Way of Truth; many there be that are thus
persuaded, and so frequent Meetings (together with them that are in the work of
Truth) in a bare Profession of Truth, never thoroughly given up to the end that
Truth may be their Guide in all their ways, but comes and sits down with some
reserve in their hearts, which they covet to keep, as Achan did the goodly
Babylonish Garment, which was appointed for the Fire; but for so doing the
Curse of the Lord followed him, though his covetousness was a trouble to the
Children of Israel for a time, yet at length God made it manifest; and so will
the Lord do those who comes amongst Friends with a reserve in their hearts;
that which is appointed for the Fire, they that covet to keep, notwithstanding
the many Precious Meetings they come to, and hear their conditions plainly laid
open to them, yet still consulting with Flesh and Blood, which will never yield
that true obedience should be given to the Lord, so cannot amend, but continue
in the same course of life, for not taking heed to the Council of the Lord, nor
giving wholly up to be guided by the Spirit of Truth; such are not in the Way of
Truth, but sit down as dead Branches by those of the Vine; but their Fruit does
manifest them: for those that deals so deceitfully with their own Hearts, how
can it be expected they should be true to others? so such becomes an ill savor
to Truth, as long as they continue so, and a burden and a trouble to them that
are in the way of growing in the Truth; but let them know who harden their
hearts against Reproof, and though they do come amongst them that lives in the
Fear and Dread of the Lord, and so meet together that they may receive a
continual supply of the Bread of Life, and enjoy the Presence of the Lord; yet
their so coming with a reserve in their heart, they cannot profit by it: So at
length, seeing they cannot bring the Way of the Lord to their way, they begin
to grow cold in meeting, and so by degrees the Enemy draws out the mind, and
then gets room for his consultations, and so persuades them to wait no longer,
but that all Places are alike: and so at length some gets into the Mass-House,
with other silly People laden with sins, ever learning, and never able to come
to the Truth; and begins to persuade themselves, (or the Enemy of their Souls
persuades them) that there is little difference in the Declaration of the
Ministers of Christ and Antichrist; their words, say they, are all good, and so
begins to build Babel again, having rejected that Love which did appear for
their Everlasting good, having chosen to please themselves in some small thing,
which they could not part with, though no better then a Mess of Pottage, for
which many have sold an Eternal inheritance; so with Cain they are in the
Curse, wandering up and down in that which is cursed of the Lord, and not
beloved of good men; so the Lord has dealt justly in making them manifest,
They went out from us, because they were not of us, but their reward will
follow them. And many others there be that comes to Meetings, and hears Truth
declared often, and confesses its the Truth, but when they see, if they come
to obey, they must take up a Cross to Flesh, either in denying to fear man, or
else hazard of losing Goods, and some their Companions and Acquaintance,
(though it may be in iniquity) and such like Baits the Enemy of man's Soul has
ready, for that mind which is willing to catch at them, to save that alive
which is in the Curse; so sometimes they come, and sometimes stay away, and
then come again, and the Enemy of their Souls gets a wound now and then; but
for want of giving up, at length the Enemy begins to be whole again, and so the
Spirit of the Lord is grieved and quenched by degrees, and the Enemy grows
stronger and stronger; and at length he gets these Reasons in the Creature,
because the Enemy knows many will not be satisfied without some plausible
Reason; so he tells many, why thou art but a poor Creature, or you are but poor
Creatures, and what can you do without power? so here the willing mind readily
catches at this bait: and then when they are asked, why they give not up, O say
they, we want power, O that I had but power to do so and so, how joyful should
I be; and such like stuff the Enemy furnishes them withal, who are willing to
receive it, and in the mean time slights the appearance of Christ, (the Light,
in whom Power is received) by grieving and quenching his Holy Spirit of Truth,
in which is the greatest manifestation of Love that God could bestow on lost
Mankind, in making manifest his Son in their hearts, for the redeeming them up
unto himself, out of their lost condition, in the nature of Adam in the fall,
up into the Nature of the Second Adam, which never fell: but how is this Love
of God slighted by those who thus wilfully yields to the Enemy of their Souls,
and rejecting the Lord, who searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and then
say they want power; and its true, when people have given themselves up to the
power of the Enemy, whose nature is to do all the hurt he can, they may well
say then they want power to do good, that being disesteemed and accounted of as
a thing of naught, having cast behind them the great Love of God in his Son,
and embraced something which the Enemy has set before them, as some glory in
the World, and the like; but as he was always a Liar, (the Devil) so will he
be found in this; for instead of giving them the glory of the World, he is
fitting them for Gods Wrath and Indignation, that so when he is cast out of
those of more upright hearts, and more thankful, that he may possess those
Swinish natures, and so throw them headlong into a Sea of Destruction, with
others of the like bad natures, of whom I shall say something.

Those are they which have heard and seen something of Truth, by reading Books,
or speaking with some in the Truth, whose words being accompanied with power,
proceeding from the Spirit of Truth, they not having been able to resist, but
standing over them, questionings and reasoning has been raised in them
concerning their buildings, whether or no they be upon the right Foundation;
but that being caught too, which shows them their conditions so plain, that
they have no assurance of their well-being, but in doubtings, and reasonings,
and fears, through which secretly torment does arise; but their minds being
from him that shows them their conditions, which, though it be the greatest
Love that God could bestow on lost Mankind, yet in that it brings a Cross to
flesh, seeing plainly that if they hearken to it, they must forsake all their
vain customs and traditions of the world, with all its Lusts and Vanities;
these things not agreeing with Flesh and Blood, with which they are consulting,
the mind being drawn from the Witness for God in their hearts, by their wilful
yielding to the Enemy of their Souls, who is always ready with his Baits to
betray them who desires ease in the Flesh, and whose minds are out in studying
Arguments to keep them in the same, the subtle Serpent being here at work, to
the end that the Creature may partake of his Table, for he knows that then they
cannot partake of Gods Table, as the Scriptures of Truth declares; so at his
Table he hands out curious words, in Prayers, and hanging down the head like a
Bullrush, and with feigning and flattering words to all sorts of Deceitful
Workers, and does help to turn and wind with all sorts of Worship, which the
Beastly Nature sets up, and so tells them there is Flesh as well as Spirit to
be satisfied, and that they must live in sin, as long as they have a being
here; and to others, whose natures be inclined to Lust, he provides plentiful
Dishes for them; and others, who are disposed to Drunkenness, he directs them
to Companions, and opportunity; and at his Table are variety of Dishes for the
Covetous man, or Proud, High, Heady, Boaster, Curser, Ranter, for all sorts
that will come to his Table, he has curious Dishes in a plentious manner, and
in all these he promises content and satisfaction; but as he ever was, so he
is, and ever will be a Liar; for let those speak who has fed most plentiful at
his Table, if ever they were satisfied, but that the more they fed the more
hungry they were; let all all these forementioned, and Gamsters speak for
themselves, and Thieves, and Murderers, and the like. But in some he works
more in a Mystery, and furnishes his Table with curious words, and so feeds
them, and decks them; but always at his Table he has this Dish for all sorts
of Professors and Profane, that they must live in Sin, in this Life; this is,
as it were, a Chain, by which he holds all, that will believe so, fast to his
Table; and then let them be as rich as they will, in comprehending, and getting
into the Brain-knowledge the Scriptures, and outward Learning, so though the
work grows so high in the Mystery of Iniquity, that the Enemy of the Soul has
exalted himself above all that is called God, and so makes a show in fine
Words, and in long Prayers, and in curious Arts; yet whilst he can keep them in
his Chain to his Table, if they cannot have ease in professing in one Sect, he
will give them leave to profess in another Sect; and if that will not serve he
will give them leave to go into the profession of Truth it self; and further,
to meet together with them in the Truth, any thing but hearing the Voice of the
Son of God, and obeying, which brings to the Table of God, and so overthrows
his Table; to any thing but this his Chain will reach: Now, as to what is
before, those that have seen something of Truth, and some trouble has by
reason thereof risen in them, but for love of a little ease to the flesh, such
their minds being out, willingly goes into the Devils Chain, and so feeds at
his Table, where they are furnished with Arguments against the Spirit of Truth
manifested to lead and to guide into all truth, and so out of Sin, which is the
Devils Chain; but being thus furnished according to their hearts lusts, being
in the Adulterous Spirit, takes all occasion to speak evil of the Truth, and
them that are in it, who are true worshippers of the Lord, according to his
Will, in Spirit and Truth; so the god of the World having blinded their minds,
an evil eye gets out, and this watches for the halting of them who are in
Truth; and when the just hand of God is gone out, in making manifest some who
have been in the profession of Truth, who have hardened their hearts against
reproof, till at length their hypocrisy and guile is made manifest; on which,
they hereby take occasion to speak evil of the Way of the Lord, and them that
are in it, the Enemy of their Souls giving them thereby some ease for the
present; but it lasts not long, but the Fame of Truth is sounded in their ears
again, by the Witness for God within, or else from those in whom in dwells
without them then the Lamb rises, and gives torment again, and their Coverings
be too narrow, and will not serve them, neither shall they; Woe to the
Rebellious Children says the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of me, and that
cover with a covering, but not with my Spirit: So all unrighteous Coverings
which people of unstable minds are under, the Woe of the Lord is against, so
what will become of them that are under them? O that men would in coolness
consider, whose day of Gods Visitation in Love is not past, lest by their often
provocations, he visits in his great Displeasure, and says My Spirit is weary
with striving, it shall strive no more: now for the sakes of many who have yet
true Breathings after Living Refreshment, and are willing to take up Christ's
Yoke and Burden, and to follow him that is meek and lowly in heart, that so
they may find rest for their Souls; for their sakes I shall give a brief
Relation of the Ministers of Christ, and of the Ministers of Antichrist: First,
The Ministers of Christ must know Christ, and see him, and believe on him, John
6.40. But some will say, Who is there that knows not Christ? Does not all that
can read see what is writ of him in the Scriptures of Truth? And is not that
the Ghrist which you mean, who suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, and the
like? Yes, we do own the same Christ, and that which the Scriptures do declare
of him is true, and we do expect no other; but to know him no further then the
report of him, (though that be true) this is but a poor knowledge, which the
Workers of Iniquity have, of all sorts, that lives visibly in gross and
manifest Sins; and notwithstanding that knowledge, yet live and abound in the
same; so that knowledge only (though that, as I have said, be true) is not
sufficient to fit a man to be a Minister of Christ: But says the diligent
Enquirer. What knowledge then is necessary for a Minister of Christ? To know
him as he is the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made
manifest to his Saints: to know what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery
among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory, Collos. 1.26, 27.
To know him as he is a Covenant given to the People, and a Light to enlighten
them, manifested within them, to give the knowledge of God; and to know that he
is the Light of the World, and how he has enlightened every man that comes
into the World: to know him to be the Word in the Heart and in the Mouth: to
know him to be the Reconciler unto God: to know him to be the Anointing, which
is true, and teaches all things: to know him to be the Spirit of Truth, which
is manifest to lead and to guide into all Truth: to know Christ's Flesh, and
what it is to each: to know Christ's Blood, and what it is to drink it: but some
will say, all this may be read in the Scriptures: But by the way, thought the
words may be read in the Scriptures of Truth, yet the knowledge of the Mystery
which is declared of in those words, is not attainable by reading them: But
because some are willingly ignorant, and so desires to be, rather then to have
true wisdom in Gods Way. and so stumbles at all, I shall say a little
concerning seeing the Son, which is necessary for a Minister of Christ; First,
To see him to be the great Love of God manifested to convince of Sin: to see
him to be the wonderful Power of God, and how that he died, to the end, that
whether we sleep or wake we should live together with him: to see him as he was
manifest to destroy the Works of the Devil: to see him to be the great Mystery
of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh; and much more might be said of the
knowledge and sight which a true Minister of Christ has, but what has been
said is enough to satisfy the truly hungring and thirsting Soul; but the full
loathes the Honey comb: But is this all may the upright-hearted say? Nay, they
that thus have obtained mercy to have the knowledge of what is above declared,
must receive it in the love of it, and this Love of God thus manifested in them
they must give up to obey, being his Everlasting and Unchangeable Covenant,
which is the Key of Knowledge, manifested to rend the Vail, and to break the
Chain of Darkness, and to open the Mysteries of the Scriptures of Truth, and to
give the knowledge of God, whom to know is Eternal Life; so Iniquity being
taken away, and Sin being purged through the knowledge of Christ, who is the
Power of God, and God known to walk, and to dwell in them through the Son of
his Love, who is Gods Righteousness, as God has said, I will dwell in you, and
walk in you: The Eye of the Understanding being thus opened, and the Revelation
of Christ being daily witnessed to fit and to furnish them with Wisdom from
above, to speak a word in season unto all conditions; being thus filled with
the Love of God, and his Glorious Appearance, a constraint lying upon them,
through the Power of God that dwells in them, and from the great Love of God in
the same, such cannot be silent, nor eat their Morsel; alone but the Love of
God does constrain them who have Wives, and Children, and Estates, and several
others that have no Wives and Children, to leave their Callings, and several
Employments, and go abroad as Sheep among Wolves, to declare this great and
unspeakable Love, to the end, That People may be turned from Darkness to Light,
and from Satan's power, to the Power of God, that others may partake of the same
Love of God in his Son Christ Jesus with them: But for this their love, how
Barbarously and Cruelly they have been used, many having finished their
Testimony in Nasly Holes, and Prisons, and other great Cruelties, which would
be too long to relate; so these thus furnished with the Love and Power of God,
and being obedient to the same, being Learned men in the Book of Life; these
are not to take with them Scrip nor Purse, so as to be careful of Earthly
things, (but as they have received freely, do minister freely) but into what
house they come, where this great Love is answered in the same Love of God in
measure, what things such set before them, for necessity they eat and drink,
and the like, seeing it comes from their Fathers Love: but when they come into
a place and cannot see, in the Counsel of the Lord, that that Love is answered
in which they come, there they cannot receive, though in never so much
necessity. True, say some, these are fit Qualifications for a Minister of Jesus
Christ; but be there any such now adays? How do thou know them? Yes, I do
testify, as thousands beside my self are ready to give the same testimony,
that such Ministers, qualified, as before mentioned, there be many in this Day
of Gods Power: But how do you know, may some say? I answer, By turning us to
the great and unspeakable Love of God manifested in our hearts, which shows us
our conditions, how it stood between us and our Creator, as it had done long
before, but we knew not that this was the appearance of the Son of his Love,
till those who had tasted, handled, seen and selt the powerful working thereof
told us; but told us also, the first step must be through Judgment; so a belief
thereof being raised, and a clean and a perfect obedience yielded to it, we in
time found its power in us, opening the Eye of our Understandings, and revealed
the m^n of Sin; and so came the knowledge of the Spirit of Truth to be revealed
in us, and by it we had a sight of the unfruitful Works of Darkness without in
his Instruments, and the sight of the Spirit of Truth, and those that were
Ministers of it: But notwithstanding this Testimony, if some should be hard to
believe, let such deal so ingeniously with their own Souls, as to go and hear,
and try, with a single heart, and hold fast that which is good; and this is
desired, to the end that others may be partakers of the same Love of God, and
of their assurance of their being reconciled unto him through his Son, to whom
be glory for ever. Now there being a necessity that the Ministers of Christ
should be qualified, as is before mentioned, the Ministers of Antichrist may be
easily known; but for the sakes of such aforementioned, I shall lay down some
marks of them: First, They are such who never knew the Son of God in the
Everlasting and Unchangable Covenant manifested in them, so not learned men in
the Book of Life, but are alienated from the Life of God, through the ignorance
that is in them, not knowing him manifested in them, who is infallible, but in
their fallible wisdom, by the Art of Tongues, gets the Prophets, Christ, and
the Apostles words, and something out of Heathen Authors, and so in their vain
imaginations patches up an hours Discourse; and so for the love they have for
their god, which is their Belly, they sell their Art at as dear a price as they
can, for several hundreds by the year, some for more, and some for less, but
all as dear as possible; as I heard a Priest say once, if it were not for
Tithes who as would should preach for him: but this being so well known to all,
that its alone for their god, which is their Belly, that their Mouths is
opened, there is little need to speak of that, these being Sayers, but not
Doers, so not accepted of God; these are they which run and are not sent, which
speaks a divination of their own Brain, so not like to profit the people, you
may read of them at large Ezekiel the thirteenth, read the Chapter; from such
Priests and Prophets as these is Profaneness gone forth in all the Land, read
Jeremiah the twenty third; so they are sufficiently marked out in the Scriptures
of Truth. But some say, we know all the Priests now adays are bad enough, and
the smoothest of them preaches for filthy lucre sake, but they speak good
words; so we may do as they say, and not as they do: O foolish People, is it
not because you love such easy Prophets, who speaks peace to you in your Sins,
that you thus speak? have you not heard what the Scriptures of Truth says? Do
men gather Grapes of therns, or Figs of Thistles? By their Fruits you may know
them: Should we not count him a very Fool that should go look for Figs on
Thistles, or sweet water out of a bitter Fountain? What if they should say the
Lord lives, that is a true saying to them which knows it in themselves; but its
a Lie to them who say it, and knows the contrary in them; but these Priests
which Peach for Hire, cry Peace to men whilst they put into their Mouths, to
the end their god may be supplied, which causes and constrains their Mouths to
be open; but in case you deny to put into their Mouths, then, Demetrius like,
prepares War; crying out, we have a Law, and if you wont pay, we will make you
pay: But by the way, what compulsive Law of man does Christ's Ministers use, or
were they to use? prove any such thing in the Scriptures of Truth, that they
were to compel any man to give to them: now, if God has appointed no such
Maintenance by his Righteous Covenant and Law; Is it not stealth in his sight,
to compel and take that by man's Law, which God has not appointed in his Law?
Look about you Priests, for the Righteous Judge will sit in Judgment, and to
the Lambs Bar to give an account you must come, and then the twisting Serpent
will stand you in no stead, but all things will be laid bare before you, what
esteem you have had of your god, which is your Belly, for the serving of which,
how have you yielded unto the lying Spirit, and so like Ahabs Prophets
persuaded and instigated many to go on in Persecution, though to their
destruction. Have you not told the Magistrates that the Quakers are
Ringleaders of Faction, though you never come to their Meetings, nor never
examined the cause why they dissented from you; nor never heard that they went
about to disturb or molest any, of their outward enjoyments, but barely because
they bore a faithful Testimony against the twisting twining Serpent, the great
Enemy of man's Soul; which Spirit of Error your god cannot be served without: so
a great stir and ado you make, in being Instruments of casting into Prison,
haling and tearing away the Goods, and the like, from those who lives in the
Fear and Dread of the Lord God Almighty, and in peace with men, though in
enmity with the Serpent, the Enemy of man's Soul: so the innocent blood which
has been shed in Nasty Holes, and Stinking Prisons, cries aloud unto the
Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who is Lord of all, who created all at his
pleasure, and can destroy all in the same; those that be innocent, out of the
revengefull spirit, have committed themselves, and so cannot use any compulsive
way, with Weapons that are Carnal, but in plain Demonstration and Power of the
Spirit of Truth, and their innocent Cause to the Judge of all they have
committed, to be cleared in his will and time, who will assuredly do it. But
further to clear that you are the Ministers of Antichrist, if, notwithstanding
what is declared, any yet be in doubt: Hearken what Christ says to the Wicked,
I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick, and in prison, and visited me not. Then shall they also answer him,
saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or a stranger, or sick,
or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them,
saying, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me; and these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, Matthew. 25. In the same Chapter he shows the Righteous man's love,
and his reward; and how did they express their love to Christ? Did they do it
in speaking great words of his Name? No, as you may read, they visited his
Brethren in their necessities: so mark by the way, there were Righteous men,
and now are, though the Ministers of Antichrist for their gods sake, would have
all err and stray again from the Lords way; but the Pearl for which they have
sold all and bought, is of more value then so; but since Christ has Brethren,
are not they them which are led by the Spirit of Truth? and if people be given
up to obey it, will it not lead them out of the Spirit of Error? If so, then
must they not depart from your ways, who are in the Revengefull Spirit? Well
then, since those that are led by the Spirit are Sons of God, as the Scriptures
of Truth declare, Romans 8. and Heirs with Christ; for he that sanctifies, and
them that are sanctified are all of one, wherefore he is not ashamed to call
them Brethen: now since there is such a unity between Christ and his Followers,
Shall it avail them any thing, who call upon Christ, yet persecute so near
Relations, as his Brethren? And since those that visited them not in their
necessities, received such condemnation, what will become of you? And you,
Generation of wicked Doers, who have been the cause of the Imprisoning so many
of Christ's Relations, where several hundreds have laid down their lives for
their faithful Testimony against you, because of your Adultery from the Lord,
and his Worship, which is to be performed in Spirit and Truth, and have set up
worships according to your own hearts Lust: and because of the Lords Patience,
and Long-suffering, and great Mercy, how do you harden your hearts against
Reproofs, and for good return evil, and so go on scoffing and mocking: well,
though the Lord has exercised a great deal of patience, its my belief, it will
not last long; but he will execute Righteous Judgment, and plead the Cause of
the Innocent, who has committed all to him, with Praises and Glory from his
own Works for ever.

The 21th day of the 11th Month, 1667. Stephen Smith.

THE END.

