A short Manifestation of the Main End of Outward Government.
OH England, how great is the Love which the Mighty GOD of Heaven and Earth
does manifest toward thee! how does he withhold his Judgments from thee for
his own Names sake! Surely he would not that thou should utterly perish, but
graciously waits that thou might come to Repentance, and turn from the evil
of the doings, that he might show thee Mercy; for the Love which he has
toward thee is in sparing thee, and not in delighting in thee, because thy
ways are grievous to him, and thy Abomination provokes him daily, and he has
raised up his Seed within thee to bear witness unto the Truth, and all that are
born of it they travel for thy good and welfare, that thou might be a Land of
Righteousness, Justice and Equity, and bear the name of Christianity in the
nature of it above all Nations in the World; this is the kindness of the Lord
toward thee, who for these several years has warned thee to forsake thy sins,
and to put away the evil of thy doings, but thou kickest against his Counsel,
and growest worse and worse: and though he has beheld the deep Sufferings and
Afflictions that his People have endured under thy Cruelty, and how thou have
made thy own Natives the Object of thy Severity, yet he has not speedily
executed his Judgments to the full upon thee, but unto this day had rather that
thou would turn from thy wickedness and live; O therefore be not still
rebellious against so gracious a God, but hear and obey his Counsel, that thou
may love mercy, do justly, and walk humbly with God; for whilst thou art at
enmity against his Light, thou exercisest thy self in cruelty, and walk
proudly, scornfully and disdainfully, and with that spirit art striving to
banish Truth out of thy Dominions, and to rid the Land of Innocent People,
whose holy Conversation in all things is blameless toward thee; for we that
are called Quakers have a Witness in the Consciences of many that bears a sure
Testimony to our peaceable life; and did not the Execution of the late Act
manifest the Intention to be against US, we could not have believed it from the
express words of it, neither are our Meetings any more concerned in it,
according to the form of it, than the children that are yet unborn; but seeing
that the Execution is laid upon us, by which it appears that it is
Intentionally against Us, we have clearness in the power of God to manifest our
own Innocence, that the Cruelty of such as put it in execution against us may
lie upon their own heads; and for this end it is that we are moved thus to
write, that all people may see and understand that our Meetings are free from
any guilt according to the form of the said Act, and that we ought not in
Reason, Truth or Righteousness to be suppressed or banished, or any way
disturbed in relation to our Meetings, being that no manner of evil can be
proved to have risen from them at any time, but contrariwise very much good, as
many are witnesses; and whosoever set themselves to act against us in this
matter, they outrun the form of their own Law, and transgress the Righteous
Law of God, and unto God they must give account for such their doings:
therefore let none reject Counsel which tends to their eternal good, for they
that would be regulating others before they be regulated in themselves, and
clearly understand by the Inspiration of the Almighty, what they ought to
suppress, and what to encourage, they may in their undertakings suppress the
Truth and encourage Error, and so run themselves into irregular actions and
proceedings, and yet count them legal; therefore to consider the ground which
first caused the necessity of outward Laws is of great concernment, for if all
people were guided by the principle of God in themselves, then they would not
need any outward Law to govern them, but the Principle of God being
transgressed, then the Enmity got up and governed, and because of transgression
the Law was added; and Cain who was of the wicked one he transgressed the
Principle of God, and slew his brother about Religion, and the just Law of God
took hold upon him as a transgressor, and his punishment was greater than he
could bear; and think you to escape whose hands are doing the same work? do not
deceive your selves with your Law, for the righteous God is just in all his
ways, and your Law will not be a defense unto you, when the Law of the Spirit
of Life takes hold upon you in Judgment. Now Religion is not a thing that falls
within the compass or power of Nations Laws, but wholly belongs unto God, to
order as he sees good, and man is only to extend his power unto such things as
he is in a capacity to understand, and that which appears to be transgression
in Civil things he is to lay the Law upon it for the terror of evildoers; for
whatsoever is ordained of God there is an end for which it is ordained, and the
End is only to be answered; and so Outward Government has its End, and if it
keep in its place, and answer its end, it is good, and ought to be submitted
unto for Conscience Sake; if it relieve the Oppressed and judge the cause of the
Widow; if it preserve the Nation in peace, and the People in their well-being;
if it do right to those that are wronged, and keep down vanity and profaness,
which is in the transgression, then it answers its End, and is to be submitted
unto: And as this is the main End of Outward Government, so it is to be
faithfully answered by all that are entrusted with it, and they are not to
intrude into any thing beyond it, for where any do so, either in making Laws or
executing them, they do that for which they were never ordained of God; and so
unrighteous Decrees come to be made and executed, and that against an Innocent
People, that answers the End of the Law without the force of the Law, and
against whom there is no Law; for the Law was not made for the Righteous, but
for Sinners, (mark) for Sinners: but to worship God in his Spirit is not sin;
to live peaceably, righteously and soberly is not sin; to speak the Truth and
not to swear is not sin; the Law was not made for such as so live, but for
sinners; (mark again) for Thieves, Murderers, Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers,
Liars, Sporters, Players, Rioters and wrong-doers, proud, heady, high-minded,
vain, and profane people, here are the sinners for whom the Law was made; and
have you any thing of this nature against us? or, does not the Witness of God
in your own Consciences clear us? Now where does your Sword fall, do you not
miss the Sinners, and smite the Righteous? Is not your Sword in your left hand,
that makes you strike so far wide of that which you should hit? must our
peaceable Meetings be suppressed, and we afflicted and punished, and such as
meet to exercise vanity and profaneness escape and go free? if you govern not
over such things, what do you govern over? Truth governs it self, and all that
live in it are well governed by it; therefore govern over the Evil, and let not
it govern over you, for thereby you are drawn to delight in it, and so cannot
smite it, but smite the Righteous, that are well-governed in the Power and
Wisdom of God. O it is a sad thing that such as represent the Nation should act
against the Body of their Representation, and such as are in power in the
Country should put such Acts in execution, and thereby endeavor to banish out
of the Nation their own Neighbors, and so leave Wives Widows, and Children
Fatherless, and Families destitute of outward succor! Surely God never
ordained you to do such things, neither does God or good men approve you in it,
and you are happy that have or do avoid the evil of it: O return to your places
all you that are out of them, that you may be found doing such things as are
well-pleasing unto God; and let your care be to answer the End of your places
in things that you understand, that the Nation may be kept in peace by your
means, and do not run things into distraction and confusion under pretense of
Reformation and Regulation. Now look over your proceedings according to your
own Law, Can you proceed to Judgment in any offense criminal, or in any case of
difference, without some Evidence to make proof unto you of the matter in
question? and is not every Witness engaged to speak the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth? and are not all Juries engaged to try all Causes
according to their Evidence? Now consider whether this can be done in a Case of
Conscience, being that no Evidence can speak from a true knowledge or
understanding of the matter; and though the Act be brought forth in such terms
as something may be taken notice of as an offense, that is to say, Sedit^ous
Conventicles; but no Evidence can prove a Peaceable Meeting to be a Seditious
Conventicle, if they speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth; and so a Peaceable Meeting to worship God in tenderness of Conscience is
not an offense which the Act takes notice of, neither is it transgression
against it, for no Evidence can prove such a Meeting to be a Seditious
Conventicle; and the matter not being proved, no Jury is in a capacity to find
it, nor Judge to condemn it. O therefore consider, and be serious in your
places, who are concerned in Authority this day; for the main End of Outward
Government is to suppress evil, and to be a terror to evildoers, and a praise
to them that do well: Now if you say, We look upon you not to do well, in that
you will not be conformable with us unto the Worship which we observe, but meet
together contrary to our discipline, and in that sense we do suppress you as
evildoers: Well, this is your persuasion; but God has otherwise persuaded us:
and if it should be an evil in us in this case, yet it is not for you to
condemn, but to leave it unto God who is a righteous Judge of the Conscience:
but we are fully persuaded in the Lord, that our not-conforming with you, and
also our Meetings in that way wherein we worship God, is according to his mind;
for he has opened our understandings by his Light, in which we see that your
Worship is not grounded upon a true foundation; and he has called us to
Separation: and though separated from your way, yet we truly worship God in his
living Spirit, which is his own way; and he has called us so to do; and in
obeying the Lord we do well, and not evil: and therefore it is not what you may
be persuaded concerning us in this case, that makes us Evildoers in the sight
of God, neither are you to force us into your persuasion, or from our own, but
to suppress every manifest Evil, as before is mentioned, and not to make a
thing evil from a supposition according to your own persuasions, and then to
make a Law against it to suppress it, this is besides your places, and does not
belong unto you: therefore if you will do that which properly belongs to your
places, cut down the sin that abounds this day before your own eyes, and then
you will answer the End of the Law in Truth; for we desire that all in Power
may be kept out of this great Evil of Persecution for Conscience Sake, or being
in it, may be plucked forth through Information to their understandings, which
is the main End why we write after this manner; for if it was not in pity unto
such as are herein concerned, we could be silent, and in patience lie down,
knowing the determination of God concerning our Cause: And as for such whose
Resolutions are to carry it on to the height against us, unto such I say, Let
not Enmity oversway Justice and Equity, and we are ready to make our Defense;
but if in Enmity you will prosecute contrary to Justice and Equity, then I say
unto you in the Word of the Lord God, That when you have filled up your
measures, the dregs of your own Cup you must drink, yea, and drink them off,
and none shall pity you; for the Lord God is on our side, and his
fresh-Springs are our Consolation, and from his Presence you cannot banish us:
though you may be permitted to force some out of their Native Land, yet when
you have done, they will be at home with the Lord, and in the Land of the
Living possess unspeakable Joy; therefore let all your thoughts cease
concerning us, for we are of good courage in our Innocent Cause, and knowing
that in this matter we have not wronged any man, we can boldly appeal to the
Witness of God in all men for Justice and Equity; and with him alone we leave
our Cause, who is our Helper and Deliverer, in whom we trust, the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, the Righteous Judge of all the Earth, whose living Spirit is
our weapon, and his Salvation our walls and bulwarks.

W. S.
The beginning of the 7th month, 1664.

