ADVICE for the Prevention of Theft. Being a short Account of the Confession
and Discovery Which was made by a Condemned Prisoner, Who was Executed the
25th. of May, 1687. TO William Smythies, Curate of St. Giles Cripplegate.
I Have been often desired to visit the Condemned Prisoners; and have heard
some passages, which I could have wished had been published for the prevention of
Mischief to many Persons and Families, but was unwilling to be the Penman of
them; well knowing what Censures many Men lie under, for doing those things
which were designed for the Good of others. I have therefore visited some
Persons, both in the City and some adjacent places, who have been accused by
Condemned Malefactors, as most destructive Abetters and Entertainers of them
and other Robbers: And I have some reason to hope it was with good Success.

I was under a Special Obligation, to attend upon a young Man who was Executed
yesterday, in the Prime and Strength of his years: And being satisfied, that
what he said was True, and that it proceeded from a great Sense which he had of
his deplorable Condition; I am willing to adventure the publication of some
Discoveries he made to me, which tend to the reforming of some Men's Lives, and
the securing of other Men's Goods and Properties.

It was his earnest Desire, at the time of his Execution, That all, Young Men
especially, should take Warning by him, that they avoid the Company of those
who lay wait to ensnare them: That in order to it, they should take care they
mispend not the Lord's day, and (especially) that they entertain not wicked
Company, by which they become the Servants of the Devil, when they should be
serving GOD in His public Worship; which is the common inlet of all
wickedness, and one of the first Steps toward that dismal End which he brought
to himself. I do not know that ever I observed any Repentance in a Condemned
Malefactor, who did not bitterly lament his Neglect of his Duty to God on that
Day. Those young Persons who make the Lord's day a day of Idleness, little
think what Advantage they give the Tempter, by degrees, to make that, and all
other, to be days of Wickedness. He acknowledged, that there is no Pleasure,
but in a Sober and Religious Life; and that the ways of Wickedness do not only
tend to the Destruction of Soul and Body, but are the occasions of such Fears
and Perplexities, as outweigh all the Profit of Ungodliness. And that is not
all, but they bring most intolerably-wounding Grief and Sorrow to tender
Parents; which was a great aggravation of his Trouble, and occasioned his
earnest Request, that all good Christians would pray to God to comfort his
Religious Father and Mother, who had it all respects discharged their Duties of
Love toward him: And I am sure there is great need of such Prayers. These
Considerations had prevailed with him to avoid all ill Company, for the space
of a Month (or more) before he was taken; and if he had escaped this Sentence,
it is very probable, that he would have changed the Course of his Actions.
Early Piety is the best Security against all Evils. Young Men may choose the
Fear of God, and his easy and pleasant Yoke, but if they break loose, and
begin an Ungodly Life, they can not tell to what Degree of Wickedness they
shall increase, when they shall come off from it, or at what time the Judgment
of God will overtake them.

But my design is not now to enlarge upon those Arguments which hardened Minds
can resist, though they come from Dying Men, when in the Bitterness of their
Souls; And therefore shall proceed to that which may alarm Housekeepers, to
beware of Thieves whose numbers are so great, that another Condemned Malefactor
told me it is impossible they can ever be suppressed: And that there is an
incredible number of Boys and Girls that are trained up by those that are
skilful in that Mystery of wickedness. I think he said there were some Hundreds.

This young Man told me of some Houses which have been lately robbed by
Day-Thieves, who have all sorts and sizes of Pick-Locks, by which they can
unlock any Door, Trunk, or Cabiner, and lock them again with such expedition,
that the Person injured shall conclude that it must be done by Servants, or
other Inhabitants with them, and not by those that come only as Guests to their
Houses. I was likewise informed by another, that they do not value any Lock
that is made in England; and therefore advised me to fasten my Doors with Bars
or Bolts.

This Person called to mind some Houses which were robbed by his wicked
Acquaintance, of which I make particular mention, for fear that Innocent
Persons have been accused, of which I knew, and was concerned in one very
remarkable instance. There was one Imprisoned for One Hundred Pounds, which a
Condemned Malefactor told me he had stolen. One of them is a Victualling-House
in Aldersgate Street, at the going into Falcon-yard. Another is a
Victualling-House within Aldgate, into which there is a Passage through a long
Entry, near Northumberland-Alley. A Third is a Cook's House near the Arch, at
the passage out of Lincolns-Inn-Fields toward Drury Lane.

He likewise informed me of three Houses, which a Man and Woman intend to robb,
and have made some attempt, but were prevented, by going at a time when there
was Company in other Rooms. One is the Red Bull in Shoe-Lane: Another is the
Chequer without Aldgate, on the Butchers-side of the Street: The third is a
Cook without Bishops-gate, near the Katherine-Wheel, directly opposite to a
yard, where there was a Robbery not long since committed: I hope that this
publication may prevent it.

He likewise told me, that there was a Thief brought into Newgate on Saturday
last, who was taken at the Sign of King James in or near Spittle-Fields; and
that if the Mistress of the House has lost so much Money as she pretended, she
may find it by emptying her Vault.

I may likewise give a Caution to the Gentry who live in Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
to which the Thieves have a great resort. It has been usual with them to go in
at Seven or Eight of the Clock in the Evening, and to go up the Stairs, where
they take what they find, and carry it away without being discovered. If they
happen to meet any person, they ask for a Lodger or Servant by Name; and when
they are told that there is none such, they beg pardon, and say, that they
mistook the House. It is almost unimaginable, that there should be so many bold
Attempts pass undiscoveted as he mentioned, that he knew of, though he could
not exactly remember the Houses.

I hope it will be granted, that I have published this for a General as well as
a Particular Good. And that those who keep Houses of Entertainment will either
be cautious of their Guests, or commit their Money, and most valuable Goods, to
the Custody of a private Housekeeper. It is, it seems, usual for Thieves to
desire privacy, for the dispatch of a Writing, or some other urgent business;
and whilst one looks to the Stairs, the other make haste into other parts of
the House, especially into those Rooms that are on the same Floor.

That this publication may answer the End for which it was made, is the desire
of

Eripplegate, May the 26th. 1687. W. Smythies.
Licensed, May the 26. 1687. To. L' Estrange.



London, Printed by T. M^lbourn in Jese^-street, 1687.


