THE Soldiers MANUAL: OR, Directions, Prayers, and Ejaculations For such as
Lead A Military Life.

By a Member of the Athenian Society.

LONDON, Printed by I. Dawks, for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry.

Price 2 d. or an Hundred of 'em stitched up in Blew Paper for 14 s. to those
Gentlemen (or Officers in His Majesty's Army) that buy 'em to disperse.

DEDICATION. To all Their MAJESTY'S Forces by Sea or Land.
Dear Countrymen!
ACcept this little Manual from those that Love you as their own Souls, and
would as willingly venture, or lose their Lives for that Glorious Cause in
which you are engaged, as you your selves can do it! Had we any thing better to
present you, you should have it: But as this is, if you follow the Directions
herein contained, you will not fail to secure what is of more value than all the
World. It Is most of it a Collection from the Works of such great Men as are
above Censure, and who are now receiving their Reward; and contracted as much
as possible, to be of more general Use. May the Lord of Hosts bless it to you,
and bless you all, giving you Victory over your Sins and Enemies, and helping
you by Faith to subdue Kingdoms, like the Primitive Worthies. Which is and
shall be the hearty and daily Prayer of,

Dear Countrymen! Your, etc.

THE SOLDIERS Manual.
THIS Short Manual consists of the following Heads:

I. Directions for every Morning. II. Morning Prayer. III. Directions for
Evening. IV. A Prayer for King William and the Confederates, to be said Morning
and Evening. V. A Prayer before Battle, and Ejaculations in it. VI. Behavior
and Thanksgiving after Victory. VII. Directions in Sickness, with Prayers and
Devotions.

I. Directions for every Morning.
1. As soon as you awake, look up to God, and say; I laid me down and slept; I
awaked, for the Lord sustained me. I will not be afraid for Ten Thousands of
the People that set themselves against me round about.

2. Immediately after this, and before the more Solemn Devotions, think with
your self, (1.) What Sins you have committed since the last Night, in Thought,
Word or Deed, humbling your self for the same before God. (2.) What Temptations
you are like to meet with that Day, and by what means you have been formerly
drawn into Sin, arming your self against 'em, by Faith and Prayer, and
resolving to avoid both the Sin, and as much as possible the Occasion of it.
(3.) What Good ye may do, by preventing or reproving and discountenancing the
Sins of others, or exhorting 'em to Piety and Virtue; encouraging them therein
both by Word and Example.

II. Then Kneeling down (if the Place permits) say humbly and devoutly (if you
have no better) this MORNING PRAYER.
O Almighty Lord God, the great Creator and Governor of all things, in whom I
live, move, and have my Being! I thy unworthy Creature humbly prostrate my self
before thee, to offer up my Morning Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise, for all thy
Goodness which endures for ever. I Bless thee for my Creation and Preservation,
my Life, [Health, Strength] and all those outward Blessings I enjoy; Here
mention any late Deliverance, or other Mercy.
the Mercies of the [Night] past, and of all my Life: But above all, for thine
inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, who
by his once offering himself upon the Cross, did there make a full, perfect and
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for our Sins. I bless thee for
being born in thy peculiar Fold, the Christian Church, and early Consecrated to
thee by Baptism, and the gracious Assistance of thy Holy Spirit, toward the
performance of the Vow which I then made unto thee; and for thy Patience and
Long-suffering; that thou have not forsaken me for the many Breaches thereof,
nor yet cut me off in the midst of my days, and in the very Act of Sin, which I
must acknowledge I have most righteously deserved.

For, O Lord! I must own with shame and confusion of Face, that I have most
grievously offended against thee. I was shapen in Iniquity and conceived in
Sin: My heart is by Nature deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
neither can I tell how often I have actually transgressed, in Thought, Word and
Deed, Here mention the chiefest of your Sins.
slighting both thy Mercies and thy Judgments, and renewed offers of Pardon
upon my Repentance and Obedience. Or if at any time I have resolved to forsake
my Sins, soon returning to them again like a Dog to his Vomit. What therefore
remains for me, but a fearful looking for of fiery Indignation, which is the
just reward of my Iniquities? What can I expect but thy Wrath and Vengeance,
both in this Life, and that to come?

But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared: Thou have laid
help upon one that is mighty, and have sent thy Dear Son to die for us, and to
save his People from their Sins.

O fit me for that Mercy which he has purchased for me, by a true Sense of all
my Transgressions, a hearty sorrow for them, and hatred of them, and a constant
and sincere resolution and endeavor, never more to be guilty of them.

And since I am not able of my self to help my self, or do any good action,
grant me thy Grace, O giver of all Grace, that I may know and do thy Blessed
Will. Work in me a true Faith, a firm Hope and Trust in thee; and unfeigned
Love to thee, Zeal for thee, Reverence of whatever is related unto thee, and
Fear to offend thee; Thankfulness for thy Mercies, Submission to thy
Providence, Devotion in thy Service, Sorrow for my Sins: Make me meek, and
contented, and humble; just and charitable; sober and temperate, and
courageous, and merciful! Create in me a new Heart, sanctify me in Body, Soul
and Spirit, and preserve me to thy heavenly Kingdom!

With me, I beseech thee, O Father of Mercies, have mercy upon all Men: All
Jews, Turks, Idolaters, Infidels and Heretics, that they may be turned from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God.

Bless the Universal Church, especially the Reformed Churches, and particularly
the Church of England, and give us Grace so deeply to repent us of our Sins,
and thoroughly to acknowledge our unworthiness, that thou may have mercy upon
us, that we may not perish. Bless with the choicest of thy Blessings our
Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary: Strengthen their Friends,
and subdue their Enemies; give 'em Wisdom to go in and out before this great
People, and Grace to punish Wickedness and Vice, and maintain thy true Religion
and Virtue: Let their Reign be long and happy, and after this Life crown 'em
with eternal Glory. Pity all that are in Affliction, especially those that
suffer for Righteousness sake, and the Defense of thy true Religion. Bless my
Friends, and forgive my Enemies: Preserve me this [Day] from Sin and Danger,
and give thy Holy Angles charge over me. Forgive my Infirmities, and deal with
me not according to my Merits, but thy Mercies in Jesus, thy Son, and my alone
Savior, in whose Name and Words I conclude my imperfect Prayers, saying as he
has taught me: OUR FATHER, etc.

III. Directions for Evening.
1. As in the Morning -- Enquire what Sin you have committed, and how you came
to fall into it. 2. What Good omitted, and for what reasons; humbling your self
before God, making new resolutions to be more upon your guard for the future.
3. If no remarkable fault or omission, if you have done any Good, or received
any Mercy or Deliverance, or been preserved even from the fear of Evil;
heartily bless God for it. 4. Repeat the Morning Prayer, only changing the
Words [Day] or [Night] as the Sense requires. 5. If lying down, think upon the
Grave and Death; and before you go to sleep say, I will lay me down in peace
and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that make me dwell in safety. Into
thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God of
Truth.

If upon Duty -- Meditate on good Things: If you can, read God's Word, or any
good Book: If not, read his Works. Look into the Heavens the Works of his
Fingers, the Moon and Stars which he has ordained, and thence argue the Wisdom
and Power of their Maker, and praise him for them; saying with the Psalmist, At
Midnight will I praise him, because of his righteous Judgments.

IV. After Morning and Evening Devotions, always add this Prayer for His
MAJESTY and the CONFEDERATE Princes.
ALmighty and most Gracious God, who have in all ages shown thy Power and
Providence in the raising up Pious and Religious Princes, to be the Savers and
Deliverers of thy People, and have promised, that Kings shall be Nursing
Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers to thy Church. I yield thee hearty thanks
for raising up thy Servant King William to be the happy Instrument of our
Deliverance, by whom thou have preserved thy pure Religion amongst us, and all
besides that is dear unto us. Praised be thy Name, for thy wonderful
Preservation of him from all those great Dangers to which he has been exposed
both by Sea and Land! And most humbly I beseech thee still to continue him
under the merciful Care and Protection of thy good Providence, to preserve him
from all secret and treacherous Practices and Attempts, to stand by him, and to
cover his Head in the day of Danger, and to bless him with Victory and all good
Success! Visit him as thou did visit Moses in the Bush, Gideon in the Field,
and Joshua in the Battle; and by him be pleased in thy own good time to
accomplish that great work which thou have begun, for the Salvation of thy
People, and Confusion of thy Enemies. Be pleased also to Bless all those
Princes which are joined together with him in the just Defense of their
Countries, and the Liberties of Europe; and give such success to their Arms,
that they may humble the Pride of him who is the great Troubler of the World.

Grant this, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake in Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

V. Preparation and Prayer before a Fight, and Ejaculations in it.
1. Prepare as for Death, and think of nothing but that or Victory, and in
order thereunto first Examine the State, the Condition of your Soul; for sure
you have Souls to be saved as well as others, and think not, that being of the
right Side, or very dying for it, or your Country and Religion, will save you,
unless you have repented of your Sins, and are reconciled to God. Since then
you may not have many moments to live in this World, you cannot doubt but it is
the highest Wisdom to secure a better. In order to which, ask your self how you
are prepared for it; and take this one short infallible Rule, Whosoever
continues in the habit of any one wilful Sin, be it Swearing, Cruelty,
Impurity, or whatever else, is not in God's Favor, nor can, if he so die,
expect any Mercy at his Hand.

Now there is no way to recover from this Condition, but Repentance and Faith:
The first, Sorrow for Sin, and leaving it; the second, an humble Trust in God's
Mercy for the sake of Christ Jesus, with a sincere Obedience to his Commands.
Without which Faith, it is impossible to please God; as without Repentance, we
must all perish.

But because these Graces require generally Time and Labor to be produced in
the Mind, it is a more desperate hazard to delay the getting 'em till such an
Exigence, than 'twould be to put off your Arming your self, 'till the Enemy
were just upon you. Therefore make this the business of your Lives, and then
you will not want Comfort, at the approach or apprehension of Death.

However, if this has been neglected before, now begin it; if practiced, renew
it. Humble your self for your Sins, and cry for Mercy: say, God be merciful to
me a Sinner; and, I Believe, Lord help my Unbelief.

2. When that is done, consider What you are Fighting for, -your Country, -your
Religion, the Liberties of Europe. Whom you are Fighting under, -King William.
Whom you are Fighting against, -the French, whom you used to beat, when the
odds was on their side; and they never you without it. Commend your Soul to God
in the following Prayer: and then Fall on in God's Name; and, May HE be with
you!

But if any of you, as is but too much to be feared, through your rude and
ignorant manner of Education, or through your long and daily converse with
Debauched and Irreligious Comrades, wherewith all, even the best of Armies
swarm; or by your own negligence and wilfulness, in slighting o^ contemning the
Means of better Instruction, and the Holy Ordinances Instituted by God, for the
working in us those Graces of Repentance and Regeneration, so necessary to
Salvation, we have been discoursing of: I say, if any of you, by these or any
other depraved disposition of Mind or Body, or unlucky circumstances of your
Lives, have hitherto been so unhappy as to spend your whole time in a continual
course and habit of Sin, and particularly in those which Men of your Vocation
are most guilty of; as Oaths, Blasphemies, Curses, Damning your selves, or
others; as likewise Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Malice, Wrathful and Foolish
Quarrels, Unjust Rapines, Barbarous and Unmanly Cruelties, Rapes; and such
Bloodshed as is downright Murder, and against all the Rules of War, as well as
the Laws both of Nature and Christianity: and in a word, have lived all along
in all the gross Sins, that Profaneness, Licenciousness, and Atheistical
Infidelity can inspire; and now are come perhaps within view of a Battle, with
a fierce and potent Enemy; by whose hands you know not how soon God may call
you to an Account for all those many Blasphemous Vollies you have formerly shot
against Heaven; and for all both your open and private Transgressions, and
above all, for your obstinacy and long impenitence in them: Yet let not
therefore Despair seize your Hearts, nor 'pall your Courage against Men, or
take off the Point of your Faith toward God: but rather increase, and add a
double Vigor to both. It Is true, the Work of Faith, or Repentance, and much
less of what crowns both, a complete Regeneration and Reformation, is not the
work of a day, and much less of a few moments; which a Man, who may be killed,
may have in or before a Battle; nor are old Habits of Sin, or rooted wicked
Customs so soon to be destroyed. But though this ought to make Men, that have
time, to fear and tremble, and be afraid to deferr the work of Repentance to
the last; or make more work for it, than Humane Frailty forces them to; yet it
ought not however to make them afraid of any thing else but Despair, or the
Mother of it, final Impenitence, which only can Damn them at last; nor tempt
them to throw away all Thoughts of Repentance, and Trust in God's Mercy; which
can, and will, and does actually Save many Souls, how wicked soever they have
been before that make good use of those last Moments, the short time of the
expectation of a Battle gives them; in preparing themselves with such Pious
Reflections and Resolutions, as the effectual Prospect of present Death before
them; and Retrospection, and backward Glances upon their past Life behind them,
will afford to them, that will give themselves leave but to think seriously
never so small a while: And for their Comfort, let me tell them this; that Men
of sound Reason, (and none but such can be truly Courageous,) how mad or
hot-brained soever they have been at other times, or may be in the heat of
Fight, will always have some Serious Thoughts, upon the sight of an approaching
Foe: which well digested in their Minds, will redouble their Courage in Battle,
fence them against all Surprises, which alone can cause Fear in a Valiant
Soldier; and render their Hearts impenetrable to any Affright or Amazement. I
say, it is almost impossible, that a Man of true Reason and Courage, that orders
his Thoughts aright beforehand, and considers the worst of the dangers he is to
encounter, before he comes at them, or they reach him, can fear them at all
when he is in them; because he can find nothing in them that surprises him;
nothing worse than he expected, and nothing in fine, but what he is armed with
a most invincible Resolution against: And though perhaps in Battle you have but
one Moment left to Pray in, and one Cast for your Lives both in this and the
other World; yet if you endeavor to Throw that well, you may Win both. What,
though like Samson, you have lived in Debauchery, and resisted the Spirit of God?
yet in Fighting for His Cause, as you do, and with such Thoughts as I shall
direct; though you like him fall in the Attempt, yet may you likewise become
Victorious over those Spiritual Philistines that have so often assaulted your
Souls; and Conquer them by your Death, and by that of your Savior's; though you
could never Subdue them in your Life. It is true, our Lord says it is harder for
a Rich Man to enter into Heaven, than for a Camel to pass through a Needles-eye:
but yet He tells us, it is not impossible, for all that. And it is without doubt,
at least as hard for an Old Sinner to enter into Heaven, as for a Rich Man; and
questionless very hard for a Deathbed or Momentary Repentance to obtain
Salvation, because it is extremely dubious whether it can be real; but yet it is
not impossible: for we see, the Thief on the Cross was Saved with one single
Act of it, exerted a moment before he died. That Example indeed is but one: but
yet it shows there may be, and is sometimes more, or else the Example would be
to no purpose: And as it evidences on one side, that Continuation in Sin, is
extreme dangerous; so on the other, it demonstrates, that Despair is still more
so, and never to be entertained, even at our latest breath. But then it ought
to be particularly considered, in favor of Soldiers, that a Late Repentance
in them, may more justly be accounted true, and more likely to be accepted from
them by God, than from a wicked man, that dies on his Bed: because their Case
every way comes nearer that of the Thief on the Cross, and may, by God's Grace,
and their strong Endeavors, far exceed it in all acceptable qualifications.
For a Man that has gone on all his lifetime in Sin, and Dies in his Bed, has
no opportunities to give any marks of a true Repentance, but mere Wishes and
Resolves; of the Sincerity of which, God only is Judge: Whereas a Soldier, that
will but seriously employ a few moments before a Battle, or while he is alive,
even in a Surprise, in such Thoughts and Resolves, as he may have by due
application to God; he may in great measure show the Truth of his Repentance,
and repair, though in a short scantling of time, the Errors of his whole
Life-past; and Entitle himself to all the Advantages of the Blood of his
Suffering Savior. For let a Soldier, how wild and wicked soever before he has
been, but thus Think and Resolve when he goes to Fight, and if he does it
sincerely; never let him fear Victory for his Soul, though the first Bullet that
comes next should part it from his Body. Let him, I say, thus Think and
Resolve: Have I been ignorant, by Carelessness or Education hitherto, of the
Saving Knowledge of Faith and Repentance, Lord, yet according to my imperfect
Notions, I Believe and Repent, help my Imperfect Repentance, and my Unbelief; I
will, if I outlive this Battle, endeavor for better Instruction, by
frequenting thy Ministers and Holy Ordinances. Have I been guilty of Damning,
Swearing, Cursing, Blasphemy, Intemperance, and the rest of the Sins that stick
so close to Men of my Profession; I will endeavor to abstain from 'em, and all
thoughts of 'em, during the Fight, and strive against them with more care
hereafter. I will not fear my Enemies, but my GOD only: and though I have spent
my Life in the Devil's Service, I will endeavor to sacrifice the last moments
of it to GOD, by Fighting for His True Worship and Cause: I will with my best
Blood endeavor to Purchase a glorious and happy Quiet for His Church and
People: And though my Tongue has been false and injurious to Him, with Rash Oaths
and Execrations; yet my Sword shall prove the Sincerity of my Good Intentions:
And if Time, and the black fortune of this days Action, will not permit my
future Amendment of Life to speak it; yet my willing and resigned Death shall
Proclaim it, and my Hearts Blood shall Seal the Truth of my Repentance. And
though my Dear Savior's Dying for me, had not power enough 't influence me to
Live to him; yet shall it work Love enough in me, to Dye for him, and for the
maintenance of the True Observation of his Gospel by others; though to my Sorrow,
and most hearty Grief, I never truly observed it my self. Lord, thou that art
able to Save, hear my inward Prayers, and strong Cries and Tears, and deliver
me to serve thee, or serve thy self of my death; and let the Merits and Blood
of my Dearest Savior atone for all my Sins, and former Disobedience. Let our
Prodigal Soldier, though on the brink of Death, thus think and resolve when he
Fights; and let him fear no Enemy, nor dread no Devil: no doubt but he will
find God a merciful and tender Father to receive him, and his blood spent in so
Glorious a Cause, as for the True Religion, and his Country, will prove next to
a second Baptism, to entitle him anew to Christ's Benefits, and repair the old.
Pretensions he had forfeited by his wicked life. Neither is this a New
Sentiment; the Old Christians thought the same, and believed, that the Blood of
the Martyrs, though they had been but a moment before Converted, washed away all
former Sins, by a full application of Christ's Blood; and supplied even the
want of Baptism it self. Let then none of your Brave Hearts despond; gratify
not your Enemies the Devils, or his Instruments the Papists, with any Despair:
There is no Crime so Black, against even an Earthly Prince, but an offending
Subject may wash off by a Bold Service; or by showing his Repentance, by a
Sacrifice of his Life, for the support or defense of his Sovereign's Crown: no
doubt of a Pardon for that Man, whether he lives or dies: And shall we think
our Heavenly Prince any less merciful, or reconcilable than an earthly one? No!
He has declared, At what soever time a Sinner shall repent, he will receive
him. Be Comforted then, all you Military Souls, that have so long lain in Sin:
and let not that thought discourage you, because you want time to Repent, from
Looking up to God, or Facing your Enemies and his: But be strong, and show your
selves Valiant, for your People, and the Cities of your God: and then submit to
him, and let him do what is good in his eyes; as Joab counsels, 1 Chronicles. 1.30.
and without all doubt your Souls will be safe, and you will have both the Crown
and Reward of Martyrs; For if they were counted Martyrs, that lost their Blood
under Persecutors, what can you be less, if you likewise fall by the Sword of
the worst Persecutors of God and his People, that ever yet were in Europe. The
Thief on the Cross, suffered indeed with Christ, but could not suffer for him
but by Sympathy: But you, if you dye, both suffer with him and for him, in the
most Glorious Cause that ever was contended for since Christianity. You Fight,
and spend your Blood, for the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of all
Christians; and for the Defense and Safety of the Protestant Religion, and the
Privileges of both King and People in your Native Country; in which are the
Cities and Places inhabited by a People, for whom he has so many times, and in
so many wonderful manners, evidently appeared. And therefore you need not
doubt, if he chooses your Arms, and your Blood now again, for the Defense of so
Glorious a Quarrel; that he will accept them, and forgive all your Sins:
Provided you will make but that Pious and Wise Use of the short moments he
shall lend you, in the intervals before or in an Engagement, which I have
Advised: Angels shall then guard you up, with the joyful Sound of Heavenly
Trumpets, into Paradise; your Souls shall live with God, and your Memories with
your Countrymen, if left Happy at the Expense of your Blood: and Future
Histories shall Preserve your Valor to all succeeding Ages. And thus, you that
will but come in, though at the last hour, shall Receive Equal of your Heavenly
Master, with them that came in at the first.

2. Prayer before an Engagement.
O Lord our God, to whom Vengeance belongs, who beholdest ungodliness and
wrong and cruelty and oppression; thou Lord of Hosts and God of Battles, who
sit upon thy Throne and judge right. We make our Address to thee in our
Necessity, that thou would take the Cause into thy own Hand, and judge
between us and our Enemies. Stir up thy Strength, Lord, and come and help us;
for thou give not always the Battle to the strong, but can save by many or
by few. O let not our Sins now cry against us for Vengeance, but hear us thy
poor Servants begging Mercy, and imploring Help; and that thou would be a
Defense unto us, against the face of our Enemy. Make it appear, that thou art
our Savior, and mighty Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

3. Ejaculations in the Battle.
LET us be of Good Courage, and play the Men, for the House of our God, and the
City of our God; and the Lord do what seems him Good.

Through thee, O God, shall we do great Acts; through thee shall we tread down our
Enemies!

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thine Honor! and let us not sink
under the Weight of our Sins, or the Violence of the Enemy. -- O, Lord!
preserve me and my Friends, and forgive my Enemies.

VI. Directions and Prayer after a Victory.
WHEN it shall please God to Bless our Good King, and the Confederates, with
Success against the Enemy; have a care of Attributing it to an Arm of Flesh,
which is so unbecoming a Christian: and avoid Cruelty, or Insulting over the
Vanquished; both which are below the Generosity of an Englishman. Say, Not
unto us, O Lord! not unto us, but to thy Name be all the Glory. -- And as soon
as convenience permits, say humbly and devoutly this or the like Prayer unto
God.

Thanksgiving after Victory.
O Almighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the World, in whose hand is
Power and Might, which none is able to withstand. Blessing and Praise be to thy
Great and Glorious Name, for this happy Victory, the whole Glory whereof be
ascribed to Thee, who art the only Giver of it. And we beseech thee, give us
Grace to improve this great Mercy to thy Glory, the Advancement of thy Gospel,
the Honor of our Sovereign, and as much as in us lies, the Good of All
Mankind. And we beseech thee, give us such a Sense of this Great Mercy, as may
engage us to a true Thankfulness, such as may appear in our Lives, by an
humble, holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Jesus Christ
our Lord; to whom with thee and the Holy Spirit, as for all thy Mercies, so in
particular for this Victory and Deliverance, be all Glory and Honor, World
without end. Amen.

VII. Directions in Sickness.
I. IF possible, get your Chaplain to assist you with the Churches Prayers,
that on your Penitent Confession, you may receive the Benefit of his Absolution
and Advice.

2. In Order to which, or at least to Receive Forgiveness from God, though you
should not have the happiness to hear it declared and pronounced by his
Minister; set about a serious and exact Review of your Life past; a Trial of
your State and Actions:

I. The End, for which you engage in the War: -- which if only Gain, or any
such mean Prospect; rather than the Excellency of the Cause, and Love to your
Country and Religion, you are now to Repent of, and heartily ask Pardon for it.

II. The Manner how you have Prosecuted it- What Life you have led - Whether
you have observed those good Lessons; Do Violence to no Man, no Friend, by
Plunder, etc. and be content with your Wages: Be not mutinous or unruly?
Whether you have not been cowardly in Fight, or cruel in Victory, or born
malice against any: Ha'nt thought your self like the Sons of Belial; -- without
Yoke or Law, either of God or Man: -- Bin lewd, or atheistical, or impious; or
have Encouraged others in the same or other Crimes. If you have wronged any
Man, as far as possible to make Restitution. -- If you have offended God, never
to be at rest, 'till you find your self truly sorrowful for it; begging Pardon,
for his Dear Son Jesus Christ's sake; who has assured us, That those who come
unto him, he will in no wise cast off.

3. Resolve by God's Grace, if he thinks good to restore you, to amend your
Life, and reform whatever you have now found amiss: and Pray heartily for the
help of his Holy Spirit, in the bringing those Resolutions to a good Effect:
since otherwise they will be but as the Morning Cloud, and Early Dew, that soon
passes away. To whom you may Address your self in these or the like Words; or
get some other to do it for you.

A Prayer in the time of Sickness, or any other Affliction.
O Just and Holy Lord, who with Rebukes do chasten Man for Sin, and yet do
always punish less than our Iniquities deserve. I desire unfeignedly to humble
my self under thy mighty hand, which now lies heavy upon me; I heartily
acknowledge, O, Lord, that all I do or can suffer, is but the due reward of my
Deeds; and therefore in thy most severe Inflictions, I must still say righteous
art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments.

But, O Lord! I beseech thee in Wrath remember Mercy, and though my Sins have
enforced thee to strike, yet consider, my weakness, and let not thy stripes be
more heavy, or more lasting than thou see profitable for my Soul. Correct me,
but with the Chastisements of a Father, not with the Wounds of an Enemy; and
though thou take not off thy Rod, yet take away thine Anger. Lord do not abhor my
Soul, nor cast thy Servant away in displeasure, but Pardon my Sins I beseech
thee, and if yet in thy Fatherly Wisdom thou see fit to prolong thy
Corrections, thy blessed Will be done. I cast my self, O Lord, at thy Feet! do
with me what thou please! try me as Silver is tried, so thou bring me out
purified. And, Lord! make even my Flesh also subscribe to this Resignation,
that there may be nothing in me that may rebel against thy Hand; but that
having perfectly suppressed all repining Thoughts, I may cheerfully drink of this
Cup. And how bitter soever thou shall please to make it, Lord let it prove
Medicinal, and cure all the Diseases of my Soul, that it may bring forth in me
the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness; that so these light Afflictions which
are but for a moment, may work for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of Glory, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psalms to be used in Sickness.
In thee, O Lord, have I put my Trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me and deliver me in thy Righteousness; incline thine Ear unto me and save
me.

Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my House of Defense and my Castle.

Deliver me, O Lord God, out of the hand of the ungodly; out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel Man.

For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even
from my Youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my Mothers Womb, my Praise shall be always of thee.

I am become as a Monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

O let my mouth by filled with thy Praise: that I may sing of thy Glory and
Honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of [my misery] neither forsake me when my
strength fails me.

Go not far from me, O God: my God have thee to help me.

Forsake me not, O my God, until I have showed thy strength unto this
Generation, and thy power unto all them that are yet to come.

Thy Righteousness, O God, is very high: and great things are they that thou
have done, O God, who is like unto thee?

Ejaculations in Sickness.
O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross and precious Blood have redeemed me,
save and help me, I humbly beseech thee.

Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son; yet do not cast off the Bowels and Compassion of a Father:
But as a Father pittieth his own Children, so be thou merciful unto me.

O Lord! of whom may I seek for for succor but of thee, who for my Sins art
justly displeased! Yet, O Lord God most Holy! O Lord most mighty! O Holy and
most Merciful Savior, deliver me not into the bitter Pains of eternal Death,
neither suffer me at my last hour for any Pains of Death, to fall from thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded. Into thy hands I
commend my Spirit, for thou have red^emed me O Lord thou God of Truth. Come
Lord Jesus come quickly.

4. If it shall please God to restore you to Health again, have a care you
don't forget you Sickness, and the Promises you then made to lead a better
life, which God will never forget, though you may perhaps do it. When you are
tempted to any Sin, ask your own Soul whether it would be a handsome return to
him, who so lately saved your Life, so soon to rebe^ against him. And every
Evening examine your self, how you have performed those Vows which you made in
your Trouble.

If you love your Country, Victory, Glory, live Holy Lives, for the
English-mans Sins are his most formidable Enemies.

Swearing is unprofitable, Lewdness is damnable, Theft is base, Cruelty is
inhuman, and Cowardie fit for none but Traitors.

Fight the good Fight! keep the Truth! lay hold on Eternal Life -- From
henceforth there is laid up for you a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give to all those that love his Appearance.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

