THE ARMIES LAST PROPOSITIONS To the COMMONS of ENGLAND: WHEREIN THEY DECLARE,
Their further Resolution, touching the Confines of LONDON, and their marching
up toward the said City; for the settling of His Majesty in His Royal Palace
at Westminster, and securing of the Rights, Liberties, and Peace of the
KINGDOM.

JUNE 28. 1647.
PRinted and published, to be communicated to the Freeborn Subjects within
the Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales.



LONDON: Printe^ for EDWARD SIMPSON. 1647.

The last NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
Kind Sir,
THese are to certify you, that part of our army quarters about Reading,
Henly, Windsor, and those parts, where we expect the rest of our Forces, there
to remain (as I suppose) until such time, that an answer be returned from the
Pa^^ (...) the late Declaration or Remonstrance of the Army, Wherein is
declared, (in the name of the whole army) to the Kingdom of England, their
candid intentions and resolutione, and what their desires are, as members of
the Commonwealth, in behalf of themselves and all others, for the clearing,
settling, and securing of the Rights, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom.

And it is further proposed, to the honorable houses of Parliament, as
follows:

1. That the Declaration inviting men to desert the army and promising their
arrears in case they do so, be forthwith recalled.

2. That his Maj coming to Richmond may be suspended, until things be better
settled and composed; and in the mean time no place may be appointed for his
Majesty's residence to be any nearer to London, then the army will allow the
quarters of the army to be. 3. That the Members charged may be forth with
suspended the house 4. That those that have deserted the army may be instantly
discharged and dispierst, and receive no more of their (...) till the army be
first satisfied. 5. That both Pa^^ and City may be speedily and effectually
freed from those multitudes of Reformadoes and other soldiers that flock
together about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from the
City.

6. That all such Listings, or raising of new Forces, or drawing together of
any parties, and all preparations toward a new war, may be effectually
declared against and suppressed, as also all invitations or endeavors to draw
in foreign Forces.

7. That the King may enjoy his just privileges, and that mercy may be showed
to his Majesty's friends, who have formerly adhered to him.

These Propositions are desired to be forthwith printed and published, for
general satisfaction of all freeborn Subjects within the Kingdom of England,
and Dominion of Wales.

For further particulars, I refer you to the ensuing Papers, wherein is set
forth their Grievances and late Desires of the Army. VIZ.

First, that being sensible of the subtilty of the aforesaid party, and having
perfectly discovered their private actions for contriving of a new war against
this Army, who (by the Power of Heaven) has been the chief and isntrumental
means of delivering the people of England from perpetual slavery; therefore,
for the preventing of all conspiracies and dangers that may arise tending to
the prejudice of the P^^^ of this Kingdom, it is declared in the name of the
whole army, that they cannot (...) descend or yield to the votes of both Houses
of Parliament, touching the Guard expressed therein, but shall with all
faithfulness and diligence endeavor to preserve his Majesty's Royal person
from danger, and to that end has appointed a competent number of faithful,
zealous, and religious men, chose out of several Regiments in the army, to
guard and secure his Majesty's person at his Court at Richmond.

Secondly, that the army is sensible of the great malice and inveteracy of
diverse persons against them, who endeavor to involve and embroyle this Nation
in a new war, by which means, if once effected, would prove prejudicial and
destructive to the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and the liberty and
propriety of the Subject.

Thirdly, that they have bin very active in several parts of the Kingdom, to
raise forces and to that end has endeavored to repossesse themselves of
diverse strong Holds, throughout this Realm; as also their endeavors, to raise
a division in the army, and to withdraw the hearts of the soldiers from the
Officers, which indeed is a thing impossible for thousands to do, their hearts
being so firmly knit and united together.

Fourthly, that so soon as they could have accomplished their wicked design,
for setting of an Army on foot, their intents were to randezvou^ near the City
of W^.

Fifthly, they further desire that the Kings Majesty may be restored to his
former Rights, and tryumphantly brought to his Royal Palace at White hall.

Lastly, they profess and declare to the Citizens of London, that they have no
evil intent against them, neither will they injure any, either by stopping of
provision, or hindering of traffic, unless they be forced and constrained
thereunto.

All which fore going Reasons are declared to be the chief cause of the Armies
near approach toward the City of London.

Diverse other particulars were propounded, viz.

1. That they have not received a satisfactory answer, touching their former
Pap^^ and Representations, humbly proposed to the honorable Houses of
Parliament.

2. That Justice may be executed, and a legal trial appointed for the Eleven
Members, which now stands charged by the army.

And thirdly, touching some soldiers belonging to Sir Robert Pyes Regiment.

Diverse Regiments of the army are upon their march toward Uxbridge, and so
either to Kingston or Windsor for a Head-quarter. God grant a happy conclusion
of Englands distractions, and a good correspondency betwixt the Parliament,
City, and army, that so Peace and truth may flourish within his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, which is the earnest desire of him, who remains

Yours, to serve you, THO: SMITH.
St. Albanes June 26. 1647.
FINIS.

