THE ANTIQUITY and ORIGINAL Of the COURT of CHANCERY, And AUTHORITY of the LORD
CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND BEING A Branch of Sergeant Snagg's Reading, upon the 28
Chapter of Magna Charta, at the Middle Temple, in Lent, 13 Eliz. WITH His
Congratulatory Epistle, (by way of Preface) to the Lord CHANCELLOR Hatton, in
29 Eliz.

Major haeredit as a Legibus, quam a parentibus. Cicero. LONDON, Printed for
Henry Seile over against Saint Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1654.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for Custody of the Great Seal
of England.
My Lords,
WHat an eminent and a learned Professor of the Laws of England heretofore in
Manuscript presented to an Honorable Predecessor of your Lordships at his
first entrance to that high place, Be pleased to give a Puisne leave to present
in print unto your Lordships at your Investiture. A small fragment, I confess:
yet such, I hope, as will appear neither unworthy of your approbation, nor
improper for your Patronage and Protection; The subject matter, as well of the
Authors Epistle, as of his Readers observations, being a little Map and Model
of your Lordships great Office and Jurisdiction, and rarely to be found in our
printed Authorities; which, peradventure, may be the Reason, why that ancient
and excellent Judicatory has lately met with such great Envy and Opposition;
Learning having no other Enemy but Ignorance, and most Men being naturally
inclined to apprehend amiss of that they comprehend not; Though it will not be
denied, but that any Court of Justice in England may admit of Regulation. My
Lords, I shall not say any thing for the Piece, it speaks Reason, and can best
speak for it self. I shall only crave your Honors pardon for this great
presumption of

Your Lordships Most humbly devoted, T. L.

To the Right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Lord Chancellor of
England, Robert Snagg an Apprentice of the Common Laws of that Realm, wishes
all increase of Grace, Mercy, and Peace, Honor, and Prosperity in this World,
and perfect Felicity in the World to come.
WHen (Right Honorable) it came to my course to Read in the Middle Temple,
after I had there continued a Puisne full 20 years, and more, (for so they are
called till they Read) and then I was to become an Apprentice of the Common
Law, and in my Reading to deliver to my Fellows of that House, such Notes as I
had collected in the course of my Study, that I thought to be most profitable
to be opened for the exercise and use of Law in our time; And when I had looked
into some other men's Travels that had Read before me, and other Writers, and
found many several Conceits, and sundry Incertainties touching the
Commencement of our Law, and whence it came, and what it was; and I thought it
as meet (as Tully teaches) that it should be understood, Quid est de quo
disputetur, as to enter into argument of particular cases which were to be
decided thereby: which is the manner of that exercise, well known to your
Lordship, as one that entered by that Gate into the happy and honorable Course
of life, that God of his great Goodness has most graciously led you in, from
Grace to Grace, and Honor to Honor, to the highest Honor and most absolute
Office that is in England under her Majesty, who is immediate in all Dignity,
Honor, and Authority under God in this Land. But when I had considered,
according to my capacity, of all the Reports that be in print of the practice
of the Law, and of some other that I have, I could find no certainty of the
Commencement of it, what it was, nor whence it came. For some said, it was the
Custom of Normandy that the Conqueror brought in, and placed here; Some, that
it came out of Germany, brought by those people that were called Angli, that
came hither to inhabit, of who^ this Land took the name of Angolia, and the Law
the name of Lex Angliae, which savoured more of Reason, that is the ground of
our Law; And some imagined one thing, and some another; But that great learned
Judge Mr. Littleton, in his first Book satisfied me, that it could neither be
the Law of Normandy, nor of any other Country in Germany, nor elsewhere, but
peculiar to this Land; For he says, That Tenant by the Courtesy of England is
to hold the Land, if his Wife die, during his life, by the Law of England, and
is called Tenant by the Courtesy of England, for this, that this is not used in
any other Realm, but only in England; whereof I collected, that if the same Law
had been in any other Realm, that Tenure by the Law had likewise been there.

And I found in stories, that presently after the Conquest there were diverse
Insurrections not only of the people, that did rise without Reason, but of
diverse of the Nobility of the best sort, who endured Famine, (and that so far as
they did ear the vilest vermin) yea, and the utter overthrow of their Houses
and Posterity; And all their cause was, but to be restored to their ancient
Laws and Liberties. And that civil dissension continued long for that cause,
and the Nobility, without restitution of them, would not yield to their Kings,
as men that showed themselves to be made of the right English mould, ready to
endure any pain and loss, rather than the loss of their native Laws and
Liberties, and to subject themselves to the Will-government of their new Lords,
and new Laws, that the Conqueror brought in, and the pleasures, and oftentimes
the displeasures of their Kings, who did all, and took all, as pleased
themselves, under pretense of their Prerogative; which Prerogative rightly
used, and truly understood, is a thing most honorable to the Crown, and not
prejudicial to the Law, nor hurtful to the Realm, nor any Subjects lawful
Interest, or Liberty.

But that Will-government in the Kings, coffeehouse in the Nobility, and
continual Wars within the Realm, continued until K. Henry the 3. who (being by
that time by diverse descents purged and purified by our English Air, and by
Education after the order of our Nation, and so become English, and of a better
nature than the Aliens, and their offspring) of love to his subjects, was
content to allow Englishmen their English Laws; And thereupon, the 10th day of
Febr. in the 9th year of his Reign, granted under his great Seal the Great
Charter, thereby to restore the Laws of the Land, the Liberties of the
Subjects, and to limit his Prerogatives, so, as they should be prejudicial to
neither.

But after, kindled (as it seemed) by the heat of his youth, he continued not
in that good mind, but infringed the same Charter, and chose his Will for his
direction, (as others his late Predecessors had don) and left that Law of the
Land, which he had granted to be Restored and Revived. Whereupon 40 years wars
after that followed between him and his Barons, (as they be generally Termed,
though the greatest Earls, and others of the chief of the Nobility, were
Partners therein) which were never fully appeased, until the Parliament was
holden at Marlebridge about the 52 year of his Reign, when and where that
Charter was enacted in that Parliament, and thereby the ancient Laws and
Liberties revived and restored; which Charter so enacted, sithence has been by
all Kings and Queens solemnly sworn at their Coronations to be kept, and so
has been sacredly Observed to this day, unless some Forgetfulness in some
Kings, and Ignorance in some Officers, has infringed the same. But now, by
Gods blessing plentifully powered upon us, it is in sull Use, to the great
Comfort of all good Subjects, and immortal fame of her most Excellent Majesty.

And in the 28 Chapter of that Charter and Act of Parliament, I find it set
down in Latin, in excellent and significant brief words, to this effect, That
no Freeman shall be dealt with either in Life, Liberty, Lands, Liberties, Body
or Goods; nor that the King would send for any, nor proceed against any, Nisi
per legale judiciu^ parium suorum, aut per legem terrae; And that the King
would not defer, deny, nor sell Justice, or Right to any; which is, as it were,
the sum of all the Charter and Act, and the whole mark that was shot at, to
revive the ancient Laws, and restore the ancient Liberty and Liberties to the
Subjects.

Wherein I noted, That, both how far the Prerogative should go, and what is
Right and Justice common to all, is referred to be decided per legem terrae;
what therefore that Lex terrae was, which was so carefully sought, and dearly
bought with so much Noble blood, which was then thereby revived, I thought if I
could find, I had that I sought for.

And therefore I thought it best to begin with such Reporters, or Writers of our
Law, as writ nearest the time of that Charter, and looked into Mr. Bracton,
that wrote about 9 H. 3. the very time of the first granting of the Charter,
who was one of the chief that were appointed (as it is delivered by Tradition)
to find out again the ancient Laws of the Land, when the King was pleased to
put the^ again into the force that they had lost by the Conquest. And in his
Book in print, I find it thus written, Cum autem fere in omnibus Regionibus
utatur legibus, and jure scripto, sola Anglia usa est in suis fmibus jure non
scripto, and consuetudine; in ea quidem ex non scripto, jus venit quod usus
comprobavit. And after that, he says in the next Chapter these words, Leges
Anglicanae fuerunt approbatae consensu utentium, and Sacramento Regum
confirmatae. And Cap. 3. Consuetudo more utentium approbata vicem Legis
obtinet, and consuetudinis non vilis est authoritas.

And he says further, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. treating of that Law which he calls
the Custom of the Land, Lex autem facit Regem; attribuat igitur Rex Legi, quod
Lex attribuit ei, id est, dominationem and potestatem; nam ubi dominatur
voluntas, and non Lex, ibi non est Rex. Whereof may be aptly collected, that
before this Law was there was no King here in this Land; for if the Law of the
Land made the King, there was none before it; But Kings we find by all Stories
to be of a great antiquity here in this Land, and so by consequence the Law
must.

And then looking for that matter in the Reports of the Law, I found a Book
Case, in 2 H. 4. fol. 18. That it was agreed by the Judges, that the Common
Custom of the Realm was the Law of the Land; And in that point looking further,
I found all Books of Law agree; which Judgment of the Judges from time after
the Enacting of that Charter, and the judgment of Mr. Bracton before at the
time of the penning of the Charter, concurring in one, satisfied me, That Lex
terrae, which is there set down, and thereby revived, and now holden by the
great Charter, whereto every King and Queen is sworn at the Coronation, was the
ancient Custom of the Land, that all People of several Nations that at several
times inhabited here liked best of, as fittest for this place, whereby the
Kings lived in greatest Honor and Ease, and the People in greatest Quietness and
Freedom, wherefore thereto the Kings were content to bind themselves, and the
Subjects could abide no other. And so I drew that travel to this conclusion,
That our Law is the ancient Custom of the Country or Land, and of that
Antiquity, that there is no Record nor Matter that can show the Commencement
thereof, nor any man can tell it, but it was before all memory of Man that
remains in the world, consisting of Maxims, General Grounds, and Rules,
received, approved and allowed as just, good, and necessary for the Government
of this Land, begun when this Land first became a Commonwealth under a King,
and ever sithence used, approved, and allowed, from time to time, time out of
mind of Man, and by experience found in all Ages to be fittest for the place,
and to be necessary, honest and profitable both for the Prince and People, and
being so found fit and continued, it became a Custom to be observed of all that
should inhabit, or remain here, and when it was lost by the Conquest, it was
again restored by Common consent of Parliament, as was necessary it should be;
for that the force it had by Custom and Usage was interrupted by the Conquest;
So as the Custom of the Realm revived by Parliament, is the Law of the Land,
which is the Genus to all; And the Parliament and the Acts thereof, and the
Prerogative of the Prince, and the particular Customs of several Counties,
Cities, Boroughs, and Manors, be all but Species of it: For that General Custom
of the Realm, which is the Law of the Land, authorizeth the Parliament,
limiteth the Prerogative, allows and disalloweth of Private Customs, and
whatsoever in England is to be allowed, and not to be allowed, as they are
consonant or dissonant to the reason thereof.

But when I had found out this by Reading, then looking into the course of
Practice, I found the Lord Chancellor fitting highest in Westminster Hall, and
had most to do, and bare the greatest rule; and yet gave his judgment (as it
seemed to me) as it pleased himself, whatsoever the Law of the Land required in
the case. And seeing Men of great Honor, Learning, and Integrity sit in that
place, and so judge. I was in a maze, not finding at the first how it could
stand with the Great Charter, that referred all judgment ad Legem terrae, and
how any thing different from that Law could be allowable in the Land, since the
Kings were all sworn to maintain the Charter that restored the Law, and his
Lordship and all the Judges were placed by the King.

But when I looked further, and perused it well, I found, that the Custom of
the Land, which is that Lex terrae, allowed of that Authority also, as of the
rest; and that it was also a Species of that General, the Law of the Land,
which was the ant ent Custom of the Realm; And that it was of necessity to be
in that sort: For that the Common Law, Custom of the Realm, or Law of the Land,
(term it as they list) standing of General Grounds, Rules, and Maxims, it was
impossible but some particular Cases must fall out, that either the General
Rule whereon it lights should be too bard for it, or too short to reach it;
And therefore was it of necessity (to the end that all Cases might be judged
according to Right and Equity,) to have one under the Prince, above the rest,
to have such an Authority that might judge secundum aequum, and bonum, and
sanam conscientiam, in these cases, and to mitigate where the Rule of Law would
light too hard, and to supply where it came too short, and to the end that he
might have the sending forth of Commissions to authorize Judges, and of
Precepts from the Prince to produce them to judgment that were to be sued; And
to be of especial Trust with the King for keeping his Great Seal, and ordering
thereof, and in such other things as appertains to that office.

Wherefore entering into consideration thereof, I found that Office also to be
limited by the Law, and erected thereby; and therefore I gathered diverse Notes
concerning the same, to Answer such Objections as might in that respect be
objected against that Charter and Statute, and the Law of the Land; which lying
by me when your Lordship was placed in that great Office, whom, I profess, I
ever affected from my first coming to the Temple more tha^ others (though then
I knew, and was known of many of excellent Gifts and Natures;) And after your
Honor was called to the Court by her Majesty, I coming sometimes to you from my
old good Lord, and dear Friend Sir Edward Saunders, late L. Chief Baron, I
found you most gracious and favorable unto me, and now lately received such
honorable usage from you, as I could not have desired; when some of good and
honorable Nature, and excellent good Disposition dealt hardly with me, (as I
thought) not affording me a good word, for a dutiful heart ever born them, and
some hard pains performed for the^; (which God, for some offense committed by
me, but not against them, laid on me,) yet your Lordship, of whom I had never
deserved any thing, nor showed any Duty to, (except God revealed to you the
Intention and Affection of my heart) defended my poor credit (as I heard) to my
great Comfort, and spoke well of me.

Wherefore to show my self thankful, (for an ungrateful Man I have ever hated
as a Devil, and loathed as a Monster) I bethought me how to present something
to your Honor, as a token of my dutiful mind, and heart tied to you; But
amongst things of price, I could find nothing that was not too dear for me to
compass, or too mean for you to receive, as a present, and that to deal that
way, was but to pour water into the Sea, so plentifully (God be blessed for it)
he has blessed you with abundance; And yet seeing your Honor had so well used
me, for nothing, but of your honorable Nature, I gathered hope, that you would
accept something, (were it never so small) in good part at my hands, whose
heart, and what he has, is ever at your Commandment; And taking example by
the poor Gardiners, that present flowers to the greatest Princes, that have
nothing in them but a small smell, and no profit, and yet are well accepted of
their gracious minds; I thought good to compose my Papers together that
concerned the Authority and Exercise of your Lordships Office, and to present
them unto you; which, though too simple to inform your Wisdom of any
understanding, yet at some vacant time may serve to recreate your self in
reading; as the plainest things, and not the gravest matters, are meetest for
that purpose. But my good Lord, with these papers I present unto you my self,
and my poor service to be altogether at your Commandment, with faithful
promise, That if my life may hold one of your fingers from hurt, I will lay it
down to help it, or to do you any good; and while I live will speak well of you
to men, as one that deserves it of all. and pray for you to God, that he may
still bless you with increase of his excellent Graces, much Honor, and perfect
assurance of everlasting joy; And that her Matie and this Land may long enjoy
you, for the maintenance of the Laws and Liberties thereof, and the relief of
the oppressed Subjects.

Notes touching the Office and Authority of the Lord Chancellor of England;
Collected out of a Reading made in the Middle Temple, in Lent, Anno Dom. 1570.
upon the 28 Chap. of the Great Charter of England, granted under the Great Seal
in the 9th year, and Enacted and made a Statute at Marlbridge, in 52 year of
King Henry the Third.
WHen the Reader had found, That, by his Statute, No Man might be arrested,
imprisoned, or dealt withal in his Person or Liberty, or put out of his
Freehold, Free Customs, or Liberties; Nor that the King would send forth
against any, nor proceed upon any, but by the lawful trial of their Peers, or
the Law of the Land; And that the King would not sell, deferr, or deny Justice
or Right to any; And that that Law of the Land was the Ancient custom of the
Country, which has continued ever sithence there was a King here, and that by
it the King was made, and had his power and pre-eminence; And that it was
confirmed by the Oath of Kings before the Statute, and sworn to be observed by
all the Kings sithence; And that all Judges are bound to try their doubts, and
Judge their Causes accordingly, howsoever their private knowledge, or
Conscience leads them; Then both by Practice, and by the Authority of Books,
looking into the course of the proceedings in the Chancery, by the Lord
Chancellor of England, from time to time, it seemed as though that Office had
been besides the Law, erected out of the absolute Authority that the Conquerors
claimed; and that it has been continued from time to time against the Law, and
the Provision of that Charter and Parliament, as it were by a Prerogative above
the Law; for that he is not tied to any Form of Trial of any point of Fact that
falls out doubtful before him, as other Judges be, but may examine Witnesses
as he pleases, and when he pleases, to inform his Conscience, and also
examine the parties by Oath or otherwise, and to proceed as it shall seem best
to his Wisdom, to beat out the Truth, as it seems good to him in his private
judgment; And that his Lordship may Order and Decree the Cause, as it seems
to him to agree most with Equity and Conscience, howsoever the Law is in the
Case; and to Imprison the party if he will not be ruled by him, and forbear the
benefit of Law, in every thing that the Lord Chancellor thinks to be
Unconscionable: So as it seemed upon the first object, for that his Lordship is
neither bound to the trial, nor the judgment that the Statute appoints to be
observed (as it seemed) upon the Letter, that his Authority is above Law, or
besides Law, and so the Great Charter of England no further holden than it
pleases the Lord Chancellor of England. Also it appeared by practice, That no
Man has Jurisdiction to judge according to the Law, before he has some Grant
or Commission from the King or Queen out of the Lord Chancellors Office, under
the Great Seal that is in his keeping: And also by course of the Common Law
(saving some particular prescriptions in some particular Courts) the Judges
cannot hold plea in any Cause, until his Lordship send them it by an Original
Writ framed in the Chancery, retornable before the Judges by his Lordships
appointment.

But when it was well considered, That the Charter and Statute of Magna Charta
was, that none of these things should be done, but according to the Law of the
Land; And that every King was sworn to observe it, and that the Lord Chancellor
is appointed by the King to his Office; It was conceived, that the Law of the
Land appointed these things to be thus done by his Lordship, for some necessary
causes known to them that first invented the Law, and so that great Office, and
the Great Charter, and the Law of the Land might all stand together.

Wherefore then was sought for, when that great Office of Chancery was erected,
by whom, and for what cause? and it was found to be erected by the Institutors
of the Common Law, as a Member thereof, of necessity to observe order in making
of Judges, direction of Suits, and to relieve and supply in those Cases, where
the Judges by the general Grounds and Rules of Law, could not give competent
Remedy by Law, according to Conscience and Equity, as shall hereafter be more
plainly showed; And so his Lordship, nor his Office, no derogation to the Law
of the Land; but his Office a member, and he a Judge thereof, without whom the
Law could not have the perfection, order, and due honor that it has; For the
better perceiving whereof, it was Noted,

First, that those (the Kings, Nobles, and Commons, whosoever, and whenever
they were) that Instituted the Law of the Land, did see that it was best to
make it so, as it might stand of General Grounds and Rules, that might
comprehend all particular Cases that should fall out, and to bind all that were
in one Case, to one judgment, without respect of persons, or other
Circumstances; or else the Law could not direct the Judges, how they should
proceed in judgment: For if consideration of the person, or other
circumstance, might have given a scope to the Judges, to judge by one Rule, one
Case one way, and another another way, the Judge might have made of the Golden
Rule of the Law, a Leaden Rule, to bend at his will, and so confusion would
have followed, and infinite inconveniences; for avoiding whereof, they made the
Rules to reach all persons alike, according to Justice, which regards the
person of no Man in judgment.

Then, they did see, that many would be overreached; for some were too simple,
and would trust untrusty persons, and be circumvented and were meet therefore
to be helped; Some would fall into the lash of the Law ignorantly, and
therefore not to be punished as those that offended of Malice; Many might
craftily over reach their Neighbors, by getting the better end of the staff;
And some by strength bear them down, if by some extraordinary Authority the
weaker were not upholden, and the simple provided for, and the subtle
prevented. For in many Cases men might offend and wrong their Neighbors in
subtle sort, and be wronged by hap, or simplicity, or ignorance, and yet the
General Rule of the Law could not fully reach or relieve them, that were so
overreached or circumvented.

Wherefore the Institutors of the Law found it to be a thing of necessity, to
tie the Judges to follow the Law in judgment in all Cases generally alike, as
the Case required: and yet to constitute one Supreme Judge further trusted than
the rest, that might have an Authority absolute and extraordinary, to supply
and reform those particular Cases, that might happen as aforesaid, according to
Equity and good Conscience, and to bind the parties not to follow Law, where by
Law they might get more by subtilty, or the others simplicity, than Conscience
would.

Here grew an Objection, That it was a dishonor to the Law to have these
wants, by this great Man to be thus supplied; for that it showed, that she had
not sufficiency and certainty in her Grounds and Rules.

But this is nothing, For there is no Law in any Nation, but particular
mischiefs have grown upon it; nor ever any Art or Science has been so
exquisitely set down, but disputable Questions have been found in it. And that
it cannot be otherwise, one example may serve; Moses that was the Lawgiver to
Gods People, and delivered it himself by Inspiration, was at the wall, we see,
in his own Books, in diverse Cases that happened, both in the Political Law, who
should inherit, and the Ceremonial Law, touching the uncleanesse that came by
touching a dead body; and he was driven to refer it to God to be decided, and
could not decide it himself by the general Rule of the most perfect Law that
ever was given to any people. Then if Moses that man of God found some doubts
that he could not decide, in that Law delivered by himself; Good Judges and
learned may find some Cases, that by Law they can hardly find a good provision
for, but leave it to such as God shall appoint to utter his Will by in Cases of
Conscience, since by Law they are not otherwise provided for.

Then it was Noted whereof his Lordship has his name of Dominus Cancellarius
Angliae, Lord Chancellor of England; wherein all agree, that he is called
Cancellarius, a Cancellando. But what he may Cancel, whereby he had that
honor, has been doubted. Some have said, that he had authority Cancellare
iniquam Legem Communem, and judicare secundum Conscientiam. But that has no
reason, and was rejected; for it is absurd, that since the Law has made him a
Judge of Law, and his Office a member of the Law, and made thereby, (as as
shall be plainly proved) that the Law should give Authority to deface or
Cancel her self, or that his Honor should deface that whereby he sits, and
has his Authority. And to that end was cited Mr. Bractons saying, Lex facit
Regem, attribuat igitur Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuitei, id est, dominationem
and potestatem; And thereupon it was concluded, a fortiore, If the King, that
has an Authority by Prerogagative above the Law in many cases, as to pardon
and acquit by Mercy, where the Law of Justice condemns, must attribute to the
Law Dominion and Power: the Lord Chancellor, though he has an Authority
besides Law, and yet allowed by the Law, is to attribute Dominion and Power to
the Law in all that he can, for that it made him an Officer in so high degree,
and therefore he may not Cancel or deface it. Which point, that he is made by
Law, and has his Authority thereby, is afterward fully proved. And it is to be
Noted, That his Lordship by his Absolute power cannot stay the Course of Law,
but only binds the person not to follow the Law in any Unconscionable
Course. This may serve to show, that it was not said of Cancelling the Law; for
in those Cases of Conscience it is found by experience, that the Law will take
her course if the party call upon it, though the Lord Chancellor has otherwise
ordered the Cause.

But his Lordship has his Name of Cancelling the Kings Letters Patents, which
is a thing of as great Honor to his Lordship and the Law, as the other had been
of Dishonor, and Disgrace to both; wherein it was Noted, That the Letters
Patents of the Prince once passed the Great Seal, do bind both his or her
Majesty, their Heirs and Successors, and all Subjects, yea so far, as the King
or Queen cannot call them in, if they find them unfit, nor any Subject can
gainsay them, if they be not just. Yet by Law if Letters Patents be past the
Great Seal in deceit of the King or Queen, the Judges by the Law are to
adjudge it undue, and not to bind the King or Queen in that respect, wherein
they were deceived; but yet they must leave it under Seal, and cannot deface
it. But if any Letters Patents pass the Great Seal, injurious to any Subject,
or prejudicial to the Law, the Lord Chancellor as a Judge of Law, (and not by
his absosolute Authority) by his Ordinary power, and by the course of the
Common Law is to judge of it which proves that the Law, and not Prerogative
gives him that power. For he is to hold plea of it by course of Law, and to
call the party interessed in it by process of Law, and so proceed according to
the Law, and repeal it by Judgment, if it be found in Law to be injurious. And
then the Lord Chancellor may Cancel it, and pull the Seal from it, and deface
it; which neither the King or Queen by Prerogative, nor any other Judge of Law,
nor other Lord of England can do, but himself, who only has that Authority.
Wherefore, thereof he is called Dominus Cancellarius Angliae, as if it were
said, that Lord that only has Authority in England to Cancel the Letters
Patents of the Kings, that bind both the King and the Subjects, if they be
injurious to any Subject, or prejudicial to the Law.

In this part, there were Three things Noted; One, that hereof his Lordship
took his Name. Another, that this was his highest Authority, for that none but
he had the like in the Land. The third, that his Lordship has it given him by
the Law, and is in that respect a Judge of the Law, and proceeds in course of
Law, and not according to Conscience, and by his Absolute power, or
extraordinary Authority; for he cannot judge thereof any otherwise, but by the
Law of the Land.

3. Then was Noted, As all justice flows from the King or Queen, as from the
Fountain, and no Authority or Jurisdiction in England is lawful, that is not
drawn from thence; so is his Lordship and his Office, next under the King or
Queen, to direct such Commissions and Grants as shall give Judicial authority
to any judge according to the Law, which must pass under the Great Seal, or
they be not sufficient. For example, There is no Judge made by Writ or
Commission, but it comes from thence, neither has any Man power tenere
placita, but it must grow first by Grant from thence, except it be the petit
Suits, that belong to petit Courts, as Courts Baron, and County-Courts; whereof
it is said by Law, de minimis non curat Lex, but the Law left them to the Lords
at home, to order them for the Peoples ease; Yet in these Courts if any fall
Judgment be given, it cannot be redressed but by Writ out of the Chancery, to
bring it before better Judges. But here of was noted, That though he must
direct out all Commissions, and Grants, before any can have Authority to judge
according to the Law, that his Lordship does that also by the Law of the Land;
And the Commissions and Grants made by him are to be adjudged by the Law of the
Land for their validity or invalidity; And therefore that his Lordship therein
is a Judge and member of the Law to appoint and direct the rest in that behalf,
and is to do it in that form, and to that effect that the Law has prescribed
him, which his Lordship may not alter; whereby it is apparent that he has that
Authority also by the Law of the Land.

4. Then was Noted, That by the Common Law, if any would complain of wrong, or
sue for right, he was to come into the Chancery, and set down by one of the
Clerks thereof, a Brief of his matter that he would put in Suit, and that was
by the Clerk to be set down in form in parchment, and a Precept written before
it in the Kings or Queens Name, and that directed to the Sheriff of that Shire
where the Plaintiff allegeth the Defendant was to be best found, or the cause
most aptly lay to be sued to Trial; which Precept Commands the Defendant or
Tenant to render right to the Plaintiff or Demandant, or appear at the day
prefixed in the Court appointed to him, to answer him to the Law, and that
Brief enclosed in Wax sealed with the Great Seal, the L. Chancellor is to send
out by the course of the Common Law before any Subject can be sued for any
matter of weight, by the course of the Common Law. And that Writ is called in
Latin Breve; wherein also was noted, a great regard that the Law had, that Men
should not be lightly heard to complain of their Neighbors, nor any Subject
drawn into Suits, nor troubled, nor any Causes (but the petit ones aforesaid)
should be brought to judgment, but by his Honors direction; so as Judges
should not send for whom they would, nor listen to all that complained, but to
do Justice to those that were sent to them by the Kings Writ, directed by the
Lord Chancellor of England to be Returned before them, as fit to be considered
of, and meet to be drawn into Suit and Judgment. Though sithence by usage,
diverse Courts have obtained other proceedings, by other process, according to
their Course, and not by Originals, and that is not derogatory either to the
Law, or that great Office; for some have grown by Grant, by reason of the Kings
Prerogative, which both the Law and the Chancery allows, and are to allow of
right, so it be not in derogation of their Authorities, and may stand with the
Law of the Land. For the Kings Bench proceeds by Bill, without Original,
against such as be Prisoners to the Marshall thereof, and that justly; for
that no Law can prescribe the King a form to proceed in Justice for those
Causes that be before himself, but he may receive any complaint, without Writ,
and proceed as it please him, so he observe the Law for Justice and Judgment,
which is done there, as well as in the Common Pleas, where all come in by
Original Writ; For though it be not by like form for process, yet it is by the
same form of pleading and judgment, and in matter and substance of Law all
one. And in this part it is manifest, that this Authority also in the Lord
Chancellor to direct out Original Writs, is by the Law of the Land given unto
him, and his form prescribed to him by the Law how he should make them. And to
that purpose there is a Book of Law left in the Chancery that the Chancery men
are bound to follow, which is called The Register; And if the Writs be not made
according to the form of Law thereby prescribed, the Judges will reject them,
and judge the^ void; which is called in Law, abating of the Writ. So as it is
apparent, that in this also his Lordship and his Office is by the Common Law,
and are members of the Common Law. and that he does it not by any other
Authority above Law, or besides it.

5. Then was considered of his Lordships authority to judge, which appears in
9 E. 4. fol. 14. in a Book-case, to be of two sorts, or by two powers, viz. One
according to the course of the Common Law, or Positive Law, which is there said
to be Potentia ordinata, which is in process, in pleading, and in judgment,
according to the course of the Common Law of the Land; The other is said
Absoluta potentia, which is in process according to the Law of Nature, to send
for the party to Answer, and receive his Answer if he will make it, and then
proceed to examine the truth of the matter, and if he will not answer, but be
Contumax, yet his Honor is to proceed to the examination of the truth, and not
to condemn him in the cause for his obstinacy, if it may appear that the matter
be not good against him.

And there is noted this difference, which is apparent and common in practice,
That where the proceeding is according to Ordinary power, mispleading on either
part may mar his Matter, and the judgment must be according to the Law,
howsoever the equity of the Case shall fall out: But if the proceeding be
according to Absolute power, though the party mis-plead, if the Lord Chancellor
shall perceive the matter to be good on his side, his Lordship is to judge for
him for whom Equity serves, be it the Plaintiff or Defendant, for that he is
to judge as he shall find the matter to be in Conscience good or bad, and not
as he shall find the pleading to be formal and good, or vicious and evil, or as
the Law will in the Case. As for example, in such actions as be brought in the
Chancery before the L. Chancellor, as an Audita querela to avoid a Recognisance
for Nonage, or other good Cause in Law; And in actions brought according to the
course of the Law, either by any of the Court, or against any of them by reason
of their Privilege, and in Vouchers upon Aid-prayer of the King, and such
other, whatsoever actions are pursued there according to the course of the Law,
his Lordship is not to regard what Conscience would in the Case, but is tied to
the strict course of Law, so as if the matter be against Conscience in his
Lordships opinion, yet he is to adjudge with him that the Law serves for, yea
if his matter appear to be good, and his Counsel have lost it by pleading, his
Lordship can not help it in judgment; nor if the Law be against him, though
Equity and Conscience would seem for him. But on the other side, if the
proceeding be by the Absolute power, howsoever the party or his Counsel
oversee, or set forth their matter, and whatsoever the precise Rule of Law
requires, if his Lordship perceive by his Wisdom that the cause in Conscience
is good on his side, his Lordship is to adjudge with him; for that then
judgment is to proceed secundum Conscientiam and Veritatem, and not in Forma
Juris. But in any Case that is there in form of Law, if it fall out that in
Conscience it ought to be relieved, the party may put in a Bill, and follow it
in that course, and then his Lordship may stay the course of Law.

6. Then was it enquired, Whether his Lordship may take order in all causes
which are against Conscience, or that the Law has limited them also, and
allowed of some to hold in that course, and some not? And it seemed, that
Conscience whereby his Lordship is to judge, is not to be understood
simpliciter, and to be Simplex Conscientia, but Regulata Conscientia, and
therein to follow Order and Course accustomed; viz. to take order in such Cases
as by the Course of the Court has been ordered before-time, and in Causes of
like Equity, or greater; wherefore oftentimes Presidents are sought for and
required, and for lack of Presidents, it has been sought how cases in the like
reason, or in eodem respectu, with that that is then in question, have been
used, to prove that that Court may take cognizance of the Cause.

As for example, it is against Conscience, that a rich Father should suffer an
honest Son to beg, and that a rich Son should suffer a good Father to want;
yet his Lordship in those cases, cannot make the one to give away his goods to
relieve the other, according to Conscience; But that, which that Regulata
Conscientia relieveth, is not when one keeps his own unconscionably, but when
one seeks an other man's Goods or Lands, or to trouble his person
unconscionably; either by color of Law, or extorted power, further or
otherwise than in good Conscience it ought to be; then his Lordship proceeding
according to the course of that Court, is in Conscience to relieve the party
that is so dealt with, or his Lands or Goods so taken or sought, contrary to
Conscience.

7. And it was thought, that if it be unconscionable that is done, if the Law
in ordinary course may give a competent remedy, and the party sufficiently able
to follow it, and that there be no defect in any circumstance, but that by the
Law the party wronged may be relieved; that his Lordship ought not to deal in
it, but referr it to the Law to be judged. But therein there is no certain Rule
but his Lordships own Wisdom, and Opinion, to discern whether the Law can
relieve it, or not, or that there be any defect or not; so as if his Lordship
think there is cause to retain it, he may, or dismiss it if it please him,
according to his own Conscience, which is in that behalf to direct him, as God
shall direct it.

8. And some cases there be that seem unconscionable, and yet the Law allows
them for good and necessary, and never Lord Chancellor thought good to deal in
them. As for example, That the Warranty of a Collateral Ancestor that never had
any thing in the Land descended upon one that had right, should bar the right
Owner from his Inheritance, for that he is Heir to him that made the Warranty,
though he has nothing for it. Or that a supposed Recovery in value in a Common
Recovery against a Crier of the Court of Common Pleas, that is not worth a
Groat, nor like ever to be able to make Recompense in value, should stand for a
Recompense, and be a bar of a man's lawful Inheritance, and to bar him that
he can never demand it, seems in every Man's particular Conscience to be
unconscionable; And yet the Law has allowed of them, upon this General Rule of
Law, Better to suffer a Mischif than an Inconvenience, and upon the regard that
the Law has to settle Possessions of Inheritace in certainty, by such
Instruments and Policies as the Law has allowed to assure them by, of which
kind these be; wherefore the Law has not suffered them either by Law, or in
Conscience, at any time to be violated or infringed, for any respect, or in any
case.

9. And it was said, That wheresoever an Act of Parliament has made any
provision for any unconscionable thing that was not to be relieved by the
Common Law, if the Lord Chancellor think in his Conscience that the Parliament
has not sufficiently relieved the party, yet his Lordship is not to relieve
him further than the Parliament has done, as before the Act he might have done;
for that so much is provided for, as the whole Three Estates thought meet, to
whose judgment his Lordship is to yield. But if any go about to defraud any
Act of Parliament, or not able to seek relief as the Statute appoints, Then,
as aforesaid, according to Conscience his Lordship is to deal therein, when and
where, as God and his Conscience is to direct, and no other, nor other rule
there can be for his direction in that behalf.

Hereupon was it also concluded, That his Lordships Authorities Judicial, both
by Ordinary power, and by Absolute power are limited by the Law of the Land;
For in the Ordinary, he is tied to the strict course of the Law, as other
Judges be; and in the Absolute power, though not tied to the course of the Law,
yet he is to deal, per Regulatam Conscientiam, and according to the course of
the Court; and in such Cases, as in cases of Conscience and Equity likewise
has been relieved before-time, but not in any Case that Law has allowed of
for good and necessary, nor in any that any Parliament has made provision for,
unless for some circumstances the party can not have that which the true intent
of the Law, or the Parliament allowed him, but by means of that Court; And many
things that a good Conscience would will a man to do in Charity to his
Neighbor, his Lordship by his Conscience cannot compel him to do, by the
course of that Court.

10. But in all that Discourse none could find how far his Lordships Absolute
power went, nor within what limits certain it could be contained, nor by what
means he might find out the truth; But that is without limitation referred to
his own Gifts, and the Grace of God, that gives Wisdom to find out the Truth,
and Conscience to judge accordingly; sometime to find it out by the Law of
Nature, as Solomon did, when no Testimony could be found in the world, yet he
found by her bowels of compassion the true mother of the Child; And sometime it
is found out by one mean, and sometime by another: But God never fails to
give wisdom and means to perform those Offices and Callings, that his Majesty
places men in; so as they serve him in Fear, and walk before him with a good
Conscience, and seek it in Humility, and with prayer at his hands, whose Will,
which is Infinite, is the Rule of the Lord Chancellors Conscience, and
therefore his Authority in that respect is infinite, and not limited in
certainty.

11. Upon all these Notes the Reader concluded with this Note, That it is
certain that his Lordships Office and Authority is by the Law of the Land, and
not derogatory thereto, but was constituted by the Lawmakers to supply those
things that the Judges that be bound to the general Rules could not relieve;
but in nothing to proceed to the prejudice of the Law. And to that end his
Lordship was made a Judge of the Law in some Cases, and also a Judge by
Conscience, besides the general Rule of Law in some other Cases; for that being
a Judge of the Law as well as others, his Lordship is with others to uphold the
credit of the Law, and that most of all others; for that she gave him greater
Authority than any other, and trusted him above all the rest, in that she tied
all the rest to follow strict Rules, and left him to rule by the Grace of God,
and his own Conscience, and to observe only the Equity, and not the strict
Rules thereof.

Wherefore no man ought once to control his Lordships judgment in any cause
that he proceeds in by his Absolute power, but is with reverence to yield
unto it, for as much as every one by the Rule of Charity, and of the estimation
that we ought to have of them that God has substituted over us, is to judge
the best, that is, that his Lordship has proceeded in singleness of heart,
according to his Conscience, and the Director of a good Man's Conscience is the
will of God, which is the perfect rule of Righteousness, howsoever it seems
to Man in his Wit or Judgment. Wherefore when his Lordship has set down his
judgment as God has guided his Conscience in any case, where he is Judge by
Conscience, though it differ from some other judgment given either by himself,
or any other good Man that sat in his Seat, all men are bound to think, that
the case differed in some circumstance that they cannot see, or has not
understood it; Or that God in this case, according to his good Will, which is
subject to no Rule but it self, has ordered this thus, and that so, and each
being according to Gods good Will, though different in our Understanding the
one from the other, both to be Righteous and Just Judgments, and are not to be
disliked, or disobeyed of any.

12. But then was it doubted by some, whether his Lordships Authority absolute
might bind the great Men of the Land, viz. The Nobility as well as the mean
Subjects? And the doubt rose upon this, For that their Honors are not to be
Arrested by their Bodies for any cause between Them and any Subject, by the Law
of the Land, and the process out of the Chancery is by Attachment of their
Bodies, if they come not in upon a Sub-poena served, and the execution of that
Court is Imprisonment, until the party will yield to obey the Decree and Order
thereof, and by the Great Charter no Freeman ought to be Imprisoned, but by the
Law of the Land. But that seems no cause, why the Order of the Lord
Chancellor should not bind them; for by the Law of the Land, if the Peers
commit any contempt to the Crown, they are to be taken by their Bodies as other
men. And Mr. Bracton, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. has these words, Ea quae sunt Justitiae
and Paci annexa ad nullum peirinent, nisi ad Coronam and Dignitatem Regiam; est
enim Coronae Regis facere Justitiam and Judicium, and tenere Pacem, and illa a
Corona separari non possunt. And what can be more near annexed to Justice, than
when a poor Man complains to the chief Judgment Seat, that he should have
justice according to Conscience and Equity, without respect of persons, and
that his Might should not overcome the poor Man's right; Therefore, when it is
found, and Ordered for the poor Man, and his Right in Conscience, and the great
Man thereby appointed and Ordered, that he shall cease his hard dealing with
him, and he contemns it, Must not that contempt needs be, Contra Coronam and
Dignitatem Regiam, seeing that Jurisdiction cannot be separated from them? And
then all Men agree, That for any contempt against the Crown their Honors may
be arrested and imprisoned as well as any other Subjects.

But in all these great Cases, neither the Reader, nor any his Associates took
upon them to decide the Law, touching the Authorities aforesaid, nor to give
any certain Rules for them, but dealt only for Learning to open the points, and
leave the judgment to the Judges, (as the manner of that Exercise is) to
determine what the Law is; And touching his Lordships Absolute Authority in
this whole Discourse, they all, both the Reader and his Associates, submitted
themselves to the judgment of the Lord Chancellor himself, for every thing
appertaining to his Lordships Office; for that God has not limited how far,
nor wherein, he should go or deal, but guides his Conscience in every case
that shall come before him, by his Grace, to do that which shall be good, just,
and equal before God and Men, so far as God shall direct him in that matter,
for his own Glory, and the good, or punishment of the parties, according to his
Good will.

13. But the last Note was this, That where every other Judge if he erreth in
judgment, is subject to a Writ of Error, to have his judgment examined by
other Judges above him, and so reversed, and himself not to be reproved, if it
be but error in judgment; and if he err of falsehood, then to be Fined, or
punished by the Lords in the Star Chamber, and his false Action defaced; Yet
the Lord Chancellor of England, if he err in his judgment, which he gives
according to his Conscience, there is no Appeal to any but to God to reform it;
for he is the only Judge of the Conscience of Man, and he only may condemn any
for Error only in Conscience, and he only may direct Conscience into a better
course, if Man err therein; for every Man of his own Nature is subject
thereunto; and also for that in that respect, there is no Magistrate in England
superior to him, for only the King or Queen is superior to him in Government,
and they are not by the Law to distribute Justice themselves, but are the
superintendents over all others, immediate under God to appoint the^ to it, and
to see it done by them, and charge them with it, and to maintain them therein.

Thus escaping out of this Laborinth, they left it, as they found it, saving
this doubt resolved, That his Lordships Authority and Office was erected by the
Law, and remains a principal Member thereof, and that so of necessity, as
without it the Law could not be just and equal to all in every Case.

FINIS.

