Sober and Serious QUAERIES about the Popish Plot, and the Protestants of
ENGLAND.
THo in this unparalled age some might think nothing could seem too strange;
Yet the Papists Impudence, in a Protestant Country, is certainly to be admired;
It Is an intolerable presumption that they dare contrive all possible Villainies,
and then endeavor to wipe off the Guilt by laying it upon Protestants. Amongst
the rest, we cannot but take notice of that Popish Drudge N. T. the Jesuits
Tool, and common Hackney for conveying their Venom into the minds of the
unthinking and unwary People, that by the noise of PLOTS and Designs amongst
Protestants, they might suppress the prosecution of that Undeniable one of
their own. This Impudent News-monger in his Lying Intelligence Numb. 162. out
of Zeal forsooth, to propagate the Reformed Religon, by ridiculing the True
Professors thereof, must needs make the world believe, by his False and
Impertinent Quaeres, That Protestants embrace as pernicious Doctrines, and use
worse Practices than the Papists, or the very Friars, Priests and Jesuits;
though Malice it self cannot instance one Protestant in England Guilty of any
such Crimes; or that will not freely renounce all Dangerous and Disloyal
Principles inconsistent with the Government. But because I intend shortly to
publish a particular Confutation of these Idle Quaeres; I will in the mean time
only desire Loyal N. T's speedy Answer to the following Interrogatories.

I. Whether it be not Arraigning the Justice of the Nation, and the Wisdom of
Three Successive Parliaments, to say, That the Popish Plot in England was but a
Contrivance of the Presbyterians, when so many Jesuits and known Traitors have
been Executed upon that account, and Coleman's Letters were so full to confirm
the Testimonies of Dr. Oats, Capt. Bedlow, etc?

II. Whether the Commitment and Persecution of the Earl of Shafts. was not a
Contrivance of the Papists, managed by their Agents and Hirelings, in order to
frighten others from prosecuting the Hellish Conspiracies of that Faction?

III. Whether the Association produced at the Proceedings against that Noble
Peer, was not framed by a Popish Politician, and foisted in among other Papers,
by those that pretend to have found it in his Lordship's Closet, the better to
gain credit to the Incredible Depositions of their Pupils?

IV. Whether it be not great Insolence in any Man in England to prosecute
Dissenting Protestants upon Penal Laws made against Papists; especially since
the Representative body of the Nation have resolved in Parliament, That to put
those Laws in Execution against Protestants, is at this time a Grievance to the
Subject, and a great encouragement to Popery?

V. Whether there be any relying on the Fidelity or Interest of the Addressors,
and Association-Abhorrors? And whether they are more Loyal now, than when they
petitioned for a Parliament? Or, can it be thought, if time will serve, but
they may again turn Petitioners?

VI. Whether Warcup, Fitzgerald, Marriot and Graham, the Great Managers of the
late Sham-Plots, have not been more zealous for the Gentleman in the North,
than for the KING; And as active to stifle Evidences of the Popish Plot, as to
create New Ones to fix a Protestant Conspiracy?

VII. Whether these Managers have won or lost by their new Employment? And
whether they are not supported by some of the first Magnitude about Court (as
is specified in the 1st. 2d. and 3d. parts of No Protestant-plot) in order to
advance the Interest of the Duke of York, and put an end to the Popish Plot?

VIII. Whether Warcup and Fitz Gerald, (who have often declared, that the
Popish Plot in Ireland was Voted in Parliament upon false and groundless
surmises) do not study to stifle the Popish Plot, and asperse the Wisdom of the
Parliament?

IX. Whether Fitzgerald (that had the Impudence to say, that Stafford and
Plunket died Innocent, and that the Papists of Ireland ought not to be Tried in
England) be not as much a Papist as he is an Irishman, and deserves rather a
close Confinement, till he is called to an account in Parliament, than to have
the liberty of trotting the Irish-Boggs, or be fed at Court for God knows what?

X, Whether the Interest of the Gentleman in the North, or the ability and
policy of Worcester. Hal: Clar. H -- d, S -- r, or J. will be able to protect their
Mercenary Hirelings, or justify their own Proceedings since the Dissolution of
the last Parliament, when called to an accoun^ in the next.

Now, Loyal Not. solve these Anxious Quaeres, Et eris mihi Apolline major.


