Dear Friends all unto whom this may come;
THE Consideration of the Natural, as well as Spiritual Benefits that God in
his Wisdom and Goodness, through the variety of his Gifts has afforded amongst
his People, whereby they are made mutual Helps and Comforts one unto another,
move us to send these Lines unto you, by way of recommendation of some
Medicines prepared by our Friend Charles Marshall, that we by long experience
have known to be safe and harmless, and through the blessing of God made
effectual for our own and others Relief, among whom we live, and that many
times in cases of eminent danger, wherein the said Medicines have (through the
blessing of the Lord) shown themselves very quick and powerful in Operation, as
a Friend and Help to Nature, by the recovery of many, particularly these two
Medicines, viz. the Spiritus Mundus, and the Spiritus Sedativus, and United
Spirit in one entire Medicine, made mention of at large in his printed Paper,
with the Uses and Directions for their taking, besides what we have heard by
account from other places, both in this Nation, and from beyond the Seas, in a
more than ordinary manner of the great good they have done to many there,
against the Distempers incident to those places; and considering how many
unusual and mixed Distempers of these times are, and how many perish for want of
help; and withal, considering how much Testimonals upon a frequent Experience
is acceptable to the weak and distempered, we thought it but just and tender to
recommend these Medicines, as what may be of good Service and Benefit to many,
who are yet unacquainted with them, and to the end they may be made public,
for the good of all under necessity, for their Health, especially among
Friends: And the Mercy of God therein known and received to his praise, we in
uprightness and sincerity of our Hearts do send these Lines unto you, and with
the Salutation of our dear and brotherly Love, in the fellowship of the blessed
Truth remain

Bristol, the 2d of the 8th Month, 1681. Your Friends and Brethren in Truth
and Righteousness, Richard Snead, Thomas Callowhill, Charles Jones, Richard
Vickeris.

We do further recommend these Medicines to the experience of such as practice
Physic, not doubting, but from thence they will find sufficient encouragement
to make use of them, especially in dangerous and acute Distempers, as Surfeits,
Gripes, Fevers, Small Pox, Plurisies, and the like.



HAving perused the above Recommendation, I must needs say, it answers my
frequent thoughts about those Medicines; for I have on my self in a peculiar
manner, and on others, experimented (by the blessing of the Lord) a speedy and
effectual Relief.

William Penn.

BEing well satisfied with the Testimonies of Friends abovementioned, and
finding our selves obliged by the experience we have had, we can do no less in
the behalf of the said Medicines, but recommend the use of the same to all
Friends, and for benefit to Mankind, to make use of the same, according to the
printed directions.

And further, we propose it to all Friends, who have the like knowledge and
experience of these Medicines, that they would tenderly recommend them to their
Acquaintance and Relations, who may be afflicted with Distempers of various
kinds; for in so doing, some have found much comfort in the effect ( viz.)
their Friends Relief.

London, the 17th of the 8th Month, 1681. John Staploe, John Harris, Francis
Stamper, John Tooby. Richard Whitpane, John Bellers, Thomas Cox.


I Having had some good experience of the Effects of the aforementioned
Medicines, am able to say somewhat from it, viz. of the Spiritus Mundus,
Spiritus Sedativus, and the Cordial Spirit, that I have found them to be
(through the blessing of God that has gone along with them) effectual, to my
comfort and relief in several Weaknesses and Infirmities, that have been long
growing upon me. And this in short further I have to say, I am fully persuaded
and satisfied, they are very proper Medicines for the good of Mankind, and
there is a blessing from God does attend them, and as such I do recommend them
to all to whom they may come, for their good, they being a Restorative to
decayed Nature, through the blessing, as before.

Thomas Burr.


