A Solemn Exhortation made and published to the several Churches of Christ
within this PROVINCE of LANCASTER, FOR The Excitation of all persons therein to
the practice of their Duties, requisite to the effectual carrying on of
Church Discipline; and in it the Edification of our Churches, and the
Reformation of Religion.

BY THE Provincial Synod assembled at Preston, Feb. 7. 1648.

LONDON, Printed for LUKE FAWN, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XLIX.

feb 1648

decorative header consisting of a French fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor rose
and a Scottish thistle
A Solemn Exhortation made and published to the several Churches of Christ
within this Province of Lancaster.
THE Government of the Church of Christ, which he himself instituted, being in
this Province lately restored to the hands of those his Officers unto whom he
himself committed it: He (who is the Head of the Church, to whom God the Father
has given all power in Heaven and in Earth,) having stirred up, and stood by
the honorable and pious Parliament, (whose Acts will be renowned,) to wrest it
out of the hands of those that usurped, depraved, and mis-administred it, and,
with the Advice of the Reverend Assembly of Divines, to deliver it (vindicated
and purged from the former depravements, and confirmed with their civil
Sanction,) to those his servants, unto whom by his Will and Testament he had
assigned it. The faithful Execution of this Government now rests upon the
charge of those Officers with whom it is so, both by divine Commission, and
humane Injunction, entrusted; and the diligent improvement of it to spiritual
advantage remains upon the care of those Churches and Church members over whom
it is placed, and to whose benefit it is appointed to be subservient; and if
either the Execution of the one, or the improvement of the other, be slacked,
the effect, of it will fail, and great will be the fail thereof, We of this
Synod, called by the aforesaid Authorities, opening a way to the Churches,
whereunto we severally appertain, to design us to the present inspection of
this large Association of Churches for their edification; having set our selves
to find out, and pursue what (within the extent of our power) may be
conducible thereunto, have quickly apprehended the promoting of the aforesaid
due execution, and improvement of Church Government, to be mainly necessary to
that end; and not only taking notice of, but laying to heart the flow
proceeding of it among us, more especially in some places, and more
particularly in some duties, have thought meet amongst other means for the
putting on thereof, to address our selves by way of exhortation to all our
Churches, and in them to all our Brethren, both public Officers, and other
Members, beseeching the God of all Grace through Jesus Christ, That this our
service may be acceptable and profitable to them, being sanctified by the Holy
Ghost.

The matter (dearly beloved in our Lord) of Church Discipline, which we
persuade, were it either Arbitrary, or of a temporal concernment, we should
have passed it over in silence at this time; but when we consider that it is
one of those Commandments which our Lord Jesus Christ, before his ascending up
to Heaven through the Holy Ghost, gave unto the Apostles whom he had chosen,
and whom he charged to teach all Nations, made his Disciples to observe all
things whatsoever he had commanded them; and that it has the Church of God,
and the souls of men purchased by his precious blood for its object; The
restoring and preserving of the purity of Christ's Ordinances, the verity of his
Doctrine, the orderliness of men's Conventions, the Peace and Union of Christian
Brethren, and Churches in Judgment, heart and practice for its end, and that
ignorance, error, and iniquity, are the enemies against which it draws forth,
and weildeth its weapons; we cannot but speak, and yet withal judge a little
speaking for this to them to whom we speak may suffice.

The miserable disorders, errors, and offenses, which like a flood have broken
out, continued, and risen to so great a height among us, to the high dishonor
of the Name of God, the great hinderance and shame of the Gospel, and the
trampling of the holy things, and precious pearls thereof, under the feet of
dogs and swine, the subversion of many fouls, the vexation of others, the
disturbance of our Churches peace, and the errecting of many walls of partition
betwixt brethren, the decay and discouragement of the power of godliness, the
opening of the reproachful mouths of the enemies of Religion, the advancement
of Satan's seat amongst us, the pulling down and continuing of many national
Judgments, and the rendering of Reformation so extremely difficult. These these,
O Brethren, are the deplorable fruits of the want of this Discipline; which but
to mention may make all pious cars to tingle: what then may the seeing and
enduring of them so long move in our hearas? And how great a guilt shall we
incur, if we shall be now wanting in our places, either to the setting up, or
diligent practice of this Discipline? And here as we cannot excuse our selves
in our own consciences, so we desire not to conceal that in the late
Prelaticall Usurpation; we are conscious to our selves of departing from our
duty, in compliance with the mis-proccedings thereof: we judge our selves for
it, and we do earnestly desire, that our failings herein may be so far from
becoming a president for future, either to our selves or others, that the
remembrance thereof may be to both, for time to come, a Caveat and an incentive
to obfirmed fidelity and diligence in all our disciplinary duties; and that
whatsoever sort of men may come hereafter to carry themselves in way, either in
neutrality, discountenance, prohibition, or opposition to us therein, we may
yet acquit our selves in the same. We would not have to he forgotten how long
the work of the Reformation of this Church, in point of Discipline, has
stayed, and stuck behind those of Doctrine and Worship, which has been our
great stain and trial: With what prayers, tears, solicitations and
testimonies, by preaching, writing, practicing, and suffering, our
Predecessors, and we have striven for the effecting of it? What expectations
and hopes of late have bin conceived of it? What undertakings gone about, and
adventures made for it? What delays and obstructions have been interposed? How
much, and many ways Satan and wicked men have stood against and retarded it?
What contestations and conflicts have been encountered? What costs, not only of
wealth, but of blood, expended for the attainment of it? What a public,
solemn, and soule-binding Covenant, and Oath, has been takin by us, and most
people in this Nation, sincerely, really and constantly to endeavor the same?
By what slow steps, through the violent and hazardous oppositions made against
it, the intervention of other urgent affairs, and the intermixture of humane
frailties, the Parliament, the Assembly of Divines, and the several Church
Assemblies, in their respective endeavors about it, have proceeded? And how,
in, and above all, the most mighty hand of God has been exalted, and his
unsearchable wisdom, and rich mercy magnified in, not only the redemption of
our lives, liberties and estates, from the common enemies, and the full
subduing of them once, and again, before the Lord, and before his people, but
the bringing forth out of all those perplexed, dangerous, difficult, and cross
occurrences of great advantage to us, as in many other respects, so especially
in the establishing of Church Government in that good measure in which it is
settled: The progress whereof in this Province, we have much cause to admire,
and study thankfulness for: And we confess the greatest defects that now remain
concerning it, are in the practice of it, which is our part; and that the
unfitness, unsetledness, averseness, and remissness of men's spirits in relation
to it, is now the great obstruction at which it sticks: And we may be jealous,
lest as the want of love to the Truth has, through the just Judgment of God,
been a wide inlet in many places to damnable Heresies, so the want of a heart
in us to use this price in our hand of Churchpower, may lay us open to
destructive disorder. We observe also, That as man's corruption and Satan's
malice concurred to hinder Church Discipline while the work of discovering,
clearing up, and public authorizing of the rule was in hand, by raising and
keeping up of differences in judgment, with hot and doubtful disputes
concerning it, unworthy aspersions, and contempt cast upon it, anticipations of
mature direction of authority about it by some brethrens rending from our
Churches, and setting up ways of Discipinle dissonant to it, private, politic
designings under pretenses of it, a common hatred to Reformation, and
strictness imposed by it, disaffection and discouragement to it by many in
places of Power; expectation and endeavors for a legal Toleration, and an
assuming of liberty in Religion for the present, the fruitful mother of all
Atheism, Error, false Religion, and Profaneness; so do they still concur by the
same arts and means, and that with a higher hand, to hinder the putting of it
in practice: so that by the short experience we have had, and the present face
of things, we may very probably make account to meet with yet as much, yea more
difficulty in the carrying on of this Discipline, then was found in the
establishing of it; which some men, whose counsel is flesh and blood,
discerning, may perhaps take occasion thence to languish, in their activeness,
or wholly to refrain from acting, or to stand off from joining in it, and
happily to blame the godly forwardness of others: but we wish such men better
counselors, and hope all those who are acted by principles of conscience, and
spiritual interest, will, from the apprehension of such difficulty, collect an
obligation to more diligence, and thence address themselves with greater zeal,
courage, and resolution to the work.

All these mighty engagements, and impulsives, brethren and beloved, being with
serious and right Christian consideration weighed, we beseech, and exhort you,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, That the Government and Discipline of the
Church, ordained by Christ, and set forth summarily by authority in the
Ordinance of Parliament of 29. August 1648. be presently, faithfully,
constantly, and impartially put in practice, in all Church assemblies, by all
Ministers, ruling Elders, and other Christians, according to the Power, or
Commandment, delivered to them in the Word of God respectively, with all other
known duties of Religion coming within the cognizance of the said Government;
and in particular as conducing, or necessarily concomitant thereunto these
following.

First, That in such Congregations as are not provided of ruling Elders, and
may afford any number of persons duly qualified for that Office, the Minister
and People do without delay or excuse, proceed with due solemnity to elect such
Elders; and that the persons so elected take upon them the said function, as
thereunto called of God; and that the Classical Presbytery, to which that
Congregation appertained, or, if that be not, the Ministers, and others,
nominated by Ordinance of Parliament of 2. October. 1646. as sit to be of that
Classis, proceed to constitute that congregational Eldership, to which the said
persons are so chosen; and the Eldership so constituted to address themselves
to the Execution of the Discipline in their Congregation with all diligence,
and to associate themselves as they have opportunity to the Classical
Presbytery, which they belong unto.

That the Ministers of the Gospel give themselves continually to prayer, and to
the Ministry of the Word; that they study to show themselves approved to God,
workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth; that
they be eminently and exemplary holy, and blameless in their conversation; that
they be quick sightedly watchful against the springing and spreading of Errors,
and the breaking out of Divisions within their flocks, and that they labor to
instruct by way of catechizing all the young, and weak in knowledge within the
same.

That the Ministers and Elders set themselves diligently to the oversight of
their Congregations, to discern into, and help them in their knowledge, and
spiritual estate, and to discover, direct, and correct their conversation,
therein passing over none that profess Christianity within their bounds, uncast
our of the Church, and endeavoring the recovery of those that are cast out;
That they constantly meet in public, that they may be ready for the addresses
of the people, and to consult on, and apply such means as may be effectual for
the edification of the congregation, or any member thereof* That they rule with
diligence, and impartiality in the application, or releasement of Church
censures, as the condition of any shall require: That they punctually observe
the meetings of the associated Presbyteries, Classical and Provincial; that in
matters too hard for their single Elderships, or wherein they are appealed
from, they may reap the benefit of joint counsel, authority, and prayer, and
mutually afford the same, and that none of them detract, grow weary, or suffer
themselves to be diverted from frequenting such assemblies, although the
affairs of Church Discipline, being so newly entered upon, be for the present
somewhat extraordinarily pressing.

The Classical Presbyteries (being that one special work of theirs is to
superintend them that have the oversight of others) are besought to take
special care, that the Ministers, and ruling Elders, within their respective
Divisions, be sufficient for their callings, industrious in the execution
thereof, and unblameable in their walking; in which respects their accutest
vigilance is required, that the unworthy be timely prevented, the negligent, or
offensive regulated, and the unreclaimable ejected.

All Christians whatsoever are exhorted, That they beware of giving any offense
to any, either by manifest sin, or by the appearance of evil, remembering that
double heavy woe, which in the sentence of our blessed Savior offenses bring,
to wit, one to the world, another to the offense giver. That they carefully
avoid all rash, or groundless taking of offense against any person, or
practice, not judging upon in evident cases, as being bound out from it by a
double Law of Justice and Charity: And here, whereas there are said to be some
that murmur against certain of the Communicants, in the several Congregations,
as if they were visibly unworthy of the Lords Supper, We desire that such
complainers would rather apply themselves to their duty of private admonition,
and public information, and proof thereof before the Elderships respectively,
and not uncharitably charge, either an unworthiness upon a party, or a
mis-administration upon an Eldership before a due eviction thereof be made.

And forasmuch as imputations of infufficiency and scandalousness are in
general expressions, and in private talk, cast upon some Church Officers; we
earnestly pray, that there may be either an orderly complaint, prosecution, and
proof made of such imputations before the Presbytery whereto any such Officer
belongs, or a forbearing of such smitings with the tongue. Furthermore,
Christians are exhorted, That what errors, or offenses, they plainly discern in
any brother, they take notice of them, not to hate, disdain, upbraid, or
presently to withdraw brotherly respect, and society from him for the same,
much less to whisper, or publish such things, when, where, or to whom there is
no warrant, to the defamation, or exasperating of the party, and the
multiplying of offenses, but to exercise pity, and endeavors of recovery
toward him; if the matter be a smaller failing, or but an infirmity, to
instruct, and persuade him, and patiently to bear, expecting his amendment: if
the matter be of an higher nature, and scandalous indeed, let every one take
heed of winking at, or being wanting in his place, to the removing of the
Scandal, and make conscience to apply himself according to the rule of Christ,
by a set, solemn, and opportune admonition in private to the lapsed party,
withal wisdom, fidelity, meekness, and love, accounting it a happy work to gain
a fallen brother, and that this private admonition is ordinarily the first step
to the process of Church Discipline. If upon it the parties repentance be not
discerned, follow our Saviors rule to the next step, take along with you to
the person, one or two faithful brethren, That they may be both witnesses and
assistants to a second admonition: If neither in this course a good effect
appear in him, omit not that third remedy prescribed by Christ, of telling it
to the Church, but go and acquaint the Eldership with thy brothers trespass,
thy past proceedings for his reclaiming, and the successesness thereof, which
last remedy is to be made use of forthwith in all publicly known, or openly
divulged scandals; and both in case of such published Scandals, and in those
more private, so persisted in against brotherly admonition, as is aforesaid; we
exhort every person that is offended, or knows, and can testify the matter
of fact, That he willingly appear and witness the same before the Eldership;
all which is to be done by every one respectively, as he tendereth the saveing
the offender, the putting away of the evil from the Church, the vindication of
that worthy Name of Christ, by which we are all called, and the purity of his
Ordinances, and that he himself may not be a partaker of other men's sins: In
this course of admonition, and prosecution before the Eldership, let none out
of private spleen revive the memory of old, and forgotten offenses; which not
only tract of time, but the real Reformation of the party, unto the full
satisfaction of the godly, and silencing of the world, may have buried: And let
every one that is overtaken with a fault be ready to receive, submit to, accept
of, and improve to his good the admonition of any Church Officer or Brother
given him, as an act of conscience, and love in his Brother, and as to him self
a kindness or excellent oil to heal him.

Also we exhort all Christians cordially to esteem and affect, diligently to
attend upon, really to subject themselves to, and profitably to use what
Discipline is but the conservatory or enclosure of, to wit the public and
private Ordinances of the Gospel, as the Word, the Sacraments, Prayer, and the
rest: And in regard of that great neglect, we observe in many places by many,
of that soul-feasting Ordinance, the Lords Supper, which was so dearly
bequeathed by Christ immediately before his death unto his Church; We exhort,
that no person of age, that names himself by the Name of Christ, would
ordinarily absent, or wretchlesly deprive himself thereof, but that he labor
for knowledge to enable him to examine himself for faith, and for a good
conscience toward God and man; and that he be diligent in the use of all
public and private means to attain the same, and particularly that he submit
to be catechized by the Minister, and tried, and approved by the Eldership. And
whereas some that come not to the Lords Supper, nor offer themselves to the
Eldership to be admitted to it, repine as if they were kept back by them, they
are exhorted not to pretend themselves to be debarred by them whereas they
never tendered themselves to be received. And whereas others that absent
themselves, except against the manner of admission, by approving themselves to
the Eldership in point of knowledge and conversation, such should religiously
weigh upon what binding grounds the Eldership requires the said satisfaction,
and to endeavor themselves, either to receive resolution of the Eldership, or
Minister, for their insisting on such satisfaction, or to yield resolution to
them for their refusing to give it; and if that way they gain not access to the
Ordinance, rather to appeal to the Classical, and thence to the Provincial
Assembly, in case they find themselves agrieved, then to sit down without using
what means they are afforded to gain participation in so necessary and precious
an Ordinance.

All Governors of Families are exhorted to see to the godly ordering of their
households, to observe constantly, and to bring all under their charge unto
Family Duties of Religion, as Prayer, reading the Word, repeating, and taking
account of Sermons, especially on the Lords Day, singing of Psalms, catechizing
them, and bringing them to be catechized by the Minister, that they may come
to, and grow up in the knowledge and obedience of the truth, necessary to their
Salvation; and so to restrain them from wickedness, and lead them to godliness,
both by their own example, and by their authority, that (as much as in them
lies) the Church, or any of their Brethren be not offended with any of them;
and their eternal happiness may be procured.

Also such as keep Schools for the education of youth, are exhorted to train up
their youth in divine literature, and to discipline them to eschew vice, and
practice piety, themselves also exercising duties of Religion in their Schools,
and being every way exemplary in good to them; and that in allowing times of
recreation, they, according to the Directory, leave the observing of holydays,
and exchange them for other convenient times.

And we exhort, That if any Brethren amongst us, either in any thing dissent
from the present constitution of Church Government, or take offense at any
practice in any of our Churches, or Members, they would beware of running into,
or continuing in Schism thereupon, but walk by the same rule with us, so far as
there is an agreement in judgment betwixt us, and endeavor to receive or give
satisfaction wherein there is any practical difference, and take heed of
violating their own declared principles, concerning continuing, or withdrawing
of Church Communion.

Lastly, Let all Christians chiefly study, strive for, and exercise the power
of godliness, whereto Church Discipline serves as an handmaid, and whereof
visible conformity is but the outward shape; and let the mainest of their care
be employed in the getting and keeping of faith and a good conscience, the
materials of that power of godliness; and seeing most perilous times are come
upon us, wherein it is opposed and assaulted by all ways, both of subtilty and
power: We earnestly exhort and warn you all, that with exquisite heed and
resolute stedfastness ye discern and resist all those that shall seek to seduce
you, either into error, or division, contrary to that sound doctrine, and safe
fellowship, which ye have embraced in our Churches; that with accurate
circumspection ye keep your selves from the common and reigning sins of these
times; that ye stand fast to our solemn League and Covenant, in all the
branches of it, and namely, in those that contain the great, and much hazarded,
public Interests of Religion, Civil Government, and Brotherly Union, not
suffering your selves to be drawn aside to any new inventions, to the
subverting of any of them: And that ye walk in the old path, and good way of
the infallible Scriptures, and avoid such courses, as have but the warrant of
pretended good intentions, urgent necessity, or mis-interpreted providence
coined for them; And if it be the Will of God, That ye must suffer for not
saying a confederacy to such ways, or for well doing, be not afraid of men's
terror, neither be troubled, nor ashamed, but sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts, rejoice, count your selves happy, glorify God on this behalf, and
commit the keeping of your souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

James Hyet, Moderator. Thomas Johnson, Assessor. Edward Gee, Scribe.


FINIS.

