Some Queries proposed to the Bishops and Ministers of England, for them, or
any of them, to answer; that there may be an understanding why Persecution is
so violently prosecuted.
QUERY 1. WHether was not Man created good, and whether had he not power in
that state over all creatures? and whether did he oppress or afflict any
creature by his power; or whether was not the Creation in love, peace and unity
together? 2. Whether did not the Fall disorder the Creation, and whether was
not the Serpent the cause of it; and whether does not the Serpent govern over
all People in the Fall, and whether any in that state be in a right capacity to
govern others? 3. Whether was not the Serpent the original of sin? and whether
is not Persecution, Sin? and whether did Cain well in killing his brother, and
for what cause did he kill him? 4. Whether is there not a day of Restoration
to be expected, and by whom is all things to be restored? and whether is that
day past, present, or to come. 5. Whether is not the Serpents head to be broken
in the day of Restoration? and whether must not his Government fall when his
head is broken, and whether is not that come which is to do it? 6. Whether is
there any Persecution in the Restoration, or whether does not Love, Peace and
Unity grow again? and whether such as persecute be in love, peace and unity
with those they persecute? 7. Whether is not Persecution an evident mark of the
Serpents Enmity? and whether any in Enmity be in Love, Peace and Unity? 8.
Whether is not Christ the Author of Faith, and whether do such as live in the
Faith persecute any? 9. Whether Unbelievers can be converted by Persecution,
and whether Persecution be a good Religion to convert any into? 10. Whether are
not such as are contrary-minded to be convinced, and the mouths of gainsayers
to be stopped; and whether Persecution be the way to do either? 11. Whether is
not Persecution an Effect of your Doctrine; and whether is your Doctrine sound
that produces such Effects? 12. Whether do not you promote the Persecution
that is, and whether have you not laid the greater part of that work upon
others to ease your selves? 13. Whether do you walk as Christ and his Apostles
walked? and whether is not your practice of Persecution contrary to their
Practice and Doctrine. 14. Whether is not the Love of God manifest in Christ,
and whether is not Christ the Light that makes it manifest? and whether is not
the Love of God shed abroad in the hearts of all that believe in the Light, and
whether is not (...) 15. Whether does any Persecution rise from the Love of
God, (...) such as know it shed abroad in their hearts do walk in that way? 16.
Whether does not Love endure all things; and whether are not such in the Love
of God that endure Persecution, and whether are not such in the Enmity that
persecute? 17. Whether is not the Doctrine of Christ to be believed and
followed? and whether such as love their Enemies, and follow Peace with all
men, do not believe and follow his Doctrine? 18. Whether are any worthy to be
persecuted, that believe and follow Christ's Doctrine; or whether they are not
worthy to be encouraged? 19. Whether is your Faith and Doctrine the same as the
Apostles was, and how may it be known? 20. Whether does your Practice and
Worship agree with Christ and his Apostles, or whether it is not nearer the
Popes Inventions? 21. Whether do you preach, pray and sing in the same Spirit
as the Apostles did; or whether are you not apostatized from it, and observing
the Traditions of men? 22. Whether do you take Tithes from any Precept or
President of Christ or his Apostles; and whether are Tithes to be taken and
paid for maintenance of a Gospel Ministry? 23. Whether do you sprinkle Infants
from any Precept or President of Christ or his Apostles, or whether has not
the Pope introduced it? 24. Whether is the whole, or any part of your Practice
and Worship according to the plain Truth of Scripture? if it be, then prove it
by the Scripture; but if you cannot, then it is not to be owned as Infallible.
25. Whether is it Error in the sight of God to dissent from your Practice and
Worship? if it be, then convince the Dissenters by sound Doctrine, and maintain
your practice in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, without Persecution and
Violence. 26. Whether is it Error for some to meet, besides the Family,
contrary to your Lyturgy? or, whether may not four so meet without
transgressing the late Act? if so, Then whether may not four hundred meet in
the same Truth, seeing four are not concluded to be in error? and whether does
the number make it an error, or whether is it not the same Truth in many as in
few? 27. Whether is not that a true Worship which is performed to God in his
Spirit, and whether such a Worship may not be performed contrary to your
Lyturgy? and whether have you ever proved the Quakers Meetings to be Seditious
Conventicles, and contrary to the true Worship in Spirit? and whether is it
reasonable to persecute for that you have never proved to be irregular? 28.
Whether Appearance only be a good ground to judge and conclude Error by; and
whether Dissenters from you in appearance may not truly worship God? and if so,
then whether you do well to persecute them? 29. Whether is a Peaceable Meeting
a Seditious Conventicle, or what makes a Seditious Conventicle? and whether is
not the late Act wrested, when executed upon such as meet peaceably? 30.
Whether must not the Lamb and the Saints have the Victory, and what must they
have victory over; and whether must not the Lamb reign over all that war
against him? and whether does not Persecution war against him? and whether such
as persecute be not his enemies, that would not that he should reign, and
whether must they not be overcome and slain before him? 31. Whether is it not
the Lamb and his Followers that patiently endure Persecution; and whether is
not Persecution the Dragon's flood? 32. Whether is it a work of Christianity to
banish People for meeting peaceably, and no other thing proved against them?
and whether is there any Law in England that gives power so to do? and whether
is true Judgment executed by those that do it? 33. Whether is it not better to
suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin?
and whether Pride, Rioting, and Drunkenness be not sin? and whether do not such
as enjoy those pleasures cause the People of God to suffer Affliction? 34.
Whether is not Christ the Prince of Peace? and whether is not Peace the fruit
of his Spirit? and whether are such governed by his Spirit, as persecute his
People for meeting peaceably, which is the fruit of his Spirit? 35. Whether is
not Persecution exposed to termination, and whether such as prosecute it be not
exposed to termination with it? 36. Whether is not Love and Good Will a sure
mark of Christianity? and whether is not Envy and Cruelty a sure mark of the
contrary? and whether is there Love and Good Will in Persecution, and whether
is the nature of Christianity in such a work? 37. Whether is the Name of a
Christian a sure Evidence of Salvation, and whether may not such as have the
Name and not the Nature, be liable to Condemnation? 38. Whether is Religion an
outward thing, or whether is it contained in outward observations? or whether
does it not stand in the Principle of Life? and whether is that Religion which
stands in the Life to be denied, and they that live in it to be persecuted? 39.
Whether are not all outward things of a perishing nature, and whether is a
perishing nature a good foundation to settle Religion upon? or whether is not
Christ the true and only Foundation? and whether that Religion that is settled
upon him ought to be suppressed? 40. Whether is not all Power in Heaven and
Earth in Christ? and whether is not he the chief Shepherd and Bishop of the
Soul? and whether is any ^ing, Bishop, or Judge to limit his Power? or whether
are not (...) to be subject unto him, and in all things give him the
Pre-eminence?
These Queries are proposed in meekness and fear for you, or any of you to
answer, for the heat of Persecution is violent upon the Innocent; and it is but
a reasonable thing to demonstrate your minds for the Nations satisfaction, and
in plainness make it known wherefore such things come to pass; and if you can
make it appear that it is for any cause of evil that we are so afflicted, then
you will manifest something to satisfaction; for it is believed you have very
much provoked the present Authority unto it, and also promote the Execution of
it; And though the Magistrates in doing of it give you ease, and so you keep
your selves more close from appearing in action, yet it is believed that you
follow it with your strength, and that by your strength the Magistrates hand is
both lifted up and pulled down: and if it be not so, then clear your selves
from it, by endeavoring to restrain the Evil of it, that the backs of the
Righteous may be smitten no more, and all that have their hands in that work
may say, It is enough, lest Judgment fall merciless because no mercy is showed:
for is it a light thing to drive Innocent People from their Peaceable Meetings
with Armed men, and to thrust them into Holes and Prisons, for no other cause
but the exercise of their Consciences toward God, and then to send them away,
and banish them into Remote Countries, and so tare and rend the Bowels of the
Nation, and lay Families waste that are a good service in their places? O
preach the doctrine of Love and Peace amongst them, and let Pity and Mercy
oversway Cruelty, that God may divert his Vengeance which unto Cruelty
belongs, from which none can escape that persist in persecuting the Innocent:
Therefore you Bishops and Ministers consider your places, and do not preach and
promote that which will draw down God's Vengeance, but preach and promote the
Gospel of Peace and Salvation, that the noise of Cruelty and Persecution may
cease and no more be heard in the Land.

And all you Magistrates and People hear what your Bishops and Ministers will
answer, for this matter is not to be carried on with Clubs and Staves, these
were the weapons of Judas's Band; that is but a bad Religion that must be so
upheld: therefore stay your hands, and let those that are accounted Spiritual,
stand forth in the Spirit of Meekness; and if in that Spirit they will appear,
we are ready in the same Spirit to make our defense, but we cannot use Clubs
and Staves in it, for our weapons are not carnal, and our Consciences are
tender toward God; therefore be you still and quiet, and let them have time to
consider and give their Answer; which if they do not, you may well forbear
standing in their defense, and also stay your hands from afflicting or
persecuting us any further; for we have a good Cause, and our patience and
peace is in it; and in the midst of our Afflictions that is our Joy and Crown
of Rejoicing. Glory be unto the Lord God for ever.

W. S.
The 12th of the 7th month, 1664.

