A SOBER VINDICATION OF THE Nobility, Gentry and Clergy OF THE Church of
England: IN ANSWER TO A Late Malicious Pamphlet, Entitled, A Dialogue between
WHIG and TORY.

Crescit sub pondere Virtus. LICENSED,

November. 28. 1693.
LONDON, Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCIV.

Price Three Pence.

TO THE READER.
A Certain Piece of Scrible, (being indeed a Julian kind of Handiwork) having
lately stolen into the World, under the Title of A Dialogue between Whig and
Tory, etc. Stolen indeed I may very well say; for License and Authority would
blush to Entertain, or Countenance it. This Enthusiast, having his Tongue once
more touched with his Republican Altar-Coal, has thus handed this doughty Brat
abroad; and possibly the Dowdy may have met some favorable Reception,
especially amongst the Zealots of his own Mark and Color: For even the
coursest Cubs never want kind Bears to lick 'em: And our own Pictures, tho
never so deformed, are naturally our most beloved Darlings. To such a Kindness,
and such a natural Affection and Tenderness, this Julian product may owe its
little Good Fortune. However, to undeceive the Ignorant World, (for the
Sensible part of mankind need it not) I shall take the Trouble, or rather the
Pleasure to unmask this Mormo, and set it forth at a much truer Light than the
Cunning and Sophistry of the Politiek Author has brought it before us. For, as
plausible a pretext as it carrys, viz. his pretended Zeal for their Majesty's
and their Government, it is worth our while to examine, if this fair Front
above, has not the Cloven-foot beneath it. For, if Preaching up of Division,
Disuniting of the popular Peace and Tranquillity, by reviving the old Obsolate
Names of Whig and Tory, does not look horridly suspicious at this Time of Day,
and carry the Seeds of Sedition, and F^ce of Confusion along with it, let
Reason and Impartiality Judge.

And therefore, as the Parish-Buckets ought to be ready, when the Coals are so
near Blowing, and Fireballs preparing, it is but the Duty of every Honest Man
to be watchful as be desires to quench his Danger, and guard his Roof. As such,
therefore, is this short Answer published to that Scurrilous (if that Epithete
can reach it) Mass of Malice and Rancour; and as such, kind Reader, I present
it to your perusal.

I shall only add one preliminary Remark upon the Kidney and Constitution of a
very Eminent Stickler of the Whig Party; who seeing the King's Messenger near
White Hall, who in discharge of his Duty had endeavored to suppress it at the
Press, be was pleased to rebuke him in this Salutation, Mr. -- Take notice, I
lay my Finger on You (laying one his Fingers upon the Messengers Hands) and I
will have you turned out of your Place, for you shall not long be a Messenger;
with several other threatening Expressions.

Good Heaven, what an Anathema was here! Our Julian's least maledicting Touch
carries the Force of the whole Romish Bell, Book, and Candle. Nay, his single
Finger has the operation of Dr. Faustus his conjuring Wand, and possibly
actuated by the same Power, some kind aiding Mephistophilus, as a Fast-friend
and Familiar at his Elbow.

ERRATA.
PAGE 5. l. 4. and 5. after present Majesty's, 1. take my Sentiments thereof,
as follow: As to your First Request. p. 6. l. 36. add The, p. 7. l. 14. r.
made. p. 15. l. 12. dele better.

A SOBER VINDICATION OF THE Nobility, Gentry and Clergy OF THE Church of
England, etc.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
SInce you have honored me so far, as not only to desire my Opinion of the
Pamphlet you sent me; but also to Answer some of the grand Reflections
contained therein, upon the Church of England's Loyalty toward their present
Majesty's; As to your first, take my Sentimen^s thereof as follow: Request, I
say, and doubt not but every honest Man will concur with me upon reading
thereof, That it is an infamous Libel against the Church, State and good
Manners: Which, tho these are (times of a deep Dye, yet do they scarce express
his unseasonable Hatred, which like an ill Humor in the Body, has so corrupted
his whole Book, that I want words to Characterize so abominable a Mystery of
Iniquity. Against the Church it is most violent, to the State prejudicial, and
in its Reflection on both, notoriously opposite to Good-manners: And lastly, so
fraught with disingenuity and malicious untruths, that it may well cry out to
him that is the Parent of Lies, Thou art my Father.

His Episile is superscribed, To the Honest English Protestant Reader: That is,
doubtless, a Protestant of some surreptitious Edition of 41, whose Title is, No
Bishop, and, Down with Lawn Sleeves; for if, as most certainly he does mean one
of his own Kidney, he must be some Kent-street Broom-maker or at least such an
honest English Protestant, as is no well Wisher to the Glorious Hierarchy of
the British Church.

But what Errand does he bring to his Reader? Why truly, a very silly one: for
(says he) such is our fate, That I am afraid, that it requires an abler Pen
than mine, to convince some, who it is highly necessary should be convinc^d,
That any of the Measures of the late Reigns were mistaken. If this be all his
Design, he might have sav^d himself the labor of this Dialogue; for he must be
foolishly obstinate, That will not be convinced, that most or all Kings have at
some time or other been mistaken in their Measures; yet This, and the following
Assertion, he says, were the Motives of his now appearing. Some are taught
(says he) that none were Rogues and Villains, and deserve to be hanged, but
those who were most Active in the bringing of the present King and Queen over,
and in settling the Crowns upon their Heads. By this Some that are taught^ he
would have to be understood the Church of England Men: Tho the ^u^^ is not
plainer at Noonday, than the Church of England's Zeal has been perspicuous (as
he elsewhere confesses) in their sending for, and advancing their present
Majesty's to the Throne. Now, if he will needs have Some to believe, as, he
says they do, it is only Some few, who not only are disowned by Us: but have
separated themselves from the Church, by running head long into an impious
Schism and Faction; for whom, as they do not belong to us, so are we in no ways
accountable; nor ought their Crimes (as most maliciously through the whole
Pamphlet they are) be in the least (for the aforesaid Reasons) imputed and
charged upon the Church.

Tell me truly (Good Sir) do you think, that this his Errand is of any more
weight, than an April one; or that he deserves any thing more, than the
extention of the forefinger amounts to, for his folly in blotting Paper to
persuade us, what we will easily grant, viz. That Some Kings have been mistaken
in their Measures: and that Some beheld the present Government, and their
Friends, with an evil Eye; but that those Some are of the Church of England, I
utterly deny: and so I rid my hands of his Epistle.

Dialogue is Discourse betwixt Whig and Tory. By the First he Points out a
Presbiterian, by the Latter the Church of England Protestant, whom I intend to
defend in this my Answer, as fully as the narrow Confines of my limits will
permit; not doubting, but my success will be according to the Justice of my
Cause, and the Righteousness of my Assertions, and withal (if he were not as
he says insensible) make him to blush at his abuse of the King's Mercy, Favor
and Friendship to such ungrateful Wretches.

Well, the old Trade of Basket-making I find goes on still: Whig is harping his
ominous Schriech-Owl Noats upon the old String; cries loud against Misfortunes,
bad Instruments, Mismanagement of Affairs, Tools of State; and by and by you
shall hear him squeak out in the old Key of 41, to the Tune of Evil
Counselors, Popery and Slavery, Liberty and ^roperty, etc. The reason of all
this is, because he^s impatient of all Government, as long as he bears not all
the Power upon his own Should^rs; Because Men deserving are put in Offices of
Trust, which his Boanarges Zeal of oppressing all but himself, makes him unfit
for. To prove the reasonableness of his claim to Places and Power, he tells us
a story, which every Man that has not as much lost his Memory, as Whig has done
all sense of Shame, knows to be a Lie, which is, that he zealously strugled in
the Convention to settle the Monarchy, whilst the Torys [Church of England men]
contested to make an Anarchy. And this meddler Whig, to expect to be a main
Stickler in the Government, which he thinks is never enough in his hands, while
any body besides himself has the least share of the Kings Favor.

Disapointment (says he) you must allow a just cause of Resentment. This
Hypothesis (by his leave) is not always true, and cannot be allowed of when his
expectations are unreasonable or unlawful: As when he desires men to be wholly
discarded from Trust, who chiefly, if not only, are qualified by the Law and
their own Merits, for the administration of Affairs: and when he expects New
Laws to destroy, and quite subvert the old ones; up-start Ministers, to
shoulder and thrust out those whom Integrity, Experience and Fidelity highly
pleads for their continuance in the Service of their Country: And lastly, when
he desires to introduce new Customs and Methods, which by the greatest and most
experienc^d Politicians have been ever found difficult to do, for the most
part, dangerous, and lastly, never enterpriz'd without the greatest preeaution
imaginable; and when invincible necessity pushed them upon such designs. But
all this cannot remove his present Discontent, nor make him hope for
Advancement, when it may with less danger, and more specious pretenses be done.
No, this Jehu will have his Carriere, resolving either to wriggle himself into
the Government, or ruin it; tho its fall be accompanied, through his fatal
precipitation, with his own Destruction.

Besides, the friendship of Whigs with Potentates, has been found upon Trial,
more than once to figure out to us, That of the old Wall and Green-vie; which
latter is of small advantage to, and sucks its nourishment from the Cement of
the Wall, and inshort undermines it, so that down they fall to the very ground
to gether. What gets the fawning Ivy, That Whiggish Emblem, by this? Even
nothing; but either dies, or at best is poorly content to creep upon the Earth,
not being able to raise it self: and only seems Powerful, in destroying his
kind Supporter.

But let us a little examine the Truth of his Assertion, about the late
Con^ention beforementioned: Who is it, in the name of Madness, can believe
that he whose Principles are notoriously known to center in the very Dreggs of
Democracy; whose Cants has for many years been nothing, but so many encomiums
upon a Common Wealth; and who has always been observed to have a more than
ordinary hanckering, to project and transcribe a Government for England, after
the Belgic Copy; or at best, for all his fair pretenses to the contrary, after
some Aristocratical Original.

Further, The improbability of his advancing their present Majesty's, will
amply appear, if you consider the Circumstances of Whig, at and a little before
the Revolution. Call to mind then his addressing the late King, with Heart and
Hand, with frequent promises of assisting him to the utmost, with Lives and
Fortunce, with Men and Money. Can their Noysie Prayers, their loud Praises, and
all their hideous pother, be out of any English Man's Ears to this day, that so
lately made most sensible impressions in our very Hearts? who has not known
their more than double diligence, in serving a Turn, and being mere Tools and
machines, to build up and prop a Popish Interest with; to no other end, but to
gratify their piquish Humor, and irreconcilable Malice against the Church
party; not caring, if the whole Frame of Government suffered Shipwreck, by the
violence of the open Storms of Tyranny, and secret the Quicksands of
Court-Intrigues; having only this poor reserve to countenance the business of
their actions, That if they could by any means whatsoever, but sink the stately
Ark of our English Hierarchy, and procure the Dilapidation of our Magnificent
Monarchy, that then they did not fear but, inspight of all Popish opposition,
to gather up scattered Pieces enough from the Ruins of both, wherewith to
erect not only their Conventicle, but also their Darling Commonwealth. Thus
you may see, for all their brave Alls, what sort of affection they bear to
their Country, and to Liberty and Property, when they will venture a Mark to a
Groat odds, to Destroy all Monarchy for Anarchy, all Rule for Confusion: Yet,
that this was their design, is notoriously known by several, to whom they
intimated no less, even when they were meditating their desperate Revenge,
under the umbrage of King J. whose Misgovernment, and our Misfortunes does (God
knows in what measure) lie at their Doors. This being so; who can imagine that
they, whose hopes depend on the Destruction of the Church and State, which they
thought by that King's help to effect, would in the least contribute either to
the sending for, or the establishing of their Present Majesty's, whom, they had
reason to guefs, would bring assistance to our Religion and Country; and may to
their Grief now see the^^ eminent Professers of the one, and true Defenders of
both. But this that I now lay to Whig's Charge, I would not have understood of
all that are ranged in that Class, or known by that Name; but only Some which
he owns to be Knaves Page 19. and let me add, whose Ignorance and Malice made
them fit Instruments for the late King to ruin, or at least break in upon the
Church: Thus much once for all.

That their numbers in the Convention were unable to effect what they pretended
to, is thus easily proved:

First, Because the Church of England-men, being most apprehensive of danger
from the late Reign, they consequently, in all probability, would be the most
active to get into the Convention, or else they would seem to suffer that
willingly from the Whigs, which under King James and Cromwell they bore with no
small regret and uneasiness. The want of Employs, and loss of Property, are no
Trifles.

Next, that the number of the Church of England-men made, by far ^he very
greatest Body in the Convention, will appear, if you consider the unwearied
endeavors and different means the late King us^d by Quo Warrantos, by
Pentions, by giving Offices, by Promises, by Caresses, and by I know not what,
to procure a Parliament of Dissenters, to serve his Turn with all; and divest
the Church of her Power, by taking off the Test and Penal-Laws, which the
Episcopal Men were averse to; resolving not to quit their hold of the two
Reigns, which most effectually held in the stiff-neck of Popery. Now it is as
plain as the Nose of a man's Face, that, that King would never have made such
choping-work, such regulations, if other ways he could got a Parliament of
Whig's Kidney, who, in plain English, for all his pretentces now, were then the
main men that put their hands to the Plough, tho with no better intention than
to betray him to ruin by their Councils, to bring us to Poverty and want of
Places by your Pride, and to make havoc of all by the force of their severe
Malice: Thus all men may s^e whether Whigs or Torys, whether Conformists or
Nonconformist, whether the Orthodox or Heterodox were most numrous in the
Convention; and consequently, who it is that deserves all the Encomiums he is
pleased to attribute to them through his whole Book: for all his boasts and
title to Preferment stood upon this ground, which you see has sunk under him.
Here if you consider the Churches discontents before, and their number in the
Convention, he being beat from his Fortress, let us ask these Questions. Pray,
Sir, who showed the most early inclinations to the Prince of Oranges person?
who went into Holland and first begun the Project of the Prince of Orange 's
coming over? Who put the Crown upon his Head, when he did come? Who showed most
apparent partiality to his Person, in all the points of the settlement of the
Crown, and particularly in giving it him for Life, over looking at the same
time the P. of D 's. Title, and Lineal Succession? And stood by the Kings
Authority in the debate concerning the P. of D 's Revenue, and left that Affair
entirely to the Kings Pleasure? And lastly, who had such care of the people in
their deliberate Consideration about Chimney-Money? And let me ask, who for
libelling the Government, deserve the ill usage and requital from their present
Majesty's, which the Libeller all a long taxes the King and his Ministers with?

What has been said, may also prove, Who are the true Defenders of their
Country; and refel his many and malicious slanders upon that Church, whose
Morals and Piety, for all his prate, page 45. etc. endeavored tooth and nail,
to keep out that very Popery and other Grievances which his Faction, as every
one knows, helped to pull in by Head and Shoulders.

The Behavior of those persons he often inveighs against, we neither countenance
nor own; but utterly explode and excommunicate from our Church and Communion,
tell we see some signals of their Recantation, an^ ^^ncere Repentance. Further,
we own as much as ever, the Doctrine of Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance.
Lastly, I say, our prayers for the King are Audible and Voluntary, and no ways
Mercenary, as he most Calumniously does Insinuate.

As for his Assertion, That we take the Oaths to this King only as he is King
de facto, and not de june, I deny to be true; nor has he produced one of the
Church of England, that ever declared he took them so; or with any mental
Reservation whatsoever: all Equivocation and Palliation being abhord by us, as
contrary to the Principles of our Religion.

Now, I will speak a word or two, in behalf of those worthy persons, his Malice
seems to carry the sharpest edge against; but I will be as brief as possible:
Because their Integrity is best known to the King and Parliament, and to them
only accountable. Their Character so eminent, that they can no more be hurt by
the noise of such drivling. Caitives than the Moon can be prejudiced by the
howling of distracted Curs: over and above this, if the Libellers bowlling
chance to reach their Ears, they can easily stop the bellowings of such a
diminitive Beast. The Law is a Receipt worth forty Rattles, to quiet the cries
of these Children of Iniquity. Thus much in General.

This I dare say particularly for the M -- of C --, That he is a Star of the
first Magnitude who has always waited upon our British Sun, our Fountain of
Light, Honor and Glory, from whence are emitted such Beams of Lusture, upon
him as the evil Eyes of our twilight Animal cannot without being bleard, so
much as behold the least glimps thereof; and that his Integrity is as great as
his Trust: Yet, he pretends to eater into the very inmost Recesses of his
Generous Heart; and put upon all his actions, the most wrested interpretation
Hell and an ill 'Tongue can foment.

Well, but what does this Fellow mean by railling against so barve a Patriot of
his Country, and others of the like Figure? Why, ill tell you, the Cry of Evil
Counselors is to, an attempt upon the King and Government with some men, what
Grace before Dinner is to the rest. Look about you, for the next thing, is fall
on. That this is true, I could bring more than one. Brecedent to justify.
Hounds of this Pack, by such cries, get a double advantage, for first it breads
jealousies betwixt Kings and their great Ministers; and again, betwixt the
latter and the Common People; all which proves an infallible Remora to the
present Affairs: For the main wheels once stopped, must needs produce a cessation
of motion in the less. Secondly, the forces which keeps the Miscreants from
executing their pernitions designs, being once divided, opens the way to their
entrance into mischievous Actions; and their follows nothing but Ruin and
Depredations in Church and State. Therefore, in such Junctures, may all Kings
and Ministers stand upon their Guard; while to them, and to the Law, I leave
the correction of such base Defamours as I have at this time to deal with.

To what he intimates of the Churches severity to Dissenters, I will only say,
that she was never without a great tenderness to them when Reasons of State,
her own safety, and their behavior rendered it seasonable.

Next, He strives to prove, and that with all his might too, how averse, and
what Step-fathers the Whigs are grown, since 1660, to their Benjamin, their
Darling Commonwealth. Should I grant them what his Arguments set forth; which
is only the difficulty of turning this Monarchy into a Commonwealth; yet,
since I have lately seen them pregnant with Endavours and frequent Attempts to
effect it, I can hardly believe, but that if Commonwealth mongers and Madmen
among us, are the same, we must even put Whig, and them together; and that
being done, fairly pack up with the Knaves that were Trump in Forty One.

Before I quite rid my self of this Business, it will not be amiss to inform
our Libeller, how far he is out in point of History; for says he, The People,
nd Army, who were in this Project of a Commonwealth, and had overthrown the
Monarchy in order to it, and could support Cromwell in a single Person; yet
after his Death, saw a necessity of restoring the Monarchy again, and assisted
toward it. Herein he is out, for it was the Independants and Anabaptists that
supported Cromwell, and were such Sticklers for the Cause, that they never so
much as thought of laying it down inorder to restore the Monarchy, had they not
been forced to it by othergets necessities than what he alleges. So that this
cannot prove the Whigs to have laid by their Republican Principles, if
Anabaptists and Independants are so.

All the dust he raises about Encroachment upon Parliaments, and working
Princes up to Jealousy, and hatred of their people, is like to fly into his
own Eyes; if we consider his behavior in the late Reign, and under Oliver^s
where Fellows of the same batch with himself, did not only prompt that King and
Oliver, to destroy the Properties of the People, and many ways to infringe upon
the Liberty of Parliament; but also with, the Usurper, exerted all the
severities of aboundless Tyranny against the Church, and on all Subjects, that
in such a Series of Rebellion durst so much as speak a word in vindication of
Loyalty: Nay, for very Thoughts, they could scarce escape from being arraigned
as Criminals.

First, All his malicious Babbling against the three, Illustrious Monarchs of
the Scottish Line, is but the dreggs of the old Poison, which has been so
corrected by Loyal and learned Doctors in their several Books with a thousand
Antidotes, that I may reasonably guess it has lost all power and strength, now
to do any considerate Person harm. Therefore I Will let him alone Unanswered, to
lurk in his Hole, and there disembogue his venom to no purpose.

Now, we come to the English-Phonix Q. Elizabeth. In reckoning up her
difficulties, he has wilfully omitted one, and that perhaps not the least,
viz. the Incumberances and Disturbances her Government was subject to, by
reason of the Puritans, the first, and therefore the best Edition of Whig; tho
even then, they gave shroud testimonies of what they have since proved. But she
wisely betimes made a Rod for their B --, Remember her Penal-Laws, -- Ah -- did
it smart then -- yes truly; Whig, was then in his Infancy; and a Rod was as fit
for his Breech, as an Halter for Guido's Neck: but being grown up from an
unlucky Boy to a proper Man, he fears not the Lash, having out lived the Whip.
To difficulty of that Queens, add the rest, as he; and then, if he look through
a True Glass, let him never take my word if he does not see all those
inconveniences either removed or overcome: By whom? -- even by no body but
mere Torys: and how comes it to pass, That those very persons, who had such
Conduct and Integrity, and Loyalty, and Love, then, should not be allowed to
have the same Now? and be as able at this day to make a King and People Happy,
as they were to make a Queen and her Government easy. This is all he gets by
his instance of that Queen; unfortunate man, to shot Darts that fall on his own
Head. Hold! let me add one word more, and this it is, If he had that great Love
for the King, as he pretends to, he might only by changing a Queen for a King,
make her Character fit him to a hair. But this King, as well as the rest, is,
in his gibberish, rather a Dragon than a St. George, K. of Clouts, a Duke of
Venice, or any thing good Lord, as long as he has a Tory about him; That Is the
Dunstable English of his whole Drift and Libel.

I give him many thanks for his Salvo, and Sweetnings to the Church of England;
but could heartily wish he would afford us fewer of his fair words, provided
his affection was real, which I should be glad to see: for I love to follow
Peace with all men.

He tells us a great Story of the want of Warmth in Tory. How they suffer
people to insult the Government in every Coffee-House; and many other Faults,
for want of warmth, he lays to our charge; But to discharge himself, has not
brought one Loyal Instance of his apprehending any inconsiderate, or malicious
Babbler. True, he tells us strange things that he did for Noll; but not a word
of his performances now, except it be the worthy Actions of the Parliament he
speaks on, Page 16th, and in other places; which if you mark what I said about
the Convention, you will find to be the very Deeds of the Church of England. ^f
he says, he'^ disencourag'd by the Court, it is a great untruth.

Now, we come to the main thing, whether Whig or Tory has done more for the
love of their King and Country better; and which Party as the case now stands,
are fittest for Administration of Public Affairs,

I have before proved even demonstrativers, That the Torys sent (...) the King,
and in the Convention were far Superior in Number to the Whigs; so that all the
Merits of the one and the other are properly ours: That Is a clear Case.

Here we, as before, disown (as not belonging to us) all those that have made
public rejoicing at the slaughter of our Armies, and destruction of our
Fleets. While he would exclude all from his Party (and I could believe him too
if he were not so fond a lover of himself) that is as bad as Judas.

One swinging Argument that he uses against our loving the King, and being
entrusted is grounded upon the false supposition, That the Church Party are two
much inclined to King James: and that we have not made our reconcilliation with
him desperate, which is a manifest falsity: for did not the Clergy
discountenance his proceedings when King? Did not they send for the P. of
Orange? Did not they put the Crown upon his Head? Did not the Torys beat the
late King out of Ireland? And did not the Church Party yearly in Parliament
raise Money and furnish their Present Majesty's with Men and Money to carry on
the War by Sea and Land against him and France. And is not all this enough,
think you to prove our Love and Loyty to the present King, and render all hopes
of reconcilliation with the other as desperate as possible can be? This proves
his talk, about King de defacto, false, showing how far we own our selves King
William 's Subjects, and that we are as well for the Government as in it. This
proves his malicious words ( Page 21.) to be mere aspersion, and lastly,
invalidates his discourse of Loyalty ( Page 22.).

Let me present you with one instance on his side, of which he has plenty; but
that ( Page 23.) shall serve at this time; where he makes the King and Queen
put a Trick upon the Country in a Proclamation about forged Passes; and in 40
places insinuates that the King is either very Pusilanimous or what is worse,
one of small skill in the choice of his Ministers: I can furnish you with store
of such patterns of his Love, Service, and Duty. As for his Stories ( Page 24.)
and elsewhere, they being doubtful, and of dangerous Consequence to meddle
with, I leave them to our August Parliament to examine who are the best Judges
of such things.

But distrusting all his pretenses of Love and Service to the King will hardly
procure his Advancement, the thing he chiefly aims at, and be Motives strong
enough to degrade the honest Tory: he comes to his last Shift which is his Wit
and Parts: These will do the deed suit. But what if we should grant that the
Whigs Parts are as good as any Torys whatsoever? does it follow that a noise
and disturbance must be made at this juncture with Turning-out and Taking-in?
Let him comfort himself and rest satisfied with this, that when the King is
sensible of any man's signal Service, the same shall be rewarded and according
to his Parts and Merits advanced: and on the other hand Trea;chery shall meet
with condign Punishment. The King graces the one with Favor, and executes
Justice on the other. The Parliament are now taking cognizance of the Army and
Fleet: therefore, I pass by what he says about such things as becomes me in
silence.

Being arived at Page 26. I saw plainly what he would be at: For he brings
Oliver upon the Stage, pulling down the Nobility and Clergy; and leaving the
Gentry nothing to do but pair their Nails. This he applauds as a delicate
pattern to govern by: O brave Oliver! who instead of Peers employed Porters,
Draymen and Tailors, Exit Barron, Enter Borther, and in the room of a learned
Clergy introduced Cobblers, Weavers and Carmen. Here Is fine Work; enter seven
Deivils Solus: And what is all this Work for, but to try if Whig can any ways
rivet himself and Gang into the sole managment of Affairs for Oliver; by the
help of Whig, yea, such poor scoundril Whigs as these, over-topt the Clergy,
Nobility and Gentry, who all combined against him? O fine Oliver! And this is
the Play he would have acted again, would the King but take his Council. Well,
we'll grant Oliver, beloved Oliver, did Wonders; but he once dead, the same
Blades could not keep Cart on Wheels. The late King also thought to work
miracles with the same Tools, but I need not tell you the issue. Who is so mad
also to think that Noblemen and Gentry, whose Element is Business, is not much
fitter for Counselors, Generals, etc. than a Weavor, or a Major General
Cobbler: The first are less apt to be Treacherous too one would think: being
more sensible of Disgrace, which thereby is like to fall on themselves and
their Family. But what need I say more, since the difficulties and ill success
of such attempts upon the great ones, will in all probability prevent the like
for the future. In fine, I believe some Whigs are Loyal to their Majesty's: and
I wish if there be any bad Torys in Places, and honest Whigs out, fit for them
that an exchange were made for the King and Countries Good. But to see the
alteration of the whole frame of Government in Church and State for the
promotion of such as our Libeller, would its to be feared ruin both King and
Country, which every true born English man would be sorry to see: This Subject
also leave for those who are best able to discuss it.

To his Discourse concerning which Party are faster Friends one to another, I
will only say that I wish all would join this the Common Interest of their King
and Country; to which distinguishing Names, Factions and Parties are
diametrically opposite: and I desire all to lay a side their violent Heats and
in striving for Places, Power; and rather then thrust themselves forward with
Violence and Avarice, be gently called for by their Sovereign, the best Judge
of Desert, to Preferment.

I will conclude my Letter, with a memorable Example of Candor, out of Valerius
Maximus, who speaks of a certain Spartan, famous both for Nobility and Virtue,
whose endeavors for Magistracy being unsuccessful, only said [Maximae sibi
laetitiae esse praedicabit, quod aliquos patria sua se meliores viros haberet]
that it was his greatest joy to see, that his Country had better Men, that were
fitter by their Deserts for Offices, than himself. This, if Pride and
Self-interest would suffer to be imitated, would render the want of Employ as
laudable as the enjoyment thereof is Honorable: To which Sir, I doubt not but
you will agree with

Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.

