A Sober Vindication OF Lt. Genesis Ludlow, And others.

In Answer to a Printed Letter sent from Sir Hardress Waller in Ireland, and
other non-commissioned Officers at Dublin to Lt. General Ludlow at Duncannon,
Commander in chief of all the Parliaments Forces in Ireland.

WHEREIN You have also a Faithful but Summary History of the Affairs in Ireland
as they now stand, of their Anti-Parliamentary Proceedings with the Parliaments
best Friends, their Imprisoning and Persecuting the Ministers of the Gospel,
and 100. of others that ever adhered to the Parliament, indulging the Irish,
but indangering the Parliament and English Interest, every day to the ruin of
the Country.

By a faithful Friend to the Parliament and Commonwealth.

LONDON. Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1660.

POSTSCRIPT.
OH Ireland! Ireland! Languishing under the apparent Symptoms of Death struck
in her very Vitalls, and sick at her very heart! Whiles men of the most
distructive Humors are the most predominant in that Nation! Aspis a Vipera
venum mutuatas est, whiles the English borrow venom of the very Irish, to sting
and wound our English worthies with! It is the common cry of the Parliaments
real friends there! They had better loose above half the Army then one Ludlow
(least they loose all) and better half the Old Protestants and Christians,
then one Corbet, Thomlinson or Steel; under the happiness of whose healing
Principles piety and Counsels (as well as Colonel Jones his, (a grave and
gracious Senator) not so the Sectaries as all the Nation has been nourished
and brought up very tenderly and in the very bosoms of them; therefore cannot
but bemoan their danger, whiles some men (like Farnese (Prince of Parma) who
threatened to swim his horse in the blood of the Lutherans) do boast that they
will not leave one Sectary in Ireland, (that is one whom they call Sectary,
which is a name they give to all godly, and the Parliaments best friends alike
(of all judgments, Presbyterians, Independants, and Anabaptists;) and indeed at
this day, as there be many Families removing to come away, so it is thought
above 500 Families of the best English in all Ireland will be shortly over, if
not timely releived; (kept and encouraged in their callings and plantations,
during their pious and peaceable deportment.) Wherefore O Lord! If Ireland yet
may live! Make our Parliament wise! Our Physicians able and skillful to recover
her! Seeing non licet bis errare, one error in their judgment now, will
absolutely ruin all their interests there as well as ours; and is more then a
100 errors in former times, if not irrecoverable.

IF all men were wise, I have said enough, for persons that were most of them
reducible for their former actings in the late Apostasy, from the principles of
a Commonwealth, upon groundless jealousies and slight suspicions; To throw
off their Noble General under the Parliament, is doubtless an Action
unwarrantable, unjustifiable, and vituperable, and there can be no better
intention in it then the Jews had in crucifying of our Lord Jesus, for
Mother-wit will tell every man, that they ought to have obeyed him, until the
Parliament had signified their pleasure to the contrary, and that it is a
frivolous allegation to say, That they will obey him upon signification of the
Parliaments pleasure, for, his Commission gives him Possession till it be
superceded, otherwise Servants may turn out their Masters, and say, That upon
order from the Justices they will restore his Possession; And as it is a
dreadful president, so it is a pretty invention of the first impression (never
any brave Commander being so unhansomly served before) thereby to blast any
man's reputation upon a bare suspicion, as the Politician advises, boldly to
callumniate, that something may be credited, though this worthy Patriot be like
pure Marble that nothing can stick upon him, but the generallity being apt to
contract Matrimony with the first Narrative, if it be my duty to relieve my
Neighbors Ox when fallen, much more am I obliged in the absence of this worthy
Person as a friend to the public, he having been so cordial a friend to all
honest men, and one whom I have for many years honored for his Virtues (or
rather the gifts and graces of God in him) he not having the benefit of a
Press to vindicate him (if there were any need of it) least silence should
give some credit to that which in it self has not the weight of a Pin in the
Balance of right Reason, I am pressed in my Spirit (though unknowingly to him,
so far as the notorietie of the Fact will comport to give it a sudden answer,
according to the best information I could get by letter and relation. The
materials in the Letter responsible are,

1. That whereas Lt. General Ludlow writ to Lt. Collonell Puckle Governor of
Rosse to preserve his Garrison for the Parliament, they say he had done it
before he had any Orders from him, this is a mistake, for Lt. General Ludlow
left Lt. Colonel Puckle in possession for the Parliament, whereof he was never
dispossessed to this hour.

2. For what concerns Colonel Jones actings, I intend not to intermeddle, he
has been a wise Counselor, a faithful man, and one that feared God above
many, true to a Commonwealths Principles in times of temptation, and therefore
presumably he has not declined when there was not the least temptation to
decline Parliamentary Authority in Ireland.

3. They proceed to doubtings, and to strong suspicions that Lt. General
Ludlow has not been a friend to the Parliament, that is, has not been a
friend to himself, no man can secure himself from suspicion, from guilt he
may; I do not in the least intend to bespatter the subscribers, but to wipe off
that dirt which they would cast upon the face of this honorable Patriot, only
presumtive Objections may be satisfied by presumptive Answers; I believe that
neither he nor they have intended to set up for themselves, so as to disown the
Parliament, but if suspicion should stand for any proof, let but the persons,
their principles, former practices and actings, be ponderated, if sufferance
for the party beloved in Person and Estate, if declining and refusing to act
under the single person, when others upon their earnest seekings had warm
employment under him, be the best Arguments of Fidelity to the Parliament; Let
the Impartial Reader judge, whether Lt. G. Ludlow or his Antagonists have
manifested most constant, good affection to their just Authority; and for
modern suspicion, what mean the Letters from Doublin, that many of the Officers
there will have a Free Parliament? what means the imprisonment of the
Parliaments constant Servants and Champions, Jones, Tomlinson, Pretty, Wallis,
Abbot, Brafield, Jones, Smith, Bennet, Low, Denison, Roberts and others, many
whereof declared with the first, and yet might not be trusted with their
commands? What means the self conferring of two Regiments upon Sir Hardress
Waller, two upon Sir Charles Coot, and three upon his brothers? so as upon the
matter, two men have seven Regiments. What means the disarming of the
Anabaptists, and the Parliaments best friends, that they must not wear a Sword,
saying they are Sectarians, and not fit to be trusted? And how do they prove
one to be an Anabaptist or Sectarian? but because he prays in his Family, or
such a one prays by the Spirit; What means the Listing and taking in of
Cavileers, Persons disaffected to the Parliament, and any that will but revile
the Sectarists? but only to model and put the Army in such a posture and
constitution to be in a prepared readiness to receive Charles Stuart at a
weeks warning, though that must not be yet mentioned, the design must be first
to bring in the Excluded Members in 1648. and then comes in ding dong bells,
King, Lords and Commons: It would be less danger to call in the Spaniard, Turk,
or the great Mogul. What means the imprisonment of Mr. Rogers at his landing,
sent thither to preach by Order from the Parliament? O Dublin, Dublin, Thou
that killest the Prophets, and stonest or imprisonest them which are sent unto
thee, as that worthy Servant of Christ, who was cast into the Common Prison,
wit out admitting him Bayl, or a hearing, with a high affront to the
Parliaments Authority so unhumanely handled, and yet he is no Anabaptist; So
that worthy Minister Mr. Enoch Gray being shut out by the Parish from
Preaching, dare not stir abroad, being threatened by the Porters and Watermen to
be stoned or thrown into the Water, and yet he is no Anabaptist: The like to
Mr. Wotten another godly Minister, kept out of his Pulpit, confined to his own
house, and yet no Anabaptist; Besides such usage of the Ministers of the
Gospel, and the Parliaments choicest Friends, who are far from being Factious,
or giving the least occasion to such cruelty. O what! What means the
Parliament-like Convention to meet at Dublin the 24 of January, with other
dismal news from thence? as if the Interest of Jesus Christ, and the Good Old
Cause of Holiness and Righteousness, were taking leave of poor Ireland! Yea,
What means the Arming so many ill affected persons! the disarming and
plundering the Parliaments best friends and well affected (that are no
Anabaptists neither;) The impowering of the Native Irish (as the Mayor of
Dublin is for one) with the Sword! And the casting out the most Noble English,
exposing them as so many naked persons to the most barbarous rage and revenge
of their Enemies! with a 1000 more such sad symptoms of our English and the
Parliaments Interest, grovelling on the Ground, and gasping for life in that
Lamentable Nation! But they will say, that the strongest presumptions will not
amount to the weakest proof, though something may be inferred, if others should
deal with them as they have dealt with precious Ludlow; for they made suspicion
the only ground of his non-admission and rejection, by a learned Vote of the
Stratagem-makers and Surprisers of Dublin Castle (when every soul within it,
was for the Parliament, for ought I ever heard to the contrary) that Lt. G.
Ludlow had given suspicion, to be no friend to the Parliament, and therefore
ought not to be received into the head of the Army, when but very few days
before by their Declaration December, 14. they had owned him for their lawful
superior.

4. But they confess they are so bold as to open his letters, wherein they
mistake one letter; for they would make that to be High Treason, which no doubt
if it be well considered is pure reason, it is observed by a Learned Minister
that snaching at Scripture, not well weighing the Antecedent and Consequent, is
the ground of many Heresies. Mat. 4. Was misalleadged, to keep thee in all thy
ways, omitted. One said that Jesus Christ was an Antinomian because he says,
Mat. 22.40. hang all the Law and the Prophets, leaving out, on these two
Commandments, who knows what dependence or coherence the words charged have
upon other parts of the Letter which are these, we seem to be necessitated to
look toward the Old Parliament, it is to be feared they will be very high in
case they should be brought in without conditions, probably he expressed other
men's opinions and fears rather then his own, and that the words immediately
preceding were, that it is the opinion of most, that we seem. etc. But take
them as substantives, their genuine and candid construction will soon appear.

They Object, That Lt. G. Ludlow, hearing of the force put upon the Parliament,
at Conway, instead of returning back to his Command, wrote only a Letter to
Colonel Jones, importing that he had received a letter from a factious party,
that a stop for that present was put upon the Parliaments sitting, and a door
of hope opened to bring them to their duty: It is some ingenuity they will
confess, so much of Sir Hardress Waller and some other of the opponents, with
whom Lt. G. L. held correspondence, would publish what they know concerning his
great dissatisfactions and abominating of the Anti-Parliamentary transaction
during their interruptions, which by virtue of the ninth Commandment they are
obliged to do.

Speak out Gentlemen, you cannot equivocate with the Lord, his faithfulness to
the Parliament would be as evident as Abraham's Servant was to his Master; Does
it not argue some detestation of the force, to say, it was done by a Factious
Party? And when he first heard of it at Bewmoris, some credible persons that
were with him say, that he took on extremely, looked paler upon it then ever he
did when he met with an enemy, that it was Dagger news unto him; and at
Chester, when some desired him to put a favorable construction upon it, as if
there were some necessity for it, he said, It was a necessity of the Devils
making, and that there was no visible means under Heaven to save the Nations,
but by a sudden restitution of the Parliament, or words to that effect; if then
Lt. G.L. having experimented the force of Eloquence and persuasion to be great
in bringing about the happy Restoration of the sixth of May, he Repaired to
London to be instrumental in another incruental Revolution, as some worthy
Patriots call it, not doubting but that he had left Ireland in safe and trusty
hands for the Parliament, and might be more useful by dealing with the
understandings of the Interrupters; what better service could he do for the
Parliamentary Interest? The noble General at Portsmouth, and General Monk have
done worthily and most honorably like true Commonwealths men, their Names
shall be immortal, and I wish them golden Statues; but that derrogates nothing
from the Wisdom, Valor* and Honor of the noble Lt. G. L. The Parliaments
Forces have always done as much ( precando, as praeliando) by praying as by
fighting, God is the Creator of this Parliaments Re-introduction and
Re-investiture; but he has had his Orators to plead for it with himself, and
those who opposed it: The Sword abroad does best when there is good Counsel at
home; I say, if Lt. G.L. or any other worthy Patriot did elect to sustain the
person of a Mediator, Arbitrator, Advocate, Orator hostia aut internuncius, to
Reconcile and make up that unhappy Breach, to compose the difference without
blood: So as with Joshua to make the Achanns to confess their guilt, to plead
the Law for the Parliament, whereof he is a Member, to mind them of their
Covenants and solemn Engagements to be faithful to the best Masters that ever
Soldiers had (not as persons Mercenary, but honourary so long as they are true
to the Parliamentary trust) to entreat them by their Tergiversations not to
open a door to the common Enemy, to be a faithful Referendary or Messenger to
other worthy Members of Parliament how to steer for best public advantage; and
to be as a sacrifice to expose his person to hazard, if they should not hearken
to sound Advice, as well for their own good, as for the good of the Nations;
and particularly if he did inculcate and press it upon them, that if they did
spontaneously and suddenly remove the force, and take off the interruption of
the Parliament, possibly they might have good Conditions, an Act of Indemnity,
as much as ever could be expected; but if the Parliament were brought in by
Force, they must expect to lose all that was dear unto them, telling them that
by the series of Providence they seem necessitated so to do; and if thereupon
Lt. G. L. did write to Colonel Jones in those Expressions, what moderate
judicious man can make any more of it, but that he had great hopes of the
Parliaments Return, and was much afraid that the Officers at Wallingford House
should persist in their defection and revolt, until the Parliament would show
them no mercy; for what could be intended by other Conditions, but an Act of
Indemnity; and what honest man would not have been grieved to the heart to see
the great Officers, Fleetwood, Lambert, and others, that had been so eminently
instrumental in breaking the powers of the common Enemy after all their good
services to have become themselves objects of the Parliaments Severe stroke of
Justice, who since (blessed be God) have tasted of their Mercy by another happy
Act of Indemnity, whereby the Parliament have gained more Honor then by all
their former Victories; and I am confident have more firmly engaged the hearts
of all good men to live and die with them, then any tongue can express: Caesar
dando ignoscendo adeptus est gloriam; when Parliaments are so justly offended,
they are both parties and Judges, and it is most Heroical to condonate what is
done against ones self, it shows that there is not one drop of revenge lodging
in their noble breasts; and for this Act of Oblivion of so great a
prevarication, having forgiven the like offense before, our noble Senators
shall be had in glorious and everlasting remembrance, Arbor honoretur cujus nos
umbra tuetur.

The next Exception taken to the Letter, is to the title of Dear Friend given
to Colonel Jones; but this is an Observation against the Laws of Friendship and
Humanity, as if it came rather from a Quaker then from persons of such Quality:
our Lord Christ said to the man that wanted his wedding Garment, Friend, how
came thou in hither? And Abraham said to Dives, Son, remember; Shall we argue
from thence that Abraham was guilty of Dives covetousness; and the Epithete
Dear, is but (pro more loci) the Custom of the Nation, not one Englishman of
an hundred that uses any other compellation then Loving Friend, or Dear
Friend; but how can these Gentlemen answer it, that in the beginning of their
Letter say Lt. General Ludlow stands accused of High Treason; and in the close
of it say, We remain your humble Servants? Does this argue their approbation of
the Treason if there were any? It is well known here, and some of them cannot
be ignorant of it, that as soon as L. G. L. heard of any such intended
Subscription, he declared his abhorring thereof, and just indignation against
such as had a hand in it; and immediately, as he said, sent away Letters into
Ireland to Colonel Jones, and others, some whereof I have seen to this effect;
in general, admiring and bewailing the unfaithfulness of men; and
particularly, had the Subscribers amongst you, or rather those that prompted
those Subscriptions, contrived a way to render themselves obnoxious to the
reproaches of those who watch to blast even Religion it self, for the sake of
those who profess it, I know not how they could have met with a more ready one
then this, when there was not the least temptation for them after a solemn
Engagement to the contrary, to espouse a personal. Interest, having been so
lately betrayed by the like Confidence, and to do it in so underhand a way,
when all the Officers, who (when they were altogether declared against it) were
gone to their respective Charges; and this to the trampling under foot, the
Parliamentary Authority by whom they were entrusted and Commissionated: For my
part I can as little see the prudence of it as the honesty; for they have
thereby, in the Judgment of all indifferent persons sacrificed their prudence,
honor, and honesty; And if in that Letter to Colonel Jones he mentioned any
thing, of his fearing the Restoring of the Parliament; it was but (sperare pro
timere) Fear put for Hope; for I am confident there are above twenty Letters
extant in Ireland, wherein he expressed his great Hopes of the Parliaments
Re-sitting, as I have often heard him most affectionately say, That this
Parliament are the only leaves of the tree of life, which (under God) must be
for the healing of the Nations; they are the only ligitimate spouse, all other
Conventions are but as Concubines, because no power upon earth can legally
summon a Parliament, nor any but this Parliament, save these Nations from ruin
and confusion; with many such like passionate Expressions, arguing a
restlesness and total dissatisfaction till this happy Parliament, the joy of
Saints, and honor of Jesus Christ, were restored.

3. It is further observed that in the same Letter he writes, I hope er'e this
the Commissions for setting Civil Justice on the wheels in Ireland are come
unto your hands, which were sent by the power of those who had violated the
Parliaments Authority: These Objectors had either bad intelligence, or bad
memories; for so soon as the Names of those Commissioners were sent from
Ireland they were approved of; And in August last there was an Order of
Parliament for the Holding of Assizes in Ireland by reason of the great want of
Justice there; which Order being of force at the time of the unhappy
interruption, whether it might not be as well observed for the Advancement of
Justice as well as the Excise and Customs, are received in Ireland for some
time by virtue of Parliamentary Order, is not for me to determine; however the
Commissioners therein named, as I understand, did not think fit to act
thereupon.

But there are Two Things whereof I perceive these Gentlemen are ignorant.

1. They argue as if Lt. G.L. had been one of the confederates at Wallingford
house against the Parliament, whereas it is well known in London, that though
he was named by the Army to be of the Committee of Safety, and for nomination
so called, he utterly refused to act in either; or in any sort to own them or
to make any Application to them as in any Civil capacity, resolving to continue
faithful to the Parliament, and endeavoring to the most what in him lay that
they might return to the exercise of their just Authority without blood.

2. They are not willing to understand what great and faithful service Lt G. L.
and others performed at their meeting with the Officers at Wallingford house,
by breaking and disturbing their Counsels and Resolutious, making them like
Penelopes Webb, resolving and altering, showing them the error and vanity of
all that they did, that they were like men building upon the Sand, that there
was no firm Rock or foundation to build upon, no Power to maintain the Laws,
and secure the Rights and Liberties of the People, but only this Renowned
Parliament, and when contrary to Reason they had resolved something about
conservators, ( viz. violators or prevaricators) Senate and Parliament, it is
well known that Lt. G. L. the next day made his Protestation against it, and
said they would be necessitated to restore the Parliament, and the sooner they
did it the better it would be for them, and not knowing what condition Ireland
might be in, whether in Peace or blood, hasted thither so soon as possibly he
could, Being advised so to do by some of the Honorable Members of Parliament,
I confess if it had so pleased God that he had not left Ireland, or had
returned a Month sooner, or might suddenly return, with others of his like,
faithful and tender spirits, empowered, and all due encouragement to the
Officers there, so far as they have owned and affected the Parliaments
Interest, Ireland may get to live, to see happy days, and honest People have
quiet habitations there; but if a spirit of persecution and asperitie shall
Predominate and be uppermost, they must return for England, such as know how to
live here, or it would be a great favor if the Parliament would lend the poor
Sectarians of that Nation, shipping to transport themselves into America, to
work there for their living, and to pray for the prosperity of the Parliament
and this Commonwealth; but the reason of his going for Ireland, was not from
any grain of fear that he had of the Parliaments displeasure, but upon the
importunity of many good People from Ireland, who were full of fears and
jealousies, impatiently entreating and beseeching him to have away, not knowing
what the danger of a few days delay might be, for whose sake he made such
expedition, thinking to have been the more welcome there for bringing so good
news, as the re-sitting of the Parliament, but was rejected at Dublin, and so
went to Duncannon, which by the objectors favor, was a better course then to
have returned at their Command, for not being conscious to himself of the least
unfaithfulness to the Parliament, he had no reason to question the legality or
validity of his Commission, being as good as ever it was, and how any Soldiers
durst in so presumptuous a manner, upon such slender and trivial suspicions,
draw their swords against their lawful General, whether they ought not to have
received him, and then to have humbly remonstrated to the Parliament what they
had against him, or whether they did well to be their own Judges to condemn him
unheard, and oppose him as an enemy, is humbly submitted to the Parliaments
great wisdom, so that upon the whole matter I do not find all that is charged
upon this worthy Person to be of so much weight, as the Feather that was in
some bodies Cap in Dublin fields at the late Muster, when the People made
acclamations, for joy, that there should not be an Anabaptist nor a Sectarist
left in Ireland. I have but three words to add.

First, That this transaction against Lt. G.L. has been commenced prosecuted,
and the wheels drawn, by four unhandsome Steeds.

1. Falsitie. And 1. They gave it out to win the Soldiers, that Lt. G.L. had
sent letters over to some of them to secure Dublin Castle, and to imprison the
Anabaptists therein, for that the said Anabaptists and Sectarians had resolved
to cut many of the old Protestants throats and to imprison the rest of them in
the said Castle, and that the time was agreed upon when it should be done. 2.
They told the Soldiers they had fix Months pay ready for them if they would
cast off their Sectarian Officers and take others, from them. 3. Within two or
three days after the surprise of the Castle, it was reported that they had
found great store of Arms and Ammunition in the houses of some of the
Sectarians, which they had prepared, for the purpose aforesaid, which were but
a Birding piece, an old Pistol, or such like.

2. Hypocrisy. There being some heart-burnings, animosities and Jealousies
about difference in opinions, some of the Professors at Dublin (who judge, that
union with the head, ought to be the ground of all Christian Communion between
the members) appointed a meeting for the propagation of brotherly love and
affection, wherein some refused to join, because Anabaptists frequented the
meeting; but so soon as the plot was laid for surprising Dublin Castle, some of
those refusers desired a conference in order to a Reconciliation, where Col.
Tomlinson, Dr. Winter, Justice Cook, Col. Laurence, Lt. Colonel Jones
Governor of the Castle, Major Warren, and others, were appointed to be
present, when all persons being secure and intent upon it, the Tuesday before
the meeting, the Castle was surprised, the Sectarians all disarmed, Bone-fires
made, and other great solemnities, for joy that no Sectarian should continue in
the Army, and healths drunk to their confusion, Mr. Madder discountenanced and
discouraged, news brought to Mr. Blackwood that if he Preached any more at
Chichester house, his throat should be cut, which Sir Hardress Waller hearing
of, gave strict order that no violence should be done unto him, Doctor Harding
and his friends driven from their meeting place, and all this pretended for the
service of the Parliament.

3. Treachery. For, so soon as notice was given that Dublin Castle was taken,
they sent to other garrisons for their concurrence therein, who very cheerfully
and unanminously all the Nation over declared for the Parliament, but desired
that all might rest in peace and quiet till they could hear from them or Lt. G.
L. but within few days after, they Voted his non-admission, in case he should
attempt to come over, as suspecting him to be no friend to the Parliament, and
gave it out that the Garrisons could not be safe in the hands of Sectaries or
such as favored them, which so sudden a recession from their Declaration for
the Parliament, wherein they had owned Lt. G. L. as Commander in chief, put
some of the Commissioned Officers to a demurre, as Pretty, Phare, Wallis,
Abbot, Brayfield, Smith, Bennet, Dennison and others who cheerfully declared
for the Parliament, but were not free to leave their Commands or to receive
orders from any but from their lawful superiors, whereupon Sir Hardress Waller
wrote letters to diveres of them, desiring their speedy repair to Dublin for
further satisfaction, promising them all Freedom and Civil usage, where they
were no sooner arrived, but instantly guards were set upon them, or were clapped
in prison; soon after was sent over, the Act of Indemnity, which instead of
giving obediencee to it, they hurried away their prisoners to remote Castles,
having imprisoned such as never subscribed either the letter to General Munck,
or the Engagement for a General, or in the least acted against the Parliament,
(and as I have been told, some of them, put in Irons,) and as the last letters
from Ireland import, they are still taking up and imprisoning honest men daily,
as if the Act of Indemnity did not extend to Ireland, hoping all shall be
approved of, that they do, which if I know any thing in the world they have
need of an Act of Indemnity themselves; how unlike is this to Gallant General
Munck who never imprisoned one man that promised to fight for the Parliament,
and of the many hundreds which I hear are imprisoned in Ireland, there is not
one of them, but promised, to be faithful to the Parliament against all
opposers, and being told that they were Sectaries and not to be trusted, they
proffered their Paroles to be quiet, or to give good security to attend the
Parliaments pleasure, yet nothing would serve but violence and disgrace to
their persons; but the best jest is, that having incarcerated whom they please,
and disposed of, and given away their Commands and Places to others, they have
published a Declaration, that notwithstanding, before the first of March, any
of them so casheered, may have a Trial at a Court Marshal for their Places; I
never thought that any, pretending to be Judges for the Parliament, would first
have Condemned and Executed any man, and after take Advise whether Clergy be
allowable in the Case: (quo te ambitio trahit) but who must be their Judges of
the Court Marshal? not the Person whose Command is in question, but those whose
Title is no better, being both Parties and Judges, and so claw me and I Will claw
thee.

4 Cruelty, when L. G. Ludlow came to an Anchor in the Bay of Dublin, he sent a
Letter by Mr. Alder, to these Officers at Dublin to give them notice of it,
intending to have landed early the next morning, but Sr. Hardress Waller upon
receipt of the Letter, commits Mr. Alder into the Sheriffs house, keeps two of
the Seamen Prisoners, and sent a party of Horse to hinder his landing, who
thereupon desired a right understanding between them, and that he might have
some Provision sent by his servant, a Shipboard, which was refused, and not a
bit of Bread or drop of fresh Water after the first day, might be sent to him
by any upon pain of imprisonment, and the high displeasure of the Officers at
Dublin; L. G. L. notwithstanding (having waited their pleasure three or four
days, endeavors being used to make a Muttering among the Seamen, and to fire
the Frigot with Granado's, as is reported) set Sail from thence to Duncannon,
where he was received at the fort, but was not permitted to have any Provisions
from Waterford for his moneys, for himself or the Seamen, though he had paid
for 1500 weight of Biscuit, it was forcibly taken away and the Country People
frighted, and forced to drive away their Cattle from about Duncannon, being
told by the Soldiers that L. G. L. was a Traitor, and run away from the
Parliament, with adulatory and minatory messages sent into the Fort, that if
the Soldiers would throw their General over the Walls, they should be made
Officers and have their Arrears; if otherwise, they should be sent to the
Barbados, and serve seven years Apprentiship.

2ly, It is very necessary to consider the rise of these strange Transactions,
so far as any thing was really intended for the Parliaments service it is
highly to be honored and commended, I hope all honest men will acquiesce and
rejoice in it; but L. G. L. and the Army in Ireland were generally for the
Parliament, without any hesitation or warping; and thus it was, L. G. L. at his
being in Ireland, made it his business to discriminate and distinguish such
Officers of the Army as had in any measure born their Testimony against the
late Apostasy, and that were faithful to the Parliamentary Interest; from such
as had not been so cordial, and there was a list agreed upon to be presented to
the Parliament; those that were omitted being left in the heads of their
Commands, fearing a Reducement, began to consult how to continue in their
Places; in that interim the Officers of the Army from London sent over an
Engagement in Lt. G. Ludlows Absence, to set up a General in opposition to the
Parliament, which abominable thing was not so zealously protested against as it
should have been, but in order to keep the Peace of the Nation, with a good
intention as was pretended, too many subscribed it, who had also some of them
sent a discouraging Letter to Renowned General Monk, hereupon the children of
this world being wiser in their generation then the Children of Light, that
which the Commissioned Officers should have done, namely, to have fully
declared for the Parliament against the factious Party in England who opposed
them, the Non-commissioned Officers did, engrossing all the applause and glory
of it to such as probably had otherwise been reduced, refusing the assistance
of any that had Commissions from the Parliament, fearing there might not be
honor enough for them all; but behold the falacy! for as I have credibly heard
many, and some of those who are now imprisoned, were then drawing up a
Declaration for the Parliament, to be sent to the Officers at
Wallingford-house, which these Gentlemen hearing of, made the more haste to
prevent them; But blessed be God that it is done, if the Cause of Holiness and
Righteousness may proceed and prosper, I hope the Sectarians will rejoice
whatever becomes of them. All this was done by the instigation and incitement
of such of the Clergy, as are implacable enemies to the Sectarians, and the
true Reason of this dissatisfaction and opposition, why they are so angry with
L. G. L. is, because they think he too much favors the Sectarians, though like
a prudent Father, he manifests an equal affection to all honest men of
different apprehensions, and being one who I am confident was never angry with
any man for being no wiser then God had made him, but his delight is in the
Saints, and in such as excel in virtue; and it being observed that the
Sectarian Officers, so called, keep a more vigilant eye, and hold a stricter
hand upon the Soldiers, then others did, punishing them for swearing,
drunkenness, absence from Gods service, or their duty, and the least disorders
and unruliness, the Soldiers hoping for and being promised more freedom and
liberty under other Commanders, were willing to shake off the yoke, and sold
their Officers, some upon promise of their Arrears, some for a Barrel of Beer,
and others for Trifles: So as in effect the Victory so much boasted of in
Ireland is only over the poor Sectarians, who are cordial Friends and Servants
to this Parliament.

My Prayers are that God would make this Parliament wise as Angels of light, to
discover the depth of this profound mystery, a greater Riddle, then when it was
for the King and Parliament, against the King, for here all Persons are for the
Parliament, L. G. L. the lawful Commander under the Parliament, yet all Persons
that went to see him must be clapped up, and all that were suspected to be for
him, used like Traitors, (and himself worse, not being allowed a bit of Bread)
for if any one spoke for an honest man at Dublin, that bond might be taken for
his appearance, the Officers and Soldiers know the Law so well, that they say,
it is High Treason, and no Bail must be taken for him; and some of the Lawyers
in Dublin are so learned, that they say, that notwithstanding the Act of
Indemnity, they may keep any man in Prison whom they suspect.

Thirdly and Lastly, I wish it may be seriously considered, that though the
Anabaptists, Independents and Presbyterians in Ireland, have been pecking one
at another, yet the true ground of the Contest, is not between them, but
betwixt the Common Enemy and them, the Prelatical, Episcopal Common Prayer Book
Party (which are the most numerous) will gladly join with the Presbyterians, to
crush and trample upon the Independents; but that being done, they must fall
upon the Presbyterians, for they hate the very Name of Pastors, Teachers,
Elders or Deacons, they must have Bishops, Parsons, and Churchwardens, and
such poor Overseers as formerly they had, they will not endure to be Examined
or to give any Reason of their Faith before they come to the Sacrament, they
will not endure any Minister that shall endeavor to make a separation between
the precious and the vile, only the Presbyterian shall be reserved for the
last morsel, as Polyphemus said of Ulysses; And as some of them said of an
honest Alderman of that City, that this is all the favor he should have, to be
one of the last that should be banished the City; And as they have already shut
the door against Mr. Wells at Cork, Mr. Gray, Mr. Wootton, Mr. Aspinal which
are no Anabaptists, but able and godly Ministers of the New Testament, so it is
reported that they have turned out Mr. Gilbert, and are putting out Mr.
Chambers, and then one or two more stars being set, Dr. Winter and Mr. Baynes,
the light of the Gospel will be extinct at Dublin, and what remains but gross
Egyptian darkness? If these powers at Dublin be such real friends to the
Parliament, why are these things suffered, that any godly Minister or other
Persons, who are the faithfullest friends of the Parliament there should be
turned out of their Places and Employments, either of the Military or Civil
list? and many of them I hear which brought Horses to mount themselves
casheered without any Pay, and exposed to a begging or starving condition,
under pretense of an Order from Sr. Hardress Waller, that none who were listed
by L. G. L. shall receive any Pay as the rest of the Soldiers until further
Order; these are High Oppressions, which I trust the Parliament will never give
them any thanks for, being as unlike to Parliamentary proceedings as light to
darkness.

They conclude with a supposition that if Lt. G. L's. actings, have not
incapacited him to sit in Parliament, and I say if their actings have not
merited to be left liable to a multitude of actions of Trespass and battery and
false imprisonment, it is well for them; for it is not enough to do ( bonum but
been) a good thing but by lawful means, and I find it now the Caveliers
masterpiece (yea there) to asperse the precious Members o Parliament calling
them the Rump, and crying up a Free Parliament, there being so very few that
are faithful to the Commonwealth (we had need be the more earnest in praying
and acting for them) hoping thereby to bring in Charles Stuart, but I trust
they are so wise as to observe these things, and that Gods Blessing and
Presence shall continue among them by the Multiplication of all his
Benedictions and Graces upon them and theirs, I only crave leave to conceal my
Name and to subscribe,

PHILANTHROPVS, a great sinner, but faithful to the Parliament, and one that
loves the Commonwealth as his own life.

FINIS.

