Sal Scylla: OR, A LETTER Written From SCILLY TO Mr JOHN GOODWIN, Minister of
the Gospel IN LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be
sold at their Shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1653.

The Printer to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THis Letter coming from a Stranger, residing in a place far remote; for the
Christian ingenuity therein expressed, and the symphony it bears (in the truth)
with the minds of those that have perused it; and for the service that it may
yet farthrr do, in several respects; It was the desire of many that it might
have the honor, and they themselves the ease, of its being made more facilely
public, then the transcribing of many Copies would afford, and therefore a
Copy of it coming to my hand (though without the knowledge of the Author or the
Owner of the Original) it is put to the Press.

VALE.
Scilly, May25. 1653. Brother,
I Dare be bold so to call and esteem you (considering what spirit you are of,)
though I be but the least too of that body whereof (I believe) you are an eye
at least: And (Providence having brought your Book of Redemption to my hand,
and given me time and opportunity to read it over once and again, as also
seriously to ponder the full-mouthed Authority of Scripture, Reason, and the
most godly Learned, in vindication of that Foundation Truth, the face whereof
has been (and still is) by most, almost as much marred, as was the face of the
Lord and Master of it) I should be injuriously unthankful to God and man, if I
should not acknowledge you so to be. For the light of the body is the eye; and
this light, which (by reflection of the true light) has enlightened your eye,
does from thence again reflect upon many members, to guide their feet in the
way of Grace, Mercy, Truth, and Peace.

About four or five years past I met with two or three small Tracts upon the
Point, as L. S. Stocks, Horn contra Owen: The first mentioned (coming first to
hand) undermined my Tabernacle (as it might easily do, having but a sandy
foundation) and blew up the whole fabric about mine ears, spoiled all my goods
which I had laid up for many years, and I escaped only with my life, wounded
and naked, destitute of house or home, food, raiment, and medicine; yet withal
showed me, a Stone choice and precious, wherewith I might lay a more sure
foundation for a better house that could not be shaken: yet this Stone was
rough and uneven, and I knew not as yet how to square and fit it to build upon,
neither have I, or heard I, of any other that could, till I found out Horn, who
squared this stone to my mind at that time; also he provided me with many
materials to build upon it. Having therefore so good Benefactors to bear the
cost, I thanked God and them, and fell to work. But having built two or three
stones high, their materials failed me. Wherefore my house being not yet
covered, and I weary of lying by the hedges, I made use of some of the ruins
of my old house to finish my new building, and so patched it up as I could: but
entering into it, I found it every shower (like a contentious woman) a
continual dropping; until I met with your Model, which having thoroughly viewed
within and without, I found every stone so close compact and cemented, as if it
had been one entire Rock; wherefore I pulled down so much as was faulty, and
built up again according to the last pattern. And now I thank my God through
the grace given to you and me; I have an house wherein to shelter me from all
winds and weathers whatsoever, and not only so, but which is well furnished
with all things necessary for my being and well-being. And that in such
abundance, that they can never fail me to eternity, unless I turn prodigal,
which I have no more cause to fear, then of cutting mine own throat. I need not
expound my parable, the Moral (I believe) is obvious to the meanest member of
your Church.

To relate the diverse transactions between the Father, Son, Spirit, and my
Soul, (from the 20. to the 45. year of my pilgrimage) would exceed the bounds
of an Epistle, and the limit of many sheets of paper. Therefore be pleased with
this brief and general account. From the 20. to the 39. year of mine age I
lived upon the husks of the common faith of Election, (yet did not then so
account it, though since I have found it to be no better.) In which time I was
under many Eclipses and relapses, and once even at the gate of despair; In this
Epilepsie, I made use of the common Antidote; Whom God loves once, he loves
to the end; The Gifts and Calling of God are without repentance, etc. But this
was but a paliative cure, the cause still remaining, depending upon the common
notion of Election; during this time I was counted a Puritan, (except in my
relapses wherein I was only a scandal to those so called,) then I turned to the
Presbyterian, after that to the Independent, thence to the Anabaptist, then to
the Seeker, where seeking for that which could not be found, I had almost lost
my self. Then I faced the Ranter, but found him to be set on fire of Hell; and
knowing by woeful experience, that the burnt child dreads the fire, I durst not
come near. Here I was at a loss, and at as great a strait as the Lepers before
that Gate of Samaria. If I stand here I must perish, If I went back to any of
the former dispensations, the Famine was there, Therefore I resolved to yield
my self to the mercy of the Gentiles, which I did accordingly, where I
continued the space of two years, not without hope, nor wiihout God in the
World, (though I had rejected the Scripture, and all men's interpretation upon
it,) the vision of all being (to me) as a Book that was sealed, which neither
learned nor unlearned could open or read, yet during this time, I had hope in
God, and committed my soul and body to my faithful Creator, who did speak peace
to me in this strange Land: And many times would lead me by his Spirit to the
Scriptures, where I should yet read with as little understanding, as the
Eunuch: At the end of this dispensation I was led by the Spirit once more to
the Scriptures, then opened he my understanding, and pressed me farther to search
and try all things, which I did accordingly; and so by the grace of God, I am
what I am. And now, my Father, (the Chariot and Horsemen of the Israel of God)
ride on because of the word of truth, charge through all opposition, and Jesus
Christ who has showed you so great things, as the despisers and wonderers of
the world will not believe, (though it be so plainly declared to them,) shall
show you yet greater things that they may marvel. I know but two or three in
all these West-parts like-minded in this point, the rest (which are many and
zealous) though they might know that the foolishness of God is wiser then men,
and the weakness of God stronger then men, yet are so bewitched with tradition,
that seeing the visions of God will not answer the visions of their own hearts,
they will make the Devil a Seer, according to that of the Poet. Flectere si
nequeo, Superos Acherent a movebo.
If the Powers above I cannot bend,
He move the Fiend some aid to send.


And therefore they rejoice in, and boast of Master Kendal's Answer, the word
Answer, being (I believe) the strongest argument for the confirmation of their
error, or the eviction of their truth; yet these (I bare them record) have all
zeal for God, though not according to knowledge; for they being iggnorant of
the righteousness of God, and also of his love, goodness, mercy, wisdom,
equity, and truth, and going about to establish his will and power alone, have
not submitted to either. If your promise upon Romans 9. be fulfilled, I pray send
it down amongst us, that the deceiving and deceived may (if possible,) be
undeceived. I pray also send us word whether your second part to the same tune
be finished, or when (probably) it may, when happily the grand Objection, (the
want of means to them that never heard of Jesus Christ) may be convincingly
answered, to the satisfaction of the most judicious of them, who chiefly
stumble at that stumbling stone.

I need make no Apology for my boldness in thus writing, believing that your
Greatness is in being least, and servant unto all. Therefore follow on (Oh man
of God) to serve your God, and your Generation, that you may finish the work
that is given you to do with joy, to the joy of many; And that both you and
they may attain to the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls, For
which the weakest and unworthiest of all the members of Christ, shall cast in
his mite of prayer into the Treasury of the Almighty; My duty I commend to you,
and all that love and wait for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which is
by love to serve you all,

Christopher Salter, Chyrurgion of the Islands and Garrison of SCYLLY.

FINIS.

