SOME REASONS Offered with Submission On behalf of the Preachers among the
People called Quakers, for their Exemption from being Taxed as such in the Poll
Bill.
1. A Poll or Tax upon Preachers, We conceive will either be a Tax laid upon
the profits arising by Preaching, or as a fine or punishment for Preaching: If
it were intended as a fine or punishment, that would infringe the toleration of
liberty of Conscience, which cannot reasonably nor charitably be supposed, it
follows then, that the intendment of it, must be a Tax upon the profits arising
by Preaching: And in as much as we allow no profit to them that speak in our
Meetings, we conceive that no such Preachers or Teachers should be comprehended
in this Bill.

2. The exempting those Clergymen from the Poll, who do not receive 60 l. per
Annum for Preaching, yields us a just argument from the greater to the less.
That if they who receive profit under that sum are exempted, much less are they
to be taxed who receive nothing.

3. It is a usual exception in Money Bills, that such Persons as receive Alms of
the Parish, and all poor Housekeepers, who, by reason of their Poverty only,
are exempted from paying to the Church and Poor, are also eased in the
Assesments therein appointed: And it seems not agreeable with this exception,
that those amongst us, who are poor laboring People, should be assest equal
with Clergymen, having 60 l. per Annum only because such Persons Preach among
us.

4. It has been our Principle, ever since we were a People, that the Gospel
ought to be freely Preached; and those received by us, as Christ's Ministers,
have a Conscientious regard to Christ's Command, and the Apostles Example in
this Case.

These reasons are humbly offered, not which any design to withdraw our
Shoulders from bearing our part of the common charge for support of the
Government; to which we are thankful for the liberty and peace we enjoy: But to
prevent such spoil as was occasioned by the late Poll Act, of which sufferings
we have many Instances.


