Something in answer TO A PETITION TO Oliver Cromwell, From the Subscribers IN
CVMBERLAND, Which are called Justices and Commissioners: Also the Examination
of some Friends at the Assizes at York, the 17 of July.

London, Printed in the Year, 1654.

Something in answer to a PETITION TO Oliver Cromwell, From the Subscribers in
Cumberland, which are called Justices and Commissioners: Also the Examination
of some friends at the Assizes at York, the 17. of July.
PEtition. You would have all able and Godly Ministers as are already settled
in this County, by the late Commissioners, to have all fit encouragement.

Answ. All the godly Ministers do not Petition to have encouragement from man,
they are not made by the will of man; but all they who are made by the will of
man, and settled by the Commission of man, must be holden up with man, and
encouraged by man, and man's Commission, as you make it appear here, that your
Teachers are not made by the will of God, for they which were made Ministers by
the will of God, as the Scripture declares, suffered by all such as had their
Commission from man, the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, and so they were
such that would thrust that Minister out which was made by the will of God: So
all you now, which would have the Ministers which are settled, to have their
Commission from man, with the light of Christ is all that to be condemned
eternally; this is the word of God which brings into his will, who sends such
Laborers into his vineyard as he will, which are persecuted, with such as you
are in your wills, and hold up such as are made by the will of man.

Petition. And may not be necessitated to travel to London for their further
approbation.

Answ. A godly Minister need not go forth to be approved of men, for that which
is approved of men in their own wills, is abomination to the Lord; and such as
Christ sends forth freely, and God, they need not go to London to be approved
of men, therefore let shame strike you all in the faces, ye which are unsent of
God and Christ, which now go to be approved of men, and for shame never say you
are God-like, or like God, or sent forth by him; for who are made Ministers by
the will of God, stand against all you who are made Ministers by the will of
man; let all the Ministers of God, the life of them all Judge you, and silence
you, and stop your mouths for ever. And them that would you approve, I charge
you in the presence of the living God, to that in your consciences I speak,
that with it you may see how you are approved with God, and whether you know
the voice of Christ that speaks where he is, and the living God: and beware, to
the light in your consciences I speak, which Christ has enlightened you
withal, which will let you see you do not know God, and see God, as they who
are of God, did and do; let their life Judge you: First, are not you such
Doctors as are called of men Masters, and have the choicest place in the
Assemblies, and stand praying in the Synagogue? and do not you send forth such
as walk in the same steps of your selves, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe
against as you may read, Mat. 23. and are you fit to send forth Teachers for
Christ, and be in place of the Pharisees, and set them in the places which our
Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against? and ye send out such as seek for their
gain from their Quarter, which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry against, Isa. 56.
and you send forth such as bear rule by their means; which the Lord sent
Jeremiah to cry out against, that uphold the horrible filthy thing committed in
the Land; and ye send forth such as are Hirelings, which the Lord sent Micah to
cry against; and ye send forth such as go in the way of Cain, that envious, and
after the error of Balaam, who are from the spirit which receives gifts and
rewards, the wages of unrighteousness, which is the end of both; so woe will be
the end of all you, who set up such who walk in the same way, from the light of
Christ Jesus within you, to the light of Christ Jesus in you all I speak, which
is the light of men, that with it you may see all this, which is contrary to
it, and to the holy men of God which you act: which, if you love it, the right,
it will condemn all your practices, and all these actions, and this must you
own, your condemnation, before God and Christ is seen, and his Gospel
witnessed, and to you that is the word of the Lord: So I warn you, and charge
you in the presence of the living God, to the light in your consciences I
speak, leave off acting contrary to the light in your consciences, which never
changes, which will witness me eternally, and condemn you which act contrary to
it; for who act contrary to it, walks in the steps of those which the Lord sent
his Prophets, his Son, and his Apostles to cry against; with the light of
Christ you are seen, your steps, and such as you send forth, to be in the steps
and paths of them, as I said before, which the Lord sent his Prophets, his Son,
and his Apostles to cry against. Let the life of all the holy men of God which
gave forth the Scripture, Judge you, and search you, and the light will condemn
you all who act contrary to it: I charge you, and so the light in your
consciences I speak, to search and see if you can witness the spirit and the
life, which was before the Scripture was given forth, which made them Ministers
of it which spoke them forth; and you which cannot witness this, are neither
Ministers your selves, nor are you fit to send forth others; which if you say
that you have the light which was before the Scripture was given forth, the
light in your consciences will condemn you, to it I speak, and that shall
witness me and you condemned, and all ungodly deeds, and to you all this is the
word of God.

Petition. And that all possible care may be taken for the supply of such
places as are destitute, of the necessary means of propagating the Gospel, by
way of Catechism or otherwise.

Answ. A silly silly, shame shame, that ever you should think men should send
forth Laborers into Gods Vineyard; here you would not have the Lord to rule
his Vineyard himself, and that the care of all should be cast upon the Lord,
and you would have people to cast their care upon men: Oh, how contrary to the
Scriptures you are! and here again you would have Laborers sent forth by the
will of man, and with the will of man; and oh how contrary to the Scriptures
and the Apostles you are here again! Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, not by
the will of man, but by the will of God, and the Gospel he preached, was not
after man, for he neither received it of man, nor from man, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, as you may read in the Scripture: So let his life
Judge you all. Ministers sent by the will of man, and are holden up by man, ye
know not the Gospel, nor them that are made by the will of God; and here you
show that you are quite without the life, the power, the conditions the
Apostles and Christ, and the Prophets were in, who put up Petitions to
Magistrates for Ministers to propagate the Gospel, which was not received from
man by Catechism or otherwise, you do not know how therefore; to the light in
all your consciences I speak, which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal,
that with it you may see what you are, and where you are, and in whose steps,
and with it you may see your sins, and then in it to stand still; here is the
way to salvation, Christ Jesus, from whence the light comes, here is the way to
receive the Gospel, and here is the Gospel received, and here shall every one
sit under his own Vine, dwelling in the light which comes from Christ, who is
the Vine; and abiding in the light, you abide in Christ, which is the Vine; but
you that hate the light, whose deeds are evil, this light is your condemnation,
and then you are such as seek to man to propagate the Gospel, which Gospel is
not of man, nor from man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; and you that
would have the Gospel propagated with Catechism; Oh has not this talk been
long, of propagating the Gospel? and has not this Catechism been, but where is
the Gospel established yet amongst you? Its the Fleece and maintenance that you
would have established, it is looked at more then the Gospel, you make
hypocrites, men to seem what they are not; in the time of the Apostles, there
were that came to be established in the Gospel; and you Teachers and People
has your Gospel yet to propagate by Catechism and Petitions: Oh abominable,
with the light which Jesus Christ has enlightened, with it are you all to be
condemned from the Gospel; for none knows it but he that owns the light, and
receives it, which comes from Christ, and who walks in it, receives Christ from
whence it comes; and here the children of the light are different from the
children of darkness, and the Ministers of the Gospel, and of God, which are
made by the will of God, from all those which are made by the will of man, and
so for shame, let shame strike you all in the face, to talk of having the
Gospel propagated by a Catechism; you are not sent of God nor of Christ, nor
made by the will of God, and this I charge upon you in the presence of the
living God; therefore give over acting in that nature in your own wills,
contrary to the light in your own wills, and silence all flesh before the Lord,
let all flesh be silent before him, and lay your hands upon your mouths, and
own your shame and ignorance; for them that live in it, and walk in it, are
with the light to be condemned, and that must you own before you come to know
the Gospel; and to you this is the word of God, to the light in all your
consciences I speak, which will let you see you are not come to repentance, and
that the entrance is not made into the inheritance, which never fades away,
where nothing that defiles shall enter.

Petition. And that some persons within the four Northern Counties may be
empowered, and all matters pertinent to the advancement of Religion, in power
and purity.

Answ. If you would own this which you speak of your selves, or were in it, in
the pure Religion, which keeps unspotted of the world, and in purity, then you
would not seek without, to men, to hold up purity and pure Religion, which
keeps unspotted of the world, but you manifest your selves, that your power is
without you, and so your Religion is without you, which must be upheld by
outward powers, and purity is without you, and they that were kept in purity in
the pure religion, the power was within them of God, working mightily, as the
Apostle witnessed: so here you differ again from him, and the Apostle, and here
again let the life Judge you: Oh when will men return unto the Lord, and seek
unto the Lord their maker, to the light in all your consciences I speak, that
with it you may see what you are going after, and with it your minds may be
turned to God, and you that turn from it, turn from God, and set up man, as
here in your Petition you make it manifest, to your shame and folly, that truth
might appear, which would have Religion set up by persons which God respects
not; so here you are looking forth, and are the fools whose eyes are abroad,
but the wise man's eye is in his head, and he that is here in the pure Religion,
does not go to an outward Magistrate for to uphold it, for the Law was not made
for the righteous, but for liars and transgressors, and that is good, we own in
its place; and you that petition to men to have supply from man, you are they
that imprison and persecute the servants of the most high God, and though he
has freely sent them to declare the way of salvation, as eight there in your
Dungeon at Carlisle, for speaking the word of the Lord; and is this now your
color new, to Petition to men, who are in your wills, and have such as are
made by the will of man; and so here again you would not have the Lord to be
Lord of his Vineyard, but them whom he sends freely you imprison, but such
Teachers as are according to your own fancies and lusts, you would set up heaps
of Teachers, and so are the itching ears, which are turned from the light of
Christ, which he has enlightened you withal, and would let you see him, and
manifest him which would bring you from all Teachers, to witness the
unchangable Priest, and to condemn all the changable, which are made by the
will of man; to the light in all your consciences I speak, which shall witness
me eternally; but the Lord God is coming to thunder, to thresh down all that
which man has set up, and you in your own wills, is to be condemned with the
light, which is contrary to man's will, and contrary to that which man sets up,
and man cannot propagate the Gospel with all his Catechism: where did ever the
Apostles put up any such Petition, or speak any such words? Oh, that men should
ever take the Gospel for their cloak, and think that should be held up by man,
and propagated that which came not by the will of man, for all Scripture being
given forth by the holy Ghost, it came not by the will of man, nor Prophecy of
it; therefore you who live in your wills cannot understand it, nor all you who
are made Ministers by the will of man: Therefore I charge you all in the
presence of the living God, be silent, and wait in the light, which is contrary
to the will, that with it the Scriptures may be approved, with the same that
gave them forth, then you will never seek to man to propagte the Gospel, but
wait upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as they did who received it of him, whose
Kingdom was not of the world, but here it is manifest what Kingdom you are of.

Petition. And that some present course may be prescribed and countenanced for
the enforcing the Payment of Tithes and other dues to Ministers, to which the
people in these parts are extremely averse.

Answ. Whereas you would have some present course prescribed, countenanced for
the enforcing the payment of Tithes: Friends, here openly you have your folly
made manifest, for you were speaking before of propagating the Gospel, and now
you are propagating Tithes, and the first Priesthood, and would have some
speedy course prescribed and countenanced for enforcing the payment of Tithes;
here you show, that you are they that deny Christ Jesus come in the flesh, for
they held up Tithes, did not believe that he was come in the flesh, and you
would hold up the first Priesthood, which received Tithes, and now under a
color would have the Gospel propagated, and have Tithes propagated: see what
confused stuff is this, read but Hebrews 7. and see how you differ from the
Ministers who were made by the will of God and of Christ, which preached the
unchangable Priesthood Christ Jesus, and said the Priesthood was changed that
received Tithes and the Law was changed also, and now Tithes you would have
propagated, then you must propagate the first Priesthood, then you must have a
storehouse, as you may read in Malachi, and the books of Moses, and let all
the widows, fatherless, and strangers come within the Priests gates, that they
Minister it to them, which receive Tithes out of the storehouse, that there be
no beggar in England, as there was no beggar in Israel, and then you act
according to the figure, the Priests, a figure of the everlasting Priest, the
changable of the unchangable, the storehouse of the everlasting Treasure,
which the everlasting Priest Ministers out of, and so deny the everlasting
Priest to be come in the flesh; and as saying the people in these parts are
extremely averse, the people which dwell in the light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened them withal, which brings them to witness this unchangable Priest,
and are of him the royal Priesthood, they witness God alone their Teacher: we
cannot hold up the changable Priesthood that receives Tithes, but we witness a
change from them, for we witness the unchangable, therefore we deny them;
Nevertheless, the Priests that take Tithes, they have no storehouse for the
fatherless, the widows and strangers to come within their gates, and be filled,
therefore you may see the blessings of God not among you, nor upon you,
therefore you put up Petitions to man, who are turned from the Lord, and woe
unto them that take counsel, and not at me, says the Lord, or offers up any
sacrifice but unto the Lord; for if you will have Tithes, you must ofter up
sacrifice, for the people cannot hold up the changable Priesthood, which
witnesses the unchangable, and so you that put up Petitions to hold up Tithes,
you are in your own wills, and would hold up the changable, and they that own
your Petition, are such guides that have eyes and see not; but with the light
of Christ which he has enlightened every one withal, are all such to be
condemned with the light, therefore the word of the Lord God to you who witness
the Gospel, and preaches it, does not preach up Tithes, nor the first
Priesthood, nor the Temple, nor the Altar, nor the old storehouse; though the
Ministry of condemnation was glorious, the Ministry of the Spirit exceeds in
glory, and with the unchangable the changable is denied; now if ye say that
Christ said ye pay Tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, and these things
ought you to have done; its true, Christ said these things ought you to have
done, but he cried woe unto them, and told them they were blind, and said they
neglected Truth, and Judgment, and Mercy, for had they been in the faith, they
would have seen him who was the end of Tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin,
the unchangable Priest; for they which preached him, and went up and down in
the Synagouges, did not preach up Tithe, and Annise, and Cummin, and the first
Priesthood, though Christ in that time did witness the figure in its place, and
said, these things ought ye to have done, but when he was sacrificed up, and
was preached, the other was denied; now if you say give Caesar his due, and by
this ye cloak, that Priests may have tithes, and people pay tithes; the answer
is, Caesar shall have his due in his place, but this shall not hold up the
figure before Christ came in the flesh, the first Priesthood to paying tithes,
and so the figures I witness in its place, and I witness Christ Jesus the end
of the figures, the unchangable Priest, and so I deny the figure, and the
changable Priesthood; so if we suffer our goods to be spoiled joyfully, for
witnessing the unchangable Priest, and denying the changable that takes tithes,
its for Christ's sake, as some now in Cumberland and Westmerland are brought
before Rulers, because they cannot pay the Priests tithes, and some again have
their goods destrained out of their houses, because they cannot pay the Priest
tithes, as many may witness it: Oh, the havoc that is made of people with this
generation of Priests, and the Justices that hold them up, at Courts and
Sessions, troubling, vexing poor people about tithes, who witness the
unchangable Priest, and denying the changable, and so many are brought to
suffer the spoiling of the goods joyfully; there was a member of a Kirk, which
turned Preacher, and he was a cause of ones being cast into prison, because he
could not pay him tithes, and deny Christ Jesus the unchangable Priest, nor
hold up the first; for shame never talk of propagating the Gospel, or mention
the Gospel; where did ever any of the Ministers of the Gospel, or the Apostles
sue any at Law for tithes, and if they could not, to have Bailiffs to come to
fetch away their goods, their kettles, or their pots, and cast poor people into
prison? Oh shame, shame, here let the life of the Apostles Judge you all, who
profess your selves Ministers, and put up Petitions for propagating and setting
up such, and say they are godly, and here you make your selves manifest, that
you are no Ministers of the Gospel, here the lie is found in your mouth, to sue
men for tithes, to destrain for tithes, and to put up Petitions for tithes, and
say you are Ministers of the Gospel; here your fruits do declare it what you
are, for the Ministers of the Gospel denied the first Priesthood, and never
sued any man at the Law for tithes, but the Ministers of the Gospel are ashamed
of you, for all who own Christ Jesus the unchangable Priest, deny tithes, and
the first Priesthood, and do not sue any man at the Law, but are brought to yea
and nay in their communications; here you may see how far you are from the
doctrine of Christ, which the Apostles walked in; or show me any example that
ever the Apostles practiced any such thing, or any of them putting up
Petitions, or any of them had tithes, or any of them sued ever any at the Law
for tithes, or the Apostles ever had Bailiffs to destrain goods for tithes for
them of the people, their pots, their kettles, and their Pewter, or bedding, or
their horses, or cattle, or threw them into prison for tithes: Oh havoc,
havoc, what havoc do you make of the Church, which witness the unchangable
Priest; and now if you cannot find one example among the Apostles, which acted
these practices which are acted among the Priests of England, let their life
Judge you, and their doctrine, to be evil beasts, which mind earthly things,
who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and lay their hands
upon their mouths for shame, and never mention it more, that they are Ministers
of the Gospel, for with the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you
withal, are you all seen and condemned, and this you must own before ever you
own the Gospel, for they which preach the Gospel, bring glad tidings, and they
do not make the Gospel chargable or burdensome, nor look at an outward power,
to have set benefits or tithes; nay, they first plant a Vineyard before they
eat of the fruit of it, and they preach the Gospel before they live of it, and
such deny the first Priesthood that receives tithes, and does not preach it
up, and does not covet any man's silver, or gold, or apparel, which preach the
Gospel; and here you that sue men at the Law, and strain their goods, and cast
them into prison, does covet both their silver and their goods, so there you
are condemned with the life of the Apostles, and to be out of their doctrine,
and with the life Judged, and with the light condemned, and unto you this is
the word of God, unto the light in your consciences I speak, which have put up
this Petition, which will let you see that your eye is abroad, which is the
fools, which if you love it, it will guide your minds to Christ, and here is
every ones Teacher, the light, and every ones way to Christ the Savior, and
every ones way out of the world, which leads them into the world where there is
no end; and you that would have tithes, and a speedy course for keeping them
up, because God has raised up the light in the hearts of people, and caused
the light to shine out of darkness in the face of Jesus, from whom the light
comes, and with the light they do confess Christ the unchangable Priest, and
deny the changable Priest, that receives tithes; for you that hold up tithes,
and the first Priesthood, are in the Ministry of condemnation, and not in the
Ministry of the Spirit, and to you this is the word of the Lord.

And you that look for Teachers, are such as are turned from the light, and are
such as would not have Christ to reign over you, which are erred from the
light, for who turns from the light, are in the self-righteousness, but who
walks in the light, with the light such are condemned, and it brings to witness
Christ the Minister and Bishop of the soul, and denies all who are made
Ministers by the will of man in that nature, to the light they are to be
condemned, they are keepers in time, your Ministry of man, made by the will of
man, and has men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, which is erred
from the light; the other which is made by the will of God, manifest to that of
God in every man's conscience, and goes to Minister to that in the person, and
to the bringing it up out of that time unto God, and with that which leads out
of time, condemns that which keeps in time, and to you this is the word of God.

To you that put up Petitions to the powers of the earth, for a set maintenance
for your Teachers and tithes, can you not here be ashamed? are you a Vineyard,
and does no fruit grow in you? he that planted gathers no fruit; you may be
ashamed, woe unto you Vineyard dressers, must you now put up Petitions to the
Powers of the earth, and a cloak to sue such at the Law, as you persecute,
which are not of you? Oh shame, you Teachers and people, will not your Vineyard
maintain you? now it is manifest what you have been sowing all this while, you
have talked, and told people of sowing spiritual things, and said it was the
least if they Ministered unto you carnal things, and now is there not carnal
things to be reaped, and now you put up Petitions to the Powers of the earth,
to get maintenance of them that are not of you, whom you do no work for, who
has not hired you, let shame strike you, ye Vineyard dressers, in the face,
and you may be ashamed of your works.

The Examination of Boswel Middleton, before the Judge of the Assize, so
called, at York, the 17. of July, 1654.
IVdge Nudigate, Hold up thy hand.


Boswell Mid. I deny the Ceremony.


Clerk read, Whereas Boswel Middleton, Cordinar, in the City of York, having
maliciously and contemptuously disturbed Mr. Edward Bowls Minister, when he
was preaching in All Saints Church, saying, Thou art a Minister of Antichrist,
and also the Congregation, and troubled and vexed the said Preacher.


Judge, What say thou, guilty or not guilty?


Boswell, The words which I spoke to him, was the word of the Lord, but
maliciously I deny; then they read over the Indictment again: and I was moved
to speak these words: Judge righteous Judgment, and do Justice, the Lord
requires it of you.


Judge, Did thou speak these words yea or nay?


Boswel, A minister of Antichrist I witness him to be.


Judge, Stood up, and said, let us reason together, what is Antichrist?


Boswell, He that practices and holds up those things which Jesus Christ
witnesses against, is Antichrist.


Judge, What things are those?


Boswell, Such as are called of men Masters, and go in Long robes, and have the
chiefest places in the Assemblies, Salutations in the Market places, and so
forth read, to that in thy conscience.


Judge, Said I was mad, and spoke nonsense, and sat him down, what say
thou, will thou confess thou disturbedst the Church, yea or no?


Bos. The Saints Church is in God the Father, our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
this Church all may speak one by one, and there peace cannot be broken, but
your Church I deny.


Judge, Will thou own the Indictment altogether as it lies?


Bos. The words which were spoken by me I own, and witness It was the word of
the Lord, but malice and the rest I deny, it is your own: A Minister of
Antichrist he is, and I shall witness it with my blood, if thereto I be
required.


Judge, It were well if you were grounded upon the Scriptures; and not such
youths to disturb the Ministers.


Bos. Give one example in all the Scriptures where ever the Ministers of Jesus
Christ were defended with a carnal Law, yea or nay, but they were all silent:
then they called a Jury, and swore them against me; and I spoke these words,
Friends, all you that swear, you are out of the doctrine of Christ, who says,
swear not at all; then I told them, I have suffered the wages of the Law, and
layen in prison near six months.


Judge, That is thy advantage, but here is another advantage, art thou sorry?


Bosw. I stand to the Lord, If I have transgressed the Law, here is my body at
the Lords service, inflict what punishment on it you can, I have cleared my
conscience, and am willing to suffer, and here the Scripture is fulfilled on
you, who make offenders for a word.


The Examination of Henry Fewler, before the Judge of Assize, so called.
Justice Dickinson, Have you brought Sureties for your good behavior?


Henry, I am bound to good behavior by the power of God.


Dickinson, Spoke to the Judge, and he would not hear him, but waved it; then
they drew an Indictment, which is as follows; whereas Henry Fewler, in the
Parish of Saint Lawrence, did maliciously disturb, and falsely accuse Thomas
Dickinson, Justice of the Peace, saying, thou art a Persecuter of the Saints of
the most high God. Quest. what say you, are you guilty of this Indictment, yea
or no?


Ans. Maliciously I deny, I have no malice to him nor no man, more then to a
child in a Cradle, neither did I know that I should speak to thee, till I saw
thy face: And then I was moved to speak to thee by the power of God, but had
thou not been guilty, thou needst not have been angry or disturbed, had thou
not had a persecuting spirit, thou would not have sent me to prison for
speaking a word to thy conscience; I did not affront thee, neither follow thee,
I was within my own door stead, and for the man that was persecured, it was
upon a false oath, as I can let the Judge understand.


Judge, Come friend, art thou sorry for disturbing the Magistrate?


Ans. I am not sorry for doing the work of the Lord, he that does the command
of the Lord, need not be sorry.


Judge, If you will acknowledge you are sorry, I will set you free here.


Ans I am not sorry;


then the Court broke up. FINIS.

