Some things memorably considerable in the Conditions, Life and Death of the
ever blessed and now eternally happy; Mris. ANNE BOVVES.
SHe was exceedingly humble and courteous: most loving and single-hearted: of
gentlest and harmless conversation: sincerely obedient to parents: hearty and
faithful in friendship: very bashful and highly modest: never bold even with
inwardest familiars in any either word or act that she could imagine the least
wise undecent: most unfeinedly and readily pliant to the mind and advice of
whose privileges she held any relation unto: most grateful, just, and
remunerable: an enemy from her childhood to Idleness, and so bestowing her
time as not the meanest, but some of her exercises made beholding her: most
singularly cleanly of hand and person: always touched with others harm, and no
less a right sensible of their welfare: eminently temperate and abstinent:
full of pity and endeavor of helpfulnesse: in the utmost of her passions (if
most rarely any such were) instantly reduceable by whom she had in confidence:
far from impatiencie and bitterness of anger: ever most speedy in forgetting
displeasure: of countenance and comportment most mildly expressing a right
seasoned bosom: womanlike soft in ordinary fears, but unto a danger of face
and importance most masculine and firm. Thus far is referrable to the
excellency and sweetness of her natural disposition.

For the Graces of God, and her spiritual gifts, she was for certain inwardly
and ardently most religious: she was most frequent and assiduous in private
devotion: most constant and cheerful in duties of piety: a severe judge of her
self: a daily weeping and brokenhearted penitent: never satisfied enough in
the strength of her Faith, measure of Repentance, and sufficience of Charity:
she bate a love, to the House, to the Ministers and the servants of God, most
full of reverence: she never held her self no way so bound as wherein she
conceived some furtherance to Heaven; her heart was so fixed above, as that
even her dreams were often full of most heavenly inexpressible comfort, and it
was very ordinary to hear her pray, and most joyously to sing whole Psalms in
her sleep: her last sickness which was unspeakably full of torment, (by
incessant sharpest headache) and wherein for at least 40. days her sleep was
almost wholy taken from her, was so allayed with patience, that the trouble
of it reached not to any least household interruption: and her prayer was
continually, not for the lengthening of life or asswagement of pain, but that
it would please God to preserve her understanding that she might still know to
praise him to the end: never was heart nor tongue more full of truth, for the
saving of life, (after her maturing in godliness) would not, I aver it, have
cost her a lie: nothing was of more horror to her then backbitings and
taxation of the absent: and it was a bad cause or worthless person that found
not a relief from her when properer defense was out of place: it cannot be
expressed what gladsome confidence she had in the Mercies of God, and how she
clung with the arms of her soul upon her dear Savior.

Her care was so great to take trouble and sorrow from the friends about her,
that she would never yield to the behaviors of sickness, but kept her foot to
the last day. Being with her Brother and his wife invited the night sevennight
before her death to sup with a worthy friend but a few steps from her own door,
hovvever her weakness was utterly extreme and manifest, her civility and
gentleness yet carried her thither: and the next day being Sunday, and that
she prepared to Church, but was besought by a servant of trust about her to
have care to her health, which apparently was wasted to the last; no, says
she, shall I go but last night to the house of a friend to a supper, and shall
I forbear this next morning to go to the house of my God to a sermon? good God
forbid it me: and yet her disablednesse was so great, that she well near
swouned and fell down as she went, but would not for all that be entreated to
turn back. The Monday following, her brother having called some friends to a
dinner, where was Music, sportings and diverse Christmasse solemnities; no
Brother says she (being still requested to favor her self, and though her
presence were wished, that she would not yet uneasefully allow it)
notwithstanding all these discordances to my present case, your company shall
not want of any the regards I can yield to it; it is not the faintness of this
body shall be able to detain me from doing observance, where you show
affection, neither (you shall see) shall it be in the power of sickness to
sullen my behavior or to make me suspected of neglect with personages of such
account to you: but through the whole course of the day (she still holding out
with the best fitted semblances she could, even until 12 a clock midnight) it
was easy to perceive both by the stolen mooving of her eyes, and often
withal, by the stirring of her lips, what other repasts her heart then fed
upon. The third day before it pleased God to take her to his mercy, being
early the morning in a little faint slumber, it seemed her that a white sheet
or a large four square linen cloth, was let down to her by cords from
heaven, the which mooving and passing diverse times before her eyes, vanished
away: do you know says she to her brother, (unto whom and her sister she
presently came down a pair of stairs from her chamber, relating to them as
abovesaid) what this should signify? yea says she, smiling and nodding her
head at him, do you know brother? and so rejoycingly she led her self into the
magnifying of Gods Mercies. Some friends coming to visit her not 3 hours
before her departure, and beholding her as with pity of her plight and agony;
noe, says she, do not so (with an emboldned and raised voice she delivered it)
I would have you to know that I fear not death, it is long since God has
quite drawn my heart and mind from this world, and with that her speech
failed. And it is true, that as she had many years before lost almost al
delight and taste in worldly things, so now never flesh and bloodlesse feared
death, or more comfortably embraced dissolution. Recovering her speech a little
again, she bestovved it all in most holy ejaculations: and as the night before
she had in a slumber with more then an ordinarily clear voice sung two staves
of a Psalm; awaking with these words in her mouth, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy word, so the very same words about an
hour before her passing were the last that she was heard to utter. When her
sight was gone and all motion began to fail, there was suddenly by diverse very
sensible and discreet bystanders a flickering heard against the glass of the
next window to her bed, as if it were the beating of little wings (nor otherwise
could it be ghessed or resembled) being yet then within night, when all things
were quiet; at which very time, with two weak neesings and without any sob or
shrinking whatever, her soul and body took leave until their joyful meeting
in a blessed Resurrection.

This befell unto us the 2. of January being a Saturday, in the year of Grace
1640. and in the 41. year of her age*

Never Fleshlesse feared to dye,
Nor Soul fled more cheerfully.


