THE Hidden things of Esau brought to light, And Reproved in an ANSWER To a
Book Entitled A true Relation of a Dispute between Francis Fulwood, Minister
of West Alvington, in the County of Devon, and Thomas Salthouse, as it is said,
of the County of Westmerland, before the Congregation of them called Quakers,
in the House of Henry Pollexpher Esquire, in the said Parish of West.

Published in the Truth's defense, and sent abroad in the World, to pursue the
unknown Authors imperfect Relation.

By a Follower of the LAMB in the War against the Beast and False Prophet,
known to the World by the name of Thomas Salthouse.

Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this world?
has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 1.20.

Thou have trusted in thy wickedness; thou have said, None sees me: Thy wisdom
and thy knowledge, it has perverted thee. Isai. 47.10.

Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord will be a light unto me. Micah 7.8.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Blackspread-Eagle near the West End
of Paul's. 1657.

The Preface.
FOrasmuch as there came lately to my hands a certain Book, or rather a Libel
without any name unto it, entitled, A true Relation, etc. which it seems the
Authors thereof, being conscious of their Unfaithfulness, vain Repetitions, and
manifold Lies therein contained, durst not own the same so far as to set their
names thereunto, that so an Answer might have been directed particularly to
them and their folly made manifest; but thinking to shelter themselves in the
dark from the eye of man, thereby to keep their deeds of darkness from the
light: Yet he that searches the heart, and tries the reins, and brings the
hidden things of Esau to light, in his due time will bring them to Judgment,
both for their evil thoughts, hard speeches, and ungodly deeds; and this is he
of whom I am a witness, who pleads the cause of the Innocent, and executes
Righteous Judgment on the Earth.

And although for that the Authors thus hide themselves in the dark by
concealing their names, and also the matters therein contained, being of so
little weight, it might justly have excused an Answer, yet notwithstanding for
the simple sake, and Truths vindication, I am constrained to send this ensuing
Answer into the World, especially into the County of Devon, and Parish of West
Alvington, where it is likely these unknown Authors Relation have past before;
that if possible, it might come to the view of some of them who have dug so
deep to hide themselves and their counsel in the dark, lest their shame and
nakedness should be made manifest.

Their Book or Libel being filled with so many vain Repetitions, and gross
untruths of their own Suggestions, the Reader thereof can expect little for his
Information or Edification: And therefore I shall not endeavor to fill a volumn
with repeating overmuch of what is herein contained; but only hint at some
passages that may seem to bear the most weight, and also manifest and reprove
some of their lies.

These Authors begin their Book as follows, A True Relation, etc.
Answer. THe first sentence is a lie, as I shall prove by your words in the
Preface your own Relation; where you confess you have concealed some
Infirmities, Repetitions, and vile Speeches, which indeed were many, as you
say; also you say, the Quaker was so full of Impertinencies and Repetitions,
that his words here set down, seem to bear no proportion to his tedious and
rude Discourses: And then how can your Relation be true, when by your own
confession, much is omitted? out of your own mouths be you judged. And though
you find me rude in Speech, yet may you not expect to find me so in knowledge;
for God has given me a mouth and wisdom to answer such gainsayers and
opposers, as call evil good, and good evil.

Book. On Tuesday 24 October, 1656.

Answ. There was no such day in the year; for the 24 day of October, 1656. was
the sixth day of the week, called Friday, and the same day I was at a meeting
in Plymouth; but I let this pass among your other infirmities, though I might
call it a lie. Its very unlike your Relation should be true, when you could not
so much as remember the day.

Book. Published by some that were present at the dispute, out of a single and
sincere desire, that Error may be ashamed, and the truth cleared.

Answ Error is ashamed; for are you not ashamed to own your Relation, which is
so full of Error, although you say you were present at the dispute? if not, why
did not you subscribe your names to your Book, which is so full of error. How
can liars clear the truth? its clear ready, notwithstanding all your deceit and
deceivableness of unrighteousness, with which you would darken the truth, and
cast a stumbling block before the simple, by rendering the truth odious; but the
woe is unto such as you, who call truth error, and error truth; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; a deceived heart has led you
aside; a lie is in your right hand.

Book. It seems strange unto some that Mr. Fulwood would venture to go to the
Quakers meeting, etc.

Answ. Its manifest, both of what generation you are of, and also him whom you
call Mr. Fulwood: Your speech bewrays you; did not you call him a Minister?
when were any of Christ's Ministers called of Men, Master? and who were they
that were so called? are not they transgressors of the command of Christ that
call men so? Read Matthew. 23. Why should not he venture, unless he had thought
the Quakers were such as the men of his generation, who hate and beat in their
Meeting places and carry before Magistrates, and to prison? or was he not
rather conscious to himself of his guilt and hypocrisy? For the sinners in
Sion are afraid, fearfulness surpriseth the Hypocrites, Isai. 33.14.

Book. He had no thought of making a set dispute of it, till provoked by the
Quakers railing discourse.

Answ. Here I call you to bear witness against your selves, that my discourse
was not railing, but words of truth and soberness, tending to the informing of
the minds of those that were present at the said meeting; that whereas they
had formerly spent their money for that which was no bread, and their labor for
that which did not satisfy; they might be turned to him who fills the hungry
with good things, and freely administers out of the Everlasting Treasury,
without money, and without price: And as they had formerly in the time of their
ignorance, heaped up to themselves Teachers, they were exhorted to turn from
the darkness to the light; that so they might come to know the true Teacher
Jesus Christ, the Everlasting, High Priest, the chief Shepherd and Bishop of
their Souls: There being many that day present, as sheep without a Shepherd,
unto whom I was moved to lay open the deceit of the blind Guides,
Idol-Shepherds, such as run, but the Lord never sent them, hirelings, false
Prophets, deceivers and Antichrists; such as divine for money, and speak a
divination of their own brain; of which sort, many are gone forth into the
world in these last days, and perilous times; and many have followed their
pernicious ways, by reason whereof the truth has been evil spoken of; and
unless you call the Scripture language, railing discourse, own your selves to
be false accusers; for it lies upon you yet to prove what your false Relation
affirms.

Book. 1: We hear the Quaker threatens to print the debate himself, from whom
we can expect no faithfulness therein.

Answ. Your first Reason is grounded on a lie, or false information at the
best: I never threatened, nor indeed intended any such thing here; your evil
surmising appears; your clearly manifest the contrary in your selves, which you
say, you could not expect from me; for if I had first printed, you might have
found more faithfulness then I find at your hands. But to me this is not
strange, seeing it is manifest of what generation you are; had you not
respected persons, you would have done to me, as you would I should have done
to you, and not to have added to, nor diminished from my words, to make them
appear ridiculous to the Reader, when you pretend to give a true Relation; but
your covering is too narrow, though you have made haste with your work, lest
others should have written before, that would have dealt equally for both
parties.

Book. 2. We hear that some others who did not write say, They will lay their
heads together, and print as much as they can remember; which if they should,
it must needs be done very imperfectly.

Answ. You have left enough for them yet to do (if any such intention were)
before the Relation be perfect; and they may either write or print,
notwithstanding what you have done: And if they should give a more imperfect
Relation then you have done, I shall deny both you and them, and stand a
witness for God against you all; but this I know there is none that owns the
truth in the least measure, that was present that day, though the words were
not written that day as they were spoken, that will join with or approve of
what you have done. For they may plainly see your unequal balance, and bag of
deceitful weights, and how you have wrested my words, and enlarged upon his, as
if your works should never have been brought to light, or you called in
question to give an account thereof; but the just God sees you in secret, who
will reward you openly.

Book. 3. We hear that since we supposed, prejudiced persons are ready to say,
etc.

Answ. That they were prejudiced persons who said so, is nothing but your
supposition; and if they said I had, the best they might speak truth, for truth
prevails against deceit, and the Lamb must have the victory: There is little
reason, that what you suppose, wonder at, or affirm, should gain much credit or
change their minds, though for the present you have endeavored to cast a mist
before the eyes of such as heard not both parties that day, to beget a
prejudice in their minds against the truth.

Book. Let none slander us with unfaithfulness in the Relation.

Answ. To say that the Relation is unfaithful and false, is no slander. It
seems you were convinced in Conscience of your guilt in this thing, else why
did you conceal your names? had you given the whole Reason on both sides, as
you say you did, you need not have been ashamed to own it, or put it to others
that would have remembered more, and yet are you so impudent as to call it a
true Relation.

Book. Yea, the weight of Mr. Fulwoods Answer, though extemporary, is such that
we think we may safely, let them loose not only to what was said that day, but
to what can be replied upon the deliberation of all the Quakers, betwixt this
and Westmerland.

Answ. You have manifested your selves in this Relation to the lest of these
called Quakers, to be proud boasters; and to such as live in the light, his
Answers, though with the assistance of his, and your deliberation appear to be
light and vain; although you that are destroyed for want of knowledge, and set
your selves to contend for, and uphold such as cry peace, while men put into
their mouths, say they are weighty; and by the assistance and direction of the
Eternal Spirit of him who gives a mouth and wisdom to his Children, that all
their adversaries are not able to gainsay or resist; I shall answer to some of
his weightest Arguments, though it may be not with such cunning devised Fables,
and excellence of Speech, as is pleasing to your ears as cannot endure found
doctrine; and yet of as much and more weight and use for edification to the
simple, as your Narrative, which you say, you have humbly put before them; your
expressions manifest but little humility.

Book. If any shall print another Narrative, let them but be faithful in
setting down Mr. Fulwoods own Answers or Arguments, in their due weight and
fullness.

Answ. Ye Hipocrites, will you pull a mote out of another eye, while the beam
is in your own? you that would teach others, would not you teach your selves?
it would be but vain repetitions to write his words over again. Ought not you
to have been faithful first, in setting down my Answers and Arguments, with the
due weight and fullness, before you had exhorted others to faithfulness in this
particular, and then there had been no need of another Relation; but the steady
eye (as you say) of those before whom you put your Narrative, might have taken
a full view of the truth on both sides, as their ears had done before, who were
present at that discourse.

Book. We know not that we have concealed any thing, save some infirmities, viz
Reproaches and vile Speeches, which indeed were such, and so many, etc.

Answ. Oh you deceitful tongues! do you pretend a concealing of infirmities,
reproaches, and vile speeches, and yet mention them in general, which such
aggravating circumstances, as to be such and so many, as even enforced some of
Mr. Fulwoods more ingenious adversaries, to say, That they wondered that flesh
and blood could contain so long under such temptations, etc. What were those
reproaches and vile speeches, had it not have been as much Charity to have
expressed the particulars, as to mention them in general with such aggravations?
Let that in your consciences witness, whether you intended any such thing as to
conceal my infirmities and vile speeches; if any had been uttered, were not
those the vile speeches as you mention; the discovery of the deceit of the
hirelings and false Prophets, which if you should have set down, would have
manife sted the folly and wickedness of him, and that generation which you go
about to hide and uphold?

Book. There were some things very remarkable, and the cunning craftiness of
the Quaker was such, That do what Mr. Fulwood could to force him to it, he
still found some trick or other to evade the maintaining those passages (of
dangerous consequence) which he let fall in his first discourse, which were not
a few; and which he took notice Mr. Fulwood wrote down.

Answ. O ye deceitful Craftsmen, and false Accusers, what were these passages
of dangerous consequence? was it declaring against sin, and exhorting to purity
and holiness, to mind the light, and take up the Cross and follow Christ in
the straight way? or was it the laying open the deceit of the false Prophets,
hirelings, and such as say they are Ministers of Christ, and are not? such as
are called of Men Master, take the chief Seats in the Assemblies, uppermost
rooms at Feasts; and whose hearts are exercised with covetous practices, and
have forsaken the right way, and are gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards: If he that you call Mr.
Fulwood, wrote down any thing of dangerous consequence, it had been his duty or
yours in this Relation, to have published them; that so they might have been
avoided, and the Author ashamed; for you say this was published out of a
sincere desire, that truth might be cleared, and error ashamed. And here you
have added another lie, to say, That I took notice that Mr. Fulwood wrote down
those passages of dangerous consequence; for I did not see him, nor any other
write any thing that day of that discourse, which I was moved of the Lord to
speak, not fearing all that came to oppose themselves: Although I were sensible
there were many that day come together to lie in wait to catch me in my words;
and if I had seen any write down what I said that day, I had no cause to be
afraid nor ashamed, knowing that I have a witness in all your consciences that
heard me, even the Authors of his Book, though they manifested themselves to be
my subtle Adversaries; their cunning will deceive them in the end as their
deceit comes to be laid open by the light; which makes manifest every man's
work, of what sort it is.

Book. 2. He took all occasions to bring the dispute to such points as lay in
difference between us and the Anabaptists, that thus he might engage the
Anabaptists with himself, which indeed he effected, the greatest advantage he
got that day.

Answ. Have you no other resuge but lies to shelter under? what occasion took I
to engage the Anabaptists? both they and most of the company then present saw
the deceit of Francis Fulwood that day, and many of them declared against it. I
utterly deny, that I endeavored to engage any further then the truth convinced
them; neither did I fear any that did engage against me: And if the Lord raised
up a witness in those you call Anabaptists, or any others, to contend for the
truth against your deceit, let him have the glory. I admire no man's person,
because of advantage; and if Francis Fulwood lost the advantage that day with
your assistance, or likely with the help of his Brethren of the Craft, he may
think to regain what he then lost, by enlarging upon his confused Answers and
Arguments, and diminishing, and wresting my Answers, Replies, and Arguments
that day, made in the truths defense; but neither yours nor the as formed
weapons shall prosper, your refuge of lies the Lord will sweep away.

Book. 3. That upon every stand or difficulty, he continually fled unto the
common Refuge of Hireling taking Tithes, etc.

Answ. Its a better refuge then lies to fly unto; did not the true Prophets,
Ministers, and Messengers of Christ, declare against hirelings, such as divined
for money, bare rule by their means; sought for their gain from their quarter;
and against covetous, proud, heady, high-minded men: Is Francis Fulwood guilty
of any of these? If so, let him repent in time, and turn you from him; if not,
neither he nor you need be offended at me, nor account it too grateful a
discourse to any.

Book. 4. Although he first urged to have the express words of Scripture, to be
the rule of the dispute, etc.

Answ. You still fly to your old refuge which cannot long stand, to wit lies;
look back to the third remarkable thing, as you call it, and compare it with
this, and your contradictions and confusions will appear remarkable indeed: Did
not you there say, that in every stand I fled to the common refuge of Tithes,
Hirelings, Diviners for money, etc. which are express words of Scripture; and
are you now so impudent, as to say, that I did not so much as once keep so
exactly to the express words of Scripture? Here you have given an opportunity
sufficiently to discover and lay open your folly.

Book 5. Yet his cunning deceived him, in that as is most remarkable. The very
Texts which he urged as before noted, afforded so direct and plain Answers upon
every occasion, that he had no room left for any colorable Reply.

Answ. What can you not open your mouths without lying? I need give no other
answer to this, but appeal to all those that heard the dispute, whose judgments
are not captivated with prejudice. Where are those plain Answers? how is it you
had not set down some of them, in that which you call a true Relation? A Reply
that had not given satisfaction, might stand for a color; but as troops of
Robbers that lay in wait to murder by consent, you bend your tongues for lies,
and shoot out your arrows, even bitter words.

Book. 6. Lastly. And which did justly amaze us, how boldly, and with what
enforcing Repetitions did Mr. Fulwood challenge him to set down his opinions,
and engage that thereupon he would at the next meeting bring Papists Books, etc.

Answ. All opinions and sects I deny, neither can I remember at present, that I
heard him speak of writing down any but my principles; what I owned and
disowned, I freely declared that day, which neither be nor you has or can
disprove; that dispute being the Fourteenth day of the Month, called October,
1656. I had three meetings the same Month, one at the house of Henry
Pollexphen aforesaid on the Six and twentieth day, another the Seven and
twentieth at Batson, and another the Eight and twentieth at Kingsbridge: of
which, its likely Francis Fulwood had notice: For Nicholas Tripe, in whose
house the Meeting then was, informed me, that he sent a Messenger to him with a
Message to this purpose; That if he were dissatisfied in any thing in the
forementioned discourse, he might have free liberty to come into his house, and
be answered to what he had to object; which was done at my request: Let his
practice and mine be judged by the Light, which is nearer to Popery, and who it
was that fainted.

Book. The Lord awaken us betime, least we say peace peace, when sudden
destruction comes.

Answ. Let him that names the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity; for none
calls Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. What have you to do to take his name
into your mouths? and thus bend your tongues for lies, and hate to be reformed,
upon you that are asleep, will the day of the Lord come as a theif in the
night, even as sudden destruction from the Almighty. Therefore arise and be
awakened, and prepare to meet the Lord by repentance; that if peradventure the
thoughts of your hearts may be forgiven you. For the Lord has appointed a day
in the which he will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ; and with equity
will he plead the cause of the innocent, against whom you make war, and shoot
your arrows in secret; fear and tremble, weep and howl, for the misery that is
coming upon you; in flames of fire will God render vengeance upon his
adversaries; out of Heaven will he thunder upon them, and they shall be even
broken to pieces, as the Vessel of a Potter is broken with a rod of Iron. In
vain do ye pot-sheards of the Earth strive to set Briars and Thorns in battle;
your formed weapons cannot prosper, a consumption is even determined upon the
whole Earth; and every man's work is to be tried by fire, that the approved of
God may be made manifest. Can ye contend with the Almighty, before whom all
Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, or as the small dust of the balance? Give
over, stop your mouths; let all flesh be silent before the Lord. Come down and
sit in the dust, you that are high and lifted up, and meet the Judge by the
way. Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and lay down your Crown at the feet of
the Lamb; and let the Lord be your fear, and let him be your dreads; and let
the light of Christ in your consciences, try your words and works; and cease
from your blind Leaders, that have used their tongues, and not profited the
people. And while you have the light, believe in the light, and know, while the
Spirit of the Lord strives with you; resist not his power, lest your Bonds be
made strong, and you for ever shut up in utter darkness. A price is put into
your hands, the Lord will not the death of a sinner; the times of ignorance God
winked at, but now he calls all men every where to repent. Call not this the
railing discourse, but take it as a Call to you, and a warning from the Lord,
by a servant of the Truth, made willing by the power of God, to follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes.

Thomas Salthouse.

Francis Fulwood.
TO the substance of what passed between thee and me, in the discourse upon the
Four and twentieth day of the Eight Month, 1656. in the house of Henry
Pollexphen, which its like thou wast not unacquainted with the Printing of, if
no: the chiefest actor. I shall return something in Answer for the Truth's
vindication, especially to the particulars of most concernment, which I call to
mind since I saw this Relation.

As first: After I had spoken to the people that day, as I was moved, and
directed by the Spirit of Truth; then a Friend of mine being moved also, stood
up according to the order in the Churches of the Saints, and spoke to the
people then present; to whom I gave liberty, the spirits of the Prophets being
made subject to the Prophets: And as thou may remember thy first Objection
was against her for saying, Eternal life was not to be found in the Scriptures.

The second thing was a Quere by me propounded to thee, which I yet received no
satisfactory Answer unto, from thee.

The third thing was an Objection made by thee against me, for expressing as I
was declaring to the people, That those who are out of the Doctrine of Christ,
as they were then described by their fruirs and marks, were such as Preach
another Gospel then that which the Apostle had preached; and so under the
curse, as it is written, Gal 1.

The fourth thing was about the light spoken of in John's Declaration, and
something concerning Tithes.

Fifthly, Concerning Baptism, and the words thee and thou, which many are
offended at, as they are, and were given and taken by the servants of God, one
to another, as we read in the Scriptures of Truth.

To these things in order, as God does direct. I shall for the truths sake
answer; and as for the other passages in the Relation, not worth the taking
notice of, or repeating over again, I shall let them stand and wither as an
untimely birth, begotten by one of the adulterate generation, and brought forth
of the womb of consusion.

I might have written down a gross sum of lies; but it feems the Authors were
pricked at the heart, when they saw what they had done; and so to hide
themselves, have concealed their names from the visible eye of man: But this
Cave of earthly subtilty, will not long hide them from the All-seeing eye of
him with whom we have to do.

If thou be one of their confederacy, fear and tremble before the Lord, and
come forth to the Light, that thou may be proved and tried; and be not thou
called of men Master, but learn of Jesus Christ to be meek and lowly; take up
his Cross and follow him, and side not longer with the Chief Priests against
him and his Ministers, whom he has sent forth as sheep among wolves, to
reprove sin in the Gates, and to preach Repentance, that people may be turned
from the darkness to the light, and from under Satan's power unto God; who has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel.

To the first of these particulars I shall proceed. Thy first Objection which
the Book also mentions against the Woman, is as follows.

Fulwood. I Have one word first unto this woman that spoke last, and that is to
charge her with speaking expressly against the Scripture: She told us, that
Eternal life was not to be found in the Scriptures; whereas the Apostle says
expressly, that the holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation.

Answ. The Scripture is plain for what she intended, John 5. Search the
Scriptures; for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they that
testify of me, says Christ. But ye will not come unto me, that you may have
life. And again he says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and he that
has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life, although
he may have the Scriptures: 2 Cor. 4.10.
For the Minister of Christ waited for, and witnessed the life of Christ
manifested in his mortal Body, and travailed again in birth with others, till
Christ the Life was formed in them; I in them, and they in me, says Christ,
John 17. And Christ in you the Hope of glory, the Mystery that has been hid
from ages and generations; and this is Life eternal, says Christ to his
Father, that they may know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. For that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and this is
plain, That eternal life is not to be found in the Scriptures, although it is
acknowledged they testify of these things. Here is no mention made, That
eternal life is to be found in the Scriptures; and thus thy Objection is
answered.

Fulw. True; but this Son in whom eternal life is, is alone to be found in
Scriptures, as the next words affirm, They are they which testify of me;
therefore eternal life is to be found in the Scriptures. And thus your own Text
overthrows you.

Ans. Be not hasty, but look back to thy confused stuff, wherein does the Text
overthrow me? for what the Scripture says, own; but neither by this Text, nor
any other. Can thou ever prove, that eternal life is to be found in the
Scriptures? or the Son whom to know is eternal life; therefore let thy mouth be
stopped, and proceed no farther to pervert the right ways of God, nor to wrest
the Scriptures to thy own destruction; for they are of no private
interpretation; although many who have them, think to find eternal life in
them, both thou and they are deceived, that seek the living among the dead; for
the letter kills, 2 Cor. 3.6.
but the spirit alone gives life: He that has understanding, let him read.

The Scripture being thus plain against thy Objection, thy next shift was this;
The Apostle says expressly; That the Scriptures are able to make wise unto
salvation: But this was not to the thing in hand; for the Scriptures I own and
witness to be profitable for Doctrine and Reproof, and to furnish the Man of
God perfectly; and through Faith, which is alone in Jesus Christ, are they able
to make wise unto salvation; and without Faith, its impossible to please God.
And the company seeing the Objection answered, said, Leave this, here is an end
of it: And my Quere to thee was as follows, Whether is it lawful for a Minister
of Christ to take Tithe^, hire, gifts, or rewards, for preaching the Gospel in
these days, since the Law and the Priesthood was changed, yea, or nay?

Fulw. You think you have put a Question that will gravel me; have but a little
patience, and this will have its place. I demand of you, Whether the Scripture
in the express Letter of it, shall be our rule? or whether we may draw
consequences from it?

Answ. I deny thy consequences and meanings, and private interpretations;
answer thou my Quere by plain Scripture.

Fulw. He may be a lawful Minister that takes hire; prove the contrary if you
can.

Answ. This is no answer to my Quere; yet I shall prove the contrary by
Scriptures. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests te^ch for hire, and
by their means they bear rule, and my people love to have it so, says the
Lord. This was a wonderful horrible thing that was then committed in the Land,
and not lawful; And for this cause, says the Lord, shall Zion be ploughed as a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high places of the forest: They run, but I never sent them, says the Lord,
therefore they shall not profit this people at all; night shall be unto them,
that they shall not have a vision, and the day shall be dark over them; Micah 3.
then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded; they shall all
cover their lips, for there is no answer of God; they have fed themselves with
the fat, and clothed themselves with the wool; and my people are destroyed for
want of knowledge, as troops of robbers wait for a man; even so the company of
Priests murder in the way by consent. Put into their mouths, and they cry
peace, peace. Put not into their mouths, and they bite with their teeth, and
even prepare war against them. This is not the lawful Ministry; for the woe is
gone forth against the men that do this, both the Master and the Scholar; and
he that helps, and he that is helped, shall fall together. Therefore all
people every where come out from among them, and be ye separated, hold them not
up, nor be partakers with them in their sins; that so you may escape the misery
that is coming upon those blind guides that have forsaken the way of the true
Prophets, Christ and his Ministers; who called all men to come freely without
money, and without price, and abode in the truth, and gave freely as they had
freely received, a necessity being laid upon them to preach the Gospel freely,
and to make it without charge. Is this thy practice, 1 Cor. 9.
or do not thou preach for hire?

Fulw. If I do, I have Scripture for it, and you cannot say I preach for hire,
unless you could see my heart; and besides my preaching twice every Lords day,
which is all I am bound by man unto, I Catechize, I Expound upon some part of
Scriture, I desire particular Conference, in order to the Sacrament, I visit
the sick, I preach my turn at some Lectures, and this day I am here doing more
then I am bound to do, or can expect any reward from man; for ye all know I
might have been quiet in my Study at home, but for love to the Souls of my poor
people, that if possibly I might save them out of the hands of such Deceivers
and Seducers.

Answ. Here thou art upon thy Self-justification, yet art thou not clear, from
being an hiteling; for thou have acknowledged thy self to be bound by man, and
also thou acknowledgest thou had a competent maintenance in lieu of
Preaching. What command or example have thou for these things? and what
Scripture have thou for the Word, Sacrament, or Catechizing, or to premeditate
aforehand? and when had any of the Ministers of Christ Studies, as thou say
thou mightiest have been quiet in thy Study at home? Thou art out of the steps
of the true Ministers of Christ, expounding and giving meanings to the
Scriptures, adding and diminishing, interpreting and wresting the Scriptures:
And therefore thy Gospel is easily proved to be another then theirs was; and if
thou call us Deceivers or Seducers, prove it by Scripture, That we are such, as
draw from the anointing within unto outward observations; for such are
Seducers; and he is a Deceiver that transgresses, and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, and steals the Word from his neighbor; that uses his
tongue, and says, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord never sent him, among
whom thou art found; although thou lean upon the Lord, and with the Pharisee,
justify thy self for Preaching many Lectures, and visiting the sick; thy long
Prayers, and thy Lecture Preaching is but the divination of thy own brain; and
thy Service and Sacrifices, is no more to the Lord then the cutting of a Dogs
neck, Isa: 66.3
or offering Swines blood, so long as thou art not justified by Faith;
therefore give over Divining for money, and Preaching for hire, and let all
flesh be silent before the Lord; for he that exalts himself, will the Lord a
base, and bring down, that no flesh may glory in his presence.

Fulw. But let me proceed to demand of you satisfaction in one thing: Pray how
do you prove the Ministers of England preach an other Gospel then. Paul,
preached? for that was one of your marks of the false Prophets.

Answ. I own and have union with the Ministers of England, and elsewhere, that
declare freely unto others that which they have heard and seen, tasted and
bandled of the Word of Life; 1 John 1.1.
which they have received neither of man, nor by man, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ; and I have nothing to say against them: But if either thou, or
any other man in England, or an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel, then
that which the Apostle preached, let him be accursed.

Fulw. I receive the Gospel from Paul, as the Galatians did even from the same
writings of Paul.

Ans. Even as Paul said to the Galatians, so say I to them who believes thy
testimony, O foolish people and unwise I who has bewitched you to believe such
a lying spirit? or to own such a one for your Minister. Is it a like thing that
Fra-Fulwood could receive the Gospel from Paul, as the Galatians did? Its
manifest, that Paul had preached the Gospel to the Galatians, before he wrote
that Epistle to them from Rome, and the Galatians had also received it, before
that Epistle was written: And these writings are not called the Gospel, which
he says he received the Gospel from; and if they were, he is found but one of
them that steal the Word from his neighbor, and from another man's writings: So
it is but death and destruction that speaks of the same; and therefore receive
no such into your houses, neither bid them God speed, least you also be
partakers with them in their evil deeds; for all such filthy dreamers and men
of corrupt minds, are sure to have their portion with Jannes and Jambres, and
their Forefathers and Brethren in iniquity, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, although
by this craft they prosper for a while, and get much wealth, which is but the
wages of unrighteousness.

Fulw. Come, come Sir, you have told us, That what you delivered, you have by
revelation from Heaven, wherein I tell you, you blaspheme the Lord; you have
said to the people, That the false Prophets, meaning us in the Ministry, deny
the light that is in all men.

Ans. It is not blasphemy to declare what I have received by revelation from
Heaven; but it is blasphemy for false Prophets to call themselves Christ's
Ministers. For me to declare against false Prophets, as I am moved of the Lord,
is neither blasphemy nor railing discourse as thou accountest it; and in as
much as thou deniest the sufficiency of the light to lead to salvation, or
eternally to condemn, thou may apply it to thy self, to be one of those false
Prophets that rebels against the light, Job 24.13. whose pernicious ways many
have followed, by reason of whom the way of truth, is evil spoken of; for thou
say, the light spoken of in the Scripture, will be found to be only common
and not saving. Here the nature and operation of the light is by thee denied,
and the Scripture perverted; and with the light that never changes, art thou
comprehended, judged, and condemned.

Christ says, John 8.12.
I am the light of the world, and he that follows me, shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have the light of life: And Christ's Ministers bear
testimony to the same light; and this is the condemnation, That light is come
into the world, and men loves darkness rather then light, because their deeds
are evil. For whatsoever is reproved is first made manifest by the light, and
whatsoever makes manifest, is light, Ephesians chap. 5. And his light turned
to, believed in, loved and obeyed, is sufficient to lead to salvation: And for
this purpose were Christ's Ministers sent forth as sheep among wolves, to turn
men from the darkness to the light that shined in the darkness; which their
dark understandings did not comprehend, before they heard Preachers that were
sent: and of this light I am a witness; and this is the Message I have to
declare, That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; in him was life,
and his life was the light of men: And this is the true light that lights
every man that comes into the world. The Law of God also is called a light,
Prove. 6 23. and the Commandment a Lamp, and the Word of God is a Light and a
Lanthorn, and his Covenant a light, as its written, Behold I will keep thee,
and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Christ Jesus is this
light, as it is written, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy Word; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel; and in vain is salvation hoped for from the
mountains and from the hills; for upon him that is mighty, is salvation laid,
who says, Look unto me, and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth.

Fulw. There is no means sufficient to salvation, but what Scripture asserts to
be so; but we do not find in Scripture, that the light is sufficient to
convince of sin, if improved; if it be, show it.

Answ. The grace of God which brings salvation, has appeared unto all men;
and this grace is sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9. And the Scripture declares there is
no other name given under Heaven, whereby men can be saved, 2 Cor. 4.6.
but by the name of Jesus, who says, I am the light; and God who commanded
light to shine out of darkness, bath also shined into our hearts, to give us
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.
And we have this treasure in Earthen Vessels, since it has pleased the Father
to reveal his Son in us, unto whom he has freely made known, what is the glory
of the Mystery that has been hid from ages and gene^ations, Christ in us the
hope of glory, 1 Col. 27.
in whom is life, and this life is our light, and this light is within; for
that which may be known of God, is manifest within: But this is a mystery to
you, whose wisdom is earthy, and your understandings darkened; and unto such is
our Gospel hid, whose minds the God of this world has blinded, among whom we
have had our conversation in times past. But our light is come, and the glory
of the Lord is risen, and arising, and shall cover the face of the earth, as
the waters cover the Sea. And now the sinners in Zion begin to tremble, and
fearfulness surprises the Hypocrites; the voice of Babylons merchants is heard
with a loud cry, Rev. 18.
Alas, alas! for none will buy our merchandise any longer. Come say they, let
us smite with the tongue, the hope of our gain is gone; you know that by this
craft we have got our wealth, and if these men's doctrine be received, not only
our craft is endangered; but our Church and Ordinances which all the world
worships in, will be denied, and our Tithes, Augmentations, Gifts, and Rewards
for Preaching, will be taken away. Report, and we will report it; let us call
them Deceivers and Seducers, for none dare contradict us: When we are in the
Pulpits, the Law of the Land is our protection, and by it we have liberty to
imprison them, if they disturb or interrupt us. And thus you Parish-Teachers
shelter your selves for a season; but your covering is too narrow, and your bed
will be found shorter then a man can stretch himself upon it. Your wickedness
is manifest, and reproved by the light; and by a foolish people are you
provoked to jealousy, whom God has chosen to confound the wisdom of the wise;
glory to his Name for ever, who has put an end to the first Covenant that made
not the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, and has
disannulled the Commandment going before, by reason of the weakness and
unprofitableness of it. This is our God, we have waited for him; he alone is
our Judge, King, and Lawgiver, to whom our soul is subject; for he ever
lives, and has an unchangable Priesthood, even him who is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him: Which we now witness, and deny, and
declare against the changable Priesthood that took Tithes, and denied Christ to
be come in the flesh.

Fulw. Tithes are lawful, because not forbidden; yea, they seem to be
encouraged by Christ himself; ye. Tithe Mint, etc. And ye do well therefore, we
do not ill to take them.

Answ. Read thy portion among them, to whom Christ spoke; and if thou do well,
may thou not be accepted? Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye
pay Tithe of Mint, Mat. 23.
Annise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: These you ought to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. But he did not say. You did well in so doing, but called them
fools and bl^nde: And so may I truly call him who says, this is an
encouragement to takes Tithes. If thou or any of thy Brethren take them on this
account, for shame never profess your selves to be Ministers of the Gospel; for
Christ gave no command or encouragement to the Twelve, Seventy, or to any of
his Disciples to take Tithes: And besides those to whom Christ then spoke, did
not believe in him, nor confess him to be the end of the first Covenant; in
which Tithes was commanded, and due to be paid to the Levitical Priesthood,
which were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason
of death: But this man has an unchangable Priesthood; for he ever lives to
make intercession for his, and is able to save to the uttermost, all them that
come to the Father by him, who is made a Priest for ever, not by the Law of a
carnal command, but by the power of an endless life; and of the things which
are spoken, Heb. 8.1.
both concerning Melchisedec, and the Levitical Priesthood, in that Declaration
to the Hebrews. This is the sum and substance, Jesus Christ who is set on the
right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, a Minister of the
Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not man.

For finding fault with the first Covenant, Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will make with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, a
new Covenant, not according to the old, which Covenant they brake. Even this is
the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days, says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their minds, and write them in their hearts; I
will be unto them a God, and they shall be my people.

And thus the Law and Priesthood being changed, as is clear by Scripture;
neither thou, nor thy Brethren have any right to take Tithes, either by the Law
of God, or example of Christ's Ministers; nor no encouragement from his words,
nor from that of Abraham, who freely gave Tithes to Melchisedec out of the
spoils, who blessed him when he returned from the Conquest; but ye receive the
tenth, not of the spoils only, but out of poor men's labors, and of them who
receive no blessing from you, and for whom you do no work.

In the time of the Law there were indeed many Priests, and the Priests lips
were to preserve the knowledge of the people; and then they ought to have
brought their Tithes into the storehouse. And these Priests had a necessity
daily to offer Sacrifice; first for their own sin, and then for the peoples:
But Christ being come, the Everlasting High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands as the figures and
shadows of these good things was: He has obtained a more excellent Ministry,
in as much as he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, established upon better
promises. And so the Priesthood being changed, Heb. 7.12.
there is made of necessity a change of the Law.

Fulw. I have two things to defend our taking of Tithes against his Verse; one
of which I am sure will hold. The first is, That we claim not Tithes by the Law
of God, as it were commanded there, but by the Law of the Land, whereby we have
as clear a title to our Tithes, as that Gentleman has to his Estate. The
second thing that I have to say, is, That you cannot prove by this Text, that
the only Law for Tithes in the Word of God is abolished.

Answ. Even upon this ground has thy generation, whose hearts are exercised
with coveteous practices in all ages, caused the Saints and Servants of God, of
whom the world was not worthy, to suffer. Some the spoiling of their goods,
Heb. 11. and others the trials of cruel mockings, yea, moreover Bonds and
Imprisonments, for bearing witness against their deceit. Here thou have
manifested thy self sufficiently to be out of Christ's doctrine and command, as
before in this Relation is expressed, to wit, Bound by man to Preach every
Lords day; and by the Law of man thou receivest thy reward. And so if thou have
a mind to sue any of those that believe in Christ at the Law, and take away
their Coat, thou may have their Cloak also; for they cannot resist thee,
being made subject to the higher power for Conscience sake: And if thou smite
me on the one Cheek, I must rather turn the other, then smite thee again. And
if any of those within the compass of thy quarter, who are witnesses of the
unchangable Priesthood, out of Conscience refuse to pay thee Tithes, thou have
this shelter to fly unto; to wit, the Law of the Land to sue them for their
own Corn or Hay, on which thou never bestowedst any labor.

But Friend, look thou first unto the Royal Law, and see if this be as thou
would be done by. If thou profess thy self to be a Minister of God, let the
Law of God be thy rule, and take counsel of him alone, and let his Word be thy
light; and here thou will come to see thy pleading for Tithes, to be only for
thy own carnal ends, and not for the glory of God: And if any one deny to pay
Tithes out of coveteousness, self ends, or a desire to save the Earth; I am
against that principle, both in thee and them; For the Earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof. And if any man have this worlds goods, and see his Brother
have need, and shut up his compassion against him; how dwells the love of God
in that man?

But that thou have as much right to Tithes, as the Gentleman thou make
mention of, has to his estate, it lies upon thee to prove by Scripture; Col.
2.14.
for that Law is changed, and the hand writing of Ordinances blotted out, by
which the Levitical Priesthood had right to their Tithes, who had no
inheritance in the Land of Canaan: But thou can not prove, that the Evidences
by which the Gentleman thou speak of, holds his estate, is disannulled or
made void.

And they who received Tithes, Deuteronomy. 14.29.
had also a commandment to pay Tithes: And if thou plead for their order, then
the strangers, the widows, and fatherless, have as much reason to plead for,
and right to receive Tithes, as thou or any of thy Brethren has.

And if thou plead for Melchisedecs order, then if thou meet any coming from
the slaughter of their enemies, after they have conquered, if thou have a
blessing for them, thou may take the Tenth of the spoils, if they be free to
give it thee; but if thou deny the figures, and own and confess Jesus Christ to
be come in the flesh, and thy self to be one of his Ministers, thou needst
neither plead for Tithes, nor take thought what to eat or drink, or what to put
on: Matthew. 6.
For after these things do the Heathen seek, who know not God.

Fulw. The Text says, he paid Tithes; and if it be granted me, That Tithes be
lawful to be paid in the time of the Gospel, I desire no more.

Answ. The Text does not say, that Tithes was paid in the time of the Gospel,
not to any of the Ministers of the Gospel; and if thou confess thy self to be
one, I demand of thee to what end thou desiredst it so earnestly. If thou did
but take Christ's counsel, to seek first the Kingdom of God and its
righteousness, all other things would be added unto thee; for God has
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, and be
content with food and raiment; and the hand writing of Ordinances for taking
Tithes is blotted out, and the Commandment going before disannulled; so that it
cannot be granted to be lawful for Christ's Ministers to take Tithes: But what
need thou be afraid, if thou be one of his? If God took care for Oxen in the
time of the Law, and for the Levitical Priests, who had no inheritance in the
promised Land? Matthew. 6.
Does he not also take care for his children in these days, seeing his mercy
endures for ever? O thou of little Faith! is not thy life more then meat, and
thy body more then raiment? If thou were but a Minister of Christ, and did
watch only for the soul, the dispute about these carnal things would be soon
at an end; but by the children of light, both your Call, Ministry, Maintenance,
and Ordinances are seen, which stands only in outside things, and carnal
washings, are seen and judged. What Scripture have you for sprinkling of
Infants, and so call it Baptism, or an Ordinance of God?

Fulw. I never saw an Infant only sprinkled.

Answ. Whether it be dipping or sprinkling, prove your Baptism of Infants by
Scripture to be a lawful command of Christ, or an Ordinance of God; else I
charge you to be usurpers of Authority: Many are unsatisfied about this
Ordiannce, as you call it; therefore it lies upon you to make full proof of
your Ministry and practice; and wherein your manner of Baptising Infants
differs in the ground of it from the Prelates, Bishops, and Papists, whose
doctrine and practice you pretend to deny: And when your deeds is brought to
the light to be proved, then it will appear, whether you or we have denied the
Popish Tenants, practice and principles.

Fulw. This is but to delude the people; you know you deny all Baptism with
water, and that you are as much against the Anabaptists as against us.

Answ. This is a false accusation; for I with thousands more in this Nation,
whose union and fellowship is in the light, do own and witness the Baptism
which the Scripture speaks of, which is by one Spirit into one Body; 1 Cor.
12.13.
but all Beggarly Elements, Bodily Exercises, Carnal Ordinances, and Outside
Services, Imitations, Likenesses, and Shadows of Heavenly things, we count as
dung and dross in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus, the Substance and End of all Figures, Types and Shadows, in whom we are
circumcised, with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the Body
of the sins of the flesh, buried with him in Baptism, and raised together with
him, through the Faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the
dead, and we are complete in him who is the head of all principalities and
powers, Col. 2.
who has made a show of them openly, triumphing over them; and so being dead
with Christ from the rudiments of the world, we are no more subject to its
Ordinances, knowing that they perish with the using, and do not make the Comers
thereunto perfect; although they have a show of wisdom, and a will worship in a
voluntary humility, by which the people are deluded; and if the Anabaptists, as
thou call them have an other Baptism then this, we are not subject unto it.
And whereas thou chargest me with deluding the people, its false, and more then
thou can prove: But I shall pass by it, having learned of him who when he was
reviled, reviled not again. And if thou have any Scripture for the baptising
Infants with water, show it for the peoples satisfaction.

Fulw. We are commanded to baptize all Nations; but Infants are a great part of
all Nations: Therefore we are commanded to baptize Infants.

Answ. Here is no mention made of water in this command; and besides, they to
whom it was given, were first sent forth to teach; as it is written, Go teach
all Nations; and they abode in the doctrine of Christ, and went forth as sheep
among Wolves; and into whatsoever City, Town, or Village they entered, they were
to inquire, who was worthy, and not what they might expect for a livelihood for
themselves, their Wives, and their Children: And some were sent forth not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; and these were sent first to teach and
preach repentance, and they were to repent before they were to be baptized. So
that it plainly manifests, That those who baptize Infan^s before they teach
them, or before they have repented, are transgressors of this command of
Christ. And I also question, where ever Frances Fulwood was sent either to
preach or baptize; for Christ's Ministers were not so beggarly, as to take hire
for their preaching twice every Lords day, or to contend or wrangle for a
competent maintenance in lieu of preaching, or for Tithes, calling them Christ's
wages; This manifests another spirit then was in the true Prophets, Apostles,
and Ministers of Christ, who called all to come freely, without money, and
without price, and gave freely as they had freely received. But as there were
false Prophets in Israel, even so there are also false Prophets in England,
whose hearts are exercised with covercous practices; and who have forsaken the
right way in these last days and perilous times; and many have followed their
pernicious ways, by reason of whom, the way of truth is evil spoken of. And
these men in the ears of deluded people, are crying up the Church and
Ordinances, Baptism, Sacrament, Preaching, Praying, and Singing, even as the
Jews did of old, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, when they
themselves were even destroyed for want of knowledge. But the Lord has raised
up a light in the hearts of Ten thousands of his Saints, whereby they are
comprehended, judged, and condemned, and turned away from them that have gotten
the words without the life; the form, but not the power; the shadow, and not
the substance; the sign, but not the seal. There was indeed a time of
ignorance, a day that was neither clear, nor dark; in the which we were led
aside by these dumb Idol-shepherds, till God commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, and shined into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge
of the glorious Gospel, Church, and Ordinances, in the face of Jesus Christ, of
whom we had heard, and on whom we had believed: And being justified by faith,
we have peace with God; Heb. 11.6.
and without faith its impossible to please God.

Fulw. Faith you say is required in Baptism, and that renders Infants capable
thereof; for though Faith be required, this does not render Infants incapable
of Baptism; for children were capable of Circumcision, and yet Circumcision was
a sign and seal of the Righteousness of Faith.

Answ. Their Circumcision made with hands was a sign, Romans 4.
but not a seal; for what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness, not when he was in Circumcision, but when he
was in uncircumcision, and he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised. The
Circumcision of the heart is the seal, Ezekiel. 20.12. and 10.
and the Circumcision with hands was the sign of that seal, as the Sabbath was
given to Israel for a sign of that Everlasting Sabbath, which is prepared for
the people of God. But now, neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails
any thing, but a new Creature; neither does the figure of Water Baptism, nor
Sprinkling of Infants which is no figure, seal, nor sign, avail any thing, 1
Pet 3.21.
but the keeping of the Commandments of God; for when the Gentiles that have
not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the
Law, are a Law unto themselves, Romans 2.
showing the effect of the Law written in their hearts, etc. Therefore if the
uncircumsion keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be
counted for Circumcision? for that is not Circumcision which is outward, Phil.
3.3.
but that of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter; for they only are
the Circumcision that worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the
flesh, and they only know the true Baptism, that are come to the answer of a
good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
who are buried with him in Baptism, Ephesians. 4.30.
and quickened together with him, and sealed up by the Spirit of promise, until
the day of redemption.

And if this be all the proof can be alleged for the baptising of Infants, by
the Teachers of the World, and their upholders, the Author of this Book, their
Foundation is on the Sand; for neither can they prove that Christ commanded to
baptize Infants with water; nor that it came in the room of circumcision, or
that it is either Sign or Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, unless we should
believe what they conceive or imagine for a truth, which few will do that have
their senses exercised by reason of use to discern between truth and error, the
power of godliness and the form, and have had experience of the deceit of such
as now are gone forth into the world, Matthew. 15.9.
who teach for doctrine the traditions of men.

Something also was spoken about singing David's Conditions in Rhyme and Meeter,
which I then opposed and denied the practice of, as they were by these Poets or
Fiddlers, Sternhold, Hopkins, and others, Translated into English Meeter, with
apt Notes to be sung in the Church and Chapels, so called, before their
Morning and Evening Prayers, and Formal Preaching; which while the people are
singing, they uncover their heads; as if the Scriptures were more holy and
honorable since these men perverted them, by putting them into Meeter, then
they were before, as they were spoken forth by him who was a holy man after
Gods own heart, inspired by the Holy Ghost.

But all your Songs will the Lord God of Sabbath suddenly turn into weeping and
howling, mourning and bitter lamentation: Although for a season these men of
the World, whose portion is in this life, may make merry over the witness, and
put far away the evil day; who lie upon their Beds of Ivory, and stretch
themselves on the Couches, that eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves
out of the midst of the stall, that chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent
to themselves instruments of Music like David, who sings lies in the Name of
the Lord, calling him to witness that they are not puffed in mind, when they are
so proud, heady, high-minded and scornful, that without disdain they can
scarcely one look upon another, and especially if any that witnesses David's
conditions come in among them, that cannot bow to their will worship, but stand
a witness against them. If they do not smite with the fist of wickedness, they
will be sure to smite with the tongue in scorn and derision, with the name of
Quaker, or some other invented, reproachful term, as their forefathers, who
said they were of Abraham, did with Christ and his Ministers, that declared
against their customs and traditions; away with such a fellow say they, It is
not fit he should live upon the earth, he brings in customs not lawful to be
observed. You that are guilty, apply this to your selves, and be you witnesses
against your selves, that you are the children of them that killed the
Prophets, crucified Christ, and persecuted his Ministers; though you may
profess their words, and cover your selves with their clothing, their life you
are strangers unto; and we are even become your enemies because we tell you the
truth. The last thing, as it is also in the Relation, was about the plain
language of Scripture, as thee or thou to a particular person.

Fulw. This is but the translation, and it was indifferent for the Translators
to have translated it you or thou, the original will suffer either.

Ans. Let that of God in thy conscience, and all who know the original, be
witnesses against thee for a lier; it had never been written nor translated to
the natural man's understanding; the original is pure, even the Word of God,
which was in the beginning before transgression was, and when the world was all
of one Language, before the dispersing of Babels builders: And this word is the
original, and not the confounded Tongues and Languages of the Nations of this
World, that are under the vail yet untaken away; and they that speak not
according to this Word, are such as rebel against the light; and those who are
in darkness, call the Hebrew and Greek the Original, and have erred from the
right way, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God; for the natural man
by his fallen wisdom, perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; and evil men
and seducers are grown worse and worse: Therefore its more reason that those
who are not come to a perfect understanding of the thing that was in the
beginning, should believe the Scripture as it is translated, rather then such
Dreamers and Diviners as set up their ancient Heathenish customs above the
Scripture; or the rule declared of in Scripture: Did not God himself use the
same expressions unto Adam, and Adam unto him again, Genesis 3. And also to
Abraham, and Abraham to him again, Genesis 18. And likewise to Moses, and Moses to
him again, Exodus 33. And also to Jeremiah, a true Prophet, and Jeremiah to him
again, Jere. 11. And to Jonah, and Jonah to him again, Jonah 4. And Christ
Jesus the end of the Prophets, to his Father used these expressions, John 17.
with a cloud of witnesses that might be instanced, if it were required, that
this is the pure Language to one particular person.

Fulw. Pray let me take occasion to mind you, when these expressions of thee
and thou have their use in custom; namely in two cases, First, In a way of
great familiarness, as to our very intimate, or those much below us. Secondly,
In way of great reverence and distance as to God, and to a Prince; but in
neither of these senses do you use them.

Answ. Can the Blackmoor change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may
those who are accustomed to lie, and to do evil be changed: Although we do not
use these words as a custom, yet we use them with reverence and godly fear,
both unto God, and to our Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors, in love and
familiarily, and not with respect to the persons of Princes, or any other that
seeks honor from men. And those that are our intimate friends in the truth, are
not offended at the expression, but they that are at a distance, and strangers
to the Covenant of Promise, and aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel cry out
against us, as being diverse in our Laws and Customs from all other people.
This is a custom not lawful to be observed say they, Come let us expel them out
of our coasts, 1 Cor. 11.16.
these contentious men, we have no such custom; these familiar expressions
cannot be borne in our Country: And therefore we deny to contend for such
indifferent things as these people make conscience of, who place Religion in
words; and even thus the brutish Pastor slights not only the words of truth
and soberness, but also the weightier matters of the Law which God has
required, Judgment, Mercy, and Humility; and by their lies and lightness have
they caused many to forsake the right way, and to follow their devised fables,
traditions, and heathenish customs, instead of true and sound Doctrine.

To the substance of what passed that day in the Dispute, thus much in answer
in brief, for the Reasons above mentioned. And where as the Relation says, one
went one way, and an other another way, as if nothing had been spoken but in
the Dispute. It may be taken notice of, that after Francis Fulwood and his
company was gone, our meeting continued a pretty season, and a door of
utterance was given me afterward, to speak to the people for their further
satisfaction in things that lay dark, as a difference between us in the
dispute, and something for their further information and edification; and so
our meeting was for the better, and not for the worse, and according to order
the Assembly was dismissed at that time.

Come down and sit in the dust, ye Merchants of Babylon, Isai. 3.3.
and all ye cunning Artificers and eloquent Orators that long have traded with
the Saints words, sit silent, and get you into darkness; for no more is your
persons to be had in admiration, because of advantage, Gird your selves with
Sackcloth, ye Ministers of the Letter, and hired Parish Teachers, that have
long used your tongues, and said, Ezekiel 34.
Thus faith the Lord, when the Lord never spoke unto you. Yet have sed your
selves with the fat, and clothed your selves with the wool; you have drunk of
the deep wate^s, and have fouled the residue with your seet, and the poor of
the flock have eaten that which ye have trodden down, and drunk that which ye
have fouled with your feet. Be ye ashamed, O ye Husbandmen, for the Seed is
even rotten under the clods; weep and howl ye pretended Vine-dressers, for the
Vineyard is overgrown with thorns, briars, and fruitless Trees; the day of
your visitation is come, the trumpet is sounded in Zion, and an alarm is heard
in the holy Mountain of the Lord. Let all the children of the West tremble, be
afraid ye sinners in Zion, and let fearfulness take hold of all deceitful
hypocrites; the Lords controversy is against the false Prophet, and
Idol-shepherd; the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; ^ch.
11.7.
his right arm shall be quite dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened; for the Lord is arising in his glorious Majesty, to shake terribly the
Earth, and to bring down the mighty from their seats, and to exalt that of low
degree. The time is come, that iniquity shall have an end, the Crown shall be
removed, and the Diadem taken away; the thrones of iniquity shall be cast down,
that the ancient of days may sit, to whom all judgment is committed; the
government must be upon his shoulders, that he alone may rule and reign, even
the Captain of our Salvation, and Prince of our Peace, who is King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, God over all, blessed for ever.

The flying Angel is gone forth with the Everlasting Gospel, ^ev. 14.
to preach unto all Kinreds, Tongues, and Languages of the Nations; and unto
you has the Call reached, that long has groaned under the dominion and
oppression of the Prince of the air; the hour comes, and now is, in the which
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and he that hears shall
live. Arise and shine, for you light is come, you that long have slept in the
dust of the earth, accept of deliverance: Come forth of the prison houses, show
your selves; salvation and strength is come, the Kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ; the knowledge of the glory of God is arising that shall
cover the face of the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea: Seek not ye the
living among the dead; for in vain is salvation hoped for or expected from the
Mountains, or from the Hills; it is laid upon him that is mighty, even able to
save to the uttermost, all those that come to the Father by him. Therefore
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, and heap not up unto your
selves Teachers, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, for many false
Prophets are gone forth into the world in these last days and perilous times:
But God who at sundry times, and diverse manners, spoke to the Fathers by his
servants, the true Prophets, has in these last days spoken by his Son, whom he
has appointed to be heir of all things, by whom also he made the world, whose
day Abraham saw and rejoiced; of whom he has said, Let all the Angels of God
worship him; And if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience, received a just recompense of reward, how can
ye escape, who neglect this great salvation. O that you knew in this your day
the things that belong unto your peace, which so long have been hid from your
eyes: A Prophet has God raised up unto you like unto Moses, and Pastors has
he sent forth according to his own heart; rising up early, and sitting down
late, saying, Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? He that has an ear, let him
hear; this is the day of Zions deliverance, the Lord is gathering in the
outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed from among the Gentiles; and out of the
heaps of rubbish is he raising up living stones to build unto himself a
Spiritual house; and other Foundations can no man lay then that which is
already laid, Jesus Christ, the Rock of Ages, the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, who is now come a light into the world; and whosoever believes on
him shall never be ashamed. This is our God, we have waited for him, who by his
own arm has brought Salvation and plenteous Redemption, who came and preached
peace to us, that sometimes were afar off, and has shined into our hearts by
the light of the glorious Gospel, and has made us nigh by the blood of the
Everlasting Covenant: To whom be glory and honor throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen.

Tho. Salthouse.

IF Ja. Godfreys Queries to Geo. Pit, which is added to this Relation, had
been all answered; then F. F. might have expected an answer to his
Counter-queries; but I shall leave them to him to whom they were directed, That
if he see any thing worth an answer, he may write to it, if he be free. And
seeing they are of so little weight, arising only from a busy mind, 1 Timothy 6.
I shall take the counsel of such a one as Paul the aged in this particular, to
shun profane and vain bablings, which genders strife, and tends to more
ungodliness, not doting about questions and strife of words, whereof comes
envies, evil furmising, and perverse disputing with men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the Faith, and destitute of the truth, who do suppose that
gain is godliness. But to me it is no advantage to fight with Beasts, if the
dead do not rise; neither would I be found as one beating the air, or boasting
in another man's line, or answering a fool in his folly: But if any ask a reason
of the hope that is in me, I am and shall be ready with meekness and fear, to
give an answer as God gives a mouth and wisdom, whose counsel and direction I
still wait for. And so unto him in weldoing I commit the keeping of my soul, as
unto a faithful Creator.

Tho. Salthouse.

FINIS.

