THE Penitent Christian, Fitted with Meditations and Prayers, FOR The Devout
Receiving OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper,

By LEWIS SOVTHCOMB, Rector of Rose-Ash in the County of DEVON.

For the Benefit of the People under his Charge, and Others.

St. John 6.56. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. London Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, 1682.

The Institution of his last Supper.
Mark. 14.22. And as they did eat. Jesus took bread and blessed and brake it
and gave to them and said, Take eat, this is my body.

And he took ye Cup and when he had given thank he gave it to them and they all
drank of it.

depiction of Last Supper

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS Lord Bishop of Exon.
My Lord,
IT were a piece of very great and intolerable vanity, (which would need a
bigger Apology than even the prefixing your Lordship's great Name to this mean
Discourse) to think, that I could say any thing more or better than what has
been already said on this Subject: particularly of late years by the Pious and
Learned Dr. Patrick, in his three several excellent Treatises of the Holy
Sacrament. I can therefore truly assure your Lordship, that I was very far
from any such persuasion or thought in the publishing these Sheets. The chief
reasons that I had to do it were two: First, that as this plain Discourse was
primarily designed only for the benefit and use of the people of my particular
Charge; so are there some things in it fitted for their peculiar needs and
tempers: with which no man can be so well acquainted as my self. The other
reason was, that though I could easily have recommended them to very many far
better Treatises of those holy Mysteries, yet I have observed, that most men
are much more ready to read attentively, and seriously consider any thing
published by a person whom they know, and with whom they daily converse, (and by
whose Neighborhood and Conversation, they have contracted a particular
Friendship and Familiarity with him, which begets a mutual confidence and
endearment) than they would, a better Discourse of one altogether unknown to
them. For their sakes therefore, chiefly have I adventured it abroad: but if it
may be useful to any other the meanest Soul, in the promoting a more frequent
and Devout use of this deplorably neglected Duty, I shall have my desire and
aim. And in prospect of that end and Design, shall be content to run the
adventure of the Censures of all men whatever. Against which, I shall be the
better guarded, if the many imperfections of this Discourse, (particularly it is
extraordinary plainness even to a fault, though in that, it is adjusted to the
Capacities of them to whom it was first delivered, and for whom it is
principally intended) may not hinder your Lordships vouchsafing me and it your
Blessing and your Patronage.

I cannot but remember your Lordships great earnestness at a late Visitation,
in pressing us of the Clergy, to recommend a more frequent and Universal
practice of this Duty to our People. And I thank God, this small evidence of my
obedience to that injunction, as it brought with it some considerable success
to my People, so I have great reason to believe, that (how mean soever it
really be) by putting it into their hands, it may be greater yet. However such
as it is, it is humbly laid at your Lordship's Feet, by

My Lord, Your Lordship's affectionate honourer, and faithfully devoted Servant
Lewis Southcomb.

To the People of his Charge, the Parishioners of Rose-Ash in the County of
Devon.
My Friends and Neighbors,
IT has long been my great wonder and trouble too, to see so many of you who
are constant frequenters of most other public Offices of the Church, and seem
to be great Lovers and Friends of it, to be so negligent and backward in your
coming to the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

I must confess, I have not altogether so much reason to complain of this now,
as I have had heretofore; but however, I am sure there is yet too much reason
for such a Complaint as this. That the necessity and meaning, the benefits and
advantages of this Christian Sacrifice, should be no better understood and
considered; and the Table of our dear Redeemer so unfrequented, deserves to be
bewailed with tears of blood: and there may be reason to fear, that the
omission of this holy duty is one crying Sin of the Nation.

The concernment that I ought to have for you, in that Relation which I bear to
you, makes me willing to hope, you will no longer be partakers in this too
common guilt. What other men's Reasons for this great Neglect may be, I know
not; But I have some cause to think, that the chief ground of your too seldom
approaching these holy Mysteries is this, that you are not satisfied of your
preparations, or not sufficiently persuaded, wheher your Examination and your
Faith, your Repentance, or your Charity are such as they ought to be, and so
tremble at the thoughts of unworthy receiving, and are resolved to let it
alone, and by so doing, at once, rob the Soul of it is greatest Privilege, and
highest Duty. If this be your Case, give me leave to enquire, If you were not
satisfied as to the Settlement of an Estate, would you not willingly ask
Counsel of the Lawyer? or if you were afraid of the State of your health, would
you not run for the Direction of the Physician? If so, let me beseech you, in
matter of doubt or Scruple or dissatisfaction of Conscience, if you think not
fit to advise with me, do it with some other Minister of Religion of greater
abilities; and not let your doubts and scruples keep you from this Solemn Act
Christian Worship, when you may so easily have them satisfied. The only Reasons
that I can think of, why you should not readily and willingly do so, are these,
Either first, you question our willingness to offer you satisfaction if you
come, and that we are loath to be troubled; Or Secondly, you question our
ability, and think you can judge of your own state, as well as a Guide of
Souls. Or, thirdly, you cannot conquer your own loathness and unwillingness and
fears so to do. Or fourthly, you are afraid we would despise you for so doing,
or make known the secrets of your Soul.

To all which therefore I shall briefly answer.

First, If you question my willingness to endeavor to remove, and satisfy
your doubts, or think me unwilling to hear you, and suppose me loath to be
troubled, I do as to this assure you, that you will find me (by God's
assistance) as ready to endeavor your satisfaction, as to take the Tenth of
your Possessions; and as we of the Ministry love our own eternal Interest, so
we cannot but be concerned for the future safety of your Souls, when our
neglects would endanger the security of our own.

But secondly, it may be it is our ability you doubt of, and think you can judge
of your own State as well as a Spiritual Guide. To this I answer, that though
it may be we are not all good Lawyers, or skilful Physicians, or cunning
managers of our affairs of this World, yet it is not to be supposed but that
such who have made it the chief business of their life, to know the mind and
will of God, should at least know somewhat more of it than they who have been
bred up in other Employments. Besides, though you should suppose us to
understand but little more of Divine things than your selves, yet consider, few
men can so well judge of their own state and case as another for them. But to
put an end to this question, I shall for my self declare and promise, that if
any of your scruples of Conscience in this Case (or any other) should be such,
as that you shall think my directions not to be safe and satisfactory, that
then, I will undertake, to procure you the opinion of some or one of the most
wise, and holy and learned persons of the Nation without giving you any further
trouble.

But thirdly, it may be you are willing to receive advice and directions in any
scruples of Conscience, but you cannot conquer your own loathness and
unwillingness, and secret fears, when you would make them known; If this be
your Case, I answer. Be pleased to consider, what you would do, if you were
really in as good earnest with Almighty God and your Souls, as you are with
respect to your Bodies and Estates; and why should it be thought more a shame
to be concerned for an immortal Soul than for a temporal Interest? when in
truth it will be esteemed far more creditable and prudent too by all good men?
and as for others, for ill men, no matter what they shall think of you for so
doing. Nay, as all wise and holy men will infallibly respect you much the more
for so doing, so also all the profane sort of the World, that outwardly
reproach and scoff at you for it, will inwardly and really reverence you the
more. Besides, sit down a little, and when you are next private and alone,
consider seriously what you would do on a sick Bed; is not the company of a
Guide of Souls welcome then? is not his advice thankfully received, and
joyfully pursued, and his prayers for you looked on as the greatest kindness he
can do for you? Remember it will come to this again: and why then should you
not be ready to advise with them sooner as well as later, when they are capable
of doing you more good, and you capable to perform more. And would you once but
thoroughly persuade your selves of this as a great truth, that a pious Person
would have a much greater value and esteem for you, for such a care of your
Souls, I am apt to think, that then you would as readily apply your selves to
them in such Cases, as you would be to make an advantageous bargain.

Consider further, Self-denial is a great Christian-Duty, (St. Matt. 16.24.)
and to do violence to our selves in conquering and subduing that unwillingness
that we have to open a doubt or scruple of Conscience to a Minister of
Religion, would be one great Exercise of that Duty.

Fourthly, possibly neither of these may be the reasons, why you will not ask
their Counsel or direction; but you are afraid that we would despise you for so
doing, or make known the secrets of your Soul. I answer, so far should we be
from this, that we should look upon them that would so do, to have a greater
care of, and concernment for their eternal safety, than the generality of the
World have; we should esteem you as those that are in good earnest with God and
their Souls; we should from thence have good ground of reason to believe, that
Religion is the Practice of such, not their Profession only. Nay, we should be
apt to hope, that our pains and labors have had some success with them, and
that they are truly willing to be in safety with Jesus at Jerusalem, when they
thus are desirous, that a Spiritual Guide should take them by the hand, and
assist and direct them in their Journies thither. And then as for your fear
that we will make known the Secrets of your Souls which you should at any time
discover to us, this is unreasonable; for as it is highly disingenuous, and
unjust so to do, so are we strictly bound by the Canons, (that is, by the
wholesome and excellent Laws of the Church, Can. 113.
which every one of us have engaged to observe and obey) to conceal all such
cases; and not at any time to reveal and make known to any person whatever, any
such trust committed to us.

Having thus taken off your great objection, I see nothing more that you can
justly plead in excuse for your absenting your Selves, but what may possibly be
spoken to in the following book.

If you shall not here mee^ with helps sufficient to direct you, in the
particulars of Self-Examination, or in your Meditations when you are at the
holy Table, that want will be abundantly supplied by another book, I mean, The
whol^ Duty of Man; a book, which a^ you tender the welfare of you^ Souls, I
desire no one famil^ may be without.

Two sorts of persons the^ are among you, which I would desire chiefly to read
and consider this discourse; First, tho^^ who wholly absent themselves:
Secondly, those who though they do not wholly neglect this Duty; yet come to it
very seldom. As for them that wholly absent themselves, my business in these
Papers, is to invite them earnestly to fit and prepare their Soul to come and
take the very next opportunities that shall be given them, whatsoever pain or
selfdenial it shall cost them, to put on the Wedding Garment, lest all
opportunities may shortly be at an end and over, and they be found in the day
of Judgment, to have lived and dyed in the guilt of this dangerous neglect. As
for them who sometimes come, but very rarely, my earnest desire of them is, to
fit and prepare the Sou^ to come more frequently, an^ that they may be so
persevering in this frequency, tha^ whenever their Lord shall come, he may come
and find the^ so doing: At least, that he man come, and find in them a So^^
habitually disposed for it, an^ not long before to have bee^ so doing.

That the good God of h^^ infinite mercy may open a your Eyes, to see, and with
serious heart consider, the necessity and advantages of a fr^quent and devout
use of th^^^ holy Mysteries, is the pray^^ of

Your Friend and Servant in our Savior. Lewis Southcomb.

OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
CHAP. I.
THE first great Infelicity that befell the World, was the fall of Adam, by
which he lost Paradise, and he and his Posterity became incapable of being
saved by the terms of the first Covenant. But the greatest Blessing that was
ever vouchsafed to the Sons of Men, was the coming of our Savior, to restore
us the hopeful possibilities of Salvation; to establish a new Covenant, between
God and us, and to seal it by his Blood.

As in our Baptisin we were received into this Covenant of Grace and Mercy, so
have we since stained and polluted these white Robes by unholyness and
disobedience; and broken our part of the Covenant. But now that we should
refuse, when we are called and invited, to come and renew it in the Holy
Sacrament, that we should refuse to come with the rest o^ our Brethren, and
commemorate the dying Love of this our Lord, is equally strange and deplorable.

I shall therefore upon this consideration, and because the great Festival set
apart in memory of our Savior's Resurrection from the Grave, is at hand, offe^
you some Meditations, touching that Holy and Comfortable, that Divine an^
Heavenly action; that so we may co^^ to our Lord, who has already invited u^
willingly and cheerfully; faithfully and charitably; humbly and penitently;
with Lo^^ and Devotion; and be found by him (...) have that Wedding Garment on,
wh^^ may be accepted by him now, and in (...) day of Judgment.

Though there are some, and th^^ Dr. Hammond, and Gomar. Camero. Synop.
great Men, that supp^^ the words of the Text (...) not directly and prope^^^
spoken of the Holy Sa^^^ment, because it was not then institut^^^ yet because
Pro Carne Corpus habet Syrus, quae vox and in Euchar, institutione legitur, ad
quam hic tanta quaedam allusio est Grot. in v. 53.
others doubt not but there is a respect had to it, being shortly after to be
instituted; and there are Luc. Brugensis Mal. citant Synop.
some that say expressly, that it is to be understood and meant of the
Sacramental eating; and a Dr. Sherlock of Religious Assemblies.
great and excellent persons says, he does not in the least doubt of it. I
shall not therefore question to understand and take the words in the same sense
also.

From which I might offer this Doctrine,

That worthily, and with a due preparation, to eat the Flesh, and drink the
Blood of our Savior, shall, by placing him in our heart, and us in his, unite
us more closely to him; and is an happy earnest of Eternal Salvation.

For the Proof and Confirmation of which, I might instance, in St. Jo.
6.54.57.58. 1 Cor. 10.16.17. and many other places of Holy Scripture. But to
make the Text more useful to our present designs, I shall from it speak to 4
things.

First, I shall briefly show you, that this is a necessary holy and Christian
Duty to be frequently performed by us, and the neglect of it infinitely
dangerous. Secondly, I shall consider to what end it was instituted or
appointed by our Blessed Savior. Thirdly, Show how we are to come prepared to
partake of these holy Mysteries. Fourthly and Lastly, insist upon 4 or 5
Considerations after Receiving.
First, that this is a necessary, holy and Christian Duty, to be frequently
performed, and the neglect dangerous.

For whatever we have an express Command of our Savior, unquestionably it
requires our obedience, and is ou^ indispensable duty, to be obeyed by un^^
readily and willingly, with Sincerity and Constancy; And this was one of the
las^ injunctions which our dear Redeemer, a little before his Death was pleased
to leave with us. Lu. 22.19. -- This do i^ remembrance of me. And that we might
have the more full assurance of the truth of it, the blessed Apostle, when he
speak^^ of this institution and command of ou^ Savior, says, I have received
of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. -- I
have (says he) received of the Lord, as if he had said, though I were not my
self present, when our Lord ordained and appointed this Memorial of his death
and suffering, by which we that name his Name, are to show forth his death till
he come; yet I do assure you, Grot.
that I received it (that is, either by the other Apostles, who were both Ear
and Eyewitnesses, or by immediate Revelation from Heaven) from our Savior,
that the very same Night in which he was betrayed, soon after to be buffeted,
reviled, scourged, spit on, crucified for our Salvation, that he instituted
this holy Feast, to be continued to the end of the World.

But then as this is a necessary and unquestionable Duty, so is it to be
performed not only once in the whole Course of our Lives, once in this our
present State and no more; or once at the hour of Death, as some of us are too
apt to suppose, and as willing to show by their practice; but a holy and
heavenly Duty to be performed more frequently. And for a Confirmation of this,
let us see. First, what the holy Scriptures say to the frequency of this
action. Secondly, what was the Practice and the Custom of the first Worthies
of the Christian Church, shortly after our Savior's time. Thirdly, Lay down
some Reasons for our frequent attendance on those holy Mysteries.

And if from all these we find cause for our often Communicating at the Lord's
Table; if from Scripture, from the practice of the first and purest ages of the
Church of Christ, and from Reason too; then I hope that each soul present will
lay this home to his own heart, and take it into his most serious
consideration, and then ever for the time to come, endeavor to make up his
former too great neglects by his future frequency in this holy Duty.

First, let us see what those Scripture are, that either countenance or imply
the frequent performance of this holy action; for this let us consider Act.
2.42. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine in breaking of bread
and prayers. We read Act. 2.7. that on the first day of the Week, they usually
came together to break Bread. So also it is said 1 Cor. 11.25. Do this as often
as ye shall drink it is remembrance of me. The word [stedfastly] as is observed
by a D^^ P. Christian Sacrifice.
Pious and Learned Person, denotes the frequency of the action, and the words
[as often] may imply it also.

Oh here then before we pass any further, let us six our thoughts and consider,
if those who first named the Name of Christ, continued in it so steadfastly, if
at least on the first day of the week, out of their flaming Love and Affection
to their dear Lord and Master, they remembered his Death with praise and
thanksgivings; how ill Copiers out of so holy and blessed an Example are some
of us? They were it seems so ready to commemorate their dying Lord, so full of
Zeal, so willing and forward, to go forth to meet him at his Table; that they
scarce ever put off their Wedding Garment, but their whole lives were a
constant and habitual preparation for this holy Feast. Whereas in this
declining Age of the Gospel, in which holiness so visibly decays, how loath
are we to approach him? how uneasy when we are there? how joyful when we are
gone? So unwilling, that alas! we must be even haled and dragged to it. And it
may be feared, that some of us could even wish it over, and at an end already.

Why, what is the Reason of this unwillingness, this backwardness, this
loathness to go to meet the Lord of life in the most holy and sweet and
pleasant Duty in the World? Is there so much charge, or difficulty in it; or is
it so hard to be performed? O what is there in this holy Action, that any Soul
that professes the Religion of the ever Blessed Jesus should have such an
aversness to it? Say, are there any expensive chargeable Sacrifices to be
offered? any Firstlings of our Flocks to be slain? No, why what is then the
Cause, that we should not be as ready and forward, and, (when any opportunities
are offered us to remember the death of our Great Master in this holy Mystery)
as constant too, as the Sun is to run his race? Alas! our great Reason is, That
the Wedding Garment of Religion and Holiness, Repentance and Reformation of our
Lives, Charity and Devotion does not please us; We are loath to put it on, it
sits uneasy about us: we are hugely unwilling to put off the old spotted
raiment of Sin and Iniquity, of Wrath and Malice, and Irreligion. We find no
taste, no relish, in the Sweets and Delicacies of Piety and Virtue.

We are willing enough doubtless to meet our Lord, that is, if we thought he
would receive and welcome us, with our sins about us, and with our old
affections to them; then would we continue as steadfastly in breaking of bread
and prayers, as ever the first Worthies did, Id. ibid. p. 9.
(though it were twice a day, as is with great reason supposed they did of
old.) Were those arms that were once stretched upon the Cross, and still are
open to receive the true-penitent, were they but as open too, to receive the
habitually disobedient and impenitent, then would we frequent the Lord's Table.

But does not the Wedding Garment of Faith and Repentance and Charity, and
Devotion and the like, does not this please us? Give me leave to ask, (as the
Apostle did in another case) unto what then were ye Baptized? have ye put on
Christ for this? And was it for this that we were early dedicated to him in
Baptism, and received into the Covenant of Grace and Mercy; that when we with
the Disciples of old, should have continued steadfastly to renew this Covenant
in the holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and to own what was then done for
us, when we could do nothing for our selves, and come and declare our
willingness to stand to those Engagements then made for us; to come and in
person to show our readiness and our willingness to follow him in the ways of
his Commands and holy Religion; that then we should refuse it? or if we do not
refuse it, yet come so seldom, as if we desired to be excused from it. Whither,
Oh whither will our Indevotion, our Lukewarmness, our Inconsideration carry us!
Is this to act as they who now sit at Peace and rest in the Mansions of Glory,
have done before us? And has not our Lord shed as much blood for us as for
them? And are not our hopes and Promises and Expectations the same which they
had? why then, Cur non possumus quod isti and istae? as the pious Father said
of old. Why cannot we (at least in far better measures than now) do as they
have done before us? whence is it then that our Practice is gone so far off
from their frequency in this Heavenly action, their zeal and their fervor?

Certainly, this must of necessity proceed from a great and most deplorable
want of Love to our Religion, or of Zeal for our Savior, from a stupid
unconcernment for a joyful Resurrection: or (as was before hinted) because we
find no taste or relish in this heavenly food, this sood of Angels, or from
intolerable inconsideration. Hence, O hence is it in a great measure, that our
Lives are so unholy, our Actions so uncharitable and unchristian, our thoughts
so impure and profane and inconsiderate, and the whole frame of our Live so
disordered and discomposed; and as this chiefly for want of a more frequent and
devout use of these holy Mysteries.

Whence (says one) came the Sanctity and Holiness of the first Christians?
Whence came their strict observation of the Divine Commandments? whence was it
that they persevered in holy Actions with a comfortable hope and unweary
diligence? from whence came their despising the World, their universal Charity?
whence came these and many other Excellencies, but from a constant Devotion and
frequent Communion? They who every day represented the Death of Christ, every
day were ready to dye for Christ.

We look upon that body to be sickly, distempered and diseased, and dangerously
ill, that allways loathes it is wholesome food, and has no appetite to that which
would be its only, or it is best nourishment. Thus, O thus! it is in the Case of
the Soul; how sickly and distempered, how diseased and disordered must that
Soul needs be, that loathes it is most wholesome food, the food of Angels? this
nourishment of the holy Sacrament; which if duly and devoutly taken, would so
nourish it up to Salvation as to make it more healthful and holy, more cheerful
and religious, more just and upright, more pure and devout and Angelical;
'Twould make it much more ready for the performance of any other Duty, more
full of zeal and fervor, more constant and unwearied in all Religious actions.
In short, 'twould make it more ready for Death and Immortality.

The holy Sacrament is called by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing,
and surely if we do not thirst after this Cup of Blessing, Blessing may be far
from us: Neither is it imaginable, That that man should love Heaven and his
Soul, or felicity or his Lord, that desires not frequently to bath in that
wholesome stream, the blood of that immaculate Lamb of God that takes away the
Sins of the World.

Having thus seen what these texts of Scripture are that imply a frequency of
Communicating, we shall briefly consider the second thing.

Secondly, let us see what was the custom and the practice of the first
Worthies of the Christian Church shortly after our Savior's time; and if in a
few Instances we find them frequently meeting and representing the death of
their and our Common Lord and Master, Let us (remembering he has done and
suffered as much for us as he had done for them) ever hereafter fit the Soul to
take all opportunities we are able, to do in some degree as they have done
before us.

The first Instance I shall produce, shall be of a great and holy man, St. Cypr.
a Bishop of the Church of Christ; who lived above two hundred and fifty years
after our Savior Christ; he tells us, that the Custom of receiving it daily
was observed in his days.

Another who lived above three hundred years from our Savior, St. Ambro.
says, Receive that every day, which may profit thee every day. And no less
than a whole Council or Assembly of Devout men at Antioch, (the place where the
Disciples were first called Christians, as we are told Act. 11.26. though not
at the same time) decreed some ages since our Savior's time, that those should
be excommunicated, cast out of the Church, who came to other holy offices and
divine Services, but went away without receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

And, (to mention no more) a Reverend Father of the Church, St. Jerome.
who lived about four hundred years from Christ's time, says the practice of
daily receiving was continued to his time. Let us then with eyes shut and arms
folded, when we are next alone and retired from the World, in a serious thought
consider, Did those of old who owned the same crucified Jesus with our selves,
Did they as constantly do this in remembrance of him, as they did publicly
meet to pray together or hear the Word? And is it come from once a day and once
a week, to once a year, to once in our whole lives? Is it come to this? Is this
all the sense and apprehension we have of the necessity and advantages of this
duty? Is this the obedience we show to an Express Command of our Savior;
either wholly to disobey it, or perform as seldom as possible we can? Is this
the imitation of the practice of the first ages of Christianity? Is this all
the reckoning and account we make of that inestimable privilege of being in
Covenant with God? or of being called and invited to come and renew it again
when we have broken our terms, and to have it signed and sealed to us again?
Was it for this, O blessed Jesu! that thou have done and suffered so much for
our sakes? Was it for this that thou were content for us to submit to an Agony
and bloody sweat, to the Cross and Passion, to a Death and Burial? And is it
for this that we have so long owned thee for our Lord and our Redeemer, a
tender and merciful Savior? that some of us should stupidly live in an
habitual neglect of doing this in remembrance of thee?

And have we no greater sense of, and concernment for the last words of a dying
Savior? shall the expiring breath of a dear Redeemer poured out for our
eternal Interest, be lost and in vain to any of us that call him so? O how much
Reason have we to say of such, Father forgive them, (or rather, father open
their eyes) for they know not what they do. Bishop Taylor's life of Christ.


But thus (as is observed by an excellent Prelate now with God) it has fared
with this Sacrament as with other Actions of Religion which have descended from
Flames, (the Flames of the Devotion of the first ages) to still Fires, from
Fires, to Sparks, from Sparks to Embers from Embers to Smoke, from Smoke to
Nothing.

But in the Name of God let me enquire, are we willing to make any public,
thankful, joyful, acknowledgments at all of the love of our crucified Jesus,
and the great things he has done and undergone for the redemption of us and of
our Children after us? if not, we are monsters of Ingratitude and Impiety. If
we are at all willing so to do, why shall we not fit our soul to take all
possible opportunities, while we are yet here below, and at this distance from
him, to do this in remembrance of him?

How can we think that our other Devotions shall be prevalent with, or
acceptable to the Holy God without the Intercession of our Savior? and the
merit of his sufferings? and yet this is the way he has appointed to give our
prayers an Interest in his Sacrifice. Can we reasonably suppose, that indeed
any Duties whatever and the performance of them shall be accepted, when this
great and solemn act of Religious worship shall be refused, omitted and
neglected?

O let us in our next retirements, when we are withdrawn from the noise and
tumult, and business and thoughts of the world, deeply think, should we not
have reason to be afraid, that no Petitions of ours, no Devotions, no works of
Mercy, Piety, or Charity, no Fastings or Alms, no hearings or readings, shall
be accepted without this part of our Christian Worship; Would it not further be
a sad and dismal consideration, to remember in the hour of Death or day of
Judgment, that these and many other holy Actions shall fall to the ground,
being vain and lost, only for our wilful neglect of this holy Sacrament.

Again in the same retirement from the World, and in your next meditations,
consider, what could you think of a rich and very wealthy person, that never in
all his life should be persuaded to bestow so much as the worth of a farthing
to the poor and needy? Or, what thoughts should we have of him, who never in
the whole course of his life, should offer up a prayer to God, either in
public or in secret? The same may we think of him that would never accept of
an Invitation to fit and trim the Soul, to come, and with the rest of his
Christian Brethren to partake of these holy Mysteries: for they did but disobey
a plain Command of our Savior's; the one only disobeyed the command of feeding
the hungry, and clothing the naked, the other only refused obedience to the
Command of praying without ceasing; So the wilful absenter from the holy
Supper of the Lord, only dissobeys the Command of Do this. Nay, I look upon
this to be a greater piece of disobedience, because in this there is an
obligation of love, Love infinite and unspeakable, an obligation of thanks and
gratitude to engage us. Do this in remembrance of me the Lord that bought you,
the Lord that paid down the dear price of his blood and Wounds, sweat and
groans, pains and death for you.

Give me leave to say further, I shall never, I can never truly believe, you
have any tolerable care of your souls, till I see this Holy Sacrament more
frequented; till I see some evidence of your greater love to these holy
Mysteries. Not however, as if I would persuade, or give encouragement by this,
to wicked men while they continue such, to approach this heavenly feast. But
for those who resolve heartily by divine Grace to reform their lives, and
(amidst the disadvantages of this life) are fully purposed, to Devote
themselves in sincerity, though not in perfection, to the Laws of our holy
Religion; whatever else you do, yet I shall never, I can never suppose you have
any tolerable Love or Zeal for our Dear Redeemer, while you habitually turn
your back on his Holy Table. Nor can your constant attendance at the house of
Prayer; your Zeal and Devotion there, your justice and integrity in dealing,
your sobriety and purity of life, be sufficient to persuade me to think you
have any truly considerable value for immortality, or that you make any
tolerable provisions for a happy Resurrection, while you wilfully deny your
selves the privilege of feasting on the Body and Blood of our common Lord, by
which new life and Grace is conveyed to us.

O how can I believe, you truly and earnestly repent of your Iniquities, and
desire a pardon of your Sins, when you will not be at the pains to prepare your
selves to come and beg it, and to have it sealed to you? Or how can I think,
that you desire to be firmly united to Christ our head, or to be united to each
other, when you refuse to come and strengthen the Union?

Surely, one might be apt to think we have lost all sense and remembrance of
the Love of God in sending his Son, and of the Son in coming to lay down his
life for us, by this one intolerable neglect of ours. How can we go to God in
our Prayers, and plead to him the meritorious Death and suffering of our
Savior, and yet refuse to show forth the Lord's Death till he come? and wholly
slight, or very seldom attend on this highest Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving? How long shall we call the Holy Jesus Lord, and not do what he
says? How long shall we thus refuse to keep the memorial of dying Love, and
obey a Command pronounced by his expiring breath?

Little, O little do you consider how great a reproach to Christianity it self,
and how dangerous to your invaluable Souls, the constant omission of this one
excellent part of Christian Worship is.

Consider, we do all believe, that Christ dyed for Sinners, and we have had the
happiness to have been baptized into this belief; we do profess to believe,
that there is no other name under Heaven by which we must be saved. We all hope
that his merits shall be applied to us, that so we may for ever partake of
these benefits purchased for us; and yet we are so imprudent, as that we will
not have them applied in such ways, as he himself has appointed, in the
performance of those Conditions, and the use of those means which he himself
has ordained to that end and purpose.

And (to use the words of a learned person) I see no reason why men may not as
well hope to be saved without Holiness by Christ, Dr. Sherlock of Religious
Assemblies.
as well as without eating his flesh, and drinking his blood in the Sacrament.
For Holiness will not save us without the merits of Christ, and I know not how
we should come by the merit of Christ, but only in such ways of dispensing,
conveying and applying them as he himself has appointed; and he has appointed
no other ordinary way but this Mysterious Supper.

Having seen the Custom and practice of the first Worthies of the Christian
Church in the purest ages; I shall upon the whole offer this further
consideration to common reason, Whether do we now suppose is most safe and
Holy, to imitate as far as we are able, this pious practice of theirs of a very
frequent communicating, (remembering also, that those Devout Souls who lived so
near the time of our Savior, better knew his mind in such cases, than we, at
this distance) or, very rarely to address our selves to this Solemn Act of
Christian worship? In which are we more likely to please God and our Savior,
to do his will, and provide for a joyful Resurrection?

Thirdly, Let us see and consider a few Reasons for the frequency of
communicating.

The first is this; That as our breaches of our part of the Covenant are too
frequent; so, seeing God is willing that yet we should renew this Covenant
again, and Seal it at the Lord's Table; how infinitely willing should we then
be of so doing? The Covenant which we entered into with God in our Baptism, is
this, Almighty God is pleased on his part to promise Pardon of Sin, Grace and
Glory, if we perform the Conditions of Faith and Repentance, and sincere,
(though not perfect) Obedience. Here then let us fix our foot and consider, how
frequently, how miserably, have we broken our part, of this Covenant of Grace!
and is it not infinite mercy, tenderness and compassion, that God is still
content and willing that we should come and renew this gracious Covenant? Shall
not we be ready and desirous to renew it for our own safety, our eternal
security; shall not we be willing and earnest so to do, when our God is
willing; and when he calls and invites us to it? shall we not be ready and
willing to renew it often, when the great God often calls and invites us to it?
Oh how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation!

A second Reason for our frequent approaching this holy Table, is, That this is
a Holy Duty which if duly and devoutly performed, conveys great comforts,
benefits, and blessings to us. Thus, Oh how would it confirm, strengthen and
increase our Faith? how would it promote and heighten our Love to our Lord and
Master Jesus, and make it more flaming and ardent, more like the Zeal and
Affection of the Cherubims and Seraphims?

How would it promote and encourage Religion and a Vniver sally Holy Life? How
would it it promote our Peace, amd Charity and Love and mutual Endearments to
each other, as we are traveling together over this Wilderness to the Land of
Canaan, as we are passing along together over this World on in our journey to
Jesus and Jerusalem.

How would it strengthen and confirm our Hopes? How would it make our
Repentance more serious, more deep, and more effectual, Our holy Resolutions
more fixed and steadfast?

How would it help us to subdue, and get the victory over our Iniquities, over
our bosom darling Sin, whether it were the Sin of our Calling, or the Sin of
our Company, or the Sin of our Constitution? How would it encourage us in all
that is good, in all that is holy, in all that is just, and all that is upright,
and bring us to a better knowledge of our own State and condition of Soul? How
would it bring us to a nearer and more intimate acquaintance with the Holy
Jesus, and with our selves also? What aids and assistances of the Grace and
Spirit of God should we receive with it? These and many more than these are the
blessings, and benefits, and advantages, which a frequent and devout
communicating would convey to us. Say now, are not these great and inestimable
blessings? Are not these desirable? Are they not truly amiable and lovely? and
to be earnestly wished for by all those whose hopes and expectations are in
another World and not in this?

What, (my Beloved,) is it not an unvaluable blessing to have our Faith
increased? and yet by the due and constant participation of these Holy
Mysteries, to how divine a pitch, and height, would it be raised? Is it
nothing to have our hope confirmed? and yet by our frequent attendance on this
holy Table, how full and lively, how raised and cheerful would it be? how much
a better ground and foundation should we have for it?

Is it nothing to have our Zeal, and Love to our crucified Lord, more inflamed
and heightened? and yet oh how would the due frequentation of this Solemn act of
Religious worship, exalt and raise and carry-up our Souls to him, and make them
mount up upon the wings of Devotion, almost high enough to reach the pitch of
Angels and freer Spirits? Is it nothing, to have our mutual Charity, and Unity,
For bearance and Forgiveness of one another promoted, as we are going on
together to the Grave and Immortality? why, nothing will so effectually do
this, as the frequent meeting our Lord at this Heavenly Feast.

Is it not a blessed advantage and benefit to have our Reformation made more
sincere, effectual and persevering? and yet in the devout and frequent use of
those holy Mysteries, we should find more reasons and arguments and
encouragements for it than we could before imagine. We should find, that in the
ways of Religion and Holiness and Virtue, we can do more by Divine assistance,
than before we thought we could; and that in our moving toward the degrees of
perfection, we can go farther than before we supposed we were able.

Is it not a blessing to have a greater power and ability and strength to
subdue a temptation, and to beat down and conquer a stubborn and rebellious Sin
Is it not a blessing to come to a more intimate and near acquaintance with our
Souls, and how their accounts stand with reference to a joyful Resurrection and
happy Eternity?

Is it not a blessing to come at last (...) be delighted with, and encouraged
it and taste the sweets and delicacies, the lightsomness and cheerfulness of
heart that accompany a truly Religious Life If these are blessings truly
desirable and amiable, why, never shall we come to have them so effectually
conveyed to us as by our frequent and devout attendance on this Christian
Sacrifice. And assure your selves, that upon your own Experience, you will find
it an undeniable truth, that there is not one of these Benefits, Blessings and
Advantages, but would (if we are not wanting to our selves) be dispensed to us.
Well then, seeing our hopes and promises, are not so much here below, and we
daily look when we shall be received to our unknown Society, and unknown
Condition, methinks these should be irresistible reasons for a frequent and
holy use of these Divine Mysteries.

Thirdly, Another reason is, that our frequent presenting our selves at the
Table of the Lord, would be a great Sign of our Love to Religion and Virtue. It
would argue our love to Religion, as this is one great and solemn part of it,
and as it is an Exercise of many Christian Graces and Virtues. It would argue
our deep apprehension and consideration of another World. 'Twould be an
evidence of our desires to make seasonable a provision for Immortality, and of
our endeavors to be such as our Lord would have us. 'Twould be one great
Argument that we desired to be employed and bear a part in Religious actions,
with the rest of our Christian brethren, whenever we have opportunities, that
we are earnestly willing to bear a part with those holy Souls here below, among
whom we would stand in the day of Judgment. 'Twould evidence that our Faith is
lively, vital and obedient, that our Charity is truly Christian, that Religion
is our practice, not our profession only. 'Twould argue, that we are willing to
stand to the engagements of our Baptism, to our utmost; that we resolve
manfully to Fight under the Banner of our Jesus, against Sin, the World, and
Devil, That we are willing to submit our selves to the Gospel, and to take on
us Christ's easy yoke and light burden. Nay, a frequent and devout
communicating would be a great Sign of our Devotion and frequency in, and love
to all other Religious actions.

And indeed how sad and deplorable an evidence, does the wilful refuser give of
his profaneness, his little love to Religion, and of his inconsideration?
whereas I say, a due and frequent performance of this holy duty, would argue
the contrary; would be a good Testimony of our desires to please God, and draw
near to him; that we are wearied and laden with our iniquities, when we thus
bring them to Jesus to be cast out, and when we come to take new Resolutions
against them.

O may these considerations woo and win us over, persuade invite and encourage
us to meet the holy Bridegroom of our Souls, who has appointed when and where
to meet us! He has given the invitation, he has made the appointment, and shall
not we go forth to meet him? why shall we so imprudently any longer refuse to
give him those demonstrations of our Love to him and his Religion?

Rather let us say, this day with one heart, and one voice, and one consent, in
the words of holy David, Ps. 40.7.8. Lo I come to do thy will O God. I come O
Jesu to renew that Covenant with thee, which (and it is a sad truth) I have so
miserably broken. I bless thee for the Call, and I come quickly to celebrate
the memory of thy dying-Love. I come to own that I am a member (though
unworthy) of thy Spouse the Church, and come with the rest of my Brethren, to
beg a portion and an Interest in thy meritorious death and sufferings. I thank
thee eternally for the Invitation, and I come with the rest of that body of
which thou art the head, to wash in that Fountain that was opened for sin and
for uncleanness, and would not be found out of the number of those holy Souls
that are devoutly going to meet thee, for the whole World, in the day of
Rewards and Punishments. Thou have done as much for me as for any one of them;
with them therefore I thankfully come to do thy Will, to do this in remembrance
of thee.

O that thus we would be winn'd and wooed to this holy action, by arguments of
Love to Religion, by arguments of Zeal and Devotion, fervor, desire, gratitude
and affection! and let us not be hall'd and dragged to it, only by the
apprehensions of Terrors and Horrors, Hell and Damnation.

And may we yet grow and still increase in our Love to this holy Sacrament, so
much and so long, till we come to desire it, and wish and long for it! Which a
great Prelate of our own, Bishop Tailor Preface to holy Living.
and another pious person make (to use their own words) one of their twelve
signs of Grace, Drexel.
and Predestination to Eternal life.

May our love of it then so increase, till we come to be able to think it too
long that our Lord tarries; too long till the opportunities of Supping with him
come about; too long before the time come when we may meet him once more in his
own House at his own Table; and to be able, with a full and teeming heart, to
say of his coming to us in that Sacrament, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, thou
have long tarried from that Soul that loves thee, from that Soul that thou
know loves thee. St. Jo. 21.15.

Fourthly, the 4th and last Reason that I shall mention is, that a frequent and
devout Communicating, would be an undeniable argument of our flaming affection
to and Love of Jesus.

How can it be reasonably supposed we should have any tolerable affection for
that man from whose company we always desired to be excused? from whom we run
when he calls and invites us? upon whom we turn our backs when he sends to us
to come and Sup with him? Can we truly call him our Familiar acquaintance or
intimate friend, with whom we never care to be? This, O this is the Case
between our Master Jesus and some of us that call him so.

But if we call him Master, for shame let us no more refuse to apply our selves
to this highest and chiefest piece of Service; If we call him Lord, let us do
what he says, and he has said, -- do this. If we call him Friend, (the Worlds
best Friend) let us make have, and be glad to go forth to meet him. Let us be
joyful, that he is willing once more before we dye, to come to us and to invite
us to come to him. Let us not think it much to lay aside our old spotted
Garments when we are going to meet our Friend, the World's best Friend Jesus.
Let us not think it much to put on our best Array, our Wedding Garment when we
are hastening to go forth to meet our Friend, the World's best Friend Jesus.

If we call him the Captain of our Salvation, then let us go and Solemnly
declare and own our selves his Soldiers, and not shrink and stay behind, when
the rest of his great Army with Banners ( Cant. 6.10.) is going so to do: but
let us also go and declare our intentions and resolutions to follow him
whithersoever he shall please to call us, though it be to lay down our lives
for him, (and yet in doing so, we should do no more than he has done for us.)
Let us go and publish our resolutions to enter into no more leagues of
Friend-ship with the Enemies of this our Captain, these enemies that once made
him bleed, these enemies, (Sin I mean) that once made him sweat drops of blood,
these enemies that flew our Captain. Let us in our very affections renounce
such Enemies, and go forth to meet our Captain, and humbly tell him, that we
are purposed by his assistance and by his conduct thus to do. Let us tell him,
that we are resolved to renew the Combat, and reinforce our diligence with all
our strength, never more to desert and leave him; and that we are now coming to
enter into this engagement again, and solemnly to seal it: and that as we were
once lifted under him by Baptism, when we knew it not, so now when we are come
to know it, we are ready and willing to stand to it to the end of our days; and
are thankful too, that he has brought us to the knowledge of this Grace, and
Faith in him: and that he has given us this one one opportunity more of making
solemn declaration of it at his own Table. Thus let us manifest our Love to our
great Master Jesus, our best Friend, the Captain of our Salvation Jesus.

But further, if we call him Friend, and this Friend of ours, be for a while
gone off from us, shall we do nothing in remembrance of him? did he require us
at parting (at least not long before he left the World) to do something in
remembrance of him, when he was gone, and had bid adieu to the World? Surely,
if we knew not what it was, had it not been plainly revealed to us, how
desirous, how earnest would we be to know it, that so we might not fail to do
it? we should then (if we knew it not) be apt to say, what should it be that
thou would have us to do, in remembrance of such love as thine? O our Jesu
what should it be? O that we could but come to the knowledge of it, that so we
might instantly set about it. If so, consider then, how far should we be from
refusing to do it, when we certainly know what it is.

What, is there something to be done in remembrance of dying Love? Something in
remembrance of a bleeding Friend? Something in remembrance of the great Lover
of Mankind? Something in memory of a crucified Savior, and a parting Redeemer?
Surely one would think it must needs be some very hard and uneasy duty,
something next to impossible, that there should any be found in the Christian
World, refusing to do this something; and yet all this that we refuse to do, is
but to fit the Soul, and come and feast on his body and blood, in memory of his
Cross and Passion: and is this all the difficulty in that which we are to do?
tremble then, at thy monstrous Ingratitude, and never more dare either come
unprepared, or to keep away.

How should this consideration rather melt us into Love? Love (in some measure)
such as his, that is, dying Love? how should it swallow up all our little and
trifling objections, as the Ocean swallows up a drop of water? how should such
considerations melt us into tears of Love, and then into those of Repentance,
and blow off all our fond excuses and vain pretenses against doing this, as
easily as Feathers are blown away by a violent blast of wind? What can indeed
resist this, but a heart bent upon iniquity and profaneness and irreligion, a
heart never opened by any serious thoughts or apprehensions of the Love of
Jesus? and how should that consideration move us, readily and speedily to
betake our selves to the putting on of the Wedding Garment of preparation, and
infallibly take the very next opportunity of coming and showing, that we are
deeply sensible of this Love, and of our former great neglects? and do it how
uneasy soever some look upon the Garment to sit about them when it is on; do
it, (that is) how much pain and loss; how much shame and reproach; how much
disadvantage and self-denial soever it costs us in our endeavors to procure
it; if the frequent use of those holy Mysteries will be so great an argument of
our Love to Jesus.

O let it no longer therefore be said of any one of us that we should live in
the habitual neglect of this known necessary duty; and let it no longer be said
of us, that our Communicating was not as frequent as possible we could have
opportunities for it. Let it no longer be said of us, that we should be so
imprudent as not to be willing to renew our Baptismal Covenant, when our Lord
is yet so willing to renew it with us. No longer let it be said of us, that we
should be so inconsiderate as to live in the omission and neglect of a duty,
which if frequented would convey so many benefits and advantages to us as we
have mentioned. O let it no more be said of us, that we should ever hereafter
live in the constant neglect of that solemn act of Christian Worship, which if
frequently performed, would be so evident a sign of our great love to Religion
and Piety, and of our deep apprehensions of another World, and our concernment
for a joyful Immortality. Never, never let it be said of us in the day of
Judgment, that while we dwelt upon Earth, we were always loath and backward, and
unwilling to present our selves whenever we were invited to that holy and
heavenly and pleasant duty, by the frequenting of which, we might so plainly
have shown our greater love to Jesus, by our readiness to take all
opportunities of commemorating his dying bleeding affection to us.

And then, O let it never be said of any of us, that the only reason why we
should or could be supposed to refuse it, was, because we would not be at the
pains of putting on the Wedding Garment, or endure the thoughts and
consideration of stripping our selves of the old spotted raiment of Sin and
Irreligion! No, the old acquaintance must be parted with, the old Dalilahs
divorced, the darling Iniquity that has long been near and dear to thee must be
thrown off. But may it be henceforth never said of us, that we had rather part
from the sweet Communion with the holy Jesus, than renounce our fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness. Why shall any of these things be ever said of
any one of us, in the hour of death or day of our Accounts? May they never be
said to us, or remembered in that day and hour, when it shall be impossible to
reform them!

To conclude this head, O that sometimes we would withdraw our selves from the
World, and look beyond the Grave, and then look upon our selves as those that
are hastening to Eternity; and then in that serious thought let us consider,
that ever long, we shall find it to have been the best and most satisfactory
employment in the World, to have been frequent and devout Communicants.

O that sometimes we would shut our Eyes, or take them off from the World, and
then think how vast that Eternity is, that depends upon the holy management of
this moment: and having so done, then tell me, how great the necessity and
advantages of this holy Duty do begin to appear.

O that sometimes we would look upon our selves only as Strangers and Pilgrims
here, and that two or three ages hence, we shall all be forgotten, and that
then nothing shall be remembered of us any more, but either our horrid
unreformed Iniquities, or our sincere holiness, and Conformity of heart and
life to the Gospel of our Savior: and then upon such a close and piercing
thought as this, instantly consider, how does this holy and heavenly Duty
appear to thee? and would thou not willingly have it then remembered of thee,
that thou were here below a devout frequenter of these holy Mysteries?

O that Sometimes we could seriously fix our eyes in a holy Meditation on that
glorious day, in which our Lord shall come to place his faithful Servants
beyond all further doubts or fears, possibility of sin or temptations,
infelicities or Scruples of Conscience: Tell me in such a thought as this,
would it not be a blessed consideration to be in a State, in which we could be
truly able to love his appearing? (2 Timothy 4.8.) why, never shall it be thus
with us, 'till we come to be devout and frequent attenders on these holy
Mysteries. Nay, I will appeal to thine own Soul in the Case, when were thou
ever able so heartily and truly to love the thoughts of thy Lord's appearing,
as when thou were but just come from his holy Table? Could thou not have been
willing then, that all thy business in this World might have been over, and
that he might have then come, and taken thee into the air with him, and set
thee down in the Mansions of eternal Holiness? and why then should not thy
frequency in this holy action be such, as that he may almost even at any time
come, and not fail to find thee so doing?

O that sometime we would look upon this life, as a state and condition in
which we are placed by the eternal God, to fit and trim the Soul, for the
society of those holy Worthies that are gone up before us; and then in that
thought consider, how far short our practice comes of their daily and weekly
communicating: Or, that lastly, we would sometime look back too, and consider
again, that among all our former days that are slid away from us, those only
shall shortly be remembered with joy, in which we have done something in order
to a joyful Resurrection, and a safe Eternity. Say now, would we not in such a
thought as this, wish heartily, that we had a better account in the Registers
of Heaven than we yet have? more especially that we had many more devout
performances of this holy and heavenly duty recorded there than we have? and if
we find Reason thus to think of our past days, Oh why should we henceforward
have reason to think the same of our future days then, when they also shall be
over, and we shall be brought to the Neighborhood of the Grave?

I shall therefore in the name and words of our dear and holy mother the
Church, earnestly beseech you no longer to continue so much strangers to, so
wilful neglecters of this holy Duty: ( -- and if any man neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a Publican. St. Mat. 18.17.)
and she invites us thus, -- I bid you in the name of God, I call you in
Christ's behalf, I exhort you as you love your own Salvation, that you all be
partakers of this holy Communion. And as the Son of God did vouchsafe to yield
up his Soul by death upon the Cross for your Salvation, so it is your duty to
receive the Communion in remembrance of the Sacrifice of his death, as he
himself has commanded: Which if ye shall neglect to do, consider with your
selves how great injury you do unto God, and how sore punishment hangs over
your heads for the same, when ye wilfully abstain from the Lord's Table, and
separate from your brethren who come to feed on the Banquet of that most
heavenly food. And thus much of the first general head, to show, that this is a
necessary holy and Christian Duty to be frequently performed, and the neglect
of it infinitely dangerous.

CHAP. II. This do in remembrance of me.
SEcondly, we come now to see to what end it was instituted or appointed by our
blessed Savior.

First, it was instituted and ordained for a perpetual and devout remembrance
of him our Redeemer, so says our Lord himself, St. Luke 22.19. This do in
remembrance of me. --

As if he had said, in remembrance of mine Agony and bloody sweat for your
interest; in remembrance of my bitter sufferings and my death; in remembrance
of my Laws and Doctrines; in remembrance of my Resurrection and Ascension; in
remembrance of my Victory for you, over Sin and Death and Hell; in a
comfortable remembrance of this too, that upon your Repentance, Reformation,
and Sincere obedience for the future, your past iniquities shall all be placed
upon the account of the Cross, and be covered with the Robes of my
Righteousness; and that I will ever be your Jesus, your Savior; Do this, do it
for a continual and grateful memorial of these things: that so such a
remembrance as this of me your dying Lord, may fill your Souls with Love and
Devotion, your Wills with holy resolutions; that so it may excite and stir up
holiness and virtue in your lives, and may unite and endear you to your Lord
and Savior, unite and reconcile you to each other, and promote peace and love,
and unanimity and Charity among you, who are all members of my body, of that
body (the Church) of which I am the head: that so meeting together frequently
at this feast of Charity, when you remember my love to you all, this may
promote love among you all, and may increase Faith and Piety and obedience in
you, and encourage you in it, till at last you come to meet me in my Kingdom.
Thus was it first instituted for a thankful remembrance of our Redeemer, and
all he has done and suffered for us.

Was it so? and Lord can it ever be, when this was the great intent and design
of it, that any that name thy sacred Name, should be unwilling to come and bear
a part in such a remembrance? Methinks that Soul that should refuse to do so,
refuse to fit and trim it self, to go forth and remember the Lords of Life and
Glory, with the rest of his Christian brethren, should upon such a thought, be
sorrowful and greatly troubled, that almost all others should go to claim and
beg an interest in the death and sufferings of their Lord, and he alone be
unconcerned in it; he alone stay back, and refuse to put his hand to the
Petition, and his Seal to the Covenant. Methinks again, such a Soul should
consider and say, how imprudent, how inconsiderate is my case and condition,
how dangerous is my state of Life, that while others are resolving and
preparing to go, and hoping to feast acceptably with Jesus, I should be alone
backwards? Here I am, wallowing in Sin, living in a heedless, stupid, careless
state of life, following my lusts and vices, and take no care to get out of
them, no care for my Salvation, making no provision for Eternity and a joyful
Resurrection; but always suffer my self to be hurried away by Iniquity, born
down by every slight Temptation, and am kept off from fitting my self for the
Table of my Lord, by vain pretenses, and little Excuses, by every Sin that
looks fair and offers a little delight or advantage; and shall I live and dye
thus? Shall I continue in this State till all opportunities be over and at an
end with me? Why, O why should not I, even I also labor to put on the
Weding-Garment, and see if he will yet be entreated, and reconciled to me, and
bless me, even me also? Rouse then O my Soul, awake and arise speedily from the
death of Sin, to the life of Righteousness; off with thy old poluted Garments,
(by divine Grace) forever, on with thy better raiment of Faith and Repentance,
Piety and Charity; and come my Soul, let us go speedily to remember the love of
our dying Lord; for most others, they are either gone, or going; Come my soul,
at last let us go willingly and cheerfully, others they are hastening, and
methinks the Love of Christ begins to constrain us to, 2. Cor. 5.14. Come then
let us hasten to commemorate and meet him, with the best preparations we can
make; for others they are sitting trimming and adorning the Soul so to do: and
the same Lord is ready with his assisting Grace for me, even for me also, if I
am not wanting to my self, that is, earnestly beg, and faithfully use and
employ it.

Well then; my Christian Brethren, all of them they are going, and shall I be
the only person that shall stay behind? they are now resolving to celebrate the
memory of a bleeding Redeemer, and shall not I also? Oh how will my Lord take
this at the day of Judgment? how ill will he take it at my hands, that I alone
should stay behind, lurking with his Enemies Sin and Satan, when others throw
them off and bid adieu to them, to go to meet and remember Jesus?

May each Soul that is seeking for pretenses and has any temptations to absent
himself, thus argue, and thus consider; and let him say further, would I be
willing to stand among those who have frequently and devoutly remembered the
Lord of Life and Peace, the Author and Finisher of our Faith? ( Heb. 12.2.) Is
not this my desire? is it not my earnest hope? Come my Soul, say once more,
come, let us stand with them now, let us stand with them now and ever
hereafter, while we stay with them here below, let us be found among them now
employed in this heavenly action, among whom we would willingly be found at our
Lord's Second coming to judge the World. Let us not (my Soul) prefer the
pleasures of Sin for a Season, let us not choose the trifling profits and
advantages of Sin for a season, but when others go forth to meet the Lord, and
commemorate the death and passion of their blessed Redeemer, may it never be my
lot to be absent, much less may it never be my choice to be so; and when others
shall be prostrate before him, and by this heavenly action jointly renewing
their Covenant with him, recounting what he has done and suffered for them,
Sending up the Incense of praises and thanksgivings, jointly Suing out their
pardon from the Court of Heaven, with one Soul and heart, sending up holy
petitions to him, to be by him presented and handed un to the Father; thus
making a joint provision for a safe and holy Eternity; far be it, O far be it
(I say) from me, to refuse to bear a part with them: but with all the devout
Souls of the Christian Church, be ever hereafter ready and joyful, and forward
and glad of all opportunities to be employed in the solemn, devout, and holy
and thankful remembrance of the Lord that bought me; And That Is the first end
to which this Sacrament. was appointed.

Secondly, it is also a Seal of that Covenant, which God was pleased to make
with us by Christ, which we entered into at our Baptism; that gracious Covenant
made between God and us, by the Mediator Jesus. Thus it is called, the blood of
the New Testament, (...)
St. Mat. 26.28. [ or of the new Covenant. Now this new Covenant, between God
and us, made by our Savior, is (as was before said) that God will give pardon
of our Sins, sanctifying Grace, and everlasting Glory, upon our Conditions of
Faith, Repentance, and sincere Obedience. Our Lord in those Mysteries, Seals
this to us, and assures us, as he is the God of Truth, and cannot lie or
deceive us, that he will perform his part; We on the other hand, seal back this
to him, that we will sincerely and heartily endeavor to perform our part: We
are then to remember, that thus it was promised for us in our Baptism, when we
knew nothing of it; but here we come in our own persons, to take those
advantageous Conditions on our selves, to renew them by our own hand, our own
act and our own choice.

This is my Blood of the new Covenant, says our Savior; to this our Lord
invites us, to show first his death till he come, and next, to renew our
Covenant with him; to Seal it again, and to declare our resolutions, to labor
more effectually and diligently for the remainder of our days to stand to our
engagements, and discharge our Conditions of it.

O my Lord, (say now upon this consideration) who am I, that thou should
leave thy Fathers bosom, to be the compassionate Mediator of a new Covenant
between God and me? but oh who am I, that after so many breaches of it, thou
should call and invite me, once more to come, and renew it with thee again?
who am I, that thou should speak to me, to come and enter again into a
further confirmation of it? what a tender mercy is this? how blessed a privilege
is this? that thou art pleased to call me once more, to come and receive my
Pardon, if but yet for the future, I do in an honest sincerity perform my part
of the Covenant? What long-suffering is this, that thou should still bid me
to approach, and have my Pardon sealed too; if my terms be but yet performed?
and how far have I been from deserving any thing of this at thy hands?

And O my Jesu, shall I refuse to come, and humbly accept of those mercies
which thou art yet pleased to offer me? and though I have broken my part of
that Covenant which this Sacrament is a seal of, shall I not thankfully come
and accept of thy desires to make good thine, if after all this I am not yet
wanting to my self?

Shall I not rejoice in an opportunity of confirming and ratifying in my own
person, that which was done for me without my knowledge in my Baptism? shall I
not come and declare my desires to be found now and ever within the Covenant of
Grace? Or shall I voluntarily withdraw my self from it, and not come and put my
hand and seal to it, with others of my Christian Brethren? shall I by my
refusal to renew it, declare for Sin, for the World, Flesh and Devil? Far be it
from me, (say) O my dear Redeemer, far be such thoughts as those, No, I come
willingly and readily and cheerfully, with a Soul, and Heart, and Mouth, full
of Praises and Adorations, to renew this gracious Covenant, to own my self thy
Disciple, thy Servant, thy follower; I come to see thy dying bleeding Love, and
to imprint it afresh upon my memory: I come to see thy earnest desires of
accomplishing my Redemption represented to me; I come to behold thy Agony and
bloody sweat, thy Cross and Passion; thy Body broken, thy Blood poured out for
me: I come freely and openly to own my unworthyness to come at all, to own how
undeservingly I have walked of those benefits. I come to sue a Pardon for my
breaches of my terms of the new Covenant; I come to seal it again with thee,
and humbly, and thankfully adore thee for this mercy, that thou call me once
more to do so.

O that instead of ever entertaining a thought of absenting our selves, we
would employ it in some such meditations as these, Dr. Sherlock Relig. Assemb.
or with the words following of that excellent person before mentioned? That
frequent Communions are as necessary to our spiritual growth and increase in
holiness, to repair the decays of our Graces, and to renew our strength and
vigor in serving God, and to procure the pardon of Sin after a relapse, and to
call back the holy Spirit when he is withdrawn from us, as bread is to keep our
bodies, in constant repair; and did men love their Souls as they do their
bodies they would no more neglect the Supper of our Lord, than their daily
food. And if we have been guilty of any breach of Covenant with God, by
venturing on the commission of any Sin, when we have with tears bewailed our
Sin and renewed our Repentance, here we must renew our Covenant, and by
approaching the Table of our Lord, declare, that though we are Sinners, yet we
are not Apostates, (that is, we are not fallen from the Faith or the Christian
Religion) but that we still own our Covenant; and by the Grace of God, which we
now implore and hope to receive, resolve to continue steadfast in it while we
live.

CHAP. III. Of Examination of our Selves.
I Come next in the third place, to show briefly, how we are to come prepared
to this holy Sacrament.

The chief parts of preparation are these.

First, Examination of our selves. Secondly, To enter then into a holy Course
of Life, by Repentance and Resolutions of a future sincere Obedience. Thirdly,
To bring with us a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ. Fourthly, To
bring with us Charity to our Brethren. Fifthly, To bring with us Devotion and a
pious frame of Soul.
Of each of these briefly.

First, of Examination of our selves; to this St. Paul advises, -- Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup. 1
Cor. 11.28.

And here we are to examine (as far as our memory can inform us) what our
breaches have been of that Covenant which we entered into with God and our
Savior in Baptism. We told you, that our part of the Covenant is, Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience. But alas! we have most miserably gone astray,
and have often, knowingly, wittingly and willingly broken all these parts of
that holy Covenant.

As to our Faith first, how dull, lifeless, and unactive has that been? how
little have we showed it by our works? by works of Mercy, Piety, Charity, or
Devotion? How little have we showed our Faith, by our Conformity of heart and
life, to those Gospel duties to God, to others, and our selves, by which we
should have shown it? St. Ja. 4.18.

Again as to Repentance, how unsincere has that been? how have we returned soon
after our beginnings of it, to our old iniquities, like the Dog to his vomit,
or the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire? 2 Pet. 2.22. Can we
not easily remember the time, when we had wept over our Crimes, and thought our
Repentance had been deep and hearty, that we instantly fell into them again,
upon the next temptation that looked fair? and forgot our holy Resolutions.
Whereas a Reformation or change of life, is the life of Repentance, and without
that, (at least in the Gospel measures, that is, in the most hearty sincerity,
though not entire perfection) what we call Repentance, is but the bowing down
the head like a Bull-rush.

Then as to that other part of our Covenant, Obedience, how unsincere has this
been too? how partial have we been in it, performing one duty, and omitting
two; reforming one iniquity, and then soon after, entering upon another instead
of it? Thus, can we not remember, that we may have changed the Lusts of our
Youth, into the Covetousness of old age? the intemperance and vanity of our
younger days, into revenge and malice, in our growing years? and so instead of
a universal reformation, often exchanging only one sin for another? Then again,
how gross has our Ignorance been of our necessary and indispensable duties? and
yet of those that we have known, how few have we faithfully discharged? how has
the World Flesh and Devil stepped in between us and our former resolutions of
Obedience? So dismally have we broken our part of the Covenant.

But now does our God and Savior call us to renew it once more? and will he be
reconciled to us yet, if we heartily return and renounce iniquity, and give up
our selves to obey his commands? and is he ready to give us an assurance of
this, and to confirm it in the holy Sacrament?

Come my Soul, let us examine our selves, and consider what our breaches have
been of this gracious Covenant, at least our greater and our more notorious,
heinous breaches; that is, what our omissions of our Duties have been; what our
known commissions have been, that so we may come to a true and deep Humiliation
of our selves before God; and being sensible of our Crimes, and heavy Laden, we
may come to Jesus to be eased of them; and that so, seeing them, we may loath
them; that loathing them, we may remember this when we come to the Table of the
Lord: and that we may remember it too, when we are come off from that holy
Table, and are going abroad into the World again, and throw them off forever.

That so we may ever remember how dear they cost us, (and if returned to again,
are like to cost us dearer) how dear they cost our Jesus, and yet how willing
he is to be reconciled. And when the Temptation returns again, we may beat it
off (by divine aid) with some of these considerations, some of these
remembrances, and especially this. That forgiveness belongs not to him, who
sins and repents, repents and sins on still; but to him who repents so, as to
forsake his Crimes and his Iniquities.

Plainly and in short, the meaning of Examination, is to consider these three
things following.

First, To examine whether you rightly understand that Vow and Covenant which
you made with God in your Baptism, and which you come to renew and Seal again
with God in the Sacrament: If you do not, it is (I say it again) briefly this;
Almighty God on his part, graciously promises a free pardon of all your
past-Sins, Grace here, and Salvation hereafter by Jesus Christ; Upon Condition,
that we discharge our part; that is, seriously believe the truth of the Gospel
of our Savior, Truly Repent of all our Sins, and by sincere resolutions and
constant endeavors of future Obedience, give up our selves to follow him in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Lives. Secondly, To look into
the Soul, and as far as our memory will reach, to enquire what our Iniquities,
(especially our greater iniquities) have been, with reference to God, Our
selves, Or our Neighbors, that we can discover we have adventured upon, either
in Thought, Word, or Action. Thirdly, To enquire, what Omissions of Duties
(especially what greater omissions) either to God, our selves, or Neighbors,
we can charge upon our selves, either of Thought, Word, or Action.
And when we have so done, to bewail them heartily, (as well as our
Secret-Sins, with David Ps. 19.12.) to take new Resolutions against them, to go
and declare those our holy resolutions at the Holy Sacrament, and when that is
over, to labor watchfully and sincerely to keep those pious Resolutions. This
is ((...) short) the meaning of Examination; as to the particular heads of
Examination, and helps to it, Whole Duty of Man.
I refer you to the book mentioned in the Preface.

But then let us Examine not only what our iniquities have been, but also how
great they have been; how they have been aggravated or increased in their
guilt, or made greater by several ways and means. For thus, Examine, have not
some of them been against much light, much knowledge? have we not rusht into
them foreseeing them plainly, and done it wittingly and willingly? Examine
again, has it not been a Sin or Sins not only of knowledge, but of which we
might easily consider beforehand the great guilt and dangers? Nay possibly did
weigh and consider it, and yet after such consideration have resolved to choose
it, for some vain delight or trifling advanrage it brought with it.

Examine further, was it not a Sin which when we adventured on, our own
Conscience flew in our face, and stepped in between us and it; and yet we broke
through all Resistances and oppositions of Conscience?

Examine again, had not thy Sin this guilt to make it greater, that it has
frequently been committed? so frequently, that no vows, no former purposes, of
amendment or obedience, could restrain thee from it, but did wilfully break
all these, to come to thy crime?

Examine further, it is not grown up to a greater height? has it not this
increase of its guilt, that 't'as been so frequently adventured upon, as that
it is grown into a custom, a second Nature with thee, strongly grafted and
deeply rooted in thee?

Examine again, is it not so deeply rooted in thee, that thy Conscience is even
hardened and seared against it? that afflictions sent from God to reclaim thee,
have not wrought upon thee? or it may be it is of so Long continuance, that the
charitable and private admonitions of thy Friends and the Ambassadors of God,
have been in vain with thee; so deeply rooted, that notwithstanding these, the
long custom of the Sin, has endeared thee to it, so as to like it in thy self
and others too.

Having inquired therefore, what thy iniquities are, examine whether they have
not some of these aggravations that make them greater and more heinous. If thou
find it so upon enquiry, Oh let the consideration of it, work thee into a
deep sense of, and humiliation for it, and that humiliation for it, lead thee
to sincere Contrition, to grief of heart, that thou should thus have
requited the infinite mercies of a tender Father, of a dear Redeemer; and that
the good and holy Spirit should have been so grieved by thee. ( Ephesians. 4.30.) And
let the end of all this be, that thou now at last, come to a hatred and
abhorrence of it, and that thou art now going to Jesus, to take up new
Resolutions of Reformation.

Such as this let thy Examination be, look back thus upon thy past days, look
into the State of thy Soul, search it narrowly, and as strictly as thou can,
and see if there be any one known wilful Sin lodging in it; and beg of God to
discover it to thee, and then take this opportunity of throwing it off forever.
Or, if after a long Custom and habit, it be not to be thrown off all at once,
then (at least) begin thy faithful resolutions, and war against it now; never
leaving, till by the grace of God (always ready for those that beg and
faithfully use it) thou have obtained the Victory, and subdued it: and here at
the Lord's Table, thou will get greater strength against it, new Arguments
against it: The remembrance of thy dying Savior's bleeding Love, will assist
thee in the conquest of it.

Come then, let us go to our Jesus, and to the Entertainment which he will make
for us, and let this Examination bring us to a sense of our Sins, that the
sense of them may bring us to a Humiliation; and that humiliation may bring us
to sincere Contrition; and that Contrition may bring us to Repentance,
Reformation and Holiness; that so we may come at length to see the Pleasures
and Advantages of a Religious and Holy Life, and taste those Sweets and
Delicacies, which we yet little think there are in such a state of Life; and
that so our past impieties may all be covered with the Robes of our Lord's
Righteousness.

But that you may never hereafter be at a loss in your Examination, so as to
neglect this Holy and Heavenly Duty, because of endless doubts and fears,
whether you are qualified or no, do but try your selves by these following
questions. As I was baptized into the Religion of the ever blessed Jesus, so am
I willing to stand to these engagements, (to the utmost of my power) that were
then made in my name? Do I seriously believe the Gospel to be the Truth of God?
and will I labor uprightly to conform my heart and life to it? Do I repent of
all my Sins, (known and secret) and my former disobedience? Have I a lively and
steadfast Faith in Christ my Savior? Am I sensible of my unworthyness to come
to this Table, and desirous to be made more worthy? that is, am I sensible of
my Crimes and Iniquities, and desirous of Pardon, and of Grace to reform? And
do I resolve and purpose a sincere reformation of any thing that I can discover
in my self at any time, which is contrary to the Will of God? -- Particularly,
do I resolve and purpose, to set my self with watchfulness and diligence
against that bosom Sin whatever it be, to which I know my self most inclined?
Do I harbor in my heart no one known wilful Sin at this instant? Do I desire,
and heartily endeavor to understand the Gospel of my Savior, and to direct my
Life and Actions, according to the Doctrines there delivered? And wherein I
shall at any time hereafter fall, through frailty, infirmity, or unawares; do I
resolve, speedily to rise again by Repentance, and by a greater Care and
diligence, and watchfulness for the future? Am I in Love and Charity with all
men, and willing and ready to do any good action for Friends and Enemies? and
do I wish and desire their good, of Soul, and Body, Goods and good Name? -- Am
I desirous to renew this Covenant of mine with God, and to come and thankfully
commemorate my Dear Savior's bleeding, dying Love for me in the Sacrament? To
come there to receive fresh tokens of his Love to me, and to beg and receive
more of his Grace, to help me to perform these things, and to live a sincerely
Holy and a Christian life?

If from a sincere and honest heart, you can answer Yes to these particulars,
then lay aside your doubts, away with your fears and scruples; And in the name
of God come, and come with joy and comfort, with a thankful, lightsom and
cheerful heart, to this most holy, and heavenly, and pleasant duty in the World.

And thus much of Examination.

Secondly, the Second part of Preparation is, That upon such Examination, we
then enter into a holy Course of life, by resolutions of a future new
obedience. Let this be the end and intent of Examination of our selves, that so
having found what our frequent, too frequent breaches of our Covenant, of the
Commands of our Savior have been, we may seasonably, while our day lasts, take
up hearty and unfeigned purposes of discharging them uprightly, for the
remainder of our days. Thus holy David, Ps. 119.59. I thought on, [or I
examined] my ways, (...) Accuratum examen institui. Synops.
and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. Let our Examination of our ways, have
the same end, the same fruit and effect that his had. Here let us come then,
and renew and declare our Christian Resolutions, when our Lord calls, and
invites us, and is willing to have us do it.

More especially here do thou go to declare and renew them against that
particular Iniquity, to which (upon thy Examination) thou foundest thy self
most frequently tempted: bring with thee an enrire hatred of all, but
especially of that, which has oftenest foiled thee heretofore, and got the
Victory over thee, and may be most like to return upon thee, and do so again.
And as now thou art to come in an hatred of it, so think and consider by what
ways and means, Companies and Temptations it may be most like to steal in upon
thee again. Consider by what occasions, in what business or employment it is,
that it may be like to entice thee again, and bear thee down before it; and
that so often, so long, till it may be thou dye in it, and thou lie down in the
grave with it, and the holy Jesus come and find it unmortified, and altogether
unreformed; and thou be at his second coming Sentenced for it, to enter into
the Lot and portion of the damned.

Having in these thy holy resolutions considered the occasions of it, or by
what delights or profits and advantages it usually tempts thee, and prevails
over thee, labor then, (how dear soever it cost thee) to get out of the snare
and the temptation; resolve, whatever mortifications, self-denials or
disadvantages in thy Worldly affairs it stand thee, to get out of the way of
it. In the first place, labor now then, to foresee what the occasion of it may
be, by which ways the temptation enters upon thee; by what Companies, (I say)
business, Employments; for the Love of what pleasures, advantages and interests
thou art led to it; that so foreseeing them, thou may abstain from all
appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22.

Resolve hence-forward, to step out of the way of these occasions, whatever
shame or reproach it may cost thee from man; that so thou may follow Jesus
uprightly and cheerfully, and ever hereafter, be a ready, willing, joyful and
prepared Communicant. And when thou have found out the occasions of it,
whatever they were, Consider, and say, And is this that petty Interest, or that
vain delight, that comes to rob me of my Soul? my Heaven, and my Immortality?
And is this all that it can ever give or promise me in exchange of them? Is
this all I shall get by my Compliance with them whenever they come again? And
shall I do so any more? shall I embrace their motions any more? No, on my Soul,
on, and as thou art going; look back no more, faint no more, give out no more;
thou know the utmost of those Pleasures or Profits, they can bring thee in,
but thou know little, or not half of those vast felicities and joys that
await thee in the place of Glory; On therefore my Soul, and be content to stay
for thy Delights and advantages, till but after the death of one Life, (and
that is no longer than thou would be content to stay for the Reversion of a
large Estate) and then sit down in the full Enjoyment of them to all ages, and
thou shall be at rest forever, at peace forever, happy and holy and safe for
ever. And thus, let us enter upon a holy course of life, by resolutions of a
future sincere obedience, and by actually putting off all known Sin whatsoever.
And that is the second thing as to Preparation.

Thirdly, let us bring with us a lively Faith, in God's mercy through Christ.
That is, steadfastly believing, that for his sake, our offended Father will be
reconciled to us, if with Repentance and such Resolutions of a sincere
obedience to his Commands, and a future Reformation, we give up our selves to
him.

And not doubting of this, let us consider and say; who am I, that after so
many acts of wilful disobedience, so many habitual Impieties, so many known
neglects of my holy Duties, there should, upon my sincere Reformation and new
Life, be any arms yet open to receive me? What, are there any possibilities for
me of being yet accepted upon my hearty returning? Can these arms that were
once stretched out upon the Cross, and nailed to it, be spread still to embrace
me, upon my becoming a new Creature? me, who have as it were trampled upon the
blood of the Covenant? Are there hopeful possibilities yet left, of my
receiving infinite benefit by that blood, if I am willing to have the merits of
it applied to me, and fit my self to have them so applied? And may I yet be
accepted to eternal ages, if I go in the name of Jesus, with a faithful
penitent Conversion to my offended Father? Why then, with the Prodigal, I will
arise and go to my Father; and if he should have Compassion upon me, should I
not rejoice that ever I went to him, and bid adieu to my impious Courses? I
will then arise and go to him, and say, Father, I have Sinned. And if I resolve
thus to go to him, I have one to go with me, and intercede for me too; One that
can produce and show to my Father the price of my Redemption: One, who (if I
thus penitently go) will stand between me and my Father's Wrath, between me and
the sorrows of Eternity. One, that can show Blood and Wounds to plead for me to
my offended Father. One, who, if we are truly desirous to wash our Sins in
penitential tears and yet cannot, can represent to my Father, that he wept
blood for me; and it is one, in whom our Father is well pleased: One, that can
prevail, and do any thing with this our Father. And because we cannot hope that
he will be reconciled to us, but by the merits and mediation of this our
Redeemer, let us go to him first, and beseech him to intercede for us.

But where shall we go to find and meet him? why, at his holy Table he will not
fail to meet us, if we go thither faithfully, penitently, charitably, and
devoutly; there it is he often calls and invites us to meet him, and expects and
stays for us there; ready (if we come thus qualified) to go with us to him.

O my Soul (say) Come let us go to this our Jesus then, Let us go and Sup with
him, and humbly tell him how the Case stands with us, how disobedient we have
been; and how heartily earnest we are to return and be accepted. And having his
Son our friend and Advocate, Let us not fear to say to him, with an awful
humility. Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; But oh my
Father, look upon thy Son, and my Jesus.

I can only confess, and sorrow, and sue for pardon, but he has atton'd for me
too, Let his wounds plead for me. See (O my Father) that side the spear pierced
for me, and there made way for me to his very Heart. Look on those Sacred hands
that were nailed to the Wood; See there how the pointed Iron drew for me in his
hand the line of Life, the line of Life Eternal. Let his bleeding palms be an
Expiation for mine, that have been so often lifted up to smite my brother, so
seldom raised in my Devotions. Let those Feet, the nail also bored, be an
Expiation for mine, that have been swift to shed blood; or slow to run the way
of thy Commandments. Thus O Father, tho I have sinned, he has suffered, and
atton'd; though I have sinned against Heaven, he is there to plead and mediate
for me; his merits are infinitely more than my Impieties.

And when thou have thus in the Name of Jesus, humbly sought the favor of thy
offended Father, would it not be matter of infinite Joy to think the Redeemer
of the World should intercede for thee, and say Behold O my Father, a penitent,
a true and contrite penitent, one that with the Prodigal had estrayed from
thee, but he is returning, and he sorrows not only for fear of Hell and
punishment, but he grieves for having offended a tender and compassionate
Father. The consideration of his very ingratitude melts him into tears, and his
Contrition also has wrought in him sincere resolution of amendment of life.
Behold O my Father, to such contrite penitents are my merits to be applied, to
such have thou promised mercy; Let all his past Iniquities therefore be charged
upon my account.

Say now, would not this be a blessed consideration, to have the Savior of the
World thus pleading and prevailing for thee with thy offended Father?

Why then go to him, but so qualified as we have mentioned, and he will be
heard in thy behalf; for thy Father is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness. Joel. 2.13. And that is the third part of a Preparation.

Fourthly, We are to bring with us universal Love and Charity to our Brethren.
To come with a readiness and willingness to be reconciled to them who have
injured us; and if we have done the wrong, to be ready, and actually to
endeavor, to reconcile them to us; according to that of St. Matthew. chap. 5. v.
23.24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
Brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

But to insist on this the more briefly, clearly and distinctly, we are to
consider, that the Charity we are to bring with us, consists, first in
Forgiving, second in Giving.

Now as to the first of these, the two great and usual Miscarriages in our
practice, are first our Loathness and backwardness to forgive. Secondly our
great unwillingness when we have done a known injury, to go and seek a
reconciliation, and to desire to be at peace with him that we have injured.

We are loath in the first place to forgive; It may be we have listened to a
Talebearer, and we have been told an idle story, and such a one has spoken ill
of us, or railed on us; Instantly we swell, and are all in a flame, and can
think of nothing but revenge and malice, and a perpetual hatred, and it may be
nothing but his blood will satisfy our revengeful humor; and bitterly say
presently, We will be even with him again.

But is this the patience, and meekness, and self-denial of the Gospel? Is this
the forbearing, forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any
one, as Christ forgave us? Col. 3.13. Is this to love Enemies, and to bless
them that curse us? Matthew. 5.34. Is this our best imitation of the Example of
our great Master Jesus? But let us not always so learn Christ, but endeavor to
bring the Soul to that mortified, calm, and peaceful temper, as to be ready to
forgive injuries, and to bear them meekly, sweetly and temperately; and when
the Talebearer shall come to thee, and tell thee, that such a one has
reproacht thee; Consider, possibly it may not be true, Si probra nobis been
oleant, and verbera Impacta malis naribusque rideant, ut vix modesto
diffluentes gaudio Reddamus alto gratias altas Deo, Ac Improbanti lene pacis
osculum, Haec solida tandem est hilaritas frater Leo, Inambulantum Regia in
Crucis via, Angel, Gaz.
and then thou art angry with him without a cause. Consider again, it may be it
was in a very great Passion, and by this time he may be sorry for it. However
labor to bring the Soul to that Christian pitch and disposition as to be able
to say. Has he spoken this of me? God forgive him for it; or to say to the
bearer Remember me to him, and tell him I heartily forgive him, and shall be
ready to do him any office of Christian Love, whatever he says of me. This
would discourage the Talebearer, and heap Coals of fire on the head of the
injurious Person, Romans 12.20. Coals of fire, not to burn or inflame him, but to
melt him into Love, or into sorrow for the injury. This would be an excellent
imitation of that great Lord of ours, who prayed for his persecutors, and laid
down his life for his Enemies.

At least Consider this, who would lose the benefits and advantages, the joy
and the Comfort, and Satisfaction of being a Holy Communicant, only for the
small and unchristian pleasure of a revengeful Word, a revengeful look, or a
revengeful action? Or consider how much easier is it to forgive an injurious,
spiteful word or action, than to lie under the wrath of God to eternal Ages?

Always too, let us take this for an Eternal Rule, that if we Copy out the
Example of Christ, in forgiving, whatever the reproach be, God will force Light
out of Darkness, bring Glory out of that which was intended for our Shame; and
clear up our Innocence, if in an humble holy and patient Life, we be content to
trust him with it.

Secondly, The second miscarriage in this part of Charity is, our great
unwillingness, when we have done a known injury, to go to the person, and seek
and desire a reconciliation with him. This I confess is a thing so much a
stranger to the World, that few look on it as a Duty: But when our dear
Redeemer has commanded it, why cannot we deny our selves so far as to be
content (I say for a known injury) to go to him, and offer to be reconciled? Oh
no! the World will call us fools, and whatever becomes of it, our proud necks
will never submit to this part of the Christian yoke: But consider, we
renounced the World in our Baptism, and shall we then suffer it to rob us of
our Innocence and Duty? Let the World account it so, Remember, our Lord sees
not as the World sees, nor judges as the World judges. Again, if we be ill
spoken of for a Christian Duty, that is, St. Matthew. 5.11.12.
for Righteousness sake, great then is our reward in Heaven. And let us be
content to stay for it, till we shall receive it there. Again, let us not
listen to the voice of an irreligious World in matters of Religion; but above
all, let us consider, our Lord has gone in the high way of the Cross before us,
he endured it, and despised the shame. O let us more readily do so too, in this
case, Looking unto Jesus. Hebr. 12.1.2. Let us remember too, That Christ is
come to mortify our carnal tempers, and to teach us self-denial, and to bear
the Cross; and what an excellent instance, would this readyness to go and
desire; and offer to be reconciled to those whom we have knowingly injured, be
of our desires to imitate our Savior? and if we were reviled and laughed at, to
say with the Martyr of old, Nunc incipio esse Christianus. Now I begin to be a
Christian, and to be likened to my Savior. To conclude this point, how much
easier is it to desire to be reconciled, to acknowledge our fault, and ask a
forgiveness when we know we have injured, than to bear the terrors of Eternity?
and it is a deplorable consideration to think, that we can deny our selves
nothing, bear nothing, do nothing, though a little against the grain, against
flesh and blood, for the sake of Immortality, for the pleasures of the holy
Sacrament, and the Love of Jesus.

Secondly, The second part of Charity consists in Giving. Alms and Oblations
have in all ages of the Church, accompanied the feast of Charity; and with
great reason is it, that in this Solemn act of Christian worship, we should
humbly offer some part of our possessions to God, as a token of this, that we
thankfully own, we hold all we have from him, and therefore desire to pay back
something again to him; that is, to those whom he has made his Receivers: and
the usual miscarriages in this case, are two likewise, either first, we come to
this feast of Charity, without setting apart any thing for the needs of our
poor brethren, or else secondly we bring too little.

As to the first of these, Consider, when we relieve any at our doors, that is
(often) because of their importunity with us, or it may be to be rid of them;
when we relieve by a Rate, that is by constraint, and the Laws compel us: But
this is a free-Will-offering. Never let us fail therefore, when we come to see
fresh tokens of our Savior's Love to us, who for our sakes became poor. 1 Cor.
8.9. then, to set apart some evidence of our Charity to those who bear his
Image, and whom he has made his proxies, and that our Lord takes it as done to
himself; and that for an Alms, we may receive a blessing. Never therefore in
this Heavenly action, let us appear before the Lord empty.

But secondly the other fault is, that our alms are often too thin and slender.
It Is true indeed the holy Scripture has not set down the exact measure or rule
of giving; but therefore, even for that very reason, we should do well to give
even beyond our ability, rather than fall short of it, that being the course
that is most safe and most holy, considering, that he that sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly, and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully.
2 Cor. 9.6. and ever remembering that it is the observation somewhere of a pious
Prelate, Bishop of Down and Conner.
(now, through Christ, reaping some of the fruits of his unknown Charity and
Piety) That the business of the great day of Judgment shall be transacted, and
the Sentence chiefly pass, according to the measure of our works of Mercy and
Charity, as he infers from St. Matthew. 25.31. to the end.

'Twere easy to produce admirable instances of the vast Charity of the
Christians of old, such as to this age might seem almost incredible, for as a
learned Person observes of them, Dr. Cave Primitive Christ.
They looked upon the Poor as the Treasure and ornament of the Church, by whom
as by bills of Exchange, they returned their Estates into the other World.

Let me therefore offer you this one Consideration, to be seriously laid to
heart, in your next sober and retired thoughts, would we be but content to cut
off from our vain Expenses, needless visits, our Excess and extravagancy, our
vanity or folly, or what we may lay out on, either Lust or Intemperance, or in
prosecuting our brother, in a revengeful malicious and contentious Lawsuit, or
the like; we might have a good portion for the Poor, and opportunity for many
more charitable actions, than are yet recorded above; and might have a large
Treasure laid up in Heaven, at the end of or Sixty or Seventy Years, yet never
the worse in our Estates, at the end of the year, or the end of our days;
besides the promise of a blessing here and hereafter, from the Eternal God, who
has past his word to us. And why then can we not secretly lay out that on our
Kingdom, on our Eternal Inheritance in Reversion, which would else be expended
on our jollity and excess, in vain and useless Expenses?

Further, he that has injured his brother by fraud or deceit, or any other
injustice, is in Conscience absolutely bound to restore, or make restitution to
him again; but in case he be deceased, we are then to make it to his Heirs or
Executors. But possibly it may so happen, that we may have been unjust to some,
or in such ways, that we cannot possibly know who they are; In this Case, the
Restitution is to be made to the Poor. Now consider, what an excellent
opportunity we have of so doing, by our Alms at this holy Sacrament; always
remembering, that the Restitution be rather beyond the injustice done, than in
the least degree to come short of it. And that is the fourth part of Preparation.

Fifthly, we are then to bring with us a great Devotion, and pious frame of
Soul.

Let us be very careful to lay aside all thoughts and considerations of this
lower World, and all things else that may clog and hinder the Soul from being
then wrought up to a Sprightly, Holy, Heavenly and Devotional temper; and
earnestly beg of God by prayer to assist us in our clothing our selves in the
Wedding Garment, that so we may go to meet our Savior acceptably and
cheerfully, as we would to meet the dearest Friend on Earth, whom we had not
seen in many years before.

And having with us a deep sense and sight of our Iniquities, begot in us by
Examination, and a lively Faith in the infinite mercies of our God, through our
Savior, having our Charity truly Christian, and our Devotion high and
Angelical, let us with joy and pleasure go to Jesus, and declare our
resolutions to be his unfeigned and faithful Servants and followers; utterly
abhorring all known Sin, and sincerely resolving for all known duty.

And let us say of our old Iniquities, Be content to lay down your Necks,
quietly, and submit to be thrown off, for I am going to renew my Covenant with
my dear Redeemer. Be content, ye my old Debaucheries, Prophanesses, Lusts and
Intemperance, Oaths and Blasphemies, Malice and Injustice, and the rest of you,
to part from me, who am resolved to take my leave of you, and to go and be more
closely united to the Holy Jesus, and to go on in my journey to the new
Jerusalem; adieu to you all, and though we weep at parting, it is not because I
must leave you, but because I have been too long with you, and had not done so
sooner.

And now my Soul, (may the devout person say) seeing we have done with them,
let us raise and exalt one affections, for our Lord is coming; and he is coming
(if yet we are not wanting to our selves) to bring us a pardon sealed with him
from God, and to re-establish our title to a glorious Inheritance: and we shall
shortly bless the day, that ever we were persuaded thus to do.

Stay, methinks we begin to feel something of the pleasures of Religion
already, something of satisfaction in our very first resolutions of holiness;
Oh what will it then be, when we are better acquainted with our blessed
Savior, and his holy and Heavenly Doctrine! what will it be when we come to
his Table, and have long frequented it, and given up our selves, entirely to
him, as we now hope to do? Come then let us begin it now.

And oh my Soul, could we but for a while steal out of the body, that we might
be the more free and lively, and active and unwearied, in our thanksgivings,
praises and Hosanna's to that Lord whom we are going to meet.

But however, Let us now say, I believe, Lord help my unbelief, for I come to
have my Faith strengthened: I am grieved and wearied with the burden of my
Sins, but I come from them to thy arms, the Sanctuary of rest and peace, where
wearied Souls alone can lay their Heads, and bring their Cares and Sorrows, to
be eased of them, and to have them turned into Peace and Pleasure. Thou (Lord)
art he whom my Soul loves, and suffer me to say with thy Servant St. Peter, --
Lord thou know that I love thee. And whatever thou please to deny me here,
deny me not thy Grace and Aid, to cloth me in that Wedding Garment which thou
will please to accept.

And may the pious Soul further say, Away away from me, all my lesser Concerns
of this life, that are apt to draw aside my thoughts from Holiness; Trouble me
not now, when I am about to sup with Jesus: and come and welcome to me all holy
thoughts, holy desires, and holy Resolutions; for you my heart is open at the
welcome news of going to feast my Soul with the Body and Blood of the Savior of
the World.

And be entreated Lord, to come and fill my heart, and take up thy dwelling
there, and turn out thence every thought, and desire, and inclination whatever
it be, which thou art not willing should dwell with thee. Be entreated Lord, to
possess thy self wholly of it; for I am coming to offer it up and present it to
thee. And I am loath, when thou shall come to take possession, that thou
should find any thing there, but holy desires, divine breathings, earnest
longings after thee, pantings after Immortality, holy hopes, and devout
affections. Fill it O my Jesu, fill it up with those for me, who am coming to
meet thy glorions Majesty, by the nearest approaches I can make to thee on
Earth; that So I may never miss of thee at thy Table, or ever go away without a
blessing; and when I shall go forth into the necessary concerns of this present
life again, ever let me keep such a flame alive in me, that so the old Enemies
may no more be lodged there, or the old temptations prevail with me; but that
always hereafter, when they shall come and seek to be entertained again in my
heart or affections, I may have this answer ready for them, Away from me, Jesus
has taken possession there already; Trouble me no more, the room is full, and
the door is fast shut, to keep him there, and you from thence.

With these, or some such meditations as these, let us raise our Devotions
then, and stir up our affections, which in this, are like other Flames, the
more they are moved and stirred, they appear the more bright and shining.

Or let the pious heart, again say, Oh my Savior, thou have touched me with
secret but strong inclinations, to be with thee at thy Table, and to take
henceforward, all opportunities of so doing; O make them greater than yet they
are, and may they never cease to be growing, till I come to meet thee in thy
Kingdom. O that thou would but look upon this heart of mine that pants after
thee, as a heart fit to be wrought upon by thee, to be made to do so,
infinitely more than it does! That it may never more be contented to take fewer
opportunities to commemorate the Death and love of a crucified Lord, than all
that it can possibly have: and when the day of my communicating is over, that I
may mourn, and sigh and long for the return of it again. O let the time come,
when my Soul shall be wrought up to this pitch and temper never to be so well
at ease, or so full of joy as when it has lately come from, or is shortly to go
to a holy Communion. It Is true, O my Redeemer, and it is a sad truth, I have
long carried a World of unholy desires and sensual inclinations about with me,
and they have long followed me, and made my love to this Sacrament but dull and
little; But I now hope they are all going off from me, to make way for that and
thee. I have long fancied, I might have found happiness in some things of this
World, but I now begin to be persuaded and to find, it is only to be found with
thee and thy Religion.

I can easily remember, when I have been greatly troubled at small
disappointments of this lower World, but never at my disappointing my self of
this holy and Heavenly feast, and can likewise as easily call to mind when I
have longed for, and been pleased in vanity and folly, much more than for a
holy Sacrament; but it is some comfort to me, that at last I can feel the
thoughts of it to begin to appear pleasing and joyous, and that those old
Clouds of Darkness begin to be scattered: and let those flames of love to thee,
never go out again, never more return to coldness and ashes; and may I ever be
much more afraid lest they should do so, than at all the troubles, and all the
disappointments, and all the reproaches of this World: May I but live and dye
with those, and then let all other things be as thou please.

And now O my Redeemer, come and take possession of my heart while it is thus
warm with the Love and desires of thee, while by it is pantings and divine
breathings it is moving toward thee, and stands open for thee. May my eager
pursuits of either Riches, Honors, or Pleasures of this life, never more shut
thee out thence, but be thou pleased to rest there, 'till I shall be caught up
in the Clouds to meet thee in the Air. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. and be ever with thee. As
this of all things is now my earnest desire, so may it ever be, 'till that
glorious day: and then all my doubts and fears shall be over and at an end, all
my temptations and inclinations to Sin, and my frailties and infirmities shall
be cured; all my scruples of Conscience, my tremblings, and my fears to
displease thee shall be ended, and be to me as if they had never been at all.
But before that time come, suffer me O my Lord, to sigh out my desires to be
always with thee, as near as I am able to be, on Earth, at this distance from
thee.

And O my Soul, shall we begin then to take this Heavenly course now at the
holy Sacrament? We will, by Divine aid. On then, our Lord invites us, and
calls, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. St. Matt. 11.28. And seeing all things are ready, and he expects us, let
us say to him, we come to do thy will, we are weary and heavy laden, we come to
find rest and ease, we come Lord Jesu, we come quickly. With these, or some
such meditation, let us then scrue up the Soul to a devout frame and temper.
And thus much of Preparation.

CHAP. IV. Considerations after Receiving.
Fourthly, what is fit to be considered and done after Receiving.
FIrst, thankfully meditate on the infinite mercy and long-suffering of God,
that he has been pleased to give thee this one opportunity more, of renewing
and sealing again the Covenant of Grace, who have so often broken thy
Conditions of it. Secondly, labor to imprint a deep remembrance of any
promises or holy resolutions there made, between God and thy Soul, and be
watchful in the keeping of them. Thirdly, earnestly beg of God, to assist thee
in the keeping them, and in the walking for the future in the ways of Religion
and Holiness. Fourthly, meditate on the danger and the guilt thou runnest into,
if thou labor not more sincerely afterward to keep those thy pious purposes,
and thy felicity if thou do. Fifthly and Lastly, by looking back on this divine
and heavenly, and pleasant duty, think and meditate, how lovely and cheerful
and pleasurable, a Religious life must needs be.
First, thankfully meditate on the infinite mercy and long suffering of God,
that he has been pleased to give thee this one opportunity more of renewing and
sealing again the Covenant of Grace, who have so often broken thy Conditions of
it.

Upon this Consideration, who is there but must needs say with David, Ps. 34.8.
O taste and see that the Lord is good. We that have lately tasted, and have seen
how good the Lord is, how gracious, to have given us one opportunity more of
renewing our Covenant with him; shall we, can we forbear to publish it? Can we
ever cease to be thankful? No surely, rather let us be ready to encourage
others ever hereafter, to go from whence we have come, and taste and see how
good the Lord is.

However, let each particular Soul, be deeply sensible, and considerate of this
goodness of the Lord which he has tasted; O my Soul, (say) has our Jesus
admitted us once more to his Table, and permitted us to seal our Covenant
again, to renew our resolutions and purposes of obedience? and would he do it
after so many old breaches of it? and is he willing yet to be reconciled, upon
our reformation, and future sincerity in Holiness? and has he confirmed this to
us in the Sacrament? O infinite Mercy and Compassion of our God! Well, my Soul,
let us never forget it, but say with David, Ps. 103.1.2. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord O my Soul,
and forget not all his benefits. Let us consider a little, might not God have
snatched away, and have called us presently before him, in the midst of such or
such a crying Sin, which we can easily remember, and not have given us one call
more, one opportunity more of a reconciliation? he might very justly. Might he
not have called us to our particular judgment in the midst, in the very act
of such or such an Impiety, of this or that Lust or Intemperance injustice or
perjury, Oath or Execration, Debauchery or uncharitableness? Might he not have
done so, after our long and wilful neglects of this holy Duty, before ever we
approacht to it? and how might it have been now with us, had he taken that
advantage against us? Might he not have hurried us away, to eternal unknown
woes, without giving us these advantages, which we now by his Grace may improve
to the purposes of a blessed Eternity? And shall we not, my Soul, shall we not
improve them, to the uses of Immortality, when our Lord is thus willing we
should? Let us do so then, and do it heartily, cheerfully and constantly; and
let this goodness of the Lord lead us to Repentance and Reformation, and invite
us to holiness and Religion, that is the first.

Secondly, after receiving, labor to imprint a deep remembrance of thy
Promises or holy resolutions then made (or before) between God and thy Soul,
and be diligent in keeping of them. O let not the old Love, the former
affection to Iniquity, return any more; but if the temptation do return, stay
and remember, how odious, how deformed and ugly the Sin appeared then to thee,
when thou were at the Lord's Table, and then it was, that it appeared most
truly as it is: and then next, let this engage thee to recall thy pious
purposes there; for alas! these are not to abide with thee only for an hour or
a day or a week, but to the end of our days: and how hypocritically should we
deal with our God, should we instantly forget that we have renewed our
Covenant, and our purposes of obedience with him, upon the Alarm of a Sin that
promises much, and shows fair.

However, Consider beforehand, the temptation will come again, whatever thy
resolutions now are, (and do thou expect no other) and it is likely thou will
not always be in this temper of Soul that thou now art in. The opportunities
for thy Sin will be fair again; but do not thou now resolve against it? I
suppose thou do: But alas! this thou have done heretofore, (perhaps often
also) and promised universal obedience to this Savior; and yet have fallen
again, as surely as a man falls that is struck with a Thunderbolt; and thus it
may be thou have gone round all the days of thy Life, Sinned and repented,
received the holy Supper, and yet still fallen as frequently and as surely as
ever, and hitherto remained in a State of Sin and Death.

Thus I say, it may be, thou have run on in this Course many years, and doubled
thy guilt with thy days, and always upon the next occasion and opportunity,
forgotten that ever thou did repent and resolve amendment of life. Remember,
this is a very ill sign (yet) of thy Condition, and it is extremely dangerous.
Much (perhaps) above half thy days have gone round in this Circle; And now if
thou would, thou have not half of them left to dedicate to Religion, and the
service of the holy Jesus, and to the blessed Severities of Piety and virtue.
And what is now to be done then? O at last (now) be more strictly watchful and
diligent, in keeping thy Resolutions against it; and against all occasions of
it also, whatever self denial, or shame or reproach or difficulty it cost thee:
Get at least some tolerable ground against it now, never leaving, till thou have
crucified and subdued all known habitual wilful sin whatever, and laid it dead
at thy feet.

Remember too, that now is thy time, that now thou have yet fair advantages;
but if thou employ them not to the uses of Eternity, and in order to the
conquest and victory over thy darling Sin that has so often born thee down
before it, thy Lord may e're long, bid thee lay aside all thy business here,
and come and appear before him, and find it uncrucified, unreformed, and
unmortified in thee.

Consider further, if so, why when thou art laid on the borders of the Grave,
and coming to the Neighborhood of Death, thou will then with sorrow perceive
and find, that by that hour all thy pains about it would have been over, and
all thy trouble at an end; and would have been as if they had never been; and
nothing left to do, but to sit down in eternal peace; all thy combats would
then have been ended, all thy mortifications over, every difficulty of thy
journey past through, and thou would have had nothing more to come, but only
(through thy Lord's merits) to sit down and to enjoy the fruit of thy
diligence, and thy Victory, in Rest and Holiness, and joy and safety.

Come then in view of these hopes, consider once more, that after all that thou
have done, the old temptation will return upon thee, and what art thou resolved
to do if it should? would thou without any resistance of it submit, and
tamely yield to it again? Do thou not resolve with sincerity of endeavors to
get some ground of it, if not the victory? art thou fully purposed to oppose
and resist it? If not, to what end have thou begun thy holy Course of life, if
thou intend only to go on in it so long till thou find a fair opportunity to
do otherwise.

If this be thy Case, if thou will run thy race no longer than thou can do it
with ease, or no longer than thy Corrupt Interests or desires, or the Devil are
quiet, and forbear to tempt thee; thou art then as surely gone as ever.

Consider therefore, now while they are at rest, before they come to be
importunate and earnest with thee again, (for they certainly will) how thou
may best resist them, or be out of the way and most secure from them, from
all appearance, all occasions of them, out of their reach and violence.
Whatever your Iniquity be, try whether there be not an absolute necessity
before it be subdued, and thy resolutions kept, to mortify thy great desires
of the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of the World. Do but try for a while, how
safe thou would be then, how much further from all danger of a relaps: and be
sure of this also, that whenever it returns, it will (like other Enemies) fall
upon thee there, where thou art weakest and least fortified.

Whatever therefore thy sinful inclinations be, O double thy guards there, that
the Enemies of thy Soul and of thy crucified Lord, may never more find thee
unarmed and unprovided, at their next return upon thee.

Further, if thou hopest to keep thy holy Resolutions against all known Sin,
then beware, lest thy affections to it, should not be left as dead, as thou art
apt to think: Take heed that they revive no more. The least indulgence, or
affection left behind, may renew insensibly, and grow great, and become big
enough to bear thee down against thy present holy purposes, and become strong
enough to break down all the bonds of Reason and Religion; and then all thy
Labor may prove to be lost, thy guilt greater, and thy time less: So great are
the least remains of affection left for the old Iniquity. O be then at least
more mindful of thy promises of obedience, than hitherto thou have been.
Remember, that now thou have begun for Heaven, and set out for the Land of
Canaan, and undertaken, sincerely to be for all that is holy just and good; and
that now thou may be safe for ever, holy and happy for ever, if prudently and
with an upright heart, thou carry on the concerns of thy Soul, with those of
thy allowable Calling, and to make them equally keep pace together, as thou art
peacefully moving toward thy Prize and thy Crown: And as thou art thus going on
cheerfully to health and peace and pleasure, look behind thee as little as thou
can, lest thy foot slip again, and thou lose thy ground, and thy last state
be worse than the first.

Whenever therefore the old allurements, the old occasions, and the former
temptations shall return, or the Flesh the World or the Devil, be strongly
drawing thee off, and pressing thee to fall as grossly as ever, then (if
possible) recalling thy pious resolutions, producing and laying them before
thee, say, O my Soul, shall we now break them again? if we do, we know not, we
are not sure, that God will ever give us one advantage or opportunity more of a
Reconciliation.

Now then is our time, of resisting the Enemies of our Savior and our Soul,
and of showing what we can do for God and for Religion; for Heaven and
Immortality. Now, when our Enemies are most earnest, busy and importunate with
us; let us now (seeing this is our time of trial) gather up all our strength,
manage the Combat with Courage, and a great and fixed Resolution, and whatever
the pleasure, whatever the advantage or Interest or Honor be, let us look on
them all, as the flatteries of our Enemies, and be deaf to them all: and then
(by Divine aid and assistance) We shall prevail, and be more than Conquerors.
Romans 8.37.

And O my Soul, let it never be said or remembered of us, in the day of
judgment, that we begun well very often, but persevered not; went not on with
alacrity and cheerfulness, with Zeal and Courage in our pious Resolutions.
Never then let it be said, that we forgot thee O Jesu! forgot our League of
Friendship, our Covenant with thee, as soon as ever we came from Feasting with
thee.

Should our Prince, whom we had highly provoked and injured by treasonable
words and actions, invite us to his House, bid us come and dine with him at his
own Table, should he tell us he were willing to pardon us; willing to be
reconciled to us; notwithstanding all the affronts and injuries he had offered
him, willing to receive us into his embraces too, and to be (as we say) friends
again, and take us to his favor; should we not thankfully accept of the
kindness? and be proud of the favor? Would it not melt us into Love and
Affection, joy and gratitude? and upon this should we promise him sincerely to
endeavor no more to partake with his Enemies, or to be lead by them to affront
or displease him; should we, or could we indeed, as soon as ever we were gone
out of his house presently run to his Enemies and join with them, and fall to
injuring him again as bad as ever, or perhaps worse than ever? How
disingenuous, how provoking must it needs be to him? If so, far be it from us
my Soul, thus to deal with the King of Kings, and Prince of Peace, the Savior
of the World, and our dear Redeemer.

But now when we go forth from his House, the House of Prayer, and are to apply
our selves to the lawful Concernments and occasions of this life, let us carry
with us a faithful and constant remembrance of our holy purposes; and let this
be one of our pious Resolutions, no more to be ever unmindful of the rest of
our good resolutions which we made with God at the Holy Table.

Thirdly, Earnestly beg of God to assist: thee in keeping any good Resolutions,
and in walking for the future in the ways of Religion and Holiness. Our pious
purposes, desires, or intentions cannot be effected by our selves alone,
without the preventing and assisting Grace of our Great Creator and Redeemer.
Let us not fail then, frequently and earnestly to sue for it at the Throne of
Grace; and then if we are not wanting to our own Interest, but with diligence
and sincerity, and watchfulness and honest endeavors, we set our selves to the
performance of them, the day will e're long be ours, the Victory and the Crown
ours.

Say then, who would be so imprudent, as not earnestly to sue for that which he
may certainly have for the asking and the using? and who would not diligently
use and husband it, when the so doing will not fail to procure more? and then
again, who would not industriously employ that More, when (like Interest upon
Interest) it would bring in more yet? St. Mat. 13.12. and 25.29. St. Lu. 8.18.
and 19.26.

O let not the Grace of God be in vain, and lost on us, only for want of our
own Diligence in employing and using it: and then let not our own watchfulness
and labors and pious endeavors be all in vain, only for want of suing for the
assistance of divine grace, frequently and devoutly beg of God therefore, to
aid thee in all thy holy purposes and desires and Resolutions; that he will
please to keep thee constant to them, as thou art passing over this World, to
him, and to a better; that he would increase the hatred of thy Sins, and the
Love of Religion in thee, both which he has lately graciously begun in thee.
Say to him, O my Lord, I have nothing, I am nothing, I can do nothing without
thee; These my Resolutions and purposes of amendment of life, of piety and
virtue, will upon the next violent Temptation be wavering and tottering again,
without thee and thy aid: By that be pleased to keep them warm and steadfast in
me; so warm, that no length of time may cause them to grow cold again, no
violence of a Temptation break through them.

Fourthly, Meditate on the guilt and the danger thou runnest into, if thou
labor not more sincerely afterward to keep those pious purposes; and thy
Felicity if thou do.

I do not say, so to keep them as to live without Sin, and in an absolutely
perfect Estate; To live wholly without Sins of frailty and mere infirmity,
ignorance or sudden surprise, that is, those that may sometime or other rush on
us e're we are a ware; No, but of not keeping thy Resolutions of Reformation of
all known customary wilful Sin whatever, and to retain no one such known
Iniquity.

Remember, the Sin, if entertained again, at least as familiarly as heretofore,
and returned to with as much love as ever, will now ever be a Sin against more
Mercy, against more Love, and against more purposes and resolutions of
returning from it; O run not thy Soul then upon this increase of Guilt and
Danger; But rathey say, O my Soul, shall we so soon forget our Lord, our Master
Jesus, to whom we lately vowed obedience, and swore Allegiance, as to entertain
and cherish a known Enemy of his within our heart and bosom? Shall we soon
forget, whose sighing, groaning, bleeding, dying Love we have seen represented
to us lately, and shall we add disingenuity and ingratitude, and a vow-breach
to the Sin it self? And shall we thus keep our integrity, and thus show our
endeavors to keep to our pious resolutions, as tamely to yield up all, lay
aside all those considerations, at the return of the next Sin that looks
pleasantly, and that comes with fair opportunities for the committing it? shall
we do this, not only after so much love, but after having our Covenant renewed
and sealed again with Almighty God? And after he has graciously declared, that
he is willing to be reconciled to us, for what is past, if we heartily give up
our selves to him for the future? and when we have promised so to do to our
uttermost, and to give up the whole man to him?

In sum, shall we (say) in spite of so much Love, so much mercy and
Compassion, such gracious offers on God's part; and then in spite of many
advantages, purposes and resolutions on ours, shall we return to our Lusts and
Intemperance, as frequently as ever? to our old Oaths and Execrations, our
Revenge and Malice, our Covetousness and Injustice, our Pride or Ambition, our
Inconsideration or Uncharitableness, to our darling Sin whatever it be? No, my
Soul, we will now at last more seriously weigh the Guilt and Danger of so
doing; We have begun, and let us go on for Eternity, whomsoever we displease by
it, whatever becomes of it as to this present life.

Let us now once more consider, that possibly this may be the last opportunity
that our Savior may give us to be reconciled to him, before we go hence and be
no more seen; the happy union and agreement between us has been lately sealed,
let us never more wilfully and knowingly break it, lest all the old account be
charged on us again. Let us therefore now make the best advantage, the best use
of it we are able, and return no more to the former state, lest our Lord come
and find us in such a breach of our part of our Covenant, and never more permit
us to renew it again, till the day of Judgment.

And as now we have by our Lord's infinite mercy, got a good advantage to try
once more for a Crown of Life and Glory, let us be watchful and diligent,
unwearied and constant in our Race, that our Lord when he comes, may find us so
doing.

Adieu then (say) once more my old Dalilahs, farewell to ye, and welcome
Religion, welcome my holy Duties, ye that once seemed irksome and tedious to
me; Welcome now as the way and means by which I am to be qualified to have my
Lord's merits applied to me, to keep me in his favor, and to meet him in his
Kingdom.

Welcome my Devotions, ye that once seemed too tedious to me, and to take up
too much of my time, the actions I once was even ashamed to be found employed
in; Welcome, though purchased at never so dear a rate, or expense of time, I am
sure I can be no loser by you.

Welcome my Solitudes and Retirements from the World, and my frequent being
alone; I find I can best see and consider the state of my Soul in ye, and
though ye were once very disagreeable to me, I now perceive you are
advantageous.

Welcome ye Christian Temperance and Sobriety, and Purity and Chastity,
whatever self-denials or reproaches ye may possibly cost me, no matter, so I
may sit at the Feet of Jesus to all Ages.

And welcome Alms and Charity, though ye once seemed expensive to me, and ill
bestown; I now see Cause, infinite Cause to think otherwise, when ye are laid
out in order to the Inheritance of a Kingdom.

Welcome Humility, Charity, and Forgiveness, and Love of Enemies, ye that once
seemed unreasonable, and of all other Duties most disagreeable to flesh and
blood, and a heavy yoke; but I now think otherwise of you, when I consider how
excellent an imitation ye are of that blessed Jesus, with whom I lately supt,
and at whose Feet I hope to sit, in the mansions of Glory.

Welcome Meekness and Patience, Mortification and Self-denial, and all that is
holy just and good. Welcome all means of my growth in Grace; all the Commands
of my Savior; Welcome to me, who have resolved never more to give out, never
to think I have done enough, till all be over, and at an end, in a holy and
happy Death in a blessed and joyful Resurrection.

Fifthly and Lastly, after receiving; by looking back on this Divine and
Heavenly and pleasant Duty, think and meditate, how lovely and cheerful and
pleasurable, a Religious Life must needs be.

Say truly, is there not a great Serenity and Calm, and peace of mind, in the
being free from Malice, and desires of Revenge, from Rage and Envy? Is there
not a Secret joy and Cheerfulness and Lightsomeness of heart, in offering up
Praises and Thanksgivings, and Hymns and Hallelujahs to the Savior of the
World? Is there not a blessed inward Relish and delight and pleasure that flows
from the offering up a holy and devout Prayer to him? How great a satisfaction
and pleasantness is there in offering up some of our substance to God in Alms?
Is there not a great quiet and sedateness, and peace of Soul and mind, in the
being free from the hurries, and the shame and follies, and solicitations of
Lustful desires? Is there not an unknown tranquillity of mind in the being
freed from proud and vainglorious and ambitious desires, and in the sitting
down at ease with meekness, contentment and humility? Is it not a blessed thing
to be freed from the pain and disorders of Intemperance? from the shame and
dishonor of Lust? to have subdued, and conquered, and mortified our passions
and sinful appetites, and to sit above the reach of them? Must it not needs be
a blissful thing, to be freed from those stings and lashings and secret
gnawings, that perpetually dwell in the heart of the wicked, and irreligious
man? though they are little known to any other but God and his own Soul? Is it
not (think you) a great felicity to be freed from the slavery of Sin and the
Devil, which are the greatest Tyrants in the World? Can you not now from this
short and small experience of these things, be persuaded of the sweets and
Delicacies that dwell with Religion?

Do but ask the holy person, the man of an heavenly Conversation, whether there
ever be any thing that greatly discomposes and troubles his serene and calm,
and peaceful heart? Ask him again, whether he do not each night lie down in
peace, and with an undisturbed Conscience, sleep sweetly and securely, content
heartily if his Lord please, to sleep 'till the general Resurrection? Ask him,
whether he, lying down in peace and Innocence, feels the insupportable horror
and amazement of any great guilt when he awakes? No, he awakes as pleasantly as
the morning, he no sooner opens his Eyes, but they are darted toward the new
Jerusalem, before they behold vanities.

Ask him whether he dreads the Face of the Sun, or Men or Devils? Whether he
greatly dreads the sight of an open Grave, of a winding Sheet, or the name of
Death? Know of the pious Soul again, whither there be any real pleasures in a
holy retired, and angelical life? and he will tell you, he has found more
pleasure in being a devout communicant at his Lord's Table, than ever he found
in the commission of the most relishing Iniquity. Ask him further, whether
those pleasures do not stay longer with him, than any others? and he must
undoubtedly tell you, that as the pleasures of Sin are but for a small Season,
none of them lasting and continuing; So those of Piety are permanent and
abiding.

But now on the other head. Let us a little enquire into the unpeaceful,
unpleasant state of the unholy person. Ask him, whether when he is sometimes in
the midst of his jollities and pleasures, there do not something within him
check and restrain the freedom of his mirth? and often on a sudden turn him
into fears and Melancholy? and if he would speak the truth, he must needs
confess, that he has been frequently served so. Alas! this is his guilty
Conscience, proceeding from his inconsiderate state of life; this is the fruit
and effect of his Crimes, and the want of a more frequent and devout
communicating.

Enquire of him again, whether he usually lies down in peace and rest? whether
he do not often startle in his sleep, and his very dreams are not terrible?
whether he be not hugely apt to be disquieted and discomposed, and disordered,
and to fear almost every little noise, and at last awakes with unknown horrors
of Guilt upon his heart? This he can doubtless tell you is a sad truth.

Ask of him again, whether, when others take their innocent recreations, and
refresh their Spirits with harmless mirth; whither (I say) he do not sometimes
sigh and droop, and goes away alone, withdraws into some solitary place, and is
there discontented, full of anguish, perplexed and haunted, and when he hears
the knel of his departed Neighbors, looks pale, and trembles; and is amazed,
being so little prepared for the same state and condition?

Ask him, whether, when he beholds a dead Corpse, his blood do not cool and
surround his heart? Alas! poor wretch, it is his guilty Conscience, his Sins
unrepented of, his life unreformed, that are the Causes of these doleful and
dismal Confusions; and little (it may be) do the World think, the Iniquities he
knows himself guilty of. This, if he would confess, he must needs acknowledge.

Say, now, is it not a blessed Estate of life, to be always freed, and to sit
at a distance from these? to be at peace from these secret tumults and inward
horrors? Why, it is Religion and holiness, and frequent communions alone, that
can effect it for us.

Say again, when we look back on the state and temper of the pious man, can we
choose but think it a blessed and peaceful thing, always to have the Soul in that
disposition? why, it is Piety and Virtue, That can alone fix and settle that joy
and peace there.

To which state, when you are once (by the assistance of Heaven) arrived, you
will find reason to say, O my Soul, how much peace and joy do we find in that
State of Life, in which we have reason to hope our Lord is reconciled to us?
How much better is it, how exceedingly beyond the old unreformed, unregenerate
course? how sweet is the consideration of being become from an Enemy, a friend
of God? and to think that we have caused joy in Heaven by our returning? Oh how
imprudent were we, that we should believe nothing of those things sooner, and
could not be brought to believe there was any such contentment and joy in
holiness!

How many Days and Months and Years of true Peace and Pleasure have we lost,
that we had not been acquainted with our Savior sooner? That the voice of God,
inwardly calling us, often by his holy Spirit, or outwardly by his Ambassadors,
should so long have been in vain? Oh that we should not have been persuaded by
them to come sooner; and to taste and see, how gracious the Lord is. -- That we
should scarce ever till now, find by our own Experience, that the ways of
Religious Wisdom, are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Prove.
3.17.

But blessed be God, that he has at last opened our Eyes to behold the
wonderful things of his Law, Ps. 119.18.
and inclined us to experience and try the sweetness, pleasure and
satisfaction, of being in a good measure qualified to have his merits applied
to us; that he has given us Grace to experience somewhat of the blissful
apprehensions of being in his Favor.

And now O my Soul, what infinite reason have we to say, Blessed be the day
that ever we came acquainted with our Savior! Blessed be the day that ever our
disobedient heart was melted into Love of thee, O our dear Redeemer! And I
beseech thee, keep it filled ever with this love, fortified ever with these
Resolutions, ever fixed and constant in this temper; and if there be any thing
in it, that yet may displease thee, O make me to know it, and assist me to
throw it off for ever!

And when will our Lord come again? that we may again Sup with him, and feast
our selves upon his sacred Body and Blood, and taste this pleasant, most
delicious food again? May he make no long tarrying, may it not be long, O may
it not be long, before we again either meet him at his Table, meet him in the
Air, or meet him in his Kingdom. O what will it be to be always with him, where
there is so much secret joy and peace, in this small glymps of him, and at so
great distance too!

And now my Soul, seeing we have given up our heart to our dearest Lord; in
this temper let us live, and in this disposition let us dye; and we hope by
Death we shall come nearer to him, never more to be pulled back again, or in
danger to be drawn off from him by the violence of any temptation; for these
shall be done away. And being thus united to him the great Lover of Souls, we
shall at last, at his glorious coming, not much dread the heavens being rolled
into a Scroul, or the Crack and flames of the dying World, or the Trump of the
Archangel; but with infinite joy, hear the words.

Arise, and come up hither; awake, and arise, and come, Take your Crowns, your
place on my right hand. Arise, and come and see your new State, and new
Condition; your unknown felicities, and unknown Glories, your endless peace and
safety.

Arise and come hither, up to me your Jesus the Captain of your Salvation;
Come, and be above the reach of Infelicities and Miseries, Sin and Death for
all ages; and sit down in your Immortality and Rest for ever. Arise, come and
partake of those Glories, that cost me your Lord, Sighs, and Groans, and Blood,
and Wounds, pangs and Life it self, to purchase it for you: that cost you also
so many Dutys; the Struggling with so many temptations, the combating so many
Enemies, before you got the Victory; so many difficulties, discouragements, so
much shame and reproach, self-denials, and the like, before you were entitled
to my Merits, and qualified to receive the been t of my purchase; Come now, and
sit down in their Enjoyment, for above millions of years and ages.

In a word, O my Soul, say, May these hopes be ever in our view, ever in our
heart and thoughts. And as we have lately begun for Eternity, upon the Stock of
this Hope; so let us by this square and order all the Actions of our lives:
That so at last, when we shall come to leave Mortality, our Passage hence may
be peaceful, safe, and holy; our Resurrection joyful, safe and holy: and
(through him who is the foundation of our hope) we may not fail to be remembered
with mercy in the day of judgment. After which, we may with Angels, and
Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, laud and magnify his glorious Name,
ever more praising him, and Saying Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts, Glory be
to the, O Lord most^ High, Amen.

A Prayer before the holy Sacrament.
O My dearest Savior, who were pleased to suffer death upon the Cross, to
purchase Heaven and Salvation for me, and now call me to a remembrance of
that thy dying Love; so fit and trim, and adorn my Soul I beseech thee, that I
may not fail, to be now and ever an acceptable guest at thy holy Table.

Let the consideration of my state, and the remembrance of my past sins, lead
me to a deep humiliation and contrition for them, and that contrition to entire
hatred, a sincere reformation of them, and fixed resolutions of future Love and
obedience. O my Savior, let my Faith, and Charity, and Devotion be, by thy
gracious assistance, raised to a Heavenly pitch and temper; that so, whatever
thou please to deny me in this lower World, I may never be denied a
participation of all the benefits of thy meritorious death and sufferings. I
come dear Jesu, I come to renew my Covenant with thee, which I have so
miserably broken, by my Sins of Omission and Commission, by my Iniquities of
thought word and deed, Here you may mention those grosser Crimes which upon
Examination, you find your self to stand guilty of.
[particularly by my Sins of -- ] For these and all other my impieties, known
and unknown, be pleased to receive a reconciliation: and let this holy
Sacrament prove a sealing of my Pardon in the Court of Heaven, and may I not
fail, O my Savior, together with thy body and blood, to receive new Grace and
strength against them. O my Jesu, who have done and suffered so much for me,
and now invitest me to come and see it represented to me, be pleased to do this
further for me, to grant that it may not be in vain and lost as to me, by mine
own default. O let it never be said or remembered of me in the day of Judgment,
that I ever appeared before thee in this holy action, without such a wedding
Garment, as thou did mercifully accept; or that I did eat and drink my own
damnation. And though my Iniquities are great; great like thy Sorrows, and
great like thy sufferings, which I am coming to commemorate; yet because they
are infinitely less than thy Mercies and thy Merits; Pity me, O Lord pity me,
accept me, O my God accept me, for lo I come to do thy will; and grant that I
may ever hereafter live the life of Grace, in a state acceptable to thee; that
so by thine Agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, which I am coming
to remember, my past Iniquities being done away, I may now at length be more
closely united to thee. That I may come back again from thy Table with joy and
thanks, and Love and adoration, and comfort and satisfaction. O that at last my
Resolutions may be fixed, and steadfast; the conquest of these Sins which I can
easily remember have often foiled me, may be such, that they may no more
prevail against me, and get the Dominion over me. And that now thou may
abide with me forever, and the holy Spirit may guide me into the paths of a
cheerful, sincere, and persevering Holiness; that so having past my days that
are to come, in the watchfulness and diligence, and Labors of Repentance and a
holy Life; I may live with thee, and dye with thee, and rise again with thee,
and then ever sit at thy Feet in the mansions of Glory, O my dearest Savior,
Amen.

A Thanksgiving and Prayer after Receiving.
OHoly and Eternal Jesu; I praise thee, I bless thee, I worship thee, I
glorify thee, I give thee thanks for those invaluable mercies from the
participation of which I lately came; for these representations of thy
bleeding, dying love to me; Love infinite, Love unspeakable, Love eternal, Love
for me before I was born. O compassionate Jesu! who am I, that thou should
please to receive me, to renew my part of the Covenant of Grace with thee, who
have so frequently, so miserably broken it? O let the return which now I may
ever hereafter make, for so much love, let it be Love and Obedience. Love, in
some measure great like thine, even to death it self; and let my Obedience be
as early as I can now make it, and as cheerful and universal, sincere and
constant. O let the deep remembrance of this Love of thine, constrain me to
such an obedience, Let neither the Love of the World, the allurements and baits
of the flesh, or the temptations of the Devil, ever force or draw me off from
such an obedience. O my dear Redeemer, though I have now again resolved against
all wilful known Sin, [particularly against the Sin of Here you may mention the
Sin to which you are most tempted.
-- ] and promised thee an obedience; yet without the continuance of thy
gracious aid and assistance, I shall most certainly fall again, upon the very
next temptation. Secure me therefore O Lord, by that, secure me, save Lord or I
perish: Whatever thou please to deny me here, deny me not, I beseech thee O
Lord, I beseech thee, the assistance of that Grace of thine, without which, my
Spiritual Enemies will soon prevail over me again. Make me to see and consider,
the necessity of avoiding all appearance of evil, all those occasions of my
falling, and to get instantly out of the way of Sin, whatever I am like to lose
by it, whatever the disadvantage be in this World: Let, O let my Sacramental
vows, and promises, and Resolutions, be never so broken again, as they have
sometime been formerly; but O my Jesu, let my Sins and Iniquities ever
hereafter appear so odious, and hateful to me, as they did then when I was at
my Lord's Table. O let them still be as vile and deformed as they then seemed
to me. Let none of my pious purposes, and holy Resolutions, be ever forgotten
by me [particularly. Here again, if you think fit, you may mention any holy
Resolution made by you.
-- ] Let neither the cares of the World, nor the disappointments of my
expectations in the affairs of it; nor the malice of my Enemies, the charitable
reproofs of my friends, the trespasses of my Neighbors, the hardness of my
Labors, the Importunity and earnestness of my Creditors, the neglects and
injustices of my Debtors, any fears of being poor, any distrusts concerning a
provision, for my posterity; or my being despised or reproached by any man, or
my Losses of the World, nor that World of Temptations, through which I know I
am to pass, ever put my Soul out of frame, or lead me to a discontented,
inconsiderate, and troubled Spirit, or put my holy purposes out of my mind: but
that in the midst of these and all other tumults of the World, I may always fly
to Religion, and take Sanctuary there, and be safe and rest there, and delight
to do thy will, and be ready to offer up my Soul and Body to thy Service. That
so the rest of my days that are yet to come in this World may be passed away
in Humility and Charity, in righteousness and holiness, in mortification and
self-denial, in love and obedience to thee O holy and Eternal Jesu. Amen.

A pious Resolution, which may be solemnly made (on their Knees) by them, who
since their Baptism, have had no opportunity to be confirmed by the Bishop: but
yet (being ready and desirous to be confirmed) are willing to receive the Holy
Sacrament.
DRead Majesty of Heaven and Earth! -- Forasmuch as thou have received me in my
Baptism into the Covenant of Grace, (sealed by the blood of Jesus) when an
Infant; Lord, I being now come to the knowledge of it, do on my bended knees
humbly and thankfully own and acknowledge that infinite favor, and adore thy
mercy. And do really and heartily take upon my self, what was then engaged for
me, and by the help of thy Grace, (which I earnestly beg) do resolve to perform
with an hearty sincerity my part of that Covenant, to the end of my days. I
believe what was then promised I should believe, Lord help my unbelief. I
renounce in my own person, what was then promised I should renounce. And for
the conditions required on my part, (to wit) a joint performance of all the
Gospel-Graces and Duties, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Self-denial, Repentance, and
the rest, and an obedience to all of them in sincerity, tho with weakness and
Imperfection; Lord, I humbly and thankfully embrace and accept of them, and
declare my hearty desires and resolutions to discharge them acceptably, through
the holy Jesus. And before thee O holy Trinity, and the whole Court of Heaven,
I do solemnly make this Declaration, and renew my Baptismal Covenant Promise
and Engagement. Amen.

If you are able to write, you may write out a Copy of these Words; and having
repeated them before God with a deep humility and pious affections, you may add
these words to it, [ and sign it on my bended knees] And then before you rise,
subscribe your name to it, and the day of the month.

January 1. 1681. N. N.

Ever after remembering, that now you have dedicated your self to God, and that
if you live the rest of your life according to these beginnings, your passing
over the World shall be safe and holy; and you be entitled to the Merits of
your Redeemer, and qualified to receive the benefits of his death and
sufferings.

An act of Resolution which may be humbly and devoutly made on their knees, by
those who since their last receiving the holy Sacrament, have (through the
violence of a Temptation, and it is daily solicitation, though constantly
resisted) sometime fallen into some one act of known wilful Sin.
DRead Majesty of Heaven and Earth. Forasmuch as I, who was early dedicated to
thee by Baptism, and have frequently renewed that Covenant at thy holy Table,
have yet sadly fallen from my Baptismal holiness, and broken my vows and
resolutions even since the last Sacrament, grieving thy holy Spirit, wounding
my Soul, and provoking thy displeasure, setting my self back deplorably in my
journey toward Heaven, by the Sin of Here you may mention the Sin.
-- ] best known to thee when and where committed: I do now heartily accuse and
judge, and condemn my self for it, and for all other known and secret Sins; and
do earnestly repent my self of it, and desire to rise from it again by a
sincere Resolution of amendment of life, a greater watchfulness and entire
obedience; and this I solemnly on my bended knees declare before thee O holy
Trinity: and do now likewise humbly beg fresh assistances of the holy Spirit to
enable me to be more constant in my holy Resolutions, and to please thee
better. And for my Lord Jesus sake, and in his Name, and for thy loves sake to
mankind, thy pity and compassions sake, humbly beg, humbly hope, my pardon may
be as certainly now sealed in Heaven, as I make this declaration here on earth.
Mercy O my God, mercy, for the sake of that immaculate Lamb, that takes away
the Sins of the World, Amen.

Here again, if you are able to write, and sincerely do desire to rise from the
Sin by Repentance, you may before you go to the holy Table, write out a Copy of
these Words; and having repeated them with a penitent heart, subscribe your
name on your bended knees, as also the day when you made this Resolution.

January 1. 1681. N. N.

That so you may the better discern, what progress your soul makes, in its
Victory over all known Sin.

For no man can well observe his own growth in Grace, Bishop Tailor Rule of
holy dying.
but by accounting seldomer returns of Sin, and a more frequent victory over
temptations; concerning which every man makes his observations, according as he
makes his inquiries and search after himself.

A Prayer before the Sacrament; which may be used by them, who never received
it before.
O Blessed Savior and Redeemer! who were pleased to adm^^ me into thy holy
Church by the Waters of Baptism in my Infant days before I knew it; I do now,
being by thy Grace come to the knowledge of it, from the bottom of my heart
adore and bless thee for that mercy, and with a penitent heart, humbly and
earnestly beg thy pardon for my great abuses of it, that I should so wretchedly
as I have, stained and poluted those white and innocent Robes which I then put
on; and for my known and unknown breaches of those vows and promises, which
were then made in my name. O my Lord, I am accused, judged and condemned by my
own Conscience. But O my Jesu, whose sacred side once dropped Water and Blood for
me; as thou have admitted me to the Water when I was baptized, so be thou now
graciously pleased to admit me to the Blood too, and to partake of all the
benefits of it, that as I early partaked of the cleansing of the one, so I may
now receive the healing virtue of the other; and let all my Iniquities I
beseech thee, that have been adventured on by me since my Baptism to this
present hour, be to thee as if they had never been at all. O that I could now
go to thy Table with the like innocence that I came from the waters of
Regeneration; But seeing I cannot, O my Jesu, who were pleased to bring me to
the honor and privilege of Baptism, before I could beg or desire it, be thou
likewise pleased, by thy grace to carry me prepared to thy Table, who can, and
do earnestly desire and beg this of thee; and as thou were pleased then to make
me a lamb of thy flock, so deny me not the favor (how unworthy soever I have
hitherto lived of it) of being one of those faithful Sheep of thy fold, that
hear thy voice. O my Lord, as I was never yet at thy Table, and come a stranger
to this Heavenly feast; so I entreat thee, let me not miss of the mercy of
being a welcome and acceptable guest there. O make me to understand and
consider the advantage that I have above many others, who may now (by thy
Grace) never be an unworthy Communicant. Do thou therefore by thy gracious
intercession supply my ignorance, and by thy Mercy and Merits, pity and pardon
the vanities and sins and follies of my youthful state, [particularly Here you
may mention the particulars.
-- ] and receive me with the Love and Compassion and Tenderness of a Parent:
that so I may love thee, and adore thee, and bless thee, and obey thee betimes;
and may taste of the sweets and delicacies of an early Religion and Holiness. I
come then O my Jesu, I come to give thee this first solemn Testimony of my Love
to thee, and to receive the first great tokens of thy Love to me. O be pleased
so feelingly to touch my heart now at the first with a deep sense of Love to
thee and thy Religion, that I may ever hereafter rejoice in all opportunities
of a holy Sacrament, and have a never-ceasing Love to those holy Mysteries. Do
thou vouchsafe O my dear Redeemer, at this our first most solemn meeting, to
bring all those Graces along with thee, which thou would have my Soul to be
fitted with, and fix them there I beseech thee. O my Lord I was early devoted
to thee by others, but suffer me now to dedicate my self to thee. Come Lord
Jesu, come then, take possession of my heart, I beseech thee, before ever the
World, Flesh, or Devil, get any more footing there; and if either of them have
got any already, for my great neglects to present my self to thee, and opening
the door of it to thee sooner, turn out, O my Lord turn them out thence, and
with the rest of thy Church accept me, even me also O my Father. Let me take
thee into my hand, O my dear Lord, and place thee in my heart, before ever any
more lusts or follies be admitted there; and then be thou pleased to take me by
the hand, and place me in thy heart, that there I may live, and there I may
dye. Finally O my Lord, let all my past Iniquities I beseech thee, be so done
away, that thou may receive me so, as if I were but now come from the Waters
of Baptism.

With such hopes as these, with such defires as these, I come to lay my self at
thy feet, O blessed Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving after the holy Sacrament, to be used only by such,
as had never received it before.
O Holy and merciful Jesus! by whom the mercies of Eternity are conveyed to
mankind; I bless and praise and thank thee, with my whole heart, and all the
powers of my Soul, for this first admittance of me to the mercy and the
privileges of the Holy Sacrament of thy Body and Blood; for my having lately
partaked of some of these joys and comforts that are alone to be found with
thee and in thy Service, and till now were unknown to me.

O that having had the mercy and advantage of renewing my Covenant with thee, I
may now at least begin to spend my days, (as far as ever the necessary business
of this present life will permit me) in thy Service, in all the parts of piety
and virtue; in works of Mercy and Charity and Devotion, in meekness and
humility, in self-denial and Repentance, in Chastity and Temperance, in all
that is holy just and good. O my Lord! it is the serious desire and resolution of
my Soul thus to do; that so early beginning to lay up my treasure in Heaven, I
may (by thy Grace) have a good account there in the Records of Eternity, at the
end of my sixty or seventy years. O my Jesu! whatever thou please else to
deny me here, deny me not a grant of this my request I beseech thee; that those
desires and resolutions of mine, may in some good measure be accomplished and
effected. Let not the allurements and persuasions of my Companions, ever entice
me from my Duty, or the jeers or reproaches of any man whatever, fright me from
my Innocence. O let me never suffer my self to be laughed out of my Religion, or
be ashamed or afraid to perform my holy Duties before the face of any man, but
be ever looking unto Jesus; and let me in view of him be content to endure the
Cross and despise the shame, or whatever else shall befall me for the sake of
Piety and Virtue, or obedience to any one Command of thine: Let my youthful
heart be never much inflamed with any Loves, or passions or desires, but those
of thee and thy holy Religion. O my Lord, grant, that I may be persuaded to
understand and consider, what a great advantage I have, of devoting and giving
up my first and best days to Religion and Piety; and that now is my time to
show, that I am lead to Religion by Love, and by my choice, and not driven to
it only by the fears and horrors of an approaching Grave: and that I may often
and betimes consider, with how much greater comfort I shall leave Mortality, if
I may be able then to remember an early Love and Obedience to thee O Jesu. Let
me who have lived in thy family ever since I was baptized, now at least begin
to feel my self more powerfully drawn to thee than ever. O make me in the
beginning of my days, to be truly serious and considerate; to begin to
withdraw from the World betimes, and to love to be sometime alone, to look into
the state of my Soul, and provide for a joyful Resurrection. Make me to think
it the greatest happiness in this World to choose thee O blessed Jesu, betimes
for my Lord and Master, and to look on Religion as the Rest and Delight, and
Satisfaction of my Soul. O fill my Soul with such a Love to thee, and to those
holy Mysteries in which I commemorate a dying Lord, that I may be able to think
it long, before I have an opportunity to come to feast upon thy Body and Blood
again; and that as I grow in years, I may in some measure grow in Grace, and in
the Divine favor. To this end, O that I may pass safely through this dangerous
state of life, freed from the Intemperance and Lusts, the folly and vanity, the
heedlesness and inconsideration, that often attends it: and that I may the
better be able thus to do, Lord I now deliver up to thee, all my Affections and
Desires, to be guided and directed by thy Holy Spirit; I am willing to submit
them all to thee, that so as I have lately begun for Eternity, I may go on, and
prosper, and in an acceptable measure, now keep up to the purity and Innocence
of my first sanctification, and never more give out, till I come to the end of
my hopes, and the beginning of my joys, and be presented to my Father, pure
and spotless, in the great day of Rewards and Punishments, by thee O holy and
merciful Jesus, Amen.

A Prayer which may be used by them, who before they come to the Sacrament, set
apart something to be then offered up to God in Alms.
O Merciful Lord! from whom every good gift comes, and by whose bounty alone it
is, that I enjoy any thing which I possess; I humbly offer up this small return
of it to thee, for the use of them whom thou have made thy receivers, the poor
and the needy. Let not the smalness of the offering, or any unworthyness of
mine, I beseech thee, keep it from being an acceptable Alms and Oblation to
thee; and let not the abuse of any of my possessions that have been laid out on
Sin and Folly, Gluttony or Vanity, Lust or Intemperance, Revenge or Malice, be
ever charged or remembered against me, in the day of Judgment. And O my God
take from me a Covetous and Illiberal heart, and teach me the truly Christian
measures of Charity, in Giving, and Forgiving for Jesus sake, Amen.

A Prayer for the Grace of Charity in forgiving, with particular reference to
that petition in our Lord's Prayer, [forgive us our trespasses as we forgive,
etc.] which may be used either before the Sacrament, or any other time.
O Blessed and holy Jesus! who were the great Example of Giving and Forgiving,
dying for Enemies, ready and willing to forgive Iniquity and Sin, and to give
Heaven and Glory to all true Penitents; Give me Grace to write after all this
blessed Copy of thine in an acceptable measure. And if there be, or has been
any offender or trespasser against me, whom I have not forgiven, according to
thy Will, and the measures of the Gospel, forgive me O blessed Jesu, and let me
not fail to receive a full pardon of that Iniquity, for thy mercies sake. O let
my desires and Petitions of being forgiven as I forgive, never be answered
according to that instance whatsoever it were, or ever shall be, wherein I have
not heretofore, or (through the frailty of humane nature, or any sudden
surprise or inconsideration) should not hereafter at any time, keep up to thy
sacred Rule and Will. And O Lord guide and direct me for the Remainder of my
days in the true measures of Patience and forbearance, and take from me all
malice and hatred, and grudgings and heart-burnings, and desires of Revenge on
any that has injured me; and plant in my Soul, I humbly and earnestly beseech
thee, the true Charity and forgiveness. O Lord, for thy mercies sake, thy
Love's sake to mankind, so pity me, and pardon all my former gratifications of
my revengeful humor, that they may never be so charged on me or remembered, as
to hinder thy forgiveness of me: And whomsoever, and wherein soever I have
forgiven any, freely and fully and truly, be thou pleased O my dear Redeemer,
that all my former, and all my future petitions may be heard and granted,
according to that instance; And whenever I have already, or ever shall
request to be forgiven as I forgive, O merciful Lord, forgive me, as I then
forgive. And grant, that for the future I may so Copy out the blessed pattern
which thou have left me, that no Enemies, Persecuters, Slanderers, Revilers, or
Injurious Persons, may ever be able to conquer my love toward them: Christ.
Sacrif.
But that I may still bear a kind and tender heart to the most outraged and
provoking Spirits, blessing those that curse me, praying for those who
despightfully use me, returning Courtesies for affronts and injuries; bewailing
their Sins, pitying their miseries, and endeavoring to overcome evil with
good. Endow me with such a wise, considering, and sober Spirit, that I may ever
prefer the example of thee my Lord and Master, before all the Customs and
fashions of this World: Enduring the mockeries, the shame and contempt which
may be cast upon me, for the following his forgiveness and patience. And do
thou. O God, to whom vengeance belongs, pardon also and forgive those by whom
I suffer wrongfully; Spare them good Lord, spare them, and deny them not the
Grace of Repentance, that we may live together in eternal Love and Friendship
with thee, O blessed and holy Jesus. Amen.

Our Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, And the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
THE absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned these Errata's to escape the Press. The Printer thinks it the best
instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not laid upon the Author, and he hopes
they are no greater than an ordinary understanding may amend, and a little
charity may forgive.

R. Royston.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 5. for tanta, read tacita: p. 11. l. 9. for as, r. all: p. 14. l.
27. r. perform it: p. 31. l. 30. r. said do this. If: p. 33. l. 13. for lifted,
r. listed: p. 33. l. 20. r. a solemn: p. 35. l. 4. r. to come: p. 39. l. 12.
for could, r. would: p. 46. l. 21. dele to: p. 48. l. 9. for never, r. ever: l.
22. dele I: p. 99. l. 23. for great, r. dangerous: p. 100. l. 5. dele to: p.
112. l. 17. for head, r. hand: p. 116. l. 23. for where, r. when: p. 147. l. 9.
r. forgave: l. 17. r. enraged.

Books lately Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
EIKON ASILIK: The Pourtraicture of His Sacred Majesty King Charles the First,
of ever blessed Memory; in his Solitudes and Sufferings, newly reprinted by His
Majesty's special Command: in Octavo.

Dr. Hammond's Annotations on the New Testament, in Folio, the Fifth Edition,
Corrected.

The Book of Psalms Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Psalm, in Two Volumes:
by S. Patrick, D. D. Dean of Peterburgh,, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty. Octavo.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books, written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the addition of a Seventh Book:
by S. Patrick, D. D. etc. Octavo.

A Book for Beginners; or, A help to young Communicants, that they may be
fitted for the holy Communion and receive it with profit: by S. Patrick, D. D.
in 24o.

Christ's Counsel to his Church; in two Sermons preached at the two last Fasts:
by S. Patrick, D. D. in Quarto, new.

The Established Church; or, A Subversion of all the Romanist's Pleas for the
Popes Supremacy in England: together with a Vindication of the present
Government of the Church of England, as allowed by the Laws of the Land,
against all Fanatical Exceptions: particularly of Mr. Hickeringill, in his
scandalous Pamphlet, styled NAKED TRVTH, the Second Part: by Fran. Fulwood, D.
D. Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon: in Octavo, new.

A Discourse of the Morality of the Sabbath: being an Exposition of Exodus 20.
v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Humbly offered to this present Age: by John Gregory,
Archdeacon of Gloucester, in Octavo, new.

The New Distemper; or, The Dissenters usual Pleas for Comprehension,
Toleration, and the Renouncing the Covenant, Considered and Discussed; with
some Reflections upon Mr. Baxter's and Mr. Alsop's late Pamphlets, published in
Answer to the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's Sermon concerning Separation: by the
late Reverend Dr. Tomkins, in Octavo.

The Lively Picture of Lewis du Moulin, drawn by an incomparable Hand: together
with his Last Words, being his Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he
had made on the Divines of the Church of England) in several Books of his)
Signed by himself on the Fifth and Seventeenth of October, 1680. in Quarto, new.

The daily practice of Devotion; or, The hours of Prayer, fitted to the main
Uses of a Christian Life, with Prayers for the peaceful re-settlement of this
Church and State: by the late Pious and Reverend H. Hammond, in 120.

A Serious and Compassionate Inquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England, etc.

A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature, and of the
Christian Religion. In Two Parts: by Samuel Parker, D. D. Archdeacon of
Canterbury.

A Sermon preached before the Judges, etc. in the time of the Assizes in the
Cathedral Church at Gioucester, on Sunday Aug. 7. 1681. Published to put a stop
to False and Injurious Representations: by Edward Fowler, D. D.

The Primitive Christian Justified; or, a Scripture Demonstration, That to be
Innocent and Persecuted, is more Eligible than to be Prosperously Wicked.
Delivered in a Sermon in the Abby-Church of Bath: by William Goulde.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, at
Guild-Hall-Chappel on the 7th of May, 1682. By Francis Turner, D. D.

The Vindication of Christianity against Paganism, in Octavo, new.

FINIS.

