SOME REMARKS Upon a Paper which Sir George Hungerford, by a very unusual and
unfair Practice, delivered at the Door of the House of Commons, after a full
hearing of his Cause before the Committee.
THE chief Objection which Sir George Hungerford makes, is against the Power of
Disfranchising, wherein it is evident how much he is mistaken both by Law,
Practice, and his own Judgment. For,

1st. The Burgesses do not Vote, by reason of any Inhabitancy or Burgage
Tenure, but by being Elected and Sworn into the Office and Trust of a Burgess;
for breach of which Trust, They may be removed from the Office of a Burgess,
there being a Condition in Law tacitly annexed to such Office, the Breach
whereof is a good Cause of Disfranchisement, and the Words of these very
Disfranchisements, are expressly from the Office and Dignity of a Burgess, so
that ceasing thereby to be Burgesses, they consequently cease to have a Right
of voting as Burgesses.

2ly. This has been the constant Practice as appeared at the Committee by
their Books for near an Hundred Years past, and Robert Hungerford Esquire Sir
George's own Brother, who was formerly a Burgess of this Borough, has set his
Hand to, and allowed of several the like Disfranchisements, as appears by the
Borough Books.

3ly. The Disfranchisement of one of the Persons whom Sir George has put into
his Pole (though his Voice was disallowed at the Election by the Stewards and
Burgesses) was done by the Advice of Counselor Blake, Sir George's Son-in-Law,
and besides Sir George Hungerford himself was the first Person at the taking of
the Pole, who made an Exception to Disfranchised Persons.

Object. Whereas Sir George Objects, That Dyers Disfranchisement was not fully
proved.

Answer. Mr. Windham's Witnesses proved that he had seen his Disfranchisement
written in the Book, and could turn to the Place where it was torn out, and
said that Dyer gave Ten Shillings to have the Book in his Custody, in which
time it is supposed he tore it out himself.

Note. Swaddon who was convicted of Forgery, and stood in the Pillory, was one
of the disfranchised Persons who voted for Sir George.

Sir George Hungerford's Objection against Oliver Harman, one of Mr. Wyndham's
Voices (who never at any time lived more than One Hundred Yards from Calne, and
his House contiguous to the Borough) is very frivolous, for it was proved, that
he lived in the Borough before the Test of the Writ, and ever since, and
besides during his living out of the Borough, he was always esteemed as a
Burgess, was summoned to their Halls, acted as a Burgess, and had at that time,
and now near 100 l. of the Borough Stock in his Hands, being entrusted
therewith as a Burgess.

So that the majority of Voices, plainly appeared to the Committee, to be for
Mr. Wyndham.


