portrait of Queen Mary J. Drapentier Sculpeit
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE Mary Queen of England Scotland France and Ireland
Defender of the Faith etc Obit Dece. 28 1694 Etate Sua 32.


A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE Pious and Glorious LIFE and ACTIONS OF THE Most
Illustrious Princess, MARY Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

CONTAINING The most Memorable Things, and Matters, relating to Her Royal Self,
etc. from Her BIRTH till the most Deplorable time of Her ever to be Lamented
DEATH, on the 28th. of December, 1694.

Faithfully Done by J. S.

LONDON, Printed for John Gwillim, in Bishopsgate-street; and Sold by most
Booksellers, 1695.

TO THE READER.
WHEN we undertake a Work of this Nature, the weight of so Illustrious a
Subject ought to strike us not only with awe and reverence, but make us
Consider, in the most serious manner, how we proceed in it, when, indeed, the
most Celebrated Pens in Europe, may come short of the Worth and Luster of so
Pious and Renowned a Princess, whose Fame may be said to have Traveled with
the Sun; and whose Virtues shall stand a living Monument to all Ages, when
Tombs of Marble, and stately Piramids are eaten by time, or crumbled into
Ruins. Her Renown shall be fresh in the minds of Men whilst the world lasts,
and then passing beyond time, shall have Eternety in store; till then Like a
guiding Star, Her Great Example may direct our Lives in ways of Piety, and be
held truly to deserve that part o^ her Royal Title, that styled he^ Defender of
the Faith.

THAT She was the best o^ Queen's, the Mourning Nation^ Tears do sadly express
in H^^ Loss: And the Royal Sorrow of a Grieving Monarch, declare^ Her the best
of Wives. Therefore as her worth was exceedin^ great, so her loss is
unexpressibl^ to us, though to her, past a^ Peradveuture, the Gain is as
Excellent and Glorious, in a happy State, as Changing an Earthly, for a
Heavenly Crown can render it.

BUT to come some what nearer to the purpose of our intended History. The
Reader may find in it, all that is Excellent and worthy in the Person and
Character of a Queen, who made it her endeavor, through the Series of her
Life, to give a worthy Example to her People; and leave a Fame behind Her, of
being Her Sex's Glory and Wonder: Who' like the Renowned Elizabeth,
Industriously labored for the Nations good, especially in the support and
encouragement of that best part of Government, which procures Gods Favors and
Blessings on all the other parts, viz. The true Religion in the Purity of
Worship, as She found it Established, and had persevered in from her Infancy:
Rejoicing only in doing good, and promoting those that made Piety their
brightest Ornament: so that Her Palace seemed a Temple, where Virtue and
unfeigned Devotion flourished: Her Closet a place fit for Angels to Visit and
Admire, with Holy Joy and Respect: So that Her Actions leave no room for
Flattery, being all Centered in that Merit which Transcends such meanness that
might attend on other Women, and flow from Mercinary Pens, to set them off with
borrowed Luster.

BUT not to Detain you longer, from that which may prove yet more pleasing to
all True English Spirits, we shall only add, That what is Inserted in this
small Vollum, is Grounded upon the most Exact and Certain Truths, Carefully
Collected and Comprised in a Method suitable to so Illustrious a Theme.

VALE.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE Pious and Glorious LIFE and ACTIONS OF THE Most
Illustrious Princess, MARY Queen of England, etc.
WHEN with our Pens we approach Majesty, and undertake to Write the Actions of
Illustrious Persons, who deservedly command a Character suitable to their
Greatness, we ought to move with such caution and care, that have and
unadvisedness will not permit of: There is a kind of Veneration due, and
therefore the Balance ought to be poifed with all the justness and evenness
imaginable; or like those that raise a stately Fabric, lay a Foundation
suitable to the intended Superstructure, Express it in such Words and Truths,
as may put gainsayers to Silence, or convince prejudiced Persons (if any such
there be) of their Errors: And if ever a deserving History, of a sublime
Nature, pressed the Pens of Men, to Celebrate a Memory worthy to be Charactered
in Gold and Crowned with Stars, we here (though in Sorrow for the Worlds
enestimable loss) have found it; and with humble submission approach, with
willingness, however weak and defficient our endeavors may prove; and labor
to pay a Tribute due to one, whose high Deserts and wondrous Excellencies,
express themselves in a liveliness beyond the Eloquence of the smoothest
Oratory, or the frame of Words can utter: Though Tears or Grief, after such a
Loss, would let them flow with all the Sweetness Rhetoritions can model or
contrive.

THE Queen! That very Name gives scope to thoughts, and delates them like
expanded Gold: But when with that Name, Her Virtues are considered, we find
them boundless or unlimited; and our selves at a loss to bring them to Center
in suitable expressions.

THIS Great Princess, so long the Joy of Three Kingdoms, and the Peoples
Blessing, Descended by the Fathers side, from a long Race of Princes, that
swayed the British Scepter; Memorable in History for great Actions; and
Renowned at Home and Abroad. She was Eldest Daughter to the Late King James, by
his first Wife Ann, Duchess of York, Daughter to the Earl of Clarendon. She
was Born at the Royal Palace of St. James's, on the 30th. of April, 1662. when
the Nations Joy was arrived at an Extraordinary height, for the Settlement and
Happiness it found under the easy Government of a Restored King, ( viz. King
Charles the Second.) Which Joy was yet more increased. by the Birth of an
Illustrious Princess, that in her Infancy gave hopes of those great and
Glorious things, that have been since manifested to the World.

THIS happy News being soon spread through the three Kingdoms, great were the
Congratulations and Joy, Bells Ringing every where, and Bonfires and
Illuminations were in all Remarkable Places; and many Rich Presents, by the
Nobles and Ladys at Court, were made to the Royal Infant. And She was
Christened according to the Ceremonies of the Church of England; and, after her
Royal Grandmother, Named MARY. Tended and Nursed she was with great care, in
the most Royal manner. And as God gave her a Beautiful Shape and Countinance,
to which were added, a Pomp of winning Graces, even in her tender Years, so he
was pleased to continue toward her, a Healthful Constitution of Body, for the
most part; and Endowed her with an Air and Livelyness beyond those of her
Years.

BUT not to insist upon her Infancy, when she was in her Cradle; we find she
was no sooner capable of Education, but King Charles her Uncle, (of Blessed
Memory) took care she should be Educated in the Protestant Religion, as
Established in the Church of England. Which Royal Care, suited extremely with
her Own Inclination; and having Tutors appointed to Instruct her in all that is
good and Princely, so far as the Capacity of her Years would admit, She was
Grounded in that Religion and those Virtues, that have rendered her a Blessing
to these Nations, and made her a Pattern to all succeeding Ages; and Her Loss
forever to be Deplored and Lamented.

HER Abhorrence of the Romish Superstitions, and the Cruelties of that Bloody
Church, was very early Imbibed; which made Her not only keep at a distance Her
Self, but labor to prevent others from Wading into those Errors, by her
Persuasions and Favors.

THE Scripture, as soon as She had Learned well to Read, She made Her Delight.
She Frequented the Chapel upon all Opportunitys, and Solemn Occasions that
Offered; and was Extraordinary Attentive to the Prayers and Sermons, and very
Fervent in her own Devotions: Heeding but little the Pastimes and Pleasures
that then were at Height in the Court. And though being a Princess of Grandeur,
and in a station of Eminency, yet She carried Her Self with that Courteous
Obliging Modesty, toward Her Inferious, that Won Her a Place in their Hearts,
that could not be taken up by any other, or ever Obliterated.

THIS Early Sprouting of Piety, in the best of Princesses, was only as a
Prodrom or Forerunner of an enlargement of Excellent things; as the Eastern
Streaks of Light, foretelling the Rising of the Sun, to Refresh the World with
Kindly Heat; and Render it Gay and Lovely, in its Fragrancy and Fruitfulness.

THIS made Queen Catharine, her Royal Aunt, highly Love and Esteem her, as a
Jewel in Nature, Admiring her Virtue, (though she differed from her in Opinion,
as to Religion.) And indeed, seeing that King Charles had not any Issue by his
Queen, the Eyes of the Nation were upon this Illustrious Princess, as a
Flourishing Branch, proceeding from the Royal Stem. Under whose Shaddowing
Protection, we have since sat secure, till our Grief disturbed us, by Her
Changing this Life for One more Glorious.

HER Charity, even in Her tender Years, was not only great to the Poor, in hard
and necessitous Times, but she stired up others, by her Incitements, to Imitate
her Pious Example, which is so great an Ornament to the Christian Religion; and
Studied how she might best dispose of her Royal Bounties, to those that stood
most in need of them. Causing Enquiry to be made for Poor, Decayed, Suffering
Houskeepers and Orphans, that were by the Death of their Parents, exposed to a
desperate Fortune; and there her seasonable Relief came. Which made the Souls
of the Hungry Bless her; and send up Prayers to Almighty God for so worthy a
Benefactoress.

SHE was about Nine Years of Age when the first Afflicting Sorrow came near her
Heart, for the Death of her Illustrious Mother, Ann Duchess of York: Who,
after a long Indisposition, at her Palace of St James's, in the County of
Middlesex, Dyed on the 31st. of March, Greatly Lamented of the whole Nation,
but Especially of this Pious Princess, whose Tender Heart found then the first
touches of Sorrow, for the Loss of so Kind and Indulgent a Mother: And indeed,
this Great Duchess was a Happy Providence to these Kingdoms, whose Fruitful
Womb Blessed us with Two Protestant Princesses, Matchless for Piety and Virtue;
and those Excellent Graces that Adorn the Sex. To one of which, next to God,
and our Gracious Sovereign, we are Beholden to for our Preservation, from an
Inundation of many Miseries, that Threatened us from a Party that have all
along Labored to Undermine the Established Church and Government.

THE Court upon the Death of this Great Lady, went into Deep Mourning, and the
Funeral Solemnitys, were performed with all the Decency, and Solemn Pomp, that
suited her High Degree, after she had brought into the World Three Princes, and
Three Princesses, Viz.

I. Charles her First Son, who was Created Duke of Cambridge, Born the First of
January, 1660. Who Dyed at Richmond the 20th. of June, 1667.

II. The Princess MARY, afterward our Gracious Queen, the Principal Subject of
this History, the Time and Place of whose Birth, is already mentioned.

III. A Second Son, Born on the 12th of January, 1663, and Christened James on
the 22d. of the same Month, and Created Duke of Kendale. Who Dyed at St.
James's the 26th of May, 1667.

IV. Of a Third Son, on July the 4th. 1666.

V. Of a Second Daughter, on the 13th of January 1668. Who was on the 15th of
that Month Christened Heneretta, and Dyed, at St. James's on the 15th of
November, 1669.

VI. Of another Daughter, afterward Named Ann, now Her Royal Highness, the
Princess of Denmark.

AND here though we take a Sad and Melancholy Survey of the Loss of so many
Princes etc. in their Infancy, yet God was abundant in his Mercys, in
preserving the Glory and Luster of the Royal Family, to make the Nation Amends,
for those Happy Souls he had so timely taken to himself, from a Troublesome
World to a more Happy State, in Joys that far Transcend the Value of all
Earthly Crowns.

FROM this sadness that Afflicted the Spirits of a Young Princess, that she
might be averted, and draw in Comforts to Cheer and Enliven her Drooping
Spirits, she was present at Diverse Masks, and Balls, held at Court, so soon
as the time of the General Mourning was conveniently over, and would Decently
admit of Mirth to Dissipate the Clouds of Sadness that hung about it. And not
long after, the Duke after the Loss of his Duchess, bethought himself of a
Second Marriage, and Pitched upon Mary, the Duke of Modena's Daughter, which
Negotiation, was opposed by the Parliament, then sitting. Yet, notwithstanding
all their endeavors to avert it, and place his Mind on a Protestant Princess,
The Marriage by Proxy was concluded, and on the 21st of November, 1673, She
and her Mother Arrived at Dover, On Board the Ship appointed for their
Equipage; and soon after the Marriage was Solemnized, with little Pomp, because
it seemed not greatly pleasing to the Nation.

THE Illustrious Princess Marys Resentments on this Match, we do not undertake
to determine; though we do not think, a Lady of a contrary Religion, and
different Interest, could be much pleasing to her, yet such was her Generous
Temper, that she chose rather to keep her thoughts in the Sacred Cabinet of her
Pious Breast, than to utter them, and when on the 10th of January 1675, the New
Duchess was brought to Bed of a Daughter, at St. James's, at the Splendid
Christening of this Infant, the Princess Mary, and her Sister, the Princess
Ann, were to stand Godmothers, and the Duke of Monmouth was Godfather. The
Child was Christened, Catharina Laura, but Lived not any considerable time after.

And now our Pious Princess, considering the Institutions of the Church she was
Baptized into, and that after being Baptized, Confirmation, when we come to
more Mature Years, is requisite, She and the Lady Ann were Confirmed at
Whitehall, by the Dean of the Chapel, with the usual Ceremonies, and all the
Devotions that is appointed on so Solemn Occasion.

KING Charles soon after this, desirous to prefer his Illustrious Neices to
Protestant Princes, for the security of our Religion, and the welfare of the
Kingdom; seeing he had no Issue by Donna Catharina his Queen: Refusing all
others pitched upon the Illustrious Prince of Orange. A Prince Descended from
one of the Greatest, and most Noblest Houses in Europe; whose Ancestors have
Signalized their Conduct and Courage like Heroes and Worthys; and thereby
Riveted their Names to Eternity, and lest a grateful Memory to all Posterity;
as being the Liberators of the Opressed, and the often Confirmers of the Peace
of Europe: Settling the most thriving and prosperous States in the World; and
what is more, Mantained it, from its Infancy, against Opressors. But, as if all
their Virtues and Courage had centered in this Prince, (our most Gracious
Sovereign) the Wonders He has done, comprize, and in a higher measure do
exceed, their many Great Exploits. But to come nearer to our purpose.

The Fair and Virtuous Princess having been seen by this Illustrious Prince,
when he was in England, to Visit his Royal Relations, Landing on the 30th of
October, 1670 So much Virtue and Innocent Goodness, no doubt made some
impressions on his Mind, to consider, and esteem her above all other Princesses
in Europe, as were not Obliterated, by the spaces of time, that intervened
between that and the happy joining of their Hands, in the Sacred Marriage Ties,
that brought so great a Blessing to these Kingdoms, and to show what high
esteem the Nation had then of a Prince, whose Virtues early Flourished, and
whose Fame was Loud in Courts and Camps, for Prudent Councils and Martial Deeds.

THE Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, on the 10th of November, (after his
Arival, and having been Caressed by the Court, and Obliged with all the
Splendid Entertainment it could afford) Waited upon him, to Welcome him to
England, and on the 6th of December, he did them the Honor to Dine with them
at Drapers-Hall, where he was highly Congratulated, and splendidly Entertained,
and by the Shouts and Acclamations of the people, the Citys Genious seemed then
to Bend to him, as a Fortunate presage of the deliverance she might expect from
him in her greatest distresses, and after found Accomplished.

THE City having expressed their Joy to be Honored in the presence of so
Illustrious a Prince, of the Royal Stem, the University of Oxford (the
Seed-Plat of Learning, and Virtuous Education, from whence chiefly streams,
those Pious Pastors of the Church, that by their unwearied endeavors, make
Religion Flourish among us) was Graced by his presence. For going from the
Court to Windsor, he took his way from thence, and was received by the Heads of
the Colleges in their Formalities, and, being highly Treated, took a view of
all that is Rare and Curious, in that Ancient City. etc. And was pleased (as a
mark of the Satisfaction he received) to accept of a Degree; and so returning
to London, on the 23d of December, he there kept his Christmas, in the nighest
Splendour the Court was capable of performing. And on the 13th of February took
his leave of the King, Duke, and Princesses, in order to his Return to Holland,
where he happily Ariv'd, with a Fair Wind, in a few days.

HE was Congratulated upon his Return by the States General, and thief Nobility
and Gentry of His Nation.

AS we have before hinted, after this happy interview, King Charles bending his
mind to bring about a Match, which proved grateful to the greatest part of
Christendom, he sent Diverse English Noblemen, to Invite him over a second time,
who found him in Arms amidst his Victories, repelling the Armies of the Invader,
and Disturber of his Country.

AND having delivered their Welcome Message, finding, without great
disadvantage, he could not oblige the French to a Battle, he drew near with his
Army to Brussels, and leaving the charge of it (aster necessary Orders were
given') to Count Waldeck, went to the Hague; and having received the thanks of
the States, for his Prudent Conduct of their Army, he Embarked for England,
with those Nobles that had attended him by the Kings Order, and diverse of his
own Nation, in the Yatches that were sent to attend him, with Three Men of War,
and a Squadron of Dutch Ships, Ordered him by the States, commanded by Admiral
Evertson.

SETTING out with a Prosperous Gale, they Arived at Harwich on the 19 of
October, 1677. Where the Duke of Albermarle sent by the King to that intent,
waited upon him to Congratulate his Arival; as did livers of the Kings Coaches:
And so he proceeded to Ipswich, where the King and Duke, attended with ^
Splendid Train of Nobility, received him; and Congratulated, not only his
Arival, but Glorious Successes abroad. And so, in the most Magnificent Manner,
they proceeded to London; and was received at Whitehall, with unexpres^able
demonstrations of Joy; and ^ad the pleasure again, to see the Fairest Flower in
Englands Garden; which now appeared more Beautiful and Lovely, no doubt, not
only by reason of her more Matur^ Years, but because Heaven ha^ Destined her to
be his Royal Consort, to make him a partner in (...) Faithful and Transcendant
Love that exceeded what before or sine has been known, or exampled o^ Earth.

NO sooner was this intende^ match spread abroad by Fame, bu^ the Nations joy
swelled to an unexpressible height, and over-flowe^ the Bounds of Moderation:
The willing and wishing People though^ that time moved too flow, till the happy
day of its appointed Consumation Dawned, to Bless the Land with its Welcome
Light.

THE King, on the First of N^vember, having declared his intentions to the
Council, the Lords we^^ extremely pleased and satisfied wit^ them, as well in
the Merrits of (...) Worthy and Just a Prince, as in the security they expected
(from so agreeable a Marriage) of the Protestant Religion. And to testify how
well they resented it, delayed not to go in a Body, and Congratulate the
Princess, upon the happy occasion of her being about to enter into a State of
Matrimony, with so Illustrious a Husband: As by their Example did most of the
Nobility of England, and Ministers of State: Declaring the high satisfaction
they conceived in it, and expected from it; who had very Gracious and Obliging
returns of thanks for their kindness, and good opinion of it.

ALL things being agreed on, in order to this Blessed Union; the Prince by
Express, sent the States General of the United Provinces, an account of his
Proceedings, the Substance of it being to this purpose, Viz.

THAT in Consideration it had been their earnest desires, and request to him,
to see him Married, when he had well weighed the reasons that induced him to
it, in a Conformity t^ their Wishes and Desires; and the Tranquillity of their
State, he had conceived he could not do better, than (...) Address himself to
the Princes^ MARY, Eldest Daughter to the Duke of York: That he had made it his
Request to have her in Marriage both of the King and the Duke, who had not
refused, but condescended to his request, and proposals; and therefore thought
it requisite, to give their Lordships an account of it; expecting in Return,
their speedy Approbation, that he might the sooner return to them, etc.

THEY had no sooner received this Advice, with the Highest satisfaction
imaginable, but they immediately assembled to consult about, and consider the
weighty reasons that obliged the Prince to make so agreeable a choice, to make
them happy, in placing his affections on the most Virtuous and Celebrated
Princess, in Europe; approving it with Congratulation and joy, and made the
high satisfaction they conceived known by a public Edict, declaring their good
opinion and esteem of so great an Alliance; promising not only to respect, but
to observe it to the utmost: And further, to testify their consent, they sent
their Approbation on the Fourth of November, to the Prince.

THINGS being Happily brought to this pass, and all things being prepared for
the Celebration of the Marriage, it was performed the Day the States
Approbation Arived, being the Prince's Birthday: The Bishop of London Tying
this Happy Knot of Wedlock, according to the appointed Ceremonies of the Church
of England, the King presenting the Royal Bride.

THE News of this Union was sounded aloud, through the Three Kingdoms, by
Ringing of Bells, and Joyful Acclamations of the People, with Bonfires, and
other Illuminations: The Gentry and Nobility giving very plentifully to the
Poor. And the Royal Pair received the Congratulations of the most eminent
persons of the Nation; having been before entertained in the City, at the
Annual Investure of the Lord Mayor, on his being Sworn before the Barrons of
the Exchequer, at Westminster. Diverse Congratulatory Poems were made by the
best hands, Illustrating upon a Subject that was before very Glorious in the
Eyes of the Nation.

AFTER some few Days spent at Court, in Feasting and Royal Treatments, of Balls
and Music, and Songs of Triumph; having farther received the Complements of
the Nobility, and Chief Ministers of State, the Royal Pair, on the 29th,
intending for Holland, took their leave, attended with a Train of Noblemen and
Ladies, Embarked in the Yatches, and waited on by diverse Men of War, ordered
to that purpose, Sailed with a Prosperous Gail, and Landed at Ter-Hyde: passing
from thence to Hounslery-Dyke, where they continued for some time, and received
private visits, till things could be prepared for a Reception suitable to their
Characters at the Hague.

THINGS being prepared in the most Splendid manner, upon their approach they
were met by Diverse Nobles; and found the Bridge Crowned with Garlands, and
Twelve Companys of Burghers drawn up in Arms, ranged in order to receive them.
The People every where expressing the highest Satisfaction imaginable, in their
Geeneral Acclamations and Shouts of Joy; and upon the passage of the Bridge,
they were met by Twenty Four Virgins, Singing Songs of Joy suitable to the
occasion; who going before the Cavelcade, strowed the way with Fragrant Herbs
and Flowers; and on their Approaching to the Townhouse, they found a Triumphal
Arch fixed very Magnificent, with Land-Skips, and Sylvian Sceens, with Two
Hands on the Top, Clasping each other, Hierogliphically signifying Amity: And
over the Marketplace, in the High Street, another Arch was Erected, with
Devices, and a Motto suitable to that occasion. During this Entrance, the
Burghers made diverse Volly's of Shot, and the Loud Thunderings of the Cannon
spread their Approach yet wider, the Congress being very Great and Numerous.

THERE were likewise diverse Curious Fireworks, imitating Fountains and Trees
of Fire, Golden-Hair, Stars and Ciphers of Flame. At Night the Streets were
Illuminated, and Bonefires Blazed in all the noted Towns of the Provinces, and
the Entertainments were very Splendid and Magnificent. The French continuing
their unjust Encroachment, King Charles upon this Alliance? dispatched his
Commission, Impowring the Lord Hyde, his Ambassador at the Hague, to make and
confirm a strict Alliance with the States General, mutualy to assist, stand by
and defend each other, till they should oblige the French King to reason, by
putting a stop and bounds to his Ambitious Designs; and the Parliament of
England, at that time, declared very earnest in the business; offering to raise
diverse great Sums of Money, for promoting this affair, and for the recovering
Satisfaction for injurys done, by such means as should be thought most
expedient and agreenble; so that the King sent the Lord Montague his Ambassador
to France, to press for a speedy Restitution of such places as were taken, and
Detained from his Confederates and Allies, and upon the triflings and delays of
that Court, to come to any result as to the Satisfaction demanded: An Army was
raised, and the King of England recalled his Forces, that were in the French
Service, who were partly sent home, but without any payment of their Arrears,
which was very considerable: And so early an effect had this Happy Marriage, in
the Alliance it made with England, and that the French King was in a great
Measure put to a stand, how to proceed: The Duke of Monmouth being sent over
with about 3000 English, Horse and Foot; and the Prince by these and other
Auxillary Troops, did give a great Defeat to the Duke of Luxemburg, who
Commanded the French Army, near Mons in Hannault; had thereupon News, that
Pursuant to a former Treaty set on foot, a Peace was concluded, between the
States General of the United Provinces, and the Crown of France; upon the
latter delivering several Towns, that he had, with great Expense of Blood and
Treasure, taken from the Former: So the War by this means being at an end on
this side, he returned to the Hague, where he was received by the People with
the usual Joy, but from his Illustrious Princess inexpressible; seeing his
precious Life had been protected by Providence, in so Eminent a Danger, as his
Royal Person was exposed unto: For in the Fight, a French Captain being in full
Career to Charge him at a disadvantage, Monsieur Overkirk, in a happy moment,
Shot that Enemy, who was reaching at the most Precious Life in the World; for
which good service, as a grateful acknowledgment, the States presented him with
a Sword, whose Hilt was Massy Gold; a Golden Pair of Horse-Buckles, and a Pair
of Pistols, Inlayed with Gold. And thus we see, this Happy Union in a great
measure, brought very early, an unexpected Peace to the Waring Nations.

THE French King having made a Peace with the States General, it was not long
after the rest of the Confederates accorded the like: So that the Prince
retired from the toils of War, had now again the Pincess's Company and
Convesation, which was so Winning and Attractive, that nothing but mighty
affairs, where Fame and Glory called him forth, to stop the impetuous Torrent,
and support a Tottering State, could have made so long a Separation, or
Distance.

AS for the Joy the Court conceived at this happy Return of a Prince, whose
presence (like the Sun, coming on this side the Aequinoctial, to revive the
Earth with Vernal Rays of kindly heat, after it had been Bound in Icey Chains
by the Winters Tyranny) made them forget their former apprehension of Danger,
and rendered them Airy and Lively, in hopes of many Happy Days under such a
Benign Influence) it is beyound our expression, and so we leave it to the
imagination of the Reader.

BUT this Peace to the Protestants, under Jurisdiction of the French King, was
not so Grateful, for that Restless Monarch too Prone to violence having a
Cessation of Arms abroad, turned wonted Cruelty upon his own Subjects of the
Reformed Religion, though upon his Accession to the Throne, they had been the
greatest sticklers for him, and the chiefest means that placed him there, but
their Loyalty, nor Protestations of a continued Fidelity, availed little, when
it was resolved their Estates and Effects should flow into his Coffers.

UNDER pretense of having but one Religion in his Kindom, he sent his Dragoons
and Bald-Pated Priests into all the Provinces, to Convert them with Plunder,
Fire, Sword, Racks, and many New invented Tortures; the Sufferings of those
Poor people, being more then space will allow to be enumerated in this History;
especially being somewhat foreign to the intended subject matter. Let it
suffice then that their Sufferings moved all the Princes in Christendom to
pity, but their own, who ought to have had the greatest concern for them. The
Pope, and we believe we might have said, the Turk, detested this Cruelty, that
Ruined near 100000 Families, under the Specious pretense of Religion.

MANY of these distressed people, fled to England, others to Holland, etc.
where they gave Her Highness, a new opportunity of exercising of her Virtuous
inclination, to the performance of Charitable Deeds, so naturally inherent to
her goodness in disposition, and tender Compassion to the Distressed: So that
by her Liberal Example, others Were incited and stirred up, in the Bowels of
Commiseration, to relieve those Fugative People; who had left their Country,
Estates, and substance, for the sake of a good Conscience; for would they have
turned their Backs upon that Religion they had received, and Embraced the
Romish Idolatry, and Superstitions, they had been permitted to live in some
quiet at home; but with what part of their Goods or Estate those that were
compelled to Apostatize, can by their severe treatment, or kind, best Testify.

AND because, as may be supposed, their Highnesses Charity extended in a great
measure to the Relief and Shelter, of these poor Protestants. So much Monsieur
was enraged, that contrary to the Treaty of Nimeg uen, he in full Peace, and
the height of Security, Commanded Monsieur Moran, Superintendant of Provence,
to March 2000 Men into His Highnesses Principality of Orange; which was done
under the Command of his Lievtenan General, of Languedock; where he threw down
the Walls of that City; Plundered the Inhabitants, and used diverse Crueltys, to
make many of them turn Roman Catholics; but in that they could little prevail,
yet for all the just complaints, made by the States General, upon the occasion
of this violation of the Treaty; at the complaint of his Highness to them, of
the wrong he and his Subjects had sustained. No satisfactory answer could be
obtained, but the French King unjustly and ungenerously detains it till a
Juster Sword shall Reeve it from, and put it again in the Hands of the Rightful
Possessor.

AND thus we see the different tempers of Princes, the one Laboring to Succor
and Relieve the Subjects of his Enemy, flying to him for Refuge and Protection;
whilst the other is only pleased with violence and oppression, and laboring to
destroy his and his own Subjects. Let these Nations consider then, in what a
Fair Line their Lot is fallen under, the Auspicious Influence of so Mild and
Gracious a Prince. When the Poor Distressed Subjects of France Groan beneath
the weight of his Burden, whose Will is his Law, whilst their Lives and Estates
depend, in a manner, upon his pleasure.

WHILST things were carried on in this manner, the Princess had cause of
Sorrow, in the Surprising News she received of the Death of her Uncle, King
Charles the Second, who after Five or Six Days Indisposition, of a grievous
Appoplexie, Dyed at Whitehall, February the 6th, 1684. And although the setting
of this Great and Prudent Monarch, gave her Father Accession to the British
Throne, yet his Love and Tender Care of Her Welfare, and Prosperity, all along
had made so deep an impression in her Princely Heart, that it Melted her Eyes
in Pearls of unfeigned Sorrow, and threw a Cloud of Sadness over the Livelyness
of her Active Spirits, nor was her Royal Consort, wanting, as in her Joys, so
to share with her in her Grief; for never any Royal Pair, were observed to
Simpathize so nearly with each other, in the passions of the Mind; as these
Illustrious Persons, which showed the Quintiscential perfection of Love in its
Brightest Mortal Refinement.

UPON this Sadness, as well that Court, as the Court of England, went into the
Deepest Mourning; and on the 14th of February, the Royal Corpse in a Private
Funeral, was Buried in King Henry the 7ths Chapel, in a Vault, under the East
End of the South-Isle.

THE Prince to divert his Melancholy on this sad occasion, went to visit
several Towns, to take a view how they stood in Repair, as to their
Fortifications, as also to settle the Military affairs; and upon Returning from
Hounslyr-dyke to the Hague; gave Audience to diverse Foreign Ministers, and
having visited some other Towns, he was Met at Loo by her Highness, where there
were splendid Entertainments and Rejoycings; and King James, after the Death of
King Charles, having been Proclaimed, and on the 23d of April, 1685, Crowned at
Westminster, Sent the Marquess D' Alberville, his Ambassador to Holland; who in
December, had Audience of the Prince, and States, whereupon they Adjourned,
till the Seventh of January.

IN the mean while, on the first of that Month, the Princess with preparations
of Curious Fireworks, Representing a Battle, Ranged in Four Lines, and
Furnished out with several Batterys, in a very Lively manner, expressing the
Actions of a Fight.

AND now, King James having Declared himself a Roman Catholic; and upon the
Defeat and Cutting off the Duke of Monmouth in England, and the Earl of Argyle
in Scotland, and gotten him a Standing Army (though the Parliament designed it
should be Disbanded) things began to run high, and Rome drove on Jehue like, to
gain her End. And, after a time, other practices failing, she began openly to
push at the Church of England. Swarms of Priests, and others of the Romish
Order, daily flocking into this Kingdom like Swarms of Locusts: And attempting,
with the same boldness, in Holland, and especially about the Princes Court,
notwithstanding the Intercession that had been made on their behalf, by some
Minesters Residing there, the Court of Justice at the Hague, by a Decree,
Commanded them to Retire out of that Country, not any more to Return, Being
Unhinged there, they, for the greatest part, returned to England: Where they
were welcome to the Court, but not to the generality of the People. Who seeing
Affairs Sicken, and the Distemper they perceived in Government, began to wish
for a Physician, to apply Healing Medicines to the Disease, e're it grew
Dangerous, and beyond all Cure.

AND among other Sinister Practices, Managed and Suggested by Evil Counselors
and Priests, who bore the greatest sway in the Court and Kingdom, they laid
hold on the Pillars of the Established Church; and at one bold push, thrust
Seven of the Bishops into Prison; and soon after Baited them, at a Trial, with
(in a manner) Bear-garden treatment, only for Petitioning that they might not
be forced to do what was contrary to their Oaths and Consciences.

THEN the Startled Nation; (oppressed with many grievous injurys) perceiving
all that was Precious and Dear to it, going to be swallowed in an Abiss of
Popery; and the many Miserys that usually attend a Change of Government, (and
the Abolishing of the Fundamental Laws) began to stretch out her hand in
earnest, for help and succor. And having cast her Eyes round about, at last
steadfastly fixed them, upon an Illustrious Prince, and Princess, always
compassionate to the Distressed; and to whom succeding Generations are bound,
for the so Wonderful a Deliverance, wrought in our Days.

THE Court party here in England, had been Tampering, but in vain, to bring
their Highnesses to some agreeableness with their proceedings, as is evident by
the Answer, Minheer Fagel, (that great Statesman, Pentionary of Holland, and
West-Frieze-Land) Returned to Mr. Stewart, who wrote to him, to have their
Highnesses opinion, or rather Approbation, about Liberty of Conscience, taking
away the Penal Laws and Test, which was not done upon his own head as a Private
Person, but by Command. The which take Briefly, thus.

THAT their Highnesses have often Declared, as they more particularly did to
the Marquess D' Albeville Ambassador Extraordinary from England, to the States
General: That it is their Opinion, that no Christian ought to be Persecuted for
his Conscience, or Opinion in Religion; or be the worse used because he differs
from the Public Established Church, and Religion; and therefore they could be
content, that even the Papists might be sussered to continue in their Religion,
with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the States of the United Provinces:
And as for the Protestant Dissenters, their Highnesses did not only Consent,
but Heartily Approve of their Entire Privilege, for the Full and Free Exercise
of their Liberty, without any Trouble or Hindrance, etc.

That their Highnesses, in case the King desired it, were willing to Declare
their willingness to concur in the Confirming and Settling this Liberty as far
as lay in them; and were ready, upon the like desire, to concur in repealing
the Laws, always provide^ those Laws remain still in Force, an^ full Vigor,
whereby Roman Catholics are Excluded both Houses o^ Parliament, out of all
Employment Eccleslastical, Civil, and Military^ and also all those other Laws,
which confirm the Protestant Religion, an^ secure it against the Attempts of
Roman Catholics.

But that their Highnesses could n^^ by any means agree to the Repealin^ the
Tests or those Penal Laws th^^ tend to the Security of the Protesta^^
Religion, since the Roman Catholics received no more Prejudice from those then
that being Excluded from Parliaments, or from Public Employments; and by them
the Protestant Religion is sheltered, and Covered from all the Designs of the
Roman Catholics against it, or against the Public safety; and that neither
the Test nor those Laws can be said to carry in them any Severity, upon the
account of Conscience, they being only Pernicious Qualifing persons to be
Members of Parliament, or of bearing Offices, by which they must declare
themselves, before God and Man, to be Protestants: So that all this amounts to
no more, than securing the Protestant Religion from any prejudice it may
receive from Roman Catholics.

That their Hignesses have thought, and still are of the Opinion, that more
than this ought not to be required, or expected from them, since by this means
of the Roman Catholics, and their Posterity, would be always secured from
every Manner of Trouble in their Persons and Estates, or in the Fxercise of
their Religion; and that they ought to be satisfied with this, and not disquiet
the Kingdom because they are not admitted to sit in Parliament, or bear public
Offices; or because those Laws, in which the Security of the Protestant
Religion does chiefly consist, are not Repealed, by which they may be put in a
Condition to Overturn it.

THAT their Highnesses believed likewise, that the Dissenters would be for ever
satisfied, when they should be for ever Covered, from all Danger of being
disturbed, or Punished for the free Exercise of their Religion, upon any
pretense or condition of their Religion, whatsoever, etc.

BY this means the good Intentions of their Highnesses, to maintain and secure
the Protestant Religion, being known to the Adverse Party, they began to take
other measures; and posted so fast in their course, to push on our Miserys,
that they not only Run their Policys out of Breath, but themselves at last out
of the Kingdom; for the chief Nobility and Gentry, seeing all at Stake, that
the weighty affairs were managed by Priests and Jesuits, or such as for
interest or prejudice were no Friends to the Protestant Religion.

They Addressed themselves to their Highnesses, to save a Country, in which
they might justly Claim so great an Interest.

TO this they gave an Attentive ear, saw us at the Brink of Ruin, and came (as
sent by Heaven,) in a happy time, to prevent our Falling into it: For when
those that were laboring to overturn our Religion, Laws, and Chain (at least)
our Liberties much shorter; thought themselves sure of Gaining the Point; and
that though their weak reasons could not work any thing upon the Generality of
the people, yet relying on that confidence, that mostly failed them, Viz. That
they were Backed, and would be supported by a very considerable Army, which had
been kept up in Summer Campaigns, several Years, at Hounslow-Heath, and in
Winter Quarters so Posted, that they might the better Awe the Nation: They
found themselves on a sudden Deceived, and so over whelmed with fears, that the
Chain of all the measures they had long been Linking, with much Labor and
Cost, instantly snapt in sunder.

UPON News that the Prince was preparing to be our Deliverer, all that had been
done by the Court party, was untwisted, Charters were Surrendered, Justices, and
other Magistrates and Officers that had been outed to make room for
Roman Catholics, restored, as also was Magdalen College, and the Bishop of
Londons Suspension taken off: The Seven Bishops, that had been Imprisoned and
Tried, were sent for to Court, and not only received into Favor, but Carressed
and Advised withal. Father Peter, the Jesuit, dismissed the Council, and the King
declared, he was willing that Roman Catholics should remain incapable to be
Members of the House of Commons. Oh the wonderful Conversions of Fear! what the
Prayers and Entreaties of the Nobles, Bishops, and the desires of all the good
Protestants in England could not do, the very name of their Highnesses
preparation, brought to pass. But not to Dwell too long on this Matter.

THE Prince, whose actions are swift in Execution as his purposes, delayed not,
though it was in the dead of Winter, and his Fleet was put back in the Harbor,
by contrary Winds, and suffered some little damage, resolved on this great
Work, on the Fifth of November, (a day whereon another great deliverance
happened to this Nation, and though long since, yet fresh in our minds) He came
with his whole Fleet before Torbay, in the County of Devon, not having met wih
any Opposition from the English Fleet, though he passed by within Cannon Shot,
insomuch that this gave a happy Presage that God had Bowd the Hearts of the
People to be at their Highnesses Devotion; and what more confirmed it was, when
the first Men were put on Shore, Viz. about 500, to put themselves in a Posture
for the better securing the Landing of the rest, so far were the Country
people from Flying their Habitations, or any Consternation, that on the
contrary, they came Flocking to Welcome them on Shore, bringing them a supply
of such Provisions as they had; and when the Prince Landed such were the Shouts
and Applaudities, that these Western Countries never Rung with the like Melody.

THE Fleet consisting of 635 Men of War, Flyboats, Pinks and Fireships; and the
Forces that Landed 14352, a great many of them being Brandenburgers, Hess
Casselers, Sweeds etc. And with them diverse great Commanders, with some English
Noblemen, and a great many others.

AND now the Nations Genious bends low, to Welcome and to Complement a Hero
who brought her Safety with him; for as well the Nobles, as others, came
Crouding in, and only a March was made, and not a War, for those who had
boasted such mighty things before, Fled and Scattered at the Martial Noise of
his Drums and Trumpets; that very Army on which they had so much Relied, coming
in a great measure over to him; and to be brief, he with little o^ no Effusion
of Blood, King ( Jame^ being retired) took a quiet possession of the Kingdom,
amidst the Loud Shouts and Acclamations o^ the People, being every where
Addressed, and Congratulated.

THIS News Flying into Holland, caused not only Excess of Joy in the Princess,
for the Safety o^ her Illustrious Consort, whose great undertaking, had
Subjected He^ Spirits to Doubts and Fears, o^ the Hazards that might attend
such an Enterprise; but with her tha^ whole Nation Simpathiz'd, by expressing
the high Satisfaction the^ conceived upon his Success and Prosperous Fortune:
And when he had here, at the earnest request of the States Assembled in
Convention, taken the Administration of the Public affairs of Government into
his Hands, and after King James's leaving the Kingdom, and going to France, the
Citizens of London, and Westminster, went in a great Body to the
Parliament House where they delivered two Petitions, the Substance of them
being to this Effect. Viz.

THAT they most Humbly and Earnestly Desired, that His Most Illustrious
Highness, the Prince of Orange, might be speedily settled in the Throne, by
whose Conduct, Courage, and Reputation the Nation and Protestant Religion might
be Secured and Defended, from it is Enemies at home and abroad. That Ireland
(which was then in Rebellion) might be rescued from its deplorable condition;
and to conclude, the Kingdoms settled on a lasting Foundation and Security, in
Peace, and Liberty.

UPON this, Her Highness having been Complemented at the Hague, by all the
Persons of Quality, that on purpose Resorted to the Court, and among others
their Electorl Highnesses of Brandenburg, and She having made to the Latter a
very Splendid Entertainment; it was concluded here, that the Illustrious
Princess should be sent for over, to be Partner in those Crowns the Wisdom of
the Nation had concluded to lay at the Pincess's Feet, to which she consenting:
And being on her Departure for England, the States of Holland, the States
General, the Courts of Justice, the Council of State, and the Colleges, either
in Bodies or by their Deputys, attended her, and made their Complements and
Congratulations on the happy occasion; and in this the Foreign Ministers
residing at Court, had a share, and the Persons of Quality of both Sexes. The
Majestrates made it their Request, that the Burghers might wait on her in Arms,
but she modestly refused it, as being too tedious a Cerimony for the intended
Expeditness: however, the States of Holland, Deputed Three of their Body to
Wait upon her, till she should be Embarked, and gave Orders to the Sieur
Allemond, with Diverse Men of War, to Join Admiral Herbert, who attended with a
Squadron and several Yatches, to Transport her for England.

THE people at her Departure, scarce refraining expressing their Sorrows in
Tears, that so much Virtue and Goodness had left their Shore, to enrich another
Land. They had seen her worth, and valued it at such a Rate, that though she
went as it were in Triumph, to possess Crowns and Kingdoms, they Grudged to be
Deprived of such a Blessing, or spare it to any other: Like the People of
Mittelene, when Cornelia the Wife of Pompey the Great, was to go with her Lord
after the Pharsalian War, left their Shoars, though in a different State and
Circumstance; they all crowded on the Rocks, and Sands, and fixed their eager
eyes on the Ship She was in, till the distance of space had removed it from
their sight. For setting sail with a Prosperous Wind, She soon reached the
shoars She was distined by Providence to Crown with blessings, where Her
Welcome was Proclaimed by the Guns from the Ships in the Road, and from the
Forts, and after them, by the Ringing of Bells, and the Joyful Acclamations of
the People; and as She came up the River, the Tower, on which the Royal Banner
was Displayed, made London Sensible in a Language of Fire, breathed from its
Thundering Cannons, that its Beloved Darling approached to Crowd upon it
greater advantages than it had long time participated.

ON the 12th of February in the Evening, the Princess Arived at White Hall,
where she was received according to her Royal Character, by the Nobles and
great Ladys of the Court; and by the Prince with all the Tender endearments and
Expressions of kindness and affection: The same Night she received the
Complements of the Nobility at Court, whilst the Streets every where Shined
with Bonfires, and Illuminations, and the Bells charmed the Air into a
stilness, by the Harmony of their desired Music; and, to be Brief, a general
Joy spread it self through the Kingdoms, for her presence, of which so long an
absence had deprived it.

THE Lords and Commons, upon the Arival of the Princess, having had the consent
of the Prince, and his Royal Consort, to accept of the Kingly Dignity, delayed
not in their Resolves to have them Proclaimed King and Queen, of England,
France, and Ireland: Scotland being an Independent Kingdom, and not within the
Jurisdiction of a Parliament of England. Whose Crown however, was soon after
Presented by the States, in like manner; of the Proceedings, in which we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter.

THE Resolves in Order to the Proclaiming, being on these considerations, That
WILLIAM and MARY, Prince and Princess of Orange, be Declared King and Queen, of
England, France, and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Dependencys, thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of those Kingdoms and Dominions
during their Lives, and the Life of the Surviver of them; and that the Sole and
Full Exercise of the Kingly Power be only in, and Executed by his Highness, in
the Name of Himself and the Princess, for the Term of their Lives, and after
their Decease, the Crown and Dignitys Royal of the Kingdoms and Dominions, to
be left to the Heirs of the Body of the Princess, and for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body, and for
default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the Prince.

AND then an Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, was Enacted, Viz.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be Faithful and bear True
Allegiance to Their Majestys, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So Help me GOD.

I A. B. do Sincerely Promise and Swear, that I do from my Heart abhor, Detest,
and Abjure, as Impious and Heretical, the Damnable Doctrine, and Position, that
Princes Excomunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of
Rome, may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.
And I do Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, withthis Realm.

So Help me GOD.

THIS and other Proceedings, preceding the Happy Proclaiming, the Wish of the
Nation Ensued; for the Officers at Arms, Sergeants at Arms, Trumpets, and
others, whose Office it was to attend in this Important Occasion, being in a
Readiness, by the Order His Grace the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England,
at White-hall-gate, and Sir Themas St. George, Garter Principal King at Arms,
receiving a Proclamation, was Ordered by the Lords forthwith to Proclaim it:
And York Herald, after the Third Sounding of the Trumpets, Proclaimed it:
Garter King at Arms, Reading it by Periods, whilst he repeated in the presence
of the Lords and Commons and a vast number of Gentry, and others, who by their
Acclamatitions of Joy, expressed their high satisfaction in what was done; and
so, in Excellent Order, they proceeded through Temple Bar, and between the Two
Temple-Gates, made the Like Proclamation, and twice more Repeated it, Viz. At
Woodstreet-End in Cheapside; and before the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill; being
in all these places concluded with Joyful Shouts and Acclamations; and soon
after they were, with the same desire of a willing people, Proclaimed in the
Cities, and chief Borroughs and Towns of England, and in the Dominion of Wales,
etc.

AND now our Epethite, by their advancement to the Royal Dignity, must be
changed. The King on the 25th of February for himself, and on the behalf of the
Queen, was pleased to express to both Houses, in Answer to their Declaration,
his high Satisfaction in what they had done, and graciously Promised them the
Utmost of his Care and Protection, for the Security and Preservation of their
Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and was extremely willing to Concur with them in
any thing that might be for the Good and Advancement of the Kingdom, and to do
all that in him lay, to promote the Glory and Welfare of the Nation. And soon
after the Lord Bishop of London, went with the Body of the Clergy of that City,
to pay their Majesty's an Humble Tender of their Duty and Fidelity, Expressing
the great Satisfaction they conceived upon Their Majesty's Accession to the
Throne; and being admitted to Kiss the King and Queens Hands, His Majesty at
the same time giving them a Satisfactory Assurance of his Extraordinary
Affection to the Church of England, and of his utmost protection and
encouragement to them, concluding I assure you, you shall find it so, and may
depend upon it. And in this indeed, (as it is promised in Holy Writ) we have
found in the care and protection of a King and Queen, the truly Nursing Father,
and Nursing Mother of the Church.

THE Convention having resolved it self unto a Free Parliament, an Act was
Passed, Entitled, An Act for removing and preventing all Questions and
Disputes about the Assembling and sitting of the present Parliament; and
preparations were making for the Relies of the opressed Protestants in Ireland,
whom the Irish Papists, countenanced by the Earl of Tyrconnel, who had declared
for the Late King James, Miserably Murdered, Plundered, and Harassed, in most
parts of that Kingdom. But Scotland had got the upper hand of those that stood
out for the Abdicated King; And it their Convention, upon the Receipt of a
Letter from his Majesty of England, they, after a few Debates, Declared the
Throne Vacant, and soon after concluded to lay their Crown, as England had
done, at thee Feet of King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY: That they should be Crowned
King and Queen, of Scotland, and the Crown, with an Instrument to Rugulate and
settle particulars, Offered them.

WHILST the Genious of Scotland Bowed thus Low to the best of Princes, a
Proclamation was Issued out here by the King and Queen, to Inform the Peers,
and such as claimed by Tenure or Offices, that the Solemnity of the
Coronation, was to be performed on the Eleventh of April, 1689, and accordingly
Magnificent preparations were made against that happy day, and on the Ninth of
April, in order to it, An Act Passed, Entitled, An Act for Establishing the
Coronation Oath. The form of it being in the manner following viz.

THE Archbishop or Bishop shall say, Will you Solemnly Promise and Swear, to
Govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same?


The King and Queen shall say, I Solemnly Promise so to do.


Archbishop or Bishop, Will you, to your Power, cause Law and Justice, in
Mercy, to be Executed in all your Judgments?


King and Queen, I will.


Archbishop or Bishop, Will you, to the utmost of your Power, Maintain the Law
of God, the True Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion
Established by Law: and will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and unto Churches Committed to their Charge, all such Rights and
Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain to any of them?


King and Queen, All this I Promise to do.


After this the King and Queen, laying their Hands on the Holy Gospel, shall
say,

These things, which I have here before Promised, I will Perform and Keep. So
help me GOD.


AND by Virtue of the same Act this Oath is to be Administered to the Kings and
Queens, that shall hereafter succeed to the Crown.

THE Nations Jubilie (as we may term it) being now come: The King and Queen
came from White Hall to Westminster, whilst the Heralds and other Officers at
Arms were ordering the Procedings, after a little stay, about Eleven in the
Morning the whole Proceeding passed into the Great Hall, from the Lords House
and Painted Chamber, at the upper end whereof a Throne, was Erected, and on it
Their Majesty's took Their Seats under a Canopy of State, whilst the Master of
the Jewel-House brought and presented the Swords to the Lord High Constable,
viz. That of State, that called Curtana, and the Two Pointed Swords, in their
proper Order, who delivered them in the same Order, to the Lord Great
Chamberlain, who having Drawn them, Presented them on the Table, before the
King and Queen; as also the Spurs.

UPON this the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster, brought and Presented the
Crowns, and the other Regalia, in their proper manner: and these again were
delivered to those whose Claim it was to bear them.

THINGS being thus fixed, the Proceeding passed from Westminster Hall to the
Abbey, in Excellent Order; and every one placed in their Station and Degree:
Silence being made, the Recognition was begun, by the Lord Bishop of London; at
the end of which there was a General Shout, and Acclamation, of high
Satisfaction among the People. The King and Queen then Offered, and the
Noblemen that carried the Regalia, Offered them severally at the Altar; there
to be disposed of: Then the Bishops of St. Asaph and Bangor, Sung the Littany;
after which the Communion Service begun. The Epistle was Read by the Bishop of
Carlisle, and the Gospel by the Bishop of St. Asaph: After this, the Nicene
Creed was Read, and by this time the Bishop of Salisbury being in the Pulpit,
Preached an Excellent Sermon on the Occasion; from these Words, Viz.

THE GOD of IsrAel said, The rock of Israel spoke to Me: He that Rules over
Men, must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of GOD: And he shall be as the Light of
the Morning, when the Sun Rises, even a Morning without Clouds, as the Tender
Grass Springs out of the Earth by Clear Shining after Rain. 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.

To which the Pious Queen, was all the while observed to be very Attentive. The
Charms of Power and Greatness, with all the Splendid Pomp and Cerimony, could
not avert her thoughts from the more Serious Contemplation of Holy things.

(BUT not to Digress in the midst of this Cerimony) The Sermon ended, Their
Majesty's took the beforementioned Oath, and Voni Creator being Sung, and the
Anointing Oil Consecrated, Their Majesty's were Conducted to the Chairs
placedon a Theater, Disrobed of their Crimson Mantles and Solemnly Anointed;
then presented with the Spurs and Sword, which were Offered up and Redeemed by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Portland.

UPON this the King and Queen were Clad, and Invested with the Imperial Robes,
and the Orbs delivered to them; and after that the Rings and Scepters, etc. And
about Four in the Afternoon, the Royal Diadems were placed on Their Heads, by
the Lord Bishop of London, Assisted by the Bishop of Rochester. Then the
Trumpets Sounded, the Drums Beat; the Thundering of the Great Guns, with the
Peoples Shouts Proclaimed the News. The Peers and Peeresses hereupon put on
their Coronets; and the BIBLE was presented to the King and Queen; after this
they Kissed the Bishops, and then Te Deum was Sung, and thereupon they Ascended
the Throne; The Archbishop and Bishops doing their Homage, and Kissed Their
Majesty's Left Cheeks, and then the Temporal Peers did the like; whilst the
Treasurer of the Household cast the Meddals among the people: and after this,
began the Communion, and the King and Queen made their second Offering, and
Receiving the Holy Sacrament, they Entered in their Robes of State, to St.
Edwards Chapel, where they were Divested of the Imperial Pall, etc. And having
Robes of Purple Velvet put on them, they returned with their Crowns on their
Heads in the same Order they came, the Peers and Peeresses now wearing their
Coronets, and Entering the Great Hall at Westminster a Royal Entertainment was
provided, of all that is Rare and Costly, several Tables being Furnished out in
the most Delicious manner, and Charles Dymock Esquire Their Majesty's Champion,
between the First and Second Course, came Riding Completely Armed into the
Hall, Conducted by the Lord High Constable, and the Earl Marshal, on Horseback
likewise, and his Challenge pronounced by York Herald, Viz.

If any Person of what Degree soever, High or Low, shall Deny or gainsay our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of
England, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to be Rightful King and
Queen of England, or that they ought not to enjoy the Imperial Crown of the
same, Here is their Champion, who says he Lies, and is a False Traitor, being
ready in Person to Combat with him, and in this Quarrel will Venture his Life
against him, on what Day soever he shall be appointed.

After this Their Majesty's Royal Styles were Proclaimed in Latin and English,
and every thing was performed with the Exactest Order and Decency, concluding
about Eight of the Clock, when Their Majesty's returned to Whitehall; and the
rest of the Evening was spent in Bonfires, Ringing of Bells, and other
Demonstrations of Joy.

THIS happy Corronation ushered in the King and Queens being Proclaimed in
Scotland; for after the States had passed the Vote to that purpose, in the
Convention of that Kingdom, they Assisted by the Magistrates, Lord Provost, and
Council of the City of Edinborough, went to the Market Cross, where Lion King
at Arms, assisted by the Heralds and Pursuvants, Proclaimed them King and
Queen of Scotland, etc. The Trumpets Sounding and the Peoples Shoutings
expressing the Joy conceived on this Occasion: And soon after they were
Proclaimed in all the Citys and principal Boroughs of that Kingdom.

ON the 18th of April, 1689, the Sieur Shemettan Extraordinary Envoy from the
Duke of Brandenburg Complement Their Majesty's in his first Audience, upon
their Accession to the Throne. Nor was the Scots Nation slow in presenting
their Crown. The States Deputing the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and
Sir John Dalrimple their Commissioners to that purpose. At the same time
causing a Day of Thanksgiving to be set apart for their Deliverance from
Popery, etc.

ON the 11th of May the Scots Commissioners waited on the King and Queen in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall, and presented a Letter from the States of
Scotland, and after that an Instrument of Government, then a Writing Containing
diverse grievances, which they Humbly Prayed might be redressed; upon the
Reading of which, His Majesty was pleased to return this Gracious and
Satisfactory Answer. Viz.

WHEN I Engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for the Kingdom of Scotland, and therefore I did Emit a Declaration in Relation
to that as well as this Kingdom, which I intend to make Good and Effectual to
them. I take it very Kindly, that Scotland has Expressed so much Confidence
in, and Affection to me. They shall find the willing to Assist them in every
thing that concerns the Weal and Interest of that Kingdom, for making what Laws
shall be Necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property, and Liberty,
and to ease them, of what may be justly grievous to them.

The Coronation Oath was hereupon Tendered to Their Majesty's, the Earl of
Argyle as chief Commissioner Reading it by periods, and the King and Queen
holding up their Hands, as is the manner of Scotland in this matter of taking
Oaths, repeated it till they came to the Clause where the Rooting out of
Heretics is mentioned in that Oath, at which his Majesty declared, That He did
not mean by those words, that he was under any Obligation to become a
Persecutor. To which the Commissioners answered, That neither the meaning of
the Oath, neither did the Laws of Scotland Import it; and that the States of
Scotland had Authorized them, to represent to Their Majesty's, that that Clause
did not Import the Destroying of Heretics; for by the Laws of Scotland, no man
was to be persecuted for his private Opinion; and tht Obstinate and Convicted
Heriticks only, were to be Denounced Rebels, and Outlawed; whereby their
Moveable Estates were to be Confiscated. Whereupon on the King Ordering the
Commissioners to witness he took the Oath in that sense. The Words of the whole
Tenor of it being repeated, Their Majesty's Signed it, and so the
Commissioners departed with Joy and Thankfulness: And on the 6th of June
ensuing, the States met, and being Assembled, it was signified to them, by His
Grace the Duke of Hamilton, that the King had sent him a Commission, to
Represent his Person in the ensuing Parliament, and that he had received
instructions to turn the Convention into a Free Parliament: whereupon they
proceeded to pass an Act for that purpose, and made it High Treason to Question
or Disown the Authority of its being such. Upon which the Duke of Gowrdon who
had a long time held the Castle of Edinborough, upon the account of the
Interest of King James, Articling for the safety of those that were with him,
threw himself wholly upon Their Majesty's Mercy, and Clemency, saying, That he
had so much Respect for all the Princes of the Line of King James the 6th, that
he would make no Conditions with them as to his own particular Interest, but
Render himself entirely to their own Discretion: And thereupon delivered up
that Strong Place to Sir John Lanier, Deputed to receive it at his hands, and
although the Viscount Dundee made Head for a time, yet upon the Entry of the
English Forces under the Command of Major General Mackay, he was Killed in a
Battle near the Blare of Athol; and soon after, the whole Kingdom of Scotland
was Reduced to Their Majesty's Obedience,

THUS Heaven as it prosper'd their other affairs, so in this gave Success to
their Arms, and brought fear where Love and Obedience was denied, under whose
Auspicious Fortune the Protestants of Ireland, having shaken off their first
fears, took Courage, Fortifying Londonderry and other places, and making a
very considerable head, not without great success in the Field, till such
Reliefs and Succors were brought them as Reduced that Kingdom to its
Obedience, and settle them in their former Tranquillity, of which more hereafter.

THE Worthy Sir Thomas Pilkington being Sworn Lord Mayor of London, before the
Barrons at Westminster, on the 29th of October, 1689. Their Majesty's did the
City the Honor to Dine with him at their Guild Hall, where the sight, as well
as the Entertainment at a Dinner, was very Magnificent, to the high
Satisfaction of all Partys; and as a farther Mark of His Royal Favor, the King
was pleased at the Humble Request of the Grocers Company, to permit himself to
be Chose Sovereign Master of it; and was Presented with an Instrument of his
Election, and a Copy of his Freedom in a Box of Gold; for which he was pleased
to return them his thanks, and Conferred the Honor of Knighthood on Ralph Box,
their Upper-Warden; and in the Evening, upon Their Majesty's Return, the
Windows were every where as they passed filled with Illuminations, and the
Shouts of the people Proclaimed their Resentments of the Royal Favor done them.

WHILST these things passed in England, the Joyful News came, that the Enemy
had been Beaten off, or obliged to Raise the Siege of Londonderry, after it
had been hard pressed a long time by a Numerous Army, in which the Late King
was to encourage them with his presence, but it availed not, for though the
Besieged endured the greatest extremitys of Famine, yet by their own Valor and
the Indefatigable Industry of Mr. Walker, whom they had Chosen their Governor
they secured that Important place, for the Interest of the Crown of England,
when the Papists had possessed themselves of almost all the other places in the
Kingdom, and with French, Irish and others, had composed a very Numerous Army
in the Field; but god who always takes Care for the Protection of Good Princes,
and their Interests, gave this as a happy presage, what wonders His Providence
was about to bring to pass.

THE Pious Queen was not a little concerned at the Miseries of the Poor
Distressed Protestants, who fled as they could find Opportunity, into England,
from the Outrages of the Papists in Ireland, as fearing a Cloud of Blood hung
over them, ready to break on them in another Massacre, and by Her Bountiful
Example, and Encouragement, they were very much Relieved and Succored, for
indeed many of the better as well as the lower condition of People, being
Stripped and Plundered of all they had, were become fit Objects to move
compassion and charity toward them; nor failed they of Public as well as
Private Collections, to support their Necessitys, till they could be restored
to what they were Divested of in their own Country, for Adhering to their
Religion, and Their Majesty's Interests, which upon the going over of the Duke
of Schomberg, with an Army, soon Increased, and those that had beeen good at
Plundring proved but very indifferent at Fighting; so that a great many Towns
were quickly recovered, and upon the Winter Encampment, of Their Majesty's
Forces on the Plains of Dundalk etc. The Enemies Fury Abated, and their
proceedings were altogether at a stand; and so at this Time stood Affairs.

AND now, for the Blessings that had been showered on these Kingdoms in a
plentiful manner, and for the further Imploring the Almightys Assistance, to
prosper the finishing of a Work so well begun, Their Majesty's Proclamation was
Issued forth for the Religious Observing of a Fast, on the 12th. of March, and
every third Wednesday in the Month till his Majesty, who now purposed to go for
Ireland, Returned. And the first Parliament being Desolved, another met, on the
20th. of March, 1690. And the King signifying to them, that intending to pass
the Seas, where his Prescence was necessary for the Reducing of Ireland, he
thought it Necessary to leave the Government, during his absence, in the Queens
Hands: Then an Act was passed to Empower Her to Manage the Affairs of
Government till his Return. And on the 14th. of June, 1690. the King Landed,
with a Royal Army, at Carickfergus in Ireland, which brought such a terror upon
the Enemy, that they began to Retire in all parts of the Frontiers, but were
closely followed, and pressed to an Engagement, which they declined as much as
possible.

THE Queen Mannaging Affairs at home, with all that Conduct which became a Wise
and Virtuous Princess. The Navy Royal being at Sea, under the Command of the
Earl of Torringion, Admiral, the French King, hoping some great Advantage from
the Kings Absence, or to Encourage the Irish Army, whose little Courage began
to droop, set forth a very considerable Fleet, the greatest we may say that has
been seen of that Nation on the Seas. But the English Seamen disdaining to
Fear, being, on the contrary, full of Courage: On the 30th. of June the two
Navys drew up in Lines, off of Beachy; and about Nine in the Morning, the Dutch
having the Vanguard gained the Weather-Gage of the Enemy; and falling on
Fought very bravely for three Hours, which made those they Engaged with hear
away with all the Tack they could make. But about One a Clam happening,
prevented the Dutch from pursuing the Advantage they had gained, and the
French, hindered by that Calm, were constrained to begin the Fight again, which,
with Extraordinary Fury, continued till Five in the Afternoon. But for what
Reason the English Admiral not coming up to Second them, as they expected, we
determine not, for but a few English Ships, who were carried on by the Courage
of their Captains Engaging the Main Body of the French falling into the Rear of
the Dutch, they were so Battered that they sound themselves constrained to make
their way thorough the French Fleet, and stand for the Coast of England,
between Beversire and Farly, loosing diverse Officers of Note, and several of
their Ships Burnt by the Enemy; and although the French Fleet consisted of 82 Men
of War, besides Fireships, and Tenders, and ours was Inferior to them in
Number; has we had a Drake to our Admiral, they had no doubt run the same
Risque, as the Spanish Armado did, in 1588 but what was done could not then be
recalled, yet was soon after repayed with such a stroke, as made all France
tremble at the unwelcome Bonfires that were made on their Coasts, by the
Renowned Admiral Russel, as will appear in the Sequel. For this Defect Admiral
Torrington was sent to the Tower, and afterward Tried on Board the Kent in the
River Medway, but had the Fortune to be Acquitted, and the French upon the
retiring of our Fleet having Burnt a few Fishers Cottages at Tinmouth, and
there hearing the Militia of the counties of England, were for the most part in
Arms, they durst Adventure no further, but returned to their Ships; and after a
little Hovering about the Coast, and Stealing a few Sheep out of the Marshes
went home, making a mighty boast of a Victory that they had not Gained.

THIS however little availed their Confederates in Ireland, for the King
(though as he was viewing the Enemies Camp having received a Wound on the
Shoulder with a great Shot) passing the River Boyne, fell upon their Army with
such Bravery that Notwithstanding they far out numbered him he put them to the
Rout in all parts in less than three Hours, whole Regiments running away
without being charged, as appeared by their Arms found on the Ground in
Regimental Order; whereupon the Late King James within a Day or two took
Shipping, and Sailed for France upon this Dublin Opened her Gates, and most of
the considerable Towns in those parts soon after Surrendered, and the Countys
that had been long Hazarded, were settled and found Ease and Peace.

THIS News caused rejoycings in England, whilst the Queen with great Conduct
and Prudence, managed in the Kings Absence, the weighty affairs of the Kingdom,
carrying her self with such a Courage and Constancy as Daunted the boldest
repiner at her Virtues. The Militia was raised, the Coast Guarded, and a strict
Eye had over those suspected to be dissaffected to the Government, and care
every where taken by Her Majestys Order, for the Security of the Peace and
Quiet of the Kingdom, so that the people were not only free from all
consternations and apprehensions of Danger, but on the contrary full of
Courage, and Smiled with Disdain, on the weak attempts and bravado's of our
Enemies. The Trained Bands of London with much Gallantry, Cheerfulness, and
Resolution, Marched into Hide Par, and Drew up in a Splendid Appearance, to the
number of 10000 Effectual Men, completely Armed, and Appointed, and there Her
Majesty was pleased to be present, taking a view of them whilst they exercised,
approving of their readyness and Loyalty at such a juncture; and by her
presence gave them the highest satisfaction Imaginable, which they expressed in
their Resolves, To Live and Dye, in her Defense, against all Invaders or
Clandestine Enemies, but there being to further occasion at that time, they
returned home in the same Excellent Order they had Marched thither, and all
things remained still and quiet; and both ours and the Dutch Fleet, were
Recruited Gallantly in a little time.

SOON after this Her Majesty received News that the English had Beaten the
French in America, Landed on St. Christophers, and Siezed the greatest part of
the Booty in the Island, and Diverse French Merchant Ships of considerable
Burden and Richly Laden, were taken by our Privateers and Men of War, for the
Fleet was again at Sea, and soon after to repair what had before happened, set
Sail for Ireland, and was mainly assisting in the taking of Cork and Kingsail:
and the Kings Returning after His Glorious Success created great Joy and
thanks, for the wonderful Mercy and Providence in preserving his Precious Life
from the Dangers that Threatened it, and restoring to us him in health and
safety. Upon His Majestys Happy Arival, after his Glorious Enterprise, having
by his wonted Courage and Conduct in a great Measure Secured a Kingdom, that
was at the Point of being overrun by an Enemy, who made their chief boast in
resolves to Root out the Protestant Religion, so long settled and Flourishing
there: The Joy was not only great in the Queen and Court, but all over England,
as appeared by the many Addresses to Congratulate his Safety, and Happy Return,
and Encomiums made on the Welcome Occasion.

THIS Joy spread wider than the narrow bounds of our Island, being Lively
expressed in almost all the Courts of Christendom. And the Duke of Savoy
finding that the French King, by large (though unjust) advances, encroached
upon his Country, thinking it high time to provide for the Liberty and Safety
of his Subjects, before they were brought to that Distress that others had
fallen into, by delay, and too much Relyance on French Flatery, and desembled
protestations of good meaning toward them. Being willing to come into the
Alyance, sent his Envoys or Ambassadors to the Courts of the Confederate
Princes, whose Negotiations Concluded very Prosperously, Averting from him the
Fate of Lorrain and Burgundy, etc. that had been so Treacherously taken from
their Rightful Owners, whilst they were held in hand with specious pretenses,
that no such thing was intended. And that it may, with reason be held, that the
Court of Savoy is looked on as one of the Politic Courts of Europe, The
Expressions of the Sieur Dela-Tour ( Baron of Bordeaux, Counselor of State to
the Duke, President of the Finaces of Savoy, and Intendant of his Royal
Highnesses Household) delivered when he had his Audience of the King and Queen,
as Envoy Extraordinary here, from the Duke, which for the Elegance of the
Style, gaining a General Approbation, may be well Inserted here.

TO the King, He Addressed Himself in the Following Words,

SIR,

HIS Royal Highness Congratulates Your Majesty's Glorious Access to the Crown,
Due to Your Birth, Merited by Your Virtues, and Maintained by Your Valor;
Providence Ordained it, for Your Sacred Head, for the Accomplishments of
Heavens Designs, from all Eternity.

THAT Providence (which after a long forbearance, Raises up Chosen Instruments
at length, to Suppress Violence, and Protect Justice. The Wonderful, beginnings
of Your Reign, are sure Presages of the Blessing Heaven is Preparing, for the
Integrity of Your Intentions, which have no other Aim, than to Restore this
Flourishing Kingdom, to that Grandeur which it Anciently Enjoyed; and to Break
those Chains, under the Weight of which, all Europe at Present Groans.

THIS Magnanimous Design so Worthy, the Hero of our Age soon filled His Royal
Highness with Unspeakable Joy, though He was Constrained to keep it Vndisclosed
for a Time, in the Privacy of his Heart; and if afterward, he could not
forbear to let it break forth the Obligation is Due to Your Majesty: You have
at length Inspired him with Hopes of Liberty, after so many Years Servitude.

MY Words, and the Treaty which I have already Signed at the Hague, with Your
Majesty 's Envoy, but faintly Express my Masters Passionate Desires, to Unite
himself to Your Majesty by an Vnviolable Devotion to Your Service.

THE Honor which he has of being one that appertains to Your Majesty, has Knit
the first Knot of this Union, and the Protection You Grant him with so much
Generosity has brought it to the Perfection of being Indissolvable. These are
the sincere Sentements of his Royal Highness, with which I dare not Presume to
intermix any thing of my own, for how Ardent soever my Zeal may be, how
Profound soever my Veneration of Your Majestys Glory, I know not how better to
express, it, than by the Silence of Respect and Admiration,

BY this Speech, we see how a Good Prince, gains not only the Love and Entire
Affections of his own Subjects, but even that of all Generous Princes and Good
Men; and Raises to himself Trophies in their Hearts, that shall stand as
Lasting Monuments of his Worth and Renown.

AFTER this Eloquent Speech made to the King, the Envoy Addressed himself to
the Queen, in the Following Words. Viz.

MADAM,

VIRTVE at the same time with Your Majesty Ascended to the Throne, and all
Europe beheld it with Admiration, but the Effects have been to none more
Joyfully Grateful than to his Royal Highness, whilst You have the Goodness to
be the Support of his Concerns, and he the Honor to Depend so nearly on Your
Majesty.

I Return Your Majesty most Humble thanks on his Behalf, and beg Your
Protection, of a Prince most Confidently Assured, That he shall still uphold
the Dignity of his high Degree, if Heaven Vouchsafe to Support the Justice of
his Cause, by the King's Valor, Your Majesty's Prudence; which You made appear
the Last Summer, after a most Wonderful manner; not only Winning the Hearts of
Your Subjects by the Mildness of Your Government, but Striking a Terror into
Your Enemies, by the Constancy of Your Courage.

THIS is a Felicity that will always attend Your Majestys Heroic Virtues, and
Unite to Your Immortal Glory, the Eternal Happiness of Your Kingdoms. And this
Madam, I altogether Wish, with a Fervent Zeal, as the Most Faithful of Your
Servants.

HERE we find the best of Queens, Admired almost to Adoration, by those who in
a manner had only heard of her Virtues, Piety, and Prudent Conduct in the
managing the Great and Weighty affair of the Kingdom, in the Kings Absence,
when the French were on the Coast, and in other matters as has been showed
before. Her Mercys and Tender Compassions to the Oppressed, have been Worthily,
but can never sufficiently be extolled. The Wisdom of the Nation were sensible
of this, and the Commons Assembled in Parliament having Addressed the King to
congratulate his Success, and Happy Preservation; Addressed the Queen in this
Humble Tender of their Affections to her Royal Person, Viz.

May it Please Your Majesty.

WE Your Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament Assembled,
do Most Humbly beg leave to Express the Deep sense we have of the Goodness
Wisdom, and Courage, which Your Majesty did Manifest in the Greatest
Difficulties, and most. Pressing Dangers, during His Majestys Absence at a
time, when a Powerful Enemy was upon the Coast, when the Nation was weakened in
that part, which is its proper Strength and Deprived of the Security of his
Majesty's presence. The Resolution Your Majesty Showed in Your Administration,
gave Life to Your Subjects and made them excert a Strength and Force, unknown
to the former Reigns, and Your Zeal for the Public Encouraged them to show
such Cheerfulness in their Duty, as Disappointed the Hopes and Designs of all
the Open and Secret Enemies of the Government.

THE Grateful Remembrance of this, which Renews the Remembrance of our most
Happy Times, will for ever Remain in the Hearts of Your People, and can never
fail to be Expressed in all Instances of Loyalty and Obedience from us and all
the Commons of England.

SO much the Goodness and Sweetness of Temper in the Queen, had wound her into
the Hearts of Her People, that no Expressions of Gratitude could be wanting to
make an Acknowledgment of the Tranquillity we enjoyed under her Auspicious
Government and Protection so Mild and secure, that it appeared a Halcyon Calm
to other Reigns, in which the Blustering Storms of State proved very Turbulent
and uneasy to a great part of the Nation, so that the People showed a Ready
willingness in all the Sums that were given by Parliament in Freely parting
with their Money for the Support of the Royal Dignity, and carrying on a War,
against our Professed Enemies. Provision was likewise made with the greatest
Celerity Imaginable for Building Ships of War, Raising Forces, and what ever
besides was Requisite, for Agrandizing the Fame and Reputation of Their
Majesty's, and their Kingdoms: So that a Greater Harmony in the minds of the
Generality of Men, was never observed in this Nation.

AND now the Princes abroad in Alliance, and Confederated in the War against
France, resolving on a General Congress at the Hague, to Concert Affairs, and
settle matters for the Vigorous Prosecution of their enterprise, and His
Majesty finding his Presence very Necessary in that Grand Assembly, minded the
Parliament of it in a Gracious Speech, and Desired them to hasten the matters
before them, which accordingly they did with all convenient speed, and diverse
Acts passed the Royal Assent, very much conducing to the Advantage of the
Government. And so both Houses having Adjourned for some time, the King took
leave of the Queen, and Court, and with some Difficulty, by reason of the Ice,
he notwithstanding all Difficulty being Landed Safe, Attended by His Grace the
Duke of Ormond, the Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain, the Earls of Portland and
Monmouth, Sieurs Overkirk, and Zulestein; and going from Oram-Haak, near
Mase-Landsluys, the place where they came on Shore to Hounslyr-Dyke; the
Deputys of the States Ordered to that Purpose, Attended on His Majesty to
Welcome him, and Congratulate his Happy Arival, and so passing to the Hague,
the States of Holland, and Council of State, with the Heads of the Colleges,
made their Complements to him.

AND here a Grateful Nations Joy appeared in the most Magnificent Manner;
Diverse Stately Arches of Triumph being placed in the chief parts of the Town,
with Motto's and Devices, suitable to the great Occasion. And the Evening
concluded with Fireworks, Illuminations, and all the Demonstrations that might
Render it Acceptable. And diverse Princes of the Confederates being there, they
Proceeded to Consult of the Weighty Affairs, that concerned the Good and
Interest of all Christendom, which was then settled in the best manner, as the
Product and Issue of those happy Councils have since manifested to the World.

THE Queen having again the Government in her Hands, during the Kings Absence,
managed it with that Prudence and Discretion, which made the Nation see, how
much it was beholden to so Excellent a Princess: Our Secret and Foreign
Enemies, who labored to take Advantages on all occasions, found their Designs
frustrated, and all their Dark Pollicys countermined, and those mischiefs they
designed others, turned upon themselves, though in their Extremity, some of
them found Mercy beyond their Expectations, from those who prefer it to
Justice, from a Queen who was all Mercy and Compassion, and a King whose
Virtues and Heroic Spirit moved him to Compassionute even his Enemies, who had
Causlesly made themselves to their Detriment and Hazard of their Lives; but
passing this over, we proceed to matters of more weight and moment.

THE King returning from the Congress, after the Happy settling of Affairs, was
received with Universal Rejoycings of the People: And by the Pious Queen with
such Joy, that is beyond our Expression. And having settled Affairs, with
Wonderful Prudence here; the English Forces passing over to Flanders, he
delayed not to be at the Head of them, and with his presence, so Encouraged and
Refreshed the Spirits of the Army, that all things Succeeded beyond what many
Expected. So that the Campaign ended Successfully, and gave us an earnest of
what have been since Evident to the World; and the Queen had the Grateful
thanks and acknowledgment of her Nation, for her Prudence and Conduct in the
Management of Affairs, and in Her Royal Condescending Goodness and Modesty,
expressed Her Self Glad, that She had done any thing that Pleased Her People.
etc.

WINTER being Come, Great Preparations at Home and Abroad were made, against
the Opening the Campaign, for the Year 1692. The Fleet was Equipped very early;
The Honorable Admiral Russel, Commanding it, under whose conduct, the Seamen
were very much Revived, in their Courage and Resolution. Nor did the Dutch
delay to Join ours, with a very Gallant Squadron of Ships of War, Resolute to
Revenge the Injurys they had Sustained the preceding Year: And all things here
went Successfully on. Whilst the King was preparing to Pursue his Victories
Abroad, Scotland had entirely gained the upper hand of its Enemies; and Ireland,
under the Conduct of Lieutenant General Ginkle, and other Brave Commanders, was
Reduced, and Owned its Rightful Sovereign; of which Proceedings we shall give a
further Account hereafter.

THE Nation at this time was full of Spirit, and that ancient Courage revived
in it, that has for many Ages been renowned through the World. Providence
concurring with our desires, to make us a Prosperous and Happy People in spite
of all Oposers, either open or clandestine. The best of Queens, by her
influence, adding new Life and Vigor to her Loyal and deservedly affected
Subjects; and like a guiding Star, leading or directing them to their
happiness. She Arose like another Debora, a Mother in our IsrAel, to relieve
her Kingdoms from Opression, and make them flourish; that after our Calamities,
we might hear of Joy and Rejoicing, That the Rains being over, and the Winter
past, the fragrant Flowers of prosperity might appear in our Land: Whilst the
noise of the Turtle promised us the Springing up from the Field of War, a
Blessed Crop of a continued and lasting Peace; when those that have Disturbed
it shall be compelled to do reason; and like a Cormorant be constrained to
disgorge in a little time, what he has been so long a swallowing. Providence to
this Nation has been always kind; and that watchful Fate that Guards the
Virtuous will, no doubt, gain the Ascendant over their Enemies.

THE Fleet, as we have said, being bravely Equiped, and the Seamen full of
Courage, nothing was wanting but on whom to express their Valor; and show the
World that the Kings of England have not their Epethite, of Lords of the Ocean,
in vain; and indeed there was not an Enemy long wanting, for the French, either
being deceived in the number of our Ships, or in hopes only our sinall Frigates
were abroad, or that being otherways gulled by false Intelligence, that there
might be a Defect in our Fleet, tending to a Revolt of some part of it: They
put to Sea, under Monsieur Tourville their Admiral, in Search of ours, who were
very desirous of finding them; and in Conclusion gave them such a welcome, as
they had never before received on the British Ocean.

A Dreadful Scene of War ensuing, which Scattered the Tossing Billows with the
Wracks of our Opposers, and made the Watery Fry, Tremble at the Repeated
Vollies of our Terrestial Thunder. Our Guardian Angel now Commissioned by
Omnipotence, Scattered Death and Destruction Round him, and Crimsoned the
Rumpled Waves with Blood; but not to Elaborate on this Great and Glorious
Action, which otherwise expresses it self in a Gloomy Terror to our Foes, we
shall procceed to give the Reader an Account of the most Material Matters that
happened on this great Occasion, on which the Balance of Europe, so mainly
Depended. Viz.

THE French Thinking to do great Matters at Sea this Summer, got their Fleet
out somewhat sooner than they were wont, appearing more numerous and daring
than they did the last Summer; so that on the 9th of May, their whole Fleet,
was, about Noon, seen off of Dartmouth, at a great Distance, viz. three Leagues
from the Start, and continued turning to the Eastward, the Wind at East and by
North; and the next Day, they were again seen from the same place, when, by
their sailing, they seemed as if they intended to stand to their own Coast: And
our Fleet being now well manned, and in a very good Readiness on the 14th of
May, in the Afternoon, Admiral Russel weighed Anchor out of Rye Bay, and about
eleven the next Morning joined Sir Ralph Delaval, and Rear Admiral Carter at
St. Helens, and soon after diverse Dutch Men of War joined him, so that the
whole Fleet consisted of about Ninety Sail of Ships for the Line of Battle, the
Officers and Seamen being very hearty and full of Courage, and every thing gave
a happy Presage of the Glorious Success that soon after ensued, as appears by
the Loyal Address, humbly presented to Her Majesty by the Chief Commanders of
her Fleet; which for the Satisfaction of the Reader, it may not be amiss to
Insert, as an Introduction to so glorious an Enterprise. viz.

THE Queen being informed of a scandalous and malicious Report that was spread
abroad, as if some of the Officers of their Majesty's Fleet were disaffected,
or not hearty in their Service, and that her Majesty had thereupon ordered the
Discharge of many of them from their Employments; Her Majesty was pleased to
command the Earl of Nottingham to write to Admiral Russel, and let him know,
that Her Majesty was satisfied that this Report was raised by the Enemies of
the Govenment, and that she reposed so entire a Confidence in their Fidelity,
that she had resolved not to displace any one of them; which being by the
Admiral communicated to them, they made and sent up the following Address.

WE Your Majestys most dutiful and loyal Subjects and Servants, FlagOfficers
and Captains in Your Majesty's Fleet; out of the deep and grateful Sense we
have of Your Majesty's good and just Opinion of our Loyalty and Fidelity
Imparted to us by the Right Honorable Admiral Russel, in a Letter to him from
my Lord Nottingham, do, in the behalf of our selves, and all other Officers and
Seamen, presume to address our selves, to your Majesty at this Juncture, to
undeceive the World in those false and malicious Reports that have been lately
spread in Prejudice of Your Majesty's Service, by People of an unreasonable
Disaffection to Your Majesty's Government, and an obstinate Aversion to the
Quiet and Good of our Country, that there are some amongst us that are not
truly zealous for, and entirely devoted to your Maiesty's Service; we do
therefore most humbly beg Your Majesty's Leave to add to our repeated Oaths,
this Assurance of our Fidelity, that we with all imaginable Alacrity and
Resolution, venture our Lives in the Defense of Your Majesty's undoubted Rights
and the Liberty and Religion of our Country, against all Foreign and Popish
Invaders whatsoever; and that God Almighty may preserve Your Majesty's most
sacred Person, direct your Counsils, and prosper Your Arms by Sea and Land
against Your Majesty's Enemies, Let all the People say Amen, with Your
Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

Dated on Board the Britania, May 15. 1692. at St. Helens.

THIS was signed by Sir John Ashby, Admiral of the Red, Mr. Rook, vice Admiral
of the Blew, Sir Clously Shovel, Rear-Admiral of the Red; Mr. Carter,
Rear-Admiral of the Blew; upon receiving which, her Majesty was pleased to say,
That she had always this Opinion of the Commanders, but was glad this was come
to satisfy others.

THE Dutch and English Fleets being Joined on the 18 of May the Admirals Scout,
gave the sign for seeing the Enemy about the gray or opening of the Morning,
our Fleet made the French Fleet in a Line of Battle, about two Leagues to the
Windward; and they then having the weather-gage, bore down very boldly and
closely upon our Fleet; at Eleven the Engagement began, and continued very hot
and furious till almost four in the Afternoon, at what time the French Eleet
bore away. The Wind at West, and South and by East, and North North East, Sir
Clously Shovel, and Sir John Ashby, having the weather-gage, fell bravely on,
maintaining the Engagement till almost ten at Night; the French all that while
bearing away, and the English pursuing them, some Ships were seen in the
Nightime in flames, about nine of the Clock;

UPON this News, and ever to be wished for Success, as well by Land as Sea, of
which heaven has given us already so great an Earnest of future Improvement
against the Common Enemy, not only the Joy of all Good Subjects Abounded, but
the Bells, in all Places where it came, were Rung out; the Tower Guns, and
those in other places, were discharged, and the Streets at Night, filled with
Bonfires and Illuminations, to the great Contentment and Rejoicing of the
Nation.

Captain Killingsworth, Commander of the Fox Fire-Ship, made his way to
Portsmouth in his Boat; and gave an Account, that he had Burnt his Fire-ship on
Board the French Rear-Admiral, but was put off with a great deal of difficulty;
and that he saw a French Man of War, of about Seventy Guns, Blow up, and
another Three-Deck'd Ship on Fire.

ON the Twenty-first, about Nine of the Clock in the Morning, our Fleet set
Sail again; as likewise did the French: Admiral Russel took his Course toward
Barfleur, having got sight of Diverse Ships under the Shore: Admiral Allemond,
of the Dutch, and the Admiral of the Blew, Sailed to the Westward. The First of
these Endeavored to get up with Sixteen of the Enemies Ships, which he
Discovered, Supposing them to be coming from France to Join the French Fleet.
Sir John Ashby pursued the rest of the French Fleet, who in much confusion
labored to get into the Raze of Ornay. Admiral Allemond lost Sight of the
Aforementioned Sixteen Ships in the Night, they having (as he supposed) got in
among the Rocks; and because he found it not Safe, nor Convenient to Follow
them there, he Sailed Eastward again to Rejoyn Admiral Russel.

ON the Twenty-Second in the Morning, Vice Admiral Delaval Burnt, near to the
Shore, under Cape de Wike, a great Ship, called the Rising Sun, of France,
being the Ship of Count De Tourville, the French Admiral, carrying a Hundred
and Four Guns; as likewise the Admiral commanded by his Second, Monsieur
Beaujeu, a Ship carrying a Hundred and two Guns; and the Fort of Eighty Guns;
with two Frigates, and three of lesser rank. The Prisoners who were taken from
the burnt Ships, declared, That during the time of the Battle, Four or Five of
their biggest Ships were destroyed. Reer-Admiral Carter, and Colonel Hastings,
after much Bravery and Resolution, were both killed in the Fight. Admiral
Russell, before Labogue, the 23d of May, ordered Vice Admiral Rook, with a
Squadron of Ships, being the smaller Men of War, and Fireships, and all the
Boats in the Fleet manned with Seamen, with Firearms, to set fire to those
French Ships which lay before them, penned up by our great Men of War: It
pleased God to bless their enterprise so well, that that Night, Six of their
Ships were set on Fire, and utterly Destroyed; and the next Morning Six more
Run the same Fate; with one that Overset, and was Entirely lost; Six of these
being Capitals of Three Decks, from Seventy to Ninety Guns, and upwards; the
others, from Sixty to Seventy: Our Men in the Boats behaving themselves so
Bravely, that they Boarded them, and made their own Guns Fire upon their
Platforms on Shore, Beating the Enemies therefrom, where they were in great
Confusion, beholding their Ruin, in the Destuction of their Ships. Thus it has
Pleased God, of his Infinite Mercy, so to Bless the Arms of Their Sacred
Majesty's, that those that Threatened England with an Invasion, and utter Ruin,
may be convinced of their Mistake, and feel the Effect themselves; of which, we
hope, this is an Happy Omen. Thus have we given you an Account of the
Destruction of their Principal Men of War. For which we ought to Bless God,
that has brought their Great Designs to Naught, and Confounded their
Enterprise, and Preserved England, as he has done heretofore in 1588. in Queen
Elizabeth's days of famous memory.

THESE Blazing Fires on the Coast of France, proved very unwelcome, not only
Affrighting those who were Spectators from the Shore, but made even Paris
Tremble, and Drew a Curtain of Melancholy over the Pleasures at the Court of
Versalies, when they contemplated how much their once unbounded hopes had been
set back, or frustrated, this and the Preceding Year: How they had altogether
lost their Footing in Ireland: For the King of Englands intent upon the Great
Affairs in Flanders, having appointed the Barron D' Ginkle, his Lieutenant
General, in the before mentioned Kingdom; Ballymore with little resistance
Surrendered; Athlone was taken by Storm; and a Formidable Army, Composed of
French and Irish, utterly Routed and Dispersed, at Agbrim, St. Ruth the French
General being Killed in the beginning of the Battle; Galloway soon after was
gained; and lastly Lymerick when it had endured a Considerable Siege,
Vigorously carried on, Capitulated upon Articles, and upon the Surrender of it,
all the Irish according to that Capitulation, returned to their Obedience,
except such as were Decoyed to France. And as a Trophey of this Success,
restoring a Kingdom to its Trade, and Flourishing State; the Banners and
Ensigns taken at Aghrim, were placed for some time in St. James's Park, by
Whitehall, to show Heavens Providence in the Justness of Their Majesty's Arms,
and the Swiftness of the Victorys obtained, for which, and the Great Defeat at
Sea, England expressed her Joy in all suitable demonstrations.

AND that we might make due Returns to Almighty God, whose Hand had so Signally
appeared in all our Proceedings, Prayers and Praises, were put up for his
wonderful Mercys and Deliverances.

THE Campaign for this Year, concluding in Flanders, His Majestys Return was
Congratulated with all the Demonstrations a Loyal Nation was capable of
expressing in Gratitude to a Prince, who had Hazzarded so much for their
Safety, and Preservation. And Affairs being settled, and in an Almost unexpected
quiet, throughout the Three Kingdoms, by Their Majesty's Prudence and Conduct,
the Alliance abroad being firmly fixed. The King departed again from Whitehall,
and with a Prosperous Gail, passed over to Holland, where he was Received with
the usual Expressions of Joy, and all the Tender Respect of a Willing and
Grateful People, whose Safety his Ancestors, and his own Heroic Virtues,
Courage and Conduct, had ^^^served and Confirmed in the Settlement of their
Government, Trade, and Liberties etc.

BUT long he Stayed not, after he had Received the Complements and
Congratulations of Holland, before he passed to the Camp in Flanders, to give
what Orders were Necessary for Opposing the Designs of the Common Enemy.

During these Transactions the Affairs in England were in a Prosperous
Condition; the Queens Prudence in all her management of Affairs, scarcely
admitting of a President in her Sex. The Fleet was Equiped and all things
Ordered in the most Excellent manner: The Courage of the Seamen, was as great
as ever, and our Land Forces being Drawn out of Ireland, and that Kingdom being
entirely Reduced, as has been already mentioned, were the better at Leisure, to
give the French King a Diversion nearer Home, who had sent his Troops so far,
to Disturb a Country to which he had not the least Pretension or Claim; and
accordingly, the Confederate Army appeared so Formidable, that Lewis the 14th.
(though we had some News told us he designed it) upon more Mature Advisement,
Ventured not into the Field, concluding the Chamber-Musick to be more Pleasant
and Secure, than the Noise of Drums and Trumpets, or Wedging into the Grim
Ridges of such a War, in Person, by which we perceive the difference in
Princes, and ought to know how to esteem a Blessing directed by the Hand of
Heaven, as a Sheltring Shield to Protect us, with so much Undaunted Bravery and
Resolution.

The Merchants so encouraged, set out a great many Gallant Ships, to Trade in
diverse parts of the Trading World; and amongst others, the Turkey Fleet, with a
considerable Convoy of Men of War, under the Command of Sir George Rook,
Sailed; our Main Fleet standing with them about Fifty Leagues W. S. W. off of
Vshant, were they parted with Sir George, on the 6th of June, not having seen
or heard of the Enemies Fleet; yet in the Streights they unexpectedly fell in
with them, not having before any certain Advice where they were. However, such
was the Courage and Prudence of ours, and the Dutch Commanders, as well
Merchantmen as Men of War, that the Enemy lost their expected advantage, very
few of the Ships falling into their hands, though their whole Naval Force had
in a manner encompassed them, most of the Merchants Ships getting into safe and
friendly Ports; and the Men of War, (after they had given them that
opportunity) making a Brave Retreat with diverse of the rest.

AND now the City of London to express the true sense they had of the Queens
Prudent Conduct, in the management of weighty affairs, and kindness to them,
made their Address to her, by the Hands of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council, in the following Words, Viz.

To the QVEENS Most Excellent Majesty.
WE Your Majesty's Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Mayor Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled; out of a Deep Sense
of the Infinite Goodness of God to this Nation, in the Signal Deliverance of
His Sacred Majesty, from those Dangers, for which he has so lately, for our
Sakes, exposed his Royal Person even to the Admiration of his Enemies. Do
Heartily and Unfeignedly in the first place, return to Almighty God, our most
Humble Thanks; and in the next, in all Humility, Congratulate Your Majesty,
upon so^^ensible a Providence as the Preservation of that Prince, in whose
Life, not only our Laws, and Religion, but the Liberty of Europe is so entirely
wrapped up.

AND Your Majesty having been so Graciously Pleased, by the Lord Keeper, to
signify the Deep Sense of the great Losses at Sea, which have befallen the
Traders of this City and Kingdom: And the Directions Your Majesty has given, to
the Committee of Your Majesty's Most Honor able Privy Council, as well to
Examine into the Causes of such Misfortunes, as to take Effectual Care to
prevent the like for the future; by encouraging Your Majesty's Subjects to make
their Application to the said Committee. We do with all Cheerfulness Render Our
Hearty Thanks to Your Most Gracious Majesty, for so great a Consideration; in
no wise Doubting, but Your Majesty will continue to give such Good and
Seasonable Directions; that the Trade of this Your Kingdom, in which the
Prosperity of it does so much depend, may be better Supported for the future.

AND as we have hitherto from a Sense of our Duty, Demonstrated to the World
our Great Zeal for Your Majesty's Service; we having now a fresh Opportunity of
showing the same, by the Cheerful and Unanimous advancing of Money, for the
Present Emergencies of Your Majesty's affairs. Humbly Beg Leave to Assure Your
Majesty, of our firm Resolution to continue our Hearty Endeavors, upon all
Occasions, to support Your Majesty's Royal Authority and Government, against
all Persons, to the utmost of our Power.


THIS was received by the Queen with very Gracious Expressions, highly
Satisfactory to those that Presented it, who as a farther mark of Her Favor
had the Honor of Kissing Her Hand.

SOON after a Proclamation was Published, for Preventing the Exportation of
Corn to France, and Ruising the Price of it at home, and for the settling Poor
People on Work. For indeed, the French Provinces, by reason of the Scarcity of
Corn, were in great straits, and the French King used all possible means to
draw it out of other Kingdoms, to prevent the Encroaching Famine;
notwithstanding which, and the disappointments he met withal a great many of
his Subjects Miserably perished by Hunger, whilst that King exacted by an
Arbitrary way, their Corn and other Provisions from them, to lay up his Stores,
and Supply his Magazines on the Frontiers.

AND the King (after the close of the Campaign, and his having Escaped very
great Dangers, and Signalized his Courage to his Immortal Glory, at the Battle
of Landen in Flanders) returning to England that God might still continue his
Mercys and Favors toward us: A Day of Public Thanksgiving was set apart by
Their Majestys Proclamation, bearing Date the Second of November, 1693. Which
was very Religiously and Devoutly Observed, through the Kingdom on the
Appointed Days. And the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, waited on Their
Majesty's to Congratulate His Majesty's Happy Return, and His Wonderful
Preservation in that Signal Providence, that had protected him in the greatest
of Dangers, to which he had exposed his Royal Person for our safety; and all
the Nation Sympathiz'd with them, in their Joy.

THE Winter was chiefly passed over in great Preparations by Sea and Land, the
Parliament cheerfully giving Their Majesty's those Supplys that were Necessary
for the carrying on a War, promising Success and Safety, to the most
Significant Kingdoms and states of Europe: And early in the Spring, the Turkey
and Streights Fleet again set forward on their Voyage, but met with some
disappointments in the Streights, by Stress of Weather: And now Admiral Russel,
taking a Second time his Commission which the the last Year was in the the
Hands of 3 Admirals jointly. The Fleet hastened to Sea, and got out so Early,
that the French found a main disappointment in the repeated losses they
sustained: A great many of their Corn Ships, and those with Noval Stores being
taken by ours. And the Kings intent upon the great Affairs abroad the 3d of May
1694 left Witehall, accompanied by the Queen, who having taken her leave of
him, soon after embarked for Holland, and after receiving the usual
Complements, passed to the Campaign, finding all things in a very early
readiness, and a posture promising Success.

THE Navy Royal having been out some time in the Narrow Seas, and no Enemy
daring to appear, Admiral Russel with the greater part of ours, and the Dutch
Squadron, had Orders to Sail to the Streights, and in Conjunction with the
Spanish Ships of War and Gallys, prevent the Designs the French had on the
Coasts of Catolonia, whose unexpected coming put Monsieur Tourville, the French
Admiral, into such apprehensions of danger, that instead of adventuring to
Engage us, or Besiege Barcelonia by Sea, or intercept our Streights and Turkey
Fleet, he ordered his Ships into the Harbor before Toulon, barring up as well
as he could the Haven, and making Platforms on Shore to defend it; and at last
Disarmed his Capital Men of War, and sent a great part of the Seamen over land
to Breast.

WHILST these Successes happened further off, a Terror and Consternation was
brought on the Coast of France, opposite to our Shore, for the Lord Berkly
keeping the Narrow Seas, with a strong Squadron Entered the Port of Diep, Bomb'd
that Important Town, and laid it in Ruins, and afterward, had almost the like
Success at Havre de Grace; putting a great many Stately Buildings in Elames,
which brought such a terror on the people, that many on the Coast left their
Habitations: And Dunkirk was likewise Attempted, but by reason of the badness
of the Harbor for Entrance and Weather, we could not there have the like
advantage.

THE Confederates during these Transactions, pressed the French Armies in Savoy,
upon the Rhine, and in Flanders: The Turks were forced to a shameful Retreat in
Hungary; and the Tartars that came to Relieve Caminick, were Routed by the
Poles: Huy in Flanders was taken from the French; and their Boasted Resolutions
appeared every where, to be in the Declining Scale, so that the Campaign
successfully ending on the part of the Confederates by Land, and our Grand
Fleet still keeping their station, for Wintering in the Spanish Ports. The King
having received the Complements and Thanks of the States General etc. Landing
in England, was met by the Queen, with Unexpressible Joy; and the Cities of
London and Westminster, in the Evening, as they came to Town, were filled with
Illuminations, Bonfires were made, and the Bells Tuned to the Music of the
Peoples Joyful Acclamation; and through these Demonstrations of Gratitude and
Loyalty, the Royal Pair passed to Kensington, where they were waited on by the
Nobility, with a Tender of their Humbly Duty, and soon after the King was
Graciously Pleased to tell the Parliament in his Speech, Of the stop that had
been this Year put to the Torrent of the French Proceedings, which had
altogether put them to a stand and was a Happy Omen of future success; and that
nothing might be wanting on his part, to Oblige his Loving Subjects. An Act was
passed for the Frequent meeting of Parliaments, to the high Satisfaction of the
Kingdom.

BUT whilst these Occasions of Joy Brightned in the Countenance of all the Well
Affected People of these Kingdoms. A Sad and Melancholy Cloud of Sorrow too
sudainly overshadowed our Rejoycings with Grief and Fear, upon the News of the
Queens Illness, which begun on the 22d of December; and in a little time Her
Distemper was known to be the Small Pox, an Inexorable and Pittyless Distemper,
too to Fatal to the Royal Family. And upon this occasion, that God in his
Infinite Mercy would be pleased to Preserve her Life, and Restore her Health
Public and Private Prayers were put up.

BUT what shall we say, for our Sins, our Sighs and Tears had not an expected
return of our fervent wishes and desires; the Blessing was too great for us,
and Heaven bereaved us of it, to change her Earthly Diadem into a Crown of
Stars and Glory: For notwithstanding all that Art, and the Prayers of a
Mourning Nation could do, the prevailing Distemper put a Period to her precious
Life, on the 28th. of December, in the 33d. Year of her Age, at her Palace of
Kensington; where she Dyed amidst the Sighs and Tears of those that were about
her, with that Pious Courage and Constancy that had attended all the Actions of
her Life. For whose Inestimable loss, no valuable things, on this side Heaven,
can suffice to allay our Sorrows, in being deprived of the best of Queens, and
of Women, in the bloom of her Beauty, excellency of Virtue, and prime of her
Years.

AND whilst preparations, of solemn Pomp and State, were making, for the
disposing of her Body in the repository of the Grave, amongst her Royal
Ancestors, till in the bright Morning of the Resurrection, it shall reunite
with her Angelick Soul in endless felicity, the Nations Grief swelled in its
highest Tide. No Loss ever came so near the Hearts of an Afflicted People, to
transport them beyond moderation in Sorrow.

THE Nations Genious, upon this great Blow, put on the deepest of Melancholy;
and things appeared as if all Nature Sighed for our Irreperable and Inestimable
Loss, such a one as even Posterity and Ages to come must in sadness and regret
deplore.

HIS Grace the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, pursuant to an Order
of Council, hereupon put forth his Order, Requiring, as it was expected, all
Persons to go into the deepest Mourning; and that the Nobility, etc. should
cover their Coaches with Black Cloth, and their Liverys to be of the same;
which was readily, and with all imaginable complying willingness, Obeyed and
Observed. The Peers and Commons in Parliament, weighted on the King, at
Kensington to condole this great Loss, in two Addresses, seting forth
extraordinary Expressions of their Sorrow, and the deep sense they had of the
Death of the most Pious and Best of Queens; and to Entreat His Majesty to
moderate his Grief, etc. With protestations to stand by him against all his
Enemies abroad and at home.

THE Loyal City of London, in the like manner, expressed its sadness, in a
Condolement of so general a loss, as did many other chief places in England in
their Addresses, which were received with very Gracious Answers. And Mourning
Scotland besides its other Demonstrations of a deep sense of Sorrow Ordered a
Day of Humiliation, and Fasting on the Occasion,

Into the Closet of the Royal Mourner, Awe and Distance Commands us not to Pry,
no Pen or Words being capable of uttering or framing so much as an Idea of the
unexpressible grief that resided there, and therefore all we can do, is to pass
it over in Duteous silence, and only add our Earnest Prayers and Wish, That God
of His Infinite Mercy would Support Him with Comforts and Blessings, under so
Weighty Affliction, to be the Protector, Blessing, and Comfort of his Sorrowful
Kingdoms.

FINIS.

