SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Posture of our Affairs, ON THE DEATH OF OUR LATE
Most Gracious QUEEN.

SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE POSTURE OF Our Affairs, ON THE DEATH Of our late
most Gracious Queen.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1695.

SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Posture of our Affairs, ON THE DEATH OF OUR LATE
Most Gracious QUEEN.
IT IS not intended that this Paper should make any new Discoveries, neither my
Business nor Inclination leads me among the Men of Intrigue in our
State Affairs; but the Conduct of our Rose-Tavern Club, our W -- ns, our G --
is, and the rest of 'em, in a late Juncture, carries so many Marks of their
dangerous Designs in it, that no private Person in his idle Hours can pass it
over without some Reflection.

They will pretend, if it comes in their way, and they can by that means serve
a Turn, That there is not such a Creature as a Republican now in England; that,
like Wolves, they had once a footing here, but their whole Race is now extinct:
Yet upon the occasion of the least change in our Government they cannot contain
themselves; Had we not an Instance of their Good Will in Monmouth's Rebellion?
Did not the same Temper and Inclinations appear plainly in the Convention upon
the settlement of our present Government? Nor have they been wanting to put in
their Claim upon the loss of the late most excellent Queen; the Thoughts of the
Princess Anne, so near as Heir Apparent of the Crown they cannot hear; she is
the support to the Succession of our Hereditary Monarchy, for though one Link by
the Act of Settlement is taken out, the Chain is not broken; and besides, she
is a visible Security to the Church of England: and therefore, if possible,
they are to step between her and the Throne; all they can do at present is to
endeavor to make her odious to the People. To this purpose they industriously
spread their Rumors in the City and elsewhere, That she was not reconciled to
our good Queen before she died, but carried herself unhandsomely and
barbarously to her in her sickness. And at the same time they were never more
enraged, than when they knew how far the Native Goodness of her Royal Highness
led her upon that Sad Occasion, and with what a Tenderness all Messages from
Berkley-House were received by the late Queen, and with what a kind Regard from
his Majesty, in the Condition that both were under, it was safe neither for the
Queen nor Princess to come together; but these Gentlemen, while with False
Reports they Asperse the Princess in Public for her Ill Carriage to the Queen,
in their Private Conversations they Curse her for the Messages she sent, and
one of 'em cried at that time, God Damn Her, who put that into her Head?

It Is not observed that the Jacobites themselves show any Dependence upon the
Princess, they know they have no Ground for any Expectation there, and yet
these Gentlemen report, That the Princess Treats underhand with the late King
James to bring him in, and it has been whispered by them in the House of
Commons, That it is necessary to have an Act of Parliament to secure the
Kingdom from this Pretended Danger which their own Wicked Designs creates and
spreads abroad; they would have a Law upon a bare Suggestion of their own
fomenting, in a Case that would be High Treason in the Princess, if proved, as
well as in any other: But we know what they mean, it is the Act of Settlement
that they would defeat, and because they dare not yet directly set themselves
against it, they desire by these Arts to weaken it, though it is notoriously known
they have felt the Pulse of several in the House of Commons about it, in Plain
Terms, and not under the Color of other Pretenses Strange Weakness of Human
Nature! that there should be some Cheats, which, though never so long practiced,
and though never so often exploded, should still obtain among Men. Has not the
Name of Liberty, when made use of to undermine a Settled Government, ended in
Universal Slavery, and the Specious Pretenses of Religion, when opposed to that
Establsh'd by Law, introduced a General Corruption of all the Common Principles
of Justice and Virtue, and whatever is esteemed most sacred among Men? Once,
within the memory of several of us, we have experimented what a Commonwealth
would do in England, and then some at the Helm were sober, just and brave,
Religion and Justice they pretended to make the Foundation upon which to build
their Government, yet this soon fell into confusion: And shall we now see the
same thing attempted again, but with greater Disadvantages? It Is now attempted
by a Set of Men, who are so far from any sense of Religion in themselves, that
they will not allow of so much as the Form of it in Public; Men, that are
either Bankrupts in their Fortunes, or Cowards in their Persons; Men, that have
spent their Estates in the most scandalous open Debaucheries, and now turn
Patriots to repair them; that were never known to be at any Divine Service
whatsoever, except when they receive the Sacrament in the Church of England, to
qualify them to take a Place that they may destroy it; Men, that Vapor and
give Ill Language in the House of Commons, where no Man ought to give an
Affront, because it must not there be resented: But though some of these Strut in
the House, they Speak as tamely when they are out of it.

What such Men as these can expect from a Commonwealth, I cannot imagine; for
were it come to that, Power would fall to the bravest and best amongst us, and
then their Qualifications of Cowardice and Knavery will render them
contemptible, as they deserve to be. It Is our Misfortune in England, and his
Majesty feels the greatest share of it, That the Party, that these Gentlemen
manage, is so great, that they can obstruct Business, if they are not employed
in it: Many Instances in the House of Commons we have had of this, but the King
knows they cannot be sincerely for him, who are open Enemies to all Kings; that
they cannot be for the good of the Government settled by Law, who are restless
in their endeavors to bring all things into confusion: But the Exigence of our
Affairs, during this great War, necessitates his Majesty to make use of some of
them; were their Characters as well known by the generality of the People, as
they are by those that have the opportunity to observe their Actions more
nearly, they would not have interest enough to call themselves a Party; but the
greatest part of Mankind are guided by the appearance of things, and
consequently easily liable to be deceived: But it is hoped, that the bold
Measures they were taking in the late Juncture, of which I have given some
hints, has a little exposed 'em to the World; they would not have stopped so
soon, but the happy Reconciliation between the King and Princess, for the
present, ended their carreer: The continuance of this Happy Union is what every
good Man prays for, and they only lament; it is so public now, that they cannot
deny it; yet they surmise, that it cannot last long, and you may know them by
their feigned Doubts, whenever the fair Correspondence between the King and
Princess is spoke of; but, blessed by God, it is gone so far, that it has
forced them to be quiet in that matter.

The next thing they turned their thoughts upon, is to promote an Act of
Abjuration, in relation to the late King; this is a Masterpiece, and only fit
for the scrutore of a Secretary of State; this is intended to render all the
Church of England-men incapable of serving our King, and will reduce his
Majesty, contrary to all Maxims of State and Reason, to be the Head of their
Party, instead of being undoubted King of all England. It Is Wisdom in every
Government to make its Foundation as wide as may be, and shall we now, in time
of danger, make the Foundation of ours narrower? The Laws of our Land know no
such term as the word Abjuration, in the sense they would impose it upon the
Subject; no Oath can be imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, other than
what is imposed and enjoined by Act of Parliament, and that only concerning
lawful and indifferent things; but this new Oath they would introduce, is, in
the opinion of many of the King's true and faithful Subjects, contrary to the
Law and Word of God and Nature, and there was nothing like it ever heard of in
the Practice or Laws of our Kingdom, till these Gentlemen, two Years ago,
promoted it in the House of Commons, where it was thrown out: In a word, it is
against Reason, Conscience, Honor or Policy, either to require it or take it;
'twas in such Practices as these that the Tyranny of the late Civil Wars
consisted, but they never proceeded to impose such an Oath, Subscriptions were
once required, but that was when the Army enslaved, and a Committee of it
governed the whole Kingdom.

Let these Gentlemen flatter themselves in their own vain Imaginations as long
as they please, let them contrive the building their own Fortunes upon the ruin
of the Public, every true Englishman knows, that we have a good Government
settled in the Person of our King; that the Monarchy is secured by the Act of
Settlement; and that the Church of England, as established by Law, is suited
for the preservation of the present King, as well as of all other, in their due
Prerogatives; that the Hereditary Monarchy is part of the Constitution of our
Government, and that the Church of England has been long made so too; that the
Church and State, as they are framed and supported by our Laws, are so adapted
the one for the other, that their Welfare is reciprocal, and their Interests
are so interwoven each with the other, that to pull down the Monarchy, the
Church must be undermined.

And this is the Source of that Rage that these Gentlemen show upon all
occasions against it: The Doctrins and Principles of the Church cannot offend
their Consciences who pretend to no Religion, why do they then oppose it, but
because they apprehend it obstructs their other Designs.

While we cheerfully and vigorously carry on the War against our Enemies
abroad, under a Prince that is Virtuous, Wise, and Brave, let every honest
Heart join in their Prayers against these Enemies to our Peace as Home, That
God Almighty would abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound their
Devices.

FINIS.

