SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE INTENDED Bank of England, Whose
Author's Name is supposed to be MR. Ierry Squirt,
WHEN first I cast my Eye on the Brief Account of the Intended Bank, I thought
I had met with such a Rarity, as would fully have explained the whole Tunnage
Act, the Nature of a Bank in General, and the full design of this intended Bank
in Particular; but when I had perused it, I looked on it as a particular
Reflection on Dr. Chamberlyn and his Proposal, as if he had a design to offer
both up a Sacrifice to Public Obloquy, and not a little exposing the Members
of Parliament, whom in good manners he ought to have treated with greater
Deference and Respect; and, take it all together, its rather a Banter, than an
Account of what he promised of the Bank. Therefore for Diversion sake I
ventured to make some Remarks upon it. The Book having no Name to it (though
approved by some of the Bank Proposers) and the same being a silly Book, seems
to be written, rather, to gratify the importunity of some dull pated Fellow,
that may have been concerned in the promoting of this Bank, and knew not well
himself how to recommend it to the World, than to inform the Nation of the true
Nature of it, as he ought to have done.

And methinks he begins very aukwardly when he tells us, That the want of a
Bank, among other inconveniences, has occasioned much unnecessary Credit, to
the loss of several Millions. What does he mean by that improper Expression of
unnecessary Credit? I think it may rather be said, that the Establishing of
this Diminutive Bank, has among other inconveniences, occasioned much
unnecessary Scrible from our insipid Author, who adds, That this together with
the height of Interest or forbearance of Money has produced, What? Why nothing
at all but some nonsencical Bombast, for he infers nothing else therefrom. But
he goes on in next place to tell us, That these, and such as these, were the
causes that the Nature and Use of Banks have been the Discourse and Expectation
of many years; but still our refined Politicians thought it would not be settled
here without a Commonwealth, and this made it to be a matter of Derision, and
was therefore laughed quite out of Countenance. But however the Notion of Bands
and Public Funds (quoth our Author) were entertained by some Mercurial Heads,
Dr. Chamberlayn he means, for here our Author having said thus much by way of
Introduction, cannot yet proceed on giving an account of the Intended Bank,
till first he has sufficiently ridiculed Dr. Chamberlain and his Proposals of
a Bank, who tho he does not Name him, is so plain in his Description, as if he
did point him out with his Fi^ger, or write his Name in a large Character, that
the Man who rides a trotting Horse may easily read it; for no other Person
offered any thing like him, or took so much pains publicly ^owards the
promo^ing a Bank, this last Sessions especially* which by his several papers
Printed at his own Charge and delivered to the Members, does farthe^ appear, at
which time he patientl^ endured all the Scorn Derision, and Contempt of many
Men, and among them, possibly were several of the Proposers of this Bank, tho
at the same time, he constantly endeavored to possess them with a right Notion
of a Bank, and such a one, as would have made the Nation far more flourishing
and happy (had they embraced i^) than i's possible for this, or any thing else,
that has hitherto yet been offered. Before which time, I presume, that neither
our Author, nor his Proposers even understood any such thing, nor does it
appear yet by this inconsiderable one that they how do. However since they were
pleased to slight the Doctor, our worshipful Author thinks fit to deride and
expose him for it, though he had no occasion so to do, neither does a make any
thing for his purpose, unless he designs it shall serve as a soul the better to
set off h^s own for he is not without his narrow design, too) which, whether i^
will or no, will be seen anon. p. 2.
And thus he begins in telling how the Notion of Banks was entertained by some
Mercurial Heads to whom the danger of V^^l^^ce from the Prince being objected,
aid therefore invent certain imaginary Banks, which they designed to settle far
enough out of the Prince's reach, and every bodies else. The truth is, it is
well enough expressed for a Buffoon, and if all were true as our Author writes,
the Doctor would appear as shallow Brained as I take our Author to be, whose
Head seems to have more of an Heavy, Dull, Lumpish Saturn, than an ingenious
Mercury; and for that he has not Brains enough to understand the Doctor's
Ba^k, does therefore deride it. For no Bank in the World is better contrived
for the Advantage, Security, and Satisfaction of the King and his People, than
the Doctor's, the subject, (...) delivered into their own hands, and the King a
large supply to carry (...) France, as well as improve his Revenue, besides the
establishing that most desirable Trade of the Fishery to this Nation; therefore
how this Author can report the Doctor's to be but an imaginary Bank, and out of
every ones reach; when the profits, and indeed the Bank it self, is all in
their own Possession, makes me much amazed to see so great Impudence, for which
he can pretend no excuse unless his profound ignorance; from thence he descends
to particulars, which he slightly hints at only, by which he would represent,
p. 3.
how the Errors and Mistakes of the Lombard Bank, and the notion of Money did
occasion their miscarriage, by running counter to all Mankind, anticipating
Ages, and imagining inestimable Value from innumerable years to come, as if 100
years were a far longer time than a perpetuity, which is allowed to this
Tunnage Act, if not redeemable in a few years, and this did want an Act of
Parliament at least to conjure every Man's imagination into the Latitude of
theirs. And as I take it, your Bank could not be what you would have it without
this Act of Parliament, notwithstanding it has the full proposed Sum of
1200000 l. but I shall leave it to the Doctor to answer these particulars, as
being more properly his province; only the last Sentence I cannot refrain
taking notice of, for that I perceive it was placed there for a clincher; by
observing the prodigious extravagancy of the Doctor's Genius to be as vastly
above and beyond, as others are below and beside the practice of extraordinary
things. Here our Author's Genius has showed his Talent to purpose, and has
strained in an extraordinary manner for this flight of Fancy, and seems to hug
himself for his extravagant Thought, tho this whole Paragraph is crammed with
nothing but Romantique Stuff, which without doubt cost him much labor of Brain
in Composing; and I can hardly believe, but that in imitation of Mr. Bays,
upon extraordi^ary occasions, he does certai^ly take Physic the better to
clear his Pericranium from those muddy Vapors, and noisome Exhalations, that
commonly at other times do use to disturb his little Genius. And tho I know not
by what proper Name or Tide the Author is distinguished, yet however I will not
call him by the Name of Mr. Bays, that being already given to several Fops in
common, but not long since reading a Comedy made on the Owls of Athens, I find
a Youngster one Jerry Squirt, which in all points so resembles our Author, that
thus appears in Masquerade, that one would swear it is the very same Person, for
it was the business of grinning Jerry to Carp and Quibble, Pun and play the
Fool with every thing that came before him. And our Author being an
extraordinary Fopling, its fit he should have a Name peculiar to his Nature,
and therefore for the future, as well out of respect, as for brevity's sake, I
shall call him by the aforesaid Name of Jerry Squirt. And now Jerry, let me
tell you, that I think you should not have treated the Doctor with so much
disrepect, since he was so fair and ingenuous, as to Print much of his Bank at
his own charge, and so freely distribute them to many others besides the
Members; by which it appears, there was no other design in it, than what was
Noble and Honest, full of well wishes, and mighty advantages both to King and
People. But alas! What can Ingenuity and good Nature otherwise expect from
Fulsome ignorance, than such like rude and barbarous Treatment, as the Swine
that takes no other notice of Pearl than to trample them under their feet. But
to our Author, who between the new-acquired Maxims of the Politicians on the
one hand, and others incomprehensible Notions, it became very Scandalous to
Countenance, or espouse any thing of a proposal relating to a Bank, then
certainly the Proposers and Contrivers of a Bank must be very scandalous
indeed, and on that Score be had in great contempt, so then it was no wonder
the Doctor could have no better Success, since the Parliament Members (as Jerry
would insinuate) were afraid to let him into their House, to hear what ^e could
say to his Bank, least it seems, they should become scandalous thereby. Well,
now, Jerry, having no sooner done with the Modern Politicians, who made the
Name of a Bank ridiculous, and Men of incomprehensible Notions, who made it
scandalous, but he presently meets with another sort full as bad, p. 4.
and those were, the Wits on both sides, who taking the advantage of the
Nations being low in Credit, found no better nor honester way to supply the
necessities of the Government, than to raise the interest of Money to treble
the value or higher, and make Merchandise of the Government, which is in effect
making the Government to pay great Extortion. But, Jerry, methinks it would not
have been amiss, if you had well considered, who those Wits are on whom you
have made this Saucy Reflection, that most of them do sit in the Parliament
House and it is they only, that have made these Acts; for no body else, you
know, have the power to treble the Interest of Money, and they have thought
fit, even in this very Act you so much extol, to allow 8 l. per cent. which is
4 s. above the common Interest to all such as will bring in their Money. If now
you are so bold and unmannerly with the whole Parliament, the Doctor cannot in
reason expect any civiler usage from you. Now for remedy of this no better nor
honester way than enhancing the price of Interest, which was but lately done,
even in the two last Sessions of Parliament, Jerry says, it was p^oposed some
years ago, that a public transferrable Fund of Interest should be established
by Parliament, p. 5.
which would in course have lowered the Interest of Money: This now is as well
said, as if Justice Clodpate himself had spoken it, to make the transferable
Fund that was proposed some years ago for the lowering of Interest, to be a
remedy for the trebling of I^terest, that was never thought on till the other
day. This looks exactly like our shallow brained Author's Nonsense, to put the
Cart before the Horse, and make the effect preceed the cause: This is one of
Jerry's master pieces, such a sort of st^ff as Jerry can do no better, the Lord
knows. But be it how it will, the Notion of Currency presen^ly marred all the
Remedy, p. 5.
because there was something of Coercion in the bo^tom, which is of sufficient
force to mar a good thing of this Nature, but never to mend a bad one. Why
truly Jerry, t^is very thought of Coercion, is enough to spoil the currency of
this Bank; for though Men are not forced to bring in their Money, yet when it
is there, you say they cannot take it out again, and that is a Coercion, besides
there are many unhappy Debtors, out of whose hands much of this Money is
called, in order to be brought into this Bank, who for Non-payment are
constrained to go to Gaol, or lose their Estates to their merciles Creditors
for little more than half the Value, and this is Coercion with a Vengeance.
When ever you shall read the D^ctor's Proposal, you will then be sensible (if
you have not quite lost all your senses, J^^ry) that your position of Coercion
is utterly false, and that it is of sufficient force both to make a good thing
of this Nature much better, and mend a bad one. For to have Brass Tickets pass,
and do the Office of Money, when there is not half Mo^ey enough for the Peoples
use, is a good thing or this Nature, and to have them made good by Land
Security for the buying them all up again, is not to mar, but to make it much
better; and if you think that paper Tickets are bad in respect of Money, why
then to make use of brass Tickets, is to mend a bad one, for that they will
last much longer, and not be so soon wo^e out, they are contrived in smaller
Sums, and may be compared as Tallies to prevent Cheat. But all this while the
Name of a Bank or Corporation was avoided, for the reason he told us before,
that it was both Ridiculous and Scandalous, tho the Nature of ^oth was
intended, the Proposers thinking it prudent, that a design of this Nature,
should have as easy and insensible a beginning as possible, ay, they were
afraid their designs should miscarry, and so they managed it like an Ass eating
of Thistles; to prevent, or at least gradually to soften, and remove the
prejudices, and bad impressions conceived in the minds of Men against things of
this kind before they are understood; they were so very fearful of a Discovery
of their designs, that they could hardly tell well how to go about it, least
when it came to be laid open, the People in general would never endure it. But
that sort of People, who ought and in whose power it was to encourage the
Undertaking, could no ways understand it; I believe so too Jerry, it was not
likely they should, after the manner as your proposers offered it, by piece
meal, that is to say, a word or two now, and a little hi^t of it anon; for the
beginning of it, was not like the Doctor's, to be fully made known all at once,
least it should be abhorred; but to be slided in as easy and insensible as
possible it could be, or else they were a sort of Blockheads, that could not
understand it in whatever manner the Proposers offered it. And what a pity it
was, that this Jerry being a Man of such discerning Faculties and acute Parts,
and also of a public Spirit, was not consulted within so Noble and Universal a
Work as this. I warrant he would have scorned to have put them on particular
undertakings, that should have produced any narrow or sinister designs, but
would have brought the Name of a Bank into credit with his management, and have
explained the nature of i^ as well, as he has in this learned piece, which no
body is the wiser for. But Jerry, what persons do you represent the House of
Commons to be all t^i^ while, to make use of such narrow and sinister Designs?
I cannot tell how far, they may privilege you, to deal with them so over
familiarly; but another Man might well f^ar his Ears of the House of Correction
for so much Sawciness; f^r no body else, bu^ the Members had the management of
such an affair. And one thing more Jerry let me whisper in your Ear as a
Friend, you ought in all Conscience and Honesty, to have discovered all these
sinister proceedings, and the Names of the Proposers that put them in Practice,
so much to the prejudice both of King and People, because, at the same time, it
hindered them from making use of Dr. Chamberlyn's Proposal, which would easily
have remedied all these inconveniences, and you to keep a^ this so secret for
so long time and then to discover so ^mpuo^n^ly, after what manner this
intended Bank was hammered out and recommend it too, as a N^b^e and Universal
Work, when it is not sufficient by tenth part to serve the Nation, is a crime
unpardonable: But now let us proceed, As the Proposer found discouragement from
one sort of Men, who could by no means reconcile this Proposal to their own
appr^hensions; so others, viz. Landed M^n, seemed ^o understand it too much,
and would have M^^^y proposed at four or four and an half per cent. least the
Land should be discouraged. This must needs put the Money Proposers in a
fearful Sweat; and therefore it wa^ pr^sently found convenient to put all ^o an
hazard, and expose so much of the nature of the thing, and its constitution, as
was needful to have it espoused in Parliamen^, and (...) take its chance.

But, quoth Jerry, tho the gilded Name of a Bank, p. 7.
and ^he popular one of a Corporation, became more formidable to the senses of
a sort of People, who wanted the Money; why how now, Jerry, how come you to
give the Epithet gilded, to the Name of a Bank? For gilded things are made so
only to set off that which has little or no intrinsic value in it. This is
much like your unnecessary Credit; yet what by the instigation of a few
covetous Men, and some who are no great Friends to the Government, diverse
otherwise well-meaning people (that is to say, Fools that have not yet been
named) became possessed with monstrous and frightful Ideas, and conceptions of
the matter which begot whole swarms of Objections, which neither the Proposers,
nor the Author will hardly ever answer; these he relates in a very Comical
manner: How one pretended Patriot comes and says, this design will make the
King absolute, p. 8.
nor is there any way to prevent it; another comes Cock a Hoop and tells ye a
Story of his Gransire, Uncle, or some of the Race who have traveled abroad and
never met with any Stocks or Banks, but in a Common wealth, and some that see
farther into a Millstone, than others will make it plain, that it will enhance
the price of Land, and utterly ruin Trade; and lastly, that the Learned say,
that the Money will run into Trade and none left to purchase Lands, and so
leaves the Objectors to confer Notes; whereas had Jerry done heartily, he would
not have raised Objections without answering them; however, Jerry tells us, it
may be to better purpose for him to give some Brief Account of the Nature of
this intended Bank, for our better Noification; ay marry, Sir, this is what I
have looked for all this while, and thought it very long before I came to it,
there being full one half of the Book, even to page 9 spent in telling how it
came to pass we had not hitherto a Bank, and the great difficulty in getting of
it at last, and now we have a Bank such a one as it is, without turning the
Government into a Commonwealth, but whether it will facilitate the Circulation
of Money, so as to promote Trade, by which the effects of the Nation may answer
the use, and do the Office of Money without such great losses as aforesaid, is
a great Question, which I hope our Author Jerry, will make ^ut plain to our
Satisfaction: For tho the Tunnage Act does tell us of a Bank that might be if
1200000 l. be brought in, yet it says nothing of the Nature of it in
particular, or what methods the Commissioners will use in the management of it.
And therefore, I hope our judicious Author Jerry, who is so well skilled in
things of this Nature, and understands neither too much, nor too little of it,
but has the true, right, and just Notion of Banks, exact to a Cows thumb, will
discover the Soul and Guts of it, together with the good effects and
consequences that may be expected therefrom. But in the first place, he says,
it is necessary to premise whatever our Notionists may imagine to the contrary.
First, That all Money, or Credit, p. 10.
not having an Intrinsic Value, to answer the Contents, or Denomination
thereof, is false and counterfeit, and the loss must fall one where or other;
ay, Jerry, that will most certainly be found true hereafter in our scandalous
clipped Money; and if the Directors of this Bank should give out Bills of Credit,
or allow Credit in their Books of Account for many more Millions, than there is
a Fund settled to make good, as they may, there being no body to call them to an
Account the loss must fall one where or other. p. 10.
I cannot so easily consent to your second Premises Jerry, it being false in
the consequence, for tho the Species of Gold and Silver be generally approved
of, yet it does not follow, that every thing else is only counted valuable as
compared with these; for before the Act for Payments to be made in Money, men
did exchange their Goods in Specie, without comparing it with Money, and an
honest Man's Word is taken for a great value, tho at the same time, he be not
worth a Farthing in the World; which shows your third premise is as bad as the
former. That therefore all Credit not founded on the Universal Species of Gold
and Silver is impracticable; for the reason I told you before, that Goods were
exchanged in Specie, and the honesty of a good Man is as well and are commonly
trusted, which shows it is as practicable, and will last as long as the honest
Man lives; but you have recollected your self at last, and I believe have
considered of the Doctor's Proposals, when you afterward tell us, that at
least till some other Species of Credit be found out, and chosen over and above
or in lieu thereof. Indeed, Jerry, you are beholding to the Doctor for this,
and if you were but half so honest and just, as you pretend to be, you would
ingenuously own your self a Plagiary, for the Doctor's Bank is founded on good
Land Security, which gives every brass Ticket its Credit, and will make their
value last full 100 Years, and this may be in lieu of your Gold and Silver;
neither can it be so easily seized and carried away. But however, I am glad to
see you hint, as if it were possible another Species of Credit may be found
out; and since the Doctor has contrived it to far better purpose, Why was it
not embraced? Alas, for the reason you told us before, the foresaid company of
Proposers had represented it as Scandalous. But now we have read the Premises,
lets see what follows, Quoth Jerry, Thus having said what a Bank ought to be,
it remains, etc. Why Jerry, I perceive you have a Memory as short as your
Brains are Shallow, and have forgot what you were going to speak to, which was
to discover the Nature of he Intended Bank, but not a word, that you was about
to define a Bank in general, or tell us what it ought to be; but only that you
would first premise, something necessary toward the better understan^ing the
Nature of the Intended Bank, for a man can no more tell, what a Bank is, or
ought to be by these premises, than by the rumbling of a Wheel-barrow, whether
Jerry Squirt be in his Senses or no. Well, lets go on, It remains to show what
this is designed, and wherein it will consist: So so, now at last we are come
to it. This Back will consist in a Revenue or Income of Eight per cent. per
annum for and upon the Money subscribed; and that profits and improvements can
be made from the Business or Credit of the Bank, will be also divided among the
Proprietors. O Jerry, this will tempt Men to draw their effects from Trade,
because as you say in the 4th. page, They will find the best and securest gain
in making Merchandise of the Government and Nation; for this is two per cent.
more than the common Int^rest. I fear this Bank already will not prove so good
as I hoped, for I thought a Bank must have had a vast heap of Money, that upon
security might have supplied all Men's occasions, and so because of the plenty,
it would in course have lowered the interest of Money, for the ease of the poor
Subjects, and not heightened it, for who then will lend their Money on Land
Security at 5 l. or 6 l. per cent. when they can have 8 l. per cent. besides
other improvements? And what then wi^^ become of the Mortgagers? Indeed and
indeed Jerry, let me tell thee, that thi^ is a very pretty contrivance to
beggar and starve a vast multitude of Debtors, and the Poor, only to enrich a
crafty company of Proprietors, which are those few Men, that have Money, that
make the people a prey to consuming Usury, and keep them under oppressions they
too frequently lie under, as you say afterward in page 15th. And thus this
Company or Corporation will exceed all ^the^s of that kind, known in the
Commercial World; What for Ex^ortion, Jerry? Faith I believe so too, for he
repeats it again, has here will be 8l. per cent. per annum upon the Capital, p.
11.
and as good and great probability of other profi^s as ever any Company had,
all this you have told us already, but Tautology we must allow to Jerry, who I
belive is a Welshman, and they have a privilege of telling their Story over and
over again. Then as to the Security, etc. still you conceal the Nature of the
Bank, but we must take it as our Friend Jerry can express it, p. 11.
The security is clear and visible and every way equal, if not exceeding the
best in Christendom; I would be glad to see that made out. This Bank will
always have 1200000 l. what, will they always keep so much Money by them? Or
100000 l. per annum over and above the effects to answer whatsoever Credit they
may have. Suppose now Jerry they give out Credit for 10 or 20 Millions either
in Books or Bybills, will the Interest of 1200000 l. at 8 l. per cent. together
with 100000 l. per annum that's over and above, answer fully for the said
Credit? Then for ought I can find, it will not be altogether a Money Bank, but
a Bank of great Credit with a very little Money; this may serve some Men's
occasions in and about London, but what shall the rest of the Nation do?
Suppose likewise, that a great part of this Money should belong to Foreigners,
and they should constantly draw out their Interest every year for their present
support, wha^ then may or will the Nation get by that, when so much Money is
constantly Exported? Well, a little after you mention a scurvy thing, that had
been better left out, for that it discovers the soft part of your Noddle, viz.
That there will be no Dividend till after some Months notice, that such as
apprehend the Security will be weakened thereby, may withdraw their effects. Why
Jerry! is it possible, that a Man should apprehend any weakness in the
Security, when in the foregoing page, you say, its the best in Europe, and a
little before, That the Security of this Bank is clear and visible, and exceeds
the best in Christendom; and immediately after you subjoin, Thus a Society of
private Men will be obliged by their Estates to strengthen and corroborate the
public Security of this Bank; but how all this does appear to be so
substantially corroborated by private Estates, we have only your bare word for
it, Jerry; for I cannot find it expressed in the Act* nor any account of the Men's
Names or of their Estates in Print that are tied and engaged to corroborate the
said Security, excepting the King's Revenue. This is like your canting way
Jerry, but if private Men's Estates should be obliged, it must be for the sake
of the profits arising from the Business and Credit of the Bank, which whether
it will be the taking Pawns like a Lombard, o^ giving out Bills and Tickets of
Credit like the Doctors, it is only time and practice must inform us, yet still
we shall have need of this Act to conjure every Man's imagination into a good
opinion of the said Bills, unless there was such plain and visible security for
every Bill or Ticket, to the satisfaction of all Men, as is made appear in the
Doctor's Bank, so as there is not room left for an objection against it. Now if
Jerry had discovered the Nature of this Bank plainly, as at first he promised,
and let us have known, if any body else should have been the better for it,
besides the Proprietors, or that Men might be supplied at any time with what
Money they wanted on good Security; or how otherwise it may, and will be
serviceable to the Poor, and public in General, as well as the Rich: I should
have believed he had understood all he pretends to, and have thought him an
honest fellow; but it is not the first time you have broke your word, Jerry.
But since you have granted, that some Men through fear of the worst, may
withdraw their Effects, why may not I ask as well, what if the major part or
all at once, should draw out their Money, as formerly, out of the Bankers Hands
at the shutting up of the Exchequer? Or what if the Managers run away beyond
Sea with more Money than they are worth, there being many Foreigners in the
Bank, where then will be the Fund to secure all and corroborate this Bank? And
tho I doubt not but all is secure under our present King and Queen, yet another
King may venture to shut up the Exchequer again, who then shall they sue? All,
or some of the Company? And what if they are all protected, as the Bankers
formerly were? Tho you will not trouble your self to answer Objections, yet
monyed Men who are many of them very timorous, will first be answered e're
they will bring in their Money, or be apt to withdraw out their Effects, when
swarms of Objections shall arise, that cannot be answered; least also this
Intended Bank should be out of all their reach at last, as you said of the
Doctors. In the 12th. page you have bethought your self Jerry, and think it
necessary to answer one common Objection, of the danger of the Change of
Government, tho you will not trouble your self about swarms of them, and in
this you are much mistaken, as in most other things, when you affirm this
foundation is grounded on a Revenue that cannot fail, but with the Nation:
Partly for some reasons I have showed just be o^e, and especially in cases of
Conquest, which is and will be the greatest alteration of Government. The Fund
of private Gentlemen's Estates will be far more secure, than the Fund of this
Bank, (tho confirmed by Act of Parliament) whose Interest comes out of the
Exchequer, w^^ch will be under the Conquerors immediate management and
disposal; but the Conquer^rs never trouble themselves to alter private
contracts made on Gentlemen's Estates, for ^hey take another method, which is to
lay heavy Taxes on them, because the^ will easi^r r^ise more Money out of them
in that manner, then if they seized all their Estates in their own Possessi^n;
and therefore private Estates are more secure and certain, for all this while
the Nation may not, neither will it fail, but the People will go on with their
Trade and Business still as before. In the next place, Jerry being about to
show how this design may redound to the improvements of the Trade of E^gland,
must first make a remarque on our Politicians, who are so curious as to split
every thing to an Hair, who being p^ssest with a sort of factious Reason, which
runs extremely on Divisions and Separations, so that when anything proves to
too heavy for their Heads, that they cannot apprehend it, they presently divide
i^, and reduce it to such confusion as no body else can understand it. Ay
Jerry, you are in the right on it; for these Politicians and Mercurial Heads do
think themselves the wisest Men in the World, and no body understands any sense
but they, because they have the knack of Prating, and starting new Notions, and
swarms of Objections; their Talent being not so much to remove inconveniences,
as to find them out: But they are all of them mistaken, and so let them go for
a company of conceited Momes as they are. It Is well for us that we have got
such an em^nent Man of Parts, true Sense, and right Reason, as Jerry Squirt,
who is so dextrous in the finding out the most secret Intrigues, and subtle
contrivances of all the the factious Cabals, or else he could never have given
us such a notable account of the Politicians new acquired Maxims, and the
Mercurial Heads incomprehensible Notions, togather with all the managements of
the Proposers crafty designs; and tho they have endeavored to reduce all
things to an unintelligible confusion, yet our judicious Friend Jerry is so
Prudent, and good Natured, as he will consider how this Bank may be beneficial
to both the Interest of Land and Trade, for the general good of all. How happy
would it be for this Nation, if all our Politicians and Mercurial Men had but
such Heads as our Friend Jerry has upon his Shoulders! then we should be wisely
governed I warrant ye. But now that I may not make too large a digression, for
which I hope the Reader will pardon me, since I have the Example of a great
Author before me, I will return again to see the Benefit of this Bank; where
Jerry, in the next place, has by a lucky chance found out, that its a sign
Money is plenty when Interest is low. p 13.
Sure he cannot call 8 l. per cent. low Interest? Oh no! but if the Bank can
with 2 or 300000 l. circulate 1200000 l. it will be as good as a Million
brought into the Nation, besides the effects increasing, will advanctage Trade
by the secure way of Reciepts and Payments, p. 14.
its safety from Fire, and Thieves, and other disasters, which Gold and Silver
are subject unto, (but not Books of Accounts, Bank Bills, or the like) all
things considered, when put in practice, will naturally and gradually lower the
interest of Money, that is to say hereafter, in a great many years to come.
Pray, Sir, what is a million extraordinary when the Nation wants Twenty
Millions? Besides, unthinking Jerry does not consider how many Persons are
necessitated and arrested, out of whose hands, much of this Money is called to
put into this Bank for the sake of the great interest, and that none of them
can be supplied on the best Security, when the monied Men, can have 8 l. per
cent. Which way then is it likely, that interest can be lowered? Since the act
it self has advanced the price of it. The effects of this management, does not
add so much Money new coined to what we have already, but it will harrass one
part of the People to enrich another, and considering the King has much of this
Money abroad, and none returned, or new coined, Where then is it to be had?
Will it be in Bank Bills? Why then the Doctors brass Tickets are better. I hope
you will not now say, that these are the groundless jealousies of Men, when
every days experience makes it good, and there is so general a complaint for
want of Money. p. 15.
As to the Good effects that Banks have had in Holland and Genoua, it has been
the practice of many Years to bring to perfection there, and so it will require
here, but how shall the people be supplied in the mean time? For it cannot be
expected, that the effects of the Nation will command the use of ready Money,
when there is none to be had, neither will there be any yet along while, almost
as innumerable Years to come, whatever Jerry does imagine, but we shall still
be a prey to consuming Usury, and lie under the oppressions of those but few
(as you say) that have Money, unless like the Doctor's Proposal there had been
Twenty Millions of Credit more, added to the present Money, then it would
really have proved a most beneficial Bank. And tho you say, it cannot
reasonably be supposed to make an alteration in the Government (I hope so too)
but it is more likely with this kind of Fund, than that of Gentlemen's Estates;
because this way, it is the Subject pays the great interest of of this Bark in a
continual settled Tax, which like the Chimney Money, will always be uneasy to
them, as long as it lasts. As to the unusual Oppositions, you fancy, this Bank
has met withal; p. 16.
I never heard, that it had any at all, but it seemed rather to be hudled up of
a sudden, and passed privately, as it were in an hurry in the House, before any
one had time or liberty to make Objections to it, least the Doctor's Proposal
should get the start of it, because the Doctor had fairly answered all the
swarms of Objections, that either Parliament Men, or any else, could bring
against it, and no proposal ever had more; besides it had passed the
approbation of two several Committees, especially the last, which was Printed
in the Votes: After that, it was again moved in the House that the Doctor might
be heard, which was impossible it seems to bring to pass, for the reason you
told us in the 5th. page, because this small intended Bank was secretly
carrying on at the same time in opposition thereunto, the Proposers thinking it
prudent a design of this Nature should have as easy and insensible a beginning
as possible, to prevent, or at least soften, and remove the prejudices and bad
impressions, viz. the swarms of Objections in page 7th. (which their Proposers
could not answer so well as the Doctor did his) and this did therefore put the
Proposers on heightning Interest and particular undertakings, producing narrow
and sinister designs no way becoming so noble a work all which the Doctor would
have abominated, his proposal no ways requiring the assistance of such
unbecoming Practices. As to your thought of the Funds for Lives and Lottery,
they had been much better applied to the sames uses with this Bank; tho I
doubt, all would have been too little to answer the ends both of King and
People What great Civilities you have shown to Jacobites, Usurers, Brokers, and
the Haman's that they should so much oppose it, p. 17.
I cannot tell, but I am sure you have not showed any at all to the Doctor, who
never opposed yours, but only proposed his own: However, you might have added a
fourth sort, who tho they may not be endued with so large a capacity as our
Jerry Squirt, yet give as good a reason for their dislike as any you have for
your approbation of it, which is, that they think it too small a sum to set up
a Bank, and serves only to make us ridiculous to the rest of the World, for
vexing so many needy Debtors to make up such a sum, as a Million of Money for a
Bank in a Nation, that has lately been so much drained, and do want at least
twenty Millions, which the Doctor's Proposal would have supplied, or else the
Committee would never have made such a report of it. But after all, you say,
the effects of this Undertaking will be best understood in the practice
thereof; I am sure it cannot in the Theory you have given us, and for the
practice it will be to the Nation, much after the same manner, as to a Man that
wants 2000 l to pay his Debts, and you lend him but 100 l. At last Jerry is
drawing to a Conclusion (make us thankful, for I am almost tired with him)
reproaches are the common fa^e of good and generous Undertakings, true Jerry,
but this cannot deserve so good terms being so little, as the whole sum is but
a 5th. part of what the King will want every year to War with France, and if
the War should continue (which God forbid) two or three Years longer, what must
become of us or the Bank then, Jerry? It is the smallness makes it despicable,
and it is liable to all the Objections that were made against the Doctor's
Proposal, which you before told us cannot or will never be answered. But as you
said before, The nature of Men being fond of their own Opinions, out of a
presumptuous Principle, think none knows more than themselves; little dreaming
there is such a Man in the World, of such prodigious intellects, as Jerry
Squirt the great Author of the Brief Account of the little intended Bank of
England, who is able to instruct them both by Reason and Rule. Lord what pity
it was, that you did never discover your self before to the World? That so the
Politicians aad Mercurial Heads, the pretended Patriots, the Wits on both sides
that understood it too much, and the Block-heads that could not understand it
at all, together with all the Objectors, ay and the Doctor too, might all have
come to Jerry Squirt, to have been better informed in the true Nature and right
Notion of Banks. Most certainly the Doctor had never miscarried, it he had
gained Jerry for his Council; but I doubt it was the cunning of the Proposers,
to conceal Jerry and his Advice, till they had obtained an Act of Parliament,
and then there was no Man in the World could be so fit to explain the Act, and
give an account of the Nature of the intended Bank, as Jerry, who so well
understa^ds them, and was privy to all their secret proceedings, even to their
narrow and sinister designs, that were no way becoming so noble and universal a
Work; all which, like a good Honest Man, that hates such Sordid, and vile
Actions of the Proposers, he has fully discovered; who notwithstanding the
apprehensions and difficulties, that were in their way, have not been
discouraged from doing their utmost to bring the designed work to perfection.
Well, Jerry, I allow you to be a Man of Parts, only you have one fault; and
that is, you tell nothing but all you know, which was beside your Text, for you
promised only a Brief Account of the intended Bank, but instead of that, you
have given us a long Account in the first half of your Book of the want of a
Bank, the miscarriage of one that was good, and the sinister designs, that were
used in procuring the future intended Bank, that's worth nothing: Could not you
have been contented to have told us the Brief Account, without discovering by
way of introduction all the sinister designs, that were unbecoming your
Proposers to bring it to pass? Who would trust Jerry Squirt with a Secret for
the future? Tho you ridicule the Doctor and his Bank, yet you cannot accuse him
of any sinister designs or practices. However, in so doing you have done the
Doctor this kindness by it, as to put the People into a farther enquiry,
whether it be practicable and proffitable as the Committee reported, or out of
both King and Peoples reach as you say it is. One thing I had almost forgot to
tell you, that it is a great pity but the World should know the Names of these
Worshipful Proposers, that all due praise and respect may be given to their
profound Noddles, that have taken so much pains, and used such narrow and
sinister designs to remove difficulties, which no Man had opportunity to lay in
their way, to the hindering of this rare Offspring of their Brains from being
brought to perfection; and now since they have been so lucky at last, pray let
us ring the Bells, and make Bonfires for Joy, that all Difficulties are
surmounted, all the Hobgoblins and frightful Monsters are vanquished, all the
horrid Specter are conjured out of the possessed, and the designed work, even
the intended Bank of England is brought to perfection. p. 18.
But now for a finishing ^^^^k at last! The work of perfection seems to be
reserved for such a time as this, the better to enable the Government and
People of England to Revive, Recover, and Transmit to posterity the Virtue,
Luster and wonted Glory of their renowed Ancestors. Hum! there is Salt in this,
Jerry, and admirably well seasoned indeed! Who Is that now, that accuses Jerry
Squirt of Reflecting on the Parliament, none but a company of vile Tongued
People, that will always be casting Dirt at their Betters. I would have you to
know, that Jerry is as Accomplished, Wellbred Gentleman, and as rare an Orator
too, as any of all your Wits, Politicians, Mercurial Heads, pretended Patriots,
ay or your Rabble of otherwise well-meaning People too. The truth is, Friend
Jerry, this is such a flourishing high Touch, as far exceeds all that ever went
before, and the Parliament is so high obliged to you, that for ought I see, by
all means they can do no less the next Sessions, than go into a grand Committee
of the whole House, and Vote Nemine Contradicente, that Mr. Jerry Squirt shall
have the thanks of this House. O, brave Jerry! in good Faith it is you will be
Cock-a-hoop now, Pray Sir, who shall have the Honor to hold your Horse? Well,
Jerry, I see thou art a notable gifted Man, and one would not think there was
half so much in thee as there is. But for Discourse sake, let us turn the Tables
a little, and see what would you have said Now Jerry, if your designing crafty
Proposers, had offered such an excellent proposal as the Doctors with twenty
Millions of good Credit, and that fairly without any narrow and sinister
designs with an answer to all Objections? And the Doctor should at the same
time have endeavored to promote such a Pigmy or piece of a Bank as they have
got, and have used all the narrow and sinister designs as your Proposers have
done, without answering any Objections? How then might or would you have
magnified and extolled your most noble Proposers up to the Heavens, till you
had been wrapped up in an Ecstasy for Joy, since you can commend them so much
on so little occasion? And on the contrary, how would you have Ridiculed,
Vilified, and Exposed the Doctor for his narrow project, carried on too with
such sinister designs? I believe you would have so shamed and disgraced him,
that he must never have dared to appear again, any more than a Dog that is
out-lawed. Now, therefore Jerry, let me tell you by the by, that unless you
could have projected something extraordinary, that would far have exceeded the
Doctor's offers, it is not fair dealing to condemn a Proposal, that is so very
good and great, and trump up another narrow one in the place of it, that has
been carried on with such sinister designs, and comes so much short of doing
good, as it has occasioned much trouble to many Subjects. Well, but for all
this, Jerry, must have one word at parting, and so Farewell, viz, That this
Bank will lay a Foundation of Trade, Security, and greatness within this
Kingdom, for the present and succeeding Ages; Ay, Jerry, but I fear it will be
such an inumerable many Years to come, that you and I shall hardly ever live to
see effected by this Molehill of a Bank. The truth is, you do deserve a reward
for recommending to the Nation such a Bank, that is thus brought to perfection,
I say, Jerry Squirt, you do deserve a Reward, but it should be that of a
Dogwhip, which is most fit for such a Yelper.

FINIS.
Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationer Hall, 1694


