Some REASONS WHY ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, Sometime Lord Lorne, ought not to be
restored to the Honor or Estate of his late Father Archibald sometime Marquess
of ARGYLE.
1. BEcause it has been always held very dangerous, both for the Interest of
the Prince, and peace of the people, to restore the children of powerful
Traitors, to their Fathers Honors or Estates; which experience demonstrated to
be too true in the Gowries.

2. The restoring of this Family is in a special manner most dangerous, by
reason of the situation and vast bounds of the Estate of Argyle in the
High-lands, the great Claim, many Vassals and Tenants that depend on it; all,
or for the much greater part, ill principled, and inured to Rebellion these
last 20 years, who blindly follow their Masters commands, without any regard of
their duty to God or the King. So that it is a most fit place to be the Nest
and Seminary of Rebellion, as it proved in the late Argyle's time, to the great
prejudice of his Majesty's service, and ruin of many loyal Subjects. And this
same very reason was brought by the late Argyle, against the Marquess of
Antrum, to dispossess him of the Lordship of Kentyre, which he had purchased
with the consent of his late Majesty. For he pretended that it was dangerous to
suffer the said Marquess of Antrum to enjoy these Lands, by reason of the great
power of the Family of the Macdonalds; and of the bad consequences that usually
follow the restoring of persons to an Estate, which they had formerly lost by
forfeiture. But it is evident to all men, that this Reason is much more forcible
against Argyle himself, and his Posterity.

3. It Is directly against the Council and advice of the Modern Solomon K. James
his Majesty's Grandfather, of blessed memory, who in his Basilicon doron speaks
thus to his Son, Basil. dor. Book 2.
As for the matter of Forfeitures, which are also done in Parliaments, My
advice is you forfeit none, but for such odious crimes, as may make them
unworthy ever to be restored again. And in the same Book, speaking of the
High-landers and their Oppressions, he subjoyns this good counsel to his Son,
Put in Execution the Laws made against the Over-Lords, and Chieffs of their
Claims, and it will be no difficulty to daunton them.

4. The restoring of this Family would prove a dangerous President to encourage
rebellious and Traitorous spirits, to perpetrate such horrid crimes, as the
late Argyle did, upon hopes, that whatsoever Treasons they commit, their
Families and Posterity may still stand: Whereas upon the contrary, the
exemplary punishment and eradicating of this Family, (especially at this first
happy appearance of his Majesty's justice) will be a Scar-crow to all others,
and serve as a Beacon, to make them shun the rocks of Rebellion, which they
know will undoubtedly ship wrack not only themselves, but also their posterity.
In confirmation whereof it was observed that the late Argyle when he received
his sentence, was more moved at that part, which touched the ruin of his
Posterity and Family, then for what concerned his own person.

5. The restoring of the Son would be prejudicial to many of his Majesty's
loyal Subjects of the best quality, and to diverse Orphans and Widows, who have
been oppressed and almost ruined by the Father; and can expect no other
reparation of their losses, but from the forfeiture of the said estate; unless
his Majesty would put himself to unnecessary charges, to repair them some other
way.

6. The restoring of this Family is not only dangerous and inconvenient for the
aforesaid general reasons, but also for the said Archibald his particular
faults and Misdemeanors; For besides that Vice runs much in a blood, as King
James has observed, it is well known that both he and his Brother Neil are of
the same Principles with their Father, who died impenitent, asserting the
Covenant, and sowing the seeds of Sedition and Rebellion, and as it were
entailing it upon his Children, as appears by his last Speech: which bad
principles were instilled in them both with their milk; and to make the elder
more complete, he was sent abroad to be bred at Geneva, with Recommendations
from his Father to that Kirk, and to the Presbyterians of France, where he kept
correspondence between his Father and them. And the younger was lately proved
to have been privy and consenting to all his Fathers treacherous complyances
with the English in Scotland, and to have been actually in Arms with them.

7. The bad principles and inclinations of the elder appeared when his Majesty
retired from St. Johnstons, with intention to go to some of his loyal Subjects
in the Northern parts of Scotland. For immediately upon that news, he rifled his
Majesty's Cabinets, and after his Majesty's return, he being Captain of the
Guard put a Padlock on his Majesty's door, keeping him as a Prisoner. Which
sufficiently shows that he is his Fathers Son.

8. To evidence further his bad inclinations and aversion from his Majesty's
service, he never raised Regiment or Company all the time the King was in
Scotland, to join with the Royal Army: But a little before his Majesty was to
march into England, he eagerly urged that some Parties might be drawn out of
every Regiment to make up one for himself, under pretense of the Kings Guard.
And though he knew that would be undoubtedly denied him, yet he still persisted
to press the same, on purpose to have some pretense of discontent, that so he
might avoid marching into Engl. with his Majesty. Which shall be testified by
some who were then privy to his Fathers and his own designs.

9. Though it be pretended for expiation of these misdemeanors, that he
appeared thereafter in his Majesty's service in the High-lands, under the Earls
of Glencairne and Middleton his Majesty's Generals; yet that does no ways
evince his Loyalty, and cannot expiate the least of his faults for diverse
Reasons. 1. Because when he was there, in his usual discourses be eagerly
asserted the Covenant, and justified the barbarous death of the renowned
Marquess of Montross his Majesty's General, as he had barbarously and
scandalously insulted over him, at his Carting and Execution. 2. Because even
then he combind with the late Lord Balcarras, to divide his Majesty's Forces,
by endeavoring to renew and set up that fatal and rebellious Covenant. 3.
Because he endeavored also another way to destroy those Forces, by using all
possible persuasions with the Viscount of Kenmure, to make him usurp the
Generals place, not only without, but against the Kings Order. And fearing this
unsuccessefull treachery would come out, to shun his deserved punishment, he
immediately fled away to his Fathers bounds; from whence he wrote Letters, to
make some chief Gentlemen desert his Majesty's General, and so break his
Forces. And this is all the great Loyalty that ever he showed, which is so much
bragged of by his friends and intercessours.


10. And that he persisted still in the same bad inclinations diverse years
after, appeared lately; For when General Monck, now Duke of Albemarle, was upon
his last March into England, and had made some transactions with his Majesty's
loyal Subjects of Scotland, for promoting his Majesty's happy Restoration, the
said Archibald then dwelling in one of the Marquess of Huntlyes houses, did
not only divert all those under his power, but also dealt with diverse others,
to enter into a Combination with him, and to sign Bonds, to oppose the said
Generals Noble and Immortal designs.

11. The restoring of the said Archibald will be also dangerous, for the great
store of money that in all probability is left him by his Father, who received
great sums from the pretended States of Scotland, for all his treacherous and
cruel Expeditions against his Majesty's loyal Subjects there; and also from the
Parliament of England, and particularly 40 thousand pound Sterling at the
delivering up of the King at Newcastle; besides a good sum he had thereafter
from Cromwell, and what he made up by the revenues of two Bishoprics these 20
years, by seizing the Marquess of Huntlyes estate, and a part of the Marquess
of Montrosses: by exacting diverse of his Majesty's few Duties, payable to the
Exchequer; by oppressing of many Gentlemen his neighbors, and dispossessing
them of their Estates. All which cannot amount to less then a hundred and
fifty thousand pound Sterling; which sum must remain entire, or little
diminished, since its known he lived sparingly, and these last 20 years he
would pay none of his Debts, neither Principals nor Profits. So that his Son
having such store of money, is as powerful as his Father, to do mischief, if
he be restored.

12. Lastly, As the restoring of this Family would be a notable prejudice to
many who have been oppressed by it, and no small grief to his Majesty's loyal
Subjects, who justly apprehend the dangers that may thence ensue, to his
Majesty's prejudice, and disturbance of the Nation, and would strengthen the
hands of his Majesty's enemies, and weaken his friends; so it is the only hopes
and desire of those, who have been enemies to his Majesty's Father of blessed
memory, or who by this means expect the Resurrection of the rebellious
Covenant, so destructive to Monarchy. And therefore that Family in prudence
ought not to be restored.

FINIS.

