THE SPEECH OF PHILIP HERBERT, LATE EARL OF Pembrook and Montgomery, in the
House of Commons, upon passing an Act for a Day of THANKSGIVING, For Colonel
Jone's VICTORY over the IRISH; As it was delivered Word for Word, and Oath for
Oath.

Taken verbatim by Michael Oldsworth.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.

The Speech of Philip Herbert, etc.
M. Speaker,
YOu know it is not my custom to make Speeches; God's Death I am an old man, and
cannot speak, I can sit here a whole day together and not speak a word, except
it be cry Ay and No, when Master Weaver winks upon me: but God's Death such a
Victory would make a dumb man speak; for Michael Oldsworth says, that Colonel
Jones has routed Ormond, and killed four thousand of his men; and does not such
a victory deserve a thanksgiving: You now Mr. Speaker Cromwell made us vote a
day of thanksgiving for killing the Levellers, and shall not we make our selves
Vote a day of Thanksgiving for killing the Cavaliers; Z'blood are not the
Cavaliers as bad as Levellers? M. Martin says Cavaliers are worse then
Levellers (but I hope M. Martin is no Leveller) and I say so too; for if
Levellers had got the Victory, they would have had no King; but if the
Cavaliers should overcome us, God's Death our Parliament would grow out of date,
and Kings and Laws would come in fashion again; and Mistress May says, that if
Kings and Laws should up, no Member of Parliament may lie with any other woman
but his own Wife, which Law Master Martin says is against the Privilege of
Parliament, and contrary to the Liberty of the Subject; 'Zounds Master Speaker
let us maintain our own Privileges, why the Devil do we fight else?

Colonel Ven, and Master Ash move that an Act be passed for the better
observation of this day; God's Death I agree, and withal my humble motion is, that
my friend Master Vicars may draw it up, for he is a learned man, and full of
Scripture, and can fill the Act full of Scripture which will be a great grace
to the Members: ('Zblood I am a Member I think, and love Scripture, although I
neither use nor understand it) besides without an Act the Presbyterians will
never meddle with it; for they begin to swell already, as though they had an
intent if they durst or could tell how to turn Levellers, and level us to make
a step for themselves to mount into the Saddle; but I hope M. Speaker, we shall
not be meat for the Presbyterians; Judge me Presbyterians are as bad, or worse
then Malignants, for should the Presbyterians rule, they would bring Master
Scot upon the stool of repentance for ravishing the Gentleman's little daughter
of 12 years old the other day: Damme me Master Speaker, the Case is dangerous,
I beseech you let us maintain our privileges.

But Confound me here are some amongst us that look like Presbyterians,
nevertheless I hope whether they be Presbyterians or not Presbyterians, the
Gentlemen will not be angry with me for speaking my, conscience; what? though
they have sequestered and plundered Malignants for their consciences, yet I hope
they will not make a Malignant of me. God's Death Malignant is a hard word, I never
understood it before this Parliament, what? cannot a man speak his conscience
but he must be made a Malignant? Judge me we shall have a through Reformation
indeed, if a man's conscience must make him a malignant; but so it is, for since
this Reformation, when I sat in the House of Lords, and spoke my conscience as
did others in Voting for the King: I was made a malignant, and since many
members of the House of Commons for speaking their conscience and Voting
against the Army, were by the Army made malignants, and pulled out of the House
and thrust into hell by Colonel Pride: 'Zblood I have as little conscience as
most, I scarce know what it is; but be it what it will I swear it is a
malignant, but confound me I care not, I am a member of Colonel Prides
Parliament, and I hope a member of Colonel Prides Parliament may speak his
conscience, and not be made a malignant; Come, come, Master Speaker let us be
loving and kind one unto another, we are but a few members left, let us agree
and Vote lustily for a thanksgiving day. 'Sdeath the victory deserves it, and
if we Vote but the day, I am sure there sits Alderman Atkins Worship will make
the Common Counsel Vote us a dinner.

But perhaps some may speak against it, and say we are beholding to them for
the last; but if they do, I say they are malignants, and lie; it is they are
beholding to us: yet it is confessed they gave us a dinner, and feasted us with
Venison; but what of that, they gave us a dinner, and we gave them a Park;
then Judge you Master Speaker whether is better the Venison or the Kings Park
that nourishes the Venison; again, others may say that the General is
beholding to them for his Basin and Ewer, and the Lieutenant General for his
Purse of Gold; but I say no, for the Gentlemen deserved it: 'Sdeath have we not
voted and made Acts for them these seven or eight years, and the General and
Lieutenant General fought for them, and killed Levellers, Malignants and
Cavaliers to keep them safe, and now do not we deserve a dinner, and the
General a Basin and Ewer, and the Lieutenant General a little Purse of rotten
Gold? 's blood shall men vote and fight for nothing.

Master Speaker, I am an old man, and you are an old Speaker, We are the
Supreme Authority, the Representative of the People, and you are our
Representative, therefore (that we sit not all day quarrelling about a
thanksgiving) my humble motion is, that as the People leave all matters of
consequence to be decided by us their Representative, so may we Mr. Speaker to
your self our Representative. We are the body and Mr. Speaker is the head,
therefore let the head speak for the body, and if Mr. Speaker think this
Victory deserve not a thanksgiving let him say so, and if he think it does,
let him Vote it, and then as I said before, if we Vote a thanksgiving, the City
will vote a dinner; for Mr. Speaker what is a Victory without a thanksgiving,
and what is a thanksgiving without a dinner? 's death, I say, no dinner no
thanksgiving.

Mr. Speaker, Here are some would have us vote Col. Jones a 1000 l. per annum,
and if I may speak my Conscience without being made a Malignant, I think he
deserves it, for he has saved us out of the hands of our enemies, and redeemed
the Cities Irish lands; so you see that Jones is both a Savior and a Redeemer,
and Mr. Speaker by this you see it is not as Malignants speak; for they say we
and our Armies vote and fight only for our own ends and profits; but they lie,
and the Supreme Authority will say they lie; 's blood we fight for the goods of
the Nation, and the Liberties of the Subjects.

Colonel Jones is the joy of our hearts, he has filled our hearts with joy and
gladness, I say 1000 l. per annum is too little for him; 's death is not Jones
the savior of the three Kingdoms, and can we do too much for our savior?
Indeed of old the Lieutenant General was our savior, and delivered us out of
the jaws of the Lions, and Bears, the Levellers, and wicked Malignants, and
had been so now, if the Citizens would have lent a hundred and fifty thousand
pounds speedily and willingly: but judge me, if Ireland had been lost, the
Citizens had been all Malignant, because they would not disburse (as they said)
without security; yet I think we offered them the greatest security in the
world, the faith of a Parliament, and a Parliament the Levellers say is the
Supreme Authority, or the Representative of the People, and so say we; why did
we pull down Kings and Lords else; then if a Parliament be supreme, their faith
is supreme, especially the faith of Col. Prides Parliament, 's death is not the
supreme faith worth an hundred and fifty thousand pounds? But Mr. Speaker as
Colonel Jones is our savior, so he is the Cities savior, and the Merchant
adventurers savior, for he has saved their Irish lands, which was like to
have proved meat for Malignants and Presbyterians, for damme. I think
Malignants and Presbyterians are all one, for Ormond is a Malignant, and
Inchequeen is a Presbyterian, and both fight against us: And Mr. Scot says,
That whosoever fights against us the Supreme power is a Malignant; then judge
you are not Presbyterians Malignants? the Scots are Presbyterians, and they
declare against Malignants and against us, and will fight against us, then are
not our brethren the Scots Malignants?

But the Cavaliers think to make us Malignants for they say we are not the
Supreme, but the King is the supreme Authority; but I say they lie, it is we are
the Supreme Authority; 's blood did not the Army make us so, and did not we cut
off the Kings head that we might continue so, and now shall not we be the
Supreme Authority? 's death I hope the Army that made us will keep us, why the
Devil do we keep them else? what? shall we vote early and late, and make Acts
and Orders to keep them, and then will not they keep us? But Mr. Speaker let
not our heart faint, let us not be faithless but believing, for without doubt
they that made us will preserve us; and damme what a shame would it be not to
confide in our Keepers, besides, if we should grow jealous of the Keepers of
our Liberties, the People would grow jealous of us the Keepers of theirs; for
does not the Army keep our Liberties, and we keep the Peoples?

The Cavaliers and Malignants say, that we and our Armies are Rebels; but hang
them, they lie: we the Supreme Authority say, the Cavaliers are rebels, and the
supreme Authority cannot lie: no, nor the supreme Faith neither, although the
faithless Citizens would not take it for an hundred thousand pounds: but I
hope they have faith enough to believe that Jones has routed Ormond, and
recovered the Irish Lands; 's death, we may go whistle for a dinner else: What?
is not Jones their savior, and the savior of us all? and will not men believe
their savior? Sink me, had Ormond taken Dublin, we might have voted these
seven or eight a years for ought I know, before we could either have voted the
Kingdom a Thanksgiving day, or the City have voted us a dinner. Lilburn,
Walwyn, Prince, and the Levellers, say that we are Tyrants; but we the supreme
Authority say, that they are Traitors, and would be Tyrants themselves if they
could tell how: 's Blood, Levellers are worse then Kings for they would have us
give an account of all moneys we have received these eight or nine years. What?
I thought we had been the supreme Authority, and must the supreme Authority be
called to recount by Levellers? 's Death, If we give them an account, are not
they the supreme Authority? But I hope, Mr. Speaker, you, nor no other member
of this honorable House is so mad as to account to Levellers, nor any else. 's
Blood, the supreme Authority give an account! Oh, high Treason! the Levellers
are Traitors, the very word Give an account proves them so. What, is not (
Lilburn a prisoner? and shall prisoners have leave to prate? But what is a
Leveller? it is a hard word, I scarce understand it: or what is Lilburn,
Prince, and Walwyn? is not Prince a Chees-monger? 's Death, I hope a Parliament
shall not be food for Chees-mongers. But M. Speaker, we did ill, that we did
not make Lilburn an Independent; we should have served him as we served Harry
Martin, and given him a thousand pounds per Annum, and he would have been a
strong Independent: for was not Harry Martin a Leveller? and did not we give
him a thousand pound per annum to convert him? and is he not now as great an
Independent as any of us all?

Mr Speaker, here are some which move that Mr Greenhil and Mr Cooper may preach
before the House upon the glorious day of Thanksgiving: to which I give
consent: I love Mr Greenhill, and I love preaching: 's death, I love a good
preacher as I love a good dog, and I love a good dog as I love Mistress May,
and I love Mistress May as I love my life. I love Mr Greenhil because he is an
Independent, and I love preaching although I cannot understand it: 's blood,
cannot a man love preaching but that he must understand it? I love Mr Cooper,
because he prays for the supreme Authority. Sink me, I love praying, although
I cannot pray my self: and I love my Man Michael Oldsworth, because he is my
mouth, and prays for me: and I hope no man will be angry with me for loving my
own mouth.

Also I love Colonel Jones, because he is the author of this Thanksgiving, and
because he has delivered us, and saved us from the hands of Cavaliers; and I
hope any man may love his Savior: and I think the City has cause to love him,
and reward him, for saving their Irish lands, or else they are ungrateful
people. Dam me, they could give the General a Basin and Ewer for killing the
Levellers; and will they not give Jones a Basin and Ewer for killing the
Cavaliers? What, are not Cavaliers as bad as Levellers? or will the City give
their lands to Malignants? or do they not believe Colonel Jones his Letter?
Zounds, if their hearts are hardened, let Major General Skippon be sent to
them to increase their faith, for he had Letter, and will swear it is true.
What, shall the General, and the Lieutenant Genesis the old saviors of the three
Kingdoms, have a Basin and Ewer, and a bag of Gold, for killing three or four
Levellers? and shall not Jones, our new savior, have a Basin and Ewer for
killing three or four thousand Cavaliers? But, Sink me, Mr Speaker, I am an old
man, and must conclude: I desire you to consider seriously of what I have said;
for this, (for ought I know) shall be the last Speech you shall ever hear me
make; but I am an old man, and must conclude.

Your Honors Servant, PHILIP HERBERT, Knight of Berk-shire.
Copia vera.



FINIS.

